*••••••••••*•••• 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  14776-1  (2000)  :  Industrial  Automation  -  Shop  Floor 
Production,  Part  1:  Reference  Model  for  Standardization  and 
a  Methodology  for  Identification  of  Requirements  [PGD  18: 
Industrial  and  Production  Automation  Systems  and  Robotics] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


gyia^/f/raa^^^:^^ 


S?St^  *  I  |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 


\\V^:5^< 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


ic 


A- 


A 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<*i^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR  10314-1  :1990 

(  Reaffirmed  2005 ) 

nmkwm 

Indian  Standard 

INDUSTRIAL  AUTOMATION  —  SHOP  FLOOR 

PRODUCTION 

PART  1  REFERENCE  MODEL  FOR  STANDARDIZATION  AND  A 

METHODOLOGY  FOR  IDENTIFICATION 

OF  REQUIREMENTS 


ICS    25.040.40 


©  BIS  2000 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

March  2000  Price  Group  6 


Industrial  and  Production  Automation  Systems  and  Robotics  Sectional  Committee,  BP/PE  18 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO/TR  10314-1  :  1990  Industrial  automation  —  Shop  floor 
production  —  Part  1 :  Reference  model  for  standardization  and  a  methodology  for  identification  of  requirements' 
issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Industrial  and  Production  Automation  Systems  and  Robotics  Sectional 
Committee  and  approval  of  the  Basic  and  Production  Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  does  not  include  the  development  of  individual  standards  themselves  but  rather  the  establishment 
of  common  frame  work,  in  terms  of  a  reference  model  to  assist  future  standards  developments. 

The  text  of  the  ISO  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without  deviation 
except  the  word  'report'.  Wherever  the  word  'report'  appears  referring  to  this  standard,  it  should  read  as  'Indian 

Standard'. 


IS    1477^  (Parti)  1 2000 
KO/TR    10314-1:1990 


Indian  Standard 


INDUSTRIAL  AUTOMATION  —  SHOP  FLOOR 

PRODUCTION 

PART  1  REFERENCE  MODEL  FOR  STANDARDIZATION  AND  A 

METHODOLOGY  FOR  IDENTIFICATION 

OF  REQUIREMENTS 


1    Scope  and  Field  of  Application 


1.1   Scope 

This  report  presents  and  describes  a  means  of  identifying  where  new  or 
revised  manufacturing  standards  may  be  required.   It  establishes  a 
Reference  Model  for  Shop  Floor  Production,  which  is  then  used  as  the 
basis  for  developing  a  methodology  for  the  identification  and  extraction  of 
areas  for  standards.   The  assumptions  used  to  develop  the  Reference 
Model  are: 

•  the  field  of  interest  is  the  manufacture  of  discrete  parts  and  in 
particular  the  production  {physical  realisation)  of  these  parts, 

•  the  Reference  Model  needs  to  be  open-ended  so  that  it  can  be 
revised  to  incorporate  new  technologies,  and 

•  the  Reference  Model  needs  to  be  generic  in  nature  so  that  it  can 
be  applied  to  a  wide  range  of  applications  and  is  not  directed  to  a 
particular  organisational  structure  of  manufacturing. 

It  is  emphasised  that  the  Reference  Model: 

•  provides  a  conceptual  framework  for  understanding 
manufacturing  and 

•  can  be  used  to  identify  areas  of  standards  necessary  to  integrate 
manufacturing  systems. 

The  Reference  Model  does  not  however  provide  a  methodology  for 
designing,  implementing,  operating  and  maintaining  any  existing  or 
future  manufacturing  automation  system.  There  may  be  a  need  to  develop 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


otlier  Reference  Models  which  can  be  used  for  tiiose  purposes,  perhaps 
based  on  the  work  described  in  this  report.    The  development  of  such 
models  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  technical  report. 


1.2  Field  of  Application 

The  Reference  Model  described  in  this  report  is  intended  for  use  in  the 
identification  of  standards  within  the  Shop  Floor  Production  area  of 
manufacturing. 

Manufacturing  is  perceived  to  be  all  inclusive,  from  customer  order 
through  to  delivery  of  the  product.    Twelve  manufacturing  functions  have 
been  identified  as  being  a  part  of  manufacturing.   The  following  is  a  list  of 
these  twelve  functions,  together  with  illustrative,  non-exhaustive 
activities  typically  related  to  these  functions: 

1)  Corporate  management,  e.g. 

•  Direction  of  enterprise 

•  Strategic  planning 

•  Feasibility  study  for  investment 

•  Risk  management 

2)  Finance,  e.g. 

•  Financial  planning 

•  Corporate  budgeting 

•  Financial  accounting 

3)  Marketing  and  sales,  e.g. 

•  Marketing  research 

•  Advertising 

•  Sales  forecasting 

•  Sales  scheduling 

•  Pricing 

•  Sales  (order,  delivery,  invoice) 

•  Product  service 

4)  Research  and  Development,  e.g. 

•  R&D  planning 

•  Basic  research 

•  Applied  research 

•  Product  development 

•  Manufacturing  development 


IS    1477«  (Parti):  2000 
iSO/TR    i03i4-iil990 


5)    Product  design  and  Production  engineering,  e.g. 

•  Define  product  specifications 

•  Preliminary  design  and  testing 

•  Detailed  design 

•  Design  analysis,  test,  evaluation 

•  Revise  design 

•  Release  design  for  production  planning 

•  Project  management 

•  Process  planning 

•  Programming  of  numerical  control  and  programmable  control 

•  Tooling 

•  Plant  engineering 

•  Bill  of  material 

•  Quality  assurance  planning  of  production 

•  Production  configuration 

6)  Production  management  e.g. 

•  Production  scheduling 

•  Product  and  Inventory  control 

•  Production  monitoring 

•  General  maintenance  request 

•  Quality  control 

•  Cost  control  and  cost  management 

7)  Procurement  e.g. 

•  Vendor  performance 

•  Purchasing 

•  Receiving 

•  General  stores 

8)  Shipping,  e.g. 

•  Product  storage 

•  Distribution 

9)  Waste  material  treatment,  e.g. 

•  Waste  material  processing 

•  Waste  material  storage 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314.1:1990 


10)  Resource  management,  e.g. 

•  Facility  management 

•  Tool  control 

•  Energy  management 
Time  and  Attendance 
Facility  security 
Health  and  Safety 
Environment  control 


• 


11)  Maintenance  management,  e.g. 

•  Preventive  maintenance 

•  Corrective  maintenance 

12)  Shop  Floor  Production,  e.g. 

•  Material  store 

•  Transport  material 

•  Transform  material 

•  Incoming  inspection 

•  In-process  gauging  and  testing 

•  In-process  audit 

•  Product  audit 

As  shown  in  Figure  1  and  described  in  the  definitions  which  follow  in 
Section  2.2,  these  functions  tend  to  be  grouped  under  three  main 
headings.    Items  I)  through  to  4)  are  functions  of  the  Enterprise 
concerned  with  strategic  long  term  planning  activities.    Items  5)  through 
to  11)  are  functions  of  the  Facility,  concerned  with  tactical  planning  of 
the  production  process,  resource  management  and  product  modelling. 
The  final  item,  12)    Shop  Floor  Production,  is  a  function  which  involves 
the  activities  that  actually  create  a  physical  product. 

The  twelve  manufacturing  functions  are  interrelated  and  a  single 
Reference  Model  covering  all  twelve  functions  would  be  desirable.    After 
careful  study  of  existing  work,  it  was  decided  that  the  development  of  a 
single  Reference  Model  covering  every  function  of  manufacturing  was  not 
manageable  at  this  time. 

The  area  of  Shop  Floor  Production  on  the  other  hand  has  shown  an 
urgent  need  for  and  a  willingness  to  adopt  standards.    The  Reference 
Model  described  in  this  technical  report  is  intended  to  guide  the 
planning  for  and  the  development  of  standards  to  assist  the  integration  of 
an  automated  Shop  Floor  Production  system.    It  is  recognised  that  the 
Shop  Floor  Production  function  will  be  required  to  interface  with 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


functions  (and  their  activities)  outside  the  scope  of  Shop  Floor 
Production  itself.    Figure  2  is  a  clarification  of  how  major  functions  of 
manufacturing  might  be  interrelated. 

In  the  future.  Reference  Models  for  manufacturing  that  include 
Enterprise  and  Facility  functions  may  be  developed.    Any  future  modelling 
work  in  the  area  of  manufacturing  should  take  account  of  the  Reference 
Model  far  Shop  Floor  Production  presented  here  and  every  effort  should 
be  made  to  ensure  compatibility  between  the  Reference  Model  for  Shop 
Floor  Production  and  emy  Facility  or  Enterprise  Reference  Models  that 
may  be  developed. 


2    Terminology 


2.1   General 


A  number  of  terms  are  described  in  this  chapter  to  provide  a  better 
understanding  by  the  user  of  this  report.    These  descriptions  are 
intended  to  be  used  solely  in  the  context  of  this  report  and  are  not 
intended  to  be  general  definitions. 


2.2  Specific  terms 

2.2.1  Reference  Model:    a  means  of  describing  the  activities  and 
components  of  manufacturing  through  the  use  of  figure  (s)  and 
text. 

2.2.2  Discrete  Parts  Manufacturing:    systems  of  functions  for 
producing  products  or  parts  consisting  of  discrete  elements. 

2.2.3  Function:    a  grouping  of  several  activities  performed  to  realise 
some  manufacturing  objective. 

2.2.4  Activity:    a  manufacturing  process  which  causes  some  change  in 
inputs. 

2.2.5  Level:    a  collection  of  activities  which  form  a  degree  of 
subordination  in  a  hierarchical  arrangement. 


s 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
BO/TR    10314-1:1990 


2.2.6  Enterprise:   an  entire  manufacturing  unit  consisting  of  a 
corporate  component  and  one  or  more  Facility  components. 
The  corporate  component  is  responsible  for  interactions 
between  the  external  environment  of  the  Enterprise  and  the 
Facility  or  Facilities,  and  also  for  the  control  of  functions  within 
the  Facility  or  Facilities. 

2.2.7  Facility:    a  component  of  an  Enterprise  which  excludes 
corporate  functions.    The  Facility  is  responsible  for  providing 
support  and  direction  for  Enterprise  and  Shop  Floor 
Production  activities. 

2.2.8  Shop  Floor  Production:    a  component  of  a  Facility  whose 
function  is  directly  related  to  the  production  of  discrete  parts 
and/  or  products. 

2.2.9  Shop  Floor  Production  Model:    the  basic  model  used  to 
describe  the  structure  within  Shop  Floor  Production. 

2.2.10  Interaction:    an  interrelationship  or  interconnection  between 
the  Subjects  within  Shop  Floor  Production,  and  also  between 
the  Subjects  and  Actions  within  or  external  to  Shop  Floor 
Production. 

2.2.11  Generic  Activity  Model:    a  generic  model  used  to  describe  the 
execution  of  activities  within  Shop  Floor  Production  and  their 
interactions  with  functions  interfacing  to  Shop  Floor 
Production, 


3   Abbreviations 


Several  abbreviations  are  used  in  this  report: 

•  GAM  Generic  Activity  Model 

•  SFPM  Shop  Floor  Production  Model 

•  ST  Store 

•  TF  Transform 

•  TP  Transport 

•  VE  Verify 


IS    1477^  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


4    Objectives  for  Mantifacturing  Standardisation 

4.1   General  information 

4.1.1  The  objectives  of  standardisation 

ISO  has  pointed  out  the  objectives  of  standardisation  as  follows: 

•  mutual  understanding 

•  health,  safety,  protection  of  environment 

•  interface,  interchangeability 

•  fitness  for  purpose 

•  variety  control. 

4.1.2  The  concept  of  Standards  Viewpoints 

The  process  of  standardisation  for  manufacturing  is  to  define  areas  of 
standards,  to  select  aspects  to  be  standardised  and  to  define  standards 
based  on  the  state  of  the  art.    In  this  report,  the  following  Standards 
Viewpoints  (defined  in  4.2)  have  been  selected  to  identify  the  needs  of 
standards  in  the  manufacturing  field  derived  from  the  guidance  of  the 
above  ISO  objectives: 

Safety 

Environment 

Compatibility 

Performance 

Operability 

Maintainability 

Reliability 

Qualifications 

Description 

These  nine  Standards  Viewpoints,  together  with  the  Reference  Model, 
are  used  in  the  proposed  methodology  for  extracting  areas  of 
standards. 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


4.2  Standards  Viewpoints  for  Manufacturing 

Nine  Standards  Viewpoints  for  manufacturing  are  defined  as  follows 
and  are  to  be  applied  to  any  area  where  standards  may  apply: 

4.2. 1  Safety  Viewpoint 

Safety  is  concerned  with  the  effect  on  safety  that  normal  and 
erroneous  operation  df  the  manufacturing  facility  would  have  on  the 
operating  personnel,  the  equipment  and  the  work  in  progress.    It  also 
covers  the  need  for  traceability,  that  is  the  ability  to  trace  the 
sequence  of  manufacturing  processes  and  components  used  in 
manufacture.    Hence  defme  design  and  operation  standards  to  ensure 
safe  operation. 

4.2.2  Environment  Viewpoint 

Environment  is  concerned  with  the  effect  that  operating  entities  can 
have  on  the  physical  environment  both  during  the  manufacturing 
activity  itself  and  as  a  by-product  of  that  activity.   In  each  case  both 
normal  and  failure  modes  should  be  considered.    Hence  identify 
standards  which  define  each  effect,  how  it  is  to  be  measured  and 
norms  for  acceptable  operation. 

4.2.3  Compatibility  Viewpoint 

Compatibility  is  concerned  with  interchangeability  and 
interdependence,  and  addresses  issues  related  to  interfacing.  Hence 
define  design  and  operation  standards  to  ensure  compatibility. 

4.2.4  Performance  Viewpoint 

Performance  is  concerned  with  the  performance  aspects  which  can  be 
categorised  in  terms  of  speed,  quality  of  finish  (output),  resources 
consumed  etc.    Hence  identify  standards  to  define  these  qualities  and 
appropriate  specifications. 


8 


IS    1477^  (Parti):  2000 
ISOyXR    10314-1:1990 


4.2.5  Operability  Viewpoint 

Operabllity  is  concerned  witJi  all  aspects  of  human  interactions  with 
the  manufacturing  environment.    It  is  essentially  concerned  with  easy 
operation  and  the  avoidance  of  improper  operation  under  both  normal 
and  erroneous  conditions.    Hence  define  design  and  operation 
standards  to  ensure  easy  and  correct  operation. 

4.2.6  Maintainability  Viewpoint 

Maintainability  is  concerned  with  reducing  downtime  and  the  risks 
and  costs  of  evolution.    It  is  very  important  to  enable  easy  maintenance 
of  all  manufacturing  constituents  and  the  system  itself,  to  maintain  a 
known  status  for  each  manufacturing  entity  and  its  documentation  and 
to  support  traceability  where  required.    Hence  define  design  and 
operation  standards  to  ensure  easy  maintenance. 

4.2.7  Reliability  Viewpoint 

Reliability  is  concerned  with  all  aspects  of  how  a  system  is  designed 
and  operated  to  meet  specified  levels  of  availability.    This  starts  with 
the  reliability  of  individual  elements  and  components,  and  goes  up  to 
the  reliability  of  the  entire  system  and  organisation.    Hence  define 
design  and  operation  standards  to  ensure  reliability. 

4.2.8  Qualifications  Viewpoint 

Qualifications  are  concerned  with  the  quality  of  personnel  for 
achieving  the  proper  design  and  operation  of  manufacturing  entities. 
The  viewpoint  is  essentially  concerned  with  the  training  of  operators 
as  qualified  experts.    Hence  define  design  and  operation  standards  for 
the  qualifications  of  personnel  for  managing  manufacturing  activities. 

4.2.9  Description  Viewpoint 

Description  is  concerned  with  all  aspects  of  how  the  design  and 
operation  of  manufacturing  entities  are  defined  and  described  to 
provide  all  persons  concerned  with  a  means  of  mutual  understanding. 
It  is  essentially  concerned  with  the  terminology,  identification  and 
description  of  documents.    Hence  define  design  and  operation 
standards  to  ensure  mutual  understanding  in  t±ie  manufacturing  field. 


IS    14776  (Fartl):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


The  Reference  Model  for  Shop  Floor  Production 


5.1   General  Information 

This  chapter  describes  the  Reference  Model  developed  to  be  used  in  the 
identification  of  standards  within  Shop  Floor  Production. 

The  Reference  Model  presented  in  the  following  three  sections  is  in 
many  ways  a  synthesis  of  a  variety  of  existing  models.   Firstly  the  major 
activities  undertaken  for  manufacturing  are  identified  as  a  context  for 
Shop  Floor  Production.    Secondly  a  Shop  Floor  Production  Model  (SFPM) 
is  presented  which  groups  Shop  Floor  activities  into  hierarchical  levels. 
Thirdly  a  Generic  Activity  Model  (GAM)  is  presented  to  model  the  various 
activities  within  each  level  of  the  SFPM. 

Each  activity  in  Shop  Floor  Production  can  be  represented  by  an  instance 
of  the  GAM.   The  various  elements  of  the  GAM  will  have  different 
interpretations  for  any  given  activity. 

The  intent  of  this  Reference  Model  is  to  assist  in  identifying  where 
standards  may  be  required  and  the  detail  is  not  sufficient  for  other 
purposes  such  as  providing  a  basis  for  designing  or  implementing  a 
manufacturing  system.   The  Reference  Model  presents  a  functional  view 
of  the  Enterprise.  Facility  and  Shop  Floor  Production. 


5.2  The  Context  of  Shop  Floor  Production 

Section  1.2  sets  out  the  scope  of  manufacturing,  identifying  12  major 
functions.   Figure  1  shows  one  example  of  how  Shop  Floor  Production 
takes  place  in  a  context  established  by  those  other  functions.  Accordingly 
interactions  occur  between  many  of  the  activities  of  Shop  Floor 
Production  and  those  of  the  Facility,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  with  those  of 
the  Enterprise  itself.    The  methodology  described  later  allows  for  these 
interactions  to  be  identified.  In  addition  to  the  interactions  occurring 
within  Shop  Floor  Production  itself. 


10 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISOyXR    10314-1:1990 


5.3  The  Shop  Floor  ProducUon  Model  (SFPM) 

Shop  Floor  Production  is  distinguished  from  the  other  eleven 
manufacturing  functions  identified  in  Section  1.2  by  the  fact  that  it 
contains  those  activities  which  are  directly  engaged  in  producing  parts. 
It  is  common  practice  to  group  these  activities  into  several  levels. 

In  this  report,  a  four  level  model  is  selected  to  present  the  activities  of 
the  Shop  Floor  Production  function.    It  is  quite  likely  that  specific 
manufacturing  implementations  may  require  more  or  less  than  four 
levels,  but  four  levels  seem  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  identifying  areas 
of  standards. 

Also  this  report  identifies  four  types  of  manufacturing  activity,  each  type 
corresponding  to  each  level  of  Shop  Floor  Production.    There  can  be  (and 
generally  are)  several  activities  in  progress  at  the  same  time  at  each  level. 
The  types  of  activity  are: 

1 )  execute  shop  floor  production  processes 

2)  command  shop  floor  production  processes 

3)  co-ordinate  shop  floor  production  processes 

4)  supervise  shop  floor  production  processes. 

The  four  level  model  in  Figure  3  illustrates  the  structure  of  Shop  Floor 
Production.    This  model  is  called  the  Shop  Floor  Production  Model 
(SFPM).    The  figure  shows  the  name  of  each  level  and  the  corresponding 
type  of  activities  at  this  level  together  with  its  description. 


5.4  The  Generic  Activity  Model  (GAM) 

This  technical  report  approaches  the  modelling  of  those  characteristics 
relevant  to  standards  identification  within  the  SFPM  through  the  concept 
of  an  activity.   A  Generic  Activity  Model  (GAM)  as  shown  in  Figure  4  has 
been  developed  to  model  the  execution  of  the  various  activities  at  each 
level. 

The  internals  of  the  GAM  represent  an  interrelated  set  of  four  vSubJects 
and  four  Actions.   The  Subjects  and  Actions  are  defined  below: 


11 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


5.4. 1      Four  Subjects 

a)  Control  Information  which  includes: 

(i)     command  information,  normally  flowing  from  a  higher 
level  to  a  lower  level  which  initiates,  alters  or  terminates 
an  activity, 

(ii)    status  information  which  is  generated  in  direct  response 
to  a  command  and  normally  flows  in  the  opposite  direction 
to  the  command. 

(iii)  request  information  which  corresponds  to  control 

information  for  control  interaction  within  a  level  (peer  to 
peer),  if  any,  and 

(iv)  response  information  which  corresponds  to  status 

information  for  control  interaction  within  a  level  (peer  to 
peer),  if  any. 

b)  Data:    all  information  other  than  control  information  required 
for  or  resulting  from  the  performance  of  an  activity. 

c)  Material:    Material  is  a  production  object  of  the 
manufacturing  activity.   Material  includes  all  the  playsical 
matter  that  enters  the  product  during  manufacturing:    raw 
materials,  parts  and  assemblies,  auxiliary  materials,  products 
and  scrap  material. 

d)  Resources:    Resources  are  all  the  physical  means  required  to 
carry  out  the  manufacturing  that  are  not  Material.   Resources 
include  transform,  transport,  verify  and  storage  equipment; 
tools  and  fixtures;  data  processing  and  communication 
systems;  basic  resources  such  as  supply  material,  energy,  space 
and  time;  personnel. 

Note:    The  general  class  of  "information"  is  defined  here  to  consist  of 
control  information  and  data,  that  is  as  the  union  of  a)  and  b)  above. 

5.4.2     Four  Actions 

a)      Transform:   The  act  of  changing  control  information,  data, 
material  or  resources  from  one  form  to  another  form,  or  one 


12 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


State  to  another  state.    Transform  includes  encoding  or  parsing 
information,  decomposing  commands,  and  cutting,  forming, 
assembling,  or  adjusting  material  or  resources. 

b)  Transport:    The  act  of  moving  control  information,  data, 
material,  or  resources  from  one  point  in  t±ie  enterprise  to 
another. 

c )  Verify:   The  act  of  assessing  the  compliance  of  all  transformed 
control  information,  data,  material  and  resources  to  determine 
their  conformance  to  a  specification. 

d)  Store:    The  act  of  retaining  control  information,  data,  material 
or  resources  at  a  specified  location  within  Shop  Floor 
Production  or  Facility  until  they  are  required  to  be  transported. 

The  GAM  describes  the  execution  of  activities  in  terms  of  four 
Subjects  (Control  Information.  Data.  Material.  Resources)  and  four 
Actions  (Transform.  Transport.  Verify.  St^re).    The  GAM  is  developed 
from  a  view  that  the  realisation  of  manufacturing  activities  can  be 
represented  in  terms  of  these  four  Subjects  and  four  Actions. 

The  representation  of  a  given  activity  will  be  a  specific  instance  (an 
instantiation)  of  the  GAM  in  which  specific  correspondences 
(bindings)  are  established  between  the  elements  of  the  GAM  (Subjects. 
Actions)  and  the  entities  which  correspond  to  those  elements  for  that 
particular  manufacturing  activity. 

Not  all  elements  of  the  GAM  will  be  present  in  every  instance  -  the 
lowest  level  of  Shop  Floor  Production  for  example  does  not  have 
command  and  status  information  for  the  non-existent  level  below. 

Major  manufacturing  activities  may  be  decomposed  into  (sub)activities 
in  a  horizontal  fashion  (into  a  series  of  further  activities)  or  in  a 
vertical/  hierarchical  fashion  (into  levels  of  activities) .    The  GAM  is 
generic  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be  applied  to  all  activities. 

Establishing  specific  GAM  bindings  to  particular  manufacturing 
activities  yields  specific  Subjects  and  Actions.   The  A-  and  B-type 
procedures  described  in  Section  6  can  then  make  use  of  these  specific 
Subjects  and  Actions  in  identifying  areas  of  standards. 


13 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314*1:1990 


6    Methodology  for  extracting  areas  of  standards 


6.1   General  Information 

There  are  a  number  of  interactions  among  activities,  and  among  Subjects 
and  Actions  within  activities,  which  are  used  to  identify  the  area  of 
standardisation  in  manufacturing.    Therefore  the  methodology  consists  of 
examining  the  various  activities.  Subjects  and  Actions  in  various 
relationships  and  connections  to  determine  if  a  standards  requirement  is 
defined. 

The  goal  of  standardisation  is  to  permit  more  effective  relationships  and 
connections  between  two  or  more  objects.    In  manufacturing,  objects  may 
be  machine-to-machine  relationships  and/  or  connections,  or  man-to- 
machine  relationships  and/  or  interactions. 

The  Reference  Model  described  in  the  preceding  chapter  is  essentially 
declarative  rather  than  procedural  —  that  is  it  presents  a  set  of  concepts 
and  a  hierarchical  approach  by  which  a  manufacturing  Enterprise  can  be 
better  understood.   The  Model  defines  useful  manufacturing  functions, 
characteristics  and  relationships  amongst  them.    It  is  also  necessary  to 
show  how  they  cem  be  used  to  identify  standards  areas  for  manufacturing. 

This  chapter  provides  such  a  methodology  for  extracting  areas  of 
standards. 


6.2  Overall  approach 

The  way  in  which  the  various  elements  of  the  Reference  Model  are  used 
to  identify  standards  is  illustrated  in  Figure  5.   The  various  activities  of 
manufacturing  are  grouped  into  twelve  major  functions.    One  of  these. 
Shop  Floor  Production,  is  further  modelled  by  a  four  level  model.  SFPM 
(Figure  3). 

The  various  activities  at  each  level  of  SFPM  can  each  be  modelled  by  the 
GAM  (Figure  4).  with  each  such  instantiated  model  resulting  in  bindings 
for  GAM  concepts  (Subjects,  Actions).    The  activities  of  SFPM  can  be 
combined  into  vertical  and  horizontal  arrangements  and  this  fact  is 
recognised  in  the  procedures  of  6.3  which  identify  potential  areas  for 
standards,  each  of  which  can  be  represented  by  a  cell  entry  in  the 
matrices  of  Figure  6. 


14 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


Once  a  potential  standards  area  has  been  identified  (a  non-empty  cell 
entry)  it  should  be  examined  in  the  light  of 

•  the  technologies  of  interest,  i.e.  the  technologies  that  might  be 
evident  in  the  Subjects  and  Actions  for  that  area,  and 

•  the  Standards  Viewpoints  described  in  Section  4.2. 

These  two  concerns  act  as  filters  which  restrict  areas  of  standards  to 
those  which  are  realisable  with  current  technology  and  which  reflect  the 
objectives  of  standardisation. 


6.3  Extraction  Procedures 

These  prpcedures  use  the  concepts  of  the  Reference  Model  and  describe 
how  these  can  be  examined  to  identify  potential  areas  for  standards.   The 
approach  places  strong  em^phasis  on  interactions  between  elements  of  a 
system.    Consequently  it  is  expected  to  produce  areas  of  potential 
standards  which  are  prerequisites  for  systems  integration. 

The  various  combinations  in  the  Reference  Model  alluded  to  above  are 
examined  by  applying  the  two  kinds  of  procedures  defined  below  to  each 
of  the  Standards  Viewpoints. 

It  is  important  to  note  that: 

•  each  of  the  two  kinds  of  procedure  can  be  applied  independently 
of  one  another. 

•  the  same  standard  might  arise  from  applying  different  procedures 
and 

•  the  application  of  these  procedures  is  not  guaranteed  to  produce 
an  exhaustive  list  of  standards  but  rather  to  clarify  areas  of 
standards. 

6.3.1     Procedures  A:    the  "Interrelationship  within  a  leveF 
procedures 

These  procedures  are  used  for  ex^acting  areas  of  standards  for 
interrelationship  between  Subject  and  Action.  Subject  and  Subject 
and  Action  and  Action  corresponding  to  each  level  of  the  SFPM. 


15 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


For  each  activity,  these  procedures  should  be  applied  to  extract  areas 
where  standards  may  apply. 

Procedure  Al:   Subject- Action  Interrelationship 

For  each  activity  in  each  level  of  the  SFPM.  consider  any  possible 
Subject- Action  interrelationship  for  applicable  areas  of  standards. 

Procedure  A2:    Subject  interrelationship 

For  each  activity  in  each  level  of  the  SFPM,  consider  any  possible 
Subject-Subject  interrelationship  for  applicable  areas  of  standards. 

Procedure  A3:   Action  Interrelationship 

For  each  activity  in  each  level  of  the  SFPM,  consider  any  possible 
Action- Action  interrelationship  for  applicable  areas  of  standards. 

6.3.2     Procedures  B:    the  "External"  procedures 

These  procedures  are  used  for  extracting  areas  of  standards  for 
interrelaiionship  between  activities  for  both  vertical  and  horizontal 
structure. 

For  each  activity  these  procedures  should  be  applied  to  extract  areas 
where  standards  may  apply. 

Procedure  Bl:   Horizontal  interrelationship 

For  each  level  of  the  SFPM  consider  any  possible  interrelationships 
between  Shop  Floor  Production  and  other  manufacturing  functions 
(the  context  functions  l.,ll  of  1.2)  for  applicable  areas  of  standards. 

Procedure  B2:   Vertical  interrelationship 

For  each  level  of  the  SFPM  consider  any  possible  Subject 
interrelationship  with  the  level  above  and  below  for  applicable  areas 
of  standards,  and  hence  relevant  Subject  attributes. 


16 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


6.4  Matrix  Representation  of  Identification  Procedures 

Corresponding  to  each  procedure  (Al,  A2,  A3.  Bl.  B2)  it  is  possible  to 
envisage  a  matrix  which  represents  that  procedure  graphically.    These 
are  shown  schematically  in  Figure  6.    Each  cell  of  each  matrix  represents 
a  potential  area  for  standards.    Similar  matrices  are  used  in  Part  2  of  this 
report  to  show  the  standards  areas  identified  through  the  application  of 
these  procedures,  as  well  as  worksheets  for  other  users  of  the  Reference 
Model  and  its  methodology. 


7    Summary 


This  document  is  Part  1  of  a  report  on  a  means  to  identify  where  industrial 
automation  standards  for  Shop  Floor  Production  may  be  required.    It  has 
described  a  Reference  Model  which  may  be  used  as  a  systematic  method  for 
determining  areas  for  standards  development  work.    Part  2  of  the  report 
describes  an  application  of  the  methodology  which  utilises  this  Reference 
Model  in  identifying  these  areas,  catalogues  them  and  cross-references 
them  with  standards  already  completed  or  in  the  process  of  development. 


17 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


Enterprise  * 


Facility 


Corporate  management 
Finance 

Marketing  &  Sales 
Research  &  Development 


Product  design  & 

Production  Engineering 
Production  management 
Procurement 
Shipping 

Waste  material  treatment 
Resources  management 
Maintenance  management 


Shop  Floor  Production 


Shop  Floor  Production 


Figure  1  -  Typical  Grouping  o1  Manulacturing 


*  The  connbination  of  Enterprise  and  Facility  form  the 
context  of  Shop  Floor  Production  as  described  in  5.2. 


18 


vSntes  Forecast 


Product  Availabitily      Product  Quality 


CORPORATE 
MANAGEMENT 


"o 

Q. 
Q 

CC 


Finance 
Policy 


FINANCE 


Marketing 
Policy 


Budget 


Production  Policy 


MARKETING  &  SALES 


R&D 
Requirements 


RESEARCH  & 
DEVELOPMENT 


Technical 
Inforrtiation 


Order 


Product  Design 
Requirements 


MM 


PRODUCT  DESIGN  & 
PRODUCTION  ENGINEERING 


Bill  of  Materials 


PROCUREMENT 


Procured 
Resource^ 


RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT 


Production  Status 


Production  Status 


Ship  Status 


PRODUCTION  MANAGEMENT 
{Quality,  Cost,  Delivery) 


Purchase 
Order 

Engineering 
Information 


Materials 


to 

o 

a> 
CO 


Production 
"  Commands 

Product 
Information 


Ship 
Order 


SHOP  FLOOR 
PRODUCTION 


Maintenance 
Request 


MAINTENANCE 
MANAGEMENT 


Products 


SHIPPING 


Waste 


WASTE  MATERIAL 
TREATMENT 


O 


^     Figure  2  -  Typical  Arrangements  of  Manufacturing  Functions 


(O 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


Level 

Sub- Activity 

Responsibility 

4 

Section 
/Area 

Supervise  shop 
floor  production 
process 

Supervising  and  co-ordinating  the 
production  and  supporting  the  jobs 
and  obtaining  and  allocating  resources 
to  the  jobs 

3 

Cell 

Co-ordinate  shop 
tloor  production 
process 

Sequencing  and  supervising 
the  jobs  at  the  shop  floor 
production  process 

2 

Station 

Command  shop 
floor  production 
process 

Directing  and  co-ordinating 

the  shop  floor  production  process 

1 

Equipment 

Execute  shop 
floor  production 
process 

Executing  the  job  of  shop  floor 
production  according  to  commands 

Figure  3  -  Shop  floor  production  model  (SFPM) 


20 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 

Information  **                 Resources 

a 

U 

Material  * 

Material  * 

. — 1^. 

Information  ** 

{  TP,  TF,  VE,  ST} 

Information  ** 

1^. 

Resources 

1^. 

Resources 

^^ 

'  r 


Information 


Resources 


Actions  {TP.  TF,  VE,  ST}  on  Material  are 
defined  only  at  Level  1 


TP 
TF 
VE 
ST 


Transport 
Transform 
Verify 
Store 


Information  is  defined  in  the  text  to  include 
both  control  and  data  components. 
For  strict  hierarchies,  horizontal 
Information  flows  are  restricted  to  data 
components 


Figure  4  ■-  Generic  Activity  Model 


21 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


Matrix  Representing 
Areas  of  Potential  Standards 


Figure  5  -  Overall  Approach  to  Identifying  areas  of  standards 


NOTE:  Part  2  will  also  use  concepts  of  appropriate  technologies  and 
Standards  Viewpoints  to  restrict  potential  areas  for  standards 
into  those  which  are  practical  and  desirable. 


22 


IS    14776  (Parti):  2000 
ISO/TR    10314-1:1990 


:  Subject  -  Action 
For  each  level, 

consider  — 


to 

c 
o 


Subjects 


:  Subject  -  Subject 
For  each  level, 

consider  — 


o 

o 

CO 


Subjects 


:  Action  -  Action 
For  each  level, 

consider  — 


CO 

c 
o 

5 


Actions 


B1  :  Horizontal 
For  each  level, 

consider  ■ 


B2  :  Vertical 
For  each  level, 

consider- 


8§ 

Context  Functions 

u_  o 

pl 

CO  Q. 

CO 

B 

CO 

Subje 
other 

fcts  in 
levels 

Figure  6  -  Matrix  representation  of  identification  procedures 


23 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  u  statLitory  institulion  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quaUty  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  )ias  the  copyright  of  ali  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Hnquiries  relating  to  copyrigin  be  addressed  to  the  Director  {Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Ainendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions' 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  BP/PE   18    (  021 1  ). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU   OF   INDIAN    STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10  002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  1 10  002 

Eastern      :  1/14  C.  IT.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA  700  054 

Northern    :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 
Southern    :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113 


Western     :  Manakalaya,  1:9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAl'  400  093 


Telegrams   :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


{ 


Telephone 

323  76  17 
323  38  41 


{ 


337  84  99,337  85  61 
337  86  26,337  91  20 


{ 


60  3843 
60  20  25 


235  02  16,235  04  42 
235  15  19,235  23  15 

832  92  95,  832  78  58 
832  78  91,  832  78  92 


Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.GHAZIABAD.GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANFUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  PATNA.  PUNE.  R  AIKOT.THIRU  VANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Printograph,  New  Delh,  Ph.:  5726847 


