**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1359 (1992): Electroplated coatings of tin [MTD 7: Light 
Metals and their Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



sta £ fMrer writ ^t fafeifai 

Indian Standard 

ELECTROPLATED COATINGS OF TIN 

SPECIFICATION 

( Third Revision ) 

UDC 669-687 



IS 1359 :1992 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1992 Price Group 6 



Metallic and Non-metallic Finishes Sectional Committee, MTD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Third Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Metallic and Non-metallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1959 and subsequently revised in 1966 and 1971. 

This standard is based on the practices generally followed in the country in this field. While reviewing the 
standard, need was felt to revise this standard to align various requirements in line with the International 
standards. In this revision, the following main modifications have been made: 

a) Service grades have been reduced to four, and 

b) Corrosion requirements of tin coatings have been incorporated. 

In the formulation of this standard, assistance have been derived from ISO 2093 : 1986 'Electroplated 
coatings of tin', issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : I960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) 5 . The number of significant 
places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 1359 : 1992 



Indian Standard 

ELECTROPLATED COATINGS OF TIN — 

SPECIFICATION 

( Third Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for 
electroplated tin coatings of not less than 99*5 
percent tin applied to fabricated articles of Iron, 
Steel, Nickel alloys and Copper and copper alloys 
containing more than 50 percent of copper. It 
also covers coatings brightened by fusion in hot 
oil after electrodeposition, the process being 
known as flow-brightening or flow melting. 

1.2 This standard does not, however, cover coat- 
ings on: 

a) threaded components; 

b) tin-coated copper wire; 

c) coatings on sheet, strip or wire in unfabri- 
cated form or on articles made from them; 

d) coatings in coil springs; 

e) coatings applied by chemical means 
( Immersion, autocatalytic or electroless ); 

f ) electroplating of steels with tensile strength 
greater than 1 000 Mpa ( or of correspon- 
ding hardness ); because such steels are 
subject to hydrogen embrittlement ( see 
7.2 ); and 

g) aluminium and zinc alloys. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. 

193 : 1982 

265 : 1976 



particular reference to the surface not to be 
plated. 

NOTE — Surfaces on which a controlled deposit can- 
not ordinarily be obtained, such as holes, recesses, bases 
of angles and similar areas, are normally exempted 
from the requirements for significant surfaces, unless 
they are specially designated as such. 

3.2 Flow-Melting, Fusing, Flow-Brightening, 
Reflowing 

A process by which a coating is melted in order 
to impact desirable properties such as brightness 
or improved soiderabiiity ^ see 9.2.1.1 ). 

4 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY 
THE PURCHASER TO THE 
ELECTROPLATER 

4.1 Essential Information 

The following information shall be supplied by 
the purchaser to the electroplater: 

a) the number of this standard; 

b) the nature of the basis material ( see 5.1 ); 

c) the service grade number { see 6,1 ) or the 
classification code ot the coating required 
( see 6.2 ); 

d) the significant surface of the article to be 
electroplated indicated, for example, by 
drawings or by the provision of suitably 
marked samples; and 

e) the method adhesion testing to be used 
( see 9.3 ). 



715 
( Part 2 ) 

2384 : 1963 



1976 



Title 
Soft solder {fourth revision ) 

Hydrochloric acid ( second 4.2 Additional Information 

revision ) 

Coated abrasives: Part 2 
Special and mechanized appli- 
cation ( third revision ) 

Tin anodes for electroplating 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition shall apply. 

3.1 Significant Surface 

The surface agreed upon between the purchaser 
and the electroplater, and indicated on the 
drawing or suitably marked on a sample with 



The following additional information may be re- 
quired and, if so, shall be specified by the 
purchaser: 

a) any heat treatment required {seel ); 

b) any requirements tor porosity testing 
1 see 9.4.2 ), 

c) any requirement for soiderabiiity testing 
and the test methods and conditions to be 
applied ( see 9.5 ), 

d) any special requirements for undercoats 
( see 8 ), 

e) a sample showing the required finish 
( see 5.3.1 ), 



1 



IS 1359: 1992 



f ) any special pretreatment requirement, 

g) any specific requirements for the purity of 
the coating, 

h) any special packaging requirements for 
plated components, and 

j ) any special post-plating treatment. 

5 MATERIAL AND WORKMANSHIP 

5.1 Basis Material 

This standard specifies no requirements for the 
condition, finish or surface roughness of the basis 
material prior to electroplating. 

5.2 Material 

The material shall be such as will produce tin 
coating conforming to this specification. The 
anode shall be of pure tin complying with the 
requirements of IS 2384 : 1963. 

5.3 Workmanship 

Over the area of the significant surface, the 
plated article shall be free from visible plating 
defects, such as blisters, pits or unplated areas, 
and shall not be stained or discoloured. The 
plated surface shall be white, of a smooth texture, 
and be free from nodules. Flow-brightened coat- 
ings shall be free from de-wetted areas. 

5.3.1 The article shall be clean and free from 
damage. When necessary, a preliminary sample 
showing the required finish shall be supplied or 
approved by the purchaser. 

6 CLASSIFICATION 

6.1 Service Grade Number 

The service grade number indicates the severity 
of the service grade in accordance with the 
following scale: 

4 : Exceptionally Severe — for example service 
outdoors in severe corrosive conditions or con- 
tact with food or drink where a complete 
cover of tin has to be maintained against 
corrosion and abrasion. 

3 : Severe — for example service outdoors in 
typical temperature conditions. 

2 ; Moderate — for example service indoors 
with some condensation. 

1 : Mild — for example service indoors in dry 
atmospheres or applications where soldera- 
bility is the primary requirement. 

NOTE — See 9.1 which gives guidance on the relation 
between service grade number and minimum thick- 
ness. 

When specifying the service grade number or 
coating classification code, it should be noted that 
tin is susceptible to damage in abrasive environ- 
ments or in those containing certain organic 
vapours. 



6.2 Coating Classification Code 

The coating classification code shall consist of 
four parts, the first two of which shall be separat- 
ed by an oblique stroke, as follows: 



a/b c d 



where, 



a indicates the chemical symbol for the basis 
metal ( or for the main constituent, if an 
alloy ); 

b indicates the chemical symbol for the under- 
coat metal ( or for the main constituent, if 
an alloy ) followed by a figure for its mini- 
mum coating thickness, in micrometres, and 
is omitted if no undercoat is required 
[ see 4.2 (d) ]; 

c indicates the chemical symbol for tin, Sn, 
followed by a figure for its minimum thick- 
ness, in micrometres; 

d indicates the surface finish, by the symbol 
m if the coating is matt, or b if it is bright 
electroplated or f if it is flow-melted. 



An example is 



Fe/Ni 2-5 Sn 5 f 



which represents as iron or steel basis metal, with 
a 2'5 ixxn nickel undercoat, tin electroplated to a 
coating thickness ot 5 ^m and flow*melted. 

7 HEAT TREATMENT 

7.1 When required by the purchaser, certain 
steels should be treated as described in 7.2 to 
reduce the risk of damage due to hydrogen 
embrittlement. 

7.1.1 Stress Relief Before Plating 

Severely cold-worked steels or parts made from 
steel of tensile strength of 100 MN/m a or greater 
which have been ground or subjected to severe 
machining after tempering shall normally be 
stress- relieved by maintaining them at 200 ± 10°G 
for not less than one hour or, preferably, for 
30 minutes at the highest temperature within the 
limit imposed by the tempering temperature. 

7.1.2 Some steels which have been caiburized, 
flame-hardened or induction-hardened and sub- 
sequently ground would be impaired by the above 
treatment, and shall instead be stress- relieved at 
140 ± 10°C for not less than 5 hours. 

7.2 Hydrogen Embrittlement Relief After 
Electroplating 

Because diffusion of hydrogen through tin is very 
slow, heat treatment for hydrogen embrittlement 
relief after electroplating is impractical. 



IS 1359 : 1992 



8 REQUIREMENTS FOR UNDERCOATS 

8.1 Undercoats may be necessary on certain basis 
materials for any of the following reasons: 

a) to prevent diffusion, 

b) to retain soIderabiIity s 

c) to ensure adhesion, and 

d) to improve protection against corrosion. 

8.2 Care should be taken to select an undercoat 
or undercoat system that will not confer undesi- 
rable properties such as embrittlement of the basis 
material or finished article. For example the use, 
of highly stressed nickel should be avoided 

8.3 If the basis material is a copper alloy con- 
taining zinc as an alloying constituent, and 
solderable properties are required, a nickel or 
copper undercoat of minimum local thickness 
2:5 fixn is essential in addition to the specified 
coating thickness of tin such coatings may also 
be necessary to retain good appearance and 
adhesion. 

SA If an undercoat is specified, its nature and 
minimum local thickness ( see 9.1 ) shall be 
specified by the purchaser. 

The thickness of the undercoat or undercoats shall 
be measured by the appropriate method specified 
in Annex A. 

9 PLATING REQUIREMENTS 

9.1 Thickness 

Tin coatings are classified by thickness and for 
each service grade ( see 6.1 ), minimum values 
are specified in Table 1. 

9.1.1 The thickness of the coating shall be mea- 
sured over a reference area by the appropriate 
method given in Annex A on any part of the 
significant surface that can be touched with a 
20 mm diameter ball In the case of articles 
having a significant surface area of 100 mm 2 or 



greater, the minimum thickness shall be regarded 
as the minimum value of local thickness. In the 
case of article having a significant surface area of 
less than 100 ram 1 , the minimum thickness shall 
be regarded as the minimum values of average 
thickness ( see Annex B ). 

9.1.2 In the case of printed circuit boards with 
electroplated-through holes, the requirements 
shall apply to the surface within the holes, as 
well as to the areas that can be touched with a 
20 mm diameter bail. 

9.1.3 In the case of flow-melted coatings, the 
thickness requirements apply to the as-electro- 
plated condition, prior to flow-melting. 

9.2 Plating 

9,2.1 Application 

Tin shall be deposited on the articles after com- 
pleting operations, such as machining, brassing, 
welding and forming. Tin shall be deposited 
directly on the basis metal without preliminary 
coating of other metals. 

9.2.1.1 When tin is plated on the article for soft 
soldering purposes, it may be flow-melted at a 
temperature between 250°G and 260°G to over- 
come difficulties in soldering during long periods 
of storage. 

9.3 Adhesion 

The coating shall withstand either of the tests 
given in Annex G. The flaking and blistering of 
the coating shall be taken as evidence of unsatis- 
factory adhesion. 

9.4 Corrosion/Porosity 

If specified by the purchaser, coatings having a 
minimum thickness of 10 microns or greater, 
shall be subjected to a corrosion test for ferrous 
basis material and porosity test for non-ferrous 
basis material. 



Table 1 Coating Thicknesses 

( Claused A ) 



Service Grade 


Copper Basis Materials 1 ) 


— * 


Other Basis Material 

. *- 


Number 


r~ 

( Partial ) 

Classify ation 

Code 


Minimum 

Thickness 

[Am 


(Partial ) 

Classification 

Code 




Minimum 
Thickness 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 




(4) 




(5) 


4 


Sn 30 


30 




Sn 30 




30 


3 


Sn 15 


15 




Sn 20 




20 


2 


Sn 8 


10 




Sn 12 




12 


1 


Sn 5 


5 




Sn 5 




5 


*> Attention is drawn to the essential requirement 


t in 8 for 


undercoats 


on copper alloy 


basis materials that contain 


zinc as an alloying constituent. 













IS 1359 : 1992 



9.4.1 Corrosion Test 

The test shall be conducted as per Annex E. The 
coated item shall be subjected to a 24 hours salt 
spray test. After removal from the salt spray 
{ fog ) cabinet examine the items The appear- 
ance of more than 6 corroded areas that are 
visible to the unaided eye per sq cm of surface 
or any corroded areas larger than 1*6 mm in 
diameter shall be cause for rejection. For purpose 
of this requirement, a corroded area is defined as 
exposure or corrosion of the basis metal. 

9.4.2 Porosity Test 

The test shall be conducted as per Annex F. 

9.5 Solderability 

The samples shall be considered solderable if 
they have a uniform coating, free from disconti- 
nuities or breaks visible to unaided eye. When so 
specified by the purchaser, samples of tin coating 
on copper and copper alloys shall be subjected to 
preliminary artificial ageing treatment as given 
in Annex D. 

NOTE — The object of this preliminary treatment is 
to demonstrate whether articles may be expected to 
retain their solderability during periods of storage. 
The period of storage at room temperatures which 
produces an effect equivalent to the t^st procedure can 
not be precisely stated but it is probably some years,. 

10 SAMPLING AND INSPECTION 
10*1 Sampling for Production Control 

Statistical quality control is recommended for 
controlling the quality of tin-plated articles* For 



this purpose, it is recommended that samples 
should be taken from a portion where it is likely 
to give the minimum thickness of plating. The 
tests specified in 9 shall be conducted on such 
samples. 

10.2 Sampling for Acceptance of a Lot 

For the purpose of sampling, a lot shall be divided 
into sub-lots consisting of 100 articles or part 
thereof of only such articles as are electroplated 
at one time in the same bath. Two samples snail 
be selected from each sub-lot and subjected to 
the tests specified in 9. 

10.2*1 Criteria for Acceptance 

If these samples stand the tests, the sub-lot repre- 
sented by them shall be accepted. If one or both 
the samples should fail, two further samples shall 
be selected from the same sub-lot and subjected 
to the tests. If these samples stand the tests, the 
sub-lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
standard. 

10.3 When the consignment is made of small 
articles plated in a barrel, the number to be tested 
shall be agreed to between the plater and the 
purchaser, 

11 MARKING 

The marking related to the tin coating shall 
include classification number as specified in this 
standard and the name or trade-mark of the 
manufacturer. 



ANNEX A 
( Clauses 8.4 and 9.1 1 ) 

METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF LOCAL THICKNESS 



A-l OVERCOATING 

On ferrous articles electrodeposit 1*3 ^m of copper 
followed by a thickness of not less than 50 ftm of 
nickel. For copper base article electrodeposit a 
thickness of not less than 50 pm of nickel or copper 
on that sample. 

A-2 MOUNTING AND PREPARATION OF 
SECTIONS 

A-2.1 Section the overcoated sample at one or 
more positions. Mount the section by moulding 
in a suitable material so that the plated surface 
is perpendicular to the face which is to be prepa- 
red for examination 1 * and so that the section is 



*) A deviation of 10 degrees from the perpendicular intro- 
duces an error of 2 percent in thickness. 



rigidly held, there being no void between the 
plated surface and the mounting material. 



A-2.1«l Polish the mounted section, using succes- 
sively finer abrasives, the last which shall not be 
coarser than IS grit No. 40 ( 500-micron ) [ see 
IS 715 ( Part 2 ) : 1976 ]. Final polishing may 
be carried out on a low speed polising wheel 
using suitable polishing media. 



A-2.1. 2 It is recommended that the surface should 
be lightly etched with a suitable reagent in order 
to improve the contrast between the deposit and 
the adjacent metal and to remove any soft metal 
which may have spread over a hard metal. 



IS 1359 : 1992 



A-3 MEASUREMENT OF THE THICKNESS 
OF DEPOSIT 

A-3.1 Project the image of the section on to the 
screen of a metallographic microscope at a known 
and properly calibrated magnification. Measure 
the thickness of the deposit on the projected 
image accurately with a graduated linear scale 
and determine the actual thickness of the deposi- 
ted metal by dividing this measurement by the 



magnification. 

A-3.1. 1 Alternatively, measure the thickness with 
a metallurgical microscope fitted with a micro- 
meter eye- piece which has been calibrated against 
an accurately graduated scale. 

A-3.1.2 In either case, the magnifications shall 
be sufficient to allow the actual thickness of 
deposit to be determined to ±1'2 /xm, 



ANNEX B 
(Clause 9.1.1 ) 

METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE THICKNESS 



B-l GENERAL 

When small articles are to be tested it is con- 
venient to perform a single determination of 
average thickness on a number of samples taken 
from a batch. 

B-2 STRIPPING SOLUTION 

Dissolve 20 g of antimony trioxide in 1 000 ml of 
cold concentrated hydrochloric acid ( d = 1*16 ) 
( conforming to IS 265 : 1976 ). 

B-3 PROCEDURE 

Carefully clean a plated part of known area> free 
it from grease by means of a suitable solvent 
treatment, thoroughly dry it and weigh it to an 
accuracy of one part in 1 000. Sufficient area of 
sample should be taken to give a weight loss on 
stripping of at least 0*2 g of tin. Immerse it totally 
in the stripping solution and turn it over so that 
the liquid has free access to all surfaces. A fresh 



portion of the stripping solution should be used 
in each test; at least 100 ml of the solution should 
be used to remove 1 g of tin. Allow the sample to 
remain in the solution for a period of one minute 
after gas evolution has ceased. Remove the part, 
wash it immediately in running water, mop 
it with a wet soft cloth or cotton wool swab to 
remove the black powdery deposit of antimony. 
Dry it and reweigh. 

B-4 CALCULATION 

Thickness of tin i 37x io» („,_„,,) . 
coating in /xm = ^ — micrometres 

where 

m x = original mass of the part in g, 
m 2 = final mass of the part in g, and 
A «= area of coating in square millimetres. 

NOTE — The above calculation assumes a specific 
gravity of 7*30 for tin. 



ANNEX C 
( Clause 9.3 ) 

ADHESION TEST 



C-l BURNISHING TEST FOR ADHESION 

C-l.l Rub an area of not more than 25 mm x 
25 mm of the plated surface, selected at the 
discretion of the inspector, rapidly and firmly for 
15 seconds with a smooth metal implement, 

C-l. 1.1 A suitable burnishing implement is a 
copper disc, for example, a copper coin used 



edgewise and broadside. Maintain a pressure 
sufficient to burnish the film at every stroke, but 
not so great as to cut the deposit. 

C-2 QUENCHING TEST FOR ADHESION 

C-2.1 Heat the plated articles in an oven to a 
temperature of 185 ± ^°C. Quench the articles 
in water at room temperature. 



IS 1359: 1992 



ANNEX D 
( Clause 9.5 ) 

SOLDERABILITY TEST 



D-l TEST SAMPLE 

For small articles of suitable shape and size 
the whole article should be tested. For larger 
articles, cut a portion of suitable size of testing. A 
recommended panel size is 25 mm X 25 mm. For 
articles not falling into the categories, sampling 
shall be as agreed to between the plater and the 
purchaser. 

D-2 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED 
D-2.1 Solder Pot 

Electrically heated and maintained at 250 ± 5 °G. 

D-2.2 Solder 

Complying with Grade Sn 60 of IS 193 : 1982 in 
sufficient volume to ensure that the temperature 
remains substantially uniform when introducing 
the test sample. 

D-2.3 flux 

Consisting of a solution containing 25 percent by 
weight of water white rosin and 75 percent by 
weight of isopropyl alcohol ( 99 percent pure ), 
free from other additives. 



D-3 ARTIFICIAL AGEING 

D-3.1 Place the sample for test in a suitable 
vessel above boiling water and leave it there, with 
the water boiling continuously for 8 hours. Keep 
the vessel covered and ensure that the sample 
does not come into contact with the wall of the 
vessel and that its lower edge is not less than 
50 mm or more than 100 mm above the surface 
of the boiling water. Arrange the cover on the 
vessel and the steam condensed water over the 
sample. 

D-3.2 Disregard any discolouration of the sample 
occurring during this ageing treatment. After the 
8 hour treatment, remove the sample from the 
steam and allow it to dry to air. 

D-4 PROCEDURE 

Coat the sample with flux by immersion. Ensure 
that the whole surface of the solder bath is clean 
and bright by skimming it with a steel scraper, 
and immediately lower the sample into the bath 
at a speed of approximately 25 mm/s. Leave it 
immersed for 5 seconds and then withdraw it at 
the rate of approximately 25 mm/s, holding at 
stationary just above the solder surface until the 
coating solidifies. 



ANNEX E 
( Clause 9.4.1) 

CORROSION TEST 



E-l TEST SOLUTION 

The test solution shall be prepared by dissolving 
sodium chloride in distilled or de-ionized water to 
produce a concentration of 50 £ 5 g/1. The 
sodium chloride shall be white and shall give a 
colourless solution in water. It shall be substan- 
tially free from copper and nickel and shall not 
contain more than 01 % of sodium iodide and 
not more than 0*4 % of total impurities calculated 
for dry salt. If the pH of the solution as prepared 
is outside the range 6*0 to 70 the presence of 
undesirable impurities in the salt or the water or 
both shall be investigated. 

E-l.l The jr)H of the salt solution shall be adjust- 
ed so that the pH of sprayed solution collected 
within the test cabinet ( see E-2.4 ) will be 
between 6*5 and 7*2. Control of j&H shall be based 
on electrometric measurement at 25°C but a 
short-range pH paper which can be read in 



increments of 3 pH unit or less and which has 
been calibrated against electrometric measure- 
ments may be used in routine checks. Any 
necessary correction shall be made by additions 
of solutions of hydrochloric acid or sodium 
hydroxide of analytical grade. 

Attention is drawn to the possible changes in pH 
resulting from loss of carbon dioxide from the 
solution when it is sprayed. Such changes may be 
avoided by reducing the carbon dioxide content 
of the solution by, for example, heating it to a 
temperature above 35°C before it is placed in the 
apparatus or by making the solution from freshly 
boiled water. 

E-1.2 The solution shall be filtered before it is 
placed in the reservoir of the apparatus, in order 
to remove any solid matter which might block the 
apertures of the spraying device. 



6 



IS 1359 : 1992 



E-2 APPARATUS 

The apparatus shall comprise the following com- 
ponents. 

E-2,1 Spray Cabinet made of, or lined with, 
material resistant to corrosion by the sprayed 
solution. The cabinet shall have a capacity of 
not less than 02 m 3 and preferably of not less 
than 4 m 3 since, with smaller volumes, difficul- 
ties are experienced in ensuring even distribution 
of spray. The upper parts shall be so shaped that 
drops of sprayed solution accumulated on them 
do not fall on specimens being tested. 

The size and shape of the cabinet shall be such 
that the quantity of solution collected in the 
cabinet is within the limits stated in E-5. 

E-2. 2 Means of Supplying and Controlling Heat, 
adequate to maintain the cabinet and its contents 
at the specified temperature ( see E-5 ). The tem- 
perature shall be controlled by a thermostat 
element placed either within the cabinet at least 
100 mm from the walls or in a water jacket on 
the cabinet. In either case the thermometer, 
capable of being read from the outside, shall be 
placed within the cabinet at least 100 mm from 
the walls. 

E-2.3 Means for Spraying the Salt Solution, 
comprising a supply of clean air of controlled 
pressure and humidity, a reservoir to contain the 
solution to be sprayed and one or more atomizers 
made of material resistant to the solution. 

The compressed air supply to the atomizers shall 
be passed through a filter to remove all traces of 
oil or solid matter and shall be at a pressure of 
70 to 170 kPa 1 *. In order to prevent evaporation 
of water from the sprayed droplets, the air shall be 
humidified before entering the atomizer by passage 
through a saturation tower containing water 
at a temperature several degrees higher than that 
of the cabinet. The appropriate temperature 
depends on the pressure used and on the type of 
atomizer nozzle and shall be adjusted so that the 
rate of collection of spray in the cabinet and the 
concentration of the collected spray are kept 
within the specified limits ( see E-5 ). 

The reservoir to contain the solution to be spray- 
ed shall be a tank made of material resistant to 
the solution and shall be provided with means of 
maintaining a constant level of solution in the 
reservoir. 

The atomizers shall be made of inert material, for 
example glass of plastics material. Baffles may be 
used to prevent direct impingement of spray on 
the test specimens and the use of adjustable baffles 
iis helpful in obtaining uniform distribution of 
spray throughout the cabinet. 



D 1 kPa = 1 kN/m* ^ 0*01 atm. 



E-2.4 Suitable Collecting Devices ( at least two ), 
which shall be funnels of glass or other chemically 
inert material with the stems inserted into gradu- 
ated cylinders or other containers. Funnels with 
a diameter of 100 mm have a collecting area of 
approximately 80 cm*. The collecting devices shall 
be placed in the zone of the cabinet where the 
test specimens are placed, one close to an inlet of 
spray and one remote from an inlet. They shall be 
so placed that only spray and not liquid falling 
from specimens or from parts of the cabinet is 
collected. 

NOTE — If the equipment has been used for a spray 
test or for anv other purpose with solution differing 
from that specified for the test to be carried out, it shall 
be thoroughly cleaned before use. 

E-3 TEST SPECIMENS 

The number and type of test specimens, their 
shape and their dimensions shall be selected 
according to the specification covering the coating 
or product being tested. When not so specified , 
details concerning the specimens shall be mutually 
agreed between the interested parties. 

E-3.1 The specimens shall be thoroughly cleaned 
before testing. The cleaning method employed shall 
depend on the nature of the surface and the 
contaminants, and shall not include the use of 
any abrasives or solvents which may attack the 
surface of the specimens. 

Care shall be taken that specimens are not recon- 
taminated after cleaning by excessive or careless 
handling. 

E-3.2 If test specimens are cut from a larger 
coated article, the cutting shall be carried out in 
such a way that the coating is not damaged in the 
area adjacent to the cut. Unless otherwise speci- 
fied, the cut edges shall be adequately protected 
by coating them with a suitable medium, stable 
under the conditions of the test, such as paint, 
wax or adhesive tape. 

E-4 METHOD OF EXPOSURE OF TEST 
SPECIMENS 

The specimens shall be so placed in the cabinet 
that they are not in the direct line of travel of 
spray from the atomizer. Baffles may be used to 
prevent direct impact of the sprayed solution on 
the specimens. 

The angle at which the sample is exposed in the 
cabinet is very important The surface shall, in 
principle, be flat and placed in the cabinet facing 
upwards at an angle as close as possible to 20° to 
the vertical. This angle shall, in all cases, be 
within the limits 15° to 30°. 

In the case of irregular surfaces, for example 
entire components, these limits shall be adhered 
to as closely as possible. 



IS 1359 : 1992 



The specimens shall be so arranged that they do 
not come into contact with one another or with 
the cabinet and that surfaces to be tested are 
exposed to free circulation of spray. Specimens 
may be placed at different levels within the cabi- 
net as long as the solution cannot drip from 
specimens or their supports at one level onto other 
specimens placed below. 

The support for the specimens shall be made of 
inert non-metallic material such as glass, plastics 
or suitably coated wood. If it is necessary to sus- 
pend test specimens, the material used shall on 
no account be metallic and shall be synthetic 
fibre, cotton thread or other inert insulating 
material. 

E-5 OPERATING CONDITIONS 

The temperature inside the spray cabinet shall be 
35 ± 2°G with the minimum possible fluctuation 
throughout the cabinet during the test. 

The solution collected in each of the collecting 
devices ( see E-2.4 ) shall have a sodium chloride 
concentration of 50 ± 10 g/1 and a/>H value in 
the range 6*5 to 7*2 ( see E-l.l ). 

The average rate of collection of solution in each 
device measured over a minimum period of 24 h 
shall be 1 to 2 ml/h for a horizontal collecting 
area of 80 cm 8 . 

Test solution which has been sprayed shall not be 
reused. 

E-6 DURATION OF TESTS 

The period of test shall be as designed by the 
specification covering the coating or product being 
tested. When not specified, it shall be mutually 
agreed between the interested parties. 

Recommended periods of exposure are 2 h — 
6 h — 24 h — 48 h — 96 h — 240 h — 480 h — 
720 h. 

Spraying shall not be interrupted during the 
prescribed test period. The cabinet shall be 
opened only for brief visual inspections of the 
test specimens in position and for replenishing the 
salt solution in the reservoir if such replenishing 
cannot be carried out from outside the cabinet. 

If the end-point of the test depends on the appea- 
rance of the first sign of corrosion, the specimens 
will need to be inspected frequently. For this 
reason such specimens shall not be tested together 
with other specimens requiring tests of predeter- 
mined duration, 

A periodic visual examination of specimens under 
test for a predetermined period may be made but 
the surfaces under test shall not be disturbed and 
the period for which the cabinet is open shall be 
the minimum necessary to observe and record any 
visible changes. 



E-7 GLEANING OF SPECIMENS AFTER 
TEST 

At the end of the test period, remove the speci- 
mens from the cabinet. Allow the specimens to- 
dry for 0*5 to 1 h before rinsing, in order ta 
reduce the risk of removing corrosion products. 
Before they are examined, carefully remove resi- 
dues of the spray solution from their surfaces. A 
suitable method is to rinse or dip the specimens 
gently in clean running water at a temperature 
not exceeding 40° G and then to dry them imme- 
diately in a steam of compressed air at a pressure 
not exceeding 200 kPa, at a distance to approxi- 
mately 3(j0 mm. 

E-8 EVALUATION OF RESULTS 

Many different criteria for the evaluation of the 
results of the test maybe applied to meet parti- 
cular requirements for example change in mass 
alteration revealed by micrographic examination 
or change in mechanical properties Usually the 
appropriate criteria will be indicated in the speci- 
fication for the coating or product tested. For 
most routine applications of the test, only the 
following need to be considered: 

a) appearance after test; 

b) appearance after removing superficial 
corrosion products; 

c) the number and distribution of corrosion 
defects, that is, pits, cracks, blisters; and 

d) the time elapsing before the appearance of 
the first sign of corrosion. 

E-9 TEST REPORT 

E-9.1 The test report shall indicate the outcome 
of the test according to the criteria for evaluation 
of results prescribed for the test. The result 
obtained for each specimen tested and, when 
appropriate, the average result for a group of 
replicate test specimens shall be reported. The 
report may, if required, be accompanied by 
photographic records of the tested specimens. 

The report shall contain information about the 
test procedure. The information may vary accord- 
ing to the purposes of the test and to the direction 
prescribed for it but a general list of the details 
likely to be required is as follows: 

a) the description of the coating or product 
tested; 

b) dimensions and shape of the test specimen 
and the nature and area of the surface 
tested; 

c) preparation of the test specimen, including 
any cleaning treatment applied and any 
protection given to edges or other special 
areas; 

d) known characteristics of any coating, with 
an indication of the surface finish; 



8 



IS 1359 : 1992 



e) the number of test specimens subjected to 
the test representing each coating or 
product; 

f ) the method used to clean test specimens 
after the test with, when appropriate, an 
indication of the loss in mass resulting 
from the cleaning operation; 

g) the angle at which the tested surfaces were 



inclined; 

h) the test temperature; 

j) the duration of test; 

k) the properties of any test panels placed in 
the cabinet expressly to check the correct- 
ness of the operating conditions and the 
results obtained with them. 



ANNEX F 
( Clause 9.4.2 ) 

POROSITY TEST 



F-l PRINCIPLE 

Exposure of a test specimen to a moist atmosphere 
containing a low concentration of sulphur dioxide 
causes no corrosion of tin but causes spots of 
corrosion product to appear at discontinuities in 
the coating. 

NOTE — If the sulphur dioxide concentration in the 
atmosphere is too high, the corrosion product formed is 
too fluid to permit easy observation of pore sites. The 
method given here ensures suitable conditions for the 
development of immobile corrosion products at discon- 
tinuities. 

F-2 APPARATUS 

F-2.1 Test Cabinet 

F-2.1.1 Capacity 

The capacity of the test cabinet should preferably 
be 300 ± 10 litres ( see Note ). 

NOTE— Cabinet of capacities other than 300±10 litres 
may be used provided that the other test conditions to 
which the test specimens as submitted are the same. 
The details and instructions given in this appendix are, 
however, appropriate to cabinets of the preferred capa- 
city and will require corresponding modifications for 
cabinets of other capacities. 

F-2.1.2 Construction and Components 

The test cabinet shall have a door or hood capable 
of being closed hermetically, and shall be fitted 
with the following components: 

a) temperature-controlling device, with its actuating 
element placed in the upper part of the 
cabinet; 

b) thermometer, capable of being read from 
outside the cabinet with its bulb 150 mm 
from the roof and door/hood and 250 mm 
from one side; 

c) inlet tube, through which gas can be intro- 
duced into the cabinet, placed approxi- 
mately 50 mm above the base; 

<i) valve, by which excess pressure can be 
relieved, placed in or near the roof of the 
cabinet; 



e) drain-cock, in the floor of the cabinet; and 

f) heating device, capable of heating the cabi- 
net to a temperature of 40 ± 3°G in 1*5 h 
and of maintaining the interior at this 
temperature. 

NOTE — A 1 kW electrically-heated hotplate is 
suitable for the preferred size of cabinet. 

Typical cabinets, with a door or hood are shown 
in Fig. 1 and 2 respectively. 

F-2. 1.3 Materials of Construction 

All the materials used in the construction of the 
cabinet shall be resistant to the action of moist 
sulphur dioxide and shall themselves not emit any 
gas or vapour likely to influence corrosion of the 
test specimens. 

The floor and lower parts of the walls shall be 
capable of being heated and shall be able to retain 
without leakage at least 2*5 litres of water 
containing dissolved sulphur dioxide, this volume 
being required to flush the apparatus. Lead-clad 
constructional material is suitable for these parts 
and for the framework and fittings of the cabinet, 
but the greater part of the walls and door/ hood 
shall be made of transparent sheet, such as glass 
or suitable plastics material. 

F-2. 1.4 Shape 

Some variation in the shape of the cabinet can be 
tolerated, but the roof shall be shaped so that 
moisture condensing on it does not fall on test 
material in the cabinet. An inclination of the 
roof of approximately 1 2° to the horizontal 
provides a suitable safeguard. 

F-2. 1.5 Ambient Conditions 

The cabinet shall be installed in a room in which 
there is a clean atmosphere and shall be protected 
from large or rapid temperature fluctuations, 
strong direct sunlight and draughts. 



IS 1359 : 1992 



THERMOMETER 



8D9 




/-WATER 
/ TROUGH 




THERMOMETER 



800 



GAS 

INLET 



-HOOD 






500 



JNG 
IP 



\ 



GAS 
INLET 



750 




j^Slftt 



7 r >0 



i^— TEMPERATURE 

IgJ REGULATING DEVICE 

PRESSURE 
RELIEF VALVE 

All dimensions in millimetres* 

Fig. 1 Cabinet with Door 

F-2.1.6 Conditioning of Apparatus 

To reduce risks of contamination of the atmos- 
phere by vapours from constructional materials, a 
new cabinet shall be operated at least once, with- 
out introduction ot test specimens, by the 
procedure applicable to an atmosphere containing 
2 litres for sulphur dioxide, before it is brought 
into use for testing, 

F-2.2 Test Specimen Supports 

The supports for the test specimens shall be of 
non-metaiiic material such as glass, suitable 



,GAS 
INLET 



^PRFSSURE 



TEMPERATURE 
EGULATfNG DEVICE 



-PRESSURE 
RELIEF VALVE 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Hooded Cabinet 

plastics material or suitably coated wood. Any 
material used to suspend the test specimens in the 
cabinet shall be of suitable synthetic fibre or other 
inert insulating material; metallic materials shall 
not be used 

F-2.3 Source and Means of Measuring 
Volume of Sulphur Dioxide 

A container of liquid sulphur dioxide is the usual 
source, but the gas may be generated in a suitable 
apparatus by treating sodium sulphite with 
sulphuric acid. Sulphur dioxide shall not be 



10 



IS 1359 : 1992 



generated inside the cabinet. The volume of gas 
delivered into the chamber may be measured by 
any suitable method, for example: 

■a) by means of a gas burette using viscous 
liquid paraffin as the pressure- controlling 
fluid; as the volume to be measured is 
usually about 0'2 litre, measures shall be 
taken to avoid errors from causes such as 
air contained in delivery tubes between the 
burette and the chamber; 

b) by means of a gas jar of known volume 
filled with sulphur dioxide and opened in 
the chamber; 

c) by means of a calibrated flowmeter. 

F-3 CONSTRUCTION AND CLEANING OF 
TEST SPECIMENS 

F-3.1 If test specimens are cut from a larger 
coated article, the cutting shall be carried out in 
such a way that the coating is not damaged, 
especially in the area adjacent to the cut. Unless 
otherwise specified, the cut edges shall be ade- 
quately protected by coating them with a suitable 
medium that is stable under the conditions of the 
test, such as wax or adhesive tape. 

F-3.2 The test specimens shall be thoroughly 
cleaned before testing. The cleaning method em- 
ployed shall depend on the nature of the surface 
and the contaminants, but shall not include the 
use of any abrasives, solvents or other materials 
that may attack the surface of test specimens. 
Care shall be taken that the test specimens are not 
recontaminated, after cleaning, by excessive or 
careless handling. 

NOTE — The number and type of test specimens and 
their shape and dimensions are not specified, these 
should be agreed between interested parties ( see 
tf/*>F-4.3and F-4.4). 

F-4 METHOD OF EXPOSURE OF TEST 
SPECIMENS 

F-4.1 When in position in the cabinet, the test 
specimens shall be located so that no part of any 
specimen is within 20 mm of another specimen or 
within 100 mm of the walls or the roof of the 
cabinet or within 200 mm of the surface of the 
water in the base of the cabinet. 



F-4.2 The test specimens shall be so arranged 
that any moisture condensing on any of them or 
on their supports does not fall on other specimens 
placed at lower levels. 

F-4.3 The orientation of the exposed test surface 
is critical, and in the case of flat surfaces, the 
angle of inclination to the vertical, unless other- 
wise specified, shall be 15 ± 2°. 

F-4.4 The total exposed surface area of the speci- 
men or specimens tested at any one time shall be 
substantially the same and, unless otherwise 
agreed, shall beO'5 ±0*1 m a for the cabinet of 
preferred capacity ( see F-2.1.1 ) and proportion- 
ately changed for different sizes of cabinet. 

F-5 PROCEDURE 

F-5.1 Introduce 2 ± 0*2 litres of distilled wat&r 
into the base of the cabinet. 

NOTE — The quantity of water in the cabinet depends 
on its size and shape. A proportional change for cabinet 
of different size is valid only for cabinets of similar 
shape. 

F-5.2 Place the test specimens in position and 
close the door/hood of the cabinet completely, 

F-5.3 Introduce 0*2 litre of the sulphur dioxide 
into the chamber. 

F-5. 4 Switch on the heater and raise the tem- 
perature inside the cabinet to 40 ± 3°C in 
approximately 1*5 h. Maintain heating, under 
control, so as to keep the temperature inside 
the cabinet at 40 ± 3°C for 24 h. 

F-6 INSPECTION AND CLEANING OF 
SPECIMENS AFTER TEST 

At the end of the 24 h test duration, remove the 
test specimens from the cabinet and, before they 
are examined, allow them to hang freely in a 
normal indoor atmosphere until any liquid corro- 
sion products have solidified. Examine all the test 
specimens first with all corrosion products in 
position. Any cleaning subsequently carried out 
shall depend on the criteria laid down for 
evaluation of the result of the test. 



11 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standrds are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions', 
Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. MTD 20 ( 3572 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters! 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams t Manaksanstha 

Telephones t 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices i Telephone 

Central x Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg j 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 [ 331 13 75 

Eastern i 1/14 C- I. T. Scheme VII M, V, I. P. Road, Maniktola / 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 { 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 ( 53 38 43, 53 16 40 

I 53 23 84 

Southern ; C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 j 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

I 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western i Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f m 92 95, 632 78 58 



{ 



BOMBAY 400093 \ 632 73 91 1 632 78 92 

Branchei : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANAKTHAPURAM. 



r^inted at New India Printing" Press. Khurja, India 



