**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11658 (1986) : General requirements and methods of tests 
of piezoelectric pressure transducers-dynamic type [LITD 5: 
Semiconductor and Other Electronic Components and Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



l5Tl1«58-1fl8S 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 

METHODS OF 1ESTS OF PIEZOELECTRIC 

CERAMIC PRESSURE TRANSDUCERS -- 

DYNAMIC TYPE 



UDC 621-317 7 0&7-92 




© Copyright L987 

l^ifDlAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. ? BAIHAIJVR ftHAH ZAFAR UARO 

VttW GLLHJ UOOOif 

Or 4 Jamarjf 1987 



IS : 11658 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 

METHODS OF TESTS OF PIEZOELECTRIC 

CERAMIC PRESSURE TRANSDUCERS — 

DYNAMIC TYPE 



Piezoelectric Devices for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional 
Committee, LTDC 12 

Chairman Representing 

Dr V. N. BiNDAii National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), 

New Delhi 

Members 

Db Ashok Ktjmar ( Alternate to 
Dr V. N. Bindal) 
Shri J. K, Bhattachabya Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shbi M. p. Sama ( Alternate ) 
Shbi a. Shahttl Hameed Kerela State Electronics Development 

Corporation Ltd, Cannanore 
Shki K. p. N. Ktjtty ( Alternate ) 
Db J. D. Jain Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute (CSIR), Pilani 
Shbi S. Janakiraman Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ), 

New Delhi 
Shri R. P. Mathub ( Alternate ) 
Shri M, R.Natraj Indian Telephone Industries, Bangalore 

Shbi H. S. Ananthanaryana 
Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. Prabhakaban Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri R. SrinivaSA Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi W. V, B. Ramalingam All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shbimati Sudha Bhatia {Alternate) 
Dr p. Saha Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute 

(CSIR), Calcutta 
Shri A-ntnamalai ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. B, V. Shanbhogue Ministry of Defence (R&D), Bangalore 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11658 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 
Shrx Nabendra. Sharma 



Representing 

Department of Telecommunication Board, New 
Delhi 
ShriJ. S. Bawa {Alternate) 
Shbi N. Srinivasan, 
Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri B. K. Sharma 

Deputy Director (Electronics), ISI 



Director General, ISI {Ex-officio Member) 



Panel for Piezoelectric Ceramic Materials and Its Devices, 
LTDG 12 : PI 



Convener 

Dr V. N. BiNDAL 



National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR }, 
New Delhi 



Members 

Shri G. S. Dhami Armament Research & Development Esta- 

blishment ( Ministry of Defence), Pune 
Shri S. V. Pingala ( Alternate ) 

Dr J. D.Jain Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR), Pilani 

Dr Janaedhan Singh National Physical Laboratory { CSIR ), 

New Delhi 

Shri A. Kashyap Concord Electroceramic Industries, Delhi 

Dr J. L. MtJKHERJBE Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. S. Ramamoorthy National Physical Oceonography Laboratory, 

Cochin 

Dr B. V. Rao . Central Electronics Ltd, Sahibabad 



IS : 11658 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 

METHODS OF TESTS OF PIEZOELECTRIC 

CERAMIC PRESSURE TRANSDUCERS — 

DYNAMIC TYPE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the 
Piezoelectric Devices for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council. 

0*2 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard deals with the general requirements and methods of 
tests of piezoelectric ceramic pressure transducers — dynamic type. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 In addition to the definitions given in IS : 1885 (Part 44)-1978t 
following terms and definitions shall apply, 

2.1.1 Measuring Range — The pressure values within which a transducer 
is intended to measure, specified by their lower and upper limits. 

2.1.2 Resolution — The smallest change ( increase or decrease ) in 
mechanical input at any intermediate point in the measuring range which 
produces a detectable change in the output signal. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)* 
fElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part 44 Piezoelectric devices. 



IS % 11638 - 1986 

2.1.3 Sensitivity — The smallest increase in pressure above the lower 
limit of measuring range that can be detected. 

2.1.4 Charge Constant — Change in output charge Q, (pico coulomb) 
due to change in pressure p ( kPa ), that is, dQ^jdp, 

2.1*5 Voltage Constant — Change in output voltage V ( volts ) due to 
change in pressure p ( bar ), that is, dV> dp, 

2.1.6 Linearity — It is defined as the closeness of the calibration curve 
from a straight line drawn between lower and upper limits of measuring 
range. It is expressed in percentage of the upper limit of measuring 
range. 

2.1.7 Reproducibility — The ability of the pressure transducer to 
reproduce output reading when the same pressure is applied to it 
repeatedly under the same conditions and in the same direction. 

2.1.8 Hysteresis — The maximum difference between the output reading 
of the transducers for the given input (usually at the half value of the 
specified range ) when the value is approached first with increasing and 
then with the decreasing input pressure. 

2.1.9 Accuracy — The total of linearity, hysteresis, reproducibility and 
any other term such as resolution, expressed in percentage. 

2*1.10 Resonant Frequency — It is the first mechanical resonant frequency 
of transducers, at which it responds with the maximum output 
amplitude. 

2.1.11 Capacitance — The capacitance value of pressure transducer 
measured between the two terminals. 

2.1.12 Insulation Resistance — The resistance measured between specified 
insulated portion of a transducer and the two terminals jointed together 
with a shunt when a specified dc voltage is applied at room conditions, 
unless otherwise stated. 

2.1.13 Maximum Safe Pressure — It is the pressure applicable on 
transducer without causing any shift beyond specified performance 
characteristics. 

2.1.14 Pressure — Force acting on a surface measured as force per unit 
area. 

2.1*15 Pressure Transducer — A device which senses pressure and 
produces an electrical signal proportional to the pressure. 



IS ; 11658 . 1986 

2.1*16 Gauge Pressure Transducer — A device that measures pressure 
referenced to local atmospheric pressure and is vented to atmosphere. 

Note — When its pressure port is exposed to the atmosphere, the device will 
indicate pressure. 

2.1«17 Sealed Pressure Transducer — A device that measures pressure 
referenced to an internal chamber typically sealed at atmospheric 
pressure. 

Note — Corrections may be required due to changes in atmospheric pressure 
when making gauge pressure measurements below 700 kPa, 

2.1.18 Absolute Pressure Transducer — A device that measures pressure 
referenced to an internal chamber sealed at pressure. 

Note — When its pressure port is exposed to the atmosphere, the transducer 
will indicate atmospheric pressure. 

2.1.19 Differencial Pressure Transducer — A device that measures the 
difference between two pressures applied to its pressure ports. 

Note — These transducers may be classified as either unidirectional or 
bidirectional depending on whether or not the higher of the two pressures is always 
applied to the same pressure port. 

2*1*20 Combined Error — The total of all deviations of a transducer 
output from a specified straight line in a constant environment defined as 
the sum of the errors due to non-linearity, reproducibility and hysteresis, 

2.1.21 Full Scale Output — The algebraic difference of transducer output 
values measured at zero and full scale pressures. 

2.1.22 Z^ro Balance ( Offset ) — The measured transducer output under 
room conditions with no pressure applied to the pressure port. 

Note — For absolute pressure transducers, this value is measured at pressure. 
Gauge and sealed pressure transducers have this value measured at atmospheric 
pressure. 

3. WORKMANSHIP, PROCESSES AND FINISHES 

3.1 The piezoelectric pressure transducer shall be manufactured and 
processed in careful and workmans' like manner in accordance with 
good engineering practices. The metal parts shall be free from burrs, 
sharp edges and corrosion effects. 

4. CLASSIFICATION 

4.1 The piezoelectric pressure transducers — dynamic type, capable of 
measuring 0-1 000 MPa may be classified in the following categories 



ISt 11658-1986 

depending upon the measuring range; 

Category 1 0-1 MPa 

Category 2 O-IO MPa 

Category 3 0-100 MPa 

Category 4 O-l 000 MPa 

5. REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Maximum Safe Pressure — The maximum safe pressure shall be 
at least three times the upper limit of the measuring range in case of 
categories 1, 2 and 3 and at least two times for category 4. 

5.2 Performance Requirement — The following parameters may be 
specified for the performance requirement. 

5.2.1 Resolution — The recommended order of resolution for each range 
is as follows: 

Category 1 001 kPa 

Category 2 0*1 kPa 

Category 3 I kPa 

Category 4 10 kPa 

5.2.2 Linearity — Shall be within 2 percent for transducers of all 
categories. 

5.2.3 Hysteresis — Shall not be more than 3 percent for transducers of 
all categories. 

5.2.4 Insulation Resistance — Shall not be less than 10^^ ohms for 
transducers of all categories. 

5.2.5 Working Temperature Range — Shall be at least between — 40'^G to 
+ 85° C for transducers of all categories. 

5.2.6 Working Frequency — Shall not be more than 50 percent of 
resonant fiequency ( fr) or shall be at least 5 kHz less than the resonant 
frequency ( fr-5 kHz ) , whichever is lower. 

6. METHODS OF EVALUATING THE QUALITY OF 
PIEZOELECTRIC TRANSDUCERS — DYNAMIC TYPE 

6.1 General — The methods of evaluating the characteristics of dynamic 
pressure transducers are similar to those employed for the evaluation of 



IS : 11658 - 1986 

static pressure transducers based on potentiometric and strain gauge 
principles, except that the input amplifier/impedance converter should 
always be used as a part of the transducer during the tests. The 
impedance converter should have a fiat frequency response from DC to 
250 kHz. A high speed readout system such as a storage oscilloscope or 
a peak meter indicator is employed for recording transducer output 
signal. The pressure source employed may be either pneumatic or 
hydraulic with provision to generate sinusoidal output, pulsed output, 
step output and ramp output. The characteristics could be assessed in 
comparison with a secondary standard transducer wherever feasible, 

6.2 Instrumentation — The basic instrumentation set up required for 
calibration of a pressure transducer is shown schematically in Fig. 1 It 
consists of a standard pressure source, charge amplifier, additional 
voltage amplifier ( if necessary ) and a suitable read-out device. 



STANDARD 
PRESSURE 
SOURCE 




PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCER 




CHARGE 
AMPLIFIER 




VOLTAGE 
AMPLFIER 




READ- 
OUT 
DEVICE 









Fig. 1 Basic Calibration System For 
Pressure Transducer 



6.2.1 Charge Amplifier — The charge amplifier should have very high 
input impedance of the order of 10^^ ohms for piezoelectric ceramic 
transducers. The frequency response of the combined system ( transducer 
4- Amplifier + read-out devices ) for any measurement should be flat 
over a certain specified frequency range. 

6.2.2 Voltage Amplifier and Read-Out Device — The additional amplifier 
stages are essential for the effective and proper recording of weak signal 
encountered in measurements. A high speed read-out system such as 
storage oscilloscope or peak level indicator is employed for recording 
output signal. 

6.2.3 Pressure Source — In the calibration procedure, a known and 
accurate dynamic pressure is applied to the pressure transducer using 
standard pressure sources and a corresponding electric charge developed 
on the transducer is measured by a suitable charge amplifier and read- 
out system as shown in Fig. 1 . 

The three pressure sources, namely, shock tube, dead weight tester 
and hydraulic pressure vessel generate pressure pulses of different 
durations of the order of 1 microsecond, 0'5 milli-second and around 5 
milli-seconds, respectively. Hence a proper pressure source can be 
selected for the calibration of a particular type of transducer. The 
details of these sources are given in subsequent clauses. 



IS : 11658 - 1986 

6.2.3.1 Shock tube — The shock tube is a basic device for the 
generation and propagation of shock waves. The media used for the 
generation of shock wave is usually atmospheric air and in some cases 
nitrogen and other gaseous substances are used. The shock tube produces 
one dimensional shock wave which travels down the tube with a velocity 
several times the speed of sound within a few microseconds. The shock 
wave is generated by bursting a diaphragm placed in between a pressure 
chamber and the tube ( see Fig. 2 ). For shock pressure computation and 
oscilloscope triggering, two integrating circuit piezoelectric transducers 
are installed on the walls of the tube. A third transducer, under dynamic 
response and calibration test, is mounted in the closed end of the tube 
with its sensing diaphragm flush with the inner wall. The step pressure 
function can be readily generated in the shock tube for the calibration of 
pressure transducers dynamically. The shock tube generates a pressure 
pulse of the order of 10 kPa and duration around one microsecond. The 
calibrations/sensitivity at lower pressure levels holds good at high 
pressures also. 



^DIAPHRAGM 


^^ CHAMBER 2 


CHAMBER > ^ 
P 1 


L 
PL 

0^ 


^-- TRANSDUCER 




O 

CRO 


(P,>P2» 






Fig. 2 


Shock Tube 





6.2.3.2 Dead weight tester — It is a most common pressure calibrating 
source using mineral oil as a pressure transmitting medium. It essentially 
consists of a piston of very accurately measured cross-sectional area which 
is closely fitted within a cylinder. Known weights are placed on piston 
and the load acting on the piston is converted into a pressure which is in 
turn applied to the liquid by compressing it within the liquid. 

The schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 3 which is self 
explanatory. The oil is filled in the cylinder by the priming pump 
When the value is opened the pressure is raised with the help of the hand 
operated screw unitl it balances to pressure exerted by the weighted 
piston so that the piston floats freely in the oil. In this situation, piston 
floating freely in the oil, the pressure is applied to the oil and in turn it 
is transmitted to the transducer. 



8 



PISTON 



CYLrNOER 



IS : 11658 - 1986 



CHARGE OUTPUT 
TO PREAMPLIFIER 




TO 

TRANSDUCER 



PRESSURISED 

FLUID 



K^r 



Fig. 3 Dead Weight Tester Pressure Calibration 



The transient pressure pulse is obtained by releasing the pressure 
applied to the transducer suddenly by a mechanical device. The 
duration of the pressure pulse can be varied by changing the dead weight 
load on the piston. 

6«2.3.3 Dynamic hydraulic test pressure vessel — The schematic diagram 
of the system is given in Fig. 4 which is quite self explanatory. 

By changing the dropping weight the amplitude of maximum 
pressure can be readily varied. The duration of the pressure pulses can be 
readily varied by using oils of different viscosities. The dynamic pressure 
pulses of 0'5 to 2 ms durations up to 6 000 kPa can be very conveniently 
generated by this method. A comparative characteristic of the pressure 
transducer can be obtained by this test vessel. The pressure pulses of 
higher amplitudes can be achieved with suitable modifications in the 
design of the system. 

6.3 Methods of Evaluation 

6.3.1 Category — The category of piezoelectric pressure transducer is 
evaluated, over the specified range, by comparing its signal output with 
that of a secondary standard transducer which has already been 
calibrated. 



IS: 11658-1986 

Increase the pressure applied to the transducer from zero to 
full-scale level, in 10 definite steps, and record the signal output in each 
case with a peak level meter or a calibrated storage oscilloscope. Plot 
the readings on a graph showing the transducer output versus applied 
pressure ( Fig. 5 ). Repeat the experiment three times. 



-STAND 



WEIGHT 



Guioe 




Fig. 4 Schematic of Dynamic Test Vessel 




IS : 11658 - 1986 

The range over which the performance of the transducer is well 
within specifications ( given by the manufacturer ) shall be its measuring 
range. 

6.3.2 Maximum Safe Pressure — After the test specified in 6.3.1, apply a 
pressure of magnitude two or three times more as specified in Fig. 5 and 
hold it constant for two minutes. 

6.3.3 Resolution ~ Apply a pressure equal to 50 percent of the full-scale 
range of the device and record the output as before. Increase the pressure 
now in small steps, say of 05 percent of FS, and observe the increments 
in the output for at least 3 steps, with a high resolution digital voltmeter. 
Repeat the experiment by decreasing the pressure level in steps of 0'5 
percent FS from the original value and record the readings as before. 
Draw a curve ( Fig. 6 ) showing the variations in output for corresponding 
changes in pressure input and from this evaluate the resolution of the 
transducer, as defined in 2.1.2. 




change in pressure (api 
Fig. 6 Resolution 



Repeat the experiment at two other points over the range, say at 3 
and 70 percent of FS. 



6.3.4 Linearity — Repeat the experiment 6.3.1 and draw a curve 
( Fig. 7 ) showing the transducer output over the measuring range. 
Evaluate the linearity of the transducer as defined in 2.1.6. 

6.3.5 Hysteresis — Repeat the experiment 6.3.1 and draw a curve 
( Fig. 8 ) showing the transducer output over one complete cycle when 
taken from zero to full-scale and from full-scale back to zero. Evaluate 
the difference in output at 50 percent of the range and compute the 
hysteresis factor as defined in 2.1.8. 

11 



IS : 11658 - 1986 













PSO 






J 


^1 








v/ 




3 










Q. 






/ jC 














3 




Jt 


i^ T 




O 


i 




f-ERROR 


,. J 



pressure 
Fig. 7 Linearity 



nn 




uu 


y^\ 








y^ / F 




X ^ £ ' 




y / X f 












y y y 1 


50 


^.^^^/ 1 








/ / A ^— HYsreREsis 








/ ^ y ' 




/ / ^^ 1 ' 




/ / ^r^ 1 ( 




// y^ 




^^ I 1 



50 100 

pressure (percent fs) 
Fig, 8 Hysteresis 



6.3.6 Rise Time — The measurement set up for rise time is as shown in 
Fig. 2. Puncture the diaphragm either electrically or mechanically so 
that a pressure pulse is generated in chamber No. 2 where the transducer 
under evaluation is installed. Record the transducer output on a 
calibrated cathode ray oscilloscope and evaluate the rise time of the 
transducer in accordance with the curve given in Fig. 9. 

6.3.7 Insulation Resistance — Measure the insulation resistance between 
the terminals or leads and the metal housing of the transducer with a 
standard megohm meter, applying a dc potential of 50 volts. (For this 
measurement the potential shall be retained for a period of two minutes, 
unless otherwise specified ). 

12 



iS:U658-lS8S 




Rise Time 



6.3.8 Working Temperature Range — Evaluate the working temperature 
range of the transducer by either of the following two methods: 

a) Calibrate the transducer (repeating experiments 6.3.1 and 
6.3.4 ) at discrete ambient temperatures ranging from — SO^C to 
+ 150°G ( unless otherwise specified ) in steps of 10**G. 

b) Soak the transducer for one hour at the lowest temperature ( as 
specified ) and conduct the calibration tests at standard reference 
temperature ( 27°G ). 

Next, soak the transducer for one hour at the highest temperature 
( as specified ) and conduct the calibration tests at the standard reference 
temperature. The range over which the performance of the transducer 
is within the given specifications shall be the working temperature range. 

6.3.9 Working Frequency — The working frequency of a piezoelectric 
pressure transducer is established either with a shock tube or with a 
sinusoidal pressure generator. For larger range transducers the shock 
tube method is preferred. Apply a pressure in step of definite magnitude 
to the transducer and record the electrical signal output on a cathode 
ray oscilloscope. Evaluate the frequency response from the type curve 
obtained. 

The sinusoidal pressure signal system is employed, if the range of 
the transducer is rather low and the frequency of interest i» limited up to 
20 Hz. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 Each piezoelectric pressure transducers, dynamic type, shall have the 
following information legibly and indelibly marked upon it: 

a) Type of pressure transducers, 

13 



IS : 11658 -1986 

b) Measuring range, and 
c) Working frequency. 

7.2 The piezoelectric pressure transducers, dynamic type, may also be 
marked with the ISI Certification Mark, 

Note — The use of the ISI Ccitification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requiremehts of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



14 



