**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14774-1 (2000) : Resistance Trace Heating in Potentially 
Explosive Atmospheres, Part 1: General and Testing 
Requirements [ETD 22: Electrical Apparatus for Explosive 
Atmosphere] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS1 4774 (Parti): 2000 

rv ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

wfcfcT fcl^ecb c||d|c|x!U| if fct^cT 

wr 1 ^hiwj Tig trftenT srtsrrq 

Indian Standard 

ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE TRACE HEATING 
IN POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

PART 1 GENERAL AND TESTING REQUIREMENTS 



ICS 19.020; 29.260.20 



©BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 2000 Price Group 7 



Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee, ETD 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Apparatus for 
Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

This standard ( Part 1 ) is one of the series of Indian Standards which deals with electrical resistance trace heating in 
potentially explosive atmospheres. The series comprises of the following two parts: 

Parti General and testing requirements 

Part 2 Informative application guide for design installation and maintenance 

This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the general and testing requirements for electrical resistance trace heating in potentially 
explosive atmospheres. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from Doc : 3 1/292/CDV circulated by the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed 
or calculated, expressing the results of atest, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off 
numerical values ( revised)' . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as 
that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14774 (Partl):2000 



Indian Standard 



ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE TRACE HEATING 
IN POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

PART 1 GENERAL ANDTESTING REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard ( Part 1 ) specifies requirements and 
test methods for electrical resistance heaters for 
application in potentially explosive atmospheres. 

The standard covers trace heaters that may either be 
factory or field (work site) assembled units, and which 
may be series heating cables, parallel heating cables, 
heating pads Tand heating panels that have been 
assembled and/or terminated in accordance with 
manufacturer's instructions. 

This standard also includes requirements for termination 
assemblies and control method used with trace heating. 
Requirements are given for potentially explosive areas, 

as defined in IS 5571. 

2 REFERENCES 

The referred Indian Standards are given in Annex A. 

3 DEFINITIONS 

In addition to the definitions given in IS 5571, the 
following definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Ambient Temperature 

The temperature surrounding the object under 
consideration. Where electrical trace heaters are 
enclosed in thermal insulation, the ambient temperature 
is the temperature exterior to such thermal insulation. 

3.2 Branch Circuit 

The portion of the wiring installation between the 
over-current device protecting the circuit and the trace 
heater unit(s). 

3.3 Certifying Body 

Organization that validates and certifies equipment 
meeting the requirements of particular standards. 

3.4 Connection/Terminations 

3.4.1 Cold Lead 

An electrically insulated conductor or conductors used 
to connect a trace heater to the branch circuit and 
designed so that it does not produce significant heat. 



3.4.2 End Termination 

A termination, which may be heat producing, applied 
to a trace heater at the end opposite that where the 
power is supplied. 

3.4.3 In-Line Connection 

Electrical connection of two trace heaters, in series 
or in parallel. 

3.4.4 Power Termination 

The termination applied to the end of a trace heater 
at which the power is supplied. 

3.4.5 Tee 

Electrical connection of trace heaters, in series or in 
parallel, to accommodate a tee or branch, 

3.5 Corrosion Resistant Covering 

A continuous layer of insulating material applied 
outside the metallic sheath, screen or armouring to 
protect against corosion. 

3.6 Dead Leg 

A segment of process piping segregated from the normal 
pattern for the purpose of providing a heat loss 
reference. 

3.7 Design Loading 

The minimum power that will meet the design 
requirements, in the worst conditions, after voltage 
and resistance tolerances and appropriate safety have 
been considered. 

3.8 Factory Fabricated 

A trace heating cable, tape or devfce, including the 
necessary terminations and connections, which is 
assembled into units or sets. 

3.9 Field Assembled 

Trace heaters supplied in bulk with terminating 
components to be assembled at the work site. 

3.10 Heat Loss 

Energy flow from a pipe, vessel or equipment to its 
surroundings. 



IS14774(Partl):2000 

3.11 Heat Sink 

A part that conducts and dissipates heat away from 
a workpiece. Heat sinks are, typically, pipe shoes, 
pipe supports and items of large mass such as valve 
actuators or pump bodies. 

3.12 Heat-Transfer Aids 

Thermally conductive materials, such as metallic foils 
or heat transfer cements which are used to increase 
the heat-transfer efficiency from trace heaters to the 
workpiece. 

3.13 Heating Pad 

A trace heater comprising series or parallel connected 
elements having sufficient flexibility to conform to 
the shape of the surface to be heated. 

3.14 Heating Panel 

A non-flexible trace heater comprising series or parallel 
connected elements fabricated to conform to the general 
shape of the surface to be heated. 

3.15 High Limit Temperature 

The maximum allowable temperature of the system, 
including the piping, the fluid and the heating system. 

3.16 Limiting Trace Heater Temperature 

The maximum permissible continuous temperature of 
the trace heater. 

3.17 Maintain Temperature 

Specified temperature of the fluid or process material 
which the trace heating system is designed to maintain 
under specified conditions. 

3.18 Maximum Ambient Temperature 

The highest ambient temperature at which the trace 
heating shall be operable and should perform according 
to specified requirements. 



3.22 Metallic Covering 

A metal sheath or braid used to provide physical 
protection for a trace heater, and/or an electrical earth/ 
ground path. 

3.23 Maximum Ambient Temperature 

The lowest ambient temperature specified at which 
the trace heating shall be operable and shall perform 
according to specified requirements and on which heat 
loss calculations will be based. 

3.24 Minimum Installation Temperature 

The minimum temperature at which a trace heater may 
be installed. 

3.25 Operating Voltage 

The actual voltage applied to the trace heater when 
it is in service. 

3.260verjacket 

A final covering continuously applied over the metallic 
braid or armour of a trace heater typically used for 
mechanical and/or corrosion protection. 

3.27 Parallel Trace Heater(s) 

Heating elements that are electrially connected in 
parallel, either continuously or in separate zones. 

3.28 Power Density 

The power output in watts per linear metre for trace 
heater cable and cable units, and in watts per square 
metre for trace heater pads and panel and trace heater 
pad and panel units. 

3.29 Rated Output 

Total power or power per unit length of heating cable 
or trace heater, at rated voltage, temperature and length 
which is normally expressed in watts/m or watts/m 2 . 



3.19 Maximum Continuous Exposure Temperature 3.30 Rated Voltage 



The highest temperature to which the trace heating 
system may be exposed. 



The voltage to which operating and performance 
characteristics of trace heaters is referred. 



3.20 Maximum Intermittent Exposure Temperature 3.31 Routine Test 



The maximum temperature of any surface adjacent to 
the trace heater, which the energized trace heater can 
withstand for specified period. 

3.21 Maximum Withstand Temperature 

The maximum operating or exposure temperature that 
will not adversely effect the thermal stability of the 
heater and its component parts. 



A test that is carried out by the manufacturer prior to 
shipment to verify conformity with the manufacturer's 
specification. 

3.32 Series Trace Heater(s) 

Heating elements that are electrically connected in 
series with a single current path and have a specific 
resistance at a given temperature for a given length. 



IS 14774 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 



3.33 Sheath 

A uniform and continuous metallic or non-metallic outer 
covering enclosing the heating tape or cable used to 
provide protection for the cable against influence from 
the surroundings (corrosion, moisture etc) ( see over- 
jacket). 

3.34 Sheath Temperature 

The temperature of the outermost continuous covering 
that may be exposed to the surrounding atmosphere. 

3.35 Stabilized Design 

A concept where the temperature of the trace heater 
will, by design and use, stabilize below the limiting 
temperature, under the most unfavourable conditions, 
without the need for a protective system to limit the 
temperature. 

3.36 Start-Up Current 

The current of a trace heater immediately upon 
energizing. 

3.37 System Documentation 

Information provided by the supplier to allow 

satisfactory understanding, instailation and safe use 

of the trace heating system. 

/ 

3.38 Temperature Controller 

A device or combination of devices incorporating a 
means of sensing temperature and of controlling the 
power to the trace heater. 

3.39 Temperature Sensor; Sensing Element 

A device which is designed to respond to temperature 
providing an electrical signal or mechanical operation. 

3.40 Thermal Insulation 

Material having air or gas filled pocket,void spaces, 
or heat reflecting surfaces that, when properly applied, 
will retard the transfer of heat. 

3.41 Trace Heater 

A device designed for the purpose of producing heat 
on the principle of electrical resistance and typically 
composed of one or more metallic conductors or an 
electrically conductive material, suitably electrically 
insulated and protected. 

3.42 Trace Heater Unit; Trace Heater Set 

A series trace heater cable, parallel trace heater cable, 
heater pad or heater panel suitably terminated in 
conformity with the manufacturer's instructions. 

3.43 Trace Heating 

The utilization of electric trace heater cable, pads, panels 
and support components that are externally applied 
and used to raise or maintain the temperature of contents 
in piping, tanks and associated equipment. 



3.44 Type Test 

A test or series of tests carried out on trace heating 
cables, tapes, devices and associated accessories, 
which the representative of a type, to determine 
conformity of the design, construction and 
manufacturing methods to the requirements of this 
standard. 

3.45 Weather Barrier 

Material that, when installed on the outer surface of 
thermal insulation, protects the thermal insulation from 
water or other liquids, from physical damage caused 
by sleet, wind or mechanical abuse, and deterioration 
caused by solar radiation or atmospheric contamination. 

3.46 Workpiece 

Objects to be heated by a trace heater which includes, 
for example, process equipment such as piping, vessels, 
tanks, valves, instruments and similar equipment. 

4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 General 

Electrical resistance trace heating within the scope 
of this standard shall be designed and constructed 
so as to ensure electrical, thermal and mechanical 
durability, and reliable performance such that in normal 
use it poses no danger to the user or the^urroundings. 
Electrical resistance trace heaters and terminations 
shall comply with one or more of the standardized types 
of protection listed in IS 5571 and additionally with 
the requirements of this standard. 

The manufacturer shall declare the maximum operating 
temperature in °C. The materials used in the trace heater 
withstand a temperature of the maximum operating 
temperature +20 K, when tested in accordance 
with 5.1.11. 

For the purpose of this standard resistance trace heaters 
are not considered to be windings. 

4.2 Trace Heaters 

Trace heaters shall be provided with a metallic braid 
or metallic sheath which shall cover at least 70 percent 
of the surface. They shall be capable of withstanding 
an impact load of 7 J or 3 .5 J when tested in accordance 
with 5.1.5. For the 3.5 J impact load, heater shall be 
marked with the symbol 'X' . 

4.3 Terminations and Connections 

Terminations and connections may be identified as 
an integral part of a trace heater, or may be identified 
separately, in which case they are regarded as 
Ex components in accordance with IS 5571. They are 
tested as part of a representative trace heater unit 
{see 5.1.1 ). 



IS 14774 ( Part 1)j 2000 



4.4 Circuit Protection Requirements for Branch 
Circuits 



of a temperature control device to limit the maximum 
pipe temperature, shall employ either of the following: 



Tno minimum rAninramartfc f/\r ti*ar>a n^ka+trtrr ci/etAmc 

X IIV lllllllllllllll IVUUUV111V1IU 1V/1 UUVV llVUHUg *)> tXlWllltJ 

for use in hazardous areas are: 

a) a means of isolating the circuit from the 
supply; 

b) over-current protection provided for each 
branch circuit; and 

c) earth fault protection for each branch circuit. 



a\ JTi 






.« iv... r .mu.viwi,i 



4.5.1 General 

A trace heating system shall be designed so that under 
an conuitions tnat may reasonauiy ue loreseen, tne 
surface temperature of the trace heaters is limited to 
the temperature classification or ignition temperature 
or lower. This shall be achieved either by a stabilized 
design in accordance with 4.5.2, or the use of 
temperature control devices in accordance with 4.5.3 
to limit the maximum equipment temperature. 

When multiple trace heaters (especially on pipes with 
different flow conditions) are grouped together under 
a single surface-sensing temperature control device, 
each one shall be analysed as a stabilized pipe design. 

4.5.2 Stabilised Design for Zone 1 and Zone 2 

Applications 

Stabilized designs — These are applications where 
the maximum surface temperature of the heating device 
is determined without thermostatic control. Two 
approaches are used: 

a) A product classification approach, in 
which the maximum self-generated sheath 
temperature of the heating device has been 
established by testing the device in an artifical 
environment simulating worst-case conditions. 

b) A system approach in which the manufacturer 
has demonstrated the ability to predict sheath 
temperature by conducting tests. Use 40°C 
maximum ambient, unless aliigher ambient 
is specified. 

Stabilized design applications, in which the maximum 
surface temperature of the trace heater is determined 
without thermostatic control, shall employ either the 
systems approach specified in 5.1.11.2 or the product 
classification approach specified in 5.1.11.3. 

4.5.3 Controlled Design 

At present this design is not permitted in hazardous 
area. 

Controlled design applications, which require the use 



Controlled design applications, which require 
the use of a temperature control device to limit 
the maximum surface temperature, shall utilize 
a protective device that will de-energize the 
system permanently after exceeding the maximum 
operating temperature. A reset shall only be 
possible by hand after the previously defined 
process conditions have returned. In case of 
an error/damage of the sensor, the heating system 
shall be de-energized before replacing the 
defective equipment. The adjustment of the 
protective device shaii be secured and sealed 
to avoid manipulation. The protective device 
shaii operate independently from the temperature 
monitoring system. 

b) For Zone 2 applications 

A single temperature controller with failure 
annunciation. Provision of adequate monitoring 
of such annunciation, such as 24 h surveillance, 
shall be made. 

5 TESTING 

5.1 Type Tests 

5.L1 General 

The prototype or sample shall be tested by the testing 
station in accordance with the requirements for type 
tests of this standard and of the specific standards 
for the types of protection concerned. However, the 
testing station: 

— may omit certain tests judged to be 
unnecessary. The testing station shall keep 
a record for all tests carried out and the 
justification for those omitted: 

— shall not make the tests which have already 
been carried on an Ex component. 

The test shall be made either in the laboratory of the 
testing station or, subject to agreement between the 
testing station and the manufacturer, elsewhere under 
the supervision of the testing station, for example, at 
the manufacturer's works. 

The testing station, where necessary, shall call for 
modifications that it considers to be needed to bring 
the electrical apparatus into conformity with this 
standard and with the specific standards for the types 
of protection concerned. 

Sample of trace heaters at least 3 m in length, unless 
otherwise specified, shall be selected for testing. Tests 



IS 14774(Partl):2000 



shall be conducted at a room temperature between 
1 0°C and 40°C unless otherwise stated. Terminations 
and connections that are to be installed as an integral 
part of the trace heater, whether intended to be factory 
fabricated or field assembled, shall be subjected to 
the same tests as the trace heater except where 
otherwise noted. These connections shall include 
end terminations, tees, in line splices and power 
terminations, as well as glands, fittings and seals where 
a heating cable enters a terminations enclosure. 

5.1.2 Dielectric Test 

The dielectric test shall be performed on trace heaters 
in accordance with Table 1 . 

Table 1 Test Voltage for the Dielectric Test 



SI No. 


Rated Voltage 


Test Voltage 

V ac rms 


1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


< 30 V rms 


500 


ii) 


<60Vdc 


500 


iii) 


> 30 V rms 


<2E + 1 000 


iv) 


> 60 V dc 


V2£ + 1 000 



The test voltage where E is the rated voltage shall be 
applied at a rate of rise neither less than 100 V/s nor 
more than 200 V/s and maintained for 1 min without 
dielectric breakdown. The test voltage waveform shall 
be essentially sinusoidal, with a frequency of 45 Hz 
to 65 Hz. 

5.1.3 Electrical Insulation Resistance Test 

The electrical insulation resistance shall be measured 
on the test sample(s) prepared in accordance with 5.1.1 
after the dielectric test specified in 5.1.2. The resistance 
of the electrical insulation shall be measured between 
conductors and the metallic outer covering, or a specially 
applied conductive metal tape or braid, by means of 
a dc voltage of 1 000 V for mineral insulated heaters 
and 2 500 V for polymer insulated heaters. The 
measured value shall be not less than 50 MQ. 

5.1.4 Flammability Test 

A flammability test shall be performed on trace heaters. 
The test shall be made in a room free from draughts. 
The sample trace at least 450 mm in length shall be 
supported in a vertical position. For pads, panels and 
other trace heaters the sample width shall be 80 mm. 

A gummed kraft paper indicator shall be wrapped once 
around the sample so that it projects 20 mm from the 
sample. The paper indicator shall be positioned 
250 mm above the point at which the inner blue cone 
of the flame contacts the sample. A layer of dry, 
untreated surgical cotton not more than 6 mm in depth 
shall be placed underneath the sample so that the 



distance from the cotton to the point of the flame 
aplication is 250 mm. 

The height of the natural gas flame of the burner shall 
be adjusted to 1 30 mm with an inner blue cone 4 cm 
high, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The burner shall be tilted 
to an angle of 20° from the vertical and the flame applied 
to the cable so that the tip of the inner blue cone of 
the flame touches the specimen at the point 
approximately 150 mm above its lower end. The flame 
shall be brought up to the trace heater in such a manner 
that the vertical plane containing the major axis of 
the burner tube is at right angles to the plane of the 
cable being tested as shown in Fig. 1(b). The flame 
shall be applied for 1 5 s, then removed for 1 5 s, until 
five such applications have been made. 

The test results shall be considered satisfactory if 
the heater does not support combustion for more than 
1 min after the fifth application of the flame, does not 
burn more than 25 percent of the extended kraft paper 
and does not ignite the cotton with falling burning 
particles. 

5.1. 5 Impact Test 

NOTE — Electric trace heaters are, in the majority of 
applications, covered by thermal insulation and therefore 
afforded some mechanical protection. In some 
applications, however trace heaters may be installed under 
conditions where they will not always be protected by 
thermal insulation; for example, during installation before 
the thermal insulation is applied or where the trace heater 
exists from the thermal insulation into a junction box. 

The impact test shall be carried out on a sample 
approximately 20 cm in length Type A. The sample is 
placed on a rigid flat steel plate and positioned 
underneath an intermediate piece of hardened steel 
in the shape of a horizontal cylinder with a diameter 
of 25 mm. This cylinder is required to have a length 
of 25 mm with smooth rounded edges to a radius of 
approximately 5 mm when used to test heating pads 
and heating panels ( see Fig. 2 ). For the test, the 
cylinder is laid horizontally on the sample and, in the 
case of a trace heating cable, its axis is placed across 
the sample. A trace heating cable having a non-circular 
cross-section shall be so positioned that the impact 
is applied along the minor axis i.e. trace heating cable 
is positioned flat on the steel plate). 

Other than in tests on electrical trace heating intended 
for use in applications with low risk of mechanical 
damage, a hammer with a mass of 1 kg shall be allowed 
to fall once onto the horizontal cylinder from a height 
of 0.7 m ( i.e with an impact load of 7 J ). 

For trace heating intended for use in applications with 
low risk of mechanical damage in accordance with 4.2, 
the height may be reduced to 0.35 m ( that is an impact 
load of 3.5 J ). Electrical resistance trace heating 



IS 1 4774 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 




1 Burner 

2 Support 

3 Kraft paper flag 



4 Test sample 

5 Cotton 



Fig. 1 Flammability Test 




1 Hammer with mass of 1 kg 

2 Cylinder with diameter of 25 mm 

3 Minor axis of non-circular heating cable 



4 Cylinder with 25 mm overall length and 5 mm 
radius rounding when used to test heating pads 
and heating panels 

5 Height of fail of hammer, 0.7 m or 0.4 m 



Fig. 2 Impact Test 



IS 14774 ( Part 1 ): 2000 



submitted to such a test shall be clearly marked with 
the symboi 'X' in addition to the marking requirements 
in 6, to caution the user of its reduced mechanical 
capability. 

Conformity is vertified by testing the electrical 
insulation in accordance with 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 while 
the steel cylinder and hammer are still in place on the 

sample. 

5.1.6 Deformation Test 

A sample is piaced on a rigid flat steel piate. A crushing 
force of 1 500 N is then applied for 30 s, without shock, 
by means of a 6 mm diameter steei rod with hemispherical 
ends and a total length of 25 mm for the test, the rod 
is laid flat on the sample and in case of a trace heating 
cable it is placed across a specimen at right angles. 
In the case of a pad, it is necessary to ensure that the 
cylinder rests across the active element. 

The impact test shall be conducted approx - 20 cm 
in length. Prior to testing the sample, assembly 
shall be conditioned for a minimum of 4 h at the 
manufacturer's minimum recommended installation 
temperature. After conditioning while still at the 
minimum recomended installation temperature, the 
sample shall be subjected to the impact forces. 
Conformity is verfied by testing the electrical insulation 
in accordance with 5.1.2 and 5.1.3. While the horizontal 
steel rod is still in place on the sample and the load 
applied. 

NOTE — Trace heating cable samples need only be 
approximately 200 mm in length. 

5.1.7 Cold Bend Test 

The test apparatus to be used for the cold bend test 
is shown in Fig. 3. The test apparatus, with sample 
in .position, is maintained for a period of 4 h between 
- 25°C and - 30°C or at the manufacturer's minimum 
declared installed temperature. Immediately afterwords, 
the sample is bent through 90° around one of the 
mandrels, then bent through 180° in the opposite 
direction over the second mandrel and then 
straightened to its original position. This bending 
cycle is carried out twice. 

Conformity is verified by testing the electrical insulation 
in accordance with 5.1.2 and 5.1.3. 

NOTE — The system documentation proved by the 
manufacturer should state all constraints and precautions 
to be taken and the minimum permissible values of the 
bending radius. 

5. 1 .8 Moisture Resistance Test ( Trace Heating Cables 
Only) 

A sample of trace heating cable at least 3 m in length 



including terminations shall be placed in a water flow 
and drain apparatus as shown in Fig. 4. The rate of 
water flow shall be regulated to cover the heating cable 
and terminations completely for a period of at 
least 30 s every 5 min, after which it is drained off. 
The voltage to the water flow solenoid and the voltage 
applied to the heating cable shall be controlled by a 
cam switch or equivalent means. The timing sequences 
shall be such that the heating cable shall be energized 
for 30 s after the water has been drained. The test 
shall be continued for a period of 24 h. 

At the end of the test period, the sample shall be tested 
in accordance with 5.1.2. The end termination shall 
be inspected to verify that no water ingress has occurred. 

5.1.9 Verification of Rated Output 

The rated output of the heating cable or heating panel 
or pad shall be verified by one of the two following 
methods, as selected by the manufacturer: 

a) Resistance — The measured dc resistance per 
unit length at a specified temperature shall by 
within the manufacturer's declared tolerance. 

b) Thermal — The thermal output of trace heating 
cables is measured by installation of a single 
sample of heating cable, 3 to 6 m in iength, 
on a carbon steel pipe of 50 mm diameter or greater, 
as shown in Fig. 5. The cable is installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
The test apparatus is completely covered with 
thermal insulation of 25 mm thickness, for 
heating pads or panels, the test is conducted 
on a liquid-cooled flat metal plate with 25 mm 
of thermal insulation installed over the surface 
of the heating pad or panel. 

A suitable heat transfer liquid is circulated through 
the pipe at a sufficient rate to establish turbulant flow 
corresponding to a Reynolds number greater than 2300. 
This will establish negligible temperature difference 
between the fluid and the pipe temperature. The heat 
transfer fluid is maintained at a constant temperature. 
These parameters are verified by thermocopules placed 
at the entry and exit ends of the pipe. Flow velocity 
shall be such that the fluid temperature does not differ 
by more than 2 K from end to end. The thermal output 
of the heating cable is measured at three pipe 
temperatures representative of the full operating range. 
The heating cable is powered at its rated voltage and 
allowed to attain equilibrium. The voltage, current 
and liquid temperatures, and sample length arerecorded 
at each test temperature. Three separate determinations 
are made on separate samples. The resulting values 
shall be within the manufacturer's declared tolerance. 



IS14774(Partl):2000 




1 Sample heating cable 

2 Steel base 

3 Steel mandrel 



Fig. 3 Cold Bend Test : Type Test 



5.1.10 Thermal Stability of Electrical Insulating 

Material 

The thermal stability of the electrical insulating 
materials of trace heaters shall be verified on a sample 
or prototype after it has been stored at a temperature 
of the manufacturer's declared operating temperature 
+20 K, but not less than 80°C for at least 4 weeks. 
Compliance of the sample or prototype shall be verified 
by submitting it to the electrical insulation integrity 
test of 5.1.2. 



5.1.11 Determination 
Temperature 

5.1.11.1 General 



of Maximum Sheath 



NOTE —In potentially explosive atmospheres it is critical 
to ensure that the maximum sheath temperature for trace 
heaters is less than the ignition temperature of the explosive 
mixture. The maximum sheath temperature is dependent 
on the heater power density, overall heat transfer 
coefficient, and the maximum possible excursion 
temperature of the surface to be heated. These factors 



are used by the manufacturer to determine the sheath 
temperature of the trace heaters. 

Maximum sheath temperatures of trace heaters shall be 
determined to ensure the safe use of the heater(s). These 
sheath temperatures shall not exceed the temperature 
class, the maximum exposure temperatures of the workpiece 
material, the trace heater material and the thermal 
insulation. 

The maximum allowable power density and sheath 
temperatures declared by the manufacturer shall be 
tested by one of the following two methods: 

a) A system approach (see 5.1.11.2 ), used to 
validate a manufacturer's design methodology 
and calculations, in which the trace heater is 
subjected to a test condition where the manufac- 
turer demonstrates ability to design and predict 
sheath temperatures by conducting specific 
tests. 

b) A product classification ( see 5.1.11.3 ), 
approach in which the maximum sheath tempera- 
tures are generated in an artificial environment 
simulating worst case conditions. 



IS 14774 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 




a) Parallel cable 

b) - Series cable, one conductor 

c) Series cable, two conductors 

1 Cam switch 

2 n-line tee or slice connection (low profile) 

3 End termination (low profile) 

4 Drain 

5 Power connection (low profile) 

6 Cold lead 

Fig. 4 Moisture 
5.1.11.2 Systems approach, design verification method 

a) For heating cables, the test apparatus (see 
Fig. 6) shall consist of a 3 m horizontal run 
and a 1 .5 m vertical run of piping having a pipe 
size between 50 mm and 150 mm diameter. A 
flanged gate valve or equivalent (butterfly valve, 
globe valve etc) shall be located in the centre 
of the horizontal run. The vertical run shall be 
so arranged that the flanged pipe ends in the 
centre. The heating cable shall be installed in 
a manner consistent with the manufacturer's 
installation instruction. Thermocouples shall 
be used to monitor the pipe and valve surface 
temperatures and the trace sheath temperatures. 
The thermocouples shall be located at 
anticipated hot spots at the discretion of the 
testing station. 

The piping system shall be insulated with 
a minimum of 25 mm thickness of thermal 
insulation and installed in accordance with the 



7 Solenoid valve 

8 Water inlet 
S To heaters 

10 Water outlet 

11 Power connection (high profile) 

Resistance Test 

manufacturer's installation procedures. Pipe 
ends shall be plugged and thermally insulated. 
Unless a higher temperature is specified, the 
ambient temperature shall not exceed 40°C. The 
trace heater shall be powered at 1 1 percent of 
its rated voltage. System temperatures shall 
be allowed and stabilized and thermocouple 
readings recorded. The measured sheath 
temperatures shall not exceed manufacturer's 
calculated valves by more than 10K. 

NOTE — This procedure shall be repeated with 
three variations of parameters, such as thermal 
insulation type and thickness. 

b) For pads, panels and other surface heaters, a 
representative section shall be applied to a 
6 mm steel plate in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions. The steel plate shall 
not extend more than 25 mm from any edge of 
the surface heater. The thermocouples shall 
be located at any anticipated hotspots at the 



IS14774(Partl):2000 




17 





'V 


on l 


V//% 


















1 




00 1 


















J 


k-l 


Wl 








A « 






1 


Controlled voltage source 


11 


In-line heater 


2 


See detail A 


12 


Heat exchanger 


3 


Test specimen 


13 


Chilling unit 


4 


50 mm on pipe 


14 


Flowmeter 


5 


Temperature indicator 


15 


Pump 


6 


Thermocouple 


16 


Test pipe 


7 


25 mm fibre glass insulation 


17 


Heat tracing strip test specimen 


8 


Electric terminals 


18 


Thermal block 


9 


Temperature controller 


19 


Fibre glass insulation 





Temperature sensor 













Fig. 5 Verification of Rated Output : Type Test 



discretion of the testing station. The heated 
side of the plate shall be insulated with a 
minimum of 25 mm of thermal insulation. The 
plate is then located in a stable room 
temperature environment in a vertical 
orientation. The surface heater shall be powered 
at 110 percent of rated voltage. After stabili- 
zation the thermocouple readings shall be 



recorded including ambient temperature. The 
measured surface temperatures shall not exceed 
manufacturer's calculated values by more than 
10 K. 

NOTE — This procedure shall be repeated with three 
variations of parameters, such as thermal insulation type 
and thickness. 



10 



IS 14*74 (Part 1 ) : 2000 




1 2-6inNPT 

2 Insulation fibre glass, 2.54 mm 
Min, 3.25 kg 



3 
4 



1.5 m 
3m 



Fig. 6 Verification of Sheath Temperature Using System Approach 



5. 1 . 1 1 .3 Product classification approach 

A sample of heating cable at least 1.5 m in length is 
placed loosely coiled in a forced air circulation oven. 
The sample shall be within the upper half of the trace 
heater's thermal output tolerance. Representative 
thermocouples shall be used to monitor sample sheath 
temperatures and shall be placed 500 mm from each 
end. One additional thermocouple is used to monitor 
the temperature within the oven. The trace heater shall 
be energized at 1 10 percent of rated voltage. The oven 
ambient temperature shall be raised from ambient 
temperature in 15°C increments. Sufficient time shall 
be permitted at each temperature to allow for the oven 
temperature and the trace heater sheath temperature 
to stabilize and attain thermal equilibrium. Oven and 
heater sheath temperatures shall be recorded at each 
successive level until the difference ( AT) between 
the two is 5 K or less. A curve shall be drawn from 
the test data, and a straight line drawn tangentially 
to the curve at 5 K temperature difference point and 
extended to K. The temperature reading at this 
intercept shall be taken as the maximum sheath 
temperature, as shown in Fig. 7. 

5.1.12 Verification of Start-Up Current 

The start-up current of the trace heater shall be measured 
as a function of the manufacturer's minimum designated 
ambient temperature. A sample of heating cable at 




1 Sample temperature minus oven air temperature 

(rs-ro) o c 

2 Oven temperature (7b) c C 

3 Recorded value of 7s 

Fig. 7 Maximum Sheath Temperature Using the 
Product Classification Approach 

least 1 m in length shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions on a minimum 
50 mm diameter liquid-filled steel pipe or solid rod, or 
for heating panels or pads a flat metal heat sink. The 
testing apparatus shall be completely covered with 
thermal insulation and conditioned at the test 
temperature for at least 4 h. 

NOTE — The apparatus described in 5.1.9 can be used 
for this test. 



11 



IS 1 4774 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 



After the conditioning period, rated voltage shall be 
applied and the time/rms current characteristic shall 
be recorded from time to 300 s. The start-up current 
recorded shall be the highest current response of three 
samples. The time-current characteristic shall not be 
more than the value declared by the manufacturer. 

5.1.13 Verification of the Resistance of Metallic 
Covering 

The resistance of the mechanical covering of at least 
3 m length of trace heater shall be measured at 10 
to 40°C. A representative sample of a heating panel 
or pad shall be used. The resistance shall be equal to 
or less than the manufacturer's declared value. 

5.1.14 Elevated Temperature Exposure Dielectric 
Test 

A sample of heating device shall be placed in a forced 
circulation air oven. The oven shall be heated to and 
maintained at a temperature of 25 ± 5°C above the 
highest exposure temperature declared by the 
manufacturer for a period of 14 days. The sample shall 
be removed from the air oven and cooled to room 
temperature. Heating cable samples shall be wound 
six close turns around a mandrel having a radius equal 
to twelve times the radius of the primary bending plane 
or thickness of the heating cable. Surface heating 
units, if flexible, shall be wrapped on a mandrel with 
a radius equivalent to the manufacturer's minimum 
recommended bending radius. While still on the 
mandrel the sample, except at terminations or ends 
where the conductor is exposed shall be submerged 
in tap water at 10 to 25°C for 5 min. While still in the 
tap water the dielectric test shall be performed. Rigid 
heating devices shall also be submerged in tap water 
and tested. Upon completion of the test, the sample 
shall have no visible cracks when examined with normal 
vision. 

5.1.15 Service Life Performance Bench Mark 

Three randomly selected samples representing the 
maximum output of all cables or surface heating device 
under evaluation shall be tested. If the type of cable 
or surface heating device has different levels of rated 
voltages and wattages, then three samples^ach shall 
be selected that represent (1) the lowest rated voltage 
level and the maximum rated output, and (2) the 
maximum rated voltage and the minimum rated output. 

Samples shall be terminated according to the 
manufacturer's specifications, such that a heating 
length of at least 0.6 m or representative surface device 
dimension is provided. The aging temperature of the 
test shall be the maximum declared to maintain 
temperature of the heating device. The samples shall 
be conditioned, while energized, at the aging 
temperature for 120 ± 24 h. The initial output of the 



samples is then to be determined, with the exceptions 
of sample length and number of test temperature points. 
For this case, the samples shall be evaluated at rated 
voltage and at the manufacturer's stated reference 
temperature for the rated output. The output shall 
be within the manufacturer's stated output range. 

The samples shall be attached to a fixture or suitable 
heat sink and insulated accordingly. The pipe or heat 
sink temperature shall be set to the specified aging 
temperature and maintained with ± 3°C plus 1 percent 
of the temperature reading in degrees Celsius. 
Circulating fluid or external heating may be used to 
raise the fixture to the aging temperature. The samples 
shall be operated at rated output for series cables or 
rated voltage for parallel cable. Surface heating devices 
shall be operated at rated output. The power supply 
shall be attached to a 1 5 min cycle timer such that the 
samples are energized for 12 min and de-energized for 
3 min. The samples shall be exposed to this 
conditioning for 32 weeks (5 376 h). 

For heating devices with an intermitent temperature 
exposure rating, the samples are exposed to the same 
conditioning for 32 weeks,except for an 8 h excursion 
once each week. At the beginning of the 8 h, the samples 
shall be disengaged from the cycle timer. The pipe or 
heat sink temperatuie shall be increased to a temperature 
equal to the manufacturer's stated intermittent exposure 
temperature. The time allowed to increase the tempera- 
ture should be not greater than 1 h. After 7 h from the 
beginning of the excursion, the pipe or heat sink 
temperature shall be decreased back to the aging 
temperature again allowing no more than 1 h for the 
operation. Where the intermittent temperature rating 
is based on the heating device being energized, the 
heating device shall be continuously energized during 
this temperature excursion, except during cool down 
back to the maximum maintained temperature. Where 
the intermittent temperature rating is based on the 
heating device being de-energized, the exposure cycle 
is conducted in a de-energized condition. At the end 
of the 8 h excursion, the samples shall be re-engaged 
to the cycle timer. The excursion should occur on 
the same day each week. 

At the end of the 32 weeks of operation at the 
continuous rated temperature, the output of the samples 
shall be determined by the same procedure as utilized 
for the initial readings. The percent change to the 
initial output shall be calculated. The heating cable 
or surface heating device shall not show an increase 
of more than 20 percent output; and the heating cable 
or surface heating device shall maintain a minimum 
of 75percent of the initial output. 

5.2 Routine Tests 

NOTE — These tests to be carried out after production 
or prior to shipment. 



12 



5.2.1 Dielectric Test 

Each shipped length or item, whether in bulk or 
individually fabricated items, shall be subjected to 
the dielectric test specified in 5.1.2. 

The sheath (overjacket) used for corrosion resistance 
over the metallic braiding or continuous metallic 
covering shall either be subjected to the dielectric test 
of 1 000 V ac, whilst immersed in water, or to a dry 
spark test using a minimum voltage of 3 000 V ac. 

As an alternative to immersing in water, the electrical 
insulation of trace heaters may be subjected to a dry 
spark test,with a minimum test voltage of 6 000 V ac 
rms that has a substantially sinusoidal wave form at 
2 500 to 3 500 Hz. For a 3 000 Hz supply, the rate of 
travel of the trace heater through the dry test device, 
in metres per second, shall not be more than 3.3 times 
the length of the electrode in centimetres. 

5.2.2 Verification of Rated Output 

The output rating for each manufactured length of 
parallel heating cable shall be verified for linearity of 
power output through continuous or statistical test 
methods. The power output rating for each length 
of series resistance heating cable or fixed resistive 
heater shall be verified by measurement of the dc 
resistance, conductance or current at a given 
temperature. The test measurement criteria shall be 
established or correlate to the output verification test 
specified in 5.1.9. If statistical methods are used the 
results shall represent a total product reliability of 95 
percent or greater. The power output shall be within 
manufacturer's declared tolerances. 

6 MARKING 

6.1 General 

All components of trace heating system, including 
the branch circuit protection device, monitoring 
instrumentation and temperature controllers, shall 
be suitably and permanently marked with relevant 
reference to the manufacturer's documents, model or 
catalogue numbers, approvals, certification and process 
requirements. 

6.2 Factory Fabricated Trace Heater Units or Sets 

Trace heaters with factory fabricated terminations shall 
have a durable tag/label permanently affixed to the 
non-heating sheath within 75 mm of the power 
connection fitting or gland, marked with the following: 

a) The operating voltage; 



IS 14774 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 

b) The rated steady state current; and 

c) The statement "Bond the metal sheath/braid 
of this trace heater to a suitable earth/ground 
terminal". 

6.3 Bulk Heater Cables 

Trace heaters certified to be field assembled into 
finished cable sets or units at the work site shall be 
clearly and permanently marked with the following: 

a) The rated or operating voltage; 

b) The rated power output or resistance per unit 
length (at a reference temperature); and 

c) The statement "Bond the metal sheath/braid 
of this trace heater to a suitable earth/ground 
terminal". 

6.4 Cable Spools, Reels or Cartons 

The spool, reel or carton in or on which the bulk trace 
heater cable is delivered shall be marked with the 
following: 

a) The rated or operating voltage; 

b) The rated power output or resistance per unit 
length (at a reference temperature); 

c) The statement "Bond the metal sheath/braid 
of this trace heater to a suitable earth/ground 
terminal"; and 

d) The statement "refer to installation instructions". 

6.5 Heater Field Termination/Splice Kits 

The kit packaging shall be approved, listed or certified, 
and marked with the following: 

a) The intended use (s) of the kit, for instance power 
termination; 

b) The statement "refer to installation instructions", 

c) The statement "Bond the metal sheath/braid 
of this trace heater to a suitable earth/ground 
terminal"; and 

d) The presence of electrically heated pipelines 
or vessels, or both, shall be evident by the 
posting of appropriate caution signs or 
markings at frequent intervals along the pipeline 
or vessel. 



13 



IS14774(Partl):2000 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. 



2148:1981 



5571 : 1979 



6381 : 1972 



13408 
(Parti): 1992 



Title 

Flameproof enclosures for electrical 
apparatus ( second revision ) 

Guide for selection of electrical 
equipment for hazardous areas 

Construction and testing of electrical 
apparatus with type of protection 

V 

Code of practice for the selection, 
installation and maintenance of 
electrical apparatus for use in 



IS No. Title 

potentially explosive atmospheres 
(other than mining application or 
explosiveprocessing manufacture) : 
Part 1 General recommendations 

13346: 1992 General requirements for electrical 
apparatus for explosive gas 
atmospheres 

14614 : 1998 Residual current operated protective 
devices (RCDs) for household and 
similar use-electrotechnical comp- 
atibility 



14 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BlS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or gfade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ETD 22 ( 5074 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 (Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg J 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 3233841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I P, Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 [ 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 \ 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, Indi? 



