**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 


•^■•■^^^■r 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  11939:  1996 

WJON    HM^  (  Reaffirmed  2002  ) 

^FcT^M  ^n^  —  ^c^^R^i  Pi4^^i  ^p^TRfr  — 

f  ww^^w ) 

Indian  Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES  —  STEERING 

CONTROL  SYSTEMS  —  IMPACT 

PROTECTION  REQUIREMENTS  AND 

METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 

(  First  Revision  ) 


ICS  43.043.30 


©BIS  1996 

BUREAU    OF     INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

October  1996  Price  Group     4 


Automotive  Suspension  and  Steering  Systems  Sectional  Committee,  TED  5 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  the  Automotive  Suspension  and  Steering  Systems  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved 
by  the  Transport  Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1987.  The  present  revision  Ls  necessary  to  incorporate  the  latest 
changes  made  in  ECE  and  FMV  standards.  It  isa  known  fact  that  in  the  case  of  accidents  the  eventualities 
are  due  to  chest,  neck  and  facial  injuries  as  a  result  of  the  impact  on  collision. 

This  standard  aims  at  the  impact  protection  of  the  driver  under  the  effect  of  the  following  three  forces: 

a)  Those  due  to  the  driver's  body  inertia  in  the  event  of  an  impact  against  the  steering  control  in  a 
frontal  collision. 

b)  Those  resulting  from  a  frontal  collision  which  may  produce  rearward  displacement  of  the  steering 
column. 

c)  Those  due  to  the  drivers  head  inertia  in  the  event  of  an  impact  against  the  steering  control  in  a 
frontal  collision. 

While  preparing  the  standard,  considerable  assistance  has  been  derived  from  the  following  EEC  directive 
and  FMV  standard: 

EEC  directive  91/662/EEC  'The  behavior  of  the  steering  wheel  and  column  in  an  impact' 

49  CFR- 10- 1-1988 

While  formulating  the  standard,  assistance  has  also  been  obtained  from  the  following  Indian  Standards: 

IS  13389 :  1992/  Road  vehicles  —  Passenger  car  —  Moving  barrier  rear  collision  test  method 

ISO  3984  :  1982 

IS  13390  :  1992/  Road  vehicles  —  Frontal  fixed  barrier  collision  test  method 

ISO  3560 :  1975 

The  composition  of  the  committee  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  A. 

In  reporting  the  results  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance,  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for 
rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'. 


IS  11939 :  1996 


Indian  Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES  —  STEERING 

CONTROL  SYSTEMS  —  IMPACT 

PROTECTION  REQUIREMENTS  AND 

METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 


(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 


1.1  This  standard  specifies  the  requirements  and 
methods  of  test  for  determination  of  impact  of 
steering  control  system  on  the  driver  in  the  event  of 
any  frontal  collision. 

1.2  This  standard  is  applicable  to  vehicles  of 
category  Mi  and  Ni,  with  a  maximum  permissible 
mass  up  to  1  500  kg,  fitted  with  steering  control. 

Note  —  Category  Mi  Vehicles  used  for  carrying  pas- 
sengers and  comprising  not  more 
than  eight  seats  in  addition  to  the 
driver  seat. 

Categoiy  Ni  Vehicles  used  for  canying  goods 
and  having  a  maximum  mass  of  not 
exceeding  3.5  tonnes. 

1.3  This  standard  is  not  applicable  for  vehicles  with 
forward  control;  for  such  vehicles  an  appropriate 
seat  belt  assembly  preferably  shoulder  type  shall  be 
provided  for  the  driver. 

2  REFERENCE 

The  Indian  Standard  IS  13749  :  1993  'Automotive 
vehicles  —  Determination  of  H-point  —  Method 
of  lest'  is  an  important  adjunct  to  this  standard. 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following 
definitions  shall  apply. 

3.1  Air  Bag 

Air  bag  means  a  flexible  bag  that  is  designed  to  be 
inflated  with  a  gas  under  pressure,  by  a  device  ac- 
tuated in  case  of  vehicle's  impact,  in  order  to 
protect  the  driver  against  steering  control. 

3.2  Body  Block 

Means  the  torso  shaped  s'tandardized  body  form 
used  for  carrying  out  the  impact  test. 

3.3  Boss 

The  part  of  the  steering  control,  usually  at  the 
centre,  that  joins  the  steering  control  to  the  steer- 


ing shaft  and  transmits  the  torque  from  the  steering 
control  to  the  steering  shaft. 

3.4  Centre  of  the  Boss 

Centre  of  the  boss  means  the  point  on  the  surface 
of  the  steering  control  boss  which  is  in  line  with  axis 
of  the  steering  shaft. 

3.5  Forward  Control 

Forward  control  means  a  configuration  in  which 
more  than  half  of  the  engine  length  is  rearward  of 
the  foremost  point  of  the  windshield  base  and  the 
steering  wheel  hub  is  in  the  forward  quarter  of  the 
vehicle  length. 

3.6  Impactor 

Impactor  means  the  rigid  hemi-spherical  head  form 
165  mm  in  diameter  with  a  mass  of  6.8  kg. 

3.7  Passenger  Compartment 

Passenger  compartment  means  the  space  for  oc- 
cupant accommodation  bounded  by  the  roof,  floor, 
side  walls,  doors,  outside  glazing,  front  bulkhead 
and  the  plane  of  the  rear  seat  back  support. 

3.8  Plane  of  the  Steering  Control 

Plane  of  the  steering  control  means,  in  the  case  of 
the  steering  wheel,  the  flat  surface  that  splits  the 
steering  wheel  rim  equally  between  the  driver  and 
front  of  the  vehicle. 

3.9  Seating  Reference  Point 

Seating  reference  point  is  the  point  specified  by  the 
vehicle  manufacturer  which: 

a)  has  coordinates  determined  in  relation  to 
the  vehicle  structure;  and 

b)  Corresponds  to  the  theoretical  position  of 
the  points  torso/thighs  rotation  (H-point) 
for  the  lowest  and  most  rearward  normal 
driving  position  or  position  of  use  given  by 
the  vehicle  manufacturer  (s)  for  each  seating 
position  specified  by  them  (see  Fig.  1). 


IS  11939 :  1996 


rORSO   WEIGHTS 


DIRECTIONS  AND    POINT 
OF  APPLICATION  OF  LOAD 


BUTTOCK   WEIGHTS 


THIGH   WEIGHTS 


LEG  WEIGHTS 


MASS  OF  MANIKIN 

kg 

Components  Simulating  Back 

16 

and  Seat  of  Body 

Mass  of  Torso  Weights 

31 

Mass  of  Seat  Weights 

8 

Mass  of  Thigh  Weights 

7 

Mass  of  Leg  Weights 

13 

Total 

75 

All  dimensions  in  miliimetres. 

Fig.  1  Dimensions  and  Mass  of  Manikin 


3.10  Spoke 

Spoke  means  a  bar  connecting  the  steering  control 
rim  to  the  boss. 

3.11  Steering  Column 

It  means  a  structural  surrounding  a  steering  shaft. 

3.12  Steering  Control 

The  steering  device,  usually  the  steering  wheel, 
which  is  actuated  by  the  driver 


3.13  Steering  Control  Rim 

The  quasi-toroidal  outer  ring  in  the  case  of  the 
steering  wheel  usually  gripped  by  the  driver's  hand 
during  driving 

3.14  Steering  Mechanism 

The  system  comprising  of  steering  control,  shaft, 
steering  gear  housing  and  all  other  components 
such    as    those    designed  to  contribute  to  the 


IS  11939 :  1996 


absorption  of  energy  in  the  event  of  impact  against 
the  steering  control. 

3.15  Steering  Shaft 

The  component  that  transmits  steering  torque 
from  steering  control  to  the  steering  gear. 

3.16  Maximum  Permissible  Mass 

Maximum  permissible  mass  means  the  maximum 
mass  declared  by  the  vehicle  manufacturer  to  be 
technically  permissible. 

4  CONSTRUCTION  REQUIREMENTS 

4.1  The  steering  mechanism  shall  be  so  designed 
and  constructed  that  no  component  or  attachment, 
including  horn  actuating  mechanisms  and  trim 
hardware  can  catch  the  driver's  clothing  or  jewel- 
lery (namely,  watch,  ring  and  bracelets  without 
loosely  attached  or  dangling  members)  during  nor- 
mal driving. 

5  TESTS 

The  following  tests  shall  be  carried  out  to  deter- 
mine the  impact  of  steering  control  system  on  the 
driver  in  the  event  of  any  frontal  collision: 


a)  Body  block  test  {see  6), 

b)  Frontal  impact  test  {see  7),  and 

c)  Head  form  test  (see  8). 

6  BODY  BLOCK  TEST 

6.1  When  the  steering  control  is  struck  by  a  body 
block  released  against  this  control  at  a  relative 
velocity  of  24.1  km/h,  in  accordance  with  the  fol- 
lowing procedure  and  the  force  applied  to  the  body 
by  the  steering  control  shall  not  exceed  11 150  N. 

6.1.1  After  carrying  out  the  impact  test  as  specified 
in  6.1,  the  part  of  the  steering  control  surface 
directed  towards  the  driver  shall  not  present  any 
sharp  or  rough  edges  likely  to  increase  the  danger 
or  severity  of  injuries  to  the  driver.  Small  surface 
cracks  and  fissures  shall  be  disregarded. 

6.2  Body  Block 

6,2.1  The  body  block  shall  have  the  shape,  dimen- 
sions, mass  and  characteristics  shown  in  Fig.  2. 


GAP  AS 

NEEDED  TO 

MEET 

COMPRESSION 

LOAD 

REQUIBEMENTS 


\REFEREN£E 
LINE 

RUBBER    LIKE   MATERIAL 
STRAPPED  AND   TAPED  TO 
BACKING    P^ATE 


SECTION   A  B 

Spring  Rate  :  107  kgf/cm  —  143  kgf/cm 

The  chest  is  loaded  with  a  100  mm  beam  as  shown,  90°  to  the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  block  and  parallel  to  the  backing 

plate.  The  load  is  measured  when  the  beam  has  moved  12.7  mm  in  to  the  body  block. 


Fig.  2 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Mass  34-36  kg,  5oth  Percentile  Torso-Shaped  Body  Block 


IS  11939 :  1996 


6.3  Positioning  of  Body  Block 

6,3.1  Using  the  layout  drawing  of  the  particular 
vehicle  in  which  the  steering  system  is  to  be  used, 
the  vertical  dimension  between  the  lower  edge  of 
the  wheel  rim  and  a  point  19  mm  vertically  above 
the  seating  reference  point  of  the  driver  shall  be 
determined. 

6.4  Conditioningof  Body  Block 

6.4.1  Ail  samples  and  the  body  block  shall  be  sta- 
bilized at  the  ambient  temperature  for  four  hours 
before  testing  and  this  temperature  shall  be 
recorded  in  the  test  report. 

6.5  Mounting  of  Steering  Control 

6.5.1  The  control  shall  be  mounted  on  the  front 
section  of  the  vehicle  obtained  by  cutting  the  body 
transversely  at  the  level  of  front  seats  and  possibly 
eliminating  the  roof,  windscreen  and  doors.  This 
section  shall  be  fixed  rigidly  to  the  test  bench  so  that 
it  does  not  move  under  the  impact  of  the  body 
block. 

6.5.2  However,  the  steering  control,  alternatively, 
may  be  mounted  on  a  framework  simulating  the 
mounting  of  steering  mechanism  provided  that,  as 
compared  with  the  real  front  body  section/steering 
mechanism,  the  framework/steering  mechanism 
has  the  same  geometrical  layout  and  rigidity. 

6.5.3  Adjustable  steering  controls  shall  be  so  ad- 
justed that  a  tilting  steering  wheel  hub  is  at  the 
geometric  centre  of  the  locus  it  describes  when  it  is 
moved  through  its  full  range  of  driving  positions.  A 
telescopic  steering  control  is  set  at  the  adjustment 
position  midway  between  the  forward  most  and 
rearward  most  position. 

6.5.4  The  tolerance  on  the  control  mounting  angle 
shall  be  ±2°  of  the  design  value, 

6.5.5  All  parts  under  test  shall  be  installed  using 
the  design  attachment  points  and  production  parts 
or  simulations  thereof  to  the  torque  "alue  recom- 
mended by  the  manufacturer. 

6.6  Setting  of  Steering  Mechanism 

6.6.1  During  the  first  test,  the  steering  control  shall 
be  turned  so  that  its  most  rigid  spoke  is  perpen- 
dicular to  the  first  point  of  contact  with  body  block; 
if  the  steering  control  is  a  steering  wheel,  the  test 
shall  be  repeated  with  the  most  flexible  part  of  the 
steering  wheel  perpendicular  to  the  point  of  con- 
tact. In  the  case  of  an  adjustable  steering  control, 
both  tests  shall  be  carried  out  with  the  wheel 
adjusted  to  the  middle  position. 

6.6.2  If  the  steering  control  is  fitted  with  an  air  bag, 
the  test  shall  be  carried  out  with  the  air  bag  inflated. 


At  the  request  of  the  manufacturer,  and  with  the 
agreement  of  testing  agency,  the  test  maybe  carried 
out  without  the  air  bag  inflated. 

6.7  Propulsion  of  Body  Block 

6,7,1  Any  method  of  propulsion  may  be  used, 
provided  that  when  the  body  block  strikes  the  steer- 
ing control,  it  shall  be  free  from  all  connections 
with  the  propelling  device,  the  body  block  shall 
strike  the  control  after  an  approximately  straight 
trajectory  parallel  to  the  longitudinal  axis  of  this 
vehicle. 

6.8  Speed  of  Body  Block 

6.8.1  The  body  block  shall  strike  the  steering  con- 
trol at  a  velocity  of  24  ^  ^-^  km/h.  This  velocity  shall 

be  achieved  either  by  the  mere  energy  of  propulsion 
or  by  using  an  additional  propelling  device.  How- 
ever, if  the  test  has  been  carried  out  at  a  higher 
impact  speed  and  the  control  has  met  the  require- 
ment laid  down,  the  test  shall  be  considered  satis- 
factory. While  carrying  out  the  test  care  shall  be 
taken  that  the  body  block  collides  against  the  steer- 
ing mechanism  at  the  specified  speed  without  any 
rotation. 

6.8.2  The  body  block  at  impact  is  positioned  as 
shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  body  block  is  centred  laterally 
in  relation  to  the  plane  of  the  steering  wheel  rim. 
The  vertical  dimension,  as  defined  in  6,3.1,  is  the 
relationship  between  the  lower  edge  of  the  steering 
wheel  and  the  reference  line  on  the  body  block. 

6.9  Test  Measurements 
6.9,1  Force 

6.9.1.1  Measurements  shall  be  made  of  the  maxi- 
mum force,  acting  horizontally  and  parallel  to  the 
longitudinal  axis  of  the  vehicle,  apphed  to  the  body 
block  as  a  result  of  impact  against  the  steering 
control.  This  force  may  be  measured  directly  or 
indirectly  or  may  be  calculated  from  values 
recorded  during  the  test. 

6.9.1.2  The  measuring  range  of  force  shall  be 
19  600  N  (2  000  kg)  and  it  shall  be  recorded  with 
channel  frequency  class  of  600  Hz. 

6.9.1.3  Load  transducer  for  measuring  the  force 
may  be  inserted  on  the  steering  mechanism,  be- 
tween steering  control  and  steering  shaft. 

6.9.1.4  Measurements  shall  also  be  made  of  the 
impact  velocity  of  the  body  block.  This  velocity  is 
the  velocity  recorded  immediately  before  the  body 
block  collides  against  the  steering  mechanism. 


IS  11939 :  1996 


BODY  BLOCK 
REFERENCE   LINE 


PLANE 
RIM 


DIRECTION  OF 
IMPACT    VELOCITY 

SEATING   REFERENCE 
POINT  OF    DRIVER 


LINE  THROUGH   SEATING  REFERENCE 
POINT  OF   DRIVER   PARALLEL   TO 
VEHICLE   HORIZONTAL    REFERENCE 


DETERMINED  FROM 
PACKAGE   DRAWING 


BODY   BLOCK   IN  FREE   FLIGHT 
AT   AND  DURING  IMPACT 


Fig.  3    Steering  Wheel-Body  Block  Relationship 


6,10  Instrumentation 


6.10.1  The  accuracy  of  instruments  used  to  record 
parameters  specified  in  6.1  shall  be  such  that  the 
measurements  made  shall  have  the  accuracies  indi- 
cated below: 


a)  Speed  of  body  block 

b)  Recording  time 


within  2  percent 
within  1/1  000  s 


6.10.2  The  beginning  of  the  impact  (zero  point)  at 
the  moment  of  first  contact  of  the  body  block  with 
the  steering  control  shall  be  identified  on  the 

recordings. 

6.11  Results  of  Test 

6.11.1  After  the  test,  the  damage  sustained  by  the 
steering  mechanism  shall  be  ascertained  and 
recorded  in  a  lest  report,  at  least  one  side-view  and 
one  front-view  photograph  of  the  steering  con- 
trol/steering column/instrument  panel  area  shall 
be  taken. 

6.11.2  The  maximum  value  of  force  shall  be 
measured  or  calculated  as  indicated  in  6.9.1,  and  it 
shall  be  reported. 

7  FRONTAL  IMPACT  TEST  (AGAINST  A 
BARRIER) 

7.1  When  the  vehicle,  in  running  order,  without  a 
manikin,  is  collision-tested  against  a  barrier  at  a 
speed  of  48.3  km/h,  in  accordance  with  the  follow- 
ing procedure,  the  top  of  the  steering  column  and 
its  shaft  shall  not  move  backwards,  horizontally  or 
vertically  by  not  more  than  12.7  cm  in  the  plane 
parallel  to  the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  vehicle  in 
relation  to  a  point  of  the  vehicle  not  affected  by  the 
impact. 


7.2  Installation  Procedure  and  Instrumentation 

7.2.1  Test  Area 

l.l.l.l  The  test  area  shall  be  large  enough  to 
accommdate  the  run-up  track,  barrier  and  teachical 
installations  necessary  for  the  test.  The  last  part  of 
the  track,  for  at  least  5  m  before  the  barrier,  shall 
be  horizontal  (slope  less  than  3  percent  measured 
over  a  length  of  one  metre),  flat  and  smooth. 

7.2.2  Bairier 

7,2.2,1  The  barrier  shall  consist  of  a  black  of  rein- 
forced concrete  not  less  than  3  m  wide  in  front  and 
not  less  than  1.5  m  high.  The  barrier  shall  be  of  such 
thickness  that  it's  mass  is  at  least  70  tons.  The  front 
face  shall  be  flat,  vertical  and  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  of  the  run-up  track.  It  shall  be  covered  with 
plywood  boards  19  ±  1  mm  thick,  in  good  condition. 
A  structure  on  a  steel  plate  atleast  25  mm  thick  may 
be  placed  between  the  plywood  board  and  the  bar- 
rier. A  barrier  with  different  characteristics  may 
like  wise  be  used,  provided  that  the  area  of  the 
impact  surface  is  greater  than  the  frontal  crash  area 
of  the  vehicle  being  tested  and  also  would  give 
equivalent  results. 

7.2.3  Propulsion  of  Vehicle 

7,2.3.1  At  moment  of  impact,  the  vehicle  shall  no 
longer  be  subject  to  the  action  of  any  additional 
steering  or  propelling  device.  It  shall  reach  the 
obstacle  on  a  course  perpendicular  to  the  barrier; 
the  maximum  lateral  misalignment  permissible 
between  the  vertical  median  line  of  the  front  of  the 
vehicle  and  the  vertical  median  line  of  the  barrier 
is  ±30  cm. 


18  11939:1996 


7.2.4  State  of  Vehicle 

7.2.4.1  For  the  test  the  vehicle  shall  either  be  fitted 
with  all  the  normal  components  and  equipment 
included  in  its  unladen  (kerb)  mass  or  be  in  such  a 
condition  as  to  satisfy  this  requirement  so  far  as  the 
components  and  equipment  of  concern  to  the  pas- 
senger compartment  and  the  distribution  of  the 
mass  of  the  vehicle  as  a  whole,  in  running  order,  are 
concerned. 

7.2.4.2  If  the  vehicle  is  driven  by  an  external  means, 
the  fuel  feed  systems  shall  be  filled  to  at  least  90 
percent  of  its  capacity  with  a  non-flammable  liquid 
having  a  specific  gravity  ranging  between  0.7  and  1 
and  all  the  other  systems  (brake-fluid  reservoir,  etc) 
may  be  left  empty. 

7.2.4.3  If  the  vehicle  is  driven  by  its  own  engine,  the 
fuel  tank  shall  be  filled  to  at  least  90  percent  of  it's 
capacity.  All  other  reservoirs  shall  be  filled  to  their 
capacity.  If  the  manufacturer  so  desires  and  the 
testing  agency  agrees,  the  fuel  feed  to  the  engine 
may  be  provided  from  an  auxiliary  tank  of  small 
capacity.  In  such  case,  the  fuel  tank  shall  be  filled 
to  not  less  than  90  percent  of  its  capacity  with  a 
non-flammable  liquid  having  a  specific  gravity 
ranging  between  0.7  and  1. 

7.2.4.4  If  the  manufacturer  so  requests,  the  testing 
agency  responsible  for  conducting  the  tests  may 
allow  the  same  vehicle  as  is  used  for  tests  specified 
by  other  Indian  Standards  (including  tests  capable 
of  affecting  its  structure)  to  be  used  also  for  the  tests 
specified  in  this  standard. 

7.2.5  Speed  on  Impact 

7.2.5.1  The  speed  on  impact  shall  be  between 
48.3  km/h  and  53.1  km/h.  However,  if  the  test  has 
been  carried  out  at  a  higher  impact  speed  and  the 
vehicle  has  met  the  requirements  laid  down,  the  test 
shall  be  considered  satisfactory. 

7.2.6  Instrumentation 

7.2.6.1  The  instruments  used  for  recording  the 
speed  specified  in  7.2.5.1  above  shall  be  accurate 
to  within  1  percent. 

7,3  Results  of  Test 

7,3.1  To  determine  the  rearward  and  upward 
movement  of  the  steering  control  during  the  col- 
lision, a  recording  shall  be  made,  of  the  horizontal 
variation  in  distance  measured  horizontally  and 
parallel  to  the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  vehicle  and 
vertical  variation  in  distance,  in  the  direction  per- 
pendicular to  that  axis  and  upwards  between  the 
top  of  the  steering  column  (and  shaft)  and  a  point 
on  the  vehicle  which  is  not  affected  by  the  impact. 
The  largest  value  of  this  variation,  obtained  from 


the  recording  shall  be  taken  as  the  rearward  and 
upward  movement. 

7.3.2  Measurements  of  distances  as  mentioned 
in  7.3.1  shall  be  made  with  reference  to  the  pas- 
senger compartment  when  the  vehicle  is  stationary 
before  the  test,  not  in  space  during  movement  of 
the  vehicle  in  relation  to  the  ground. 

7.3.3  Recording  of  the  variations  in  distance  may 
be  replaced  by  the  maximum  measurement. 

7.3.4  After  the  test  the  damage  sustained  by  the 
vehicle  shall  be  recorded  in  a  test  report;  one 
photograph  at  least  shall  be  taken  of  each  of  the 
following  views  of  the  vehicle: 

—  side  (right  and  left ), 

—  front, 

—  bottom, 

—  affected  area  inside  the  passenger  compart- 
ment. 


7.4  Correction  Factors 

7,4.1  The  corrected  variation  D\  used  to  check  the 
conformity  of  the  prototype  with  the  requirements 
of  this  standard  shall  be  calculated  by  the  following 
formula: 


where 

Do  = 

Di  = 

Ki  = 
V 

K2  = 

mo  = 

mi  = 


Di  =DoxKiXK2 

variation  in  the  distance  measured 
during  the  impact,  as  defined  in  7,3.1. 
variation  in  the  distance  used  to  deter- 
mine the  results  of  the  test, 
the  greater  of  (48.  3/vf  and  0. 83. 
recorded  speed  in  km/h. 
the  greater  oimoMn  and  0.8. 
mass  of  prototype  in  the  state  defined 
in  7.2,4,1. 

mass    of   prototype     with     testing 
apparatus. 


8  HFAD  FORM  TEST 

8.1  When  the  steering  control  is  struck  by  an  im- 
pactor  released  against  this  control  at  a  relative 
speed  of  24.1  km/h,  in  accordance  with  the  follow- 
ing procedure,  the  deceleration  of  the  impactor 
shall  not  exceed  80  g  cumulative  for  more  than 
3  milliseconds.  The  deceleration  shall  always  be 
lower  than  120  g  with  channel  frequency  class 
600  Hz 

8.2  After  carrying  out  the  impact  test  as  specified 
in  8.1,  the  part  of  the  steering  control  surface 
directed  towards  the  driver  shall  not  present  any 
sharp  or  rough  edges  likely  to  increase  the  danger 
or  severity  of  injuries  to  the  driver.  Small  surface 
cracks  and  fissures  shall  be  disregarded. 


8.3  Installation  Procedure  and  Instrumentation 

8.3. 1  Mounting  of  Steering  Control 

8.3.1.1  The  control  shall  be  mounted  on  the  front 
section  of  the  vehicle  obtained  by  cutting  the  body 
transversely  at  the  level  of  the  front  seats  and  pos- 
sibly eliminating  the  roof,  windscreen  and  doors. 
This  section  shall  be  fked  rigidly  to  the  test  bench, 
so  that  it  does  not  move  under  the  impact  of  the 
head  form . 

8.3.1.2  However,  the  steering  control,  alternatively 
may  be  mounted  on  a  framework  simulating  the 
mountingof  the  steering  mechanism  provided  that, 
as  compared  with  the  real  front  body  section  /steer- 
ing mechanism,  the  framework/steering 
mechanism  has  the  same  geometric  layout  and 
greater  rigidity, 

8.3.1.3  The  tolerance  on  the  control  mounting 
angle  shall  be  ±2°  of  the  design  angle, 

8.3.2  Setting  of  Steering  Mechanism 

8.3.2.1  The  plane  of  the  steering  control  shall  be 
set  up  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  impact.  A 
typical  head  form  setup  is  shown  in  Fig.  4. 

8.3.2.2  Testing  shall  be  carried  out  by  setting  the 
steering  control  so  that  the  axis  of  impactor  is  in 
line  with  following  points  during  each  impact: 

a)  The  centre  of  the  steering  control  boss; 

b)  The  joint  of  stiffest  or  most  supported  spoke 
to  the  inner  edge  of  the  steering  control  rim; 

c)  The  mid-point  of  the  shortest  unsupported 
are  of  the  steering  control  rim  that  does  not 
include  a  spoke;  and 

d)  Any  other  'worst  case'  position  on  the  steer- 
ing control,  in  the  event  that  such  a  case 
exists,  as  determined  by  the  testing  agency. 


IS  11939 :  1996 

8.3.2.3  A  new  steering  control  shall  be  used  for 
each  impact. 

8.3.2.4  If  the  steering  control  is  fitted  with  an  air 
bag  the  test  shall  be  carried  out  with  the  air  bag 
inflated.  At  the  request  of  the  manufacturer,  and 
with  the  agreement  of  the  testing  agency,  the  test 
may  be  carried  out  without  the  air  bag  inflated. 

8.3.3  Test  Apparatus 

8.3.3.1  This  apparatus  consists  of  a  fully-guided 
linear  impactor  as  specified  in  3.6. 

8.3.3.2  The  head-form  shall  be  fitted  with  two  ac- 
celerometers  and  a  speed  measuring  device,  all 
capable  of  measuring  values  in  the  impact  direction, 

8.3.4  Speed  of  Impactor 

8.3.4.1  The  impactor  shall  strike  the  steering  con- 
trol at  a  velocity  of  24.1  km/h;  this  velocity  shall  be 
achieved  cither  by  mere  energy  of  propulsion  or  by 
using  an  additionl  propelling  device. 

8.3.5  Instrumentation 

8.3.5.1  The  instrumentation  used  to  record  the 
parameters  specified  in  8,1  shall  enable  the  meas- 
urements to  be  made  with  the  following  accuracy 
characteristics: 

a)  Acceleration 

Channel  amplitude  class:  150  g 
Channel  frequency  class:  600  Hz 

b)  Speed:  within  1  percent 

c)  Time  recording:  1/1  000  s 

8.4  Results  of  Test 

8.4.1  In  the  tests  carried  out  according  to  the  above 
procedure,  the  deceleration  rate  of  the  impactor 
shall  be  taken  as  the  average  of  the  simultaneous 
readings  of  the  two  decelerometers. 


PLANE  OF 

STEERING 

CONTROL 


PENDULUM    PIVOT 


Fig.  4    Typical  Head  Form  Impact  Set-up 


IS  11939  :  1996 


ANNEX  A 

( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Automotive  Suspension  and  Steering  Systems  Sectional  Committee,  TED  5 


Chairman 
Dr  S.  Satya  Murty 

Members 
Shri  M.  Balakumar 

Shri  S.  Sundararaj  {Alternate  ) 
Dr  p.  R.  Sajanpawar 

Shri  S.  Raju  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  B.  Bhaumik 

Shri  C.  Y.  Deshpande  {Alternate ) 
Shri  C.  S.  Maikhuri 

Shri  A.  A.  Khinvasara  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  R.  Tapade 

Shri  S.  Kumar  {Alternate ) 
Shri  S.  S.  Khosla 

Shri  A.  P.  Singh  {Alternate ) 
Shri  K.  C.  Jain 

Shri  Raju  Agarwal  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  Sundraraman 

Shri  S.  K.  Bhaumick.  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  N.  Saharsa  Budhe 
Shri.G.  B.  Lal 

SHRIG.  S.  KHUNNU  {Alternate) 
Shri  N.  N.  Neelakantan 
Shri  I.  V.  Rag 

Shri  Deepak  Sawkar  {Alternate ) 
Shri  B.  L.  Pathariya 

Shri  M.  K.  Mishra  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  O.  P.  Narula 

Shri  K.  C.  Gupfa  {Alternate ) 
Shri  A.  K.  Malik 
Shri  S.  N.  Srinivasan 

Shri  V.  Murugan  {Alternate ) 
Shri  J.  K.  Subramanian 
Shri  S.  Radhakrishnan 
Director  Motive  Power 
Shri  T.  K.  Pal 

Si  iri  K.  Deshmukh  {Alternate ) 
Dr  P.  D.  Singhal 

Shri  V.  Vishwanathan  {Alternate  I ) 

Shri  B.  K.  De  {Alternate  II  ) 
Shri  B.  S.  Mohan 

Shri  P.  K.  Chattopadhyaya  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  M.  Kishinchandani 

Shri  V.  V.  Athavale  {Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  H.  Munot 

Shri  C.  K.  Dance  {Alternate ) 
Shri  A.  R,  GuLA-n, 
Director  (Transport  Engg) 


Representing 
Eicher  Goodearth  Limited,  Ballabhgarh 


Ashok  Leyland  Limited,  Madras 

Automotive  Research  Association  of  India,  Pune 

Bajaj  Auto  Limited,  Pune 

Bajaj  Tempo  Limited,  Pune 

Central  Institute  of  Road  Transport,  Pune 

Department  of  Technical  Development,  Ministry  of  Industry,  New  Delhi 

Escorts  Ltd,  Faridabad 

Gabriel  India  Limited,  Mumbai 

Kinetic  Engg  Limited,  Pune 

HMT  Limited  (Tractor  Division),  Pinjore 

Hydraulics  Limited,  Madras 
Maruti  Udyog  Limited,  Gurgaon 

Ministry  of  Defence  (DGOF),  Jabalpiir 

Ministry  of  Defence,  DGQA(V) 

Ministry  of  Surface  Transport,  New  Delhi 
Premier  Automobiles  Limited,  Mumbai 

Rane  (Madras)  Ltd,  Madras 

Rane  power  Steering  Ltd,  Pudukkottai 

Research  Design  and  Standards  Organization,  Lucknow 

Sona  Steering  Systems  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Tata  Engineering  and  Locomotive  Co  Ltd,  Pune 

Vehicle  Research  and  Development  Establishment,  Alimednagar 
XLO  India  Limited,  Mumbai 
Z.  F.  Steering  Gear  (I)  Ltd,  Pune 
Director  General,  BIS  {Ex-officio  Member) 

Member  Secretary 

Shri  M.  V.  S.  D.  Prasada  Rao 
Joint  Director  (Transport  Engg),  BIS 


Itureuu  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  tiie  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  TED  5  (  206  ). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Pnblication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 
Telephones  :  323  0131,  323  S3  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central     :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern    :  1/14  C.  I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I,  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34- A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern  :  C.  1.  T.  Campus.  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600113 


Western   :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andhcri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400093 


Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


Telephone 


{ 


323  76  17 
323  38  41 


{ 


337  84  99,  337  85  61 
337  86  26,337  9120 


{ 


60  38  43 
60  20  25 


/  235  02  16,  235  04  42 
\235  15  19,235  23  15 


832  92  95,  832  78  58 
832  78  91,832  78  92 


Branches  :  AHMADABAD.       BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR.    KANPUR.    LUCKNOW.    PATNA.    THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Dee  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi-110015,  India. 


