•••*****•*•••••• 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



g^njife^^vf i fiJA^Nb^ ^isaa ^i ra^a * ^ 



IS 11425 (1985) : Test procedures for semiconductor charged 
particle detectors [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 



<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



TS : 11425-1585 
I EC Pub 333 (1993) 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 



TEST PROCEDURES FOR SEMICONDUCTOR 
CHARGED-PARTICLE DETECTORS 



UDC *U ■aiT"39-5»'|W55:539'l2:fi2frI 




© Copyright L9&? 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAX tiHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAH MARC 

KHW DELHI 110003 



■ :r 11 



Fchrv.irf 



UDC 621 3l7'39S39T074-55:539- 12:620-1 



IS : 11425-1985 
IFC Pub 333 U983) 




Indian Standard 

TEST PROCEDURES FOR SEMICONDUCTOR 
CHARGED-PART1CLE DETECTORS 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with 1EC Pub 333(1983) 'Test procedures for 
semiconductor charged-p^rticle detectors', issued by the International Llectrotechnical Commission 
(lEC) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendaiion oi'the Nuclear Instru- 
mentation Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division 
Council. 



Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

Cross References 



referring to this standard, they should 



a 



In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
places the following: 



IS 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

1885 (Part 63)-1985 Electrotechnical voca- 
bulary: Part 63 Nuclear instrumentation 



International Standard 

IEC Pub 50 (391) (1975) International electro- 
technical vocabulary: Detection and mea- 
surement of ionizing radiation by electrical 
means 

IEC Pub 340 (1979) Test procedures for ampli- 
fiers and preamplifiers for semiconductor 
detectors for ionizing radiation 

IEC Pub 759 (1983) Standard test procedures for — 

semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometers 
(see Note) 

Note — The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard, has reviewed the provisions 
of this IEC Standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopt- 
ing it in this Indian Standard. 



IS : 11645-1985 Test procedures for amplifiers 
and preamplifiers for semiconductor detec- 
tors for ionizing radiation 



Adopted 24 September 1985 



February 1987, ISI 



Gr 11 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11425-1985 
1EC Pub 333 (1983) 



CONTENTS 

Page 



Clause 

1. Scope 3 

2. Object 3 

3. General requirements 3 

4. Resolution measurements 4 

4. 1 Energy resolution 4 

4.2 Time resolution 6 

4.3 Position, resolution and linearity of a position-sensitive detector 10 

5. Noise measurement 13 

5.1 Noise measurement by pulse height distribution (preferred method) 13 

5.2 Noise measurement by oscilloscope and true root-mean -square voltmeter 14 

5.3 Measurement of electronic noise with the detector removed 16 

5.4 Determination of detector contribution to noise and resolution 16 

5.5 Noise linewidth(FWHM) as a function of amplifier time constants n 

6. Sensitivity to ambient conditions 17 

6.1 Atmospheric sensitivity 17 

6.2 Vacuum thermal cycle test 17 

6.3 Mechanical and environmental tests 18 

6.4 Light sensitivity 18 

6.5 Radiation damage measurements 18 

7. Other measurements 19 

7.1 Current- voltage characteristics 19 

7.2 Dead layer energy loss 19 

7.3 Sensitive area 20 

7.4 Detector thickness (transmission detectors) 20 

7.5 Capacitance-voltage characteristics 20 

Appendix A - Symbols and glossary . ■ 22 

Appendix B - General information concerning semiconductor charged-particle detectors . 30 



( IEC page 3 ) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPob 333 (1983) 



Introduction 

Symbols and glossary are to be found in Appendix A and general information regarding semi- 
conductor charged particle detectors in Appendix B. 

1. Scope 

This standard applies to semiconductor radiation detectors which are used for the detection 
and high-resolution spectroscopy of charged particles. The measurement techniques 
described have been selected to be readily available to all manufacturers and users of semi- 
conductor charged particle detectors. Some superior techniques are not included because the 
methods are too complex or require equipment (such as particle accelerators) which may not 
be readily available. 

Test procedures for the associated amplifiers and preamplifiers are described in 1EC 
Publication 340: Test Procedures for Amplifiers and Preamplifiers for Semiconductor 
Detectors for Ionizing Radiation. 

2. Object 

The object of this standard is to establish standard test procedures for semiconductor 
charged particle detectors. These detectors are in widespread use for the detection and high- 
resolution spectroscopy of charged particles. It is desirable to maintain standard test proce- 
dures so that measurements may have the same meaning to all manufacturers and users. 

Not all tests described in this standard are mandatory, but tests which are used to specify 
performance shall be performed in accordance with the procedures described herein. 



3. General requirements 

The following requirements apply for all the tests and measurements described herein: 

3. 1 All measurements shall be performed with the device itself in total darkness, unless otherwise 
specified. 

3.2 The ambient conditions shall be 20 °C and a pressure of less than 1 0~ 4 Pa ( 1 0~ 6 mm Hg), unless 
otherwise specified. (Precautions should be taken when working in the pressure region 10~ 2 to 
10 Pa (10~ 4 to 10~ l mm Hg) because of corona discharge. Thus, some detectors that work 
satisfactorily at higher pressures may show degradation at pressures lower than ^10~ 4 Pa 
(10-6mmHg).) 

3.3 The values of the parameters measured shall be reproducible, within the specified precision 
after any and all of the tests have been performed. 



( IEC page 7 ) 



IS : 11425-1985 
lECPob 333 (1983) 

3.4 The detector bias supply and other test equipment (amplifier, multichannel analyzer, etc.) 
shall not significantly influence the detector parameter measurements. 

3.5 Maximum diode voltage, current, radiation flux ratings and other manufacturer-specified 
limits should not be exceeded or permanent changes of the device characteristics may result. 

3.6 It shall be confirmed that radioactive sources used do not contribute to the resolution broad- 
ening. (This may occur especially with alpha particle sources due to self-attenuation and 






3.7 AH data reported shall correspond to equilibrium conditions, unless otherwise clearly noted. 

3.8 All measurements shall be made and reported in accordance with proper scientific practice. 
No changes in test system components (e.g. substituting a different preamplifier or detector) 
or changes in system parameters (e.g. changing gain or equivalent detector capacitance) may 
be made without complete system recalibration. Results which contain the effects of changing 
more than one parameter shall explicitly show the effects of each parameter on the 
measurement. 

4. Resolution measurements 

4. 1 Energy resolution 

The resolution of a detector system at a specific energy is determined by measuring the full 
width at half maximum (FWHM) of a spectral peak. A source of ionizing radiation emitting 
one or more prominent lines is used. 

The detector is connected to an integrating (charge sensitive) preamplifier, main amplifier 
and multichannel analyzer as in Figure i, page 11. The amplifier pulse shaping shall be quasi- 
Gaussian with a Af of 3 u,s. Alternatively, other shaping may be used, but the shaping charac- 
teristics shall then be clearly stated. The precision pulse generator should be switched off 
when measuring the resolution for ionizing radiation. 



( IEC page 9 > 



Bias voltage 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 



fl L 



Detector 



1 ±-T 







Precision 

pulse 

generator 



1 Attenuated output 



Amplifier 



Multi- 
channel 
analyzer 



Direct 
output 



Synchroni- 
zation 



Oscilloscope 



409/83 



Fig. 1. - System configuration for spectral measurements. 




— -V- FWHM: AM 



N, Channel number 



4IQ/81 



Fig. 2. - A typical spectrum. 



(IEC page li) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

A spectrum shall be acquired in which the peak to be measured has a FWHM of at least six 
channels and a peak channel count of at least 4 000 counts. At least one other peak should be 
located in the spectrum for the purpose of energy calibration. This may be a line of known 
energy from a source of ionizing radiation. Alternatively, it may be a line produced by a 
precision pulse generator. A typical spectrum for this measurement is shown in Figure 2, 
page 11. 

The FWHM of the peak is measured in channels AN$ (interpolated). The channel location 
of the peak centre can be determined by the method described in Section Two of IEC Publi- 
cation 340. The energy E\ of the peak should be known and its channel location N\ noted. If a 
second peak corresponding to energy E 2 is known, then the FWHM in energy units is given 
by: 

£,-E 2 
A£ AN S (1) 

N r N 2 

If the peak corresponding to energy Ei is produced by a precision pulse generator, then the 
pulse generator is calibrated by adjusting the attenuation of the output until pulses of voltage 
Vp! are shown to produce a peak of channel location N\ on the multichannel analyzer. This is 
the same location as that of the peak of known energy E\. Then a second peak is generated 
using pulses of voltage V p 2. The energy corresponding to this peak is given by £2 " Vp2 
{E\/ V pI ). The value of E 2 can then be used in equation (1) to find the FWHM in energy units 
A£s- Energy calibration may also be accomplished by appropriate normalization of the 
pulser output. For example, the linear attenuator output of the pulser is set to a multiple of the 
numerical value of the peak energy E\. Then a second (normalization) attenuator is adjusted 
until the output voltage is K pi . This voltage is achieved when the output pulses produce a peak 
at channel location N\ corresponding to energy E\. The linear attenuator may then be set to 
the desired value of £2* and the output voltage will be Vp2. The actual values of V p i and K p2 
do not need to be known since their relative values are given by the attenuator setting. If this 
method is employed, the precision pulse generator shall have an integral nonlinearity of less 
than 0.5%. 

In recording information on energy resolution, the following shall be noted: 

1) Incident particle type and energy. 

2) Amplifier pulse shaping parameters (At, t p> t t ) and type of pulse shaping utilized. 

3) Detailed description of the detector including active area and sensitive depth. 

4) System total noise FWHM with the detector connected and operating. 

5) Detector operating conditions (bias, temperature, ambient atmosphere). 

6) Detector-source geometry, including identification of the detector face on which the 
radiation is incident. 

7) Count rate. 

8) Procedure used in determining channel location and FWHM in fractional channels. 



4.2 Time resolution 

The measurement technique given here is recommended for its convenience and reprodu- 
cibility. However, the results will be generally better than can be obtained when using charged 



(IEC page]3> 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

particles. In the case of charged particles, plasma effects and the greater spatial dispersion of 
charge produced by long range particles will degrade the time resolution. The results obtained 
with this method should represent the best performance possible with a given detector- 
preamplifier timing system. 

The timing characteristics of a detector-preamplifier system can be measured by exciting 
the detector with a light pulse from a laser diode pulser (LDP). A coincidence system, as in 
Figure 3, page 17, is used for this measurement. A start signal from the LDP and a stop signal 
from the detector under test are needed. A time-to-amplitude converter followed by a multi- 
channel analyzer measures and records the time differences between the start and stop signals. 
The time spectrum obtained with the multichannel analyzer represents the distribution of 
these time differences. The FWHM and FWTM (full width at tenth maximum) of the peak 
measured at several energies should be stated to characterize the timing properties of the 
system. The energies selected should cover the operating range and should be separated by 
approximately equal energy intervals. 



The signal from the detector preamplifier is routed through a fast shaping amplifier 
followed by a constant fraction discriminator. The constant fraction should be set at 20%. A 
shaping time delay equal to 1.1 times the pulse rise time (10% to 90%) shall be used. Shaping 
times should be adjusted to optimize the timing performance. (Shaping with no integration 
and a differentiation time constant somewhat greater than the preamplifier output signal rise 
time is usually optimum.) 



The equivalent energy of the light pulses from the LDP shall be known. A vacuum chamber 
is used in which the detector may be rotated to face either the LDP or a 241 Am source. The 
precision pulse generator is first calibrated for the 5.48 MeV a line of 241 Am. Then the desired 
energy is selected with the pulser, and the LDP adjusted to produce the same signal amplitude. 
Typically, several timing measurements are made at energies ranging from «*1 MeV to 
MOO MeV. The precision pulser output should be off while the timing measurement is being 
made. 



Using this method, a timing peak should be obtained with a FWHM of at least six channels, 
and with at least 4 000 counts contained in the peak channel. Alternatively, if computer curve- 
fitting is used, determination of the FWHM within ±5% (90% confidence level) is adequate. 



After calibrating the time axis with at least two calibrated delays, the FWHM and FWTM 
shall be measured and stated in units of nanoseconds. Measurements at three or more energies 
ranging from «*1 MeV to ^100 MeV, as obtained by adjustment of the Iris diaphragm 
(Figure 3), are recommended. (Quadrature subtraction can be used to determine the time reso- 
lution of the detector itself from the system time resolution that is measured.) The following 
parameters shall be stated for each measurement: 

*"* Spectral characteristics of the pulsed light. 
-> Detector bias voltage. 

3) Constant fraction discriminator setting and shaping time delay. 

4) Differentiation time and rise time of the fast shaping amplifier. 



( IEC page 15 ) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECP.b 333 (1983) 



Pulse 
generator 



High 

voltage 

supply 



Precision 

pulse 

generator 



Test 
input 



Energy 
output 



High 

voltage 

supply 



Bias 
input 



Timing 
output 



Preamplifier 



Laser 
diode 
pulser 



Iris 



''VAA/yvr j\r*4 ]) 



'Am 



Vacuum test chamber 




Time to 

amplitude 

converter 



Start 



Stop 



Multichannel 
analyzer 



Shaping 
amplifier 



Fast 

shaping 

amplifier 



Constant 

fraction 

discriminator 



411/83 



Pig. 3. - Time resolution measurement system. 



(IEC|«ael7) 



4.2. 1 Detector electrical rise time 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 



Using the apparatus of Figure 4, a series of steps of K p volts is applied to the detector. The 
value of V p shall not exceed one-tenth of the band gap voltage, or one-tenth of the bias 
voltage, whichever is the smaller. The quadrature difference between the rise time of the 
preamplifier output signal with the detector connected and the preamplifier rise time is 
defined as the electrical rise time. 



Detector 



'Vs/V*. 





Oscilloscope 



Precision 

pulse 

generator 



412/83 



-]_K 



Fig. 4. - Detector electrical rise time measurement. 

4.2.2 Charge collection time 

Direct measurement of charge collection time t c for one sign of charge carrier in relatively 
"slow" detectors can be made by using a monoenergetic source of short range particles and 
observing the signal pulse directly at the output of an integrating preamplifier. If the observed 
10% to 90% output pulse rise time is f , while the rise time observed by injecting pulses into 
the preamplifier input from a precision pulse generator is t T , then the detector charge 
collection time is given by: 



y^ 



(2) 



For this measurement to be significant, t and t T shall differ by at least 20%. 

The response of a fast detector is most easily measured by using a fast pulsed accelerator or 
a fast pulsed light source to generate a large number of hole-electron pairs in a detector and 
monitoring the resulting current pulse directly using a sampling oscilloscope. 



( IEC page 19) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPab 333 (1983) 

In either case, it is essential to determine the detector electrical rise time (see Sub-clause 
4.2.1) by separate measurements and to distinguish its effect from that due to carrier motion in 
the depletion layer. 

Charge collection time data shall include details of the nature of the incident radiation, 
track orientation and position and amplifier rise time. 

4.3 Position, resolution and linearity of a position-sensitive detector 

One common type of position-sensitive detector is shown in Figure 5, page 23. This detector 
has one contact of relatively high resistivity which has one end grounded and the other end 
connected to a preamplifier input. The resistive contact acts as a current divider, and as a 
result, the output pulse height is proportional to the distance of the position of impact from 
the grounded end of the detector. Bias voltage is applied to the opposite contact. 

Both position and energy measurements for this type of detector should be made using the 
system shown in Figure 6, page 23, (preferred method) or an equivalent system. As an alter- 
native, commercially available analog pulse dividers may be used. Time constants and other 
settings should be optimized. The system, as it is used, shall be capable of simultaneously 
measuring position and energy. This is required since a system configured only for energy 
measurements may have measurably better resolution than a system configured for the simul- 
taneous measurement of energy and position. An energy-only system may provide a useful 
measurement of the detector quality, but it is not fully representative of the detector 
performance in many applications. 

Position resolution and linearity measurements are performed with a mask having slits in it 
placed in front of the detector face as shown in Figure 9, page 31. The slits are perpendicular 
to the direction along which position is measured. A minimum of five slits should be approxi- 
mately uniformly distributed across the mask in front of the active region of the detector. A 
slit image shall be located at each end and near the middle of the useful active length of the 
detector because the deviation from linearity is usually largest at these positions. Sources of 
monoenergetic ionizing radiation shall be located in front of the mask in such a way that the 
radiation exposes regions of the detector to form an image of the slits on the detector surface. 

The details of collimation, source location and geometry shall be such that the following 
conditions are met: 

1) There is a one-to-one correspondence between the slits on the mask and the slit images on 
the detector. 

2) The width of the image of each slit is small enough that it does not introduce any signi- 
ficant error into the position resolution measurements. (If any corrections are made for 
finite slit width, a simple quadrature subtraction is not adequate. Any correction shall not 
exceed 10% of the reported result.) 

3) The error in determining distances between the slit images is small enough that it does not 
introduce any significant error into the position linearity measurement. (This usually 
requires placing slits as close to the detector surface as possible.) 

4) The image of each outermost slit used shall be located within two slit widths of the ends of 
the useful active length of the detector. 

A spectrum shall be acquired using the described methods. Each peak must have a FWHM 
of at least six channels with a minimum of 4000 counts in the peak channel. Position linearity 
and resolution are determined from this spectrum. 



(IECpage21) 10 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPab 333 (1983) 




413/83 



FIG. 5. - Position-sensitive detector. 







Preamplifier 
















_ Position signal 




V, 


\ 


Main 
amplifier 




Multi- 
channel 
analyzer 




H 


:_ 




y> 


















n 






Pulser 


























\ 


Main 
amplifier 




Biased 

linear 

amplifier 




Multi- 
channel 
analyzer 




i 






/ 










Pr 


eamplifier 


w\ 


— c 


► E 


ias voltage 









Fig. 6. - System for position-sensitive detector measurements. 



414/93 



Detector 




Mask 



(D 



(D 



(D 



(D 



Radioactive 
sources 



415/83 



Fig. 7. - Apparatus for position measurements. 



11 



(IEC page 23) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPob 333 (1983) 

The integral nonlinearity (in position) of a position-sensitive detector is defined as the 
maximum positional deviation from linearity expressed as a percentage of the total length 
over which the measurement is made. The deviation from linearity should be measured for 
each slit image, and the integral nonlinearity of the detector is determined from the largest of 
these values. 

Let the channel number be represented by S and the peak channel numbers by So, Si, 
$2, . . . S,, . • • Sm, where So and S m are the smallest and largest peak channel numbers respec- 
tively. Let D(Do, D\, E>2 ... D m ) be the perpendicular distance measured from the first slit 
image (at the grounded end of the detector). The distances from the first slit image to 
successive slit images are represented by D\, L>2, ...£>„.. D m . 

Set Dq =» 0, and let D m be the distance between the two outermost slits used in the 
measurement. A straight line is then fitted to the set ofpoints (Dq, Sq), (Dj, Si), (D2, S2) ... 
(Di, Si)... (D m , Si,,) by the method of least squares. Let AD max De the maximum difference 
between any' value of D, and the corresponding value of Don the fitted line at the point where 
S — Sj. The integral nonlinearity of the detector is given by: 



AD max (3) 

^ An 



Position resolution is calculated for each slit image. Given the FWHM of a peak in 
channels AN p , the position resolution in units of length AD p is given by: 



AD p --^-AJV p (4) 



If one value of positional resolution is given to characterize the entire detector, it shall be 
the largest FWHM value obtained for any slit image. Record the same information with this 
measurement as requested for the energy measurement in Sub-clause 4.1. 

The following information shall be supplied with the results of this linearity measurement: 

1 ) Total active length of the detector. 

2) Useful active length of the detector. 

3) Time constants (shaping time characteristics) used for energy and position measurements. 

4) Detailed description of the detector including sensitive depth and detector geometry. 

5) Operating conditions. 

6) Incident particle type and energy. 

(IECpagetf) 12 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

5. Noise measurement 

5.1 Noise measurement by pulse height distribution (preferred method) 

5.1.1 Measurement with radioactive source calibration 

The total noise contribution to spectral broadening (including detector leakage current) can 
be measured by determining the FWHM of a peak produced with a precision pulse generator. 

The equipment shall be configured as shown in Figure 1 , page 1 1 . The preamplifier pulse 
shaping shall be quasi-Gaussian with a At of 3 u,s. Alternatively, other shaping suitable for the 
detector may be used, but the shaping characteristics shall then be clearly stated and the same 
as those used to specify energy resolution. A simple method for system calibration is similar to 
that described in Sub-clause 4.1 using a source of monoenergetic ionizing radiation and a 
precision pulse generator. However, the radiation (of known energy E]) need only be counted 
until the peak location N\ is accurately known. The source is then removed, and the pulser is 
adjusted to generate a peak at this same location. A second peak, equivalent to energy £2 at 
location N2 is generated with £2 determined from the calibration as in Sub-clause 4. 1. 



The spectrum of the second pulse generator peak shall be accumulated until it reaches 4 000 
counts in one channel. The width shall be at least six channels at FWHM. However, a lesser 
number of counts may suffice if computer fitting that determines the FWHM to within ±5% 
(90% confidence level) is employed. The total noise resolution is determined from the width of 
this peak in channels AAfj by: 



A£ T = 



E t -E 7 \ 



N r N 2 \ 



AN T (5) 



The separation of the peaks should be at least three times the FWTM. 

5. 1 .2 Measurement with capacitor and pulse generator calibration 

An alternative to the method of Sub-clause 5.1.1 uses a pulse generator with a calibrated 
capacitor to introduce a known quantity of charge with each pulse to the preamplifier input. 
This leads directly to the determination of noise linewidth in units of charge. If this method is 
to be used, a calibrated capacitor Q is connected to the preamplifier input in series with a 
precision pulse generator. The capacitor C c should preferably be of the three-terminal type; 
the capacitance is measured between two insulated terminals, and the third terminal is 
grounded. A highly accurate measurement of the capacitance between the two insulated term- 
inals can be obtained with a capacitance bridge, and this capacitance is invariant with 
external circuit connections. The pulse generator should provide signals of the form shown in 
Figure 8, page 29, where the rise time t T is no more than 20% of the main amplifier differen- 
tiating time constant and the decay time constant t<j is such that the pulse V p does not drop 
more than 2% in a time equal to the differentiating time constant of the system pulse shaping 
network. In addition, the equivalent input capacitance of the integrating preamplifier shall be 
not less than 1 00 C c . 



13 (IEC page 27) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

Under these conditions the charge injected per pulse from the pulse generator is V p C c 
coulombs to within about 1%. (If the stated conditions are not satisfied, a calculation can be 
made to determine the quantity of charge actually injected by each pulse.) With all elements of 
the system operating within their linear range, two settings of the pulse generator, corre- 
sponding to voltages K p i and V p 2, should result in a spectrum consisting of two separated 
peaks centred at channels JVi and #2 as shown in Figure 4, page 19. The system gain and pulse 
amplitudes must be such that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) AAT T of each peak is at 
least six channels. 



XL 



Decay time constant r d 




Fig. 8. - Precision pulse generator waveform. 



Time 

416/83 



The system total noise linewidth (FWHM), in coulombs, is given by: 



A£r 



N r N 2 



C C AN T 



(6) 



with ANj being determined from the wider of the two peaks. 

5.2 Noise measurement by oscilloscope and true root-mean-square voltmeter 

An alternative method of measuring noise employs the system shown in Figure 9, page 3 1 . 
It is similar to the system used for pulse height distribution measurements (Figure 1, page 1 1), 
but it differs in that a true r.m.s. voltmeter replaces the multichannel analyzer. This method 
may use either a radioactive source or capacitor and pulse generator calibration. 

If this method is to be accurate, two conditions must be fulfilled. 

1) The voltmeter shall have a flat frequency response over the entire amplifier bandwidth, 
and a true r.m.s. readout. (A suggested minimum 3 dB bandwith is 10 MHz.) 

2) The amplifier incremental gain shall be constant down to well below the noise level (e.g. a 
biased amplifier shall not be used). 

An estimate of the noise can be obtained by means of an effective voltmeter. In this case, 
e no =- 1.12 e e ff, where e e n is the voltmeter reading. 



(IEC page 29) 



14 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 



Bias 
voltage 



*L 



Detector 




c 



Precision 

pulse 

generator 



True r.m.s 
voltmeter 



X 



Amplifier 



Direct Synchrony 

output ^zation 



Oscilloscope 



Attenuated output 



417/X3 



Fig. 9. - Noise measurement by oscilloscope and true r.m.s. voltmeter. 

5.2. 1 Measurement with radioactive source calibration 

The detector is exposed to a source which has a prominent, easily resolvable line of known 
energy E, After the system gain has been set to a convenient level, the output pulse amplitude 
V is read from the oscilloscope for pulses corresponding to energy £. The source is then 
removed, and the r.m.s. voltage e no is read from the voltmeter. The total system noise FW'HM 
is given by: 



A^r- 2.355 



(7) 



5.2.2 Measurement with capacitor and pulse generator calibration 

A pulse generator is used with a calibrated capacitor C c , as in Sub-clause 5.1.2, to introduce 
a known quantity of charge with each pulse into the preamplifier input. After the system gain 
is set to a convenient level, pulses of amplitude V p are applied to the calibrated capacitor. The 
system output pulse amplitude V is read from the oscilloscope. The pulse generator output is 
switched off, and the r.m.s. noise voltage e no is read from the voltmeter. The total system noise 
FWHM (in units of charge) is given by: 



AQr - 2.355 K-q 



g~c 



-no 



(8) 



15 



( IEC page 31) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPab 333 (1983) 

5.3 Measurement of electronic noise with the detector removed 

The electronic noise line width FWHM can be determined by the methods of Sub-clauses 
5. 1 and 5.2 after disconnecting the detector from the circuit and substituting for it a suitable 
capacitor which has been shown not to contribute noise and which is of capacitance substan- 
tially equal to that which the detector exhibited under test conditions (see Sub-clause 7.2). 

If radioactive source calibration is used, then it shall be performed before the detector is 
removed. Care shall be taken not to change the system gain before the measurement is made. 
The capacitor and pulse generator calibration may be performed with either the detector or 
the substituted capacitor in place. 

The noise FWHM is determined in number of channels, units of charge or in units of 
energy according to the methods of Sub-clauses 5.1 and 5.2, and the symbols used are AJVg, 
AQe or A£e respectively. These values represent the electronic noise without the detector 
noise contribution. 

5.4 Determination of detector contribution to noise and resolution 

In Clause 4 and 5, methods are given to determine energy resolution (A#s> A£s), total 
system noise (A Nj, A Qj,AEj) and electronic noise other than detector noise (ANg, AQ& 
A£g)- These quantities are expressed in channels (AN), and units of charge (A0, and in units 
of energy (AJE), respectively. 

Since all of these spectral broadening effects add in quadrature, the following quantities of 
interest may be calculated for Gaussian or quasi-Gaussian distributions: 

1) The detector contribution to spectral broadening attributable to factors other than noise, 

ANqotAEq. 



AN «"V/an£-AN^ (9) 



or 



AEq~ yAEj-AEj (10) 

2) The contribution to spectral broadening of detector noise alone AJVp, AQd, or AJEp- 

AAr D --|/AJVf-AN| (11) 



or 



or 



AQ D --}JAQ\-AQl (12) 



A£ D - ~\IaE\-AEI (13) 



(l£Cpage33) 16 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPab 333 (1983) 

5.5 Noise linewidth (FWHM) as a function of amplifier time constants 

Information related to the detector noise spectrum can be obtained from the noise line- 
width FWHM as a function of the amplifier time constants. The method of Sub-clause 4.1 is 
employed with quasi-Gaussian pulse shaping. The noise linewidth FWHM should be plotted 
versus Af for a number of values of detector bias voltage. In quoting the results, the series 
equivalent noise resistance of the input element of the preamplifier should be given (see I EC 
Publication 340). 

6. Sensitivity to ambient conditions 

In performing the following measurements, the manufacturer's specifications should not 
be exceeded or permanent damage to the device may result. 

For certain tests it may be appropriate to test the detector before and after exposure to 
specified conditions rather than during exposure. Other tests may be performed during 
exposure. When test results are quoted, it should be clearly stated whether they were obtained 
during exposure or before and after exposure. The limits of reproducibility of the measure- 
ments should be stated with the results. 

6.1 Atmospheric sensitivity 

The detector shall be mounted in a chamber in which it can be tested while exposed to 
vacuum or to various gases under specific conditions of pressure, temperature and humidity. 
Such conditions may include, for example, dry oxygen at standard temperature and pressure. 
Other appropriate conditions may be specified for particular applications. 

In each environment, sufficient time shall be allowed to enable the detector characteristics 
to reach equilibrium. Alternatively, the time spent in each environment shall be recorded. 
Under each set of ambient conditions, the appropriate tests described in Sub-clauses 4. 1 , 4.3, 
and 4.4 may be repeated. 

It should be noted that certain environments may be very harmful to many detectors. 
Bottled gas has been known to become contaminated with harmful substances such as certain 
acids. Some desiccants may give off a residual acid. Various solvents and cleaning 
compounds may evolve harmful vapours. Ammonia vapour and other reducing atmospheres 
may be harmful. 

6.2 Vacuum thermal cycle test 

The ability of a device to withstand vacuum thermal cycling without degradation is 
important for certain applications. A temperature cycle over a specified range with a vacuum 
of 1 0- 4 Pa (= 1 0-6 mm Hg) is suggested. 

The noise of a detector should first be measured at 20 °C. Then the detector should be taken 
through the required thermal cycle. Noise values at 20 °C, at maximum temperature and at 
minimum temperature should be recorded. Finally, the temperature of the detector should be 
returned to 20 "C and the noise measured again. The final measured noise value should not 
differ from the initial noise value at 20 °C by more than the stated limits of reproducibility in 
in order for the detector to pass this test. 

The detector may be taken through a thermal cycle while under vacuum with no applied 
bias voltage. The detector should have a noise measurement at 20 °C with the same bias 
voltage both before and after such a thermal cycle. Again, the two noise measurements should 
not differ by more than the stated limits of reproducibility for the detector to pass this test. 



17 (IECpage35) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

6.3 Mechanical and environmental tests 

Detectors may be tested both before, during and after any specified mechanical, thermal or 
other environmental exposure. All of the tests indicated in Sub-clauses 4.1, 4.3, 4.4 and 5.6 
may be performed. As a minimum the noise and leakage current should be measured before 
and after such exposure. Unless other specifications suitable for the particular application are 
stated, the measured characteristics of the detector should not change by more than the stated 
limits of reproducibility for it to pass such a test. 

In certain cases, such as long-term exposure to a vacuum environment, it may be necessary 
to perform electrical tests during the exposure period as well as before and after it. 

6.4 Light sensitivity 

Most detectors are light sensitive and should be used and tested in the dark. Some detectors 
are constructed in such a way that they are relatively insensitive to light. The light sensitivity 
of a detector should be specified as that percentage increase in system noise which results 
from moving the detector from total darkness to specific conditions of light exposure. 

The recommended condition of light exposure shall be achieved by placing the detector 
45.0 cm away from the standard lamp with the face of the detector perpendicular to a line 
connecting the lamp and the detector. The standard lamp shall be a 250 W tungsten filament 
quartz-halogen bulb with a colour temperature of 3 000 K.* A filament current of 
2.08 ± 0.05 A d.c. shall be maintained. Test conditions shall be provided in which reflected 
light and contribution of light from other sources are minimized. 

It should be noted that the noise increase observed for a detector with some light sensitivity 
can be much greater if the light is modulated rather than constant in intensity. This is particu- 
larly relevant for detectors exposed to fluorescent lighting. Detectors to be used under condi- 
tions of modulated light should be tested for sensitivity to such tight. 

Other conditions of light exposure may be used as required for certain applications. Such 
conditions should be stated if a value of light sensitivity is given. Note that light intensity 
above a certain level will significantly heat the detector and result in thermal effects. 



6.5 Radiation damage measurements 

Following irradiation, properties of the detector may be affected and each test may have to 
be repeated. To obtain meaningful data, it is important that all the following be recorded: 

1) Test data obtained before irradiation. 

2) Type and energy of radiation, flux and fluence. 

3) Detector temperature, bias voltage and ambient conditions during irradiation. 

4) Time between termination of irradiation and commencement of tests, and detector condi- 
tions in the intervening period. 



* It shall have the same bulb and filament configurations and meet all other specifications of ANSI designation 
ENH or equal. 



(IEC page 37) 18 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPnb 333 (1983) 

7. Other measurements 

7.1 Current'Voltage characteristics 

A point-by-point measurement is made of the reverse bias leakage current as a function of 
the detector voltage V^ at a constant temperature (see Figure 10). 

Both the points corresponding to successively increasing and successively decreasing 
voltage should be recorded. The voltage changes should be made slowly enough to exhibit any 
hysteresis effects. 




418/83 

Fig. 10. - Detector current- voltage characteristic measurement. 

7.2 Dead layer energy loss 

A beam of monoenergetic heavy ionizing particles is caused to impinge upon a detector 
whose dead layer is to be measured. The amount of energy lost in the dead layer region shall 
be such a small part of the total energy that there is no significant spectral broadening. The 
particles shall be colli mated to a semi-angle not exceeding 5 ° and oriented so that the incident 
particles enter the detector normal to the surface. A spectrum is then obtained. The detector is 
subsequently rotated by an angle 6 and another spectrum is obtained. Using the reference 
pulse generator, the energy origin of the multichannel analyzer and hence the energy 
difference SE between the two spectra can be determined. From this difference, the effective 
energy loss for the particles used in the test may be determined. The 5.48 MeV a particles 
emitted by 241 Am are suggested as a standard, although other particle types and energies may 
be used. 

If the specific energy loss within the dead layer is essentially constant, the energy lost in the 
dead layer by particles at normal incidence is given by: 



DLLN - SE 



cos 9 
1 - cos 



(14) 



where: 

DLLN - dead layer energy loss at normal incidence 

SE - energy difference, in MeV, between measurements at normal incidence and after a rotation through 
angle 6 

- angle of rotation of detector for non-normal incidence of particles (45 ° is a recommended value for fl) 



19 



(lECpage 39) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

Since the dead layer energy loss may depend on the detector bias voltage, this voltage 
should be stated. For transmission detectors, the measurement shall be performed for both the 
entrance and exit faces. The method is applicable only to charged-particle detectors with a 
depletion depth exceeding the incident particle range and if the energy resolution permits. 



7.3 Sensitive area 

While monitoring the detector leakage current, the surface is explored with a small light 
spot. The edge of the sensitive region can be defined as that boundary beyond which the 
photocurrent decreases by approximately 10%. The light spot diameter shall be small 
compared with the dimensions of the sensitive area and the light intensity such that the photo- 
current is large compared to the leakage current. For detectors having an opaque front 
window, the edge of the sensitive region can be found by using a collimated beam of mono- 
energetic heavy charged particles and defining the boundary as that region beyond which the 
FWHM of the spectral peak doubles in value. 

The sensitive area, without regard to delineation, may be measured by exposing the 
detector to a known flux of heavy charged particles and measuring the counting rate with and 
without a collimator of known dimensions. 



7.4 Detector thickness (transmission detectors) 

A radioactive source is used to provide a narrow collimated beam of monoenergetic 
photons (X-rays or low energy y-rays). Provision shall be made to determine the location of 
the charged-particle detector in this beam. The beam shall also be incident upon a detector 
which is part of a low energy photon spectroscopy system. A high resolution detector is 
needed to minimize the effect of scattered radiation on this measurement. The intensity of the 
radiation, from the line of interest, incident on the photon detector is measured both with and 
without the presence of the charged particle detector. 

Thickness is then determined from the attenuation by the charged-particle detector of the 
specific photon energy employed. This technique may be used to measure thickness 
uniformity by using a narrow collimated beam. The matching of photon energy to charged- 
particle detector thickness should be such that at least 15% but no more than 85 % attenuation 
is achieved. The 6.4 keV, 14.4 keV and 122 keV lines from 57 Co are frequently useful for this 
measurement. It shall be noted that the X-ray attenuation technique measures the total 
effective detector thickness and not the detector sensitive thickness. 

This thickness measurement can be performed non-destructively on finished devices. 
During the manufacturing process, simpler techniques are feasible. 

7.5 Capacitance-voltage characteristics 

The capacitance of a detector as a function of detector bias can be measured by using an a.c. 
bridge. The bridge should operate in the range 10 3 Hz to 10 s Hz. At each value of applied bias 
the peak-to-peak ax. signal amplitude applied to the detector shall not exceed 10% of the d.c. 
bias voltage or 10% of the band gap voltage, whichever is the smaller. The detector tem- 
perature, bias voltage and environment shall be recorded. 



( IEC page 41 ) 20 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

A log-log plot may be used to display the capacitance-voltage characteristics. Series 
resistance, possibly resulting from undepleted base material in the diode, can lead to signi- 
ficant errors in the capacitance values obtained by this technique. This measurement tends to 
be more susceptible to error from surface effects at low bridge frequencies. Errors caused by 
stray capacitance can be minimized by using a three-terminal measurement. 



21 (IECpage43) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPob 333 (1983) 



APPENDIX A 
SYMBOLS AND GLOSSARY 



Al. Symbols 



C - electrical capacitance 

Q = calibrated capacitor used to couple a pulse generator to circuit under test 

Qff — effective input capacitance of a preamplifier 

Cf = feedback capacitance in the charge-sensitive loop of a preamplifier 

Q = total capacitance at preamplifier input 

D = perpendicular distance from the first slit image measured along the surface of a 

position-sensitive detector. (The image is formed by ionizing radiation passing 
through a mask with slits used to measure positional linearity. The first slit is at the 
grounded end of the detector.) 

D[ = distance D between the images of the first slit and the ith slit measured along the 

surface of a position-sensitive detector. (The index i ranges from i ■* to i - m 
such that Do - and D m is the distance between the two outermost slits used.) 

SE " energy difference in dead layer measurement 

A - full width at half maximum (F WHM) of a spectral peak 

€ — the average energy required to form one hole-electron pair in a semiconductor 

detector 

e = the charge of the electron 

e no " equivalent root-mean-square noise voltage referred to the preamplifier input 

Lp = integral nonlinearity in position of a position-sensitive detector 

N, N\ = channel number used to represent energy loss in detector of energy E\ 

Q — electric charge 

R = electrical resistance 

/?L = detector load resistor 

S - channel number for a multichannel analyzer spectrum obtained to check the posi- 

tional resolution and linearity of position-sensitive detectors 

Sj - peak channel number of the ith position peak generated by a position-sensitive 

detector when used with a mask with slits. (The index i ranges from i = to i — m) 

T - absolute temperature (K) 

t = time 

t c = charge collection time in a detector 

t — observed detector rise time due to the combined effects of the charge collection 

time and electronic rise time 

t[ = pulse fall time (90% to 10% of its peak value) 

fp = peaking time of a pulse 

t T — pulse rise time (10% to 90% of its peak value) 

/ t ■ tailing time of a pulse 

t = time constant 

Td - time constant for decay of a pulse 

V - voltage 

K a - amplitude of pulse amplifier output 

Vj, - detector bias (operating) voltage 

*g» Jgi * output voltage of precision pulse generator, and that corresponding to energy E\ 

V Q - amplitude of the voltage output signal of an amplifier during measurement of 

amplifier linearity 

A^MAX ■ maximum value observed for the difference between a value of D\ and the value of 
D at the point (D;, Sj) on the line fitted to the set of points (D\, S\) 



( IEC page 52 J 22 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPab 333 (1983) 

AD p - FWHM of the position resolution in units of length 

A£a * FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to amplifier noise 

AEd ■ FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to detector noise 

A£e = FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to electronic noise without the detector 

noise contribution 
A£o ■" FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to all factors other than electric noise 
A£ s =» FWHM, expressed in units of energy, derived in spectral energy resolution 

measurement 
AEj = FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to the combined effect of detector and 

amplifier noise 
AN^ — FWHM, expressed in channels, due to amplifier noise 
AN& "* FWHM, expressed in channels, due to detector noise 
AJVe " FWHM, expressed in channels, due to electronic noise without the detector noise 

contribution 
ANq = FWHM, expressed in channels, due to all factors other than electric noise 
AJVp - FWHM, expressed in channels, of a peak generated from the position signal of a 

position sensitive detector 
A JVg = FWHM, expressed in channels, of an absorbed spectral peak used for energy reso- 
lution determination 
ANj = FWHM, expressed in channels, due to the combined effect of detector and 

amplifier noise 
AQa = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to amplifier noise 
AQd = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to detector noise 
AQe ~ FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to the electronic noise without the 

detector noise contribution 
AQt ** FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to the combined effect of detector and 

amplifier noise 
At - duration of a pulse; the time interval between the half amplitude points of a pulse 

AX$ = FWHM for monoenergetic incident radiation, expressed in channels, including 

all spectral broadening effects 
E, E\ — energy of a particle or radiation (or radiation having specific energy, E\, where i is 

an integer, 1,2,.. .) 
A V e ~ a voltage difference signal related to the nonlinearity of an amplifier 
Vp> ^pi = amplitude of the voltage step impressed on a calibrated capacitor C c by the pulse 

generator, corresponding to energy E\ 
X, X\ = channel number, of channel corresponding to energy E\ 
Zq = characteristic impedance 

A2. Glossary 

Active dimension (of a position-sensitive detector) 

A dimension (i.e. length, width) of that region of a position-sensitive detector which is 
depleted. 

A valanche breakdown (of a junction) 

A breakdown caused by the cumulative multiplication of charge carriers in a semi- 
conductor under the action of a strong electric field which causes some charge carriers to gain 
enough energy to liberate new hole-electron pairs (field-induced impact ionization) (IEV 391- 
10-51). 

Band gap 

The difference in energy between the energy level of the bottom of the conduction band and 
the energy level of the top of the valence band. 



23 (IECpage53) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

Baseline (at pulse peak) 

The instantaneous value that the voltage would have had at the time of the pulse peak in the 
absence of that pulse. ( I E C Publication 340). 

Bias (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 
Synonymous with bias voltage. 

Bias voltage (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The voltage applied to the detector to produce the electric field to collect the signal charge 
(I EC Publication 340). 

Biased linear amplifier 

An amplifier giving essentially zero output for all inputs below a threshold and having 
constant incremental gain for all inputs above the threshold up to a specified maximum 
amplitude. 

Bias resistor (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 
The resistor through which bias voltage is applied to a detector (I EC Publication 340). 

Blocking contact (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

That contact from which depletion proceeds into the semiconductor material under condi- 
tions of reverse bias. 

Breakdown (of a reverse biased junction) 

Transition from a state of high dynamic resistance to a state of substantially lower dynanv" 
resistance for increasing magnitude of reverse voltage (IEV 391-10-50). 

Breakdown region (of a semiconductor diode characteristic) 

That entire region of the voltage-current characteristic beyond the initiation of breakdown 
for increasing magnitude of reverse current (1 EC Publication 759). 

Breakdown voltage (of a semiconductor diode) 
The voltage measured at a specified current in the breakdown region (I EC Publication 

759). 

Capacitance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The capacitance between terminals of the detector as measured with small signals under 
specified conditions of bias and frequency (I EC Publication 340). 

Channel, surface (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A thin region at a semiconductor surface of p- or n-type conductivity created by the action 
of an electric field; e.g. that due to trapped surface charge. 

Channelling, lattice (in a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A phenomenon that results in a crystallographic directional dependence of the rate of 
energy loss of ionizing particles. 

Charge carrier (abbreviation : carrier) 
1 n a semiconductor, a free conduction electron or a mobile hole (I EV 39 1 - 1 0-53). 

Charge collection time (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

By convention the time interval for the integrated current due to the charge collected in the 
semiconductor detector, after the passage of an ionizing particle, to increase from 10% to 90% 
ofits final value (IEV 391-10-59). 

Clip, clipping (jargon) 

A limiting operation such as I) use of a high-pass filter (see differentiated), or 2) a non- 
linear operation such as diode limiting of pulse amplitude. 



( IEC page54> 



24 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPub 333 (1983) 

Constant fraction discriminator 

A pulse amplitude discriminator in which the threshold for acceptance of a pulse is a 
constant fraction of the peak amplitude of the pulse. 

Note. - Its purpose is to produce an output pulse delayed with respect to the input pulse by a time interval essen- 
tially independent of the input pulse amplitude { I EC Publication 340). 

Crest factor (of an average reading or root-mean-square voltmeter) 

The ratio of (1) the peak voltage value that an average reading or root-mean-square 
voltmeter will accept without overloading to (2) the full scale value of the range being used for 
measurement (I EC Publication 340). 

Cross-over time (of a pulse) 

The instant at which the waveform of a bipolar pulse passes through a designated level 
(I EC Publication 340). 

Cross-over walk (of a pulse) 

The variation of the cross-over time for some variable, such as amplitude (I EC 
Publication 340). 

CR-RC shaping 

The pulse shaping present in an amplifier that has a simple high-pass filter and a low-pass 
filter, each consisting of a capacitor and a resistor, with the filters, separated by impedance 
isolation. 

Note. - This definition is for use with this document. 

Dead layer (of a semiconductor detector) 

An inactive region (layer) in which the energy absorbed from the passage of monoenergetic 
charged particles does not significantly contribute to the resulting full energy peak (IEV 
391-10-55). 

Decay time constant 

The time for a true single-exponential waveform to decay to 1/eof the original step height 
(I EC Publication 340). 

Depletion layer (in a semiconductor detector) 

A layer of a semiconductor detector which constitutes its sensitive volume. Most of the 
energy lost by the particles in this region can contribute to the resulting signal. 

Depletion region (in a semiconductor) 

A region in which the charge-carrier charge density is insufficient to neutralize the net fixed 
charge density of ionized donors and acceptors. In a diode-type semiconductor radiation 
detector the depletion region is the sensitive region of the device (I EC Publication 340). 

Depletion voltage (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 
Synonymous with total depletion voltage. 

Differen tial d E/dx semiconductor detector 

A transmission semiconductor detector in which the thickness of the depletion layer 
is small compared to the range of the incident particles in the semiconductor material 
(IEV 391-09-48). 

Differentiated pulse 

A pulse that is passed through a high-pass network, such as a CR filter 
(I EC Publication 340). 

Diffused junction semiconductor detector 

A semiconductor detector in which the P-N or N-P junction is produced by an impurity of 
one type into a semiconductor of opposite type. 

Note. - The first letter P or N designates the type ofthe diffused impurities (IEV 39 1-09-43). 



25 ( IEC page 53) 



IS : 11425-1985 
lECPob 333 (1983) 

DLLN 
Dead layer energy loss at normal incidence. 

Energy resolution (FWHM) (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The detectors contribution (including detector leakage current noise), expressed in units of 
energy, to the FWHM of a pulse height distribution corresponding to an energy spectrum 
(I EC Publication 340). 

Energy resolution (per cent) (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

One hundred times the energy resolution divided by the energy for which the resolution is 
specified ( I E C Publication 340). 

Equivalent noise resistance referred to input (of a linear amplifier or preamplifier) 

That value of resistor which when applied to the input of a hypothetical noiseless amplifier 
with the same gain and bandwidth would produce the same output noise. 

Fixed fraction discriminator (see constant fraction discriminator). 

Full width at half maximum (FWHM) 

In a distribution curve comprising a single peak, the distance between the abscissa of two 
points on the curve whose ordinates are half of the maximum ordinate of the peak. 

Note. - If the curve considered comprises several peaks, a full width at half maximum exists for each peak (based on 
IEV39I-I5-08). 

Full width at tenth maximum (FWTM) 

Same as full width at half maximum except that measurement is made at one-tenth the 
maximum ordinate rather than at one-half ( I E C Publication 340). 

FWHM (see full width at half maximum). 

FWTM (see full width at tenth maximum). 

Geometry, detector 
The physical configuration of a solid-state detector ( I EC Publication 340). 

Ion implanted contact 
A detector contact consisting of a junction produced by the process of ion implantation. 

Ion implantation 

A process in which a beam of energetic ions incident upon a solid results in the implan- 
tation of those ions into the material. 

Inactive region (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A region of a detector in which charge created by ionizing radiation does not contribute 
significantly to the signal charge. 

Integrated pulse 

A pulse that is passed through a low-pass network, such as a single RC network or a 
cascaded RC network (I EC Publication 340). 

Intrinsic semiconductor (I-type) 

An effectively pure semiconductor in which, under conditions of thermal equilibrium, the 
charge carrier densities of each sign are nearly equal. 

Note. - By extension, this term is incorrectly used to designate compensated semiconductors ( I EV 391-05-02). 

Junction 

A transition layer between semiconductor regions of different electrical properties, or 
between a semiconductor and a superficial layer of different type. This layer is characterized 
by a potential barrier impeding the charge carriers to move from one region to the other 
(IEV 391-10-42). 



( IEC page 56) 26 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

Junction depth (ofap-n semiconductor radiation detector) 

The distance below the crystal surface at which the conductivity type changes (I EC Publi- 
cation 759). 

Leakage current 

The total detector current flowing at the operating bias in the absence of radiation 
(IEV 391-10-14). 

Lithium-drifted semiconductor detector 

A compensated semiconductor detector in which the compensated region is obtained by 
causing lithium ions to move through a P-type crystal under an applied electric field in such a 
way as to compensate the charge of the bound impurities (IEV 391-09-45). 

Load impedance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The impedance shunting the detector, and across which the detector output voltage signal is 
developed. 

Load resistance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 
The resistive component of the load impedance. 

Noise linewidth 
The contribution of noise to the FWHM of a spectral peak (I EC Publication 340). 

Non-injecting contact (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A contact at which the carrier density in the adjacent semiconductor material is not 
changed from its equilibrium value (IEC Publication 340). 

Ohmic contact (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A purely resistive contact, i.e., one that has a linear voltage-current characteristic 
throughout its entire operating range. 

Peaking time (of an amplifier output pulse) 

The time between the 1% and the 100% amplitude points on the leading edge of a pulse 
(provided that the pulse does not have a flat top). For flat topped pulses the peaking time is 
defined as the time between the 1 % amplitude point and the mid-point of the flat top. 

Percent energy resolution (see energy resolution (percent)). 

p-i-n detector 

A detector consisting of an intrinsic or nearly intrinsic region between a p and an n region. 

Position-sensitive detector 

A detector which measures the impact position, in one or more dimensions, of ionizing 
radiation upon the detector surface. 

Pulse fall time (t{) 

The interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value last reaches specified 
upper and lower limits, namely, 90% and 10% of the peak pulse value unless otherwise stated. 

Note. - In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier that has simple CR-RC shaping, the fall time i ; given 
byf f -3.36CR). 

Pulse rise time (t T ) 

The interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value first reaches specified 
lower and upper limits, namely 10% and 90% of the peak pulse value, unless otherwise 
specified. 

Note. - In the case of a step function applied to an RC low-pass filter, the rise time is given by t T - 2.2 RC. In the 
case of a step function applied to an amplifier that has simple CR-RC shaping, i.e., one high-pass and one 
low-pass RC filter of equal time constants, the rise time is given by ( r - 0.57 RC) (I EC Publication 34')). 



27 ( IEC page 57) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

Pulse duration (of an amplifier output pulse) 
The time interval between the 50% of maximum amplitude points of a pulse. 

Quasi- Gaussian shaping 

Pulse shaping consisting of one differentiation followed by four or more integrations which 
results in a pulse shape that is approximated by a Gaussian curve. For n integrations, the 
shaping network is sometimes denoted as CR-(RC) n . 

Resolution, energy (per cent) (see energy resolution (per cent)). 

Schottky barrier contact 

A metal semiconductor contact structure whose % properties are heavily influ- 

enced by the difference in material work functions, these, contacts frequently utilize an inter- 
facial metal/semiconductor compound (e.g. a silicide). 

Schottky barrier radiation detector 
A semiconductor radiation detector whose blocking contact is a Schottky barrier contact. 

Semiconductor, compensated 

A semiconductor in which the effects of the impurities of a given type on the charge carrier 
density partially or completely cancel those of the other type. Such a semiconductor has 
properties which are similar to those of an intrinsic semiconductor (IEV 39 1 -05-03). 

Semiconductor detector 

An ionization detector using a semiconductor medium in which an electric field is provided 
for the collection at the electrodes of the excess charge carriers produced by ionizing radiation 
(IEV 391-08-13). 

Space-charge generation (in a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The thermal generation of free charge carriers in the space-charge region 
(I EC Publication 340). 

Space-charge region (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A region in which the net charge density is significantly different from zero (see also 
depletion region). 

Spectral line 

A sharply peaked portion of the spectrum that represents a specific feature of the incident 
radiation, usually the full energy of a monoenergetic radiation. 

Spectrum (of an ionizing radiation) 

Distribution of the values of a specific radiation quantity, usually associated with energy, 
for example emission rate as a function of energy of emitted particles (IEV 391-15-07). 

Straggling, energy 

The random fluctuations in energy loss whereby those particles having the same initial 
eriergy lose different amounts of energy when traversing a given thickness of matter. (This 
process leads to the broadening of spectral lines.) (I EC Publication 340.) 

Surface barrier contact 

A rectifying contact that is characterized by a potential barrier associated with an inversion 
or accumulation layer; said 4 inversion or accumulation layer being caused by surface charge 
resulting from the presence of surface states and/or work function differences (I EC Publi- 
cation 759). 

Surface barrier semiconductor detector 

A semiconductor detector in which the potential barrier due to the junction results from a 
superficial inversion layer (IEV 391-09-42). 



(IECpa»») 28 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPnb 333 (1983) 

Sweep-out time, charge (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (see charge collection time). 

Tailing time (of an amplifier output pulse) 

The time between the 100% and 1 % of maximum amplitude points on the trailing edge of a 
pulse (provided that the pulse does not have a flat top). For flat topped pulses, the tailing time 
is defined as the time between the midpoint of the flat top and the 1 % of maximum amplitude 
point. 

Totally depleted semiconductor detector 

A semiconductor detector in which the thickness of the depletion layer is essentially equal 
to the thickness of the semiconductor material (IEV 391-09-49). 

Total depletion voltage (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The reverse voltage at which the depletion layer extends over essentially the whole 
thickness of the semiconductor (IEV 391-10-58). 

Transmission detector 

A totally depleted detector whose thickness, including its entrance and exit windows, is 
sufficiently small to permit radiation to pass completely through the detector. 

Note. - This definition is for use with this standard. 

Useful active dimension (of a position-sensitive detector) 

A dimension (i.e. length, width) of that region of a position-sensitive detector over which 
the specifications of resolution and linearity are met. 

Window (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (see dead layer thickness). 

Window amplifier (see biased linear amplifier). 



29 (IECpage») 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 



APPENDIX B 



GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING SEMICONDUCTOR CHARGED- 

PARTICLE DETECTORS 

B 1 . Interaction of charged particles with matter 

Charged particles interact with matter by losing energy through: 

1) inelastic collisions with atomic electrons; 

2) inelastic collisions with atomic nuclei. 

Other energy losses due to radiative processes and nuclear reactions are usually negligible. 

For energetic charged particles (> 1 MeV/u), the energy loss is primarily due to collisions 
with electrons of the absorbing material. For each collision between a heavy charged particle 
and an electron, the amount of deflection and energy transfer are small. Many such interac- 
tions take place as the particle loses energy along a relatively straight trajectory. Under such 
conditions, the particles can be characterized by a definite range R and specific ionization 
loss (energy lost per unit path length) dE/dx, within the absorbing material. 

For highly ionized particles, atomic displacements can become an important part of the 
energy loss process. This is the case for fission fragments, heavy ions, or lighter charged 
particles near the end of their range. 

Energetic electrons also interact with matter through the Coulomb force. Because of the 
small mass of electrons, no significant energy is transferred to nuclei. However, at energies of 
more than a few megaelectronvolts (MeV), radiative processes (Bremsstrahlung) and pair 
production become significant in high Z material. 

Because their mass to charge ratio is small, electrons are scattered along erratic tracks and 
the previous concept of range cannot be used. Instead, the concept of 10% transmission range 
may be applied. This range is that absorber thickness which results in 10% electron trans- 
mission at a given incident electron energy. 

B2. Semiconductor charged-parttcJedetector 

B2.1 The^asic detector 

^"■^ 

When charged particles interact with a semiconductor crystal, electrons are scattered in 
lattice bonds by the processes described in Clause Bl, resulting in the creation of free 
electron-hole pairs. The average energy e required to create a free electron-hole pair at a given 
temperature in a semiconductor is relatively insensitive to the type and energy of the ionizing 
radiation (for E > e). Values of £ are 3.6 eV at room temperature in silicon, 3.8 eV at 80 K in 
silicon and 3.0 eV at 80 K in germanium. Therefore, for a given semiconductor at a given 
temperature, it is usual for the number of electron-hole pairs produced by the absorption of a 
charged particle to be directly proportional to that particle's energy. 

Le detecteur est constitue d'un crista! semi-conducteur dispose entre deux contacts elec- 
triques. Le detecteur peut etre une diode fonctionnant sous une tension de polarisation 
inverse. Cela est necessaire pour atteindre une valeur suffisante du champ electrique entre les 



( IEC page 61) 30 



IS : 11425-1985 
IECPab 333 (1983) 

charge transport without excessive leakage current. If the resistivity of the semiconductor 
material is sufficiently high, rectifying contacts may not be necessary. 

The application of bias voltage establishes a depletion region in which the concentration of 
charge carriers is greatly reduced and in which an electric field exists. Within this sensitive 
region, the free electron-hole pairs produced by a charged-particle interaction with the semi- 
conductor material are swept to opposite contacts by the electric field. This process produces 
a current pulse at the input of a preamplifier. The integral of this pulse is a measure of the total 
signal charge and thus of the energy of the incident charged particle. 

Due to a number of deleterious effects, the signal charge may be less than that expected. 
A significant part of this reduction may be due to energy lost in nuclear collisions within the 
detector. Such collisions may even give rise to reaction products which are detected separ- 
ately. Another part of this signal loss may be attributed to poor charge collection from within 
the dense plasma created along the paths of some particles. The plasma shields electrons and 
holes from the electric field of the detector and favours electron-hole pair recombination. 
Another part of this signal loss may be attributed to charge trapping, low electric field and 
slow charge collection. Additionally, some of the incident particle's energy may be absorbed 
in a dead layer or window thereby contributing a reduced amount of charge to the detector 
output signal. 



B2.2 Geometry 

Charged-particle detectors are usually made in the planar configuration in which the two 
contacts are segments of parallel planes. The dimensions of the active region of the detector 
are usually determined by the dimensions of the contacts. Detectors may be partially depleted 
or totally depleted. In a partially depleted detector, the depletion region extends inward from 
the front contact but is separated from the back contact by undepleted material. In totally 
depleted detectors this depletion region extends from one contact to the other. Totally 
depleted detectors are used in (A£, E) telescopes and in timing measurements with heavy ions 
and fission fragments, as well as other applications requiring a very uniform sensitive depth. 



Although planar detectors are usually made as disks, other shapes are sometimes used. 
Annular detectors may be employed to measure backscattering of a beam which passes 
through a hole in the detector. Detectors of the position-sensitive type are often made in a 
rectangular configuration. A coaxial cylinder geometry can be used to maximize detector 
active volume for a given depletion layer thickness. This is of primary importance for high 
energy gamma-ray detectors and for high range particles. 



B2.3 Material 

Charged-particle detectors are usually made of silicon, but germanium and other materials 
may also be used. The higher density of germanium results in a reduced range for energetic 
particles. Therefore, for a given detector thickness, particles of significantly higher energy 
shall preferably be studied with a germanium detector than may be studied with a silicon 
detector. However, silicon detectors are often more convenient to use because they may be 
operated at room temperature while germanium detectors must be operated at cryogenic 



31 



( IEC page 63) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

temperatures. In addition, silicon detectors typically have thinner dead layers than 
germanium detectors. 

The thickness of the depletion region which may be obtained with a given material is 
dependent on the purity of the material and the applied bias voltage. For silicon, the room 
temperature resistivity is often used as a measure of the purity of the material. As an example, 
a silicon detector with an electrically active impurity concentration of 1.1 x 10 12 cm-3 (resis- 
tivity of 4 500 CI • cm for N-type or 12 000 CI • cm for P-type) requires a bias of 70 V to achieve 
a depletion region 300 um thick. 

Impurity concentrations in the 5 x 10 11 cm- 3 range (~ 10 000 CI • cm to 20000 CI • cm, 
N-type) allow depletion layers of 1 mm to 1 .5 mm to be obtained at several hundred volts bias. 
Silicon of sufficient purity (in the range of 1 x 10 1 J cm- 3 or less) provides depletion layers of 
3 mm to 5 mm with bias of 1 000 V or more. However, it is difficult to obtain silicon material 
of this purity. 

The lithium compensation technique was developed to allow fabrication of Si(Li) detectors 
with depletion layers many millimetres thick starting with readily available material of rela- 
tively low resistivity. In this process lithium ions are drifted deep into the detector under the 
influence of an electric field in such a way that the lithium compensates the acceptor impu- 
rities in P-type silicon. This produces a region with material property nearly intrinsic. Such 
devices are sometimes referred to as PIN diodes. 

Much work has been directed towards developing detectors for ionizing radiation from 
compound semiconductors such as mercuric iodide, cadmium telluride and gallium arsenide. 
Although the main advantages of such materials are probably in y ray and X-ray appli- 
cations, they may also prove useful for charged particles. 



B2.4 Fabrication 

After suitable semiconductor material is obtained, a detector shape is produced by slicing, 
dicing or other techniques. For thin A£ detectors, special shaping techniques are required to 
assure that the detector thickness is sufficiently uniform. Treatments involving the bulk of the 
material, for example lithium compensation, may also be performed. 

Non-injecting detector contacts must be fabricated. One of the contacts is usually a reverse- 
biased rectifying junction. 

The rectifying contact can be a surface barrier, a Schottky barrier, a diffused, alloyed, or 
ion implantation junction. 

Since one of the detector contacts serves as the entrance window, a dead layer associated 
with this contact directly affects the detector performance. One effect is a pulse height reduc- 
tion due to the absorption of part of the energy of incident particles in the dead layer. Any vari- 
ation in the angle of incidence of the particles or any non-uniformity in the dead layer thick- 
ness will cause variations in the amount of energy absorbed and result in spectral broadening. 
Even if the dead layer is uniform and the angle of incidence is constant, the energy loss in the 
dead layer undergoes fluctuations (which increase in magnitude with dead layer thickness) 
that contribute to spectral broadening. Depending on the nature of the dead layer and the ion- 
izing radiation, some nonlinearity in energy response may also result. 



( IEC page65) 32 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 

Detector contacts have special significance for the position-sensitive detector which 
measures both the energy and the position of impact of a charged particle. One configuration 
of this detector utilizes a resistive contact which acts as a current divider. The output pulse 
height is representative of the impact position along the length of the detector. However, the 
resistive contact is a source of noise which reduces both the energy and spatial resolution of 
the device. In some applications this is overcome by the use of an array of separate detectors 
with individual outputs. 

The fabrication of silicon or germanium detectors also requires the achievement of critical 
surface conditions through such techniques as etching and other chemical treatments. This is 
necessary to produce surfaces that can withstand high electric fields without producing exces- 
sive leakage current or electrical noise. 

B3. Pulse shaping 

In order to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio and count rate performance obtainable from 
any given semiconductor detector and amplifier combination it is necessary to use some form 
of electrical filtering procedure. This procedure is carried out by suitably designed electrical 
networks associated with the electronic amplifier system, and typically produces a pulse for 
each event registered by the detector. While the optimum pulse shape is known to be that of a 
symmetrical cusp, this is not generally employed for practical reasons. Instead it is more usual 
to use a "quasi-Gaussian" pulse shape produced by the action of one CR differentiator and 
four or more RC integrators having the general form shown in Figure Bl, page 69. While the 
precise form of such a pulse is completely defined by specifying the nature of the pulse 
forming network and the time constant t, it is useful to introduce some additional parameters 
as indicated in Figure Bl. These are At, the FWHM of the pulse in time, together with the 
quantities t p and f t . The latter specify the "peaking time" f p from 1 % amplitude to the peak of 
the pulse on its leading edge, is designated as t p and the corresponding pulse tailing time on 
the trailing edge as f t . The quantity At dominates the S/N ratio of the filter, while t p and f t 
dominate its performance at high counting rates. 

Although At is well defined and readily measurable for any pulse shape, * p and t t need 
redefining for pulses having flat tops such as those produced by delay-line shaping or trape- 
zoidal filtering as indicated in Figure B2, page 69. Here the quantities are defined as in 
Figure B2. For amplifiers employing switchable time constants the relevant switch(es) should 
be specified in terms of At. 



33 (IEC page 67) 



IS : 11425-1985 
IEC Pub 333 (1983) 



Q 

E 

ID 

83 



100 % 




Fig. Bl. - Quasi-Gaussian pulse shape. 



Midpoint of flattop 




FlG. B2. - Trapezoidal pulse shape. 



( IEC page 69) 



34 



