**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14773-3 (2000) : Mechanical Vibration of 
Non-Reciprocating Machines - Measurements on Rotating 
Shafts and Evaluation Criteria, Part 3: Coupled Industrial 
Machines [MED 28: Mechanical Vibration and Shock] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



K^V 1 iIW^k^^^ IS^aTTF^ 



£«> \\ i %^sfi^^^>9i^: 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14773 (Part 3): 2000 
ISO 7919-3 : 1996 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Hmfcwm 

^H ffaS ^R JTFFT TOT ^H*H £ *iH^ 

*TPT 3 3?fcJtfor7 gfaRT T9M 

Indian Standard 

MECHANICAL VIBRATION OF 

NON-RECIPROCATING MACHINES — 

MEASUREMENTS ON ROTATING SHAFTS 

AND EVALUATION CRITERIA 

PART 3 COUPLED INDUSTRIAL MACHINES 



ICS 17.160 



© BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 2000 Price Group 3 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, ME 28 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 7919-3:1996 'Mechanical vibration of non- 
reciprocating machines — Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria — Part 3 : Coupled 
industrial machines' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. In the adopted standard certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as Indian Standard 1 . 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian 
Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place 
are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Corresponding Indian Degree of 

Standard Standard Equivalence 

ISO 7919-1 : 1996 IS 14773 (Part 1) : 2000/ISO 7919-1 : 1996 Identical 

Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating 
machine — Measurements on rotating shaft 
and evaluation criteria : Part 1 General 
guidelines {first revision) 

ISO 7919-2: 1996 IS14773 (Part 2) : 2000/ISO7919-2:1996 do 

Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating 
machines — Measurements on rotating shaft 
and evaluation criteria : Part 2 Large land 
based steam turbine generator sets 

ISO 10816-1 : 1995 IS 11724 (Part 1) : 2000/ISO 10816-1 : 1995 do 

Mechanical vibration — Evaluation of machine 
vibration by measurements on non-rotating 
parts : Part 1 General guidelines 

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard 

referred in this adopted standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this 

standard: 

ISO 7919-5 : 1997 Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating 

machines — Measurements on rotating shafts 
and evaluations criteria — Part 5 : Machine 
sets in hydraulic power generating and pump- 
ing plants 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value.observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



IS 14773 (Part 3) -.2000 
ISO 7919-3 : 1996 



Indian Standard 



MECHANICAL VIBRATION OF 

NON-RECIPROCATING MACHINES — 

MEASUREMENTS ON ROTATING SHAFTS 

AND EVALUATION CRITERIA 

PART 3 COUPLED INDUSTRIAL MACHINES 



1 Scope 

This part of ISO 7919 gives guidelines for applying 
evaluation criteria for shaft vibration under normal op- 
erating conditions, measured at or close to the 
bearings of coupled indistrial machines. These 
guidelines are presented in terms of both steady run- 
ning vibration and any magnitude changes which may 
occur in these steady values. The numerical values 
specified are not intended to serve as the only basis 
for vibration evaluation since, in general, the vibratory 
condition of a machine is assessed by consideration 
of both the shaft vibration and the associated struc- 
tural vibration (see the introduction to ISO 7919-1). 

This part of ISO 7919 applies to coupled industrial 
machines with fluid-film bearings, having maximum 
continuous rated speeds in the range 1 000 r/min to 
30 000 r/min, and not limited by size and power, 
comprising 

— steam turbines; 

— turbocompressors; 

— turbopumps; 

— turbogenerators; 

— turbofans; 

— electric drives and associated gears, where rele- 
vant. 



This part of ISO 7919 does not apply to large land- 
based steam turbine generator sets for power 
stations with outputs greater than 50 MW (see 
ISO 7919-2), nor to machine sets in hydraulic power 
generating and pumping plants with outputs of 
1 MW or greater (see ISO 7919-5). 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this part of ISO 7919. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
part of ISO 7919 are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below. Members of IEC and ISO 
maintain, registers of currently valid International 
Standards. 

ISO 7919-1:1996, Mechanical vibration of non- 
reciprocating machines — Measurements on rotating 
shafts and evaluation criteria — Part 1: General 
guidelines. 

ISO 7919-2:1996, Mechanical vibration of non- 
reciprocating machines — Measurements on rotating 
shafts and evaluation criteria — Part 2: Large land- 
based steam turbine generator sets. 

ISO 7919-5: — 1J , Mechanical vibration of non- 
reciprocating machines — Measurements on rotating 



1) To be published. 



IS 14773 (Part 3) 
ISO 7919-3:1996 



2000 



shafts and evaluation criteria — Part 5: Machine sets 
in hydraulic power generating and pumping plants. 

ISO 10816-1 : 1995, Mechanical vibration — Evaluation 
of machine vibration by measurements on non- 
rotating parts — Part 1: General guidelines. 

3 Measurement procedures 

The measurement procedures to be followed and the 
instrumentation used shall be as described in 
ISO 7919-1. 

In industrial machines, shaft vibration relative to the 
bearing is normally , measured. Therefore, unless 
stated otherwise, this part of ISO 791-9 always refers 
to relative vibration displacement. In view of the 
relatively high rotational frequencies involved with in- 
dustrial machines, measuring methods using non- 
contacting transducers are most common and are 
generally preferred on rotor elements with operating 
frequencies of 3 000 r/min and above. For monitoring 
purposes, the measuring system shall be capable of 
covering overall vibration up to a frequency equivalent 
to 2,5 times the maximum service speed. However, 
it should be noted that for diagnostic purposes it may 
be desirable to cover a wider frequency range. 

4 Evaluation criteria 

Criteria for vibration magnitude, changes in vibration 
magnitude and operational limits are presented in an- 
nex A. 



The vibration magnitude is the higher value of the 
peak-to-peak displacement measured in two selected 
orthogonal measurement directions. The values pre- 
sented are the result of experience with machinery 
of this type and, if due regard is paid to them, ac- 
ceptable operation may be expected. If only one 
measuring direction is used, care should be taken to 
ensure that it provides adequate information (see 
ISO 7919-1). 

The criteria are presented for the specified steady- 
state operating conditions at the rated speed and load 
ranges. They apply for normal slow changes in load 
but do not apply when different conditions exist or 
during transient changes, for example during start-up 
and shut-down and when passing through resonance 
ranges. In these cases alternative criteria are necess- 
ary. 

It should be rioted that an overall judgement of the 
vibratory state of a machine is often made on the ba- 
sis of both relative shaft vibration as defined ^bove 
and of measurements made on non-rotating parts 
(see ISO 10816-1). 



IS 14773 (Part 3): 2000 
ISO 7919-3:1996 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Evaluation criteria for relative shaft vibration of coupled industrial machines 

under specified operating conditions 



A.I General 

Two evaluation criteria are used to assess the relative 
shaft vibration of coupled industrial machines, 
measured at or close to the bearings. One criterion 
considers the magnitude of the observed broad-band 
relative shaft vibration; the second considers changes 
in magnitude, irrespective of whether they are in- 
creases or decreases. 

A.2 Criterion I: Vibration magnitude at 
rated speed under steady operating 
conditions 

This criterion is concerned with defining limits for 
shaft vibration magnitude consistent with acceptable 
dynamic loads on the bearing, adequate margins on 
the radial clearance envelope of the machine, and ac- 
ceptable vibration transmission into the support 
structure and foundation. The maximum shaft vi- 
bration magnitude observed at each bearing is as- 
sessed against four evaluation zones established from 
international experience. 

A.2.1 Evaluation zones 

The following typical evaluation zones are defined to 
permit a qualitative assessment of the shaft vibration 
on a given machine and provide guidelines on possible 
actions. 

Zone A: The vibration of newly commissioned ma- 
chines would normally fall within this zone. 

Zone B: Machines with vibration within this zone are 
normally considered acceptable for unrestricted long- 
term operation. 

Zone C: Machines with vibration within this zone are 
normally considered unsatisfactory for long-term con- 
tinuous operation. Generally, the machine may be 
operated for a limited period in this condition until a 
suitable opportunity arises for remedial action. 



Zone D: Vibration values within this zone are normally 
considered to be of sufficient severity to cause dam- 
age to the machine. 

A.2.2 Evaluation zone limits 

In accordance with present accumulated experience 
of shaft vibration measurements in this field, the rec- 
ommended values for the zone boundaries are in- 
versely proportional to the square root of the shaft 
rotational frequency n (in revolutions per minute). The 
recommended values presented in figure A. 1 are de- 
rived from the expressions below: 

Zone boundary A/B 

«(„,)- 4 800/^7 nm 
Zone boundary B/C 

S(pp) = 9 000/^7 -urn 
Zone boundary C/D 

V) = 13 200 l\f" ^ m 
NOTE 1 For a definition of S (M))f see ISO 791 9-1 . 

These values are not intended to serve as acceptance 
specifications, which shall be subject to agreement 
between -the machine manufacturer and customer. 
However, they provide guidelines for ensuring that 
gross deficiencies or unrealistic requirements are 
avoided. 

In certain cases, there may be specific features as- 
sociated with a particular machine which would re- 
quire different zone boundary values (higher or lower) 
to be used. For example, with a tilting pad bearing it 
may be necessary to specify alternative vibration val- 
ues, whilst in the case of an elliptical bearing, different 
vibration criteria may apply for the directions of maxi- 
mum and minimum bearing clearances. In particular, 
it should be recognised that the allowable vibration 
may be related to the journal diameter since, gener- 
ally, running clearances will be greater for larger di- 
ameter bearings. Consequently different values may 



IS 14773 (Part 3): 2000 
ISO 7919-3:1996 



apply for measurements taken at different bearings 
on the same rotor line, in such cases, it is normally 
necessary to explain the reasons for this and, in par- 
ticular, to confirm that the machine will not be en- 
dangered by operating with higher vibration values. 

Higher values of vibration can be permitted at other 
measuring positions and under transient -conditions, 
such as start-up and run-down (including passage 
through critical speed ranges). 

A.3 Criterion II: Change in vibration 
magnitude 

This criterion provides an assessment of a change in 
vibration magnitude from a previously established 
reference or baseline value. A significant increase or 
decrease in shaft vibration magnitude may occur 
which requires some action even though zone C of 
Criterion I has not been reached. Such changes can 
be instantaneous or progressive with time and may 
indicate that damage has occurred or be a warning of 
an impending failure or some other irregularity. Cri- 
terion II is specified on the basis of the change in 
shaft vibration magnitude occurring under steady- 
state operating conditions. 

The reference value for this criterion is the typical, 
reproducible normal vibration, known from previous 
measurements for the specific operating conditions. 
If this reference value changes by a significant 
amount, and certainly if it exceeds 25 % of the upper 
limiting value for zone B, regardless of whether this 
increases or decreases the magnitude of vibration, 
steps should be taken to ascertain the reasons for the 
change. A decision on what action to take, if any, 
should then be made after consideration of the maxi- 
mum value of vibration and whether the machine has 
stabilized at a new condition. 

When Criterion II is applied, the vibration measure- 
ments being compared shall be taken at the same 
transducer location and orientation, and under ap- 
proximately the same machine operating conditions. 

It is necessary to appreciate that a criterion based on 
change of vibration has limited application, since sig- 
nificant changes of varying magnitude and rates can 
and do occur in individual frequency components, but 
the importance of these is not necessarily reflected in 
the broad-band shaft vibration signal (see ISO 7919-1). 
For example, the propagation of a crack in a rotor may 
introduce a progressive change in vibration compo- 
nents at multiples of rotational frequency, but their 
magnitude may be small relative to the amplitude of 
the once-per-revolution rotational frequency compo- 



nent. Consequently, it may be difficult to identify the 
effects of the crack propagation by looking at the 
change in the broad-band vibration only. Therefore, 
although monitoring the change in broad-band vi- 
bration will give some indication of potential prob- 
lems, it may be necessary in certain applications to 
use measuring and analysis equipment which is ca- 
pable of determining the trends of the vector changes 
that occur in individual frequency components of the 
vibration signal. This equipment may be more sophis- 
ticated than that used for normal supervisory moni- 
toring and its use and application requires specialist 
knowledge. Hence, the specification of detail criteria 
for measurements of this type is beyond the scope 
of this part of ISO 7919. 

A.4 Operational limits 

For many machines, mainly those of small size or 
power, continuous monitoring of vibration is not 
necessary. However, for those machines for which 
continuous monitoring of vibration is employed, it is 
common practice to establish operational vibration 
limits. These limits :ake the form of ALARMS and 
TRIPS. 

ALARMS: To provide a warning that a defined value 
of vibration has been reached or a significant change 
has occurred, at which remedial action may be 
necessary. In general, if an ALARM situation occurs, 
operation can continue for a period whilst investi- 
gations are carried out to identify the reason for the 
change in vibration and define any remedial action. 

TRIPS: To specify the magnitude of vibration beyond 
which further operation of the machine may cause 
damage. If the TRIP value is exceeded, immediate 
action should be taken to reduce the vibration or the 
machine should be shut down. 

Different operational limits, reflecting differences in 
dynamic loading and support stiffness, may be speci- 
fied for different measurement positions and di- 
rections. 

A.4.1 Setting of ALARMS 

The ALARM values may vary considerably, up or 
down, for different machines. The values chosen will 
normally be set relative to a baseline value deter- 
mined from experience for the measurement position 
or direction for that particular machine. 

It is recommended that the ALARM value should be 
set higher than the baseline by an amount equal to 
25 % of the upper limit of zone B. If the baseline is 
low, the ALARM may be below zone C. 



IS 14773 (Part 3): 2000 
ISO 7919-3:1996 



Where there is no established baseline, for example 
with a new machine, the initial ALARM setting should 
be based either on experience with other similar ma- 
chines or relative to agreed acceptance values. After 
a period of time, the steady-state baseline value will 
be established and the ALARM setting should be ad- 
justed accordingly. 

If the steady-state baseline changes (for example after 
a machine overhaul), the ALARM setting should be 
revised accordingly. Different operational ALARM 
settings may then exist for different bearings on the 
machine, reflecting differences in dynamic loading 
and bearing support stiffnesses. 



A.4.2 Setting of TRIPS 

The TRIP values will generally relate to the mechanical 
integrity of tUfc machine and be dependent on any 
specific design features which have been introduced 
to enable the machine to withstand abnormal dynamic 
forces. The values used will, therefore, generally be 
the same for all machines of similar design and would 
not normally be related to the steady-state baseline 
value used for setting ALARMS. 

There may, however, be differences for machines of 
different design and it is not possible to give more 
precise guidelines for absolute TRIP values. In gen- 
eral, the TRIP value will be within zone C or D. 



450 
400 
350 
300 



E 250 



200 



150 



u , 100 

1 90 

S 80 

H 70 

I 60 

I 50 

u 

> 40 

m 
x: 

v- 30 



20 



10 

















































































































^ 


?/> 
























e < 


























C 
























<h 


V 










































































<i 


























n 


*4 



























































































































2 4 6 8 10 20 

Shaft rotational frequency x 1 000 (r/min) 



30 



Figure A.1 — Recommended values for maximum relative displacement of the shaft as a function of the 

maximum service speed for coupled industrial machines 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue* and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ME28/LM04 (0398). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAUOFINDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 323 01 31 , 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELH1 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A f CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



{ 



Telephone 

323 76 17 
323 38 41 



{ 



{ 
{ 



337 8499,337 85 61 
337 86 26,337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



235 02 16,235 04 42 
2351519,235 23 15 

832 92 95, 832 78 58 
832 78 91 , 832 78 92 



Branches AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press, New DeIhi-2 



