**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10981 (1983) : Class of acceptance test for centrifugal 
mixed flow and axial pumps - Class B [MED 20: Pumps] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-671/-674: 620-16 




Indian Standard 

CODE OF ACCEPTANCE TEST 

FOR CENTRIFUGAL, MIXED FLOW 

AND AXIAL PUMPS — CLASS B 



18:10981-1983 

••Rcaffirnicd |988' 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



CONTENTS Page 

1. Scope ... ... ... 2 

2. Symbols ... ... ... 2 

3. Terminology ... ... ... 4 

4. Guarantees ... ... ... 7 

5. Tests ... ... ... 8 

6. Procedure for Measurement of Rate of Flow, Head, Speed of Rotation and Power Input 14 

7. Cavitation Testing ... ... ... 21 

8. Tests on Pumps for Liquids other than Clean Cold Water ... 25 

9. Analysis of Tests ... ... ... 26 

Appendix A Pumping Installation Under Non-standard Conditions 28 

Appendix B Costs and Repetition of Tests ... ... 29 

Appendix C Friction Losses ... ... ... 29 

Appendix D Effect of Pre-swirl Induced by the Pumps ... ... 33 

Appendix E Pump Test Sheet ... ... ... 33 

Appendix F Conversion to SI Units ... ... 35 

Appendix G Check List ... ... ... 36 

Explanatory Note ... ... ... 36 



Adopted 9 September 1983 



© March 1985, ISt 



Gr 12 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10981 - 1983 



1. Scope 

1.1 Lays down a code for acceptance testing of pumps, defining the terms and quantities that are 
used, establishing the methods of testing and the ways of measuring the quantities Involved 
according to Class B, so as to ascertain the performance of the pumps and to compare them with 
the manufacturer's guarantee. 

1.2 In general this code applies to any size of pumps tested with clean cold water and other 
liquids behaving as clean cold water such as defined In 8. 

1.3 This code Is not concerned with the structural details of the pumps nor with the mechanical 
properties of their components. 

1.4 This test code specifies the standard methods of measurement and instruments to be used for 
the determination of rate of flow, inlet total head, outlet total head, pump total head speed of 
rotation and pump power Input. 

2. Symbols — Given in Table 1. 







TABLE 1 


SYMBOLS 










Reference Num 


ber 














in* Relevant 




Quantity 


Symbol 


Dimensions 




SI Units 


Part of IS : 1890 



















Mass 


m 




M 




kg 


— 




Length 


I 




L 




m 


— 




Time 


t 




T 




s 


— 




Temperature 


e 




e 




"C 


— 




Area 


A 




u 




m'' 


— 




Volume 


V 




L3 




m3 


— 




Angular velocity 


w 




T-1 




rad/s 


— . 




Velocity 


V 




LT-i 




m/s 


, — 




Acceleration of free fall 


9 




LT-a 




m/s2 


— 




Speed of rotation 


n 




T-i 




s-i 


— 




Density 


P 




ML-3 




kg/m3 


— 




Gauge pressure 


Pe 




ML-iT- 


-2 


Pa 


— 




Viscosity (dynamic viscosity) 


!* 




ML-iT 


-1 


pa-B 







Kinematic viscosity 


V 




LST-I 




ma/s 


__ 




Energy 


E 




ML»T- 


-3 


J 


— 




Power ( genera! term ) 


P 




ML2T- 


-3 


W 


— 




Reynolds number 


Re 




pure I 


lumber 









Diameter 


D 




L 




m 


3.2.1.1 




Mass rate of flow 


Qm 




MT-i 




kg/s 


3.2.1.2 




Volume rate of flow 


Qv 




L3T-1 




ms/s 


3.2.3.2 




Distance to reference plane 


z 




L 




m 


3.2.3.8 




Pump total head 


H 




L 




m 


3.2.3.6 




Inlet total head 


H, 




L 




m 


3.2.3.7 




Outlet total head 


H, 




L 




m 


3.2.3.9 




Specific energy 


y 




L2T-2 




j/kg 


3.2.3.10 




Loss of head at inlet 


Hh 




L 




m 


3.2.3.11 




Loss of head at outlet 


Hh 




L 




m 


3.2.3.12 




Net positive suction head 


(NPSH)* 




L 




m 






Atmospheric pressure (absolute ) 


pb 




ML-iT-2 


Pa 






Vapour pressure (absolute) 


Pv 




ML-iT~2 


Pa 


3.2.4.1 




Pump power output 


Pu 




ML2T- 


-8 


W 


3.2.4.2 




Pump power input 


Pa 




ML2T- 


-3 


W 


3.2.4.3 




Motor power input 


Per 




ML2T 


-3 


W 


3.2.5.1 




Pump efficiency 






pure 


number 




3.2.5.2 




Transmission efficiency 


lint 




pure 


number 




3.2.5.3 




Motor efficiency 


, vjmot 




pure 


number 




3.2.5.4 




Overall efficiency 


Igr 




pure 


number 




3.2.6 




Type number 


K 




pure 


number 




6.2.1.2 




Friction factor 


X 




pure 


number 




Note 1 — 


M = 


= Mass L = Length T = Time $ = 


Temperature. 










Note 2 - 


• Where no number is given, reference may 


be made to various parts 


of IS : 1 


1890 ' Recommendations 


for quantities 


and units '. 












♦An optional 


symbol for net positive suction head is Hh. 











15:10981-1983 



2.2 Alphabetical Lists of Basic Letters and Subscripts — As given in Tables 2 and 3. 



TABLE 2 LETTERS USED AS SYMBOLS 



Symbol 



Quantity 



SI Units 



A 


Area 


D 


Diameter 


t 


Energy 


9 


Acceleration of free fall 


H 


Head 


Hi 


Losses in terms of liead of liquid 


K 


Type number 


k 


Absolute roughness 


1 


Length 


m 


Mass 


n 


Speed of rotation 


{NPSH) 


Net positive suction head 


P 


Pressure 


P 


Power 


Qm 


Mass rate of flow 


<7v 


Volume rate of flow 


Re 


Reynolds number 


t 


Time 


V 


Velocity 


V 


Volume 


X 


Tolerance 


y 


Specific energy 


z 


Distance to reference plane 


1 


Efficiency 


$ 


Temperature 


X 


Friction factor 


V- 


Dynamic viscosity 


V 


Kinematic viscosity 


p 


Density 


<•> 


Angular velocity 



m2 
m 

J 

m/s2 
m 
m 
pure number 
m 
m 

i^g 
s-i 

m 

Pa 

W 

kg/s 

m3/s 
pure number 

s 

m/s 

m3 
pure number 

J/lig 

m 
pure number 

»C 
pure number 

Pa.s 

m2/s 

kg/m3 

rad/s 



15:10981-1983 



TABLE 3 LETTERS AND FIGURES USED AS SUBSCRIPTS 

( Clause 2.2 ) 

Subscript Meaning 

value at the specified speed 

1 inlet 

2 outlet 

a absorbed 

av available 

b atmospheric 

e effective 

G guaranteed 

gr unit ( overall ) 

int intermediate 

] loss 

m 1) general case : mean 

2) related to q : mass 

IVI manometric 

mot motor 

P pump 

r required 

S eye 

sp specified* 

t total 

u useful 

V 1) general case : vapour 

2) related to q : volume 

♦This indication applies to the values of quantities relating to the guarantee point. 



3. Terminology 

3.1 Genera/ — In order to avoid any error of interpretation it has seemed preferable to reproduce 
here the definitions of quantities and units as given in various parts of IS : 1890 and to supple- 
ment these definitions by some specific information on their use in this test code. 

g — Acceleration of free fall* 

n — Speed of rotation : The quotient of the number of rotations by the time. 

p — Density ; Mass per unit volume. 

p — Pressure : The quotient of force by area. Unless otherwise specified, all pressures are 
gauge pressures (measured with respect to the atmospheric pressure ). 



•For Class B tests, the local value of g should be used. 
Nevertheless, in most cases, a value of 9'81 m/sS would not involve significant error. 
The local value should be calculated by the formula : 

g = 9-806 17(1- 2-64 X 10-3 cos 2? + 7 X 10-6 cos2 29 ) - 3'086 X lO-^Z 
where 9 and Z are respectively the latitude and the altitude. 



IS: 10981 -1983 

f6 — Viscosity (dynamic viscosity, some times called absolute viscosity) Is defined by 
expression: 

Wo 



^ h 



where 



uo is the velocity of a flat plate moving in its own plane while keeping parallel to a 
fixed flat wall; 

h is the distance from the flat plate to the fixed flat wall; 

T is the friction force of the fluid on the unit area of the flat plate during its motion.- 

Note — /? should be small enough to obtain laminar flow of the fluid between the flat plate and the 
fixed flat wail. 

V — Kinematic viscosity : the quotient of the viscosity ( dynamic viscosity ) by the density : 

P 

P— Power : The quotient of the energy transferred during a time interval by the duration 
of this interval. 

Re — Reynolds number Is defined by the expression : 

Re = 

V 

3.2 Definitions Peculiar to ttie Test Code — The definitions of concepts used in this test code, 
together with associated symbols, if any have been allocated. 

Concepts, even though in current use, which are not strictly necessary to the application of 
this code are not defined. 

3.2.1 Flow rates 

3.2.1.1 Qm — In this test code, mass rate of flow designates the external mass rate of flow of 
the pump, that is, the rate of flow discharged into the pipe from the outlet branch of the pump. 

Note 1 — The following losses or abstractions inherent to the pump are not to be reckoned in the quantity 
delivered: 

a) Discharge necessary for hydraulic balancing of axial thrust; 

b) Cooling of bearings of the pump itself; 

c) Water seal to the packing; and 

d) Leakage from the fittings, internal leakage, etc. 

Note 2 — On the contrary, if the losses or abstractions as indicated in Note 1 above are taken at a point before 
the flow measuring section, the following derived quantities should be added to the measured rate of flow : 

a) Cooling of motor bearings; and 

b) Cooling of gear box, bearing, oil cooler, etc. 

3.2.1.2 Qv — The outlet volume rate of flow has the following value : 

» _ gni 
Qw— -— 
Pa 

In this test code, this symbol may also designate the volume rate of flow in a given section*; 
It Is the quotient of the mass rate of flow In this section by the density. (The section may be 
designated by the proposed subscripts. ) 

3.2.2 Velocity of flow (/) — The mean velocity of flow equal to the volume rate of flow divided by 
the pipe cross-section* : 

'=-A- 

3.2.3 Head — The energy per unit weight of fluid. 



♦Attention is drawn to the fact that in this case qv may vary for different reasons across the circuit. 

5 



15:10981 -1983 

3.2.3.1 Reference piane — The horizontal plane through the centre of the circle described by 
the external point of the entrance edges of the impeller blades; in the case of double inlet pumps 
the plane should be taken through the higher centre. 

The manufacturer should indicate the position of this plane with respect to precise reference 
points on the pump. 

3.2.3.2 The difference between the level of the horizontal plane under consideration and the 
level of the reference plane ( z ) is : 

a) positive, if the plane in question is above the reference plane; 

b) negative, If the plane in question is below the reference plane. 

3.2.3.3 Gat/flre pressure ( pe ) — The effective pressure, relative to atmospheric pressure. The 

jDe 
head corresponding to this pressure is . Its vafue Is : 

a) positive, if this pressure is greater than the atmospheric pressure; 

b) negative, if this pressure is less than the atmospheric pressure. 

3.2.3.4 Velocity head — The k'\r\et\c energy per unit weight of the liquid in movement. It is 
expressed by : 



2y 
where v Is the mean velocity of the liquid in the section considered. 

3.2.3.5 Total head — In any section, the total head is given by : 



P I V 



^ P9 ^ 2fir 
This is related to atmosphere. The absolute total head in any section is given by : 



P9 P9 Sfif 

3.2.3.6 /n/et total head (Hi) — The total head in the inlet section of the pump ; 

3.2.3.7 Outlet total head ( A/a ) — The total head in the outlet section of the pump : 

P29 2g 

3.2.3.8 Pump total head (H) —The algebraic difference between the outlet total head and the 
inlet total head. 

H=H2 — II 1 

If the variation of density of the pumped liquid is not significant, 

P2-P1 ,V2*—Vl^ 



H=z^ — Z\ 



P9 2g 



If the variation of density of the pumped liquid is significant, p should be replaced by the 

mean value (pm ) 

Pi + Pa 
Pm — 2 

3.2.3.9 Specific energy (Y) — The energy per unit mass of liquid. It is given by the equation 

Y=gH 

3.2.3.10 Loss of total head at inlet {Hn ) ~ The difference between the total head of the liquid at 
the measuring point, or possibly of the liquid without velocity in the suction chamber, and the total 
head of the liquid In the Inlet section of the pump. 



18:10981-1983 

3.2.3.11 Loss of total head on del/very ( Hjs ) —The difference between the total head of the 
liquid in the outlet section of the pump, and the total head of the liquid at the measuring point. 

3.2.3.12 Net positive suction tiead (NPSH)~The total Inlet head, pluse the head corresponding 
to the atmospheric pressure, minus the head corresponding to the vapour pressure: 

NPSH=Hi+ -^ -^'' 



P9 P9 

Thus NPSH, as well as inlet total head, is referred to the reference plate. It is necessary to 
make a distinction between: 

— the A/PSH required at given flow and speed of rotation for a given pump specified by the 
manufacturer; 

— the NPSH available for the same flow determined by the Installation; 

— the NPSH determined during the cavitation test. This value is that which causes in the first 
stage a drop of ( 3-i-/C/2 ) percent in total head of the first stage or in efficiency at a given 
rate of flow, or in a rate of flow or efficiency at a given total head. 

Subscripts may be used to differentiate these quantities [for example {NPSH) when the 
required value is concerned and {NPSH) when the available value is concerned ]. 

3.2.4 Power 

3.2.4.1 Pump power output ( Pu ) — The power transferred to the liquid at its passage through 
the pump: 

Pn=qm9H^qmY=pqvgH 

3.2.4.2 Pump power input ( Pa ) — The power measured at the pump cooling. 

3.2.4.3 l\/fotor power input ( Pgr ) — The power absorbed by the pump driver. 

3.2.5 Efficiency 

pump power output 



3.2.5.1 Pump efficiency ( >] ) = 

yjuiiifj ^\jvvc;i iii|jui 

^ « r « -r . ■ iT . / u «- i. X \ / ^ pump power input 

3.2.5.2 Transmission efficiency { sfiafting, coupling, gears, etc ) { r]int ) = power at motor shaft 

3.2.5.3 i\/lotor efficiency ( TQmot ) 



pump power input 
hafting, coupling, 
power at motor shaft 



motor power input 

-.oc^irt n a- ■ I \ t \ pump power output 

3.2.5.4 Q^feraii efficiency {t^^^) = {f^ )^int v]mot = ^otor power input 

3.2.6 Type number K — The type number, a dimensionless quantity, is defined by the following 
formula*: 

^_ 2Tr n { q'y )i 

(gH')- 

where 

g'v is the volume rate of flow per eye, and 
H' is the head per stage. 

Note— Attention is drawn to the fact that, in this standard, the type number applies to the guaranteed flow 
rate, which is not in conformity with common practice whsre K is calculated from the flow rate corresponding to 
the maximum efficiency. 

3.2.7 Osc/7/a^/o/7S — Short-period fluctuations about a mean value during the time that a single 
reading is being made. 

3.2.8 Variations — Those changes in value which take place between one reading and the next. 

4. Guarantees 

4.1 Subjects of Guarantees — One or more of the following quantities may be guaranteed by the 
manufacturer under the specified conditions and speed of rotation: 

a) total head of the pump ( Ha ), at the agreed flow rate qxo, or flow rate of the pump qya at 
the agreed total head Hq { see 9,4.1 ); 



*This formula is the same as the basic formula K = . ^^ '^ — 

7 



15:10981-1983 

b) power input or efficiency of the pump or combined pump-motor unit at guaranteed qyaHa 
point; 

c) NPSH required by the pump at the agreed flow rate qva] 

d) other points of the qvH curve may be indicated by guaranteeing the total head at a reduced 
or increased flow rate, In which case separately agreed increased tolerances will apply. 

4.2 Other Conditions for Guarantee — Unless otherwise specified in the contract, it shall be taken 
that the following conditions apply to the guarantee values: 

a) unless the chemical and physical properties of the liquid are stated, it shall be taken that 
the guarantee points apply to clean cold water; 

b) the relation between the guarantee values under clean cold water conditions and the likely 
performance under other liquid conditions shall be agreed in the contract; 

c) guarantees shall apply only to the pump as tested by the methods and in the test arrange- 
ments specified, In this standard; and 

d) the pump manufacturer shall not be responsible for the specification of the guarantee point. 

4.3 Fulfilment of Guarantee — The nominated guarantee for any quantity shall be deemed to have 
been met if, when tested according to this standard, the measured performance falls within the 
tolerance specified in 9 for the particular quantity. Other points on the q^H curve shall not be 
guaranteed unless the points and tolerances for fulfilment of guarantee are agreed in the contract. 

5. Tests 

5.1 Organization of Tests 

5.1.1 Place of testing — Acceptance tests shall be carried out at the manufacturer's works, or 
alternatively at a place to be mutually agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

5.1.2 Time of testing — The time of testing shall be mutually agreed by the manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 

When tests are not carried out in the manufacturer's works, time shall be allowed for pre- 
liminary adjustments by both the manufacturer and the installer. 

5.1.3 Staff — Accurate measurements depend not only on the quality of the measuring instru- 
ments used but also on the ability and skill of the persons operating and reading the measuring 
devices during the tests. The staff entrusted with effecting the measurements should be selected 
just as carefully as the instruments to be used in the test. 

Specialists with adequate experience in measuring operations in general shall be charged 
with operating and reading complicated measuring apparatus. Reading simple measuring devices 
may be entrusted to such helpers who, upon short prior instruction, can be assumed to effect the 
readings with proper care and the accuracy required. 

A chief of tests possessing adequate experience in measuring operations shall be appointed. 
Normally, when the test is carried out at the manufacturer's works, the chief of tests is a staff 
member of the manufacturing firm. 

All persons charged with effecting the measurements are subordinated during the tests to the 
chief of tests, who conducts and supervises the measurement, reports on test conditions and the 
results of the tests and then drafts the test report. All questions arising in connection with the 
measurements and their execution are subject to his decision. 

The parties concerned shall provide all assistance that thechief of tests considers necessary. 

5.1.4 Test programme — Only the guaranteed operational data shall form the basis of the test; 
other data determined by measurement during the tests shall have merely an indicative 
( informative ) function and it shall be so stated if they are included in the programme. 

5.1.5 Testing equipment — The chief of tests shall be responsible for the selection and operation 
of measuring equipment. All of the measuring equimpent shall be covered by reports showing, 
by calibration or by comparison with other relevant Indian Standards, that it complies with the 
requirements of accuracy of measurements given in 5.4. These reports shall be presented, if 
required. 

5.1.6 Test reports — All test records and record charts shall be initialled by the chief of tests 
and by the representatives of both the purchaser and the manufacturer, each of whom shall be 
provided with a copy of all records and charts. 

8 



IS: 10981 -1983 

The evaluation of th© t6st results, iRGludin*^ graphical pIottiFT^ of the f^urrs" •^erfomancs curv© 
shall be made as far as possible while the tests are In progress and, in any case, before the 
installation and instrumentation are dismantled in order that suspect measurements can be repeated 
without delay. 

5.2 Test Arrangements ( see Appendix A ) 

5.2.1 Standard test arrangements — All practical steps shall be taken to ensure that flow through 



... inn ear^f ir\n cKal I rc^ci i If i n ■ 

|Vk4<JUIlll^ WI^WL ivy I ■ «JIIV4II 1^1-fUIL III! 



a) an axlally symmetric velocity distribution; 

b) a uniform static pressure distribution; and 

c) freedom from swirl induced by the installation. 

Some methods for ensuring these conditions for standard test arrangements are suggested 
below. 

Acceptance tests may be carried out under standard test conditions for pumps where the 
type number is less than or equal to 1*5. 

When the type number is greater than 1'5, it shall be agreed contractually that the results of 
such tests will be held to apply only to specified conditions. The purpose of such tests will be to 
provide an assurance that the pump will, if suitably Installed, perform the specified duty. 

It is recommended that for standard test circuits leading from reservoirs with a free surface or 
from large stilling vessels in a closed circuit, the inlet straight length L shall be determined by the 
expression: 



|- = K + 5 



where D is the pipe diameter. 



This expression is also valid for an arrangement that includes, at a distance L upstream, a 
simple medium-radius right angle bend that is not fitted with guide vanes. Under these conditions, 
flow straighteners are not necessary in the pipe between the bend and the pump. 

However, in a closed circuit where there is neither a reservoir nor a stilling vessel immediately 
upstream of the pump, it Is necessary to ensure that the flow into the pump is free from swirl 
induced by the installation and has a normal symmetrical velocity distribution. 

Significant swirl can be avoided by: 

a) careful design of the test circuit upstream of the measurement section; 

b) judicious use of a flow straightener; and 

c) suitable arrangement of the pressure tappings to minimize their influence on the 
measurement. 

5.2.1? Simulated test arrangements — When pumps are tested under simulated site conditions, 
flow straighteners shall not be Installed immediately before the pump. It is important that the 
characteristics of flow to the simulated circuit should be controlled; that the flow should, as far as 
possible, be free from significant swirl induced by the installation and have a symmetrical 
velocity distribution. If necessary, the velocity distribution of the flow into the simulated circuit shall 
be determined by careful pitot tube traverse, In order to establish that the required flow 
characteristics exist; if not, the required characteristics can be obtained by the installation of 
suitable means, such as the Zanker flow straightener ( Fig. 1 ); care shall be taken to ensure that the 
conditions of test will not be affected by the high, irrecoverable pressure losses associated with 
efficient straryhtening devices. 

5.2.3 Pumps tested with fittings — If specified in the contract, standard tests can be carried out 
on a combination of a pump, and 

a) associated fittings at the final site installation; 

b) an exact reproduction thereof; or 

c) fittings introduced for testing purposes and taken as forming part of the pump itself ( see 
5.2.4 to 5.2.6). 

Connection on the inlet and outlet sides of the whole combination shall be made in 
accordance with 6.2.2. 



CO 



(S 
00 




00 
CO 



FIG. 1 ZANKER FLOW STRAIGHTENER 



18:10981-1983 



Measurements shall then be taken in accordance with 5.3.2.2 and 5.3.2.3. 



5.2.4 Pumping installation under submerged conditions — Where a pump, or a combination of a 
pump and its fittings, is tested or installed in conditions where the standard pipe connection on 
either inlet or outlet as described in 6.2.2 cannot be made owing to inaccessibility or submergence, 
measurements shall be taken In accordance with 6.2.1.6. 

5.2.5 Borehole and deep well pumps — Borehole and deep well pumps cannot usually be tested 
with their complete lengths of delivery main and consequently the loss of head in the portions 
omitted; therefore the power absorbed by any shafting therein cannot be measured. Any thrust 
bearing would also be more lightly loaded during the test than it would be in the final installation 
(see 6.2.1.6). 

5.2.6 Self-priming pumps — \n principle the priming ability of self-priming pumps shall always 
be verified at the contractual static suction head with the attached inlet piping equivalent to that in 
the final installation. When the test cannot be carried out in the described manner, the test 
arrangement to be used shall be specified in the contract. 

5.3 Test Conditions 

5.3.1 Execution o/" /es^s — The duration of the test shall be sufficient to obtain consistent 
results having regard to the degree of accuracy to be achieved. 

Where multiple readings are taken to reduce the error margin ( see 5.3.2 ), they shall be taken 
at unequal intervals of time. 

All measurements shall be made under steady conditions of operation but a decision to make 
measurements when such conditions cannot be obtained shall be a matter of agreement between 
the parties concerned. 

Verification of the guaranteed point shall be obtained by recording at least five points of 
measurements closely and evenly grouped around the guaranteed point, for example between 09 
and 1'1 qvG. 

Where, for special reasons, it is necessary to determine performance over a range of 
operating conditions, a sufficient number of measurements points shall be taken to establish the 
performance within the limits of error stated in 5.4 ( see also Appendix B ). 

5.3.2 Stability of operation 

5.3.2.1 Permissible oscillations in readings and use of damping — Where the construction or 
operation of a pump is such that oscillations of great amplitude are present, measurements may be 
carried out by means of an instrument capable of providing an integration over at least one 
complete cycle of oscillation. The calibration of such an instrument shall comply with the 
provisions of the appropriate clauses. 

5.3.2.2 Restricted damping may be introduced in measuring instruments and their connecting 
lines where necessary to reduce the amplitude of oscillations to within the values given in Table 4* 

TABLE 4 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE AMPLITUDE OF SPECIFICATIONS AS A PERCENTAGE 
OF MEAN VALUE OF QUANTITY BEING MEASURED 

( Clauses 5.3.2.1 and 5.3.2.3.1 ) 

Measured Quantity Maximum Permisslbre Amplitude 

of Oscillations 

Rate of flow "| 

Power J 

Speed of rotation ± 1 

Note 1 — When using a differential pressure device to measure flow rate, the maximum permissible amplitude 
of the oscillations of the observed differential head may be 6 percent. 

Note 2 — In the case of inlet total pressure head and outlet total pressure head measurement, the maximum 
permissible amplitude oscillation is to be calculated individually on the pump total head. 

Where it Is possible that damping will significantly affect the accuracy of the readings, the 
tests shall be repeated using a symmetrical and linear damping device, for example a capillary tube. 

11 



15:10981- 1983 

5.3.2.3 Number of sets of observations 

5.3.2.3.1 Steady conditions — In steady and well controlled test conditions, only one set of 
readings of individual quantities will be recorded for the specified test conditions. This set shall be 
recorded only after the observers have been satisfied that the oscillations have settled down within 
the limits specified in Tables 4 and 5. 

5.3.2.3.2 Unsteady conditions — In such cases where the unsteadiness of test conditions gives 
rise to doubts concerning the accuracy of the tests, the following procedure shall be followed. 

Repeated readings of the measurements shall be made at the guaranteed point, only speed and 
temperature being allowed to be controlled. Throttle valve water level, gland, balance water, 
settings, etc, shall be left completely unaltered. The difference between these repeated readings of 
the same quantities will be a measure of the unsteadiness of the test conditions, which are at least 
partly influenced by the pump under test as well as the installation. 

A minimum of three sets of readings shall be taken at the guaranteed point and the value of 
each separate reading and of the efficiency derived from each set of readings shall be recorded. 
The percentage difference between the largest and smallest values of each quantity shall not be 
greater than that given in Table 5, It will be noted that a wider tolerance is permited if the number 
of readings is increased up to the maximum requirement of nine readings. 

These tolerances are designed to ensure that the errors due to scatter, taken together with the 
systematic error limits given in Tabled, will result in overall measurement errors not greater than 
those given in Table 7. 

TABLE 5 LIMITS OF VARIATION BETWEEN REPEATED MEASUREMENTS OF THE SAME 
QUALITY ( BASED ON 95 PERCENT CONFIDENCE LIMITS ) 

Number of Sets of Maximum Permissible Difference Between Largest and 

Readings Smallest Readings of Each Quantity, Percent 



3 
5 
7 
9 

The arithmetic mean of all the readings for each quantity shall be taken as the actual value 
for the purposes of the test. 

If the values given In Table 5 cannot be reached, the cause shall be ascertained, the 
conditions rectified and a new complete set of readings made, that is, all the readings in the original 
set shall be rejected. No reading(s) in the set of observations may be rejected because it lies 
outside the limits. 

In the case where the excessive variation is not due to procedure or instrumentation errors, 
and cannot therefore be eliminated, the limits of error may be calculated by statistical analysis. 

5.3.3 Speed of rotation during test ( see 4.1 ) — The difference between the specified speed of 
rotation and the test speed of rotation may be expressed as a percentage as follows: 

( dZl!^) X 100 

This shall be within the following limits. 

5.3.3.1 For flow rate and liead — From i|J percent of the specified value. 

5.3.3.2 For pump efficiency — From db 20 percent of the specified value. 

For a combined motor-pump unit, the motor efficiency change between specified and test 
speeds, shall be established at the time of agreeing the contract. 

The lower speeds are also acceptable. The following formula for efficiency correction shall 
be applied: 

(Na^\n 

\ A/i ; 



^ . , . . 

Rate of Flow Head 
Torque Power 


Speed of Rotation 


0-8 


0-25 


1-6 


0-5 


2-2 


0-7 


2-8 


0-9 



1—^1 

1 —fls 

where 

Tf]i = efficiency at actual speed, 



12 



15:10981-1983 

/Jb = efficiency at specified speed, 

Nb = specified speed, 

A/i = actual test speed, and 

n = exponent established by test data, its value of exponent is 0'17. 

5.3.3.3 For ( NP$H ) tests — From ± 20 percent provided that the pump flow rate during the 
test lies within 0-50 and 1*20 of the flow rate corresponding to the maximum efficiency. 

Note — For tests conforming to the requirements of 7.1.1.1, the variation mentioned in 5.3.3.3 may always be 
allowed. For tests conforming to ttie requirements of 7.1.1.2, it maybe allowed for pumps with type numbers less 
than or equal to 2; for pumps with type numbers greater than 2, agreement between the parties concerned is required. 

5.3.4 Control of head — The test conditions may be obtained, among other methods, by throttling 
in either or both the inlet and outlet pipes. When throttling in the inlet pipe is used, due 
consideration shall be given to the possibility of cavitation or of air coming out of the water, which 
might affect the operation of the pump ( see 7.1.2 ) the flow measuring device ( see 6.1.3 ) or both. 

5.4 Accuracy of Measurement — The limits of measurement errors laid down in this standard are 
those which refer to measurements iaken and to quantities calculated therefrom; they apply to the 
maximum permissible discripanciesba tween measured and actual performance ( see 9.4 ). 

For the purpose of this standard, the tolerance on the measurement of a variable is defined 
as twice the standard deviation of this variable. The tolerance shall be calculated and indicated as 
such for any measurement in accordance with this standard. 

When partial errors constituting the tolerance are independent one from the other, are small 
and numerous, and have a gaussian distribution, there is 95 percent probability that the true error is 
less than the tolerance. 

Any device or method which by calibration or comparison has been" demonstrated to be 
capable of measuring with systematic errors not exceeding the limits given in Table 7 may be used. 
The devices or methods shall be agreed upon by both the parties concerned. 

If the recommendations concerning the systematic errors of instruments as given in Table 6 
and those concerning the actual test procedure are followed, it shall be assumed that the overall 
limits of error will not exceed those given below. 



TABLE 6 PERMISSIBLE SYSTEMATIC ERRORS OF MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 

( Clauses 5.3.2.3.2 and 5.4 } 



Measured Quantity 

Rate of flow 

Pump total head -j 

Pump power input ' 

Electrical power input f 

( for overall efFrciency tests ) J 
Speed of rotation 



Permissible Limit, percent 

± 1-5 

± ^•o 

± 0-35 



TABLE 7 MAXIMUM LIMITS OF OVERALL ERROR 

( Clauses 5.3.2.3.2 and 5.4 ) 



Quantity 

Rate of flow 

Pump total head 

Pump power input 

Electrical power input 
( for overall eflficiency tests ) 

Speed of rotation 

Overall efficiency ( computed from 
the rate of flow, total head and 
electrical power ) 

pump efTrciency 



Permissible Limit, percent 

±2-0 

± 1-5 

±0-5 
± 2-5 
± 2-8 



u 



18:10981.1983 

6. Procedure for Measurement of Rate of Flow, Head, Speed of Rotation and Power Input 

6.1 Measurement of Flow Rate 

6.1.1 Weighing tank method — This method is capable only of measuring the mean values of the 
flow rate during the period concerned. 

It is subject to the errors of the weighing, of the time-measuring apparatus employed, of the 
lime taken for the diversion of the flow into and from the weighing tank and those involved in the 
determination of density. 

Note — In the case where two tanks are used alternately during the measuring period, the flow being diverted 
from one to the other, only the times of initial diversion into and final diversion from the measuring system are to 
be taken into account, not the times of the intermediate diversions from tank to tank. 

6.1.2 Volumetric tank method — This method, as in the case of the weighing method, is only 
capable of measuring the mean value of the flow rate during the period concerned. 

In every case a leakage test of the tank shall be carried out and correction made for leakage, 
if necessary. Where possible, initial calibration shall be carried out by weighing a liquid of known 
density into the measuring tank. Outdoor tanks should be adequately sheltered so that the level 
and the level-measuring devices are not disturbed by wind or rain. 

In the case of big outdoor tanks the method is in general subject to errors in measurement of 
levels which are not stationary and which may be non-uniform. In such a case the levels shall be 
simultaneously measured within stilling tubes, at not fewer than four widely-separated positions 
within the tank. 

Water levels may be measured with hook gauges, float gauges, piezometer or other instr uments 
capable of maintaining the required accuracy. 

6.1.3 Orifice plates, venturi tubes and nozzles — The measurement of flow rate may be carried 
out using devices designed and installed in accordance with relevant part of IS : 2952 
' Recommendation for methods of measurement of fluid flow by means of orifice plate and nozzles ' 
for orifice plates and nozzles and relevant part of IS : 4477 ' Method of measurement of fluid flow by 
means of venturimeters ' for venturi tubes. Minimum straight lengths required upstream 
from the pressure difference device, especially, are given in Table 1 of IS : 2952 ( Part 1 )-1964 in the 
case of orifice plates and nozzles and in Table 1 of IS : 4477 ( Part 1 )-1967 in the case of venturi 
tubes. For the purpose of this standard the pump will be considered to cause a flow disturbance 
equivalent to a single 90° bend lying in the same plane as the pump volute or the last stage of a 
multistage pump or the outlet bend of the pump. 

Care shall be taken to ensure that neither cavitation, nor air is present in the flow measuring 
devices. Special care should be taken to ensure that the indications of the device are not affected 
by air coming out of solution at the control valve. The presence of air can usually be detected by 
operating the air vents on the measuring device. 

It shall be possible at any moment to check the equipment for differential pressure 
measurement using liquid column or dead weight manometers. 

BAA Other flow measurement devices — Some other methods, such as electromagnetic 
flowmeters or ultrasounds, etc, may be used only after mutual agreement between the parties 
conerned on the installation conditions and obtainable accuracy. 

6.2 Measurement of Head 
6.2.1 Pump total head 

6.2.1.1 The pump total head is calculated in accordance with the definition given in 3,2.3.8. 
However, in certain cases the pump total head may be measured using one differential pressure 
device. 

This type of installation and the corresponding formulae are given in Fig. 6. 

When this is deemed preferable, the pump total head may be replaced by an expression 
giving the increase in specific energy of the fluid conveyed by the pump ( Y = gH, see 3.2.3.9 ). 

The ' specific energy ' increase is obtained by multiplying both sides of the pump total head 
equation given above by g. 

6.2.1.2 Friction losses at Inlet and outlet — The guarantees under 4.1 refer to the pump inlet 
and outlet flanges, and the pressure measuring points are in general at a distance from these 
flanges ( see 5.2.1 to 5.2.4 and 6.2.2 ). It may be necessary to add to the measured pump total head, 
the head losses due to friction ( Hji and Hjs ) between the measuring points and the pump flanges. 

Such a correction shall be applied only if: 

Hn = Hj2 > 0002 H 

If the pipe between the measuring points and the flanges Is unobstructed, straight, and of 
constant circular cross-section: 

/ v^ 
^'^'D "2^ 

14 



18:10981-1983 



The value of A shall be derived from: 

1 o r r 2-51 , A I 



b 
A pipe roughness 



where Re = - — ( pure number ) 



„ — . .. , ( pure number ) 
D prpe diameter ^ ^ ' 

Appendix C gives guidance on how to check whether a correction need be made, and on how to 
calculate the correction if necessary. 

If the pipe is other than unobstructed, straight, and of constant circular cross-section, the 
correlation to be applied shall be the subject of special agreement in the contract. 

6.2.1.3 Installations In accordance with 5.2.1 — These installations and the corresponding 
formulae are given in Fig. 2 and 3. 

6.2.1.4 Installations in accordance with 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 — Where a pump is tested in 
combination with Fittings forming part of the site or test installation, the provisions of 6.2.1.3 shall 
be applied to the inlet and to the outlet flange of fittings and not to the inlet and outlet of the pump. 

This procedure debits against the pump all head losses caused by fittings on the inlet and 
outlet side. 

During the acceptance test, fhe pump shall be fitted with the pipe arrangements corresponding 
to the final arrangement at site. In this case the friction losses between the section for measuring 
the inlet pressure and the inlet flange as well as between the outlet flange and the section for 
measuring the outlet pressure, shall be determined in accordance with the method mentioned 
In 6.2.1.2 and added to the sum of the differences of positional head, of pressure head and of 
velocity head. 

6.2.1.5 Pumps with inaccessible ends — In the inlet or outlet or both sides of the pump are 
inaccessible, the procedure prescribed below shall be followed in measuring the pump's head. 
Under certain circumstances, friction losses, such as mentioned In 6.2.1.2 and 6.2.1.4, shall be 
taken into account. 

6,2 A.6 Installations In accordance with 5.2.4 and 5.2.6 — The installations and the 
corresponding formulae are given in Fig. 4. 

However, if the pump discharges into a sump with a free surface the outlet total head is 
equal to the positional head of the still surface of the liquid into which the pump delivers plus the 
gauge pressure head. 

The inlet total head is equal to the positional head with respect to the reference plane of the 
st4ll surface of the liquid in which the pump is tested or from which it draws, plus the pressure 
head equivalent to the gauge pressure on that surface. 

This assumption debits against the pump all losses caused by fittings on the inlet and the 
outlet side. 

6.2.1.6.1 Submersible pumps — If the outlet flange of this type is, for practical purposes, 
defined as placed at a certain distance from the pump proper, and is thus preceded by an outlet 
pipe, length and a bend(s) being always parts of the installation, the measurement of outlet head 
shall be made in accordance with 5.2.3. 

6.2.1.6.2 Deep-well pumps — In this case friction losses between the pressure measuring 
points and the inlet or outlet flanges, respectively, that may have to be taken into account, shall be 
determined in accordance with the method given in 6.2.1.2 and Appendix C. 

Friction losses at the inlet are primarily caused by resistance to flow within the inlet strainer, 
the foot valve, and the inlet pipe. All of these head losses shall as far as possible be indicated in 
the contract by the pump manufacturer if he supplies such accessories, or by the purchaser, if they 
are fitted by the latter. Should it prove impossible to submit such data, the purchaser and the 
manufacturer, prior to the acceptance test, shall arrive at an agreement concerning the flow resis- 
tance data to be applied. 

Friction losses at outlet result from resistance to flow within the column-pipe and the outlet 
bend. 

Since deep-well pumps in general are not tested with the entire stand pipe attached, unless 
the acceptance test is performed at site, the pipe friction losses in regard to the pump total head 
shall be estimated and declared by the manufacturer to his purchaser. 

Should it be considered necessary to verify the data Indicated by an acceptance test at site, 
such a test shall be specified in the supply contract. 

For tests on installations conforming to the requirements of 5.2.3(a), 5.2.4 and 5.2.5, the 
guarantees also apply to fittings. 

15 



15:10981-1983 



Tube containing air 



^ Tube containing 
"*^ pumped liquid 

^^ Tube containing 
manometric liquid 



Pa ^9 



AIR VENT 



2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
( SEE 6.2.2 ) 



2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
( SEE 6.2.2 ) 



AIR VENT 




POSITION OF REFERENCE PLANE 



POSSIBLE RESIDUE 
OF PUMPED LIQUID Pi 



a) The pump inlet is under vacuum 



H,=^(z,^-z,^,)+^^+(z,,-z,;,) 



2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
(SEE 6.2.2) 




Pm 






POSITION OF 
REFERENCE PLANE 



b) The pump inlet Is under pressure The drawings show the principles but not full technical details. 

FIG. 2 TEST OF A CENTRIFUGAL PUMP BY MEANS OF LIQUID COLUMN GAUGES 

16 



IS:10d81*1983 



REFERENCE PLANE OF 
THE MANOMETER 



ATMOSPHERIC 



Tube containing 
pumped liquid 

Tube containing air 



\ 



a) Arrangement for determint'ng reference 
plane of Bourdon type gauge 



P29 ■^ 



AIR VENT 



2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
( SEE 6.2.2 ) 



PRESSURE READING P2 



GAUGE 



REFERENCE 

;f PLANE 



2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
( SEE 6.2.2 ) 



PRESSURE READING P^ 



AIR VENT 




POSITION OF REFERENCE PLANE 



> 






b) The pump inlet is under vacuum 



PRESSURE READING Pi >0 



2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
I SEE 6.2.2 ) 




c) The pump inlet Is under pressure The drawings show the principles but not full technical details 

FIG. 3 TEST OF A CENTRIFUGAL PUMP BY MEANS OF BOURDON GAUGES 

17 



15:10981-1983 



Hi 



H,^ 



H = 



Pa 
Paflf 



Pi 



+ z. + ^ 



P.9 +^^-=+^ 



/re. 



PRESSURE 
ADING ?2 



PRESSURE 
READING P2 



"7777777? 



r 



:tXJ= 



7777777777. 



w- 



II 



/hi:/' 



J 

I/^ REFERENCE PLANE 

-7: 




The drawings show the princip 
FIG. 4 MEASUREMENT OF PUMP TOTAL HEAD 



les but not full technical details. 

H FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF SUBMERGED PUMPS 



6.2.2 Pressure tappings — Four static pressure tappings are to be provided symmetrically 
disposed around the circumference of the inlet and of the outlet pipes. These tappings shall be 
located at a distance of 2 pipe diameters upstream of the pump inlet flange when the length of this 
pipe allows it and at a distance of 2 pipe diameters downstream of the pump outlet flange. When 
the distance of 2 pipe diameters upstream cannot be reached ( for example, In the case of a rather 
short inlet bellmouth ) the available straight length shall be divided so as to take the best possible 
advantage of the local conditions between the upstream and downstream parts of the measuring 
section. 

The pressure tappings shall be connected through shut-off cocl<s to a ring manifold 
of cross-sectional area not less than the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the tappings, so that 
the pressure from any tapping may be measured if required. Before malting observations, the 
pressure with each individual tapping successively open, shall be taken at the normal test 
condition of the pump. If one of the readings shows a difference of more than 0'5 percent of the 
total head with respect to the arithmetical mean of the four measurements, or if it shows a devia- 
tion of more than once the velocity head in the measuring section, the cause of this spread shall 
be ascertained and the measuring conditions rectified before the proper test is started. 

Note — When the same pressure tappings are used for A^PSW measurements, this deviation shall not exceed 
1 percent of the NPSH value or once the dynamic head. 

The inlet head shall be determined from the pressure head measured at the ring manifold, the 
positional head of the point of measurement and the velocity head calculated as though there were 
uniform velocity in the inlet pipe. Appendix D covers corrections required if swirl exists. 

The outlet head shall be determined from the pressure head measured at the ring manifold, 
the positional head of the point of measurement and the dynamic head calculated as though there 
were uniform velocity in the outlet pipe. 

Possible errors of measurement of energy at discharge are caused by swirl and/or variations 
of local velocity distribution. 



18 



IS : 10981 -1983 

Figures 2 to 6 show the application of U-tube and Bourdon type manometers to measure the 
pressure head plus positional head. Where single-leg manometers, Bourdon or pressure 
transducers are used, an allowance for the difference in altitude between the manometer reference 
plane and the mean height of the pressure tappings shall be added to the pressure head as read. 

Static pressure tappings shall comply with the requirements shown In Fig- 5 and shall be free 
from burrs and irregularities and flush with, and normal to, the inner wall of the pipe. 



THICK WALL 




THIN WALL 




I ^ 2d where rf = 2 to 6 mm or — „ pipe diameter whichever value is less. 

10 

FIG. 5 REQUIREMENTS FOR STATIC HEAD TAPPING 





H = A W + 



vi -V 



2g 



Pi 



25 



This equation is valid for pi= 
Pj, which may be assumed for 
Class C tests. 



FIG. 6 DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF PUMP TOTAL HEAD 

The diameter of the pressure tappings shall be between 2 and 6 mm or equal to one-tenth of 
the pipe diameter, whichever Is the less. The length of a pressure tapping hole shall not be less 
than two and a half times its diameter. 

The bore of the pipe containing the tappings shall be clean, smooth and resistant to chemical 
reaction with the liquid being pumped. Any coating such as paint applied to the bore shall remain 
Intact. If the pipe is welded longitudinally, the tapping hole shall be displaced as far as possible 
from the weld. 

Pipes connecting pressure tappings to possible damping devices ( see 5.3.2.1 and 5.3.2.2 ) 
and to instruments shall be at least equal in bore to the bore of the pressure tappings. The system 
shall be free from leaks. It is recommended that transparent tubing be used so as to allow 
determination of the amount of water or air in the tubing. 

6.2.3 Instruments for pressure measurement 

6.2.3.1 Liquid column manometers — No calibration is required. 
The minimum distance between two scale graduations shall be 1 mm. 



19 



IS: 10981 -1983 

If possible, the use of differential liquid columns less than 50 mm high shall be avoided. If 
this is impossible attention shall be specially drawn to errors of measurement. 

The length of the liquid column may be modified by using one manometric liquid In place of 
another or by an inclined manometer. 

For readings below 100 mm of liquid column, the bore of manometer tubes shall be 6 mm at 
least for mercury and 10 mm for water and other liquids. 

The cleanliness of the liquid in the manometer shall be maintained to avoid errors due to 
variation of surface tension. 

The design of the manometers shall be such that parallax errors are minimized. 

Water column manometers maybe either open ended ( for low pressure measurement only) 
or closed with the air in the column connecting both limbs compressed to the amount required to 
permit the differential head to be read on the scales. 

The use of the liquid column manometer is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2 and 6 to which 
reference shall be made. 

Connections between the pipes where pressure is measured and the manometer shall be made 
as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2. 

It is essential that there is no break in continuity ( for example, by air pockets through failure 
to vent properly ) of the water between the pipe and the reading surface in the manometer. 

6.2.3.2 Weight manometers — For pressures exceeding the possibilities Of the liquid column 
manometer, weight or piston manometer is of practical utility whether in its simple or differential 
form. 

The effective diameter de of the simple type manometer can be taken equal to the arithmetic 
mean of the pistion diameter dj,, measured directly, and of the cylinder diameter dc; it can then be 
used for calculating pressures without further calibration if the following condition is satisfied 
before testing: 

^< 0-1 percent 

Friction between the piston and cylinder may practically be made zero by adjusting rotational 
movement of the piston to a speed at least equal to 30 rev/min. 

It is desirable to check the weight manometer by comparison with a liquid column manometer 
to determine the effective piston diameter in a pressure range to be as wide as possible. 

Similar principles apply to the differential type weight manometer. For the meansurement of 
variable pressures it can be profitable to use a weight manometer mounted in series with a liquid 
column manometer or a special weight manometer in corporating a liquid column manometer. 

6.2.3.3 Bourdon dial gauges — When this type of gauge is used for inlet and outlet pressure 
measurements to ascertain pump total head, it is recommended that the difference between two 
consecutive scale graduations be within 15 and 3 mm for both measurements, and that this 
difference corresponds to not more than 5 percent of the pump total head. The calibration of these 
measuring devices shall be checked for each test. 

6.2.3.4 Other types of manometer — Other types of manometer may be used provided the 
specifications given in 6.1.3, are met with. 

6.3 Measurement of the Speed of Rotation — The speed of rotation shall be measured by counting 
revolutions for a measured interval of time, by a direct indicating tachometer, a dynamo or a 
tachometric alternator, an optical counting and a frequency meter, or in the case of a pump driven 
by an ac motor, from observations of the mean frequency and motor slip data either directly 
measured ( for example, using a stroboscope ) or supplied by the motor manufacturer. 

Where the speed of rotation cannot be directly measured ( for example, immersed pump ), it is 
usually sufficient to check the frequency and voltage. 

%A Measurement of Pump Power Input — The, pump power input shall be derived from 
measurement of the speed of rotation and torque, or determined from measurements of the 
electrical power input to an electric motor of known efficiency, directly coupled to the pump. 

6.4.1 Measurement of torque — Torque shall be measured by a suitable dynamometeror a torque 
meter, capable of complying with the requirements of 5.4. 

20 



15:10981-1983 

6.4.2 Electric power measurements — Where the electrical power input to an electric motor 
coupled directly to the pump is used as a means of determining the pump power input, the 
■following conditions shall be observed: 

a) the motor shall be operated only at conditions where the efficiency is known with sufficient 
accuracy; and - 

b) motor efficiency shall be determined in accordance with the recommendations of 
IS : 4889-1968 ' Methods of determination of efficiency of rotating electrical machines'. 

The electric power input to the ac driving motor shall be measured by either the two-wattmeter 
or the three- wattmeter method. This allows using either single-phase wattmeters or a wattmeter 
measuring two or three phases simultaneously or integrating watt-hour-meters. 

In the case of a dc motor, either a wattmeter, or an ammeter and a voltmeter may be used. 

The type and grade of accuracy of the indicating instruments for measuring electrical power 
shall be in accordance with IS : 1248-1968 ' Specification for direct cutting electrical indicating instru- 
ments ( first revision ) '. 

Where the power input to an electric motor coupled to an intermediate gear, or the speed of 
rotation and torque measured by a dynamometer between gear and motor are used as a means for 
determining the pump power input, it shall be stated in the contract in what way the losses of the 
gear shall be determined. 

6.4.3 Pumps with inaccessible ends — In the case of combined motor-pump units (for example, 
submersible pumps or monoset pump, or separate pump and motor with overall efficiency guarantee ), 
the power of the machine unit shall be measured at the motor terminals if accessible. When a 
submersible pump Is involved, the measurement shall be effected at the Incoming end of the cables; 
cable losses shall be taken Into account and specified in the contract. The efficiency given shall 
be that of the combined unit proper, excluding the cable and the starter losses, 

6.4.4 Deep-well pumps — In this case the power absorbed by the thrust bearing and the vertical 
shafting and bearings shall be taken into account. 

Since deep-well pumps in general are not tested with the entire stand pipe attached, unless 
the acceptance test is performed at site, the thrust and vertical shaft bearing losses in regard to 
power and efficiency shall be estimated and stated by the manufacturer to his purchaser. 

6.5 Measurement of Pumping Unit Overall Efficiency — To determine the efficiency of a pumping 
unit, only the power Input and output are measured, with the driver working under conditions 
specified in the contract. In this test, the proportion of losses between driving agent and pump is 
not established, nor any losses associated with intermediate machinery, such as gear box or variable 
speed device. 

7. Cavitation Testing 

7.1 General — When the contract specifies a guaranteed NPSH, a test may be conducted to verify 
that the NPSH required by the pump is equal to or less than the guaranteed NPSH. 

In no case shall the cavitation tests be used to check that the pump will be free from cavitation 
erosion during its service life. 

7.1.1 Test types — There are two distinct possible types of cavitation test: 

a) A check may be made simiply to show that the pump is sufficiently free of cavitation at the 
specified duty and NPSH. This type of test is described In 7.1.1.1. 

b) In the other type, cavitation performance Is explored more fully by reducing NPSH until 
measurable effects are noted. This type of test is described in 7.1.1.2. 

7.1.1.1 A test at the specified flow rate and NPSH — This test may be made simply to show that 
the pump is sufficiently free of cavitation at the specified duty and NPSH. 

The pump meets the requirement to be free of the effects of cavitation if another test at a 
higher NPSH gives the same total head at the same rate of flow. 

7.iA.2 During the cavitation test NPSH carried according to 3.2.3.12 — A safety margin 
previously agreed will be added to the cavitation test NPSH. The pump meets the requirement if 
the NPSH resulting from the addition of the cavitation test NPSH, and the agreed safety margin is 
equal or less than the required NPSH. From this test the behaviour of the pump at various 
departures from the specified NPSH may be judged. When negotiating the safety margin, account 

21 



18:10981-1983 

shall be taken of the type of pump, of the number of stages, of the physical properties of the liquid 
to be pumped and of materials of construction and the operating conditions to be expected. 

7.1 .2 Methods of varying the NPSH 

7.1.2.1 The pump is installed In a closed pipe loop ( Fig. 7 ) In which the pressure level or, by 
an alteration of temperatures, the vapour pressure may be varied without changing the pump head 
or rate of flow until cavitation occurs in the pump. 

Cavitation in outlet and inlet regulating valves may make this test more difficult and special 
valves may be required. 

Arrangements for cooling or heating the liquid in the loop may be needed in order to maintain 
the required temperature, and a gas separation tank may also be required. The tank shall be of 
sufficient size and so designed as to prevent the entrainment of gas in the pump inlet flow. 



TO VACUUM OR 
PRESSURE CONTROL 



COOLING OR 
HEATING COIL 




SPRAY NOZZLE FOR 
DE-AERATING WATER 



FLOWMETER 




THE SETTLING TANK MAY 
NOT BE NEEDED IF AIR 
CONTENT OF WATER IS 
CONTROLLABLE 



iC 



THROTTLE VALVE 

STILLING SCREENS MAYBE 
NEEDED r V>0.25m/5 



PUMP UNDER TEST MAY BE PUT IN 
SYPHON IF (NPSH) < W IS NEEDED 



3J 



Note — Cooling by means of a coll may be replaced by an injection of cool water above the liquid free surface 
and an extraction of heated water. 

The drawing shows the principle but no full technical details. 

FIG. 7 CAVITATION TESTS — VARIATION OF ( NPSH ) BY MEANS OF A CLOSED LOOP 



De-aeration of water used for a cavitation test is necessary if the pump is to be used ir> 
practice with de-aerated water. 

Stilling screens may be needed if '^ > 025 m/s, where A Is the cross-sectional area of the 
tank. 

7.1.2.2 The pump draws liquid from a sump in which the level of the free liquid surface may 
be adjusted through a pipe showing no cross-sectional restriction ( Fig. 8 ). 



22 



18:10981 -1983 



c 



7^777 



/ 



/ — 



I "-A TQ THROTTLE 

^+y VALVE AND 



"^ziiz-y 



FLOWMETER 

77777 

1 V. V«ATER LEVEL 






/ 



ADJUSTABLE 



/ 



77777777/. 

The drawing shows the principle but no full technical details. 
FIG. 8 CAVITATION TESTS — VARIATION OF (;NPSH ) BY CONTROL OF LIQUID LEVEL AT INLET 



7.1.2.3 The pressure of the liquid entering the pump is adjusted by means of a throttle valve 
installed In the inlet pipe at the lowest practical level ( Fig. 9 ). 

The cavitation induced by the throttle valve can sometimes be avoided by using two or more 
throttle valves mounted In series or by directly discharging the throttle valve into a closed vessel, 
or a large diameter pipe interposed between the throttle and the pump inlet. Baffles and a means 
for extracting air from such a vessel may be needed, especially when the NPSH is low. 



L 



w 



1 



'A^ 



i 



9 



^--%^--/. 



r 






■/z-zzzzzzrJ/ 
vtzttttttttV/ 



The drawing show the principles but not full technical details. 
FIG. 9 CAVITATION TESTS — VARIATION OF ( NPSH ) BY MEANS OF A THROTTLE VALVE AT INLET 

When the throttle valve is to be partially closed and it is situated at a distance less than 12 
inlet diameters from the pump inlet flange, it is necessary to make sure that the pipe is full of 
liquid at the position of the inlet pressure tappings. 

7.2 Determination of NPSH Required by tfie Pump — Tests described in 7.1.1.2 can be conducted 
by any of the methods indicated in Fig. 7 to 9. it is possible to vary two control parameters and 
thus keep flow rate constant during a test, but this is a usually more difficult (see aiso Fig. 10). 

7.3 Limits of Error in Determination of ( NPSH ) — The maximum limits of error concerning NPSH 
measurements shall be assumed to be 3*0 percent of the measured NPSH, or O'lS m, whichever 
is greater, provided that the measurements are made with a liquid column manometer. 



23 



Type of 
Installation 



Independent 
variable 



Constant 



Quantities the 
variation of 
which is de- 
pendent on 
control 



Open Sump 



Inlet throttle 
valve 



Outlet 

throttle 

valve 



Head, flow 
rate, NPSH, 
water level 






Head charact- 
eristic curves 
various flow rate 
and NPSH 



NPSH Charact- 
eristic curve 
various flow 
rate 



Open Sump 



Water level 



Inlet and 
outlet 
throttle 
valves 



Head flow 
rate. NPSH 



Closed 
Loop 



Reference 
pressure 



Closed 

Sump or 

Loop 



Temperature 
( vapour 
pressure ) 



Inlet and outlet 
throttle valves 



Head, flow ]after onset 
rate. NPSH \ of 

J cavitation 




(NPSH) 7,1.1.2 



Q..i q ■ q 



Open Sump 



Outlet throttle valve 



Inlet throttle valve 



Head, flow rate, NPSH, water 
level 



nOt^lH/lOO 




--Pi 



(NPSH) 7.1.1.2 



flv. q.j q. 



-^«J« 



Open Sump 



Inlet throttle 
valve 



Flow rate 



Outlet 
throttle 
valve ( for 
constant 
flow rate ), 
head, NPSH 



Closed Loop Open Sump 



Pressure in 
the tank 



Flow rate 



Head NPSH, 
outlet throttle 
valve ( for 
constant flow 
rate, when 
head begins 
to drop ) 



Water level 



Flow rate 



NPSH, 
head, outlet 
throttle 
valve 



Closed Loop 



Temperature 
( vapour 
pressure ) 



Flow rate 



NPSH, head, 
outlet throttle 
valve (for 
constant flow 
rate, when 
head begins 
to drop ) 



(3* 7.) H^/ 100 



q = COMSt 



f)Hj/lOO 



Tpi^ 



q,j = CONST =- q,i 



/! p(3*^)H, 



2.- Ik/100 
q, „ = CONST > q,j 



(NPSH) 7.1.1.2 



NPSH) 
MEASURED 




*q. 



Fie, 10 METHODS OF DETERMINING REQUIRED {NPSH) for AH/W=(3+x )% 



18:10981-1983 

The case of tests with liquids at high temperature or near their critical points shall be studied 
with special care in the contract. 

7.4 Measurement of Pump Head, Outlet Flow Rate, Speed of Rotation, Power Input ( if Necessary ) 
and Vapour Pressure — The requirements of 6 regarding the measurement of head, outlet rate of 
flow, speed of rotation and power Input shall also apply during cavitation tests. If the test 
conditions are so unsteady as to require repeated readings, variations oi NPSH are permitted up 
to a maximum of 1*5 times the values given for head in Table 5, or 0*15 m, whichever is greater. 

Particular care is needed to ensure that in the flow measurement cavitation dose not affect the 
accuracy of the flowmeter. It is also necessary to take care to avoid the Ingress of air through 
joints and glands. 

The vapour pressure of the test liquid entering the pump shall be determined with sufficient 
accuracy to comply with 7.3. When the vapour pressure is derived from standard data and the 
measurement of the temperature of the liquid entering the pump, the necessary accuracy of 
temperature measurement may have to be demonstrated. 

The active element of a temperature-measuring probe shall be not less than one-eighth of the 
inlet pipe diameter from the wall of the inlet pipe. If the immersion of the temperature measuring 
element In the inlet flow is less than that required by the instrument manufacturer, then a 
calibration at that Immersion depth may be required. 

Care shall be taken to ensure that temperature measuring probes inserted into the pump inlet 
pipe do not influence the measurements of inlet pressure. 

8. Tests on Pumps for Liquids other than Clean Cold Water — The performance of a pump may 
vary substantially with the nature of the liquid being pumped. Although it is not possible to give 
general rules whereby performance with clean cold water can be used to predict performance on 
another liquid, it is often desirable for the parts to agree on empirical rules to suit the particular 
circumstances and test the pump with clean cold water. 

8.1 Characteristics of Clean Cold Water' — The characteristics of the water corresponding to what 
is called in this standard ' clean cold water ' shall be within the limits indicatcD d in Table 8. 

TABLE 8 SPECIFICATION OF ' CLEAN COLD WATER ' 

Temperature Characteristic Max 

Temperature 40°C 

Kinematic viscosity 1*75 x 10-6 m2/s 

Mass density 1 050 kg/m3 

Non-absorbent free solid content 2'5 kg/m^ 

Dissolved solid content 50 kg/m^ 

The total dissolved and free gas content of the water shall not exceed the situation volume 
corresponding: 

a) to the pressure and temperature in the pump sump for an open circuit, and 

b) to those existing in the tank for a closed loop. 

8.2 Characteristics of Liquids for which Clean Cold Water Tests are Acceptable — Pumps for liquids 
other than clean cold water may be tested for head, flow rate and efflciency, with clean cold water*, 
if the liquid is within the specifications In Table 9. 

TABLES CHARACTERISTICS OF LIQUIDS 

Characteristics of Liquids 

Kinematic viscosity 10 x 10-«m*/s, Max 

Mass density 450 to 2 000 kg/m^ 

Non-absorbent free solid content 5*0 kg/ms, Mw 



•The usual NPSH ctirves of pump mantifacturers are established using clean cold water and the required NPSH 
values are always given for clean cold water. 

25 



18:10981 -1983 

The total dissolved and free gas content of the liquid shall not exceed the saturation volume 
corresponding: 

a) to the pressure and temperature In the pump sump for an open circuit, and 

b) to those existing in the tank for a closed loop. 

Tests on pumps for liquids other than those specified above shall be subject to special 
agreement. 

In the absence of a special agreement cavitation tests shall be carried out with clean cold 
water. Attention is drawn to the fact that the results may be affected by this procedure when the 
liquid to be pumped is not clean cold water. 

9. Analysis of Tests 

9.1 Test Data Required for the Analysis — The quantities required to verify the characteristics 
guaranteed by the manufacturer are given in 4.1. 

Methods for measuring these quantities are given in 6. 

9.2 Translation of the Test Results to the Guarantee Basis — Such translation serves to determine 
whether the guarantee would have been fulfilled if the tests had been concluded under the same 
conditions as those on which the guarantee is based. 

9.2.1 Translation of the test results into data based on the specified speed of rotation of frequency — 
All test data obtained at the speed of rotation, in deviation from the specified speed of rotation /jgp. 
do not exceed the permissible variations stated in 5.3.3, the measured data on the discharged flow 
rate q^ the total head H, the power input P, the net positive suction head NPSH and the efficiency 
>) can be translated as follows: 

<7vo ■= q 






NPSHo = NPSH 



M 



no = n 

If the deviations in speed of rotation from the specified speed of rotation Osp exceed the per- 
missible variations stated in 5.3.3 it will be necessary to stipulate the formula for translating the- 
test results to the basis of the specified speed of rotation. 

In the case of combined motor-pump units or where the guarantees are with respect to an 
agreed frequency and voltage instead of an agreed frequency and voltage instead of an agreed 
speed ( see 4.1 ), the flow rate, pump total head, power input, and efficiency data are subject to the 
above-mentioned translation laws, provided that ^sp is replaced by the frequency fsp and n by the 
frequency f. Such translation, however, shall be restricted to the cases where the frequency during 
the acceptance test varies by no more than 1 percent from the frequency prescribed for the charac- 
teristics under guarantee. If the voltage used in the acceptance test is no more than 5 percent 
above or below the voltage on which the guaranteed characteristics are based, the other operational 
data require no change. 

If the above-mentioned tolerances, that is 1 percent for frequency and 5 percent for voltage, are- 
exceeded, it will be necessary for the purchaser and the manufacturer to arrive at an agreement. 

9.2.2 Tests made with NPSH different from that guaranteed — Pump performance at a high NPSI-f 
cannot be accepted ( after correction for speed of rotation within the permitted limits of 5.3.3.2 ) to 
indicate performance at a lower NPSH. 

Pump performance at a low NPSH can be accepted after correction for speed of rotation withir* 
the permitted limits of 5.3.3.2, to indicate performance at a higher NPSH provided that the absence 
of cavitation has been checked in accordance with 7.1.1.1. 

9.3 Measuring Inaccuracies — Every measurement is inevitably subject to inaccuracies, even if the 
measuring procedure and the instruments used, as well as the analysis directives, fully comply with 
prevailing acceptance rulies. When comparing the test results with the guaranteed characteristics^ 
these inaccuracies shall be given adequate consideration. The fact should be stressed that the- 
term 'measuring inaccuracies' merely covers the errors that are unavoidable with all measure- 
ments; they refer in no way to the pump and the guaranteed characteristics. The maximum permi- 
ssible limits of overall error for the quantities used in Class B measurements are defined In Table 7. 

26 



IS: 1G981-1983 



9.4 Verification of Guarantee 

9.4.1 Curves qr H and q^ri — The guarantee points qvHo and (7vgv)g are plotted on a graph and a 
continuous curve is then drawn through the measured points qyH and another through the points 
qy-fl of which q^ is measured and v) is calculated ( Fig. 11 ). 

If the test is made at a value of speed that is different from that specified as relevant to the 
particular guaranteed values, the test values shall be corrected to the specified speed of rotation in 
accordance with 9.2.1. Similarly, if the test is made at a value of frequency different from that rele- 
vant to the particular guaranteed values, the tests shall be corrected to the specified frequency. 

Tolerances ± Xt/v and Xh shall be applied to the guaranteed duty point <7vgA/o. These toleran- 
ces include the maximum permissible limits of overall error e^v and eH ( see Table 7) and the 
constructional tolerances. 

In the absence of a specific agreement as to the values to be used, the following values may 
be taken: 

Xqv = dz 0-04 
Xh = ± 0-02 

If the guaranteed point lies at a vertical distance ± AH and a horizontal distance ± Aqv 
from the test curve ( see Fig. 11 ), the following shall be evaluated: 



mhi"^)' 



If the amount is greater than or equal to 1 the guarantee condition will be deemed to have 
been met; but if the total amount is less than 1, the guarantee condition has not been achieved. 

Note — This quantity expresses the fact that there is at least one point of the test curve within an ellipse of 
which the eentre is the guaranteed duty point and the semi-axes the limiting errors: 

' qxQXqv' and 'HqX H' 

This, however, does not allow to checit that a given flow rate qv is obtained for the guaranteed head Hq nor that 
algiven head H is obtained for the guaranteed flow rate qva- 

It should actually be noted that checking this relationship does not necessarily Imply that: 

a) for the guaranteed flow rate qvai a head H is obtained such that: 

Wo — WqXh < H<Z Ha + WgXh 

b) for the guaranteed head Wo a flow rate ^t is obtained such that: 

<7vo — Qva X Qv <9t< qva + qra X qry 



GUARANTEED DUTY 



1/ 



POINT q^^H,. 



PO'NT qvo'^c 



MEASURED 




FIG. 11 CURVE Qfv H FOR VERIFICATION OF GUARANTEE 
27 



18:10981-1983 

9.4.2 Efficiency — The guaranteed efficiency shall be checked for the duty point as defined by th© 
point of intersection of curve gv^/ with a straight line passing through the guaranteed duty point 
qyaHo and the zero of q^H axes. The efficiency at this point shall be read on the qrvv) curve versus 
the corresponding abscissa. 

The efficiency at the point of intersection shall be of at least 0'972 of that specified. 

For combined motor-pump units this value is 0"975. 

These values take into account the measuring errors ( see Table 7 ). 

9.4.3 Pt/mp power /npt/i — The pump power input within the range qya^tfn Ha±tn defined 
in 9.4.1, shall not exceed that agreed between the manufacturer and purchaser at the time of contract. 
This value applies to the conditions of use of the pump as specified in the contract. 

Such an arrangement may have to take into account different transmission losses and different 
gland and seal torques between works test and site operation. 

9.5 Test Report — After actual scrutiny, the test results shall be summarized in a report, that is 
signed by the chief of tests alone; or, together, by him and representatives of the manufacturer and 
of the purchaser. 

All parties to the contract shall receive a copy of the report as an essential condition for the 
completion of the contract. 

The test report should contain the following information: 

a) Place and date of acceptance test; 

b) Manufacturer's name, type of pump, serial number, and possibly year of construction; 

c) Guaranteed characteristics and operational conditions during the acceptance test; 

d) Specification of the pump's drive; 

e) Description of the test procedure and the measuring apparatus used including calibration 
data; 

f) Observed readings; 

g) Evaluation and analysis of test results; and 
h) Conclusions: 

1) comparison of the test results with the guarantees; 

2) determination whether the guarantees covering certain specific areas were completely or 
only partly fulfilled or not fulfilled at all; 

3) recommendation whether the pump can be accepted or should be rejected and under 
what conditions; and 

Note — If the guarantees are not fully satisfied the final decision whether the pump can be accepted 
or not Is up to the purchaser. 

4) statements arising out of action taken in connection with any special agreements that 
were made. 

The pump test sheet 'SI' conversion factors and check list pro forma are given in Appendices E, 
F and G respectively. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 5.2 ) 

PUMPING INSTALLATION UNDER NON-STANDARD CONDITIONS 

A-1. Where it is impracticable to test a pump in accordance with the standard test conditions 
specified In 5.2, or where alternatively it is required to ascertain the performance of a pump, not 
under standard conditions, but under the conditions in which it will work when installed, or where 
it is desired to test the performance of a pumping installation including items other than the pump 
itself, then the following decisions shall be made and recorded with the test results: 

a) The precise range of the items to be included in the installation to be tested. 

Note — Where auxiliary plant is involved, whether the consumption of each individual item is or is not 
to be debited to the installation. 

28 



18:10981-1983 

b) The exact positions in the proposed layout at which inlet head and outlet head ( or their 
difference ) are to be measured. 

c) The point in the circuit, the flow past which is to be credited to the installation. 

d) The nature of the supply of energy ( for example, mechanical, electric, fuel, steam, 
hydraulic or pneumatic ). 

e) The position, or positions, at which the supply of energy is to be measured. 

f) The method as laid down in the foregoing specification which is to be used for hydraulic 
measurements; the method as laid down in other relevant Indian Standards to be used for 
measurement of power, fuel, etc, both quantitative and, where necessary, qualitative; the 
method of measurement to be used where no Indian Standard exists. 

g) The extent to which the conditions pertaining during the tests may vary from the specified 
conditions. 

h) Where lubricating oil or other consumable stores are to be taken into consideration, the 
methods of measurement to be used for these. 

j) The proposed date(s), usually referred to the date of installation, of the tests, their dura- 
tion and the frequency with which readings are to be taken. 



APPENDIX B 

{Clause 5,3.1 ) 

COSTS AND REPETITION OF TESTS 

B-0. Matters of a purely commercial nature, such as the cost of the tests are not included in the 
scope of this Indian Standard and shall be made the subject of special agreements between the 
parties concerned. 

B-1. Costs of Acceptance Tests and Special Tests — It is recommended that the costs of 
acceptance tests and special tests be clearly stated in the contract. 

B-2. Repetition of Tests — In case of doubt as to the correctness or adequate accuracy of the 
measurement data obtained, both the manufacturer and the purchaser are entitled to demand that 
the test be repeated. Should the new measurement fail to justify the doubts expressed, the party 
demanding the renewed test shall assume the cost of repetition. 



APPENDIX C 

{Clauses 6.2.1.2 and 6.2.1.6.2) 

FRICTION LOSSES 

C*1. The formula given in 6.2.1.2 for calculating head loss due to friction involves a lengthy 
calculation, which would lead only in many cases to the conclusion that a correction need not be 
applied. 

C-2. The chart in Fig. 12 may be used as a preliminary check as to whether a calculation needs to 
be made. It applies to straight steel pipes of constant circular cross-section, handling cold water. 
Outlet and inlet pipes are assumed of equal diameter, and measuring points 2 diameters upstream 
and downstream of the inlet and outlet flanges respectively. 

C-3. If the pipes are of different diameters, the diameter of the smaller pipe should be used. Then 
if ' no correction ' is indicated, the calculation need not be made. 

C-3.1 If ' correction ' is indicated. Fig. 13, which applies only to steel pipes handling cold water, 
may be used to determine the value of A. 

29 



IS: 10981 -1983 



220 



200 



180 



160 



g UO 

Z) 



< 

UJ 

X 

-J 

< 

I— 

o 

I- 

a 

ID 



120 



100 



80 



60 



40 



40 





























































1 








































1 




















1 1 


















/ 




















/ 


/ 


















/ / 


iIl 








NO C( 


DRRECTI 


DN REQL 


IIRED 


1 


' 1 


///// 
















J 




///a 
















/ J 




///// 
















// 




'^/// 
















//// 




V 
















/M 


w 














} 




WA 


V 














/ 


M. 


W 














/ 


^M 


w 


^ 
















Am 


Wy 


CORRECTION R 


EQUIRED 










y^ 


w 
















/4 


^r 


y 














^ 


w 
















^ 


^ 

















SO 



100 



ISO 



200 

250 
300 

350 
^00 

500 

600 

750 

1000 



£ 

LU 

H- 

< 
o 

LU 
Q. 

CL 



1 



4 5 6 

VELOCITY (m/s) 



8 



10 



FIG. 12 CHART SHOWING VELOCITIES ABOVE WHICH LOSS CORRECTIONS ARE REQUIRED 

30 



18:10981-1983 



o 

»- 
o 
< 

z 
o 

»- 
o 

a. 













































0.024 














































I 




































0-023 






\ 








































N 


V 


































0.022 








\ 


"^i. 








































V 


X 






























0.021 
















"^ 


^ 
















































— 
















0.020 






V 






























'*"~ 


"■*■ 






\ 




































0.019 








\ 






































L 




x 


v^ 






























0.018 






\ 






V, 


^ 


^ 






























N 


\, 










"^ 




■— 




















0.017 






V 


s 


S 




























— 


— 






N 

\. — 


V 




"^ 


■^ 




























0.016 






N 


N 


X 








■^ 




-^ 
























K 


\ 




■^ 


-««^ 


.^_^ 
























— — 


0.015 






^ 


\, 


^ 


*^ 






""^ 




— 




i«^ 






















N^ 


N 


•^ 


N*. 




■^ 


-- 




-__ 




- 












"~~" 


"^ 


o.ou 






^ 


s^ 








■--, 





















— 


— 






^ 


\^ 


< 


h~ — 




" ' 


■*- 




— , 




























0.013 






\^ 


s 


^ 


"^ 




— 







— 




— 












~~" 


— 








^ 


Ss 


^ 


^^ 




"^ 


--^ 




IZ; 




■ — 












- 


,„___ 


0.012 






\ 


:^ 


i^ 


^ 




^■ 


^ 




— 
















-— 


— ■ 














i;::;^ 




I);;^ 


— 









^__^ 












~— 


— 


















^ 


— 




— 




— 








^^■1 


"*** 


0.011 








"~ 


"^™* 










































— 


0.010 











































50 



100 



150 



200 

250 
300 
350 
400 
450 
500 

625 
750 
875 
1000 



E 
£ 

q: 
< 

Q 

Ml 

a 



4 5 6 7 

VELOCITY (m/s) 



10 



Surface roughness ( AC )== 5-186 x 10-Bm 
Kinematic viscosity ( V) = 1*022 x 10-*m/s 

FIG. 13 FRICTION FACTOR CHART 



31 



15:10981 -1983 

C-4. \n cases where pipes are of other material, or the liquid is not cold water the graph by Moody 
given in Fig 14 may be used, or the formula for A given In 6.2.1.2 may, if preferred, be solved. For 
the pipe roughness A one may take the values given in Table 10. 



LAMINAR FLOW 



CRIT ICAL ZONE 
TRANSITION ZONE 



O.t 
0.09 

0.08 
0.07 

0.06 
0.05 
O.OU 

0.03' 
0.025 

0.02 
0.015 

0.01 
0.009 

n.008 





'JT 


— 1 


-"^-•;r- 


^2:::: 






^:":: 








1 / 




..\. .. 


z :„:: 














/ 




---\^ 
















h^ 


» 


Zl^\t=i 




MPLETE TURBULI 


:nce»rou( 










\-L- 


1 .1" 






1 II 1 1 1" 


_:::: 






\ 


1 -p.- 


















K 


1 Yc 


S:|!i = 


— -■: 








, 


1 9 5 iS 1 




-A 


fFiSi 




s=;;:: 
















^U- 




^""SSi. 


, , J . . . ^_j 












"-H 


'M--- 


-Sj^ 


F^"" 




^ 












— i- 




-^Iji 




' , 




rtirTTnTT 












:::! 




. . 




= :::; = ::: 















































^ k 














IMOOTH F 






_ -.: 












" " " " c 


MPEs;=^ ^!: 


s^-i" "** 




"^ , 




















^ 


















k. ^-:! 


■^ . 


















^'Sil*. 




















?: 




■ '4? 
















_.s 


S:;*;.*^ - - 


, 


















•«i ::^^».-.. 










L, , 










_. i^aiZi:: 


!!~s::i 



0.05 
0.04 

0.03 

0.02 
0.015 

0.01 

0.003 

0.006 

0.004 
0.002 
0.001 

0.000 e 

0.000 6 
0.000 4 

0.0002 



CO 

CO 

LU 

z 

X 

o 

3 

o 

on 

hi 



UJ 



0.000 1 
0.000 05 



0.000 01 



10^ 2 34568 10* 2 34568 10^ 2 34568 10® 2 34568 lO^^sAs 4 

VD 0.000 001_\\. 



REYNOLDS NUMBER Re= 



55 8 10® 
.000 005 



FIG. U VALUES OF FRICTION FACTOR X MOODY CHART 



TABLE 10 ABSOLUTE ROUGHNESS k FOR PIPES 



Commercial Pipe ( New ) Material 

Glass, drawn brass, copper or lead 

Steel 

Asphalted cast iron 

Galvanized iron 

Cast iron 

Concrete 

Riveted steel 



Absolute Roughness k 
of the Surface 

Smooth 
0-05 mm 
0'12 mm 
0-15 mm 
0'25 mm 
0'3 to 30 mm 
1-0 to 10"0 mm 



32 



18:10981-1983 

APPENDIX D 

{ Clause e.2. 2) 

EFFECT OF PRE-SWIRL INDUCED BY THE PUMP 

D-1. Errors in the measurement of pump inlet head can occur at part capacity due to pre-swirl. 
These errors can be detected and corrected on the following basis. 

D-2. The differential head is measured between the specified inlet measuring section and another 
position further upstream where the pre-swirl induced by the pump is known to be absent ( for 
example the sump ). This differential head should follow a quadratic law with flow; any departure 
from this law will show the amount by which an inlet head measurement shall be corrected for the 
effect of pre-swirl induced by the pump ( see Fig. 15 and 16 ). 



GAUGE USED FOR 
DETERMINATION OF H' 



A^ 



:3. 



'(iWlfit) 



\\0 



FIG. 15 EXAMPLE OF INSTALLATION WITH PRE-SWIRL 



(^-q 




FIG. 16 CORRECTION OF MEASURED INLET HEAD 

APPENDIX E 

( Clause 9.5 ) 

PUMP TEST SHEET 

E-1. The pump test sheet Is given for guidance for presenting pump test results and to assist in 
their interpretation. It does not purport to include all the information required from a pump test and 
modifications may be necessary depending on the type of pump, its application, and the mode of 
calculation. 



33 



18:10981 -1983 



PUMP TEST SHEET ( Class B ) 



Sheet No. 



Nature of test 



Customer 



Pump 



Guaranteed 
values 



Pumped liquid 



Motor 



Measuring 
method 



Test conditions 



Type 



Volume rate of flow ( gvo ) 



Total head (Hq) 



Maimer's Order Number 



Speed of rotation ( nep) 



Efficiency (7)0) 



Temperature ( t) 



Order No. 



Diameter of inlet : 
Diameter of outlet: 



Power input {pa) 



Net positive suction head ( NPSH ) 



kinematic viscosity {v) 



Density (p ) 



Maker 



Type 



Method used 



Constant 



Rate of flow 



Inlet head 



Test cetirficate 



degree of acidity (pH) 



Power 



Outlet head ( NPSH ) 



Room temperature 
Temperature of test liquid 



Barometric pressure 



Number of phases 



Speed of rotation 


Torque 


Power 











Speed of g 
rotation ^^^^ 



Head correction to 
reference plane 



Voltage 



Current 



inlet 



outlet 



Results of 
measurement 



Speed of rotation 



Units 



8 9 10 11 



Time interval 



Flow rate 



Reading 



Measured flow 



Outlet head reading 



Inlet head reading 



Outlet head 



Inlet head 



Head 



Power ( torque ) 



Values referred 
to specified 
speed of 

rotation 



Av^/2si 



Difference of measuring position 



Pump total head 



VB2/2sr 



(NPSH) 



Useful power (Pu) 



Voltage 



Current 



Wattmeter reading 1 



Wattmeter reading 2 



Total of wattmeter readings 



Motor power input 



Motor efficiency 



Torque reading 



Gear efficiency 



Motor power output 



Pump power input 



Overall efficiency 



Pump efficiency 



Volume rate of flow 



Total head 



power 



( NPSH ) 



Notes 



Date 



Chief of tests 



Representatives 



of the customer of the manufacturer 



34 



18:10981 -1983 
APPENDIX F 

(Clause 9.5) 

CONVERSION TO Si UNITS 

F-1. This Appendix gives factors for conversion to SI for covering units of some of the quantities 
expressed in multiples or sub-multiples of SI units and in units other than SI units. The conversion 
factor is the number by which the value expressed in various units should be multiplied to find the 
corresponding value in SI units. 





TABLE 11 CONVERSION FACTORS 








Quantity 


Symbol of SI Unit 


Various Units 




Conversion 
Factors 


Name 


Symbol 


Volume rate of flow 


m3/s 


litre per second 

cubic metre per hour 

litre per hour 

litre per minute 

imperial gallon per minute 

cubic foot per second 

gallon ( US ) per minute 

barrel ( US ) per hour ( petroleum) 


I/s 

m3/h 

l/h 

l/min 

gal (UK)/min 

ft3/s 
gal (US)/mln 
barrel (US)/h 




10-3 

1/3 600 
1/3 600 000 
1/60 000 
0,000 075 77 
0,028 316 8 
0,000 063 09 
0,000 044 16 




Mass rate of flow 


kg/s 


ton per second 
ton per hour 
kilogram per hour 
pound per second 


t/s 
t h 
kg/h 
Ib/s 




103 
1/3.6 
1/3 600 
0.453 592 37 




Pressure 


Pa 


kilopond per square centimetre 


kp/cm2 


1 










kilogram-force per square centi- 
metre 


kgf/cms 


J 


98 066,5 








bar 

hectopieze 


bar 
hpz 


t 
J 


105 








torr 


torr 


T 










conventional millimetre of mercury 


mmHg 


> 
J 


133,322 








conventional millimetre of water 


mmHaO 


9,806 65 








poundal per square foot 


pdl/fta 




1.488 16 








standard atmosphere 


atm 




101 325 








pound-force per square inch 


Ibf/in2 (psi ) 


1 


6 894,76 




Density 


kg/ms 


kilogram per cubic decimetre 


kg/dm3 










gram per cubic centimetre 


g/cm3 


1 


103 








pound per cubic foot 


lb/ft3 




16,018 5 




Power 


W 


kilowatt 

kilopond metre per second 

1. T. kilo calorie per hour 

cheval vapour i) 

horsepower^) 

British thermal unit per hour 

kilogram-force metre per second 


kW 

kp'm/s 

kcaliT/h 

ch 

hp 

Btu/h 

kgf-m/s 




103 

9,806 65 

1,163 

735,5 

745,7 
0,293 071 

9,806 65 




Viscosity 
(dynamic viscosity) 


Pa.s (kg/m.s) 


decapoise 
poise 


daP 

P 


1 


1 








dyne second per square centimetre 


dyn-s/cm^ 


> 


10-1 








gram per second centimetre 


g/s-cm 


J 










kilopond second per square metre 


kp-s/m'' 




9,806 65 








centipoise 


cP 




10-3 








poundal second per square foot 


pdl-s/ft2 




1,488 16 




Kinematic viscosity 


m^/s 


stokes 
centistokes 


St = cm2/s 
cSt 




10-4 
10-6 








square foot per second 


ft2/s 




0.092 903 




1) No international s 


symbol exists for this 


unit; the symbol shown is the most c 


ommon. 









35 



18:10981 -1983 

APPENDIX G 

{Clause 9.5) 

CHECK LIST 

G-1. The following is a check list of items where agreement is recommended between manufactu- 
rer and purchaser before the test. It should be noted that it will not always be necessary to agree 
upon all these items during the elaboration of the contract: 

a) extent of guarantee: 

1) pump without motor ( see 4.1 ); 

2) combined motor-pump unit ( see 4.1 ); 

3) guarantee values ( for example flow rate, total head, power input, efficiency, NPSH, 
etc. ) ( see 4.1, 4.2 and 9.4.3 ); 

b) method of verification of guaranteed NPSH ( see 7.1.1 ); 

c) rotational speed deviations outside permissible tolerance ( see 5.3.3.2 ); 

d) voltage and frequency deviations outside permissible tolerance ( see 9.2.1 ); 

e) method of prediction of pump performance from a test using clean cold water ( see 8 ); 

f ) liquid to be used for acceptance test; 

g) inlet and transmission losses in vertical well pumps ( see 8.2.1.6 and 6.4.4 ); 
h) cable losses ( see 6.4.3 ); 

j ) gear losses ( see 6.4.2 ); 

k) arrangement for proving priming ability of self-priming pumps ( see 5.2.6 ); 

m) time of tests ( see 5.1.2 ); 

n) test equipment ( see 5.1.5 ); 

p) test arrangement ( see 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 ); 

q) use of recognized methods of measurement other than those described In this standard; 

r) chief of test when test is not carried out at manufacturer's works ( see 5.1.3 ); 

s) test costs ( see Appendix B ); 

t) number of pumps to be tested in a batch of identical pumps; and 

u) any other aspect of pump behaviour to be checked during the test. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is the second of a set of three dealing with acceptance tests of centrifugal, 
mixed flow and axial pumps; they correspond to three classes of Tests A, B and C; Class A Is the 
most accurate and Class C is the least accurate; the use of Classes A and B pumps Is restricted to 
special cases when there is need to have the pump performance more precisely defined. It should be 
borne in mind that tests for Class A and B pumps require more accurate apparatus and methods, 
which increase the cost of such tests. 

The standard arrangements and procedures described are those to be employed for testing a 
pump individually, without reference to its final installation conditions or the usual conditions In 
which a pump is tested at the manufacturer's works. 

Pump performance may be affected by conditions of the final site installation, and procedures 
are described for carrying out 'Standard Tests' on certain types of installations of which an 
overall performance is required. 

The conditions in which pumps are finally installed, however, often do not permit reliable 
tests measurements, and recommendations are made concerning the procedure to be adopted here 
the layout precludes tests in conformity with the standards, or where the tests cover the pump and 
the plant ancillary to the pump itself. 

While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from International 
Standard ISO 3555-1977(E) 'Centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps — Code for acceptance — 
Class B' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 

36 



Printed at Naw tndla Printing Press, Ktiurja, India 



