**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11136 (1984) : Methods of measurement for video tape 
recording and reproducing equipment [LITD 7: Audio, Video 
and Multimedia Systems and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11136 - 1984 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

VIDEO TAPE RECORDING AND 

REPRODUCING EQUIPMENT 



UBC i.".fll'a+W : 621-317 : 62046 




Copiright ]yS5 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 ISAllADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI I [OUR 

Or 3 April 1985 



IS : 11136 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

VIDEO TAPE RECORDING AND 

REPRODUCING EQUIPMENT 

Recording Sectional Committee, LTDC 23 

Chairman Representing 

Shri A. K. Sen* Research Department, All India Radio, New Delhi 

Members 
Shri N. P. Bhattaciiauya Department of Teaching Aids, New Delhi 

Shri J. N. Bisaria Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi 

Director Engineering ( TR ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Chan^rachudan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri M. P. Sama ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. F. Chhapgar National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri P. H. Ganatra Vimal Enterprises Ltd, Umbergam 

Shri K. L. Garg Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 

Shri R. V. Narayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Ghosh The Gramophone Co of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Arun Bagri ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Das Gupta PeicoTSlectronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and 

The Radio Electronic & Television Manufactu- 
rers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 

Shri T. S. Buxi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. G. Gupta Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Joint Director Stds/S&T/Tele Railway Board, New Delhi 

Joint Director Stds/S&T/ 
Lab ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kamal Jyoti Music India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri L. R. Gala ( Alternate ) 
Maj P. K. Mago Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri K. Ber a ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Mazumdar General Electronics of Haryana Pvt Ltd, Faridabad 

Shri B. C. Mukherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Bh attach arya ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Patel Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri Sunii, Patel Electronic Component Industries Association 

( ELCINA), New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



♦Shri A. K. Sen was Chairman for the meeting in which this standard was finalized. 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11136 - 1984 



( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 
Shri K. D. Pavate 



Representing 

Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 
(CSIR),Pilani 
Shri M. R. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. fe. R. Rao Research Department, All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri P. V. Krishna Reddi Film & TV Institute of India, Pune 

Representative Films Division, Bombay 

Shri Virendra Vijay Directorate General Doordarshan, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Ghoudhury ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Dircetor ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri Pavan Kumar 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Panel for Video Recording and Reproduction Systems, LTDG 23 : P3 



Convener 
Shri A. K. Sen 



Research Department, All India Radio, New Delhi 



Members 
Director Engineering ( TR ) ( Alternate to 
Shri A. K. Sen ) 
Dr A. F. Chhapgar 
Shri V. S, Sundara Rajan 



Representative 

Representative 
Representative 
Shri Virendra Vijay 

Shri S. S. Swani ( Alternate ) 



National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 
Gujarat Communications & Electronics Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( GSIR ), Pilani 
Department of Electronics, New Delhi 
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 
Directorate General Doordarshan, New Delhi 



IS : 11136 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

VIDEO TAPE RECORDING AND 

REPRODUCING EQUIPMENT 



0. FORE W[0 R D 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 18 September 1984, after the draft finalized by the 
Recording Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics 
and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the methods of measurement of characteristics 
of video tape recording and reproducing equipment. 

0.2.1 This standard applies to complete apparatus only and not to 
any component parts thereof. 

0.3 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from 
IEC Publication 698 'Measuring methods for television tape machines', 
issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.4 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance 
with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be 
rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the conditions and procedures for measure- 
ment of mechanical and electrical performance characteristics of video 
tape recording and reproducing equipment. 

2* TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions specified 
in IS : 1885 ( Part 48 )-1978t shall apply. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 
fElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part 48 Recording. 



IS: 11136- 1934 

3. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENT 

3.0 Unless otherwise specified, measurements shall be made under 
normal measuring conditions as specified below. 

3.1 Normal Supply Voltage — The rated supply voltage shall be 
applied to the equipment. 

3.1.1 The voltage applied to the equipment shall be held constant 
within 1"0 percent of the rated value during the measurement of the 
characteristic. 

3.1.2 In case of ac mains operations, the voltage shall be applied at 
the rated frequency. The harmonic content of ac mains supply voltage 
shall not exceed 5*0 percent. 

3.1.3 In case of battery operation, primary batteries of the type and 
rated voltage as specified by the manufacturers shall be used* 

3.2 Atmospheric Conditions for Test 

3.2.1 Unless otherwise specified all measurements shall be carried out 
under the following atmospheric conditions: 

Temperature 15 to 35°C 

Relative humidity 45 to 75 percent 

Pressure 86 to 106 kPa ( 1 kPa 10 m bar ) 

3.2.2 The equipment shall be protected from draught and direct 
radiation. 

3.3 Accuracy of Test Set-Up — The test set-up employed to carry out 
measurements in accordance with this standard shall have an accuracy 
of at least one -order better than that specified for the quantity under 
measurement. 

3.4 Stereophonic Recording and Reproducing Equipment — 

Unless otherwise specified, measurements shall be carried out on each 
channel for stereophonic equipment. 

3.5 Reporting — The test report shall clearly indicate the following: 

a) Rated supply voltage type ( ac or dc ) and frequency in the case 
of ac, 

b) Atmospheric conditions under which tests are carried out, 

c) Any change of necessary adjustment to the equipment done 

before measurement, and 

d) Results of tests. 



IS : 11136 - 1984 

4. OPERATING CONDITIONS 

4,1 Before any measurements are made, the unit shall operate at least 
for the stabilization period specified by the manufacturer or 10 minutes 
whichever is greater. 

4.2 Before any measurements are made all measuring equipment shall 
have reached temperature stability. 

4.3 Apart from the specified load, the measuring equipment shall not 
introduce additional load which would significantly affect the parameters 
measured. 

4.4 Before measurements are made, it should be ensured that parts of 
the equipment near or in contact with the tape are maintained clean and 
demagentized. 

4.5 Unless permanently connected, all noise reductions and/or automatic 
gain control circuit shall be rendered inoperative. 

4*6 If video and power ground points are provided separately, the 
equipment under test should be grounded at both these points separately. 

5. TESTS 

5.1 Diameter x>f the Headwheel ( or Drum ) — The drum diameter 
is measured by means of a precision micrometer. Measurements shall 
be made at several points on the drum, and these paints shall be speci- 
fied by the manufacturer. 

5.2 Projection of Video Head Pole Tips — Measurements are also 
made by means of a dial indicator. Usually either the upper or lower 
drum serves as reference s depending on the specifications of the manu- 
facturer. The measuring device is specified and often supplied by the 
manufacturer. 

5.3 Radius of Curvature of the Vacuum Guide 

5.3.1 Reference Used for Measurements — The basic reference used in the 
measurement of the radius of the vacuum guide is a master template. 
Such a template is made by fabricating a ring to a very precise inner 
diameter tolerance, and measuring the ring on a roundness metering 
apparatus to a specified accuracy of ±0*13 /*m. The calibrated ring 
is then split across a diameter and two reference masters thus obtained. 
These reference masters are inspected to ascertain that no distoriton has 
occurred during the splitting process. 

5.3.2 Vacuum Guide Measuring Fixture — The fixture consists of a solid- 
steel base with a precision spindle holding a dial indicator calibrated 
in divisions of 0*5 jum. A radius reference master is permanently affixed. 



IS : 11136 - 1984 



Two micrometer adjustment mechanisms are used to position the guides 
to be measured to be concentric with the radius of the reference master 
and a set of gauge blocks is used to adjust the vertical position of the 
spindle to measure the two 'lands' of the vacuum guide. The inherent 
accuracy of the spindle has been measured to be within the range of 
0'5 j^m total error. 



5.3.3 Method of Measurement ( see Fig. 1 ) 



UPPER 
LAND 





LOWEK 
LAN© 



Fig. 1 Measurement of Radius of Curvature of the 
Vacuum Guide. 



5.3.3.1 The dial 
reference master. 



indicator is zeroed asfainst the radius of the 



5.3.3.2 A master guide is placed into the fixture and its radius 
measured to verify the measurement system. This may be done daily 
or at other time intervals as is required. 

5.3.3.3 The vacuum guide to be measured is placed into position on 
the fixture and cen'ered with the micrometer mechanisms until it is 
concentric to the reference master. By observation of the difference in 



IS: 11136 -1984 

dial indicator reading between the guide radius and the reference radius 
an absolute radius dimensions is obtained. This is repeated for both 
'lands'. 

5.3*3.4 The perpendicularity of the cylindrical surface to the guide 
reference mounting surface is also checked by sliding the spindle verti- 
cally and observing the difference in readings between the 'lands'. 

5.3.4 Accuracy — Evaluation of the results of this procedure, performed 
by a number of operators, has verified the accuracy obtained, including 
fixture repeatability, as being within a total range of 1*5 ptm. 

5.4 Longitudinal Pitch of the Video Tracks — The measurement 
shall be made between control track signals over a length of tape of one 
meter or a length appropriate to a travelling microscope. The number 
of control track signals for a given length of tape shall be counted. 

5.5 Coplanarity Error of Video Heads — Two methods of measure- 
ment exist. The first is simple and suitable for field use, and the second 
more accurate and suitable for laboratory use. 

5.5.1 Method A — Having made the tracks visible by magnetic develop- 
ment of the tape, this pattern is lifted from the tape by means of 
transparent adhesive tape. This latter tape is applied to a suitable piece 
of glass and the combination projected optically onto a large screen 
where coplanarity errors are observed and measured with reasonable 
accuracy. 

5.5.2 Method B — Coplanarity errors may be measured directly on 
the headwheel by means of a precision microscope. It is not advisable 
to make the measurement on magnetically developed tape. 

5.6 Video Track Curvature — Assuming that all tracks recorded 
by one head show the same curvature error, the following method can 
be applied: 

Using a piece of magnetically developed tape the distance of each 

track from the reference edge of the tape ( A^ K ~ 1 n, see 

Fig. 2 ) is measured on a straight line perpendicular to the direction 
of tape motion and over the whole width of the tape area occupied 
by the video tracks. The difference /\ A between the average 
distance, given by the recording standard, and the actual distance 
is calculated as: 

AA = A* — A — K n ( A n — A ) 
and is suitably plotted on a graph. 

5.7 Location of Control Track Record Along the Tape — Under 

consideration. 




w> 



as 






AAi 




Fig. 2 Measurement gf Video Track Curvature. 



IS: 11136 -19*4 



5.8 Jitter of Reproduced Picture 



5*8.1 Several methods exist for measuring the time-base disturbances 
in the reproduced signals. Which one is used depends upon the 
accuracy required of the measurements balanced against the com- 
plexity of the measurements. 

5.8.2 The methods given below apply to broadcast video-tape 
recorders. Methods applicable to non-broadcast recorders are under 
consideration. 

5.8.3 A simple, quick technique is to view the reproduced picture on 
a receiver or monitor having either horizontal sweep circuitry controlled 
by AFC circuitry having a response time ( RG time constant ) of at 
least one second, or driven externally from a sync generator to which the 
tape machine is locked while reproducing the recording under 
measurement. 

5.8.4 Viewing the horizontal jitter and geometric distortions in the 
reproduced picture gives a rough idea of the frequency of the distur- 
bances and a very good idea of their amplitude when the picture width 
is related to the active line period of approximately 52 jxs. If more 
accurate measurements are needed, the following methods may be 
employed. 

5.8.5 If the reference source to which the machine is locked is not 
stable, the off tape H rate synchronizing pulses shall be compared in 
phase with an oscillator locked to the same pulses with a time constant 
of at least one second. 

5*8.6 If the reference source to which the machine is locked is a stable 
source such as a television sync generator, the off tape H rate synchroniz- 
ing pulses shall be compared in phase with the H rate sync pulses from 
the reference sources. 

5.8.7 In both cases the resultant error voltage may be dealt with in 
two ways; it may be analysed by means of frequency selective voltmeters, 
or by means of recording galvanometers. In the latter case the various 
frequency components may be identified by Fourier analysis. A weight- 
ing factor to be specified may be used in the evaluation of the data 
obtained, 

5.8.8 This measurement can be made with or without time base 
correction. The results should specify whether the time base correction 
had been used or not. 

5.9 Velocity Errors — It is possible to evaluate the errors approxi- 
mately by reproducing a colour bar test signal and observing it on a 



IS : 11136 - 1984 

vectorscope. Velocity errors will cause angular spread of the dots 
representing colours of the bar pattern. This method is severaly 
restricted by noise. 

5.10 Video Signal-to-Noise Ratio — The technique consists of record- 
ing and reproducing a 30 percent grey level and 75 percent white level 
video signal and subsequently removing in the measuring apparatus the 
H and V pulses and leaving these periods at black level. The loss of 
noise energy during blanking is taken into consideration when calibrating 
the measuring instrument. The evaluation may be made on a linear or 
weighted scale. 

The S/N ratio in dB ( unweighted ) is: 

S/N = 20 log - T - Fs ! g P? 
° V noise rms 

Fgig is the voltage corresponding to 100 percent amplitude of the 
noncomposite video. 

5.11 Differential Gain 

5.11.1 Method A — Evaluation of the errorson a vectorscope is possible 
when viewing a reproduced signal such as colour bars or staircase with 
superimposed subcarrier. 

5.11.2 Method B — A subcarrier is extracted from a reproduced test 
signal by means of a band pass filter, optionally rectified and displayed 
on an oscilloscope. The measurement accuracy is impaired by noise. 

Note — Suitable direct reading instruments may also be used. 

5.12 Differential Phase 

5.12.1 Method A — The equipment used in 5.11.1 is also suitable for 
measuring differential phase. Noise and velocity errors seriously impair 
the accuracy of the results obtained. 

5.12.2 MethodB — The evaluation of differential phase in magnetic 
video recording is limited by two reasons: 

a) Influence of velocity-errors, and 

b) Poor S/N ratio. 

5.12*2.1 The test signals for differential phase errors are usually 
sawtooth or grey-scale-signals at line rate, superimposed with a sub- 
carrier with a suitable amplitude. In case of velocity errors the 
subcarrier phase is shifted from zero at the beginning to a maximum 
towards the end of the line. This phase is added to the differential 
phase error in question and cannot be separated during evaluation. 

10 



IS : 11136 - 1984 

To overcome this difficulty, a grey-scale signal is proposed, the level 
of which is changed from line to line. The differential phase error 
is sampled and measured only at the beginning of the line, where the 
velocity error is small enough not to influence the result. 

The period of the grey scale may be choosen so as to meet the 
scanning rate of the video heads . In this way in case of quadruplex 
machines the 4 video channels can be measured separately. 

5.12.2.2 Noise reduction by means of integration is an usual 
technique. Combining the test signal according to 5.12.2.1 which a 
sample-and-hole device ( the integrating time constant of which should 
be choosen to some tenths of a second ) vary accurate figures of 
differential phase errors may be reached. 

Note — Suitable direct reading instruments may also be used. 

5.13 Moire — The method is suitable for helical scan recorders utilizing 
direct colour recovering technique. 



11 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
Base Unit* 



Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


ste radian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


orce 


newt on 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


I J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W- lj/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb - 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T « 1 Wb/m* 


Frequency 


hem 


Hz 


1 Hz - 1 c/s (s" 1 ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m» 



