**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13989 (1994): Bulk handling equipment - Bagging machines 
(mechanical type) - Design and construction - General 
requirements [MED 7 : Material Handling Systems and 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13989 : 1994 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 

BAGGING MACHINES ( MECHANICAL 

TYPE) — DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION — 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



UDC 621*798-34 



© BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 1994 Price Group 1 



Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 7 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of 
Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This Indian Standard covers the general requirements of mechanical type bagging machines. The 
requirements laid down in the Indian Standard are notwithstanding the requirements of any other 
Status, Regulations, Acts or Rules or any other Central or State Governments Orders issued from 
time to time which are to be met otherwise. 

Various material handled by the bagging machine are granular and powdery material, grains, 
cement etc. The accessories and auxiliaries for the bagging systems e.g. bag holder, carousal, 
off-take conveyor are not covered in this standard. 

Mechanical bagging machines are being replaced by electronic type bagging machines where feasible 
but still a large number of such machines are in use and are expected to be so in future to come. 
There may be some specific areas where only mechanical, type of bagging machines work 
satisfactorily. This standard, therefore, attempts to provide uniform guidelines to the purchasers 
and the suppliers on these machines. This standard covers a net-weigher type bagging machines 
( mechanical ) suitable for filling in open mouthed and/or valve type bags. 

The general requirements for design and construction of electronic type bagging machines have b^en 
specified in IS 13992 : 1994 *Buik handling equipment — Bagging machines ( electronic type ) — 
Design and construction — General requirements' and data sheet necessary for selection and 
design of such machines is laid down in iS 13945:1994 *Bulk handling equipment — Bagging 
machines ( Electronic type ) — Data sheet'. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following pulications 
issued by Organization Internationale Dc Mctrologie Lega ; 

OIML C 8 Non-automatic weighing instruments 

OIML R 60 Metrological Regulations for load cell 

OIML R 61 Automatic gravimetric filling machines 

OIML R 74 Electronic weighing instruments 

OIML R 87 Net content in packages 

Accuracy requirements have been specified in International Recommendation OIML R 61, 
Accuracies other than those specified in clause 3.9 may be adopted as per agreement between 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2 : 196D 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)\ The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off values should be same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



IS 13989 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 
BAGGING MACHINES (MECHANICAL 
TYPE ) — DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This sUnuIard covers the net-weigher type 
bagging machines (luechanical) suitable for bulk solid 
materials. 

1.2 The standard also covers details of the lunclions 
and the operating characteristics of the bagging 
machines (mechanical ty|x;). Any additional or alternate 
lealnres may be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 

1.3 This standard generally covers the bagging 
machines used in conjunction with machines xiirectly 
mounted on the olT-take conveyors. These machines 
may also be used with carousel type conveyors etc, 
operational details oT which have to be specified by 
the purchaser. 

2 GENEl^VL REQUI1<J:MENTS 

2.1 Design, maiuifaclure and supply of bagging 
machines shall meet the performance requirements as 
specified by the purchaser. 

2.2 The bagging machines shall be suitable for the 
duty conditions as specified by the purchaser. 

2.3 All parts in contact with material weighed shall 
be of stainless skel construction. 

3 DESKiN AND CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 The bagging machine shall be compatible 
WMth weighing unils and shall be manual, semi- 
automatic or fully automatic type as specified by the 
purchaser. The bagging machine shall be suitable for 
working as net or gross-weighing unit as may be 
specified by the purchaser. It may also be suitable for 
working as double net range unit if so specified by 
the purchaser. 

3.2 The bagging machine shall be constructed from 
heavy duty formed or welded steel and shall be 
manufactured from steel suitable for the bulk material 
specified. 

3.3 The bagging machine shall be designed so that 
the flow of the nuvterial into the weigh hopper shall 
be controlled by either gravity feeder, belt feeder, 
vibrating feeder, rotary feeders or any other feeder 



to suit the material How characteristics and as per the 
requirements given by the purchaser. 

3.4 Suitable mechanism shall be provided to vary the 
feed rates and cut-off the flow of the material 
automatically as the weigh hopper is filled to target 
weight. Connection shall be suitable for the 
volume to be vented for the values furnished 
by the manufacturer. 

3.5 A gale shall be provided at the bottom of the 
weight hopper which shall ojien and allow the material 
to fall into Uie bag. 

3.6 The filling spout with bag clamping device shall 
be provided to securely hold the bags while the 
material is being discharged into the bag. The ehnnp 
closing and opening shall be controlled by a manual/ 
switch operated device or as specified by the 
purchaser. 

3.7 Bagging machine housing shall be of dust tight 
construction with doors as required. The dedusting 
connections shall be provided at pre-filling spout, 
weigh hopper etc as the case may l>c depending on 
the product handled. The connections shall be suitable 
for the volume of air to be vented, the value of which 
shall be indicated by supplier, 

3.8 A counting device for counting the number of 
bags may be provided with the machine as specified 
by the purchaser. 

3.9 The accuracy of the bagging machine shall be 
± 0*1 percent per weighment and — percent for any 
20 consecutive bags while weighing 50 kg/25 kg bags 
or as specified by the purchaser as per the relevant 
clauses of the Weights and Measures (Packaged 
Commodity) Act. 

3.10 The machine shall be capable of being adjusted 
to weigh in ratio of 1 : 3 without showing any deficiency 
in its accuracy perlbrmance. 

3.11 A complete wired local control panel suitable 
for area classification as per the specificatioii of 
purchaser shall be provided. 

3.12 In case of feeder type machines, feeding 
of material to be weighed sluiU be done with variable 
speeds so as to achieve and maintain the sustained 
accuracy. 



IS 13989 : 1994 

4 OPERATION 

4.1 The mode of operation oT bngging machine 
normally is: 

a) Clamping of bag on bagging spout — Manual 

b) Discharge ot* material in the bag — Automatic 

c) Residue material in the hopper — Manual 

d) Filling cycle of machine — Automatic 

4.2 It shall Ix^ ensured that no automatic discharge 
of material takes place unless the bag is clamped. 

4.3 Initiating the cycle, for clamping the bag manually, 
if all the operations of filling right upto discharge of 
bag are automatic then the operation is termed as 
semi-automatic. 

4.4 The operation of the bagging machine shall be 
such that the operator while lifting the empty bag for 
fixing to the filling spout shall simultaneously press 
with his knuckle the operating lever, after which all 
the ibllowing operations shall bt automatic in their 
proper sequence: 

1) Clamping of empty bag on filling spout. 

2) Effecting discharge of pre-weighed material 
to the clamped bag. 

3) Closing the discharge gale of weighing 
receptacle and then starting tilling in of fresh 
charge of material in the weighing receptacle. 

4) Release of filled bag. 

4.5 Arrangements shall be provided for remote manual 
release of residue material or material filled in a burst 
bag. 

5 SUPPLY CONDITIONS 

Bagging machine shall be supplied complete in all 
respect along with its discharge chute and pneumatically 
operated l:>ag holder and all controls including bag 
spout, internal wiring and control panel, complete 
drive unit including electric motors, limit switches, 
required quantity of counter weights, tamper proof 
counter in six digits with manual resetting provision, 
anchor lx)Its, gaskets and other items as may be s}:>ecified 
by the purchaser. 



6 I)RA\V1N(;S AND 1 1:( HNICAL DO( I IMKNTS 

The complete technical specification, layout and 
sectional drawings including functional, operational 
and control features shall Ix^ furnished for the machine. 

7 INSPIX TION AND TESTINCi 

7.1 The schedule of inspection and testing at 
manufacturer's works shall be as agreed t(^ between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 

7.2 The bagging machine shall operate satisfactorily 
without undue noise, vibration or display of any 
unfavoral^le characteristics. 

7.3 For establishing the sustained capacity and accuracy 
of the bagging machine, a load test run at site under 
stabilized conditions for a minimum period of one 
hour at its rated capacity shall be conducted without 
any changes in setting of the machine. 

8 PROTECTION AND PAIN IINC; 

8.1 The bagging machine, its sub-assemblies and other 
components shall be suitably painted. The machined 
pirrts shall be protected against mst with a nist preventive 
coating, 

8.2 Unless otherwise specified by purchaser, all 
structural parts shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted 
with at least two coats of paint after a coat of primer. 

8.3 The bagging machine shall be properly packed 
so as to avoid any damage during transportation. 

8.4 In case the sub-assemblies or the components 
have to be packed separately they shall have suitable 
markings to match them with the related sub-assemblies 
or the components. 

8.5 The bagging machine shall have identification 
plate showing: 

a) manufacturer's name, 

b) serial number and year of manufacture, 

c) capacity and 

d) a^ny other particular data as specified l>y 
purchaser. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS, This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. HMD 7 ( 5019 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C, I. T. Campus. IV Cross Road. MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 



(331 01 31 
|331 13 73 



137 84 99. 37 85 61 
|37 86 26. 37 86 62 

(53 38 43, 53 16 40 
)53 23 84 

[235 02 16, 235 04 42 
1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

J632 92 95, 632 78 58 
1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi. India 



