**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11494 (1986) : Code for construction and maintenance of 
surface farm drainage systems [FAD 17: Farm Irrigation and 
Drainage Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11494- 1986 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR 

CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 



UDC C31 -62 004-5 




© Copjrighf l£f8e 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAKAK BHAVAN. 9 HAKArjUR. SHAIi ZAFAlt MARG 

NEW DELHI nmoi 

Gr 2 ^f^J l^^ 



IS : 11494 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR 

CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 

Farm Drainage Sectional Committee, AFDG 47 

Chairman Representing 

Db a. M. Michael Indian Agricuhural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 

Members 

Db a. K. Bhattacharya ( Alternate to 
Dr A. M. Michael ) 
Db M. G. Agaewal Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 

Db Bhupal Singh Tocklai Experimental Station, Jorhat 

Dr H. S. Chauhan G. B. Pant University of Agricultural and 

Technology, Pantnagar 

Db Sewa Ram ( Alternate ) 
Chief Enqineeb PWD Irrigation ( North ), Belgaum 

Superintending Engineer 
( Designs ) ( Alternate ) 
Director Irrigation Research and Development, Pune 

Executive Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( FCM ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi ^ 

Shri V. S. Heqde Hulgul Group Cooperative Society, Sirsi 

Shri N. G. Joshi Indian Hume Pipe Go Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. D. Khepar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Dr Sita Ram Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Pattabhi Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri A. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Dr H, Purnapbagnachar University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore 

Dr R. K. Rai Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna 

Db T. K. Sarkar Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta 

Shri G. K, Srinivasan Wavin India Limited, Madras 

Shri K. R. RaHGAraJan ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Vasxtdevan Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri B. P, Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri R. N. Sharma 
Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11494 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR 

CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Farm 
Drainage Sectional_Gommittee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Surface drainage is normally required for efficient crop production 
on slowly perm-eable soils with restricted topography. It is not required 
when excess water is removed naturally. The objectives of surface 
drainage are: 

a) To prevent water from ponding on land surface or in surface 
drains that are crossed by farm equipment, 

b) To remove excess water in time to prevent damage to crops, and 

c) To accomplish the above without excess erosion. 

0.3 Complete drainage systems shall be planned and designed after 
considering all aspects. The collection system consisting of the land 
surface and shallow drains removes excess surface water from individual 
areas within fields. The disposal system consisting of some what larger 
ditches receives drainage water from the collection system and removes 
it from the farm. Transitions, including structures, that permit drains 
to discharge into larger or deeper drams must provide for adequate 
erosion control without holding water on field surfaces for excessive 
periods of time. The system shall be designed as an integrated com- 
ponent of the land and water management activity on the farm. 

0.4 This standard is intended to serve as a guide for proper construction 
and maintenance of surface drainage systems in the farms. 

0.5 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
ASAE EP 302: 2-1973 'Design and construction of surface drainage 
systems on farms in humid areas', published by the American Society of 
Agricultural Engineers, USA. 



IS : 11494 - 1986 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the recommended practice for construction and 
maintenance of surface farm drainage systems. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard definitions given in IS : 1 1495-1986 \ 
shall apply. 

3. DESIGN 

3.1 Design of the surface drainage system shall be done in accordance 

with IS : 11495- 1986 1. 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 Good quality construction is essential for adequate drainage. 
Qualified engineers should be responsible for surveys, designs, layouts 
and checking to guarantee that construction meets specifications. Land 
owners and contractors shall be provided with complete information 
necessary for construction. 

4.1.1 Land smoothing will provide adequate drainage only if 
depressions are eliminated by smoothing the land surface. Row drains, 
field drains, and/or laterals shall be installed in the remaining low areas. 

4.1.2 Land grading is hampered by trash and vegetation which shall 
be destroyed or removed prior to construction and kept under control 
while the work is being done. Ploughing trash under the land surface 
is not recommended. 

4.1.2.1 Fields shall be scarified prior to construction if there are 
hard pans. The field surface shall be firm when surveyed so that staff 
readings taken at stakes will reflect the true elevations. Fields shall not 
be graded when wet, because this impairs the physical condition of 
the soil. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
fCode for design of surface drainage system. 



IS : 11494 - 1986 

4.1.2.2 Grading shall be checked prior to and foljowing the finishing 
operations. A tolerance of 30 mm may be allowed in checking, provided 
there are no reverse grades in row direction. 

4.1.2.3 Land smoothers shall be passed over the field surface at 
least three times as a finishing operation. The first two passes shall be 
on opposite diagonals to the stake lines, and the last pass shall be in the 
row direction. 

4.1.2.4 Fields shall be scarified either before or after the final land 
smoothing operations to loosen the cut surfaces and to blend the fill 
material with the underlying soil. 

4.1.3 The slope in the direction of drainage shall usually be 0'2 to 
0*4 percent. 

4.1.4 Field drains shall be constructed to facilitate quick disposal of 
runoff water from the cultivated areas. These may be shallow and 
crossable by farm equipment. 

4.1.5 Field drains shall be located along the lowest edge of the field. 
If the fields are long in the direction of drainage, there may be more 
than one field drain. 

4.1.6 Collector drains shall be constructed as per the hydraulic design 
and with variation in cross section if required. Such variation may be 
made at the point of road crossing where a permanent structure exists. 

4.1.6.1 Runoff water from the field may be allowed to fall in the 
collector if it is not feasible to have field drains. However, such entry 
points sh^ll be planted and hurried pipe outlets shall be provided from 
the field into the collector. 

4.1.6.2 In the event of constructing culverts at road and collector 
junctions, the culvert capacity should be more than the maximum 
designed discharge. This will ensure that the culvert will not act as a 
bottleneck at any time during the drainage. 

4.1.6.3 The productive soil dug out during the construction of 
collector drain shall be uniformly spread over the cultivated areas if 
possible. Otherwise, all the soil material dug out shall be used to 
construct farm road after the drain and to make a protective levee along 
the edge of the field adjacent to the drain. The loose soil shall be put at 
least 50 cm away from the edge of the drain to avoid falling back of the 
soil into the drain during monsoon. 

5. CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT 

5.1 Proper construction equipment and skilled operators are required 
for good quality work. 

4 



IS : 11494 - 1986 

5.1.1 Tractor and scraper combinations are used for excavating for 
hauling excavated material to fill areas, and for spreading excavated 
material. Tractors and scrapers are used for land grading, and to 
construct and maintain field drains and diversions. Under favourable 
conditions, they are used to construct and maintain field laterals with 
flat side slopes. Wheel type tractors have been used with scrapers for 
levelling when lead length is over 50 m. Self-loading ( carry all ) 
scrapers operated by tractors are used for short lead length when earth 
movement is heavy. Animal drawn scrapers are suitable for levelling 
small holding. 

5.1.2 Land smoothers, commonly known as land levlers or land planes 
operated by tractors are used for land smoothening or to finish land 
grading. They will automatically fill small low areas and remove small 
high areas when traversing a field. They cannot accomplish the major 
grading operations done by tractors and scrapers. Land smoothers are 
used periodically to maintain the surface of land that has previously 
been graded or smoothened. Animal drawn wooden flat are suitable 
for land smoothening in small scale operations. 

5.1.3 Motor graders and animal and tractor drawn ^V ditchers are 
used to excavate relatively small channels, such as field drains or field 
laterals, where the excavated material can be spread or shaped along 
one or both sides of the channels. 

5,1.4 Draglines and beckhoes are used to construct and maintain large 
size drainage channels, 

6. EROSION CONTROL 

6.1 Erosion of deep productive soils in fields that require surface drainage 
may be of little direct economic importance. On shallow soils, erosion 
may over a period of time result in irreparable losses in productivity. 
Sedimentation that results from erosion obstructs nearby channels. The 
justifiable intensity of erosion control measures on field surfaces is, there- 
fore, dependent on the depths of productive soils and the relative costs 
of preventing erosion and maintaining channels. 

6.1.1 Erosion control on land surfaces is normally required only where 
land grades exceed I'O percent or where there are reverse row grades. 
By concentrating water and causing it to overflow row beds, reverse row 
grades are a major contributing cause of erosion across rows. Graded 
rows, precisely constructed so that there are no reverse row grades and 
that each row carries its own water, are an efiective erosion control 
practice. 

6.1.2 Field drain side slopes and the row middles immediately above 
the field drains are subject to rill erosion with resultant sedimentation in 



IS : 11494 - 1986 

the field drains. To control this erosion, portions of field drains that 
are 0' 15 m below field level or below row middles shall be vegetated 
except vegetation is not necessary for field drains re-established yearly. 

6.1.3 Field drains with grades of about 0*3 percent and steeper shall 
be vegetated to prevent channel erosion. The initial erosive grades 
vary somewhat with soils. 

6.1.4 Field laterals are subject to serious erosion in some areas where 
they are located on erodible soils and steeper grades. There laterals 
should be vegetated. Where there is a doubt, the maximum permissible 
grade for unvegetated channels should be checked. Permissible grades 
are dependent on the scour conditions which are likely to occur in the 
channels. 

6.1.5 Sedimentalion in field laterals is usually expected. In areas 
where sedimentation is anticipated, field laterals should be overcut 0*1 m 
or more to provide for sedimentation. 

6.1.6 Inlets to field laterals for surface water shall be constructed only 
at planned points. Continuous low levees, spread spoil or spoil banks 
shall prevent entry except at planned inlets, 

6.1.7 The outlets of field drains and field laterals shall be checked for 
erosiveness. In some cases the depths of channels can be controlled by 
design to reduce or eliminate erosion. In other cases the water level in the 
larger channels may reduce velocities sufficiently to effectively control 
erosion. Where additional erosion control measures are indicated, graded 
channel transitions shall be considered. Such transitions may be grass 
waterways or non-vegetated channels, depending on the erosion potential. 
When graded transitions are not adequate for erosion control, pipe drops, 
chutes, drop structures or other suitable erosion control structures 
shall be used. 

6.1.8 Pipe drops are relatively inexpensive, usually have long lives, 
and provide crossings for field roads. Pipe drops shall have design 
capacities of 1*25 to 1*5 times the rate of flow indicated on the drainage 
curves. Small diameter pipe drops are subject to blockage by debrish. 
Hydraulic radius of the pipe line of the range 0*25 to 0*4 percent 
depending upon the size and overfall at the drain junction 0"15 to 0*3 
below design grades shall be provided. 

6.1.9 All uncultivated field laterals, side slopes and spoil banks shall be 
vegetated as soon as practical after cunstruction. Vegetative plants shall 
be selected for theinerosion resistance, wildlife habitat and beautification 
values. 



IS-. 11494-1986 

7, MAINTENANCE 

7.1 Timely maintenance is essential for continued adequate performance 
of a drainage system. Maintenance operations shall be planned when 
the system is designed. Inspection of the entire drainage system should 
be made following heavy rainfall, and at least once each year. Tillage 
operations should retain the shape of field surfaces as initially constructed. 
The two-way plough is desirable for primary tillage because dead 
furrows and back furrows can be eliminated or located to meet the needs 
of the drainage system. Where the one-way plough is used, dead 
furrows and back furrows shall be kept to a minimum, and shall be 
located so they will not restrict water flow. Unless dead and back 
furrows are parts of the drainage systems as in bedding, their locations 
shall be alternated annually. 

7.1.1 Field drains may require cleaning following tillage operations. 
When the field drains are not cultivated, weed growth shall be kept 
under control by mowing, spraying, or burning. 

7.1.2 Field laterals require periodic maintenance. Suitable chemical 
weed and bush sprays are effective in controlling cattails, williows, and 
other undesirable vegetation. Mowing is effective where side slopes are 
not steeper than 3:1. Controlled grazing of livestock is a good method. 
Laterals require clean out where excess deposition has occurred. 

7.1.3 Land grading maintenance is critical during the first year or 
two after construction. Settlement of the fill areas may make serveral 
annual land smoothing operations necessary. In some cases, particularly 
where deep fills have been made, it may be necessary to^ut and fill 
again with tractors and scrapers to eliminate depressions arrareverse row 
grades. It is recom^mxended that the land planning operation be substi= 
tuted for one of the secondary tillage operations. The final land main- 
tenance operations shall be in the direction of the crop rows. 

7.1.4 Transitions shall be checked frequently for restriction of drainage. 
Removal of deposition downstream from the transition may be the only 
maintenance required. 

7.1.5 Pipe drops shall be checked and maintained to see that the flow 
is not restricted, that overtopping of the fills is not causing excessive 
erosion ^nd that piping is not occurring along the conduits. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) 

Base Units 

Unit 



Quantity 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity 

Plane angle 
Solid angle 

Derived Units 

Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Symbol 



metre 


m 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candela 


cd 


m.ole 


mo! 


Unit 


Symbol 


radian 


rad 


steradian 


sr 


Unit 


Symbol 


newton 


N 


joule 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesia 


T 


hertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


volt 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

1 N = 1 kg.m/s» 
1 J - 1 N.m 
1 W - I J/s 

1 Wb = 1 V.s 
1 T = 1 Wb/m" 
1 Hz = 1 c/s (s"i) 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V = 1 W/A 
1 Pa « 1 N/m« 



