**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14176 (1994): Information Processing - Volume and File 
Structure of CD-ROM for Information Interchange [LITD 16: 
Computer Hardware, Peripherals and Identification Cards] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



iS 14176 : 1994 
ISO 966G : 1988 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



//7Gf/an Standard 

INFORMATION PROCESSING — VOLUME AND 

FILE STRUCTURE OF CD-ROM FOR 

INFORMATION INTERCHANGE 



UDC 681 .327.28 



O BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



June 1994 Price Group It 



Computer Peripherals and Media Sectional Committee, LTD 37 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with ISO 9660 : 1988 'Information processing — Volume and 
file structure of CD-ROM for information interchange\ issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the 
Computer Peripherals and Media Sectional Committee (LTD 37) and approval of the Electronics and 
Telecommunication Division Council. 

The text of the ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards; attention 
is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

c) For the purpose of this Indian Standard metric dimensions are applicable. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

in this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective 
places the following: 



International Standard 

ISO 646 Information processing 
— ISO 7-bit coded character set 
for information interchange 

ISO 1539 Programming lan- 
guages — FORTRAN 



Corresponding Indian 
Standard 

IS 10315 : 1994 7-bit coded 
character set for information 
interchange {first revision) 

IS 10680 : 1983 Programming 
languages — FORTRAN 



IS 1 2326 (Part 1 ) : 1 987 7-bit and 
8-bit coded character sets — 
Code extension techniques 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Identical 



Identical 



Identical 



ISO 2022 Information process- 
ing—ISO 7-bit and 8-bit coded 
character sets — Code extension 
techniques 

The ComputerPeripherals and Media Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following 
ISO Standard and has decided that this is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard : 



ISO 2375 Data processing — Procedure for registration of escape sequences 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



IndJan Standard 

INFORMATION PROCESSING — VOLUME AND 

FILE STRUCTURE OF CD-ROM FOR 

INFORMATION INTERCHANGE 



Section one : General 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies the volume and file struc- 
ture of compact read only optica! disks (CD-ROM) for the inter- 
change of information between users of information processing 
systems. 

This International Standard specifies 

— the attributes of the volume and the descriptors 
recorded on it; 

— the relationship among volumes of a volume set; 

— the placement of files; 

— the attributes of the files; 

— record structures intended for use in the input or out- 
put data streams of an application program when such data 
streams are required to be organized as sets of records; 

— three nested levels of medium interchange; 

— two nested levels of implementation; 

— requirements for the processes which are provided 
within information processing systems, to enable infor- 
mation to be interchanged between different systems, utiliz- 
ing recorded CD-ROM as the medium of interchange; for 
this purpose it specifies the functions to be provided within 
systems which are intended to originate or receive CD-ROM 
which conform to this International Standard. 



2 Conformance 

2.1 Conformance of a CD-ROM 

A CD-ROM shall be in conformance with this International 
Standard when ail information recorded on it conforms to the 
requirements of section two of this Internationa! Standard. A 
statement of conformance shall identify the lowest level of in- 
terchange to which the contents of the CD-ROM conform. 

A prerequisite to such conformance is conformance of the 
CD-ROM to a standard for recording (see 4.15). 



2.2 Conformance of an information processing 
system 

An information processing system shall be in conformance with 
this International Standard if it meets the requirements 
specified in sections two and three of this International Stan- 
dard either for an originating system, or for a receiving system, 
or for both types of system. A statement of conformance shall 
identify which level of these requirements can be met by the 
system. 

3 References 

ISO 646, Information processing — /SO 7-bit coded character 
set for information interchange. 

ISO 1539, Programming languages ~ FORTRAN. 

ISO 2022, Information processing — ISO 7~ bit and 8- bit coded 
character sets ~ Code extension techniques. 

ISO 2375, Data processing — Procedure for registration of 
escape sequences. 

ISO 4873, Information processing — ISO 8-bit code for infor- 
mation interchange — Structure and rules for implementation. 

International Register of Coded Character Sets to Be Used 
With Escape Sequences. 

Standards for recording: This International Standard assumes 
the existence of a standard for recording (see 4.15). 



4 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply : 

4.1 application program : A program that processes the 
contents of a file, and may also process selected attribute data 
relating to the file or to the volume(s) on which the file is 
recorded. 

NOTE — An application program is a specific class of user, as defined 
in this International -Standard. 

4.2 byte : A string of eight binary digits operated upon as a 
unit. 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



4.3 Data Fieid of a sector : A fixed-length field containing 
the data of a sector. 

4.4 data preparer : A person or other entity which controls 
the preparation of the data to be recorded on a volume group. 

NOTE — A data preparer is a specific class of user as defined in this 
International Standard. 

4.5 descriptor : A structure containing descriptive infor- 
mation about a volume or a file. 

4.6 Extent : A set of logical blocks, the logical block 
numbers of which form a continuous ascending sequence. 

4.7 file : A named collection of information. 

4.8 File Section : That part of a file that is recorded in any 
one extent. 

4=9 implementation : A set of processes which enable an 
information processing system to behave as an originating 
system, or as a receiving system, or as both types of system. 

4.10 Logical Block : A group of 2" '^ ^ bytes treated as a 
logical unit, where n equals or a positive integer. 

4.11 originating system : An information processing 
system which can create a set of files on a volume set for the 
purpose of data interchange with another system. 

4.12 receiving system : An information processing system 
which can read a set of files from a volume set which has been 
created by another system for the purpose of data interchange. 

4.13 record : A sequence of bytes treated as a unit of 
information. 

4.14 sector : The smallest addressable part of the recorded 
area on a CD-ROM that can be accessed independently of other 
addressable parts of the recorded area. 

4.15 standard for recording : A standard that specifies the 
recording method and the addressing method for the infor- 
mation recorded on a CD-ROM. 



The specifications of the standard for recording that are rel- 
evant for this International Standard are 

— a unique Physical Address for each recorded sector; 

— the location of the Data Field within each sector; 

— the length of the Data Field within each sector. 

NOTE — The standard for recording used in conjunction with this 
Internationa! Standard is subject to agreement between the originator 
and the recipient of the volumes. 

4.16 user : A person or other entity (for example, an appli- 
cation program) that causes the invocation of the services 
provided by an implementation. 

4.17 volume : A dismountable CD-ROM. 

4.18 Volume Set : A collection of one or more volumes, on 
which a set of files is recorded. 

5 Notation 

The following notation is used in this International Standard. 

5.1 Decimal and hexadecimal notations 

Numbers in decimal notation are represented by decimal digits, 
namely to 9, 

Numbers in hexadecimal notation are represented by 
hexadecimal digits, namely to 9 and A to F, shown in par- 
entheses, 

5.2 Other notation 

BP : Byte position within a descriptor, starting with 1 

RBP : Byte position within a descriptor field, starting with 1 

ZERO : A single bit with the value 

ONE : A single bit with the value 1 

Digit(s) : Any digit from DIGIT ZERO to DIGIT NINE 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Section two : Requirements for the medium 



6 Volume structure 



6.1 Arrangement of data on a CD-ROM 



The System Area shall occupy the Logical Sectors with Logical 
Sector Numbers to 15. The System Area shai( be reserved for 
system use. Its content is not specified by this International 
Standard. 



6.1.1 Physical Addresses 

Each sector shall be identified by a unique Physical Address as 
specified in the relevant standard for recording. 

6.1.2 Logical Sector 

The sectors of a volume shall be organized into Logical 
Sectors. Each Logical Sector shall consist of a number of bytes 
equal to 2 048 or 2^, whichever is larger, where n is the largest 
integer such that 2" is less than, or equal to, the number of 
bytes in the Data Field of any sector recorded on the volume. 
The number of bytes in a Logical Sector shall be referred to as 
the Logical Sector Size. Each Logical Sector shall begin in a 
different sector from any other Logical Sector, and shall begin 
with the first byte of the Data Field of the sector in which it 
begins. If the number of bytes of the Data Field of each sector 
recorded on the volume is less than 2 048, a Logical Sector 
shall comprise more than one sector, and the set of the 
Physical Addresses of its constituent sectors shall form a con- 
secutive ascending sequence. The data of a Logical Sector 
shall be recorded in the Data Fields of its constituent sectors. 

Each Logical Sector shall be identified by a unique Logical 
Sector Number. Logical Sector Numbers shall be integers 
assigned in an ascending sequence, in order of ascending 
Physical Addresses of the constituent sectors, starting with 
for the Logical Sector containing the sector having the lowest 
Physical Address which may contain recorded information. The 
numbering shall continue through successive Logical Sectors, 
each of which begins with the sector with the next higher 
Physical Address than that of the last sector constituting the 
previous Logical Sector. 

6.1.3 Volume Space 

The information on a volume shall be recorded in the set of all 
Logical Sectors on the volume. This set shall be referred to as 
the Volume Space of the volume. 

The bytes in the Volume Space shall be numbered consecutively. 
The numbering shall start with 1 , which shall be assigned to the 
first byte of the first Logical Sector of the Volume Space. The 
numbering shall continue through successive bytes of the first 
Logical Sector, and then through successive bytes of each 
successive Logical Sector, of the Volume Space. 



6.2 Arrangement of the Volume Space 

6,2.1 System Area and Data Area 

The Volume Space shall be divided into a System Area and a 
Data Area. 



The Data Area shall occupy the remaining Logical Sectors of 
the Volume Space. 

6.2.2 Logical Block 

The Volume Space shall be organized into Logical Blocks. Each 
Logical Block shall consist of 2^ ^ ^ bytes, where n equals or a 
positive integer. The number of bytes in a Logical Block shall be 
referred to as the Logical Block Size which shall not be greater 
than the Logical Sector Size. 

Each Logical Block shall be identified by a unique Logical Block 
Number. Logical Block Numbers shall be integers assigned in 
ascending order starting with 0. Logical Block Number shall 
be assigned to the Logical Block which begins with the first 
byte of the Volume Space. Each successive Logical Block 
Number shall be assigned to the Logical Block which begins 
with the byte in the Volume Space immediately following the 
last byte of the preceding Logical Block. 



6.3 Arrangement of the Data Area 

File Sections shall be recorded in the Data Area. More than one 
File Section of a file may be recorded on the same volume. 

The following types of descriptors shall be recorded in the Data 
Area to descM -je the use of the Data Area : 

— Volume Descriptors 
~ File Descriptors 

— Directory Descriptors 

— Path Tables 

The Volume Descriptors shall be recorded in consecutively 
numbered Logical Sectors starting with the Logical Sector 
having Logical Sector Number 16. The Logical Sectors in the 
Data Area shall be available for the assignment of Volume Par- 
titions and the recording of File Sections, File Descriptors, 
Directory Descriptors and Path Tables. 

Each File Section shall be recorded in an Extent, and shall be 
identified by a descriptor in a directory. An Extended Attribute 
Record can be associated with the File Section. If present, it 
shall be recorded in the same Extent as the associated File 
Section, and shall be identified by the descriptor that identifies 
the associated File Section. Each directory shall be recorded as 
a file in a single Extent, and shall be identified by a Directory 
Descriptor either in another directory or in a Volume Descrip- 
tor, Each directory shall also be identified by a record in a Path 
Table. Each Path Table shall be identified in a Volume 
Descriptor. 



IS 14176: 1994 
iSO 9660: 1988 



Space within the Data Area may be assigned to one or more 
Volume Partitions. Each Volum.e Partition shall be recorded in 
an Extent and shall be identified by a Volume Descriptor. 



6.4 Arrangement of Extents 



6.4.1 Extent 

An Extent shall be a set of Logical Blocks, the Logical Block 
Numbers of which form a continuous ascending sequence. 

6.4.2 Mode of recording a File Section 

A File Section, and its associated Extended Attribute Record if 
any, shall be recorded in an Extent either in interleaved mode or 
in non-interleaved mode. 

6.4.3 Interleaved nnode 

6.4.3.1 File Unit 

A File Unit shall comprise a set of Logical Blocks that are within 
an Extent and the Logical Block Numbers of which form a 
continuous ascending sequence. 

When a File Section is recorded in interleaved mode, one or 
more File Units, each consisting of the same number of Logical 
Blocks, shall be assigned to the File Section within the same 
Extent, The number of Logical Blocks in the File Unit shall be 
the assigned File Unit Size for the File Section. 

The first Logical Block of each File Unit shall have a Logical 
Block Number which is the lowest Logical Block Number in the 
Logical Sector that contains that Logical Block. 

The sequence of the File Units in an Extent shall correspond to 
the sequence of the Logical Block Numbers of the first Logical 
Block of each File Unit. 

NOTE - The Logical Blocks comprising a File Unit assigned to a File 
Section may 

— also each be assigned to a different File Section, and/or 
comprise part of one or more Volume Partitions. 

6.4.3.2 Interleave Gap 

An Interleave Gap shall comprise the set of Logical Blocks that 
are within an Extent and the Logical Block Numbers of which 
lie between the last Logical Block Number of a File Unit and the 
first Logical Block Number of the next File Unit, if any, in the 
sequence. All Interleave Gaps between the File Units assigned 
to a File Section shall comprise the same number of Logical 
Blocks. This number shall be the assigned Interleave Gap Size 
for the File Section. 

NOTE — The Logical Blocks comprising an Interleave Gap between the 
File Units assigned to a File Section may 

- also each be assigned to a different File Section, and/or 
comprise part of one or ^nore Volume Partitions. 



6.4.3.3 Relation of File Section to File Unit 

When a File Section is recorded in interleaved mode, the File 
Section, and its associated Extended Attribute Record, if any, 
shall be recorded over the sequence of File Units assigned to 
the File Section. 

6.4.3.4 Recording of an Extended Attribute Record 

If an Extended Atthbute Record is recorded it shall be recorded 
in the first File Unit of the sequence. The recording shall begin 
at the first byte of the first Logical Block of the File Unit. !t shall 
continue through successive bytes of that Logical Block, and 
then through successive bytes of successive Logical Blocks, if 
any, of the File Unit, until ail of the Extended Attribute Record 
is recorded. 

The assigned Extended Attribute Record length shall be equal 
to the assigned File Unit Size. 

6.4.3.5 Recording of a File Section 

The successive parts, if any, of the File Section shall be re- 
corded in successive File Units, starting from the second File 
Unit in the sequence if an Extended Attribute Record is re 
corded, and starting from the first File Unit in the sequence if 
no Extended Attribute Record is recorded. 

6.4.3.6 Data Space 

The set of File Units in which the successive parts of The File 
Section are recorded shall be the Data Space of the File 
Section. 

The bytes in the Data Space shall be numbered consecutively. 
The numbering shall start from 1 which shall be assigned to the 
first byte of the first Logical Block of the first File Unit, if any, of 
the Data Space. The numbering shall continue through suc- 
cessive bytes of that Logical Block, then through successive 
bytes of each successive Logical Block, if any, of the first File 
Unit, and then through successive bytes of the Logical Block(s) 
of each successive File Unit, if any, assigned to the File 
Section. 

The numbering shall end with a number equal to the number of 
bytes in which the File Section is recorded in the Data Space; 
or this number shall equal zero if there are no bytes of the file 
recorded in the Data Space. 



6.4.4 Non-interleaved mode 

When a File Section is recorded in non-interleaved mode the 
File Section, and its associated Extended Attribute Record, if 
any, shall be recorded over the sequence of Logical Blocks in 
an Extent. 

6.4.4.1 Recording of an Extended Attribute Record 

If an Extended Attribute Record is recorded, it shall be recorded 
over one or more Logical Blocks, the Logical Block Numbers of 
which form a continuous ascending sequence. The recording 
shall begin at the first byte of the first Logical Block of the Ex- 
tent. Itjshall continue through successive bytes of that Logical 



!S 14176: 19S4 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Block, and then through successive bytes of successive Logical 
Blocks, if any, of the Extent, until all of the Extended Attribute 
Record is recorded. 

The number of Logical Blocks over which the Extended 
Attribute Record is recorded shall be the assigned Extended 
Attribute Record length for the File Section. 

NOTE — The Logical Blocks comprising an Extended Attribute neoord 
assigned to a File Section may 

— also each be assigned to a different File Section, and/or 

— comprise part of one or more Volume Partitions. 

6.4.4.2 Recording of a File Section 

The File Section shall be recorded over zero or more Logical 
Blocks, the Logical Block Numbers of which form a continuous 
ascending sequence. If no Extended Attribute Record is re- 
corded, the sequence shall start with the first Logical Block of 
the Extent. If an Extended Attribute Record is recorded, the 
sequence shall start with the first Logical Block, if any, im- 
mediately following the last Logical Block over which the 
Extended Attribute Record is recorded. 



The other attributes identified in an Extended Attribute Record 
shall apply to that File Section and all preceding File Sections of 
the file (see 6.5.1). If no Extended Attribute Record is recorded 
in association with the last File Section of a file, then these 
attributes are not specified for the file. 

6.4.7 Recording of a Volume Partition 

If a Volume Partition is recorded, it shall be recorded over one 
or more Logical Blocks, the Logical Block Numbers of which 
form a continuous ascending sequence. The recording shall 
begin at the first byte of the first Logical Block of the Extent. It 
shall continue through successive bytes of that Logical Block, 
and then through successive bytes of successive Logical 
Blocks, if any, of the Extent, until all of the N/olume Partition is 
recorded. The first Logical Block of each Volume Partition shall 
have a Logical Block Number which is the lowest Logical Block 
Number in the Logical Sector that contains that Logical Block. 

The number of Logical Blocks over which the Volume Partition 
is recorded shall be the assigned Volume Partition Size for the 
Volume Partition. 



6.4.4.3 Data Space 

The set of Logical Blocks over which the File Section is re- 
corded shall be the Data Space of the File Section. 

The bytes in the Data Space shall be numbered consecutively. 
The numbering shall start from 1 which shall be assigned to the 
first byte of the first Logical Block, if any, of the Data Space. 
The numbering shall continue through successive bytes of that 
Logical Block, then through successive bytes of each suc- 
cessive Logical Block, if any, of the Data Space. 

The numbering shall end with a number equal to the number of 
bytes in which the File Section is recorded in the Data Space; 
or this number shall equal zero if there are no bytes of the file 
recorded in the Data Space. 



6.4.5 Data length of a File Section 

The data length of a File Section shall be the number of bytes in 
which the File Section is recorded in the Data Space. If this 
number is less than the number of bytes in the Data Space, 
then any remaining bytes in the Data Space shall be ignored in 
interchange. 



6.4.6 Relation of Extended Attribute Kecord to File 
Section 

An Extended Attribute Record may be associated with a File 
Section. If present, the Extended Attribute Record shall ident- 
ify certain attributes of the file of which the File Section forms a 
part. 

A subset of those attributes shall apply to all File Sections of a 
file that contains records according to 6.10. If any of those 
attributes are assigned to the file, an Extended Attribute 
Record shall be recorded in association with each of the File 
Sections of the file. 



6.5 File structure 



6.5.1 Relation to File Sections 

Each file shall consist of one or more File Sections. Each File 
Section of a file shall be identified by a record in the same direc- 
tory. The sequence of the File Sections of a file shall be ident- 
ified by the order of the corresponding records in the directory. 

A File Section may be part of more than one file and may occur 
more than once in the same file. A File Section may be ident- 
ified by more than one record in the same or a different 
directory. 

Each File Section of a file may be recorded on a different 
volume. 



6.5.2 Numbering of bytes in a file 

The bytes comprising a file shall be numbered consecutively. 
The numbering shall start from 1 which shall be assigned to the 
first byte of the first File Section, if any. The numbering shall 
continue through successive bytes of that File Section and then 
through successive bytes of each successive File Section, if 
any, of the file. 

The numbering shall end with a number equal to the sum of the 
number of bytes in all File Sections of the file. 

6.5.3 Contents of a file 

The information in a file shall be interpreted according to the 
relevant standards for the coded representation of information. 

NOTE — The identification of these standards is the subject of an 
agreement between the originator and the recipient of the file. 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



6.5.4 Associated File 

An Associated File has a relationship not specified by this Inter- 
national Standard to another file that has been assigned the 
same File Identifier (see 7.5) as that of the Associated File in the 
same directory. 

6.6 Volume Set 

A Volume Set shall be the set of volumes on which a set of files 
is recorded. 

A Volume Set shall consist of one or more volumes having 
common volume set identification and identifying the same 
coded graphic character sets for use within selected descriptor 
fields (see 7.4). All volumes in a Volume Set shall be numbered 
consecutively starting from 1 . 

A Volume Group within a Volume set shall consist of one or 
more consecutively numbered volumes the contents of which 
are established at the same time. The sequence number of the 
volume that has the highest sequence number within the 
Volume Group shall be the assigned Volume Set Size. 

Each volume of a Volume Set shall contain a description of all 
the directories and files that are recorded on those volumes the 
sequence numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the 
assigned Volume Set Size of the volume. 

NOTE ~ Such description recorded on a volume shall supersede the 
description recorded on any volume of the Volume Set having a lower 
assigned Volume Set Size. 

The Logical Block Size shall be the same for all volumes of a 
Volume Set. 



6.7 Volume Descriptors 

A Volume Descriptor shall be one of the following types : 

— Primary Volume Descriptor 

— Supplementary Volume Descriptor 

— Volume Partition Descriptor 

— Boot Record 

— Volume Descriptor Set Terminator 

6.7.1 Volume Descriptor Set 

A Volume Descriptor Set shall be a sequence of volume 
descriptors recorded in consecutively numbered logical Sec- 
tors starting with the Logical Sector with Logical Sector 
Number 16. Each successive Volume Descriptor shall be 
recorded in the Logical Sector with the next higher Logical 
Seclor Number than that of the Logical Sector in which the 
previous Volume Descriptor is recorded. The sequence shall 
consist of two or more volume descriptors consecutively 
recorded as follows. 



6.7.1.1 The sequence shall contain one Primary Volume 
Descriptor (see 8.4) recorded at least once. 

The Primary Volume Descriptor shall describe the Volume 
Space, and identify the attributes of the volume, the locations 
of a Root Directory and of a group of Path Tables, and the 
number of volumes in the Volume Set. 

6.7.1.2 The sequence may contain zero or more Supplemen- 
tary Volume Descriptors (see 8.5) each recorded at least once. 

A Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall describe the Volume 
Space, and identify the attributes of the volume, the locations 
of a Root Directory and of a group of Path Tables, and the 
number of volumes in the Volume Set. It shall also Identify the 
coded graphic character set used within selected fields of this 
descriptor, and of the fields in associated File Descriptors, 
Directory Descriptors and Path Tables. 

6.7.1.3 The sequence may contain zero or more Volume Par- 
tition Descriptors (see 8.6). 

A Volume Partition Descriptor shall identify a Volume Partition 
within the Volume Space, its position and size, and its 
attributes. 

6.7.1.4 The sequence may contain zero or more Boot Records 

(see 8.2). 

A Boot Record shall contain information which may beusedto 
achieve a specific state in a receiving system or an application 
program. 

6.7.1.5 The sequence shall be terminated by the recording of 
one or more Volume Descriptor Set Terminators (see 8.3). 



6.8 Directory structure 

6.8.1 Directory 

A directory shall be recorded as a file containing a set of 
records each of which identifies a File Section or another direc- 
tory. A directory shall not be recorded as an Associated File, 
shall not be recorded in interleaved mode and shall consist of 
only one File Section. 

The identification of a file shall be different from the identifi- 
cation of any other file, unless the file is an Associated File (see 
6.5,3), or of any directory identified in the same directory. The 
identification of a directory shall be different from the identi- 
fication of any file or of any other directory identified In the 
same directory. 

The first Logical Block of the Extent in which a directory is 
recorded shall have a Logical Block Number which is the lowest 
Logical Block Number in the Logical Sector that contains that 
Logical Block. 

6.8.1.1 Directory Record 

A Directory Record shall contain 

— information to locate a File Section; 



IS 14176 : 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



— information to locate any Extended Attribute Record 
associated with the File Section; 

— the identification of the file; 

— certain attributes of the file; 

— certain attributes of the Ftte Section. 

The first or only Directory Record recorded in a Logical Sector 
Shalt bec|in at the first byte of the first Data Field of that Logical 
Sector. Each subsequent Directory Record recorded in that 
Logical Sector shall begin at the byte imnnediately following the 
last byte of the preceding Directory Record in that Logical 
Sector. Each Directory Record shall end in the Logical Sector in 
which it begins. Unused positions after the last Directory 
Record in a Logical Sector shai' be set to (00). 

6.8.1.2 Order of Directory Records 

The records in a directory shall be ordered according to 9.3. 

6.8.1.3 Directory length 

The length of a directory shall be the sum of 

— the lengths of ail Directory Records in the directory; 

— the number of unused positions after the last Directory 
Record in all Logical Sectors in which the directory is 
recorded. 

6.8.2 Directory Hierarchy 

A Directory Hierarchy shall be a set of directories related to 
each other as follows. 

The root of the hierarchy, called the Root Directory, shall be a 
directory identified either in a Primary Volume Descriptor or in a 
Supplementary Volume Descriptor. 

Each directory, other than the Root Directory, shall be ident- 
ified by a record in another directory. 

A directory identifying another directory shall be called the 
Parent Directory of the identified directory. Each directory shall 
contain a record which identifies its Parent Directory. Different 
directories may have the Sa.ne Parent Directory. 

A hierarchical relationship shall exist between the Root Direc- 
tory and all other directories : 



Root 

X \ 

SUB 1 SUB 2 

/ \ 

SUB 3 



The hierarchy shall consist of a number of levels ii.e. for n 
levels : level 1, level 2,..., level n). The Root Directory shall be 
the one and only directory at level 1 of the hierarchy. 



If a directory is at level /;/ of the hierarchy, its Parent Directory 
shall be at level KmA). The Parent Directory of the Root Direc- 
tory shall (36 the Root Directory. 

6.8.2.1 Depth of Directory Hierarchy 

The number of levels in the hierarchy shall not exceed eight, in 
addition, for each file recorded, the sum of the following shall 
not exceed 255 : 

— the length of the File Identifier (see 7.5.2); 

— the length of the Directory Identifiers (see 7.6) of aM 
relevant directories; 

— the number of relevant directories. 

6.8.2.2 Identification of directories 

For a Root Directory 

— the first Directory Record of the Root Directory shall 
describe the Root Directory and shall have a Directory Ic^ent- 
ifier consisting of a single (00) byte; 

— the second Directory Record of the Root Directory shall 
describe the Root Directory and shall have a Directory Ident- 
ifier consisting of a single (01) byte; 

— a Directory Record describing the Root Directory shall 
be contained in the Root Directory field of the volume 
descriptor that identifies the directory hierarchy. 

For each directory other than the Root .Directory 

— the first Directory Record of the directory shall describe 
that directory and shall have a Directory Identifier consisting 
of a single (00) byte; 

— the second Directory Record of the directory shall 
describe the Parent Directory for that directory and sh*all 
have a Directory Identifier consisting of a single (01) byte; 

— a Directory Record in its Parent Directory shall describe 
the directory. 



6=8,3 Relation of Directory Hierarchies 

One or more Directory Hierarchies shall be recorded on a 
volume. 

A Directory Hierarchy shall be identified in the Primary Volume 
Descriptor. 

Each additional Directory Hierarchy shall be identified in a Sup- 
plementary Volume Descriptor. 

The directories within each hierarchy shall identify zero' or more 
of the files that are recorded in those volumes, the sequence 
numbers of which are less than, or equal to, the assigned 
Volume Set Size of the volume. 

A directory shall not be a part of more than one Directory 
Hierarchy, 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9S6G: 1988 



6.9 Path Table 

A Path Table recorded on a volume of a Volume Set shall con- 
tain a set of records describing a directory hierarchy for those 
volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of which are 
less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size of the 
volume. 

For each directory in the directory hierarchy other than the 
Root Directory, the Path Table shall contain a record which 
identifies the directory, its Parent Directory and its location. 
The records in a Path Table shall be numbered starting frorn 1. 
The first record in the Path Table shall identify the Root Direc- 
tory and its location. 

The directory number of a directory shall be the ordinal number 
of the Path Table Record that identifies the directory. 

6.9.1 Order of Path Table Records 

The records in a Path Table shall be ordered by the following 
criteria in descending order of significance : 

— in ascending order according to level in the directory 
hierarchy; 

— in ascending order according to the directory number 
of the Parent Directory of the directory identified by the 
record; 

— in ascending order according to the relative value of the 
Directory Identifier field in the record, where the Directory 
identifiers shall be valued as follows : 

If the two Directory Identifiers do not contain the same 
number of byte positions, the shorter Directory Identifier 
shall be treated as if it were padded on the right with all 
padding bytes set to (20), and as if both Directory Ident- 
ifiers contained the identical number of byte positions. 

After any padding necessary to treat the Directory Ident- 
ifiers as if they were of equal length, the characters in the 
corresponding byte positions, starting with the first posi- 
tion, of the Directory Identifiers are compared until a 
byte position is found that does not contain the same 
character in both Directory Identifiers. The^greater Direc- 
tory Identifier is the one that contains the character with 
the higher code position value in the coded graphic 
character set used to interpret the Directory Identifier of 
the Path Table Record. 



6.9.2 Path Table Group 

A Path Table shall be either a Type L Path Table or a Type M 
Path Table. 

in a Type L Path Table, a numerical value shall be recorded ac- 
cording to 7.2.1 if represented as a 16-bit number and accord- 
ing to 7.3.1 if represented as a 32-bit number. 

In a Type M Path Table, a numerical value shall be recorded 
according to 7.2.2 if represented as a 16-bit number and 
according to 7.3.2 if represented as a 32-bit number. 



A Path Table Group shall comprise one or two identical Type L 
Path Tables and one or two identical Type M Path Tables. 

6.9.3 Recorded Occurrences of the Path Table 

One or more Path Table Groups shall be recorded on a volume. 
The Primary Volume Descriptor shaH'identify the size and lo- 
cations of the constituent Path Tables of a Path Table Group. 
These Path Tables shall identify the directories in the Directory 
Hierarchy which is identified by the Primary Volume Descriptor. 

Corresponding to each additional Directory Hierarchy recorded 
on a volume an additional Path Table Group shall be recorded 
on the volume. For each such Path Table Group the cor- 
responding Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall identify the 
size and locations of its constituent Path Tables. These Path 
Tables shall identify the directories in the corresponding Direc 
tory Hierarchy. 

8.9.4 Consistency of Path Tables between volumes of a 
Volume Group 

6.9.4.1 The contents of a Type L Path Table identified in a 
Primary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the contents 
of any other Type L Path Table identified in a Primary Volume 
Descriptor on a volume of the same Volume Group. 

The contents of a Type M Path Table identified in a Primary 
Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the contents of any 
other Type M Path Table identified in a Primary Volume 
Descriptor on a volume of the same Volume Group. 

6.9.4.2 The contents of a Type L Path Table identified in a 
Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the 
contents of any other Type L Path Table identified in a 
Supplementary Volume Descriptor, having the same volume 
set identification and identifying the samexoded graphic 
character sets for use within selected descriptor fields (see 7.4), 
on a volume of the same Volume Group. 

The contents of a Type M Path Table identified in a 
Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall be identical with the 
contents of any other Type M Path Table identified in a Sup- 
plementary Volume Descriptor, having the same volume set 
identification and identifying the same coded graphic character 
sets for use within selected descriptor fields (see 7.4), on a 
volume of the same Volume Group. 



6.10 Record structure 

The information in a file may be organized as a set of records 
according to this clause. 

6.10,1 Characteristics 

A record shall be a sequence of bytes treated as a unit of 
information. 

The length of a record shall be the number of bytes in the 
record. 

A record shall be either a fixed-length record, or a variable- 
length record. 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



All records in a file shall be either fixed-length records or 
variable-length records. 

6.10.2 Measured Data Units {MDU) 

6.10.2.1 Contents of an MDU 

A Measured Data Unit shall contain either a fixed-length record 
or a variable-length record. An MDU shall comprise an even 
nunnber of bytes. 

6.10.2.2 Relationship to File 

Each MDU shall comprise a set of successive bytes of the file. 
The first or only MDU shall begin at the first byte of the file. 
Each successive MDU shall begin at the byte in the file im- 
mediately following the last byte of the preceding MDU. 

6.10.3 Fixed-length records 

A fixed-length record shall be a record contained In a file that is 
assigned to contain records that must have the same length. 

A fixed-length record shall be contained in an MDU. The MDU 
shall consist of the fixed-length record, immediately followed 
by a (00) byte if necessary to give the MDU an even length. 

The minimum assigned length of a fixed-length record shall 
be 1. 

6.10.4 Variable-length records 

A variable-length record shall be a record contained in a file that 
is assigned to contain records that may have different lengths. 
The value recorded in the Record Format field of an Extended 
Attribute Record for a file containing variable-length records 
shall contain the same value as that recorded In the Record 
Format field of any other Extended Attribute Record of that 
same file. 

A variable-length record shall be contained in an MDU. The 
MDU shall consist of a Record Control Word (RCWI im- 
mediately followed by the variable-length record, immediately 
followed by a (00) byte if necessary to give the MDU an even 
length. 

The RCW shall specify as a 16-bit number the length of the 
record. The RCW shall be recorded according to 

— 7.2.1, if the value in the Record Format field of the 
Extended Attribute Record associated with the File Section 
is 2, or 

— 7.2.2, if the value in the Record Format field of the 
Extended Attribute Record associated with the File Section 
is 3. 



7 Recording of descriptor fields 



7.1 8-bit numerical values 

A numerical value represented in binary notation by an 8-bit 
number shall be recorded in a field of a descriptor in one of the 
following two formats. The applicable format is specified in the 
description of the descriptor fields. 

7.1.1 8-bit unsigned numerical values 

An unsigned numerical value shall be represented in binary 
notation by an 8-bit number recorded in a one-byte field. 

7.1.2 8-bit signed numerical values 

A signed numerical value shall be represented in binary no- 
tation by an 8-bit two's complement number recorded in a one- 
byte field. 

7.2 16-bit numerical value 

A numerical value represented In binary notation by a 16'bit 
number shall be recorded in a"field of a descriptor in one of the 
following three formats. The applicable format is specified in 
the description of the descriptor fields. 

7.2.1 Least significant byte first 

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal represen- 
tation (wx yz) shall be recorded in a two-byte field as (yz wx). 

NOTE — For example, the decimal number 4 660 has (12 34) as its 
hexadecimal representation and is recorded as {34 12). 

7.2.2 Most significant byte first 

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal represen- 
tation (wx yz) shall be recorded in a two-byte field as (wx yz). 

NOTE - For example, the decimal number 4 660 has (12 34) as its 
hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (12 34). 



7.2.3 Both-byte orders 

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal represen- 
tation (wx yz) shall be recorded in a four-byte field as (yz wx 
wx yz). 

NOTE - For example, the decimal number 4 660 has (12 34) as its 
hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (34 12 12 34). 



A maximum record length shall be assigned for a file. The 
length of any record in the file shall not exceed this value. The 
assigned maximum record length shall be in the range 1 to 
32 767. 

The minimum length of a variable-length record shall be 0. 



7.3 32-bit numerical values 

A numerical value represented in binary notation by a 32-bit 
number shall be recorded in a field of a descriptor in one of the 
following three formats. The applicable format is specified in 
the description of the descriptor fields. 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



7.3.1 Least significant byte first 

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal represen- 
tation (st uv wx yz) shall be recorded in a four-byte field as 
(yz wx uv St). 

NOTE - For exampie, the decirr.al number 305 413 836 has {12 34 56 
78) as its hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (78 56 34 12). 

7.3.2 Most significant byte first 

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal represen- 
tation (st uv wx yz) shall be recorded in a four-byte field as (st 
uv wx yz). 

NOTE -' For example, the decimal number 305 419 896 has (12 34 56 
78) as its hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (12 34 56 78). 

7.3.3 Both-byte orders 

A numerical value represented by the hexadecimal represen- 
tation (st uv wx yz) shall be recorded in an eight-byte field as 

(yz wx uv st st uv wx yz). 

NOTE For example, the decimal number 305 419 896 has {12 34 56 
78) as its hexadecimal representation and is recorded as (78 56 34 12 12 
34 56 78). 



7.4 Character sets and coding 

7.4.1 d-characters and a-characters 

Except as specified in 7.4.4, the characters in the descriptors 
shall be coded according to ISO 646 (see annex A). 

The 37 characters in the following positions of the International 
Reference Version are referred to as d-characters : 

3/0 to 3/9 
4/1 to 5/10 
5/15 

The 57 characters in the following positions of the International 
Reference Version are referred to as a-characters : 

2/0 to 2/2 
2/5 to 2/15 
3/0 to 3/15 
4/1 to 4/15 
5/0 to 5/10 
5/15 

The applicable set of characters is specified in the description 
of the descriptor fields. 

7.4.2 c-characters 

The characters of the coded grap!iic character sets identified by 
the escape sequences in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor 
are referred to as c-characters. 



7.4.2.1 al-characters 

A subset of the c-characters will be referred to as 
a1-characters. This subset shall be subject to agreement be- 
tween the originator and the recipient of the volume. 

7.4.2.2 dl-characters 

A subset of the a 1 -characters will be referred to as 
dl-characters. This subset shall be the subject of agreement 
between the originator and the recipient of the volume. 

7.4.3 Separators 

The characters separating the components of a File Identifier 
shall be 

SEPARATOR 1 represented by the bit combination (2E) 
SEPARATOR 2 represented by the bit combination |3B) 

7.4.4 Use of characters in descriptor fields 

The characters in the fields of the following descriptors shall be 
a-characters or d-characters as specified in clause 9. 

~ Directory records within a Directory Hierarchy that is 
identified in a Primary Volume Descriptor; 

-~ Path Table records within a Path Table Group identified 
in a Primary Volume Descriptor; 

— Extended Attribute records identified in a directory of a 
Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Primary Volume 
Descriptor. 

The characters in the fields of the following descriptors shall be 
al-characters or dl-characters as specified in clause 9. 

— Directory records within a Directory Hierarchy that is 
identified in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor; 

— Path Table records within a Path Table Group identified 
in a Supplementary Volume Descriptor; 

— Extended Attribute records identified in a directory of a 
Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Supplementary 
Volume Descriptor. 

7.4.5 Justification of characters 

In each fixed-length field the content of which is specified by 
this International Standard to be characters, the characters 
shall be left-justified and any remaining positions on the right 
shad beset to (20). 



7.5 P-iie identifier 

7.5.1 File identifier format 

A File Identifier shall consist of the following sequence : 

" File Name : A sequence of zero or more d-characters or 
dl-characters; 

- SEPARATOR 1; 



10 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



— File Name Extension: A sequence of zero or more 
d-characters or dl-characters; 

— SEPARATOR 2; 

— File Version Number: Digits representing a number 
from 1 to 32 767. 

This sequence shad meet the following requirements: 

— If no characters are specified for the File Name then the 
File Name€xtension shall consist of at least one character. 

— If no characters are specified for the Fiie Name Exten- 
sion then the File Name shall consist of at least one 
character. 

— The sum of the following shall not exceed 30: 

if there is a File Name, the length of the File Name ; 

if there is a File Name Extension, the length of the File 
Name Extension. 



7.5.2 File Identifier length 

The length of the File Identifier shall be the sum of the 
following : 

— if there is a File Name, the length of the File Name, 

— if there is a File Name Extension, the length of the File 
Name Extension, 

— if there is a File Version Number, the number of digits in 
the File Version Number, 

— the number of SEPARATORS. 



7.6 Directory Identifier 

7.6.1 Directory Identifier Format 

A Directory Identifier shall consist of a sequence of one or more 
d-characters or d1 -characters (see 7.4.4), except as specified in 
7.6.2. 

7.6.2 Reserved Directory Identifiers 

The Directory Identifier of a Directory Record describing the 
Root Directory shall consist of a single {00} byte. 

The Directory Identifier of the first Directory Record of each 
directory shall consist of a single (00) byte. 

The directory Identifier of the second Directory Record of each 
directory shall consist of a single (01) byte. 

7.6.3 Directory Identifier length 

The length of a Directory Identifier shall not exceed 31. 



8 Volume Descriptors 

The Volume Descriptors shall identify the volume, the par- 
titions recorded on the volume, the volume creator(s), certain 
attributes of the volume, the location of other recorded descrip- 
tors and the version of the standard which applies to the 
volume descriptor. 

8.1 Format of a Volume Descriptor 

Table 1 — Volume Descriptor 



BR 


Field name 


Content 


1 

2 to 6 

7 

8 to 2 048 


Volunne Descriptor Type 
Standard Identifier 
Volume Descriptor Version 
(Depends on Volume 
Descriptor Type) 


numerical value 
CD001 

numerical value 
(Depends on Volume 
Descriptor Type) 



8.1.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the Volume Descrip- 
tor Type. 

Number shall mean that the volume Descriptor is a Boot 
Record ; 

Number 1 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Primary 
Volume Descriptor; 

Number 2 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Sup- 
plementary Volume Descriptor; 

Number 3 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Volume 
Partition Descriptor; 

Nunrrbers 4 to 254 are reserved for future standardization; 

Number 255 shall mean that the Volume Descriptor is a Volume 
Descriptor Set Terminator. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.1.2 Standard Identifier (BP 2 to 6) 

This field shall specify an identification of this International 
Standard. 

The characters in this field shall be CD001. 

8.1.3 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the 
specification of the Volume Descriptor. 

The content and the interpretation of this field shall depend on 
the content of the Volume Descriptor Type field. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.1 .4 Depends on Volume Descriptor Type ( BP 8 to 2 048) 

The content and the interpretation of this field shall depend on 
the Volume Descriptor Typ^ field. 



11 



IS 14176 : 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



8.2 Boot Record 

The Boot Record shall identify a system which can recognize 
and act upon the content of the field reserved for boot system 
use in the Boot Record, and shall contain information which is 
used to achieve a specific state for a system or for an appli- 
cation. 

Table 2 — Boot Record 



BP 


Field name 


Content 


1 


Volume Descriptor Type 


numerical value 


2 to 6 


Standard Identifier 


CD001 


7 - 


Volume Descriptor Version 


numerical value 


8 to 39 


Boot System Identifier 


a-characters 


40 to 71 


Boot Identifier 


a-characters 


72 to 2 048 


Boot System Use 


not specified 



8.2.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) 

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the 
Volume Descriptor is a Boot Record. 

The number in this field shall be 0. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.2.2 Standard Identifier (BP 2 to 6) 

This field shall specify an identification of this International 
Standard. 

The characters in this field shall be CD001 . 

8.2.3 Volimie Descriptor Version (BP 7) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the 
specification of the Boot Record structure. 

1 Shalt indicate the structure of this International Standard, 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.2.4 Boot Systenfi Identifier (BP 8 to 39) 

This field shall specify an identification of a system which can 
recognize and act upon the content of the Boot Identifier and 
Boot System Use fields in the Boot Record. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 

8.2.5 Boot Identifier (BP 40 to 71) 

This field shall specify an identification of the boot system 
specified in the Boot System Use field of the Boot Record. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 

8.2.6 Boot System Use (BP 72 to 2 048) 

This field shall be reserved for boot system use. Its contents is 
not specified by this International Standard. 



8.3 Volume Descriptor Set Terminator 

The recorded set of Volume Descriptors shall be terminated by 
a sequence of one or more Volume Descriptor Set Terminators. 

Table 3 — Volume Descriptor Set Terminator 



BP 


Field name 


Content 


1 

2 to 6 

7 

8 to 2 048 


Volume Descriptor Type 
Standard Identifier 
Volume Descriptor Version 
(Resen/ed for future 
standardization 


numerical value 
CDOOl 

numerical value 
(00) bytes 



8.3.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) 

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the 
Volume Descriptor is a Volume Descriptor Set Terminator. 

The number in this field shall be 255. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.3.2 Standard Identifier (BP 2 to 6) 

This field shall specify an identification of this International 
Standard. 

The characters in this field shall be CDOOl. 

8.3.3 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the 
specification of the Volume Descriptor Set Terminator. 

1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.3.4 Reserved for future standardization (BP 8 to 2 048) 

All bytes of this field shall be set to (00). 

8.4 Primary Volume Descriptor 

The Primary Volume Descriptor shall identify the volume, a 
system which can recognize and act upon the content of the 
Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers to 15, the size 
of the Volume Space, the version of the standard which applies 
to the Volume Descriptor, the version of the specification 
which applies to the directory records and the Path Table 
records and certain attributes of the volume. 

8.4.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) 

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the 
volume descriptor is a Primary Volume Descriptor. 

The number in this field shall be 1 . 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 



12 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



Table 4 — Primary Volume Descriptor 



BP 


Held name 


Content 


1 


Volume Descriptor Type 


numerical value 


2 to 6 


Standard Identifier 


CD001 


7 


Volume Descriptor Version 


numerical value 


8 


Unused Field 


(00) byte 


9 to 40 


System Identifier 


a-characters 


41 to 72 


Volume Identifier 


d- characters 


73 to 80 


Unused Field 


(00) bytes 


81 to 88 


Volume Space Size 


numerical value 


89 to 120 


Unused Field 


(00) bytes 


121 to 124 


Volume Set Size 


numerical value 


125 to 128 


Volume Sequence Number 


numerical value 


129 to 132 


Logical Block Size 


numerical value 


133 to 140 


Path Table Size 


numerical value 


141 to 144 


Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table 


numerical value 


145 to 148 


Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L 
Path Table 


numerical value 


149 to 152 


Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table 


numerical value 


153 to 156 


Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M 
Path Table 


numerical value 


157 to 190 


Directory Record for Root Directory 


34 bytes 


191 to 318 


Volume Set Identifier 


d-characters 


319 to 446 


Publisher Identifier 


a-characters 


447 to 574 


Data Preparer Identifier 


a-characters 


575 to 702 


Application Identifier 


a-characters 


703 to 739 


Copyright File Identifier 


d-characters, 

SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2 


740 to 776 


Abstract File Identifier 


d-characters, 

SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2 


777 to 815 


Bibliographic File Identifier 


d-characters, 

SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2 


814 to 830 


Volume Creation Date and Time 


D(git(s), numerical value 


831 to 847 


Volume Modification Date and Time 


Digit(s), numerical value 


848 to 864 


Volume Expiration Date and Time 


Diglt(s), numerical value 


865 to 881 


Volume Effective Date and Time 


Digit(s), numerical value 


882 


File Structure Version 


numerical value 


883 


(Reserved for future standardization) 


(00) byte 


884 to 1 395 


Application Use 


not specified 


1 396 to 2 048 


{Reserved for future standardization) 


(00) byte 



8.4.2 Standard Identifrer (BP 2 to 6) 

This Field shall specify an identification of this International 
Standard. 

The characters in this field shall be CD001, 

8.4.3 Volume Descriptor Version IBP 7) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number an identification of 
the version of the specification of the Primary Volume Descrip- 
tor. 

1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.4.4 Unused Field (BP 8) 

This field shad be set to (00). 



8.4.5 System Identifier (BP 9 to 40) 

This field shall specify an identification of a system which can 
recognize and act upon the content of the Logical Sectors with 
logical Sector Numbers to t5 of the volume. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 

8.4.6 Volume Identifier (BP 41 to 72) 

This field shall specify an identification of the volume. 
The characters in this field shall be d-characters. 

8.4.7 Unused Field (BP 73 to 80) 

AH bytes of this field shall be set to (00). 

8.4.8 Volume Space Size (BP 81 to 88) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the number of Logical 
Blocks in which the Volume Space of the volume is recorded. 



13 



!S 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



This field shall be Fecorded according to 7.3.3. 

8.4.9 Unused Field (BP 89 to 120) 

All bytes of this field shall be set to (00). 

8.4.10 Volume Set Size (BP 121 to 124) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number the assigned Volume 
Set Size of the volume. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 

8.4.11 Volume Sequence Number {BP 125 to 1^) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number the ordinal number of 
the volume in the Volume Set of which the volume is a 
member. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 



8.4.12 Logical Block Size (BP 129 to 132) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number the size, in bytes, of a 
Logical Block. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 



8.4.13 Path Table Size (BP 133 to 140) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the length in bytes of 
a recorded occurrence of the Path Table identified by this 
Volume Descriptor. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. 



8.4.16 Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table 
(BP 149 to 152) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte 
numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path 
Table shall be recorded with the most significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.2. 

8.4.17 Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path 
Table (BP 153 to 156) 

This field shall specify as a 32-b(t number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value 
is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have 
been recorded. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of 
this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the 
most significant byte first. 

This field ^hall be recorded according to 7.3.2. 

8.4.18 Directory Record for Root Directory 
(BP 157 to 190) 

This field shall contain an occurrence of the Directory Record 
for the Root directory- 

This field shall be recorded according to 9.1. 

8.4.19 Volume Set Identifier (BP 191 to 318) 

This field shall specify an identification of the Volume Set of 
which the volume is a member. 

The characters in this field shall be d-characters. 



8.4.14 Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table 
(BP 141 to 144) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte 
numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path 
Table shall be recorded with the least significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1. 



8,4.15 Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L Path 
Table (BP 145 to 148) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value 
is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have 
been recorded. iViultiple-byte numerical values in a record of 
this occurrence of the Path Tabia shall be recorded with the 
least significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7,3.1. 



8.4.20 Publisher Identifier (BP 319 to 446) 

This field shall specify an identification of the user who 
specified what shall be recorded on the Volume Group of which 
the volume is a member. 

If the first byte is set to (5F|, the remaining bytes of this field 
shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification 
of the user. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. 
The File Name shall not contain more than eight d-characters 
and the File Name Extension shall not contain more than three 
d-characters. 

If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
user is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 



8.4.21 Data Preparer identifier (BP 447 to 574) 

This field shall specify an identification of the person or other 
entity which controls the prepapration of the data to be re- 
corded on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member. 



14 



IS 14176 M994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field 
shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification 
of the data preparer. This file shall be described in the Root 
Directory, The File Name shall not contain more than eight 
d-characters and the File Name Extension shall not contain 
more than three d-characters. 

If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
data preparer is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 



8.4.22 Application Identifier (BP 575 to 702) 

This field shall specify an identification of the specification of 
how the data are recorded on the Volume Group of which the 
volume is a member. 

if the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this fieid 
shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification 
of the application. This file shall be described in the Root Direc- 
tory. The File Name shall not contain more than eight 
d-characters and the File Name Extension shall not contain 
more than three d-characters. 

If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
application is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 



The characters in this field shall be d-characters, SEPARATOR 1 
and SEPARATOR 2. 

This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 



8.4.25 Bibliographic File Identifier (BP 777 to 813) 

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by 
the Root Directory and containing bibliographic records inter- 
preted according to standards that are the subject of an agree- 
ment between the originator and the recipient of the volume. If 
all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
file is identified. 

The File Name of a Bibliographic File Identifier shall not contain 
more than eight d-characters. The File Name Extension of a 
Bibliographic File Identifier shall not contain more than three 
d-characters. 

The characters in this field shall be d-characters, SEPARATOR 1 
and SEPARATOR 2. 

This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 



8.4.26 Volume Creation Date and Time (BP 814 to 830) 

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the volume was created. It shall be recorded 
according to 8.4,26.1. 



8.4.23 Copyright File Identifier (BP 703 to 739) 

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by 
the Root Directory and containing a copyright statement for 
those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of 
which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size 
of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall 
mean that no such file is identified. 

The File Name of a Copyright File Identifier shall not contain 
more than 8 d-characters. Ttie File Name Extension of a 
Copyright File lden€ ier shall not contain more than 
3 d-characters. 

The characters in this fieid shaii be d-characters, SEPARATOR 1 
and SEPARATOR 2. 

This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 



8.4.24 Abstract File Identifier (BP 740 to 776) 

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by 
the Root Directory and containing an abstract statement for 
those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of 
which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size 
of the volume. If a!! bytes of this field are set to (20), It shall 
mean that no such file is identified. 

The File Name of an Abstract File Identifier shall not contain 
more than 8 d-characters. The File Name Extension of an 
Abstract File Identifier shall not contain more than 
3 d-characters. 



8.4.26.1 Date and Time Format 

The date and time shall be represented by a 17-byte field 
recorded as follows. 

Table 5 — Date and Time Format 



RBP 


Interpretation 


Content 


1 to 4 


Year from 1 to 9999 


Digits 


5 to 6 


Month of the year from 1 to 12 


Digits 


7 to 8 


Day of the month from 1 to 31 


Digits 


9 to 10 


Hour of the day from to 23 


Digits 


11 to 12 


Minute of the hour from to 59 


Digits 


13 to 14 


Second of the minute from to 59 


Digits 


15 to 16 


Hundredths of a second 


Digits 


17 


Offset frcm Greenwich Mean Time 


numerical 




In number of 15 min intervals from 


value 




-48 (West! to +52 (East) recorded 






according to 7.1.2 





If ail characters in RBP 1 to 16 of this fieid are the digit ZERO 
and the number in RBP 17 is zero, it shall mean that the date 
and time are not specified. 



8.4.27 yolume Modification Date and Time 
(BP831 to 847) 

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the volume was last modified. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1. 



15 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



8.4.28 Volume Expiration Date and Time (BP 848 to 864) 

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the volume may be regarded as obsolete. If 
the date and time are not specified then the information shall 
not be regarded as obsolete. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1. 



8.4.31 Reserved for future standardization (BP 883) 

All bytes of this field shall be set to (00). 

8.4.32 Application Use (BP 884 to 1 395) 

This field shall be reserved for application use. Its content is not 
specified by this International Standard. 



8.4.29 Volume Effective Date and Time (BP 865 to 881) 

This f ielS shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the volume may be used. If the date and time 
are not specified then the information may be used at once. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1. 



8.4.30 File Structure Version (BP 882) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the version of the 
specification of the records of a directory and of a Path Table. 

1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 



8.4.33 Reserved for future standardization 
(BP 1 396 to 2 048) 

This field shall be set to (00). 

8.5 Supplementary Volume Descriptor 

The Supplementary Volume Descriptor shall identify the 
volume, a system which can recognize and act upon the content 
of the Logical Sectors with Logical Sector Numbers to 15, the 
size of the Volume Space, the version of the standard which 
applies to the Volume Descriptor, the version of the specifi- 
cation which applies to the directory records and the Path 
Table records, certain attributes of the volume and the coded 
graphic character sets used to interpret descriptor fields that 
contain characters. 



Table 8 — Supplementary Volume Descriptor 



BP 



Field name 



Content 



1 


Volume DescriptorType 


2 to 6 


Standard Identifier 


7 " 


Volume Descriptor Version 


8 


Volume Flags 


9 to 40 


System Identifier 


41 to 72 


Volume Identifier 


73 to 80 


Unused Field 


81 to 88 


Volume Space Size 


89 to 120 


Escape Sequences 


121 to 124 


Volume Set Size 


125 to 128 


Volume Sequence number 


129 to 132 


Logical Block Size 


133 to 140 


Path Table Size 


141 to 144 


Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table 


145 to 148 


Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L Path Table 


149 to 152 


Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table 


153 to 156 


Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table 


157 to 190 


Directory Record for Root Directory 


191 to 318 


Volume Set Identifier 


319 to 446 


Publisher Identifier 


447 to 574 


Data Preparer Identifier 


575 to 702 


Application Identifier 


703 to 739 


Copyright File Identifier 


740 to 776 


Abstract File Identifier 


777 to 813 


Bibliographic File Identifier 


814 to 830 


Volume Creation Date and Time 


831 to 847 


Volume Modification Date and Time 


848 to 864 


Volume Expiration Date and Time 


865 to 881 


Volume Effective Date and Time 


882 


File Structure Version 


883 


(Reserved for future Standardization) 


884 to 1 395 


Application Use 


1 396 to 2 048 


(Reserved for future standardization) 



numerical value 

CD001 

numerical value 

8 bits 

a1 -characters 

dl-characters 

(00) bytes 

numerical value 

32 bytes 

numerical value 

numerical value 

numerical value 

numerical value 

numerical value 

numerical value 

numerical value 

numerical value 

34 bytes 

dl-characters 

a1 -characters 

a1 -characters 

al-characters 

dl-characters, SEPARATOR 1, 

SEPARATOR 2 

dl-characters, SEPARATOR 1, 

SEPARATOR 2 

dl-characters, SEPARATOR 1, 

SEPARATOR 2 

Digit(s), numerical value 

Digit(s), numerical value 

Dtgit(s), numerical value 

Digit(s), numerical value 

numerical value 

(00) byte 

not specified 

(00) bytes 



16 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Within a Volume Descriptor Set the contents of the fields of 
this descriptor shall be identical with the contents of the cor- 
responding fields in a Primary Volume Descriptor except for the 
following fields. 

8.5.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) 

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the 
Volume Descriptor is a Supplementary Volume Descriptor. 

The number in this field shall be 2. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.5.2 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number an identification of 
the Version of the specification of the Supplementary Volume 
Descriptor. 

1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

8.5.3 Volume Flags (BP 8) 

The bits of this field shall be numbered from to 7 starting with 
the least significant bit. 

This field shall specify certain characteristics of the volume as 
follows. 

Bit 0: — if set to ZERO, shall mean that the Escape Sequences 
field specifies only escape sequences registered according to 
ISO 2>35; 

— if set to ONE, shall mean that the Escape Sequences 
field specifies at least one escape sequence not registered ac- 
cording to ISO 2375. 

Bits 1 to 7:These bits are reserved for future standardization 
and shall all be set to ZERO. 

8.5.4 System Identifier (BP 9 to 40) 

This field shall specify an identification of a system which can 
recognize and act upon the content of the Logical Sectors with 
Logical Sector Numbers to 15 of the volume. 

The characters in this field shall be a1 -characters. 

8.5.5 Volume Identifier (BP 41 to 72) 

This field shall specify an identification of the volume. 
The characters in this field shall be d1 -characters. 

8.5.6 Escape Sequences (BP 89 to 120) 

This field shall specify one or more escape sequences according 
to ISO 2022 that designate the GO graphic character set and, 
optionally, the G 1 graphic character set to be used in an 8-bit 



environment according to ISO 2022 to interpret descriptor 
fields related to the Directory Hierarchy identified by this 
Volume Descriptor (see 7.4.4). If the 01 set is designated, it is 
implicitly invoked into columns 10 to 15 of the code table. 

These escape sequences shall conform to ISO 2022, except 
that the ESCAPE character shall be omitted from each 
designating escape sequence when recorded in this field. The 
first or only escape sequence shall begin at the first byte of the 
field. Each successive escape sequence shall begin at the byte 
in the field immediately following the last byte of the preceding 
escape sequence. Any unused positions following the last 
sequence shall be set to (00). 

If all the bytes of this field are set to (00), it shall mean that the 
set of a 1 -characters is identical with the set of a-characters and 
that the set of d1 -characters is identical with the set of 
d-characters. In this case both sets are coded according to 
ISO 646. 



8.5.7 Path Table Size (BP 133 to 140) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the length in bytes of 
a recorded occurrence of the Path Table identified by this 
Volume Descriptor. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. 



8.5.8 Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table 
(BP 141 to 144) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte 
numerical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path 
Table ?hall be recorded with the least significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1. 

8.5.9 Location of Optional Occurrence of Type L Path 
Table (BP 145 to 148) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value 
is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have 
been recorded. Multiple-byte numerical values in a record of 
this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the 
least significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.1. 

8.5.10 Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table 
(BP 149 to 152) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an occurrence of the Path Table. Multiple-byte 
nunierical values in a record of this occurrence of the Path 
Table shall be recorded with the most significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.2. 



17 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



8.5.11 Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path 
Table {BP 153 to 156) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent which 
contains an optional occurrence of the Path Table. If the value 
is 0, it shall mean that the Extent shall not be expected to have 
been recorded. Muttiple-byte numerical values in a record of 
this occurrence of the Path Table shall be recorded with the 
most significant byte first. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.2. 

8.5.12 Directory Record for Root Directory 
(BP 157 to 190) 

This field shall contain an occurrence of the Directory Record 
for the Root Directory. 

This field shall be recorded according to 9.1. 

8.5.13 Volume Set Identifier (BP 191 to 318) 

This field shall specify an identification of the Volume Set of 
which the volume is a member. 

The characters in this field shall be d1 -characters. 



8.5.14 Publisher Identifier (BP 319 to 446) 

This field shall specify an identification of the user who 
specified what shall be recorded on the Volume Group of which 
the volume is a member. 

If the first byte is set to {5F), the remaining bytes of this field 
shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification 
of the user. This file shall be described in the Root Directory. 

If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
user is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be a 1 -characters. 

8.5.15 Data Preparer Identifier (BP 447 to 574) 

This field shall specify an identification of the person or other 
entity which controls the preparation of the data to be recorded 
on the Volume Group of which the volume is a member. 

If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field 
shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification 
of the data preparer. This file shall be described in the Root 
Directory. 

If alt bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
data preparer is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be a 1 -characters. 

8.5.16 Application Identifier (BP 575 to 702) 

This field shall specify an identification of the specification of 
how the data are recorded on the Volume Group of which the 
volume is a member. 



If the first byte is set to (5F), the remaining bytes of this field 
shall specify an identifier for a file containing the identification 
of the application. This file shall be described in the Root Direc- 
tory. 

If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall nnean that no such 
application is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be a 1 -characters. 

8,5.17 Copyright File Identifier (BP 703 to 739) 

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by 
the Root Directory and containing a copyright statement for 
those volumes of the Volume Set the sequence numbers of 
which are less than, or equal to, the assigned Volume Set Size 
of the volume. If all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall 
mean that no such file is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be dl-characters, 
SEPARATOR 1 and SEPARATOR 2. 

The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 

8.5.19 Bibliographic File Identifier (BP 777 to 813) 

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by 
the Root Directory and containing bibliographic records inter- 
preted according to standards that are the subject of an agree- 
ment between the originator and the recipient of the volume. If 
all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
file is identified. 



The characters in this field shall 
SEPARATOR 1 and SEPARATOR 2. 



be d1 -characters, 



The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 

8.5.19 Bibliographic File Identifier (BP 777 to 813) 

This field shall specify an identification for a file described by 
the Root Directory and containing bibliographic records inter- 
preted according to standards that are the subject of an agree- 
ment between the originator and the recipient of the volume, (f 
all bytes of this field are set to (20), it shall mean that no such 
file is identified. 

The characters in this field shall be d1 -characters, 
SEPARATOR 1 and SEPARATOR 2. 

The field shall be recorded as specified in 7.5. 

8.5.20 Application Use (BP 884 to 1 395) 

This field shall be reserved for application use. Its content is not 
specified by this International Standard. 



8.6 Volume Partition Descriptor 

The Volume Partition Descriptor shall identify a volume par- 
tition within the Volume Space, a system which can recognize 
and act upon the content of fields reserved for system use in 
the Volume Descriptor, the position and size of the volume par- 



18 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



tition, and the version of the standard which applies to the 
Volume Descriptor. The contents of the volume partition are 
Tiot specified by this International Standard. 

Table 7 - Volume Partition Descriptor 



BP 


Field name 


Content 


1 


Volume Descriptor Type 


numerical value 


2 to 6 


Standard Identifier 


CD001 


7 


Volume Descriptor Version 


numerical value 


8 


Unused Field 


(00) byte 


9 to 40 


System Identifier 


a-characters 


41 to 72 


Volume Partition Identifier 


d-characters 


73 to 80 


Volume Partition Location 


numerical value 


81 to 88 


Volume Partition Size 


numerical value 


89 to 2 048 


System Use 


not specified 



8.6.1 Volume Descriptor Type (BP 1) 

This field shall specify an 8-bit number indicating that the 
Volume Descriptor is a Volume Partition Descriptor. 

The number in this field shall be 3. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1,1. 

8.6.2 Standard Identifier (BP 2 to 6) 

This field shall specify an identification of this International 
Standard. 

The characters in this field shall be CD001. 

8.6.3 Volume Descriptor Version (BP 7) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number an identification of the 
version of the specification of the Volume Partition Descriptor, 



1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. 
This field shall be recorded according to 7.M. 

8.6.4 Unused Field (BP 8) 

This field shall be set to (00). 

Table 8 — Format of a Directory Record 



8.6.5 System Identifier (BP 9 to 40) 

This field shall specify an identification of a system which can 
recognize and act upon the content of the System Use field in 
the Volume Descriptor. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters. 

8.6.6 Volume Partition Identifier (BP 41 to 72) 

This field shall specify an identification of the Volume Partition. 
The characters in this field shall be d-characters. 

8.6.7 Volume Partition Location (BP 73 to 80) 

This field ^hall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Volume Par- 
tition. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. 

8.6.8 Volume Partition Size (BP 81 to 88) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the number of Logical 
Blocks in which the Volume Partition is recorded. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. 

8.6.9 System Use (BP 89 to 2 048) 

This field shall be reserved for system use. Its content is not 
specified by this International Standard. 

9 File and Directory Descriptors 
9.1 Format of a Directory Record 

Details of the format of a Directory Record are given in table 8. 

9.1.1 Length of Directory Record (LEN_DRI (BP 1) 



This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the length in bytes of 
the Directory Record. 



BP 


Field name 


Content 


1 


Length of Directory Record (LEN_DR) 


numerical value 


2 


Extended Attribute Record Length 


numerical value 


3 to 10 


Location of Extent 


numerical value 


n to 18 


Data Length 


numerical value 


19 to 25 


Recording Date and Time 


numerical values 


26 


File Flags 


8 bits 


27 


File Unit Size 


numerical value 


28 


Interleave Gap Size 


numerical value 


29 to 32 


Volume Sequence Number 


numerical value 


33 


Length of File Identifier (LEN _F0 


numerical value 


34 to (33 + LEN_F1) 


File Identifier 


d-characters, d1 -characters, 
SEPARATOR 1, SEPARATOR 2, 
(00) or (01) byte 


(34 + LEN_FI) 


Padding Field 


(00) byte 


(LEN DR LEN SU 


System Use 


LEN_,SU bytes 


+ 1) toLEN__DR 







NOTE - LEN_SU denotes the length of the System Use field. 

19 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.1.2 Extended Attribute Record Length (BP 2) 

This field shall contain an 8-bit nunnber. Thio number shall 
specify the assigned Extended Attribute Record Length if an 
Extended Attribute Record Is recorded. Otherwise this number 
shall be zero. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.1.3 Location of Extent (BP 3 to 101 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. 

9.1.4 Data Length (BP 11 to 18) 

This field shall specify as a 32-bit number the data length of the 
File Section. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3.3. 

NOTE — This number does not include the length of any Extended 
Attribute Record. 

9.1.5 Recording Date and Time (9P 19 to 25) 

This field shall indicate the date and the time of the day at 
which the information in the Extent described by the Directory 
Record was recorded. 



The date and time shall be represented by seven 8-bit numbers 
each of which shall be recorded according to 7.1.1 as follows. 

Table 9 — Recording Date and Time 



RBP 


Interpretation 


Content 


1 


Number of years^ince 1900 


numerical value 


2 


Month of the year from 1 to 12 


numerical value 


3 


Day of the month from 1 to 31 


numerical value 


4 


Hour of the day from to 23 


numerical value 


5 


Minute of the hour from to 59 


numerical value 


6 


Second of the minute from to 59 


numerical value 


7 


Offset from Greenwich Mean Time 
in number of 15 min intervals from 
-48 (West) to +52 (East) 
recorded according to 7.1.2 


numerical value 



If all seven numbers are zero, it shall mean that the date and 
time are not specFfied. 

9.1.6 File Flags (BP 26) 

The bits of this field shall be numbered from to 7 starting with 
the least significant bit. 

If this Directory Record identifies a directory then bit pos- 
itions 2, 3 and 7 shall be set to ZERO. 

If no Extended Attribute Record is associated with the File Sec- 
tion identified by this Directory Record then bit positions 3 
and 4 shall be set to ZERO. 

This field shall specify certain characteristics of the file as 
follows. 



Table 10 — File flags 



BP 


Bit name 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that the existence of the file shall be made known to the user upon an inquiry by 

the user. 

if set to ONE, shall mean that the existence of the file need not be made known to the user. 





Existence 


1 


Directory 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that the Directory Record does not identify a directory. 
If set to ONE, shall mean that the Directory Record identifies a directory. 


2 


Associated File 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that the file is not an Associated File. 
If set to ONE, shall mean that the file is an Associated File. 


3 


Record 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that the structure of the information in the file is not specified by the Record For- 
mat field of any associated Extended Attribute Record (see 9.5.8). 

If set to ONE, shall mean that the structure of the information in the file has a record format specified by a 
number other than zero in the Record Format Field of the Extended Attnbute Record (see 9.5.8). 


4 


Protection 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that 

- an Owner Identification and a Group Identification are not specified for the file (see 9.5.1 and 9.5,2) ; 

— any user may read or execute the file (see 9.5.3). 
If set to ONE, shall mean that 

- an Owner Identification and a Group Identification are specified for the file (see 9.5.1 and 9.5.2); 

— at least one of the even-numbered bits or bit in the Permissions field of the associated Extended 
Attribute Record is set to ONE (see 9.5.3). 


5 to 6 


Reserved 


These bits are reserved for future standardization and shall be set to ZERO. 


7 


Multi- Extent 


tf set to ZERO, shall mean that this is the final Directory Record for the file; 
if set to ONE, shall mean that this is not the final Directory Record for the file. 



20 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



9.1.7 File Unit Size (BP 27) 

This field shall contain an 8-bit number. This number shall 
specify the File Unit Size for the File Section if the File Section 
is recorded in interleaved mode. Otherwise this number shall be 
zero. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

3.1.8 Interleave Gap Size \8P 28} 

This field shall contain an 8-bit number. This number shall 
specify the Interleave Gap Size for the File Section if the File 
Section is recorded in interleaved mode. Otherwise this number 
shall be zero. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.1.9 Volume Sequence Number (BP 29 to 32) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number the ordinal number of 
the volume in the Volume Set on which the Extent described by 
this Directory Record is recorded. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 

9.1.10 Length of File Identifier iLEN_FI) (BP a3) 

This field shall specify as an 8-btt number the length in bytes of 
the File Identifier field of the Directory Record. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.1.11 File Identifier [BP 34 to (33 -k LEN„FI)] 

The interpretation of this field depends as follows on the setting 
of the Directory bit of the File Flags field. 

If set to ZERO, it shall The field shall specify an identi- 

mean: ficatton for the file. 

The characters in this field shall 
be d-characters or 
d1 -characters, SEPARATOR 1, 
SEPARATOR 2. 

The field shall be recorded as 
specified in 7.5. 

If set to ONE, it shall mean: The field shall specify an identi- 
fication for the directory. 

The characters in this field shall 
be d-characters or 
dl-characters, or only a (00) 
byte, or only a (01) byte. 

The field shall be recorded as 
specified in 7.6. 

9.1.12 Padding Field [BP 34 -\- LEN_FI)] 

This field shall be present in the Directory Record only if the 
number in the Length of the File Identifier field is an even 
number. 



If present, this field shall be set to (00). 

9.1.13 System Use [BP(LEN_DR-LEN_SU + 
to LEN_DR] 



1) 



This field shall be optional. If present, this field shall be reserved 
for system use. Its content is not specified by this Internationa! 
Standard. If necessary, so that the Directory Record comprises 
an even number of bytes, a (00) byte shall be added to ter- 
minate this field. 



9.2 Consistency of File Attributes between 
Directory Records of a File 

The following fields of each Directory Record for the same file 
shall contain the same values: 

— Existence bit of the File Flags field; 
~ Directory bit of the File Flags field ; 

— Associated File bit of the File Flags field; 
~ Record bit of the File Flags field; 

— Reserved bits of the File Flags field; 

— Length of File Identifier field; 
~ File Identifier field; 

— Padding field. 

9.3 Order of Directory Records 

The records of a Directory shall be ordered according to the 
relative value of the File Identifier field by the following criteria 
in descending order of significance: 

a) in ascending order according to the relative value of File 
Name, where File Names shall be valued as follows: 

— If two File Names have the same content in all byte 
positions, then these two File Names are said to be equal 
in value. 

— If two File Names do not contain the same number 
of byte positions, the shorter File Name shall be treated 
as if it were padded on the right with all padding bytes 
set to (20) and as if both File Names contained the ident- 
ical number of byte positions. 

— After any padding necessary to treat the File Names 
as if they were of equal length, the characters in the cor- 
responding byte positions, starting with the first pos- 
ition, of the File Names ^re compared until a byte pos- 
ition is found that does not contain the same character in 
both File Names. The greater File Name is the one that 
contains the character with the higher code position 
value in the coded graphic character set used to interpret 
the File Identifier field of the Directory Record. 



21 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



b) in ascending order according to the relative value of File 
Name Extension, where File Name Extensions shall be 
valued as follows: 

— If two File Name Extensions have the same content 
in all byte positions, then these two File Name Exten- 
sions are said to be equal in value. 

— If two File Name Extensions do not contain the 
same number of byte positions, the shorter File Name 
Extension shall be treated as if it were padded on the 
right with all padding bytes set to {20} and as if both File 
l^ame Extensions contained the identical number of byte 
positions. 

— After any padding necessary to treat the File Name 
Extensions as if they were of equal length, the characters 
in the corresponding byte positions, starting with the 
first position, of the File Name Extensions are compared 
until a byte position is found that does not contain the 
same character in both File Name Extensions. The 
greater File Name Extension is the one that contains the 
character with the higher code position value in the 
coded graphic character set used to interpret the File 
Identifier field of the Directory Record. 

c) in descending order according to the relative value of 
File Version Number, where File Version Numbers shall be 
valued as follows: 

— If two File Version Numbers have the same content 
in all byte positions, then these two File Version 
Numbers are said to be equal in value. 

— If two File Version Numbers do not contain the 
samenumber of byte positions, the shorter File Version 
Number shall be treated as if it were padded on the left 
with all padding bytes set to (30) and as if both File Ver- 
sion Numbers contained the identical number of byte 
positions. 

— After any padding necessary to treat the File Ver- 
sion Numbers as if they were of equal length, the 
characters in the corresponding byte positions, starting 
with the first position, of the File Version Numbers are 
compared until a byte position is found that does not 
contain the same character in both File Version 
Numbers. The greater File Version Number is the one 
that contains the character with the higher code position 
value in the coded graphic character set used to interpret 
the File Identifier field of the Directory Record. 

d) in descending order according to the value of the 
Associated File bit of the File Flags field. 



e) The order of the File Sections of the file. 
9.4 Format of a Path Table Record 

9.4.1 Length of Directory Identifier (LEN_DI) (BP 1) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the length in bytes of 
the Directory Identifier field of the Path Table Record. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.4.2 Extended Attribute Record Length (BP 2) 

This field shall contain an 8-bit number. This number shall 
specify the assigned Extended Attribute Record Length if an 
Extended Attribute Record is recorded. Otherwise this number 
shall be zero. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.4.3 Location of Extent (BP 3 to 8} 

This field shall specify as ja 32-bit number the Logical Block 
Number of the first Logical Block allocated to the Extent in 
which the directory is recorded. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.3. 

9.4.4 Parent Directory Number (BP 7 to 8) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number the record number in 
the Path Table for the parent directory of the directory. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2. 

9.4.5 Directory Identifier [BP 9 to (8 + LEN_DI)] 

This field shall specify an identification for a directory. 

The characters in this field shall be d-characters or 
xl1 -characters or only a (00) byte. 

This field shall be recorded as specified in 7.6. 

9.4.6 Padding Field [BP (9 + LEN^DD] 

This field shall be present in the Path Table Record only if the 
number in the Length of Drrectory Identifier field is an odd 
number. 

If present, this field shall be set to (00). 



Table 11 — Path Table Record 



BP 


Field name 


Content 


1 


Length of Directory Identifier (LEN__DI) 


numerical value 


2 


Extended Attribute Record Length 


numerical value 


3 to 6 


Location of Extent 


numerical value 


7 to 8 


Parent Directory Number 


numericai value 


9to(8 + LEN_DI) 


Directory Identifier 


d-characters, d1 -characters, 
(00) byte 


(9 + LtN_Di) 


Padding Field 


(00) byte 



22 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 



Table 12 — Extended Attribute Record 



BP 


Field name 


Content 


1 to 4 


Owner Identification 


numerical value 


5 to 8 


Group Identification 


numerical value 


9 to 10 


Permissions 


16 bits 


11 to 27 


File Creation Date and Time 


Digitis), numerical value 


28 to 44 


File Modification Date and Time 


Digit(s), numerical value 


45 to 61 


File Expiration Date and Time 


Digitis), numerical value 


62 to 78 


File Effective Date and Time 


Digit(s), numerical value 


79 


Record Format 


8 bits 


80 


Record Attributes 


8 bits 


81 to 84 


Record Length 


numerical value 


86 to 116 


System Identifier 


a-characters, al-characters 


117 to 180 


System Use 


not specified 


181 


Extended Attribute Record Version 


numerical value 


182 


Length of Escape Sequences 






(LEN^ESC) 


numerical value 


183 to 248 


(Reserved for future standardization) 


(00) bytes 


247 to 250 


Length of Application Use (LEN_AU) 


numerical value 


251 to (250 f LEN_„AU) 


Application Use 


LEN_AU bytes 


(251 + LEN_, AU) to 






(250 + LEN„ESC + 






LEN_„AU} 


Escape Sequences 


LEN_ ESC bytes 



9.5 Format of an Extended Attribute Record 

If present, an Extended Attribute Record shall be recorded over 
at least one Logical Block. 



9.5-1 Owner Identification (BP 1 to 4) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number an identification of 
the file owner who is a nr^ember of the group identified by the 
Group Identification field of the Extended Attribute Record. 

If the nunnber in this field is 0, this shall indicate that there is no 
owner identification specified for the file, in this case, the 
Group Identification field shall contain zero. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 



9.5.2 Group Identification (BP 5 to 8) 

This field shall specify as a 16-bit number an identification of 
the group of which the file owner is a member. 



The values for this number from 1 to a number subject to agree- 
ment between the data preparer and receiving system shall 
identify the group as belonging to the class of user referred to 
as System. 

If the number in this field is 0, this shall indicate that there is no 
group identification specified for the file. In this case, the 
Owner Identification field shall contain zero. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 

9.5.3 Permissions (BP 9 to 10» 

The bits of this 16-bit field shall be numbered from to 15 
starting with the least significant bit of the byte recorded in 
byte position 10. 

Bits to 3 may be ignored in interchange. 

If requested by the owner, bits 4 to 7 may be ignored in inter- 
change. 

This field shall specify access permission for certain classes of 
users as follows. 



23 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Table 13 — Permissions 



BitO 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may read the file. 
If set to ONE, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may not read the file. 


Bit 1 


Shall be set to ONE. 


Bit 2 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may execute the file. 
If set toDNE, shall mean that an owner who is a member of a group of the System class of user may not execute the file. 


Bit 3 


Shall be set to ONb. 


Bit 4 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that the owner may read the file. 
If set to ONE, shall mean that the owner may notTead the file. 


Bits 


Shall be set to ONE. 


Bite 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that the owner may execute the file. 
If set to ONE, shall mean that the owner may not execute the file. 


Bit 7 


Shall be set to ONE. 


Bits 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user who is a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may read 
the file. 

If set to ONE, shall mean that of the users who are members of the group specified by the Group Identification field, only the 
owner may read the file. 


Bits 


Shall be set to ONE. 


Bit 10 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user who is a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may 
execute the file. 

If set to ONE, shall mean that of the users who are members of the group specified by the Group Identification field, only the 
owner may execute the file. 


Bit 11 


Shall be set to ONE. 


Bit 12 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user may read the file. 

If set to ONE, shall mean that a user not a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may not read the 
file. 


Bit 13 


Shall be set to ONE. 


Bit 14 


If set to ZERO, shall mean that any user may execute the file. 

If set to ONE, shall mean that a user not a member of the group specified by the Group Identification field may not execute 

the file. 


Bit 15 


Shall be set to ONE. 



9.5.4 File Creation Date and Time (BP 11 to 27) 



9.5.7 File Effective Date and Time (BP 62 to 78) 



This field shall specify the date and the tinne of the day at which 
the infornnation in the file was created. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1. 



9.5.5 File Modification Date and Time (BP 28 to 44) 

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the file was last modified. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26,1. 



9.5.6 File Expiration Date and Time (BP 45 to 61) 

This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the file may be regarded as obsolete. If the 
date and time are not specified then the information shall not 
be regarded as obsolete. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8,4,26.1. 



This field shall specify the date and the time of the day at which 
the information in the file may be used. If the date and time are 
not specified then the information may be used at once. 

This field shall be recorded according to 8.4.26.1. 



9.5.8 Record Format (BP 79) 

This field shall contain an 8-bit number specifying the format of 
the information in the file. 

Number shall mean that the structure of the information 
recorded in the file is not specified by this field; 

Number 1 shall mean that the information in the file is a se- 
quence of fixed-length records (see 6.10.3); 

Number 2 shall mean that the information in the file is a se- 
quence of variable-length records (see 6.10.4), in 
which the RCW is recorded according to 7.2.1 ; 



24 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Number 3 shall mean that the information in the file is a se- 
quence of variable-length records (see 6.10.41, in 
which the RCW is recorded according to 7.2.2. 

Numbers 4 to 127 are reserved for future standardization. 

Numbers 128 to 255 are reserved for system use. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 

9.5.9 Record Attributes (BP 80) 

This field shall contain an 8-bit number specifying certain pro- 
cessing of the records in a file when th^y are displayed on a 
character-imaging device. 

Number shall mean that each record shall be preceded by 
a LINE FEED character and followed by a 
CARRIAGE RETURN character; 

Number 1 shall mean that the first byte of a record shall be 
interpreted as specified in ISO 1539 for vertical 
spacing; 

Number 2 shall mean that the record contains the necessary 
control information. 

Numbers 3 to 255 are reserved for future standardization. 

If the Record Format field contains zero ihen the Record 
Attribute field shall be ignored in interchange. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1.1. 



9.5.10 Record Length (BP 81 to 84) 

This field shall specify a 16-bit number as follows. 

If the Record Format field contains the number 0, the Record 
Length field shall contain zero. 

If the Record Format field contains the number 1 , the Record 
Length field shall specify the length in bytes of each record in 
the file. 

If the Record Format field contains the number 2 or 3, the 
Record Length field shall specify the maximum length in bytes 
of a record in the file. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 



9.B.11 System Identifier (BP 85 to 118) 

This field shall specify an identification of a system which can 
recognize and act upon the content of the System Use fields in 
the Extended Attribute Record and associated Directory 
Record. 

The characters in this field shall be a-characters or a1 -charac- 
ters. 



9.5.12 System Use (BP 117 to 180) 

This field shall be reserved for system use. Its content is not 
specified by this International Standard. 

9.5.13 Extended Attribute Record Version (BP 181) 

This field shaH specify as an 8-bit number the version of the 
specification of the Extended Attribute Record. 

1 shall indicate the structure of this International Standard. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1 .1 . 

9.5.14 Length of Escape Sequences (BP 182) 

This field shall specify as an 8-bit number the length in bytes of 
the Escape Sequences field in the Extended Attribute Record. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.1,1. 

9.5.15 Reserved for future standardization 
(BP 183 to 246) 

All bytes of this field shall be set to ((X)). 

9.5.16 Length of Application Use (BP 247 to 250) 

This field shall specify as a 16-blt number the length in bytes of 
the Application Use field in the Extended Attribute Record. 

This field shall be recorded according to 7.2.3. 

9.5.17 Application Use [BP 251 to (250 + LEN_AU)1 

This field shall be reserved for application use. Its content is not 
specified by this International Standard. 

9.5.18 Escape Sequences [BP (251 + LEN_AU) 
to (250 + LEN^ESC + LEN_AU)) 

This field shall be optional. If present, this field shall contain 
escape sequences that designate the coded character set to be 
used to interpret the contents of the file. These escape se- 
quences shall conform to ISO 2022, except that the ESCAPE 
character shall be omitted from each escape sequence. 

The first or only escape sequence shall begin at the first byte of 
the field. Each successive escape sequence shati begin at the 
byte in the field Immediately following the last byte of the 
preceding escape sequence. Any unused positions following 
the last escape sequenpe^all be set to ((X)). 

9.6 Coiosistency of File Attributes between 
Extended Attribute Records of a File 

The following fields of the Extended Attribute Record 
associated with the File Sections of a file shall contain the same 
values : 

— Record Format field; 

— Record Attributes field ; 

— Record Length field, if the records are fixed-length 
records (see 6.10.3). 



25 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



10 Levels of Interchange 

This International Standard specifies three nested levels of 
interchange. 



10.1 Level 1 

At Level 1 the following restrictions shall apply: 

— each file shall consist of only one File Section; 

— a File Name shall not contain more than 8 d-characters 
or 8 d1 -characters; 



— a File Name Extension shall not contain more than 
3 d-characters or 3 dl -characters; 

— a Directory Identifier shall not contain more than 
8 d-characters or 8 dl -characters. 

10.2 Level 2 

At Level 2 the following restriction shall apply: 

— each file shall consist of only one File Section. 

10.3 Levels 

At Level 3 no restrictions shall apply. 



26 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Section three: Requirements for systems 



11 Requirement for the description of 
systems 

This International Standard specifies tt>at certain information 
shall be communicated between a user and an implementation 
(see clauses 12 and 13). 

An information processing system that conforms to this Inter- 
national Standard shall be the subject of a description which 
identifies the means by which the user may supply such infor- 
mation, or may obtairi it when it is made available, as specified 
in this International Standard. 



12 Requirements for an originating system 

12.1 General 

The implementation shall be capable of recording a set of files, 
and all descriptors that are specified in this International Stan- 
dard, on a Volume Set in accordance with one of the inter- 
change levels specified in this International Standard, 

12.2 Files 

The implementation shall obtain from the data preparer the in- 
formation that constitutes the set of files to be recorded. 

12.3 Descriptors 

12.3.1 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to 
supply the information that is to be recorded in each of the 
descriptor fields listed below, and shall supply the information 
for a field if the data preparer does not supply it. 

For the Primary Volume Descriptor: 

— System Identifier 

— Volume Identifier 

— Logical Block Size 

— Location of Occurrence of Type L Path Table 

— Location of Optional Occurrence o^ Type L Path Table 

— Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table 

— Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table 

— Volume Set Identifier 

— Publisher Identifier 

— Data Preparer Identifier 
~ Application Identifier 

— Copyright File Identifier 

— Abstract File Identifier 

~ Bibliographic File Iderttrfier 



— Volume Creation Date and Time 

— Volume Modification Date and Time 

— Volume Expiration Date and Time 

— Volume Effective Date and Time 

— Application Use 

For each Path Table Record : 

— Extended Attribute Record Length 

— Location of Extent 

— Parent Directory Number 

— Directory Identifier 

For each Directory Record ; 

— Extended Attribute Record Length 

— Location of Extent 

— Data Length 

— Recording Date and Time 

— Existence bit of the File Flags field 

— Directory bit of the File Flags field 

— Associated File bit of the File Flags field 

— Record bit of the File Flags field 

— Protection bit of the File Flags field 

— File Unit Size 

— Interleave Gap Size 

— Volume Sequence Number 

— File Name of a File Identifier 

— File Name Extension of a File Identifier 

— File Version Number of a File Identifier 

— System Use 



12.3.2 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to 
supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor 
fields listed below, and shall not record the Supplementary 
VolurDe Descriptor if the data preparer does not supply the 
information. 

For each Supplennentary Volunrje Descriptor : 

— System Identifier 

— Volume Identifier 

— Logical Block Size 

— Location of Occurrence of Type L Path TaWe 

— Location of Optional Occurrence of Type 1 Path Table 



27 



!S 14176 : 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



— Location of Occurrence of Type M Path Table 

— Location of Optional Occurrence of Type M Path Table 

— Bit of the Volume Flags field 

— Escape Sequences 

— Volume Set Identifier 

— Publisher Identifier 

— Data Preparer Identifier 

— Application Identifier 

— Copyright File Identifier 

— Abstract File Identifier 

— pibliographic File Identifier 

— Volume Creation Date and Time 

— Volume Modification Date and Time 

— Volume Expiration Date and Time 

— volume Effective Date and Time 

— Application Use 



12.3.3 The impiementation shaii aiiow the data preparer to 
supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor 
fields listed below, and shall not record the Volume Partition 
Descriptor if the data preparer does not supply the information. 



For each Volume Partition Descriptor: 



For each Extended Attribute Record : 

— Owner Identification 

— Group Identification 

— Permissions 

— File Creation Date and Time 

— File Modification Date and Time 
~ File Expiration Date and Time 

— File Effective Date and Time 

— Record Format 

— Record Attributes 

— Record Length 
~ System Identifier 

— System Use 

— Length of Escape Sequences 

— Length of Application Use 

— Application Use 

— Escape Sequences 

12.4 System Area 

The implementation shall allow the data preparer to supply the 
information that is to be recorded on the Logical Sectors with 
Logical Sector Numbers to 15. 



— System Identifier 

— Volume Partition Identifier 

— Volume Partition Location 

— Volume Partition Size 

— System Use 



12.3.4 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to 
supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor 
fields listed below, and shall not record the Boot Record if the 
data preparer does not supply the information. 

For each Boot Record: 

— Boot System identifier 

— - Boot Identifier 

— Boot System Use 



13 Requirements for a reaeiving system 

13.1 Genera! 

The implementation shall be capable of reading the files and the 
recorded descriptors from a Volume Set that has been recorded 
in accordance with one of the interchange levels specified in 
this Internationa! Standard, except Associated Files, 



13.2 Files 

The implementation shall make available to the user the 
information that constitutes the recorded files, except any 
Associated File. 

If the implementation allows the user to specify that the infor- 
mation constituting a file is to be Interpreted according to 6.10, 
the implementation shall make available to the user the length 
of each record in the file. 



12.3.5 The implementation shall allow the data preparer to 
supply the information that is to be recorded in the descriptor 
fields listed below, and need not record the Extended Attribute 
Record if the data preparer does not supply the information for 
any of the descriptor fields listed below. If the Extended At- 
tribute Record is recorded, the implementation shall supply the 
information for a field if the data preparer does not supply it. 



13.3 Descriptors 

13,3=1 The implementation shall allow the user to supply in- 
formation sufficient to enable the implementation to locate the 
files required by the user, and to locate the volumes on which 
these are recorded. 



28 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



13.3.2 The implementation shall make available to the user 
the information that is recorded in each of the descriptor fields 
listed betow. 

For the Primary Volume Descriptor: 

— Volume Identifier 

— Volume Set Identifier 

— Copyright File Identifier 

— Abstract File Identifier 

— Bibliographic File Identifier 

For each Supplementary Volume Descriptor: 

— Volume Identifier 

— Bit of the Volume Flags field 

— Escape Sequences 

— Volume Set Identifier 

— Copyright File Identifier 

— Abstract File Identifier 

— Bibliographic File Identifier 

For each Path Table Record : 

— Parent Directory Number 

— Directory Identifier 

For each Directory Record: 

— File Name of a File Identifier 



— File Name Extension of a File Identifier 

— File Directory bit of the File Flags field 

13.4 Restrictions 

The implementation may impose a limit on the length of a 
record to be made available to the user. The implementation is 
not required to make available to the user any byte beyond the 
first n bytes of a record, where n is the value of the imposed 
limit. 

13.5 Levels of Implementation 

This International Standard specifies two nested levels of im- 
plementation. 

13.5.1 Level 1 

At Level 1 the implementation is permitted not to make 
available to the user: 

— the information that constitutes the files identified in a 
Directory Hierarchy that is identified in a Supplementary 
Volume Descriptor; 

— the information that is recorded in the descriptor fields 
of a Supplementary Volume Descriptor and of the 
associated Path Table Records, associated Directory 
Records, and Extended Attribute Records identified by the 
associated Directory Records. 

13.5.2 Level 2 

At Level 2 no such restrictions shall apply. 



29 



IS 14176: 1994 
ISO 9660 : 1988 



Annex A 

(informative) 

ISO 646: International Reference Version (IRV) 



Table 14 



b7 



b6 



b5 



bU b3 



b2 b1 















8 



10 



11 



12 



13 



14 



15 



NUi 



SOH 



STX 



ETX 



mt] 



«M« 



APC 



ilL 



ss^^ 



mi 



&L£: 



DC1 



I&C2 



SC3 



DC4 



MAk. 



STN 



tTB: 



MMm 



li 



Ifcftiii 



SP 



li 



a 



{J 



S 







8 



t- 



B 



D 



H 




Q 



R 



U 



V 



W 



a 



b 



c 



jef 



# 



1^. 



m 



m 



^: 



*- 



IS 



The d-characters are those which are not shaded in table 14. 



30 



Table 15 



IS 14176 : 1994 
ISO 9660: 1988 





b7 














1 


1 


1 


1 




bt 








1 


1l 


IE 




1 


1 




b5 





1 





1 





1 





1 









1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


ISISISISI 

















vi'i ::=:•:■■ iv. : 




SP 







P 


■';;:l^j|^::;;;i| 


xi|K:;,i:;:i 











1 


1 


;.-':! "':';;.: 


: ; ;;•:::■.;.: 


1 


1 


A 


Q 


■iv::;;!:'':'':';:; 


lis 








1 





2 


;1 .:*-;; :••.;■■•,: 




■1 


2 


B 


R 


i! 


III 








1 


1 


3 


;.;r:;;::::;,:;;: 


;■";■:■";■■:■:■" 


* 


3 


C 


S 


-BS 


Mi 





1 








4 


Si 

:;■ ;,■::'■,■■:■: 


IfS? 


..■;«;: 


4 


D 


T 


*il 


WMWMM 

III 





1 





1 


5 


ii-ivr ■■ 


ipK 


% 


5 


E 


U 


Si 


ft; 





1 


1 





6 


U^ 


SYN 


& 


6 


F 


V 


■11 


P;; 





1 


1 


1 


7 


K 


E-Ti 


! 


7 


G 


w 


MMMM 


;M- 


1 











8 




CAN 


( 


8 


H 


X 


:,ft 


jM; 


1 








1 


9 




S«' 


) 


9 


I 


Y 


m 


Si- 


1 





1 





10 


Wi 


M 


* 


'• - 


J 


Z 


;|: 


^M^^ 


1 





1 


1 


11 


'!^!S|?^ 


« 


+ 


m 
/ 


K 


m 


MfiiMMf 


m 


1 


1 








12 


ii' 


■1^1 


r 


< 


L 


pi 


III 


ii 


1 


1 





1 


13 


Si 


:^3£| 


- 


= 


M 


11; 


11;;: 


III 


1 


1 


1 





14 


\^^:: 


■m 


■ 


> 


N 


MMMMM 
■■■■ :'>■,■■:■■: 


?i?: 




1 


1 


1 


1 


15 


k%-.. 


m 


/ 








- 


■:c^^::; 


MmMph 



The a-characters are those which are not shaded in table 15. 



31 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designa- 
tions. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as tlie need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes 
are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian 
Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition, by referring to 
the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. LTD 37 (1693) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 331 01 31,331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Telegram : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all offices ) 

Telephone 

r331 01 31 
I 331 13 7^ 



Eastern : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VB M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



37 84 99, 37 85 61 
37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 1 60036 



53 38 43, 53 16 40 
53 23 84 



Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 1 3 



-235 02 16, 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 
1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
EARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 

printed at Simco Printing Pr*«s, Delhi. India 



