**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13430 (1992): Code of practice for safety during 
additional construction and alteration to existing 
buildings [CED 29: Construction Management including safety 
in Construction] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13430 : 1992 

[ Reaffirmed 2002 ] 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY DURING ADDITIONAL 

CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION TO 

EXISTING BUILDINGS -CODE OF PRACTICE 



UDC 69-059-3 : 6148 : 006-78 



$ BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK RHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NF.WDET-HI 110002 

July 1992 Price Group 2 



Safety in Construction Sectional Committee, CED 45 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

A large number of v^orkmen, skilled and unskilled, are employed in the numerous construction work, 
big and small, under execution in the country. Due to the increased tempo of such works and large 
scale machanization, hazards of accidents have increased considerably. It has, therefore, become 
imperative that adequate safety rules are laid down for every phase of work and that these are meticul- 
ously followed. 

Safety aspects in some of the constructions may assume such a great importance that instead of merely 
deputing supervisory staff in adequate strength to look after the safety aspects, it may become desirable 
to have a separate organization to control this important aspect. 

Many safety measures are required to be taken during construction and alterations to existing build- 
ings for the safety of workers and public. It has, therefore, been felt necessary to lay down the safety 
measures required to be taken during such construction with a view to minimizing the risk of accidents 
and injuries and accordingly this standard has been brought out. 



IS 13430 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



SAFETY DURING ADDITIONAL 

CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION TO 

EXISTING BUILDINGS— CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down the safety require- 
ments required for various operations and items 
during additional construction and alteration 
to existing buildings. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard : 

Title 



IS No, 

3696 (Part 1 ) : 

1987 



3696 ( Part 2 ) : 
1991 

3764 : 1992 

4081 : 1986 



Safety code for scaffolds and 
ladders: Part I Scaffold {first 
revision ) 

Safety code for scaffolds and 
ladders : Part 2 Ladders 
{first revision ) 

Excavation work — Code of 
safety {first revision ) 

Safety code for blasting and 
related drilling operations 
{first revision ) 



3 EXCAVATION AND TRENCHING 

3.1 Trenches and foundation pits shall be 
adequately and securely fenced, provided with 
proper caution signs and marked with red lights 
at suitable intervals during night to avoid acci- 
dents. Adequate protective measures shall be 
taken to see that the excavation operations do 
not affect or damage adjoining existing build- 
ings. 

3.2 Position of all underground installations 
such as sewer, gas pipes^ water pipes, electrical 
cables and other civic facilities that may cause 
danger during the work shall be checked and 
proper precautions shall be taken not to damage 
them. 

3.3 Land shall be cleared of trees, loose bould- 
ers and other obstructions before excavation 
commences so as to avoid accidents. 

3.4 Where hard rock is met with and blasting 
operations arc considered necessary, the cont- 
ractor shall obtain the permission of the 
Enginecr-in-Charge in writing for resorting to 
blasting operation. Only low explosive like gun 
power shall be used. 



3.4.1 Proper precautions shall be taken for 
safety of persons and adjoining property before 
undertaking any blasting operation. Red flags 
shall be prominently displayed around the area 
to be blasted. All the people on the work except 
those who actually light the fuses shall be with* 
drawn to a safe distance of not less than 30O 
meters from the blasting site. Recommenda- 
tions given in IS 4081 : 1986 shall be followed 
for safety during various operations involved 
in the process of blasting. 

NOTE — Explosive of high velocity of detonation 
shall not be used. Only low type of explosive or 
chemical which swells shall be used for the purpose 
of breaking hard rock. 

3.5 All trenches 1-2 m or more in depth shall at 
all times be supplied with at least one ladder 
for each 30 m length or fraction thereof. Ladder 
shall be extended from the bottom of the trench 
to at least 90 cm above the surface of the 
ground. The side of the trenches which are 
1'5 m or more in depth shall be stepped back to 
give suitable slope or securely held by timber 
bracing, so as to avoid the danger of sides to 
collapse. The excavated materials shall not be 
placed within 1-5 m of the edges of the trench 
or half of the depth of the trench whichever is 
more. Cutting shall be done from top to bottom. 
Under no circumstances undermining or under- 
cutting shall be done. 

3.6 Shoring and strutting, where necessary, shall 
closely follow the excavation. 

3.7 Recommendations given in IS 3764 : 1992 
shall be followed, to the extent applicable, 
depending on site condition. 

4 SCAFFOLD AND LADDERS 

4,1 Suitable scaffolds should be provided for 
workmen for all works that cannot be safely 
done from the ground or from solid construc- 
tion, except such work as can be done safely 
from ladders for a short period. When a ladder 
is used, an extra mazdoor shall be engaged for 
holding the ladder and if the ladder is used for 
carrying materials as well, suitable footholds 
and handholes shall be provided on the ladder 
and the ladder shall be given an inchnation not 
steeper than 1 to 4 (1 horizontal to 4 
vertical ). 



1 



IS 13430 : 1992 



4.2 Scaffolding or staging at and above 3-5 m 
height above the ground or floor shall have a 
guard rail properly attached, bolted, braced and 
secured at least 90 cm high above the floor or 
platform. Such guard rails shall be provided 
with openings as may be necessary for the 
delivery of materials. Scaffolding or staging 
shall be fixed to prevent it from swaying from 
the building or structure. 

Safety requirements described in IS 3696 ( Parts 
1 and 2 ) shall be followed while using scaffolds 
and ladders. 

5 WORKING PLATFORM, GANGWAYS AND 
STAIRWAYS 

5.1 These should be so constructed that they do 
not sag unduly or unequally. If the height of 
the platform or the gangway or the stairway is 
more than 3-5 m above ground level or floor 
level, they should be constructed with planks 
closely secured and suitably fastened. 

5.2 Openings in the Floor of Buildings 

Every openings in the floor of a building or in a 
woiking platform shall be provided with neces- 
sary railing and/or toe guard. 

5.3 Safe Means of Access 

Safe means of access shall be provided to all 
working platforms and other workings places. 
Every ladder shall be securely fixed. Ladders 
conforming to the requirements described in 
IS 3696 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 shall be used. 

6 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS AND 
SYSTEM 

^*1 Adequate precautions shall be taken to 
prevent danger from electrical installations as 
described in Indian Standard Recommendations 
for preventive measures against hazards at work- 
sites for electrical safety ( under preparation ). 

6,2 Temporary electrical lines shall be hung 
overhead and not run along the floor. All 
electrical system components shall be protected 
from damage, 

7 STACKING OF MATERIALS 

7.1 No materials at worksites shall be so stac- 
ked or placed as to cause danger or inconveni- 
ence to any worker or the public. Necessary 
fencing and lights to protect the public from 
accidents are to be provided. 

7.2 No overloading which is likely to disturb 
the stability of the structure, shall be done on 
any of the floor or a part of the building. 

7.2.1 Waste materials should be cleared and 
removed as demolition proceeds so as to prevent 
overloading and obstruction for workmen. 



7.3 Materials liable to cause persons to slip or 
trip and fall should be cleared immediately. 

7.4 Projecting nails shall be removed or bent 
over, 

8 PROTECTIVE BARRIERS 

Where there is a danger of collapse of 
structure, steps shall be taken to barricade the 
area and support the structure. 

9 SAFETY EQUIPMENT FOR WORKERS 

9.1 All necessary personal safety equipment as 
considered necessary should be kept available 
for use of the persons employed on the site and 
maintained in a condition suitable for immediate 
use. 

9-2 Workers employed on mixing asphaltic 
materials, cement and lime mortars shall be 
provided with protective hand and foot wear 
and protective goggles, 

9.3 Workers employed in white washing and 
stacking of cement bags or any materials which 
are injurious to the eyes shall be provided with 
protective goggles. 

9.4 Workers engaged in welding works shall be 
provided with welders protective eye shields. 

9.5 Stone breakers shall be provided with 
protective goggles, leg guards and protective 
clothings and they should be seated at 
sufficiently safe distance from each other. 

9.6 Whenever workmen are employed on the 
work of lead painting, the following precautions 
should be taken: 

a) No paint containing lead or lead products 
shall be used except in the form of paste 
or ready mixed paint. 

b) Suitable face masks shall be supplied for 
use by the workers when paint is applied 
in the form of spray or a surface having 
lead paint is to be dry rubbed and 
scrapped. 

9-7 Use of Hoisting Machines 

9.7.1 Use of hoisting machines and tackle 
including their attachments, anchorage and 
supports shall conform to the following require- 
ments; 

a) These shall be of good mechanical cons- 
truction, sound material and adequate 
strength and free from patent repair and 
defects and shall be kept in good working 
condition, 

b) Every rope used in hoisting or lowering 
materials or as a means of suspension, 
shall be of durable quality and adequate 
strength, and free from patent defects. 



IS 13430 : 1992 



"9,7.2 In case of every hoisting machine and of 
every chain, ring, hook, shackle, swivel and 
block used in hoisting or as a means of suspen- 
sion, the safe working load shall be ascertained 
by approved means. Every hoisting machine 
referred to above shall be marked with safe 
working load. In case of a hoisting machine 
having a variable safe working load, each safe 
working load and the conditions under which it 
is applicable shall be clearly indicated. No part 
of any machine or any gear referred to above 
shall be loaded beyond the safe working load 
except for the purpose of testing. 

9,7.3 In case of departmental machines, the 
safe working load shall be notified. As regards 
contractor' s machines, the contractor shall 
notify the safe working load of the machine to 



the principal employer and whenever the con- 
tractor brings any machinery to site of work, he 
should get it verified by the competent 
authority. 

9.7.4 Motors, transmission gears, electric wiring 
and other parts of hoisting appliances should be 
provided with means to reduce the risk of acci- 
dental descent of the load. Precautions should 
be taken to avoid the risk of any part of a 
suspended load being accidentally dislodged, 

9.7.5 When workers are employed on electrical 
installations which are already energised, insul- 
ating mats and wearing apparel, such as gloves, 
sleeves and tools, as may be necessary, shall be 
provided. The workers should not wear any 
ring, watch, and carry keys or other materials 
which are good conductor of electricity. 



standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer, Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference; 

Doc : No CED 45 ( 4848 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 ( 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 87 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-0, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I, T, Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 632 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR, 

COTMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA THIRUVANANTHAPIIRAM. 



V^rioted at Npw Indifi PrintiniJ Pres*, Khuna. Indi^ 



