**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14414 (1996) : Agricultural tractors - Axle power 
determination - Test procedures [FAD 11: Agricultural 
Tractors and Power Tillers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1814414:1996 

(Reaffirmed 201 2) 



Indian Standard 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS — AXLE POWER 
DETERMINATION-TEST PROCEDURES 



ICS 65.060.10 



©BIS 19% 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1996 Price Group 3 



Agricultural Tractors and Power TilUers Sectional Committee, FAD 32 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agricultural 
Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

Earlier tractors were tested at the drawbar and PTO for power declaration. It is now an international practice to declare the 
axle power of the tractors also. In order to have a unifrorm practice for testing axle power a need was felt to formulate a 
standard on the subject. 

Though high ambient temperature test has not been covered in ISO, keeping in view the prevalent situation in the 
country an optional high ambient temperature test has been included in this standard. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 789-7 : 199 1 'Agricultural tractors 
— Test procedure -Part 7 : Axle power determination', issued by the International Organization for Standardization 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values 
(revised) \ 



IS 14414 : 19% 



Indian Standard 



AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS -AXLE POWER 
DETERMINATION — TEST PROCEDURES 



1 SCOPE 

This Indian Standard specifies test procedures for 
determiningthe power available at the axle or axles 
of wheeled or track-laying agricultural tractors having 
one or two driven axles. 

2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of pubhcation, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 



IS No. 



Title 



5994 : 1987 Test code for agricultural tractors 
( second revision ) 

10274 : 1993 Agricultural wheeled tractors — 
Maximum travel speed — Method 
of determination ( first revision ) 

12226 : 7995 Agricultural tractors — Power test 
for drawbar -Test procedure (first 
revision ) 

3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Rated Engine Speed 

Engine speed specified by the tractor manufacturer 
for continuous operation at full load. 

3.2 Axle Power 

Sum of the powers measured at all powered axles. 

3.3 Maximum Permissible Torque 

Maximum torque specified by the manufacturer for 
the purposes of this test. 

3.4 Specific Fuel Consumption 

Mass of fuel consumed per unit of work. 



4 MEASUREMENT UNITS AND 
TOLERANCES 

The following units and tolerances are used in this 
standard in addition to those given in 4 of IS 5994 

7987.- 

Fuel consumption. 

in kilograms 

per kilowatt hour ±1 percent. 

5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Specification 

The tractor tested shall conform to the specification 
in the test report (see Annex A) and shall be used in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations 
for normal operation. 

5.2 Running-In and Preliminary Adjustments 

The tractor shall be run-in prior to the test. For spark- 
ignition engines fitted with a means for the operators 
to vary the ratio of the fuel/air mixture, the tests shall 
be carried out with the settings recommended for 
normal operation. The adjustment of the carburettor 
or the injection pump shall conform to the 
manufacturer's specification. Run-in shall be done 
with the govemor set at full throtde and with the engine 
operating at rated speed. 

5.3 Fuels and Lubricants 

Fuels and lubricants for the test shall conform to 5.3 
of IS 12226:1995. 

5.4 Ancillary Equipment 

For all tests, accessories such as the hydraulic lift 
pump or air compressor may only be disconnected 
if it is practicable for the operator to do so as normal 
practice in work, in accordance with the operator's 
manual and without using tools. If not, they shall remain 
connected and operate at minimnm load. 

If the tractor is equipped with devices that create 
variable parasitic power losses such as a variable speed 
cooling fan, intermittent hydraulic or electrical 
demands, etc, the device shall not be disconnected 
or altered for test purposes. If it is practical for the 



18 14414:1996 



operator to disconnect the device as outlined by the 
operator's manual, it may be disconnected for test 
purposes; this shall be recorded in the test report. 

Power variations during tests caused by these devices 
exceeding ± 5 percent shall be recorded in the test 
report in terms of percent variation from the mean. 

5.5 Operating Conditions 

Make no corrections to the measured values of torque 
or power for atmospheric conditions or other factors. 
Atmospheric pressure shall not be less than 96.6 kPa. 
If this is not possible because of conditions of altitude, 
a modified carburettor or fuel pump setting may have 
to be used, details of which shall be included in the 
report. 

The surrounding temperature shall be 27°C ± 7°C. 

Stable operating conditions shall have been attained 
at cachload setting before beginning test measurement. 

5.6 Fuel Consumption 

Arrange the fuel measurement apparatus so that the 
fuel pressure at the carburettor or the fuel injection 
pump IS equivalent to that which exists when the tractor 
fuel tank is half-full. The fuel temperature shall be 
comparable to that occurring during full load operation 
for 2 h of the tractor when fuel is taken from the 
tractor fuel tank. 

When consumption is measured by volume, calculate 
the mass of fuel per unit of work using the density 
corresponding to the appropriate fuel temperature. 
This figure shall then be used to calculate the 
volumetric data using the fuel density at 15**C, 

Alternatively, when the consumption is measured by 
mass, calculate volumetric data using the fuel density 
(specific gravity) value at 15°C. 

6 TEST PROCEDURE 

6.1 General 

All the driven axles of the tractor shall be coupled to 
the dynamometers. All measurements shall be made 
with the engine governor control set for maximum 
engine speed. 

The various tests shall normally be carried out 
continuously. 

The angularity of any shaft connecting the driving axles 
to the dynamometers shall not exceed 2°, 

If an exhaust gas discharge device for the test is used. 
It shall not change the engine performance. 



6.2 Choice of Transmission Ratios 

Measurements shall be made in transmission ratios 
including and between that giving the slowest forward 
speed and that giving the fastest forward speed 
recommended by the manufacturer for field work, at 
between 3 km/h and 16 km/h. A minimum of six 
transmission ratios shall-be used, their choice as far 
as possible allowing the efficiency of the various ratio- 
changing devices to be assessed. 

If the tractor has a hydrokinetic torque converter which 
can be locked out by the driver, carry out the test 
both with the torque converter in operation and with 
it locked out. 

If the tractor has a stepless variation transmission, 
carry out the test at six transmission ratio 
approximately equally spaced. 

Tractors with two drive axles shall be tested with both 
axles engaged. 

6.3 Control of Speeds and Torques 

The torques apphed and the rotational speeds of the 
two wheels of the same axle shall be equal. In the 
case of an axle which cannot be tested with the 
differential locked, the torques applied to each of 
the two wheels shall be controlled so that the deviation 
of the rotational speeds of the two wheels is less 
than 5 percent. 

In the case of tractors with two driven axles with a 
differential between them which cannot be locked, 
the torques apphed to each of the two axles shall be 
controlled so that the deviation between the mean 
peripheral speeds of the front and rear wheels is less 
than 5 percent. The dynamic radius indices of the tyres 
as given in Annex A of IS 10274 : 1993 shall be used 
for this determination. 

In the case of tractors with two drive axles without 
a differential between them, power at the axles shall 
be measured with several distributions of power 
between them. For each transmission ratio selected, 
increase the torque on the axle for which the 
manufacturer indicates the higher permissible torque 
until the rated engine speed or the maximum torque 
permissible for the axle is reached. If the rated speed 
of the engine has not been reached, increase the torque 
on the second axle until the rated engine speed or 
the -maximum torque permissible for this axle is 
reached. If the rated speed of the engine has still not 
been reached, the measurement shall be terminated 
for that transmission ratio. 



IS 14414 : 1996 



If the rated speed of the engine is reached, the 
measurement shall be repeated as many times as 
necessary to obtain the maximum torque permissible 
at the second axle by reducing the torque apphed to 
the first axle each time by 20 percent of the value 
applied to that axle in the first measurement. If the 
maximum torque permissible for the second axle is 
reached, increase the torque on the first axle to attain 
rated engine speed. 

For each measurement, record the rotational speed 
of each wheel, the torque apphed to each wheel, the 
rotational speed of the engine and the fuel 
consumption. Also, calculate the axle power. 

6.4 Additional M easurements 

In addition to the performance measurements specified 
above, report the following: 

a) Ambient air temperature at a representative 
point approximately 2 m in front of the tractor 
and approximately 1.5 m above the ground 
(where the tractor is fitted with a forward 



blowing pusher fan, ambient air temperature 
measurements shall be made at appropriate 
alternative positions); 

b) Air temperature at the engine air intake; 

c) Atmospheric pressure; 

d) Relative air humidity; 

e) Maximum coolant temperature (in case of 
an air-cooled engine, measure the 
temperature of the cylinder block at 
representative points); 

f) The fuel temperature at the inlet to the 
carburettor or injection pump; 

g) Engine oil temperature; and 
h) Transmissionoil temperature. 

6.5 Tests at High Ambient Temperature (Optional) 

The tests given under 6.2 and 6.3 shall be conducted 
under high ambient temperature of 43°C ± 2°C. The 
observations given under 6.4 shall also be reported. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 5.1 ) 

SPECIMEN TEST REPORT 

A-1 LOCATIONS 

Tractor manufacturer's name and address 

Place of running-in: 

Duration of running-in: 

A-2 SPECIFICATION OF TRACTOR 
Tractor 

Model SI No 

Engine 

Make Model 

Type SI No 

Rated speed min' 

Cylinders 

Number Bore 

Stroke m m Capacity 

Fuel and I njection System 

Capacity of fuel tank ^ 

Make, type and model of injection pump 

Manufacturer's production setting ^l/h 

Make, type and model of injectors 

3 



,nim 
1 



IS 14414 : 1996 

Make, type and model of magneto, coil and distributor - ... 

Make, type and model of carburettor 

Injection or injection timing (manual or automatic) 

Air Cleaner 

Make and model ., Type 

Precleaner ( if fitted ) 

Make and model Type 

Transmission 
Clutch 

Type Diameter of discs ,mm 

Nominal Travel Speeds 

Gear 



Rear Wheels 
Tyre size 

Dynamic radius index 
Axle, r/min* 
Nominal travel speed, km/h* 



Front wheels ( if powered ) 
Tyre size 

Dynamic radius index 
Axle, r/min* 
Nominal travel speed, km/h* 



Steering 

Type 

( for example, manual, power or power-assisted ) 
Wheels 

Location of steered wheels 

Front 

Make of tyres Type 

( for example radial or cross-ply ) 

Size 

Front axle powered (Yes/No) Ply rating 

Dynamic radius index >mm 

Rear 

Make of tyres Type 

{ for example radial or cross-ply ) 

Size 

Ply rating 



*At rated engine speed. 



IS 14414 : 1996 

Wheelbase ,. 

, mm 

Track 



^^^ Number of track plates . 

Width of track plates 



Masses (With tanks full but without driver) 



.mm 



Total 



Without ballast 
With ballast 



A-3 FUEL AND LUBRICANT SPECIFICATIONS 

Fuel 

Trade name O^^^^^ ^^^y, 

Octane number or cetane No Density at 1 50c 

T y p e 

Engine oil 

Trade name .. r^^^ 

Type 

Viscosity class 

Transmission oil 

Trade-Name .... rr. 

Type . 

Viscosity class 

M aximum temperatures 

C o o 1 a n t op 

Engine oil op 

F u e 1 op 

Engine air intake op 

Transmission oil .. 



^C 



RON : Research Octane Number. 



IS 14414 : 1996 



Table A.l Table of Results 



Date of Test: 



Temperature °C 
Relative H umidity 
Pressure kPa 



Atmospheric Conditions 



Gear 


Rear Axle 


Front Axle 


Total 
Power 


Fuel Consumption 




Left 


Right 


Power 
kW 


Left 


Right 


Power 

kW 


kW 


Specific 
kg/kWh 


Hourly 




Torque 

Nm 


Speed 
r/min 


Torque 
N m 


Speed 
r/min 


Torque 
Nm 


Speed 
r/min 


Torque 
Nm 


Speed 
r/min 


1/h 















































































































































NOTE — Repeat this table if measurements are made in more than six transmissions. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its pubhcations. No part of these pubUcations may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Pubhcations), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also-reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 32 ( 348 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 83 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 / 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95,832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 I 832 78 91,832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. BATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



