**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 12892 (1989) : Safety of barrage and weir structures - 
Guidelines [WRD 22: River Training and Diversion Works] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | *ft ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12*92 : 1989 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY OF BARRAGE AND WEIR 
STRUCTURES - GUIDELINES 

UDC 627 82 + 62743 : 614*8 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1»90 Priw Gnmf * 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 1991 

TO 

IS 12892:1989 SAFETY OF BARRAGE AND WEIR 

STRUCTURES — GUIDELINES 

I P*ge 2, clause *.l (e), (6) | — Substitute 'excessive retrogression' for 
'(•adequate retrogression'. 

(RVD20) 



Rcprognpby Unit, BIS, New DnJtu, lulu 



Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee, RVD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau or Indian Standards on 22 December 1989, after the 
draft finalized by the Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the River ValJey 
Projects Division Council. 

The safety of barrage and weir structures should be ensured right from the investigation stage and 
continues up to the location, design, construction, operation and maintenance stages. There cannot be 
any laxity on these aspects. A safe structure should not only be hydraulically and structurally safe 
but it should also fulfil the functions for which it has been constructed. Fire fighting equipment may 
be provided near the barrages 



rs 12892 : 1989 



Indian Standard 



SAFETY OF BARRAGE AND WEIR 
STRUCTURES - GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides guidelines on various 
aspects of safety of the barrage and weii struc- 
tures, such as, investigations, location, design, 
construction, operation and maintenance. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard. 

IS No. Title 

6532 ; 1972 Code of practice for design, 

installation, observation and 
maintenance or uplift pressure 
pipes for hydraulic structures 
on permeable foundations 

6966 Guidelines for hydraulic 

{ Part 1 )•: 1989 design of barrages and weirs: 
Part 1 Alluvial reaches { first 
revision ) 

7349 : 1989 Guidelines for operation and 

maintenance of barrages and 
weirs (first revision ) 

7720 : 1975 Criteria for investigation, 

planning and layout of bar- 
rages and weirs 

8408 : 1976 Criteria for river training 

works for barrages and weirs 
in alluvium 

11130:1984 Criteria for structural design 

of barrages and weirs 

11150: 1934 Code of practice for construc- 

tion of concrete barrages 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For various terms used in this standard, 
reference may be made to the following Indian 
Standards. 

a) IS 6966 : 1989 

b) IS 7349: 1989 

c) IS 7720 : 1975 

d) IS 8408 : 1976 

e) IS 11130: 1984 

f) IS 11150: 1984 



4 SAFETY ASPECTS ON INVESTIGATIONS 

4.1 The investigations should be earned out 
without any laxity as the continued safety and 
efficient functioning of barrage/weir structure and 
integrating it with the master plan of the basin 
development depends on the data collected and 
analysed. The structure designed based on inade- 
quate data may suffer an unexpected serious 
structural damage. 

4.2 For details of preliminary and detailed 
investigations for barrages and weirs, IS 7720 : 
1975 may be referred, 

5 SAFETY ASPECTS ON LOCATION 

5.1 For a safe and efficient barrage/weir, the 
location of the structure is very important. 
Various considerations for locating tbe structure 
at the proper p/ace shaM include the course of the 
river, the nature of silt, condition of the bank*, 
width of the river bed, foundation conditions, 
confluence of tributaries, bends and rapids in the 
river, etc. The following aspects shall be thoro- 
ughly examined from safety considerations. 

a) Course of the River 

It shall be studied with survey maps/satellite 
imageries that the course of the river has not 
changed for many years at the prospective site of 
the structure. In the case of shifting rivers. 
proper measures shall be adopted to contain the 
river in the desired course. 

b) Nature of Silt 

It shall be examined to determine whether the 
soil tnrough which the canal alignment runs, is 
able to withstand the velocity of flow which can 
carry the silt down the canal. This factor will 
influence the location of the head regulator and 
also tbe overall cost of the barrage as costly lining 
may be required otherwise for safe operation. 

c) Condition of the Banks 

It shall be ensured that the banks at the proposed 
location are firm and not easily erodible. The 
banks shall normally be high so that the country 
areas are not submerged during high floods. 
Otherwise, costly flood protective embankment! 
would be necessary. 



I 



I» 



d) Width of the River Bed 

The width of the river at the proposed location 
shall not be too wide wMett induces- isregular silt 
forming shoals on tfce *rJsfreailt and downtftredril 
and consequent irregular anrflikdy oross flow*, 
A very narrow width «f the riv«r shrfP ako be 
avoided as it would reduce the waterway and 
induce high intensities of flow which would 
necessitate deeper eat offir and Wumfetfons and 
protective works to make the structure safe against 
surface flows. 

e> rWidbM Coftdttwm 

Fo* «fc safety «f the flructars, she- fauwdafwn 
conations, Suelf an-, weak ami fettiMtf rocks^ fault 
zoAss, el«ysy hyaf, aifty l«y4» pron* to Hquefaw- 
tion, artisian and quicksand, etc, staff btf fhoro- 
ugtily known so that proper foundation treatment 
cotrtd be effected. 

f) Confluence of Tributaries 

The location of the sttnetnrw Jr* th* mafci. siver 
with a tributary flowing parallel and close to the 
mam river strait be Avoided as thew wouM he 
possibilities at a later date of ttte mam river 
breaking imcr the tributary and dtttflstrtkrrtg the 
structure thereby render iog it wwsaft and infrac- 
tuon». 

g) Corrective Measures 

It is arfways very difficult to select an ideaf sire for 
the location of a barrage and its head regulators 
satisfying all the requirements including the safety 
aspects. Hence, it ofien becorrteS necessary \a 
select a site satisfying most of the requirements 
anil for tfte rtst, sdrfie corrective measures shall 
be irtc»rpo rated in the fawut and designs to 
ensave & <fafe structure-. These inefode proper 
fi>undaffon twatrttent, properfy designed gutde 
burhfe, lifnlM , flood protective embaflkrherrts, pilot 
channels, silt excluding devices, proper gate 
regulation, etc. 

6 SAJiETV ASPECTS ON DESIGN 

6.1 PaYaTOettrsr, St/en as, design flood, pond level, 
free bdarcf, waterway gauge- discBarge curve, etc, 
shaft tte prdperfy selected to eosure safe design of 
the structure and guidelines for the same are 
givew in ttM foflowitg paras. Reference may also 
be made to M 4966 ( Part 1 > : 19W. 

a) Design Flood 

Thff faurifge/weif shall be designed to safely pass 
a flood wfrh certain return period, Usually^ in. tbc 
case of barrages of minor and normal isnporUiace, 
the design flood for waterway shall be taken to 
have; a frequency of 1 in 50 years. la such cases 



Where rials and hazards arc involved, a review of 
this criteria based on site conditions may be 
necessary. 

b) Fnc Board 

The free budrd shall fte caflefliHy, fixed so that the 
structure and abutments are safe for a higher 
flood with a frequency of 1 in 500 years. The 
likely accretion of bed on the upstream rtwhl 
also be taken into account while fixing the free 
board. The top levels of abutment* and piers shall 
also- be fixed M accommodate tbe gates inthw 
maximum lifted position a«k,% that tbsse are met 
damaged by floating Wees', etc. 

c) Afflux 

The permissible afflux shall be aacefutl? fixed so 
that the waterways of the barrage cam be feted 
accordingly without causing damage to nearby 
important/populated towns, industries, etc and 
risk of outflanking by breaches of bunds* etc 
coufd be avoided. Occasionally, flooding of culti- 
vated lands in the river bed isfands and the banks, 
under extreme case of flood above 1 in 100 years 
frequency, may be allowed. Otherwise, the water- 
way will be unnecessarily too wide which may 
cause shsggish flow through the barrage, shoal 
formation, cross flews, excessive cost of structure, 
etc. 

d) Waterway 

The waterway of a barrage sha.lt be very carefully 
fixed to avoid shoal formation and excessive 
scour. 

e) Hydraulic Design 

The failures of barrages /wetcs can be attributed to 
the following main causes, acting alone or in 
combination. These are (1) undermining through 
piping, (2) eruption of floor caused by uplift 
exceeding gravity force* < not ia the case Of raft 
floor ), (3) deep scour tearaedtatefy upstream and/ 
or downstream of the solid floor, (4) faulty cons- 
truction, (5J faulty regulation of gates, and {€) 
inadequate fetrogessiofl. 

After proper investigation of foundation condi- 
tions of the proposed barrage aad its afeutmeaCS, 
suitable foundation treatments are to be proposed 
by the design organization for improving bcariag 
capacity, reducing the settlement and avoiding 
liquefaction, etc. Proposals for preconsolidatioir, 
vibrofloatation, compaction piles, grouting rf 
loose rock, ground anchors, etc, may be properly 
analysed and design intimated to the construction 
agency well in advance. 

The hydraulic design of the barrage/weir shall be 
carried out to be safe against exa gradient, scour 



KSK892: W» 



and uplift and settlement of foundation. For 
guidelines for their designs, reference may be made 
to IS 6966 : 1989. In general, this would involve 

safe design of upstream and downstream cutoffs/ 
sheet piles, energy dissipation arrangements, 
thickness of floor, flexible protections, etc. 

f) Structural Designs 

In so far as the structural design is concerned, 
the various forces and moments including those 
caused by the earthquake, differential heads, 
differential settlement etc, shall be taken into 
account and the various factors, such as, sliding, 
overturning, etc, shall be arrived at to be within 
the permissible limits. Allowable stresses in mate- 
rials, such as, concrete, masonry, steel, etc, shall 
not be exceeded. For guidelines for structural 
design of barrage/vveir, reference may be made to 
IS 11130 : 1984. Proper measures to protect the 
barrage crest and floor against abrasion damage 
by rolling boulders may be provided. Fenders may 
be added where navigation is expected. 

Gate designs 

For the safety of the barrages, proper remote 
control and group control systems of the gate 
operation must be provided. Sometimes, after the 
erection of the gates, some gate leaves vibrate 
under certain lifted conditions. These should be 
immediately checked by manufacturers and desig- 
ners and necessary rectifications carried out. 

Occasionally, floating tree trunks hit the under- 
side of the gate leaves which may seriously 
damage the gates. Whenever such possibility 
exists, sufficient margin must be allowed above 
high flood level to allow large size tree trunks 
to pass underneath the gates. 

Radial gates may be advantageous in barrages 
where flashy flood is expected. These can be 
operated in a shorter tine than vertical gates. 

g) Hirer Training Works 

Care shall be taken for the safe design of various 
river training works, such as, guide bunds, spurs, 
etc, and other safety works, namely, afflux bund, 
marginal and approach embankments, etc. For 
guidelines for design of river training works, 
reference may be made to IS 8408 : 1976. For 
major barrages, performance of river training 
works should be reviewed from time to time. If 
necessary, it may also be checked in models 
because the flow conditions in upstream and 
downstream regions of the barrages get consider- 
ably changed after a few years due to shoal for- 
mation, bank scour, etc. If necessary, the guide 
bunds are sometimes required to be extended or 
its protection works to be strengthened after the 



flood season. Detailed pictures of the flow condi- 
tions and their effect on river training works 
should be placed before the designers for review 
and reconsideration every year. 

h) Design of Other Components 

A safe design offish pass would necessitate pro- 
per provisions for the safe passage of fish from 
upstream to downstream and vice versa. Effective- 
ness of the fish passes is to be regularly observed 
both during the monsoon and past-monsoon 
period. If it is not effective, proper modifications 
in the design and operation method have to be 
requested from the design organizations. Similarly, 
the safe design of navigation lock would necessi- 
tate proper Ailing and emptying arrangements, 
berthing arrangements, desilting arrangements, etc. 
Whenever ice formation takes place, provision of 
de-icing arrangements for proper gate operation 
should be ensured. 

NOTE — For guidelines on the design of fish pass, 
navigation lock, trash racks or head regulator, etc, 
reference may be made to the Publication No. 179 
Vol II* of the Central Board of irrigation and 
Power, New Delhi. 

7 SAFETY ASPECTS ON CONSTRUCTION 

7.1 A good coordination between designing and 
constructing agencies shall be established for 
bringing out a safe and economical structure. The 
field engineers shall be m the knowledge of the 
implications of provisions in the design of various 
components. Any change required to be made on 
account of site conditions or any other reason 
whatsoever, shall not be attempted by him on his 
own without evaluating the implications due to 
such changes and the designer shall invariably be 
consulted to find out any other economical and 
safe alternative thereof. Frequent checks on the 
construction vis-a-vis design provisions and cons- 
tant quality control shall be ensured for providing 
a safe structure. 

7.2 For carrying out the construction efficiently 
and safely, the following points shall be carefully 
planned and data on the same regularly collected 
during the construction period: 

a) Sequence of construction of various items 
of the structure including river diversion 
and de-watering arrangements. 

b) Various constraints on different activities 
of construction of the components. 

c) Inter-dependence of various items so that 
there is minimum interference in the con- 
tinuity of progress. 



^Manual on barrages and weirs on permeable 

foundation. 



IS 17*91 : 1989 



d) Obligatory precaution* to be taken for the 
protection of season's works from the 
ensuring floods. 

c) Special features, if any. 

f) Proper lighting arrangements to be pro- 
vided at tbe project site. 

g) Right type and capacity of the equipment 
required for de- watering well point and 
pumping, excavation, machines, sheet 
piling equipment, foundation treatment, 
plants, such as, vibro-floatation, etc, com- 
paction equipment, concreting plant, river 
crafts, floating cranes, etc to be carefully 
planned and arranged before the construc- 
tion is started. Wrong selection of equip- 
ment often causes serious bottlenecks in 
construction and even causes accidents. 
The selection of the above may be got 
vetted in the design office including safety 
arrangements to be provided for their 
operation. 

h) Safety crew including divers with full 
diving kit must be provided at site. 

j) First aid kit for accident or emergency 
should be provided wherever necessary. 

73 Right from the preparation of foundation /or 
the structure, each and every component of the 
barrage/weir shall be constructed properly for 
ensuring safety of the structure. For general 
guidelines on the construction of barrages/weirs, 
reference may be made to IS 1 1 150 : 1984. 

7.4 Safety aspects on the construction of follow- 
ing items shall be ensured by the site-in-charge 
as detailed. 

a) Foundation 

Foundation preparation is an important item 
since the whole structure is going to rest on the 
same. It shall be dressed up to the barrage/weir 
profile and excavation shall be carried out care- 
fully without exceeding tbe tolerance limits. The 
foundation shall not contain loose pockets or 
materials and they shall be watered and compact- 
ed to the specified relative density. This is appli- 
cable to those portions of the foundation also 
which may become loose during excavation and 
de-watering operations. Clay pockets shall be 
treated as specified by the designer including 
removal, refilling with sand and compacting. It 
shall be ensured that proper drainage arrange- 
ments in the foundation in accordance with the 
design including inverted filter wherever indicated 
are provided before concreting work is taken up. 
To avoid honey-combing of concrete of the floor, 
proper mudmat of lean concrete usually 50 to 
150 mm thick shall be provided. 



b) Cut-Off ( Sheet PiU 

1) Wherever sheetpiles are to be provided, 
they shall be driven at their correct align- 
ment without any gaps between them in 
the wall. Since it may not always be 
possible to drive them at exact plumb, 
suitable tolerances may be allowed. If the 
tolerances exceed the permissible limit, they 
shall be corrected by taper piles. If there 
is any split jo the interlock, additional 
piles in front shall be driven to cover it. 
Driving of welded sheet piles of mare than 
8 m length shall not be allowed as the weld 
may give way due to excessive driving 
stresses. Random checking of sheet pile 
joints should be done for leakage by die- 
injection technique or any other suitable 
technique. Wherever seals are to be jointed 
to the sheet piles, it shall be carefully done 
by welding and bracing. Since sheet pile 
are designed to have hinge action at the 
top, it shall be ensured by the provisiofl of 
the tar paper Wherever two piles rows 
are provided side by side, cork mastic filler 
on top shall be provided to take care of 
uneven heights and hinge action. 

Sheet pile caping beams should be cast 
monalithic with the barrage raft. Other- 
wise clean cold joints may form at the 
inter face, which may cause short circuiting 
of the seepage flow and even piping along 
this joint. 

V:brosmkers should be recommended for 
pile sinking to avoid mis-alignment, damage 
of pile head, separation of clutches and to 
facilities quick driving. 

2) Wherever concrete/masonry cut offs are 
provided, precautions shall be taken to 
avoid cracking as it may lead to short 
circuiting of seepage path and the exit 
gradient may be exceeded endangering the 
safety. 

c) Solid floor 

The solid floor shall be constructed carefully 
avoiding stratification of concrete which may lead 
to failure by blowing off against uplift pressures. 
Cold joints shall be avoided. The strength of 
cement concrete of the raft shall be maintained 
in accordance with the specifications so that the 
stresses in both the concrete and steel reinforce- 
ment are not exceeded. The main and distribution 
reinforcement of the raft shall be carefully laid 
in accordance with the specifications and design 
requirements. The spacings shall be arranged in 
such a way that proper placements of concrete 
and vibration ere ensured. Reinforcement around 
sill beam grooves shall not be omitted. Proper 



IS 12892 : 1989 



dowels between first and second stage concrete in 
the gate grooves, trestle foundation, etc, most not 
be forgotten. The pier reinforcement shall be pro- 
perly anchored to the raft. Wherever horizontal 
or vertical construction joints are necessary, 
proper steps to cut the joint and provision of seals 
when the joint is to be left open for more than 
3 days, are to be provided. 

d) Piers and Gates 

In the piers, correct alignment of the gate and 
stoplog grooves shall be ensured so that no diffi- 
culty is experienced in their operation, specially 
during floods. For inspection and repairs of the 
gate wheels wherever contemplated, suitable galle- 
ries in the piers with easy access shall be provided. 

While concreting, the pressure relief pipes instal- 
led in the piers and their outlets shall not be lost 
sight of and the open ends of the pipes shall be 
covered so that the concrete does not fall into the 
pipes and chokes them. 

In the case of gravity type of floor, the stepped 
pier footings shall be concreted up to the barrage 
floor level and further portion of the pier above 
the bay level shall be concreted simultaneously 
with the bay concrete. The steps shall be so 
provided that there is no vertical joint. In the 
raft type of floor, the bay concreting and pier 
concreting shall be done simultaneously. 

e) Abutment 

Anchorage of the abutment reinforcement to the 
base slab shall be ensured. The abutment well 
shall be raised simultaneously along wnh the 
backfill and in any case shall not be more than 
about I '5 m above the compacted backfill. Speci- 
fied relative density of the backfull shall be 
ensured by proper compaction. Wherever drain- 
age is to be provided behind the abutment walls 
in accordance with the design, the same shall be 
done carefully so that the saturated water level 
of the backfill is not allowed to exceed the design 
values. Inverted filter and sealing arrangements 
at the junctions of different abutment blocks 
shall be properly ensured. 

High abutments sometimes undergo long term 
settlements, in foundations susceptible to settle- 
ment, at the toe side resulting in gradual 
tilting of the abutment face. As a result, the gate 
grooves may get jammed It may be desirable in 
such cases to provide extra depth for the vertical 
grooves on (he face of the abutment to allow free 
movements of gates even if tilted. 

f) Divide Wall 

As the divide wall is the one coming under the di- 
rect attack of flood flow, proper protection around 



the same in accordance with the design shall be 
provided. The change in the levels of the bed in 
front of the sluice and spillway portion shall be 
gradually made up and abrupt changes avoided. 
The junction between the divide wail and the 
bay concrete shall be doDe with proper precau- 
tions. 

Sometimes due to the cross-flow at the nose of 
the upstream divide wall, a differential scour 
may take place between the two faces of the 
divide wall. This may even cause tilting of the will. 
Regular watch is necessary, by sounding, on tbe 
two sides of the upstream divide wall. If 
necessary, boulders in crates may have to 
be dumped near the nose if the scour is serious. 
Jute bags or nylon nets filled with sand may be 
dumped in deep scour holes and covered with 
crated boulders up to 1 m. 

g) Downstream Protection 

As the downstream inverted filter below the 
cement concrete (. ex. ) blocks is very important 
as a measure against piping, it shall be laid with 
due care. The gaps between the c.c. blocks shall 
always be filled with small stones or bajri. Where- 
ever downstream bed level is higher than the 
level of downstream c.c. block protection, reverse 
slopes, not steeper than I in 5 shall be provided 
and it shall be ensured that some loose stone 
protection is provided for a length of not less 
than 2 m in the higher bed portion after the 
reverse slope. 

Sometimes, due to error in gate operation and 
also due to shoal formation near the barrage, 
high concentration of flow may generate unsteady 
shooting flow over the down stream protection 
works. To prevent any damage due to such 
contingency, indigenous gcofilters of bamboo 
mattress, etc, can be provided below the mineral 
filters, to avoid displacement of the filter material 
from below the c.c. blocks resulting in the suction 
of bed materials underneath. 

h) Instrumentation 

The importance of instrumentation shall be 
understood fully and care shall be taken in their 
installation so that wrong data are not observed 
leading to misleading and dangerous conclusions. 
For guidelines on the instrumentation in barrages/ 
weirs, reference may be made to IS 6532 : 1972. 

It may be stressed that often the instruments are 
simply forgotten, once tbe construction is over. 
Even the locations of the instruments are not 
remembered. It is desirable to prepare an ex- 
haustive manual for instruments embedded in the 
barrage, with their locations, frequency of obser- 
vations, analysis to be done, importance of these 
observations, etc. This manual may be kept both 
in the offices of the Assistant Engineers and 



IS 12892 : 1989 



Executive Engineers in charge of the barrage, as 
also in the site control room. 

The location of each of the instrument may also 
be painted on the face of the piers where the end 
of the cable pairs emerge out. The actual tip 
location may also be indicated there by paints. 

j) River Training Works 

The materials used in the construction of various 
river training works, such as, guide bunds, afflux 
bunds, approach embankments groynes or spurs, 
etc, and that their construction itself shall be of 
required standards so that their failures, impairing 
the hydraulic performance and hence the safety 
of the diversion structure, do not occur, wherever 
filters are indicated in the design, they shall be 
provided without fail since the stability of the 
bunds would depend on it. It shall be ensured 
that the afflux bunds are tied to high grounds to 
prevent outflanking of the structure and endanger- 
ing the same wherever the deep channel of the 
river hugs the guide bunds and adequate apron 
shall be provided to avoid scour and consequent 
failures. 

k) Head Regulator 

Head regulator is also a structure similar to the 
mam structure in so Far as the general principles 
of design are concerned. Hence, whatever pre- 
cautions are to be observed in the construction 
of the main structure from safety point of view, 
they shall be followed for the head regulator 
also. 

Whenever there is a chance of floating debris, 
such as, grass logs, tree trunks, etc, entering the 
canal through the head regulator, log-booms or 
trash booms may have to be provided at the 
upstream of the head regulator. 

If heavy silt deposition takes place at the entry of 
the canal, thereby reducing the canal capacity, it 
may be necessary to have a small dredger operat- 
ing in the canal ( damage of lining in the canal 
should be provided J and clearing the sitt deposit- 
ed. The dredged material can be dumped on 
either side of the bank. 

m) Damages due to Rolling Stones 

Barrages/ weirs located in the bouldery reaches 
face the problem of abrasion and damages due to 
rolling stones thus endangering the safety of the 
structure. In order to ensure the safety, measures 
like provision of richer concrete in the top thick- 
ness of the floor, paving stones, clading of pier 
nose with steel or stone, etc, shall be adopted. 

While repairing the cavaties on the crest slope 
and cistern of the barrage and in the piers, proper 
dowel bars and wire mesh may be embedded 
inside the cavities before concrete is poured into 
it. At the surface, special concrete, namely, 



haematite concrete, epoxy concrete, etc, may be 
used, for a thickness of 1 50 mm or so. 

When big boulders roll over the barrage, steel 
rails with welded anchors may be fined on the 
surface, so that the boulders cannot damage the 
concrete surface. 

n) Shearing Off of Pier Reinforcement 

When the piers are under construction, the pro- 
jecting pier reinforcement shall be properly pro- 
tected from floods by bending them in the direc- 
tion of flow, well before the floods and later on 
straightening them when the construction is 
resumed. As some damages could be caused due 
to oblique flow or any other reason, the reinforce- 
ment shall be first checked up before starting the 
construction after floods whether they are loosely 
sticking out or not. After ensuring its proper 
bending with the lower portion, new reinforcement 
shall be welded on to the old ones. Proper bond- 
ing of new concrete with the old one shall also he 
ensured. A few welded rods shall also be test 
checked for their strength. 

p) Provision of thrust forces, exerted by ice-covers 
of the pond, with reference to the safety of the 
structure should be made. This provision is of 
importance in sub-Himalayan areas of tlie 

country. 

Provision for safety against uplift forces on the 
floor structure that are exerted by the water 
seeping down the mountain on hill slopes ( Parti- 
cularly, during rainy seasons ) while the floor is 
under repairs and no counterweight is available 
due to diversion of river waters. 

q) Quality Control 

Safety of the barrages/weirs depends on the sound 
construction with strict quality control. Safety 
shall not be compromised for cost or speed of 
construction. To prevent possible failures, the 
spots where faulty construction has occurred shall 
be identified by non-destructive tests and suitable 
measures taken with strict quality control. 

Alkali aggregate reaction sometimes causes ex- 
pansion of concrete at a much later stage after 
construction. Sometimes, such expansion in peirs 
and abutments james the gates. It is essential that 
the cement and the aggregate proposed to be used 
in the construction of the barrage or (he weirs 
should be tested in a competent laboratory for 
alkali-aggregate reactivity. Use of poizolana 
material, for example, fly ash, etc, to a consider- 
able extent ( up to 40 percent of the cement 
quantity ) may reduce the alkali aggregate reacti- 
vity. All the cement and aggregates which are 
liable to such reaction should be avoided in the 
construction. 



IS MtW : 1919 



r) Strict quality control during constrncticM 
should be exencised so thar the following construc- 
tion defects do not occur and the safety of struc- 
ture is ensured. 

1) Stratification of concrete layers in the solid 
floor and the improper bond between the 
layers of concrete. 

2) Various construction and structural design 
defects 

3) Cracks in the downstream glacis- leading to 
short circuiting of seepage path. 

4) Improper foundation treatment leading to 
subsidence and consequent disturbance in 
the alignment of gate track and jamming. 

5> Cracking of seals in the joints. 
6} Tearing of sheet piles and. improper inter- 
locking. 

7) Improper foundation treatment of imper- 
vious layers leading to locked up seepage 
pressure. 

8) Inadequate cover for reinforcement bars. 

9} Honeycombing of bottom layers of floor 
concrete due [o omission of inadequate 
mudtnat. 

10) Improper concrete max used resulting m 
structural failure, etc. 

11) Necking failures of flexible concrete cut 
off walls. 

12) Rigid sheet piles instead of hinged ones 
due lo non-pro vision of tar paper, cork 
mastict, asphalt, etc. 

8 SAFETY ASPECTS ON MAINTENANCE 
AND OPERATION 

8.1 Proper inspection, maintenance and opera- 
tion of the diversion structures are neees&ary 
adjuncts to safe and economical designs. Any 
slackness in these aspects, would lead to failures 
and extension of damages. For guidelines on. this 
aspect, reference may be made to IS 7349 ; 1989. 

8.2 Safety against faulty gate regulation can be 
prevented only by imparting adequate knowledge 
to the operating personnel about the significance 
of the proper regulation and proper maintenance 
of the gates and other hoisting arrangements. They 
shall also be imparted adequate training in this 
regard. These shall form part of the duties of the 
site-in-charge. Operation and maintenance manual 
oi gates should be updated. 

"A group of engineers including the designers, 
model research officers and maintenance engi- 
neers may form a committee of gate regulation. 
This committee may meet twice a year, once 
immediately before the flood and once imme- 
diately after the flood. The committee shall 
review the condition of the river, both upstream 



aid downstream of the baring* u»i Being tile 
crosssecttons taken of the river. Whenever 
serious scour is taking place, the committee 
may advice repair work by crated boulders 
etc, where high shoals have been formed near 
the barrage, both upstream and downstream, 
proper deshoaling measures either by dredgers 
or by dozers durtag the non-momooit period 
are to be recommended. Any bunk scour near 
the barrage will also be carefully surveyed and 
remedial measures to be quickly deaigned- 
lf quick decisions are not taken, agxrcvanaaa 
may become beyond the control of the main- 
tenance engineers. 

Sometimes, the under sluice tunnefs are choked 
due to heavy silt deposition. This should be 
regularly checked after closing the tunnel 
gates on the downstream. If necessary, such 
chokages are to be ckaaed by compressed air 
or air water jets". 

8.3 Safety of the barrages against scour damages 
resulting from cross flows, shoal foimation* vor- 
tex formation, etc, shall be eaauied by proper 
operation of the gates and dredging of shoals 
wherever necessary. 

8.4 The piezometric data shall be regularly 
checked, particularly during and after the floods 
and suitable action taken if unusual behaviour 
different from the design values are observed. 
Readings of tiltmeter» installed over abutments, 
piers and divide walls shall be regularly observed 
and safety of the structure ensured whenever 
adverse behaviour is observed. Similarry, the 
readings of soil meters and stress meters, wherever 
provided, shall be analysed and suitable set ion 
taken to ensure safety of the structure. 

8.5 Safety of the trash racks provided sometimes 
upstream of the gates of the head regulator feed- 
ing hydel channels shall be ensured by frequently 
cleaning the clogged openings, thus ehminatiDg 

high differential pressures to develop. 

8.6 Divide walls analysis of scour holes and year 
to year maintenance required should be examined 
from hydraulic performance, gate operatieua and 
flow phenomenon. If the scour holes are deepened 
to vortex formation leading to washing of fine due 
materials and sinking boulders, remedial measures 
should cover treatment of proper fibre filter. 

9 MISCELLANEOUS 

9.1 For each and every barrage/weir, a record of 
its construction features and behaviour, both 
hydraulic and structural, shall be kept in the office 
of the Divisional Engineer of the project. The 
record shall also contain the details of its failures/ 
problems, if any, and remedial measures adopted 
from time to time. Necessary photographs shall 
also be available of the same. These would always 



IS 12892 : 1989 



help for future modification if any, needed for the 
safely of the structure. 

Construction details, design calculations and 
construction drawings of barrages/weir*, etc, 
should be documented and preserved for future 
reference and use. 

River plan forms in the vicinity of barrage should 
be monitored from ground survey as well as from 
satellite imageries if possible. Model studies 
should be earned out before design and construc- 
tion of barrage/'WWT. 

9.2 Whenever there is any problem or failure 
of the barrage/weir, a lot of data needs to be 
collected for study and analysis so that suitable 
remedial measures could be adopted and safety 
ensured. A. list of such data is given below: 

a) Detailed drawings of the barrage/weir, its 
head regulators, guide bunds, afflux bunds, 
approach bunds, spurs, etc. 

b) Detailed note on the damages noticed in- 
cluding the history and remedial measures 
carried out, if any, so far. 

c) Development of the damages. 

d) Photographs taken, if any. 

e) Discharge and water levels at various points 
along guide bunds, afflux bunds, approach 
bunds, spurs, abutments, etc, 

f) Flow pattern observed, for example, con- 
centration of flow through some bays or 
otherwise. 

g) Sounding data both upstream and down- 
stream at the ends of the raft, cement 
concrete blocks, stone protection around 
divide walls and for a distance of 60 m 
or so at 15 m interval. 

h) Gate operations followed during floods and 
other times. 

j) Any seismicity experienced prior to or 
duimg, the 'floods. 

k) Data on settlement of piers, abutments, 
flank whIIs, etc, if any. 



m) Quantity and quality of bed materials and 
floating debris during the floods. 

n) Details of spurs upstream and downstream. 

p) Data on traffic over the structure, if any, 
during the floods. 

q) Details of construction materials used in- 
cluding quality of construction for various 
components including the different bunds. 

r) Instrumentation data available including its 

s) Details about stages of construction. 

t) Details of any field investigation done for 
detecting hoJIows if any and results thereof. 

u) Previous history of any damages and reme- 
dial measures thereof. 

v) Recommendations of any Technical Advi- 
sory Committee from time to time and 
compliance thereof. 

w) Notes on hydraulic and structural designs 
with assumptions made if any ( full details 
shall be available with the design office ). 

y) Any other data relevant to the case under 
investigation. 

z) Analysis of discharge, silt charge observa- 
tions near the barrage and head regulator 
should be carried out on year to year basis. 
Gauge discharge relationship and retrogres- 
sion in the vicinity of barrage, if any, 
should be taken into consideration for 
protection measures and river training 
measures. 

9.3 Another important point leading to the safety 
of the barrage/weir structures being planned, 
designed, constructed and/or operated and main- 
tained is that of publishing the cases of failures 
of barrages/weirs and remedial measures adopted 
in the technical journals for the benefit of the 
designers and the project authorities. This shall 
be done wherever feasible subject to orders, if 
any, regarding publications on projects classified 
as secret. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark On. 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
CO compJy with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked hy BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matter* in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc : No RVD 20 < 4478 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 3], 331 13 75 Telegrams- Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mara 
NEW DELHI 110002 



f331 01 31 
(331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P Road. Maniktola 37 86 62 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 -41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR COIMBATORE 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATJ HYDERABAD. JAIPUR KANPUR. 
PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Priutwell Printers, Delbt, India 



