**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^viiTSs^-SfS^^fS*?*:: 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14817  (Part  5) :  2004 
18010816-5:2000 

Indian  Standard 

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION  —  EVALUATION  OF 

MACHINE  VIBRATION  BY  MEASUREMENTS  ON 

NON-ROTATING  PARTS 

PART  5  MACHINE  SETS  IN  HYDRUALIC  POWER  GENERATING/PUMPING 

AND  PUMPING  PLANTS 


ICS  17.160 


©  BIS  2004 
BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI  110002 

June  2004  Price  Group  8 


Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock  Sectional  Committee,  ME  28 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Part  5)  which  is  identical  with  ISO  10816-5  :  2000  'Mechanical  vibration  — 
Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on  non-rotating  parts  —  Part  5:  Machine  sets  in 
hydraulic  power  generating  and  pumping  plants'  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for 
Standardization  (ISO)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendations  of  the 
Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock  Sectional  Committee  and  approval  of  the  Mechanical  Engineering 
Division  Council. 

The  text  of  ISO  Standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  an  Indian  Standard  without 
deviations.  Certain  conventions  are,  however,  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian  Standards. 
Attention  is  particularly  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be 
read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker,  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  current 
practice  is  to  use  a  point  (.)  as  the  decimal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  the  following  International  Standard  for  which  Indian 
Standard  also  exists.  The  corresponding  Indian  Standard  which  is  to  be  substituted  in  its  place  is 
given  below  along  with  its  degree  of  equivalence  for  the  edition  indicated: 

International  Standard  Corresponding  Indian  Standard  Degree  of 

Equivalence 

ISO  10816-1:1995  Mechanical  vibration  IS   14817   (Part   1)    :   2000   Mechanical         Identical 
—  Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  vibration     —     Evaluation     of     machine 
measurements  on  non-rotating  parts  —  vibration    by    measurements    on    non- 
Part  1  :  General  guidelines  rotating  parts:  Part  1  General  guidelines 

The  concerned  Technical  Committee  has  reviewed  the  provision  of  the  following  International 
Standard  referred  in  this  adopted  standard  and  has  decided  that  it  is  acceptable  for  use  in  conjunction 
with  this  standard: 

I  EC  60994      Guide  for  field  measurement  of  vibrations  and  pulsations  in  hydraulic  machines 
(turbines,  storage  pumps  and  pump-turbines) 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the 
final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'.  The  number  of 
significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value 
in  this  standard. 


IS    14817  (Part  5):  2004 
ISO    10816-5  :2000 


Indian  Standard 

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION  —  EVALUATION  OF 

MACHINE  VIBRATION  BY  MEASUREMENTS  ON 

NON-ROTATING  PARTS 

PART  5  MACHINE  SETS  IN  HYDRUALIC  POWER  GENERATING/PUMPING 

AND  PUMPING  PLANTS 


1     Scope 

This  part  of  ISO  10816  gives  guidelines  for  applying  bearing  housing  vibration  evaluation  criteria  measured  under 
normal  operating  conditions  at  the  bearings,  bearing  pedestals  or  bearing  housings  of  the  main  machine  sets  in 
hydraulic  power  generating  and  pumping  plants.  These  guidelines  are  presented  in  terms  of  both  steady-state  running 
vibration  and  any  amplitude  changes  which  may  occur  in  these  steady  values.  The  numerical  values  specified  are  not 
intended  to  serve  as  the  only  basis  for  vibration  evaluation,  since,  in  general,  the  vibratory  condition  of  a  machine  is 
assessed  by  consideration  of  both  the  bearing  housing  vibration  and  the  associated  shaft  vibration  {see  introduction  of 
ISO  10816-1  and  ISO  7919-1). 

This  part  of  ISO  10816  is  applicable  to  machine  sets  in  hydraulic  power  generating  and  pumping  plants  where  the 
hydraulic  machines  have  speeds  from  60  r/min  to  1800  r/min,  shell  or  shoe  type  sleeve  bearings  and  a  main  engine 
power  of  1  MW  and  more.  The  position  of  the  shaft  line  may  be  vertical,  horizontal  or  at  an  arbitrary  angle  between 
these  two  directions. 

Machine  sets  covered  by  this  part  of  ISO  10816  may  be  combined  from 

—  hydraulic  turbines  and  generators, 

—  pumps  and  electrical  machines  operating  as  motors,  or 

—  pump-turbines  and  motor-generators. 

Auxiliary  equipment  {e.g.  starting  turbines  or  exciters  lying  in  the  shaft  line)  is  included.  Evaluation  criteria  are  at 
present  only  given  for  the  main  bearings  of  the  machine  set. 

This  part  of  ISO  10816  is  applicable  also  to  single  turbines  or  pumps  connected  to  generators  or  electrical  motors 
over  gears  or/and  radially  flexible  couplings.  However,  electrical  machines  of  this  type  should  in  principal  be  evaluated 
according  to  the  criteria  specified  in  ISO  10816-3. 

This  part  of  ISO  10816  is  not  applicable  to  the  following: 

—  pumps  in  thermal  power  plants  or  industrial  installations  (for  these  machines,  see  ISO  10816-3); 

—  hydraulic  machines  or  machine  sets  having  rolling  element  bearings. 

Consistent  with  clause  1  of  ISO  10816-1:1995,  bearing  housing  vibration  of  machine  sets  in  hydraulic  power 
generating  and  pumping  plants  may  be  determined  with  regard  to  following  tasks: 

—  task  A:  monitoring  changes  in  vibrational  behaviour; 

—  task  B:  prevention  of  excessive  kinetic  load. 


IS    14817  (Part  5)  :  2004 
ISO    10816-5  :  2000 


The  criteria  are  applicable  mainly  for  the  vibration  produced  by  the  machine  set  itself.  Special  considerations  should 
be  made  when  necessary  for  vibration  transmitted  to  the  machine  set  from  external  sources. 

2  Normative  references 

The  following  normative  documents  contain  provisions  which,  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of 
this  part  of  ISO  10816.  For  dated  references,  subsequent  amendments  to,  or  revisions  of,  any  of  these  publications 
do  not  apply.  However,  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this  part  of  ISO  10816  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  normative  documents  indicated  below.  For  undated 
references,  the  latest  edition  of  the  normative  document  referred  to  applies.  Members  of  ISO  and  lEC  maintain 
registers  of  currently  valid  International  Standards. 

ISO  10816-1:1995,  Mechanical  vibration  —  Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on  non-rotating 
parts  —  Part  1:  General  guidelines. 

I  EC  60994,  Guide  for  field  measurement  of  vibrations  and  pulsations  in  hydraulic  machines  (turbines,  storage 
pumps  and  pump-turbines). 

3  Machine  arrangements 

Significant  differences  in  design  and  arrangement  of  hydraulic  machine  sets  require  a  separation  into  four  principal 
groups  with  regard  to  the  radial  bearing  stiffness,  as  follows. 

Group  1 :  Horizontal  machine  sets  with  pedestal  or  end-shield  bearings  mounted  on  a  rigid  foundation,  usually  with 
operational  speeds  of  above  300  r/min. 

Group  2:  Horizontal  machine  sets  with  bearing  housings  which  are  only  braced  against  the  casing  of  the  hydraulic 
machine,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of  less  than  300  r/min. 

Group  3:  Vertical  machine  sets  with  bearing  housings  which  are  all  braced  against  the  foundation,  usually  with 

operational  speeds  of  between  60  r/min  and  1  800  r/min. 

Group  4:  Vertical  machine  sets  with  lower  bearing  housings  braced  against  the  foundation  and  upper  bearing 
housings  braced  against  the  generator  stator  only,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of  between  60  r/min  and 

1  000  r/min. 

NOTE  Umbrelta-type  machines  belong  to  Group  4. 

Figures  1  to  4  show  examples  for  each  group. 


IS  14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
ISO  10816-5  :  2000 


NOTE  The  numbers  indicate  measurement  locations. 


Figure  1  —  Measurement  locations  for  Group  1  machine  sets  with  horizontal  shaft  and  pedestal  or 
end-shield  bearings  mounted  on  rigid  foundation,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of  above  300  r/min 


IS  14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
ISO  10816-5  :  2000 


NOTE 


The  numbers  indicate  measurement  locations. 


Figure  2  —  Measurement  locations  for  a  Group  2  machine  set  with  horizontal  shaft  and  bearing  housings 
which  are  only  braced  against  the  casing  of  the  hydraulic  machine,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of 

less  than  300  r/min 


IS   14817  (Part  5):  2004 
ISO   10816-5  :  2000 


NOTE  The  numbers  indicate  measurement  locations. 


Figure  3  —  Measurement  locations  for  a  Group  3  machine  set  with  vertical  shaft  and  bearing  housings 
which  are  all  braced  against  the  foundation,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of  between  60  r/min  and 

1  800  r/min 


IS    14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
ISO   10816-5  :2000 


NOTE  1       The  numbers  indicate  measurement  locations. 
NOTE  2        Umbrella-type  machines  belong  to  this  group. 


Figure  4  —  Measurement  locations  for  a  Group  4  machine  set  with  vertical  shaft,  lower  bearing  housings 

braced  against  the  foundation  and  upper  bearing  housing  braced  against  the  generator  stator  only,  usually 

with  operational  speeds  of  between  60  r/min  and  1  000  r/min 


IS    14817  (Part  5):  2004 
ISO   10816-5  :  2000 


U     U 


-H-^ 


y////////,   ^///////////////////////A 


'/. 


NOTE  It  is  recommended  that  the  location  for  horizontal  measurements  should  be  on  the  bearing  pedestal  and  not  on  the 

bearing  cap,  whenever  possible. 

Figure  5  —  Measurement  locations  and  directions  at  pedestal  or  end-shield  bearings 

4    Measurement  procedures  and  conditions 
4.1     General 


Follow  the  general  procedures  given  in  ISO  10816-1  and  lEC  60994,  subject  to  the  recommendations  given  in  4  2 
to  4.5. 


IS    14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
ISO    10816-5  :  2000 

4.2  Measurement  type 

Absolute  bearing  housing  vibration  measurements  are  commonly  made  on  hydraulic  machine  sets  using  seismic 
transducers  measuring  the  vibration  velocity  v^^g  in  millimetres  per  second  or,  after  electronic  integration,  the  vibration 
displacement  5p_p  in  micrometres.  The  vibration  displacement  Sp_p  can  also  be  measured  directly  as  a  relative 
quantity  using  displacement  transducers  in  the  case  where  a  rigid  non-vibrating  support  can  be  found. 

Because  of  the  special  nature  of  the  vibratory  behaviour  of  hydraulic  machines  and  their  different  speed  ranges,  these 
quantities  have  favoured  ranges  of  application  as  follows: 

a)  For  low-speed  machines  (below  300  r/min),  the  preferred  measurement  quantity  is  the  vibration  displacement 
5p_p.  If  the  spectrum  is  expected  to  contain  high-frequency  components,  the  evaluation  should  normally  be 
based  on  broad-band  measurements  of  both  displacement  and  velocity. 

b)  For  medium-  and  high-speed  machines  (300  r/min  to  1  800  r/min),  the  preferred  measurement  quantity  is  the 
vibration  velocity  Vj^^^.  If  the  spectrum  is  expected  to  contain  low-frequency  components,  the  evaluation  should 
normally  be  based  on  broad-band  measurements  of  both  velocity  and  displacement. 

4.3  Measurement  locations  and  directions 

Measurement  tasks  A  and  B  (see  clause  1 )  require  measurements  to  be  taken  on  exposed  parts  of  the  machine  that 
are  normally  accessible  and  are  representative  locations  for  the  so-called  force  flow  in  the  supporting  structure,  for 
example  on  all  main  bearings  of  the  machine  set.  Typical  examples  of  measurement  locations  for  hydraulic  machines 
are  shown  in  Figures  1  to  5. 

Care  shall  be  taken  in  this  context  to  ensure  that  measurements  reasonably  represent  the  vibration  of  the  bearing 
housings  and  do  not  include  any  local  resonance  or  amplification.  The  locations  and  directions  for  vibration 
measurements  shall  be  such  that  they  provide  adequate  sensitivity  to  the  dynamic  forces  of  the  machine  under 
various  operating  conditions.  Typically,  this  will  often  require  two  orthogonal  radial  measurement  directions  on  each 
bearing  cap,  pedestal  or  housing.  For  low-speed  machines  with  a  horizontal  shaft  axis,  such  as  bulb-turbines  as 
shown  in  Figure  2.  the  measurement  locations  and  directions  shall  be  determined  with  great  care. 

-CAUTION;  The  vibration  measured  at  the  lower  guide  bearings  of  vertical  machines  may  sometimes  be 
misinterpreted;  the  vibration  level  measured  at  such  bearings  and  their  surrounding  supports  which  are  rigidly 
embedded  in  the  buildings  is  sometimes  produced  by  hydraulic  forces,  directly  transmitted  from  the  hydraulic 
machine  via  the  foundation.  Such  vibrations  do  not  necessarily  give  a  correct  image  of  the  vibration  of  the  Totaling 
shaft  system. 

For  horizontal  machines  when  using  portable  measuring  instrumentation,  take  measurements  in  the  vertical  and 
horizontal  directions  90°  apart  (perpendicular  to  the  shaft  axis)  and,  if  possible,  in  the  axial  direction  (parallel  to  the 
shaft  axis)  as  shown  in  Figure  5. 

A  single  transducer  may  be  used  on  a  bearing  cap  or  pedestal  in  place  of  the  more  typical  pair  of  orthogonal 
transducers  if  it  is  known  to  provide  adequate  information  about  the  magnitude  of  the  machine  vibration.  However, 
caution  should  be  observed  in  evaluating  vibration  from  a  single  transducer  at  a  measurement  location,  because  it 
may  not  be  oriented  to  provide  a  reasonable  approximation  to  the  maximum  value  at  that  location. 

In  the  case  of  vertical  or  inclined  machine  sets,  the  locations  and  directions  that  give  maximum  vibration  readings 
shall  be  used,  for  example  the  stiff  and  the  elastic  axis  (this  is  important  for  cases  with  spider  arm  support 
constructions),  and  the  specific  location  and  direction  shall  be  recorded  with  the  measurement.  If  possible,  the  setting 
of  the  transducers  at  different  bearings  should  be  in  line.  For  vertical  machines,  the  preferred  measurement  directions 
are  upstream  and  90°  to  that. 

For  monitoring  purposes  (task  A)  only,  in  some  cases  measurement  locations  may  be  reduced  to  the  most  important 
ones,  mainly  at  machine  sets  with  four  or  more  bearings.  The  selection  should  be  based  on  vibration  performance 
analyses,  simulating  all  types  of  faults  or  disturbing  effects.  Preferred  measuring  locations  should  be  those  where 
possible  disturbing  events  produce  significant  bearing  housing  amplitudes  (velocity  or  displacement). 


IS   14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
_  ISO   10816-5  :2000 

The  installation  of  one  single  transducer  at  the  bearing  pedestal  or  housing  in  horizontal  or  slightly  inclined  position  is 
comnnonly  considered  adequate  for  continuous  monitoring  of  Group  1  or  2  machine  sets.  For  monitoring  axial 
vibration  of  the  machine,  one  transducer  mounted  on  the  thrust  bearing  is  often  sufficient. 

4.4    Measurement  equipment 

The  measurement  equipment  shall  be  capable  of  broad-band  measurement  of  vibration  with  flat  response  within  the 
following  frequency  ranges: 

—  from  at  least  a  quarter  of  the  nominal  rotational  frequency  up  to  the  product  of  three  times  the  rotational 
frequency  times  the  number  of  buckets  or  blades,  if  the  measurement  quantity  is  the  vibration  displacement 

—  from  2  Hz  to  1  000  Hz  if  the  measurement  quantity  is  the  vibration  velocity  v^^^^. 

NOTE  If  the  measurement  equipment  is  also  to  be  used  for  diagnostic  purposes,  an  upper  frequency  limit  higher  than  that 
specified  may  be  necessary  (e.g.  higher  than  1  000  Hz  in  the  case  of  vibration  velocity  measurements). 

Vibration  displacement  can  be  measured  as  an  absolute  quantity  with  special  seismic  transducers  or  accelerometers. 
If  standard  equipment  is  applied,  particular  attention  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  measuring  instrumentation  is 
fitted  with  specific  electronic  compensation  to  obtain  a  flat  response  over  the  specified  frequency  range. 

For  machines  with  nominal  speeds  lower  than  or  equal  to  300  r/min,  vibration  displacement  is  often  measured  as 
relative  quantity  (relative  to  the  foundation)  using  contact  or  non-contact  displacement  transducers.  These 
transducers  shall  be  installed  on  rigid  bars  or  frames  fixed  to  rigid  parts  of  the  foundation.  It  is  necessary  to  ensure 
that  the  natural  frequencies  of  these  elements  are  at  least  higher  than  ten  times  the  nominal  rotational  frequency,  and 
also  they  should  not  be  a  multiple  of  this  frequency. 

Vibration  velocity  shall  be  measured  as  an  absolute  quantity  with  seismic  transducers  or  accelerometers.  If  seismic 
transducers  are  used,  attention  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  measuring  instrumentation  is  fitted  with  specific 
electronic  compensation  to  obtain  a  flat  response  over  the  total  frequency  range  from  2  Hz  to  1  000  Hz. 

Transducers  for  absolute  vibration  measurements  shall  be  mounted  on  rigid  parts  of  the  bearing  housing  or  adjacent 
surrounding  structures  which  can  be  classified  to  give  a  representative  vibration  response  of  the  machine.  Particular 
attention  shall  be  given  to  ensure  that  transducer  mounting  complies  with  specifications  from  the  transducer 
manufacturer.  If  additional  elements  for  mounting  such  transducers  are  necessary,  it  shall  be  ensured  that  the  natural 
frequencies  of  those  elements  are  at  least  higher  than  ten  times  the  nominal  rotational  frequency,  and  also  they 
should  not  be  a  multiple  of  this  frequency. 

The  characteristics  of  the  measuring  system  shall  be  known  with  regard  to  the  effects  of  the  environment,  including 
the  following: 

—  temperature  variations; 

—  magnetic  fields; 

—  sound  fields; 

—  power  source  variation; 

—  transducer  cable  length; 

—  transducer  orientation. 

Particular  attention  shall  be  given  to  ensuring  that  the  vibration  sensing  transducers  are  correctly  mounted  and  do  not 
affect  the  vibration  response  characteristics  of  the  machine. 


IS  14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
ISO  10816-5  :  2000 

4.5    Operational  conditions 

Measurpments  shall  be  carried  out  when  the  rotor  and  the  main  bearings  have  reached  their  normal  steady-state 
operating  temperatures  and  with  the  machine  running  under  steady-state  conditions. 

5     Evaluation 

5.1  General 

ISO  10816-1  provides  a  general  description  of  the  two  evaluation  criteria  used  to  assess  vibration  severity  on  various 
classes  of  machines.  One  criterion  considers  the  magnitude  of  vibration  observed  by  broad-band  measurement;  the 
second  considers  changes  in  magnitude,  irrespective  of  whether  they  are  increases  or  decreases. 

5.2  Criterion  I:  Vibration  magnitude 

The  reliable  and  safe  running  of  a  machine  under  normal  operating  conditions  requires  that  the  vibration  magnitude 
should  remain  below  certain  limits  consistent  with,  for  example,  acceptable  kinetic  loads  and  acceptable  vibration 
transmission  into  the  support  structure  and  foundation.  Generally,  this  criterion  will  be  taken  as  the  basis  for  the 
evaluation  of  machines  in  the  absence  of  any  other  established  knowledge  of  the  satisfactory  running  characteristics 
for  machines  of  that  type  (e.g.  for  new  machine  types). 

The  maximum  vibration  magnitude  observed  at  each  bearing  pedestal  or  housing  is  assessed  against  the  evaluation 
zones  defined  below. 

Zone  A:  The  vibration  of  newly  commissioned  machines  would  normally  fall  within  this  zone. 

Zone  B:  Machines  with  vibration  within  this  zone  are  normally  considered  acceptable  for  unrestr'rcted  long-term 
operation. 

Zone  C:  Machines  with  vibration  within  this  zone  are  normally  considered  unsatisfactory  for  long-term  continuous 
operation.  Generally,  the  machine  may  be  operated  for  a  limited  period  in  this  condition  until  a  suitable  opportunity 
arises  for  remedial  action. 

Zone  D:  Vibration  values  within  this  zone  are  normally  considered  to  be  of  sufficient  severity  to  cause  damage  to  the 
machine. 

Numerical  values  assigned  to  the  zone  boundaries  are  not  intended  to  serve  as  acceptance  specification,  which  shall 
be  subject  to  agreement  between  the  machine  manufacturer  and  the  customer.  However,  the  zone  boundaries 
provide  guidelines  for  ensuring  that  gross  deficiencies  or  unrealistic  requirements  are  avoided.  In  certain  cases,  there 
may  be  specific  features  associated  with  a  particular  machine  which  would  require  different  zone  boundary  values 
(higher  or  lower)  to  be  used.  In  such  cases,  it  is  normally  the  responsibility  of  the  machine  manufacturer  to  explain  the 
reason  for  this  and,  in  particular,  to  confirm  that  the  machine  would  not  be  endangered  by  operating  with  higher 
vibration  values. 

NOTE  Vibration  magnitudes  for  recommissioned  units  with  increased  output,  usually  characterized  as  "uprated",  may  be  located 
in  zone  A  or  B.  The  choice  of  zone  A  or  B  depends,  however,  on  the  relation  between  the  new  excitation  forces  and  the  capacity  of 
the  new  and  re-used  components  to  withstand  long-term  dynamic  exposure. 

5.3     Evaluation  zone  limits 

5.3.1     Turbine  operating  conditions 

Recommended  values  for  the  zone  boundaries  are  given  in  Tables  A.I  to  A.4  for  the  four  machine  groups  covered  by 
this  part  of  ISO  10816.  Application  of  these  criteria  is  valid  for  measurements  in  a  radial  direction  on  bearing  pedestals 
or  housings  of  machine  sets  with  nominal  speeds  between  60  r/min  and  1  800  r/min  operating  within  the  contractually 
permissible  steady-state  range,,  as  well  as  at  other  load  conditions  if  the  machine  has  been  made  suitable  for  these 
particular  conditions.  Higher  values  of  vibration  may  be  permitted  under  the  conditions  specified  in  annex  B. 


10 


IS   14817  (Part  5):  2004 
ISO   10816-5:2000 

Zone  boundary  values  are  specified  for  both  measurement  quantities.  If  both  quantities,  vibration  velocity  and 
displacement,  are  measured  and  compared  to  the  corresponding  values  in  Tables  A.1 ,  A.3  and  A.4,  the  evaluation 
which  is  most  restrictive  shall  apply. 

The  limiting  values  are  applicable  for  all  types  of  machine  sets  belonging  to  one  group,  independent  of  head  and 
power,  except  for  the  restrictions  given  in  clause  1 .  For  hydrodynamically  smoother  running  machines,  normally  lower 
bearing  housing  vibration  may  be  expected. 

In  the  case  of  pump-turbines,  increased  bearing  housing  vibration  amplitudes  may  occur  because  of  the  runner 
design  criteria,  which  are  a  compromise  between  the  optimal  design  for  a  turbine  and  a  pump  runner. 

The  values  in  Tables  A.1  to  A.4  are  based  on  statistical  analyses  of  collected  measurement  data  from  more  than 
1  400  samples,  collected  worldwide  from  machine  sets  with  different  powers  and  speeds  within  all  four  groups.  A  brief 
description  of  the  analysis  procedure  and  the  applied  regression  technique  is  given  in  annex  C. 

NOTE  1  In  general,  an  overall  judgement  of  the  vibratory  state  of  the  machine  Is  made  on  the  basis  of  both  the  bearing  housing 
vibration  as  defined  above  and  the  measurements  performed  on  the  shaft  (see  ISO  7919-5). 

NOTE  2  As  explained  in  annex  C,  the  given  limiting  values  are  based  on  a  statistical  procedure  and  the  defining  of-predictive 
limits;  this  was  necessary  due  to  the  wide  spread  of  the  measured  data.  Therefore  It  should  not  be  assumed  that  a  correct 
correlation  between  zone  boundaries  and  possible  faults  or  troubles  at  the  observed  machine  will  exist  In  all  cases. 

5.3.2  Pump  operating  conditions 

At  present,  sufficient  data  are  not  available  to  prepare  criteria  for  machine  sets  in  pump  operating  conditions,  they  will 
be  incorporated  in  a  future  edition  of  this  part  of  ISO  10816  when  available. 

5.3.3  Special  operating  conditions 

Attention  should  be  paid  to  the  following  operating  conditions: 

~    steady-state  operating  conditions  at  low  partial  load,  at  overload,  and  the  frequent  transient  operating 
conditions  during  start-up  and  shut-down; 

—    rare  transient  operating  conditions  such  as  emergency  shut-down,  no-discharge  operation,  and  running 
through  the  brake  quadrant  with  pumps  and  pump-turbines. 

The  evaluation  of  such  processes  is  much  more  difficult  than  that  of  operation  in  the  specified  load  range.  At  present 
there  are  insufficient  data  and  experience  available  to  establish  limiting  curves  for  these  operating  conditions.  The 
less  the  operating  condition  corresponds  to  the  nominal  conditions,  the  more  the  flow  within  the  hydraulic  machine  is 
disturbed;  disturbances  such  as  separation  and  swirl  generate  violent  stochastic  excitation.  Due  to  the  density  of 
water,  the  forces  caused  by  the  stochastic  excitation  are  much  greater  than  in  thermal  tutto  machines.  Therefore 
during  operation  outside  the  specified  load  range,  the  bearing  or  structure  vibrations  caused  by  mass  unbalance  are, 
as  a  rule,  totally  masked  by  the  stochastic  components.  Because  of  these  large  stochastic  components  under  extra- 
ordinary operating  conditions,  less  reliance  should  be  given  to  the  instantaneous  value  and  more  to  the  mean  value 
over  a  representative  measurement  period. 

5.3.4    Axial  vibration 

It  is  not  common  practice  to  measure  axial  vibration  on  main  radial  load-carrying  bearings  during  continuous 
operational  monitoring.  Such  measurements  are  primarily  used  during  periodic  vibration  surveys  or  for  diagnostic 
purposes.  At  thrust  bearings,  axial  vibration  in  general  correlates  with  axial  pulsations  which  could  cause  damage  to 
the  axial  load-carrying  surfaces.  Criteria  for  axial  vibration  of  bearings  cannot  be  given  at  present  because  of  the  lack 
of  measured  data. 


11 


IS    14817  {Part  5):  2004 
ISO    10816-5  :  2000 

5.4  Criterion  II:  Change  in  vibration  magnitude 

This  criterion  provides  an  assessment  of  a  change  in  vibration  nnagnitude  from  a  previously  established  reference 
value  when  operating  under  steady-state  conditions.  A  significant  change  in  broad-band  vibration  magnitude  may 
occur  which  requires  some  action  even  though  the  alarm  zone  C  of  Criterion  I  has  not  been  reached.  Such  changes 
can  be  instantaneous  or  progressive  with  time  and  may  indicate  that  damage  has  occurred  or  be  a  warning  of  an 
impending  failure  or  some  other  irregularity.  Criterion  II  is  specified  on  the  basis  of  change  in  broad-band  vibration 
magnitude  occurring  under  steady  operating  conditions.  Steady  operating  conditions  should  be  interpreted  to  include 
small  changes  in  the  machine  power  or  operational  conditions. 

When  Criterion  II  is  applied,  the  vibration  measurements  being  compared  shall  be  taken  at  the  same  transducer 
location  and  orientation,  and  under  approximately  the  same  machine  operating  conditions.  Obvious  changes  in  the 
normal  vibration  magnitudes,  regardless  of  their  total  amount,  should  be  investigated,  because  a  dangerous  situation 
could  then  be  avoided.  When  changes  in  vibration  magnitude  exceed  25  %  of  the  upper  boundary  value  of  zone  B 
(defined  as  B/C  in  Tables  A.1  to  A.4),  such  changes  should  be  considered  significant,  particularly  if  they  are  sudden. 
Diagnostic  investigations  should  be  initiated  to  ascertain  the  reason  for  the  change  and  to  determine  what  further 
actions  are  appropriate. 

NOTE  The  25  %  value  is  considered  significant  regardless  of  whether  it  is  an  increase  or  decrease  in  vibration.  The  25  %  value  is 
provided  as  a  guideline,  but  other  values  may  be  used  based  on  experience  with  a  specific  machine. 

5.5  Operational  limits 

5.5.1  General 

For  long-term  operation,  it  is  common  practice  to  establish  operational  vibration  limits.  These  limits  take  the  form  of 
ALARMS  and  TRIPS. 

ALARMS:  To  provide  a  warning  that  a  defined  value  of  vibration  has  been  reached  or  a  significant  change  has 
occurred,  at  which  remedial  action  may  be  necessary.  In  general,  if  an  ALARM  situation  occurs,  operation  can 
continue  for  a  period  whilst  investigations  are  carried  out  to  identify  the  reason  for  the  change  in  vibration  and  define 
any  remedial  action. 

TRIPS:  To  specify  the  magnitude  of  vibration  beyond  which  further  operation  of  the  machine  may  cause  damage.  If 
the  TRIP  value  is  exceeded,  immediate  action  should  be  taken  to  reduce  the  vibration  or  the  machine  should  be  shut 
down. 

Different  operational  limits,  reflecting  differences  in  dynamic  loading  and  support  stiffness,  may  be  specified  for 
different  measurement  positions  and  directions. 

5.5.2  Setting  of  ALARMS 

The  ALARM  values  may  vary  considerably,  up  or  down,  for  different  machines.  The  values  chosen  will  normally  be 
set  relative  to  a  baseline  value  determined  from  experience  for  the  measurement  position  or  direction  for  that 
particular  machine. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  ALARM  value  should  be  set  higher  than  the  baseline  by  an  amount  equal  to  25  %  of  the 
upper  limit  of  zone  B.  If  the  baseline  is  low,  the  ALARM  may  be  below  zone  C. 

Where  there  is  no  established  baseline  (for  example  with  a  new  machine)  the  initial  ALARM  setting  should  be  based 
either  on  experience  with  other  similar  machines  or  relative  to  agreed  acceptance  values.  After  a  period  of  time,  the 
steady-state  baseline  value  will  be  established  and  the  ALARM  setting  should  be  adjusted  accordingly. 

In  either  case  it  is  recommended  that  the  ALARM  value  should  not  normally  exceed  1 ,25  times  the  upper  limit  of 
zone  B  (this  limit  is  defined  as  B/C  in  Tables  A.1  to  A.4). 


12 


IS   14817  (Part  &|  •,  2004 
ISO   10816-5  :2000 

If  the  steady-state  baseline  changes  (for  example  after  a  machine  overhaul),  the  ALARM  setting  should  be  revised 
accordingly.  Different  ALARM  settings,  reflecting  differences  in  dynamic  loading  and  support  stiffness,  may  exist  for 
different  measurement  locations  and  directions. 

5.5.3  Setting  of  TRIPS 

The  TRIP  values  will  generally  relate  to  the  mechanical  integrity  of  the  machine  and  be  dependent  on  any  specific 
design  features  which  have  been  introduced  to  enable  the  machine  to  withstand  abnormal  dynamic  forces.  The 
values  used  will,  therefore,  generally  be  the  same  for  all  machines  of  similar  design  and  would  not  normally  be  related 
to  the  steady-state  baseline  value  used  for  setting  ALARMS. 

There  may,  however,  be  differences  for  machines  of  different  design  and  it  is  not  possible  to  give  clear  guidelines  for 
absolute  TRIP  values.  In  general,  the  TRIP  value  will  be  within  zone  C  or  D,  but  it  is  recommended  that  the  TRIP 
value  should  not  exceed  1 ,25  times  the  upper  limit  of  zone  C  (this  limit  is  defined  as  C/D  in  Tables  A.1  to  A.4). 

5.5.4  Special  operating  conditions 

When  the  machine  is  operating  outside  the  normal  load  range  and  during  all  transient  operating  conditions,  ALARM 
and  possibly  TRIP  contacts  shall  be  blocked  for  these  conditions.  If  the  machine  should  be  monitored  during  these 
operating  conditions  too,  a  second  set  of  ALARM  and  TRIP  values  shall  be  selected  according  to  the  maximum 
vibration  values  accepted  during  commissioning  of  the  machine. 

5.6  Supplementary  procedures/criteria 

The  measurement  and  evaluation  of  machine  vibration  given  in  this  part  of  ISO  10816  may  be  supplemented  by  shaft 
vibration  measurements  and  the  applicable  criteria  given  in  ISO  7919-5.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  there  is  no 
simple  way  to  relate  bearing  housing  vibration  to  shaft  vibration,  or  vice  versa.  Thus,  when  the  criteria  of  this  part  of 
ISO  10816  and  those  of  ISO  7919-5  are  both  applied  in  vibration-severity  assessment,  independent  shaft  and  bearing 
pedestal  or  housing  vibration  measurement  shall  be  made.  If  application  of  the  different  criteria  leads  to  different 
assessments  of  the  machine  vibration  severity,  the  more  restrictive  zone  classification  is  considered  to  apply. 

5.7  Evaluation  based  on  vibration  vector  Information 

The  evaluation  considered  in  this  part  of  ISO  10816  is  limited  to  broad-band  vibration  without  reference  to  frequency 
components  or  phase.  This  will,  in  most  cases,  be  adequate  for  acceptance  testing  and  operational  monitoring 
purposes.  However,  for  long-term  condition  monitoring  purposes  and  for  diagnostics,  the  use  of  vibration  vector 
information  is  particularly  useful  for  detecting  and  defining  changes  in  the  dynamic  state  of  the  machine.  In  some 
cases,  these  changes  would  go  undetected  when  using  only  broad-band  vibration  measurements  (see,  for  example, 
ISO  1 081 6-1 ).  The  specification  of  criteria  for  this,  however,  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  part  of  IS0 1081 6. 


13 


IS   14817  (Part  5) :  2004 
ISO    10816-5:2000 


Annex  A 

(normative) 

Evaluation  zone  boundaries 


Recommended  values  for  the  zone  boundaries  are  give  in  Tables  A.I  to  A.4  for  the  four  principal  machine  groups 
covered  by  this  part  of  ISO  10816.  They  apply  to  the  broad-band  r.m.s.  values  of  vibration  velocity  and  the  peak-to- 
peak  values  of  vibration  displacement  when  measured  with  equipment  as  specified  in  4.4  on  the  bearing  pedestals  or 
housings  in  the  radial  direction.  They  are  valid  only  for  turbine  operation  within  the  contractually  permissible  steady- 
state  range  as  well  as  at  other  loEid  conditions,  if  the  machine  set  has  been  made  suitable  for  these  particular 
conditions  (for  restrictions,  see  5.3.1  to  5.3.3). 

NOTE  1  Limiting  values  are  defined  by  statistical  evaluation  of  measured  data  (see  annex  C).  They  are  not  derived  from  an 
evaluation  of  the  operational  behaviour  (e.g.  occurrence  of  faults)  of  individual  machines. 

For  some  machine  groups,  recommended  zone  boundary  values  have  to  be  subdivided  corresponding  to  the 
differences  in  radial  bearing  stiffness.  Separate  values  are  given  for  the  different  measurement  locations  shown  in 
Figures  1  to  4. 

Zone  boundary  values  are  specified  for  both  measurement  quantities.  If  both  quantities  (vibration  velocity  and 
displacement)  are  measured  and  compared  to  the  corresponding  values  in  Tables  A.1 ,  A.3  and  A.4,  the  evaluation 
which  is  most  restrictive  shall  apply. 

NOTE  2  Machines  with  Francis  turbines  might  have  higher  vibration  values  at  the  bearing  housings  when  there  are  draft  tube 
excitations.  Experience  has  shown  that  this  excitation  can  occur  even  under  standard  operating  conditions.  In  the  case  of  heavy 
draft  tube  excitations  at  Francis  turbines,  the  zone  boundary  values  specified  in  Tables  A.1,  A.3  and  A.4  have  limited 
applicability.  At  present,  insufficient  measurement  data  are  available  to  specify  limits  for  machines  with  heavy  draft  tube 
excitations. 


Table  A.1  —  Recommended  evaluation  zone  boundaries  for  machines  of  Group  1:  Horizontal  machine  sets 
with  pedestal  or  end-shield  bearings  mounted  on  rigid  foundation,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of 

above  300  r/min 


Zone  boundary 


A/B 
B/C 
C/D 


At  measurement  location  1,  2, 3  and  4 
R.m.s.  velocity 


Pea  l(-to- peak 
displacement 


nm 


30 
50 
80 


mm/s 


1.6 
2,5 
4,0 


NOTE  Vibration  levels  of  two-jet  Pelton  machines  are  strongly 
influenced  by  the  orientation  of  the  resulting  steady-state  force  vector  and 
the  operating  jet  (lower  or  upper)  under  part-load  conditions. 


14 


IS  14817  (Parts):  2004 
ISO  10816-5  :  2000 


Table  A.2  —  Recommended  evaluation  zone  boundaries  for  machines  of  Group  2:  Horizontal  machine  sets 
with  bearing  housings  which  are  only  braced  against  the  casing  of  the  hydraulic  machine,  usually  with 

operational  speeds  of  less  than  300  r/min 


Zone  boundary 

At  measurement  location  1  and-2 

R.m.s.  velocity 

mm/s 

A/B 
B/C 
C/D 

2,5 
4.0 
6,4 

NOTE      Displacement  values  cannot  at  present  be  given  for  this  machine 
group  since  vibrations  of  the  bulb  with  very  low  frequencies  and  high 
displacement    amplitudes    are   frequently   transmitted    to    the    machine 
bearings.  They  may  disguise  at  these  parts  all  vibration  displacement 
values   originating   from   the   machine   itself.   The    recommended   zone 
boundary  values  are  not  applicable  to  the  evaluation  of  bulb  vibration 
amplitudes. 

Table  A.3  —  Recommended  evaluation  zone  boundaries  for  machines  of  Group  3:  Vertical  machine  sets 
with  bearing  housings  which  are  all  braced  against  the  foundation,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of 

between  60  r/min  and  1  800  r/min 


Zone  boundary 

At  all  main 

Peak-to-peak 
displacement 

urn 

bearings 

R.m.s.  velocity 

mm/s 

A/B 
B/C 

C/D 

30 
50 
80 

1.6 
2,5 
4.0 

Table  A.4  —  Recommended  evaluation  zone  boundaries  for  machines  of  Group  4:  Vertical  machine  sets 

with  lower  bearing  housings  braced  against  the  foundation  and  upper  bearing  housings  braced  against  the 

generator  stator  only,  usually  with  operational  speeds  of  between  60  r/min  and  1  000  r/min 


At  measurement  location  1 

At  alt  other  main  bearings         | 

Zone  boundary 

Peak-to-peak 
displacement 

R.m.s.  velocity 

Peak-to-peak 
displacement 

R.m.s.  velocity 

nm 

mm/s 

\xm 

mm/s 

A/B 

65 

2,5 

30 

1,6 

B/C 

100 

4,0 

50 

2,5 

C/D 

160 

6.4 

80 

4,0 

NOTE  1    If  a  machine  has  a  lower  generator  bearing  without  br 
should  be  evaluated  according  to  measurement  location  1 . 

acing  against  the  foun( 

jation,  the  vibration 

NOTE  2    Umbrella-type  machines  belong  to  this  group,  evaluatio 
bearings. 

n  zone  boundaries  are 

those  for  the  main 

15 


IS  14817  (Parts)  :  2004 
ISO  10816-5  :  2000 


Annex  B 

(informative) 

Special  features  of  bearing  housing  vibration  of  hydraulic  machine  sets 


B.I   General 

The  principles  of  the  mechanics  of  bearing  housing  vibration  are  explained  in  ISO  10816-1.  They  are  based  mainly  on 
a  broad  spectrum  of  theoretical  and  experimental  investigations  on  horizontal  shaft  machines.  Until  now,  not  as  much 
attention  has  been  paid  to  machines  with  vertical  shafts  which  are  more  common  for  hydraulic  machine  sets. 

For  hydraulic  machines,  bearing  housing  vibration  may  occur  over  a  wide  range  of  frequencies.  Possible  causes  of 
vibration  are  given  in  B.2  to  B.4. 

B.2  Mechanical  causes 

These  are  incorrect  shaft  alignment,  bearing  anisotropy,  loose  assemblies  in  rotating  or  stationary  parts,  and  residual 
unbalance  in  the  runner  or  impeller,  the  generator  or  the  exciter  rotor. 

Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  the  frequency  of  rotation  and  its  harmonics. 

8.3  Electrical  causes 

These  are  inadequately  equalized  magnetic  pull  in  the  rotor  of  the  coupled  electrical  machines. 
Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  the  frequency  of  rotation  and  its  harmonics. 

B.4  Hydraulic  causes 

B.4.1      Flow  through  the  waterways 

Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  the  frequency  of  rotation,  frequency  of  the  blade  or  bucket  passing,  or  various 
combinations  of  these. 

B.4.2     Draft  tube  flow  Instabilities 

These  occur  in  Francis  turbines  even  during  steady-state  operation  outside  the  optimum  efficiency  range. 

Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  those  below  the  frequency  of  rotation,  often  down  to  one-third  to  one-quarter  of  it. 
Resonance  with  hydraulic  structures  or  with  the  grid  might  occur,  aggravating  the  phenomenon. 

B.4. 3     Cavitation 

This  is  due  to  incorrect  flow  conditions  around  the  runner  or  impeller  blade  profiles,  and  occurs  mostly  within  the 
higher  load  ranges.  Another  important  reason  for  cavitation  is  a  change  in  tail  water  level. 

Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  usually  high  ones,  as  for  bursts. 


16 


IS    14817  (Part  5)  :  2004 
ISO    10816-5  :  2000 

B.4.4     Hydroeiastic  vibration 

This  can  be  due  to  incorrectly  shaped  discharge  edges  of  hydraulic  profiles  (blades,  buckets,  stayvanes,  etc.). 

Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  from  below  100  Hz  to  several  kilohertz  (depending  on  profile  dimensions  and  flow 
velocities).  Often  a  pronounced  beat  character  is  observed. 

B.4.5     Self-excited  vibrations 

These  occur  where  the  movement  of  mechanical  parts  (seals,  clearances)  influences  the  flow  around  or  throjugh 

them. 

Frequencies  to  be  expected  are  those  slightly  above  the  frequency  of  rotation,  often  coinciding  with  the  bending 
natural  frequencies  of  the  rotating  system. 

In  machines  of  type  Group  3  and  4  at  part-load  or  overload,  higher  vibration  may  occur  due  to  hydraulic  vortices. 
Provided  that  such  machine  conditions  with  restricted  operational  periods  do  not  effect  fatigue  of  main  structural 
members  (even  with  higher  vibration  levels  but  lying  below  the  recommended  limiting  zones),  the  machine  set  may  be 
made  suitable  also  for  these  particular  operating  conditions. 

B.5  Additional  excitations 

During  regular  transient  operating  conditions  such  as  start-up  and  shut-down,  additional  excitation  forces  interact  with 
the  runner,  inducing  a  wider  spectrum  and  higher  amplitudes.  During  load  rejections,  even  Kaplan  turbines  can  be 
subjected  to  draft  tube  instabilities  (see  B.4.2)  with  considerable  subsynchronous  bearing  vibration  amplitudes.  Under 
similar  conditions  (especially  for  rotor  arrangements  with  only  two  radial  bearings)  resonance  phenomena  can  be 
observed  at  certain  speeds  while  decelerating,  with  bearing  vibration  amplitudes  containing  one  or  more  of  the  rotor's 
natural  frequencies  corresponding  to  the  instantaneous  speed. 

At  frequent  transient  operating  conditions,  such  as  start-up  and  shut-down,  random  excitations  with  broad-band 
spectra  are  dominant.  In  the  case  of  extreme  transients,  occurring  for  example  at  a  failure  of  a  shut-off  valve,  the 
intensity  of  this  broad-band  excitation  spectrum  increases  even  more. 

In  contrast  to  thermal  machines,  hydraulic  machines  can  normally  be  started-up  and  shut-down  or  power  can  be 
changed  rapidly  and  frequently.  Hydraulic  machines  are  therefore  often  used  for  peak-load  supply  or  for  frequency 
and  power  control.  Since  such  operations  also  involve  frequent  starts  and  stops,  and  often  rapid  changeover  from  one 
operational  state  to  the  other,  these  machines  are  exposed  to  enhanced  vibration  and  stress.  For  peak-load  or  pump- 
storage  equipment,  transient  operating  conditions  can  become  so  frequent  that  the  sum  of  the  time  intervals  of 
increased  vibration  amounts  to  more  than  1  %o  of  the  overall  operating  time.  These  frequent  transient  operating 
conditions  should  then  be  evaluated  separately  with  respect  to  the  additional  stress  and  fatigue  on  the  bearings  and 
other  involved  parts  of  the  machine. 


17 


IS    14817  (Part  5):  2004 
ISO   10816-5  :  2000 


Annex  C 

(informative) 

Analysis  procedure  and  applied  regression  technique 


Using  data  (measured  quantities  on  bearing  housings  or  pedestals)  collected  from  1 1  countries,  two  databases 
were  established  (data  from  different  machine  types  with  vertical  or  horizontal  shaft  orientation  and  different 
speeds).  The  databases  were  structured  as  follows: 

—  measured  bearing  housing  displacement  jp_p  versus  rotational  speed  of  the  machine; 

—  measured  bearing  housing  velocity  v^^g  versus  rotational  speed  of  the  machine. 

On  some  of  the  submitted  rough  data,  modifications  were  necessary  because  of  incompatibility.  With  the  improved 
data  sets  the  following  steps  in  the  described  procedure  (using  a  software  package  for  statistical  analysis)  were 
performed  (see  reference  [5]): 

a)  proof  of  data  distribution  within  the  specified  speed  range; 

b)  regression  analysis  using  a  "Multiplicative  model"  Y  =  aX^  with  transformed  data  in  a  log-log  scajed  database 
with  the  dependent  variable  displacement  or  velocity  and  the  independent  variable  rotational  speed, 

c)  computation  and  plot  oi 

—  analysis  of  variance, 

—  lack  of  fit  and  pure  error  test, 

—  mean  value  regression  curve  with  a  defined  98  %  probability  limit  and  prediction  limits  (between  60  %  and 
95  %  in  steps  of  5  %), 

—  residuals, 

—  normal  plot  of  cumulative  residuals, 

—  f-test  (for  significance  of  regression  model); 

d)  linearization  of  computed  prediction  curves  (mainly  near  the  boundaries,  in  the  low-  and  high-speed  range)  in  a 
double  logarithmic  scale; 

e)  definition  of  the  prediction  limit  curve  85  %  as  zone  boundary  B/C,  which  implies  that  92,5  %  of  all  collected 
measurement  data  are  below  this  evaluated  prediction  curve; 

f)  the  ratios  between  the  zone  boundaries  A/B,  B/C  and  C/D  were  found  through  intensive  discussions  within  the 
working  group  and  with  experts  in  other  working  groups  about  safety  margins  and  trip  or  alarm  settings. 


1« 


IS    14817  (Part  5):  2004 
ISO    10816-5  :2000 


Bibliography 


[1]  ISO  2954,  Mechanical  vibration  of  rotating  and  reciprocating  machinery  —  Requirements  for  instruments  for 
measuring  vibration  severity. 

[2]  ISO  7919-1,  {Mechanical  vibration  of  non-reciprocating  machines  —  Measurements  on  rotating  shafts  and 
evaluation  criteria  —  Part  1:  General  guidelines. 

[3]  ISO  7919-5,  Mechanical  vibration  of  non-reciprocating  machines  —  Measurements  on  rotating  shafts  and 
evaluation  criteria  —  Part  5:  Machines  sets  in  hydraulic  power  generating  and  pumping  plants. 

[4]  ISO  10816-3,  Mechanical  vibration  —  Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on  non-rotating 
parts  —  Part  3:  Industrial  machines  with  nominal  power  above  15  kW  and  nominal  speeds  between 
120  r/min  and  15000  r/min  when  measured  in  situ. 

[5]  Schmid;  Guetl  and  Posch.  Statistical  analyses  for  the  evaluation  of  limiting  cun/es  —  Bearing  housing 
vibration.  Technical  Report,  Tiroler  WasserkraUenwerke,  Innsbruck,  August  1 993. 


19 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of 
goods  and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any 
form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course 
of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publication),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  tal<en  up  for  revision. 
Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or 
edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  MbU  28  (0662). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

l^anak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 
Telephones:  2323  0131,  2323  3375, 2323  9402 

Regional  Offices: 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELH1 110002 

Eastern     :  1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I.R  Road,  Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA  700054 

Northern    :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern   :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113 


Western 


Branches 


Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400093 


Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

r  2323  7617 
12323  3841 

1-2337  8499,2337  8561 
12337  8626,2337  9120 

(•60  3843 
1.60  9285 

(-22541216,22541442 
12254  2519,2254  2315 

r  2832  9295,  2832  7858 
12832  7891,2832  7892 


AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  ViSAKHAPATNAM. 


Printed  at  Simoo  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


