*••••••••••*•••• 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  11476  (1985) :  Glossary  of  terms  relating  to  oils  and 
fats  [FAD  13:  Oils  and  Oilseeds] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


gyiaf/f/raa^^^:^^ 


S?St^  *  I  |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 


\\V^:5^< 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


ic 


j^- 


A 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<*i^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  ;  11476-  1985 
( Reaffirmed  2000 ) 

Indian  Standard 

GLOSSARY  OF 
TERMS  RELATING  TO  OILS  AND  FATS 

(  First  Reprint  OCTOBER  1996  ) 


UDC  665.1  .001.4 


©  Copyright  1986 
BUREAU   OF    INDIAN   STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,    9   BAHADUR   SHAH  ZAFAR   MARG 
NEW   DELHI    110002 

Gr8  June\9%6 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

Indian  Standard 

GLOSSARY  OF 
TERMS  RELATING  TO  OILS  AND  FATS 

Oils  and  Oilseeds  Sectional  Committee,  CAFDC  5 
Chairman  Representing 

Prof  M.  M.  Chakrabartv  Oil     Technologists*     Association     of    India, 

Kanpur 

Members 

Prof  A.  M.  Gupta  (  Alternate  to 
ProfM.  M.  Chakrabarty) 
Shri  S.  N.  Agarwal  The  Central  Organization  for  Oil  Industry  and 

Trade,  Bombay 
Shri  H.  P.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  A.  Ashtaputre  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Shri  P.  N.  Agarwal  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  B.  p.  Baliga  The  Tata  Oil  Mills  Company  Ltd,  Bombay 

Dr  N.  L.  Murty  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  A.  Bhat  Swastik    Household   and   Industrial    Products 

Ltd,  Bombay 
Shri  C.  R.  Krishnamoorthy  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  N.  V.Bringi  Hindustan  Lever  Limited,  Bombay 

Dr  V.  V.  S.  Mani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  K.  Chakrabarty  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shri  J.  L.  Chaudhuri  Khadi   and     Village     Industries  Commission, 

Bombay 
Shri  P-  V.  Gujrathi  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  Central  Food  Laboratory,  Calcutta 

Shri  A.  K.  Dhar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  C.  Gupta  Directorate  General  of  Technical  Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  S.  N.  Pandey  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  G.  Lakshminarayana  Regional       Research     Laboratory     ( CSIR ), 

Hyderabad 
Dr  B.  M.  Lal  Indian  Agricultural    Research  Institute,  New 

Delhi 
Shri  T.  V.  Mathew  Central  Agmark  Laboratory,  Nagpur 

Shri  K.  S.  Kamath  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1986 
BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 
This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  ( XIV  of  1957  )  and  re- 
production in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  V.  M.  Pai  Karnataka     Soaps  and     Detergents    Limited* 

Bangalore 
Shri  B.  T.  Janardhan  (  Alternate  ) 
Senior  Manager  (  VP  )  Shrlram  Foods  and  Fertilizer' Industries,  New 

Delhi 
Shri  T.  N.  Aggarwal  (  Alternate  ) 
Secretary  (  CCFS  )  Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards,  Minis- 

try of  Health  and  Family  Welfare 
Shrimati  Debi  Mukheriee  {Alternate  ) 

Dr  R.  K.  Shah  Kusum  Products  Ltd,  Rishra 

Shri  Jagdish  Rai  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  I.  A.  SiDDiQi  Directorate  of  Vanaspati,  Vegetable  Oils  and 

Fats,  Ministry  of  Food  &  Civil  Supplies, 
New  Delhi 
Shri  P.  K.  Sardar  (  Alternate  ) 
Bhri  G.  V.  SiRUR  The    Solvent    Extractors   Association  of  India, 

Bombay 
Shri  L.  Krishan  Kumar  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  (  Shrimaii  )  Kamala  Sohnie       Consumer  Guidance  Society  of  India,  Bombay 
Shri  G.  K.  Sood  The   Vanaspati  Manufacturers'  Association  of 

India,  New  Delhi 
Shri  M.  S.  Thakur  Godrej  Soaps  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  D.  Thirumala  Rao  Oil  Technological  Research  Institute,  Anantapur 

Shri  G.  Azeemoddin  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  D.  Vashist  Directorate    of     Marketing     and    Inspection, 

Faridabad 
Shri  R.  J.  Verma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  R.  Vishwambharan  Central  Warehousing  Corporation,  New  Delhi 

Shri  Ajay  Khera  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  D.  Wasnik  Directorate      and      Oilseeds       Development, 

Hyderabad 
Dr  Rajvir  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Satish  Chander,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Chem  ) 

Secretary 

Shri  R.  K.  Bajaj 

Assistant  Director  (  Chem  ),  ISI 

Ad  hoc  Panel  for  Glossary  of  Terms,  CAFDC  5/AP 

Convener 

Shri  S-  P.  Gupta  Rasan  Detergents  Pvt  Ltd,  Patiala 

Members 

Director  Directorate  of  Vanaspati,  Vegetable  Oils  and 

Fats,  New  Delhi 
Director  of  Laboratories  Central  Agmark  Laboratory,  Nagpur 

Shri  Robin  Sarkar  Indian  Paint  Association,  Calcutta 

Secretary  ( CCFS )  Central     Committee     for     Food    Standards 

(  Ministry  of  Health  and  Family  Welfare  ) 
Shri  B.  K.  Swaika  The  Solvent  Extractors*  Association  of  India, 

Bombay 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

Indian  Standard 

GLOSSARY  OF 
TERMS  RELATING  TO  OILS  AND  FATS 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  20  November  1985,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Oils  and  Oilseeds 
Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Chemical  Division 
Council  and  the  Agricultural  and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  Various  terms  relating  to  oils,  fats  and  their  industrial  products  are 
being  frequently  used  in  the  trade  and  Government  policy  documents  and 
standard  specifications.  In  order  to  have  a  uniform  terminology  and  to 
give  authoritative  definition  to  some  of  these  terms,  this  standard  has 
been  prepared.  Information  has  been  freely  drawn  from  various  inter- 
national specifications  and  technical  literature,  too  numerous  to  be 
mentioned  individually.  This  standard  is  expected  to  facilitate  common 
understanding  of  the  terms  by  all  concerned. 

0.3  A  standard  on  the  trade  names  of  different  oil  bearing  materials  and 
their  botanical  nomenclature,  as  well  as  their  analytical  specifications  will 
be  issued  separately  in  due  course.  Certain  common  terms  are  also 
included  in  IS  :  9373-1979*  and  IS  :  9328-1979t. 

0.4  This  standard  is  intended  chiefly  to  cover  the  technical  definitions  of 
terms,  and  it  may  not  necessarily  include  all  the  legal  meanings  of  the 
terms. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  defines  the  various  terms  used,  concerning  oils  and  fats 
and  their  industrial  products.  Some  of  the  analytical  terms  commonly 
used  in  the  specifications  have  also  been  included. 

2.  DEFINITIONS 

2.1  Acetone  Tolerance  —  Acetone  tolerance  is  a  method  employed  as  a 
measure  of  the  high  polymer  content  of  heat  bodied  drying  oils  such  as 
stand  oil.    Acetone  tolerance  of  a  drying  oil  is  defined  as  the  number  of" 


^Glossary  of  terms  relating  to  bakery  industry. 
tGlossary  of  terms  relating  to  confectionery  industry. 

3 


IS :  11476  -  1985 

grams  of  acetone  required  to  produce  a  persistent  cloudiness  in  100  g 
of  oil  at  25''C,  under  the  conditions  prescribed  in  the  test. 

2.2  Acetyl  Value  —  The  number  of  milligrams  of  potassium  hydroxide 
required  to  neutralize  the  acetic  acid  liberated  by  the  hydrolysis  of  one 
gram  of  the  acetylated  oil  or  fat.  Acetyl  value  of  an  oil  or  fat  is  a 
measure  of  the  hydroxyl  content  of  the  material. 

2.3  Acid  Oil  —  The  product  consisting  essentially  of  a  mixture  of  fatty 
acids  obtained  by  the  treatment  of  soapstock  with  a  mineral  acid  solution. 

2.4  Acid  Value  —  The  number  of  milligrams  of  potassium  hydroxide 
required  to  neutralize  the  free  acid  present  in  one  gram  of  the  oil  or  fat 
under  the  prescribed  conditions.  The  acidity  of  the  oil  or  fat  indicated 
by  its  acid  value  is  frequently  expressed  as  free  fatty  acids  present  in  the 
sample. 

2.5  Acidolysis  —  Acidolysis  is  the  process  of  displacement  of  the  fatty 
acid  radical(s)  of  an  ester  by  another  fatty  acid(s). 

2.6  Acidulated  Soap  Stock  —  The  product  that  results  from  the  complete 
acidulation  of  soap  stock.  Minimum  percentage  of  total  fatty  acids  are 
usually  specified. 

2.7  Active  Oxygen  Method  —  A  method  used  for  measuring  the  stability 
of  oils  and  fats  by  bubbling  air  through  the  hot  oil  and  measuring  the 
fofmation  of  peroxides.  The  method  is  also  referred  to  as  SWIFT 
STABILITY  TEST  or  AERATION  TEST. 

2.8  Adsorption  —  The  existence  of  a  higher  concentration  of  a  component 
at  the  surface  of  a  phase,  than  is  present  in  the  main  bulk  of  the  phase  is 
known  as  adsorption.  The  process  is  commonly  used  in  oil  and  fat 
industry  for  the  removal  of  colour  and  the  adsorbents  used  are  bleaching 
earth  and  carbon  in  natural  and/or  in  activated  form. 

2.9  Adatoxin  —  Polynuclear  toxic  substances  derived  from  stain  of  the 
mould  Aspergillus  flavous,  occurring  in  peanuts  and  many  other  plant  food 
product  such  as  maize,  etc. 

2.10  Alcoholysis  —  Alcoholysis  is  the  process  of  displacement  of  the 
alcohol  radical  of  an  ester  by  another  alcohol. 

2.11  Alkali  Refining  —  Alkali  refining  is  a  process  in  which  free  fatty 
acid  level  in  oils  and  fats  is  reduced  by  reacting  it  with  alkali,  forming 
alkali  metal  soap  which  is  then  removed  by  setting  or  centrifuging  and 
washing. 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.12  Alkyl  Resin  —  A  general  term  applied  to  synthetic  resin  formed 
from  a  polyhydric  alcohol  and  a  poly  basic  acid. 

2.13  Amino  Acids  —  Chief  components  of  proteins  building  which  are 
the  building  blocks  of  living  tissues. 

2.14  Aniline  Point  —  Aniline  point  is  the  lowest  temperature  at  which 
equal  volumes  of  freshly  distilled  aniline  and  the  substances  being  tested 
arc  completely  misciblc. 

2.15  Antifoam  Agents  —  Antifoaming  agents  are  the  substances  which 
are  added  to  the  oils  and  fats  to  overcome  or  minimize  foaming  observed 
during  processing  or  frying. 

2.16  Antioxidants  —These  arc  synthetic  or  naturally  occurring  substances 
which  inhibit  the  oxidation  of  fats  and  oils  or  fat  containing  food  stuffs. 
They  prevent  oxidative  rancidity  and  increase  shelf  life  of  the  product. 

2.17  Ash  —  Ash  is  the  mineral  matter  found  after  ignition  of  oils  or 
fats. 

2.18  Auto-Oxidation  —  This  is  the  name  given  to  the  process  of  self 
catalysed  oxidation,  occurring  in  the  presence  of  air.  Drying  of  vegetable 
oils,  the  spoilage  of  fats  due  to  oxidative  rancidity  are  a  few  examples. 
It  is  sometimes  also  called  as  auto-catalysis. 

2.19  Auto-Ignition  Point  —  Auto-ignition  point  is  the  minimum  tempe- 
rature required  to  initiate  or  cause  self  sustained  combustion  in  any 
substance  in  the  absence  of  spark  of  flame.  Ignition  temperature  varies 
with  the  test  method. 

2.20  Bakery  Shortening  —  Bakery  shortening  has  been  defined  as  vanas- 
pati  meant  for  use  as  a  shortening  or  leavening  agent  in  the  manufacture 
of  bakery  products,  that  is,  for  promoting  the  developments  of  the  desired 
cellular  structure  in  the  bakery  product  with  accompanying  increase  in 
its  tenderness  and  volume. 

2.21  Baudonin's  Test  —  It  is  a  specific  test  for  sesame  oil.  The  develop- 
ment of  a  permanent  pink  colour  with  furfural  solution  in  the  presence 
of  concentrated  hydrochloric  acid  indicates  the  presence  of  sesame  oil. 
Hydrogenated  oils  give  less  sensitive  or  even  negative  reaction. 

2.22  Beilstein  Test  —  It  is  a  qualitative  test  for  the  detection  of  chlorine 
in  organic  compounds,  particularly  for  testing  chlorinated  solvent  in  oiU 
and  fats. 

2.23  Besson  Test  —  The  test  based  upon  the  reaction  of  silver  nitrate 
directly  with  the  oil  dissolved  in  a  solvent  is  used  for  differenciation  of 
kapok  oil  as  distinct  from  cottonseed  oil  and  other  vegetable  oils.  The 
test  is  done  in  a  sample  of  oil,  which  has  been  refined  with  alkali  and 

5 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

filtered  with  diatomaceous  earth-  Kapok  seed  oil  closely  resembles 
cottonseed  oil  as  it  also  gives  Halphen  test.  It  can  be  distinguished  from 
the  latter  by  Besson  Test. 

2.24  Bellier  Turbidity  Temperature  Test  (  Acetic  Acid  Method  )  ~  The 
test  is  specific  for  detection  of  peanut  or  groundnut  oil  and  is  based  on 
the  comparative  insolubility  of  arachidic,  behenic  and  lignoceric  acid  in 
70  percent  ethanol.  It  is  based  upon  the  critical  solution  temperature 
of  oil  in  the  prescribed  solvent. 

2.25  Bleaching  —  When  applied  to  oils  and  fats  the  term  is  applied  to 
special  treatments  given  for  reduction  in  colour  of  oil  or  fat.  When 
done  in  conjunction  with  adsorbents,  it  is  known  as  adsorption  bleach- 
ing. Chemical  bleaching  is  the  term  used  exclusively  for  removal  of 
coloured  compound  by  chemical  processing  with  specific  agents  such  as 
oxidising  and  reducing  agents  like  sodium  hypochlorite  and  sodium 
hydrosulphite.  Seme  of  the  colouring  matters  particularly  carotenoids 
get  decolourized  by  heat  and  when  done  in  the  presence  of  hydrogen, 
the  process  is  sometimes  called  as  hydro  bleaching.  Some  removal  of 
colour  also  takes  place  in  the  process  of  chemical  refining  and  deacidi- 
fication  of  fats  by  steam  stripping. 

2.26  Bleaching  Earths  —  Bleaching  earths  are  the  montmorillionite  clays 
which  in  their  natural  state  or  after  physical  or  chemical  activation,  have 
the  capacity  to  adsorb  colouring  matter  from  oils  or  fats.  They  are  fine 
crystalline  silicates  of  aluminium  and/or  magnesium  with  variable 
amounts  of  lime,  alkalies,  iron  and  with  a  proportion  of  water  of 
hydration. 

2.27  Blending  —  It  is  the  process  of  mixing  of  two  or  more  straight  or 
modified  oils  and  fats,  to  satisfy  the  prescribed  technical  specifications, 
for  a  particular  product  application. 

2.28  Blown  Oils— (Oxidized  oil,  base  oil,  thickened  oil,  polymerized 
oil) — Vegetable  and  animal  oils,  which  have  been  treated  and  agitated  by 
a  current  of  air  or  oxygen  with  application  of  heat.  They  are  partially 
oxidized,  deodorized  and  polymerized  by  this  treatment  and  have 
increased  density,  viscosity  and  drying  power. 

2.29  Boiled  Oils  —  (Or  Oxidized  Oils  )  are  obtained  by  heating  the  oils 
generally  with  the  addition  of  small  quantity  of  oxidising  agents.  These 
are  used  in  paints  and  varnish  industry.  Pale  boikd  oil  is  paler  in 
colour  and  contains  added  driers.  Boiled  oils  blown  to  a  higher  specific 
gravity  are  designated  as  'Double  Boiled',  'Triple  Boiled'  or  'Heavy 
Boiled'  oil. 

2.30  Bomer  Value —  Bomer  value  is  defined  as  the  sum  of  the  meUing 
point   of  triglycerides  isolated  by  the  prescribed  method  and  double  the 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

diffcrer.ee  between  this  meltirg  point  and  that  of  the  corresponding  fatty 
acids.  The  test  is  particularly  useful  for  detecting  the  adulteration  of 
foreign  fats  in  pork  fat  (  primarily  lard  ). 

2.31  Bone  Oil  or  Fat  —  It  is  an  oil  or  fat  extracted  from  bones  by  mean* 
of  boiling  ^ater,  steam  or  organic  solvents.  Bone  fat  is  used  in  soap 
and  candle  makir  g  whereas  bone  oil  is  used  as  a  lubricant  and  for 
dressing  the  skins. 

2.32  Break  Material  —  Break  material  is  the  term  generally  used  for 
fiocculent  material  (  precipitate  )  that  appears  in  and  can  be  separated 
from  crude  oil,  when  oil  or  fat  has  been  rapidly  heated  to  temperature 
between  250  to  300*'C.  It  is  found  to  be  high  in  ash  content,  contains 
phosphorus,  calcium  and  magnesium  derived  from  phospholipids,  which 
get  decomposed  at  such  high  temperature. 

2.33  Break  Test  —  Ttie  method  which  is  applicable  to  crude  soybean  oil 
and  crude  linseed  oil  determines  the  material  in  percentage  of  the  oil, 
which  is  rendered  insoluble  in  carbon  tetrachloride  by  heating  the  specifi- 
ed quantity  of  oil  to  specif  c  temperature,  in  presence  of  acid. 

2.34  Butter  —  It  is  a  fatty  product  made  from  milk  or  cream  or  both 
and  consisting  of  emulsion  of  fat  globules  and  water. 

2.35  Batter  Fat  —  The  oily  portion  of  the  milk  of  mammal,  is  largely 
composed  of  glycerides  of  oleic,  stearic  and  palmitic  acid  with  smaller 
amounts  of  glycerides  of  butyric,  caproic,  caprylic  and  capric  acids. 
Cow's  milk  contains  approximately  4  percent  butter  fat.  Table  butter 
( creamery  )  has  been  defined  as  the  product  obtained  from  cow  or 
buffalo  milk  or  a  combination  thereof  or  from  cream  or  curd  obtained 
from  cow  or  buffalo  milk  or  a  combination  thereof  with  or  without  the 
addition  of  common  salt  and  annatto  or  carotene  as  colouring  matter. 
It  shall  contain  not  less  than  80  percent  by  mass  of  milk  fats. 

2.36  Carfcoxylic  Acids—  Carboxylic  acids  are  the  most  important  organic 
acids  found  in  oils  and  fats.  They  contain  one  or  more  carboxylic 
group  ( -COOH  )  in  their  molecules.  The  molecular  structure  and 
general  formula  for  carboxylic  acids  is  as  follows: 

O 
!l 
R  —  C—  OH  ;  R  —  COOH  R  -=  alkyl  group 

They  are  classified  according  to  the  number  of  carboxyl  groups 
present  in  the  molecule,  as  mono-,  di-,  tri- and  tetra-carboxylic  acids 
containining  one,  two,  three  and  four  carboxylic  groups  in  the  molecule  as 
in  fatty  acids,  oxalic  acid,  citric  acid  and  mellophonic  acid,  respectively. 
ITcme  of  the  carboxylic  acids  are  known  to  have  an  additional  functional 


IS  :  11476  -1985 

group  like  hydroxy  (  -OK  )  in  ricincleic  acid,   epoxy  (— C— C — )  in 

O 

vemolic  acid  cyclopropene  (  — C=C—  )  in  stercuHc  acid,  Qtc, 

Strength  of  a  carboxylic  acid  depends  on  the  number  of  available 
protons  from  the  molecule.  Accordingly  mono-,  di-,  tri-  and  poly-  basic 
acids  release  one,  two,  three,  and  more  than  three  protons,  respectively. 
Monobasic  carboxylic  acids,  dibasic  carboxylic  acids  and  poly  basic 
carboxylic  acids  have  one,  two,  three  or  more  tluin  three  available 
hydrogens,  respectively. 

Carboxylic  acids  may  also  be  classified  in  terms  of  groups,  other 
than  the  carboxyl  and  hydroxy  groups,  they  may  contain  —  ketonic 
carboxylic  acids  which  contain  ketonic  (>C=0)  group  and  are  reported 
to  be  formed  in  some  of  the  fat  processing  operations  such  as  dehydro- 
xylation  of  castor  oil.  Aldehydic  carboxylic  acids  contain  the  — CHO 
group.  Amino  carboxylic  acids  contain  the  — NK2  group,  as  found  in 
glycine  (  amino  acetic  acid  ). 

2.37  Cocoa  Butter  —  Cocoa  butter  is  a  cocoa  fat,  which  is  hard  at  room 
temperature.  It  is  the  fat  obtained  from  roasting  sound  Theobroma 
Cocoa  beans  removing  the  shell,  breaking  the  ribs  and  pressing  the 
fractured  ribs  to  obtain  oil. 

2.38  Carotenoids  —  A  group  of  naturally  occurring,  fat  soiubxe  pigments 
composed  of  isoprene  units.  The  most  important  are  carotene  and 
-xanthophyll,  which  occur  with  chlorophyll  in  some  of  the  oils.  jS-caro- 
tene  has  gained  importance  since  it  has  been  shown  to  be  the  precursor 
of  vitamin  A,  into  which  it  is  converted  in  the  liver. 

2.39  Catalysis  —  The  term  is  used  to  describe  all  processes  in  which  the 
rate  of  reaction  is  influenced,  positively  or  negatively,  by  a  substance 
called  a  'catalyst'  which  itself  remains  chemically  unchanged  'at  the 
completion  of  the  reaction. 

2.40  Catalyst  —  It  is  a  substance,  added  in  very  small  quntities  to  the 
components  of  a  chemical  reaction  to  increase  or  decrease  the  rate  of 
reaction  but  it  cannot  initiate  reaction  by  itself. 

2.41  Chelating  Agents  —  Chelating  agents  are  the  additives  used  in  oil 
and  fat  processing  to  inactive  by  complex  formation,  trace  amounts  of 
metals  that  would  catalyse  oxidation  x>f  the  food  products.  Citric  and 
phosphoric  acids  are  commonly  used  chelating  agents  in  oils  and  fats. 

2.42  Chlorophyll  —  Chlorophyll  is  the  green  pigment  essential  for 
photosynthesis,  found  in  vegetative  parts  of  the  plants. 

8 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.43  Cbloridfzed  Oil  —  Chlorinated  and  iodised  vegetable  oil  containing 
26  to  28  percent  iodine  in  organic  combination  used  in  medicine. 

2.44  Cholesterol  —  The  sterol  most  commonly  found  in  animals,  a 
monounsaturated,  secondary  alcohol  of  the  cyclopeiitenophenanthrene 
(4  ring,  fused  )  system.  It  occurs  in  animals  in  pari  as  free  sterol,  and  in 
part  esterified  with  higher  fatty  acids.  Its  presence  is  frequently  used  as  a 
test  for  the  detection  of  animal  fats  in  vegetable  oils  and  fats. 

2.45  Chromatography  —  Chromatography  is  the  name  given  to  a  pro- 
cedure based  on  physical  adsorption  principles  for  separating  various 
components  from  a  mixture  of  chemical  substances.  In  its  broad  inter- 
pretation, chromatography  is  a  combination  of  separation,  identification 
and  quantitative  measurement.  Chromatography  depends  upon  selective 
retardation  and  separation  of  substances  by  a  bed  of  porous  sorptive 
media  as  they  are  transported  through  the  bed  by  a  moving  fluid.  The 
degree  of  retardation  and  hence  the  rate  of  migration  of  each  substance 
is  determined  by  its  relative  affinity  of  the  sorbent.  The  sorbent  bed  is 
often  referred  to  as  the  stationary  phase,  the  moving  fluid  as  the  mobile 
phase.  The  mobile  phase  may  be  liquid  or  gas.  In  the  case  of  gas  as 
mobile  phase  it  is  known  as  gas  chromatography.  The  term  solvent  is 
used  in  both  gas  chromatography,  in  reference  to  the  stationary  liquid 
phase,  and  liquid  chromatography  in  reference  to  the  mobile  liquid 
phase.  Chromatography  is  sometimes  classified  in  relation  to  some 
distinctive  feature  of  the  apparatus  or  method  used.  The  terms 
commonly  used  refer  to  a  specific  technique  such  as  thin  layer,  paper 
and  gel  permeation  chromatography. 

2.46  Cloud  Point  —  It  is  the  temperature  at  which,  under  the  conditions 
of  the  test,  a  cloud  is  induced  in  the  sample  caused  by  the  first  stage  of 
crystallisation. 

2.47  Coagulation  —  Coagulation  is  the  name  given  to  the  treatment 
given  to  the  oil  or  fat  for  removal  of  coarse  suspension  and  colloidally 
suspended  matter  by  heating  alone  or  in  presence  of  reagents,  which  help 
precipitation  of  the  impurities,  which  can  be  subesqucntly  removed  by 
decantation,  filtration,  and  other  separation  processes. 

2.48  Cod  Liver  Oil  —  Cod  liver  oil  is  a  marine  oil  obtained  from  freshly 
extracted  sound  livers  of  cod  fish  by  hot  water  extraction. 

2.49  Cod  Oil  —  The  term  is  commonly  used  for  inferior  grades  of  cod 
liver  oils,  not  suitable  for  medicinal  purposes. 

2.50  Codex  Alimentarius  Commission  —  A  commission  operating  under 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation /World  Health  Organisation  {  FAO/ 
WHO )  auspices  which  has  the  tas1c  of  preparing  model  standards  and 
codes  of  practice  for  edible  products  and  food  processes. 


18:11476-  1985 

2.51  Cold  Test  —  The  test  measures  the  resistance  of  the  sample  t^ 
crystallisation  and  is  commonly  used  as  an  index  of  winterising  or  similar 
stearin  removing  process. 

2.52  Congeal  Point  —  Congeal  point  is  a  measure  of  the  solidification 
iempcrature  of  fat  under  the  conditions  prescribedby  the  method.  The 
distinction  beiween  this  and  the  titre  U  that  the  latter  is  ihe  solidification 
temperature  of  fatty  acids  while  the  congeal  point  is  applied  directly  to 
fats  without  separation  of  fatty  acids. 

2.53  Confectionery  Fats  —  Confectionery  fats  are  specialised  products., 
possessing  specific  melting  and  organoleptic  quality. 

2.54  Conjugation  —  Two  or  more  double  bonds  when  separated  by  a 
single  bond  (  — C^C— C=C— )  are  known  as  conjugated  double  bonds 
and  the  arrangement  is  known  as  conjugation.  Eleostearic  acid  in  tung 
oil  is  an  example. 

2.55  Consistency  —  It  is  a  rheological  property  describing  the  plastic 
state,  varying  from  very  soft  like  petroleum  jelly,  through  soft,  medium, 
firm,  tough  to  hard  and  brittle.  Consistency  can  be  determined  by 
measuring  solid  fat  content  at  a  given  temperature  or  by  instruments 
capable  of  measuring  rheological  properties  of  substances,  such  as 
penterometers,  viscometers,  etc. 

2.56  Cooking  ~  Cooking  is  the  name  given  to  the  heat  treatment 
applied  to  oilseeds  and  similar  material  prior  to  pressing  for  rupturing 
the  cells. 

2.57  Creaming  —  Creaming  is  th^  term  applied  to  the  fat  to  indicate  its 
ability  to  absorb  air  during  mixing.  Certain  ingredients,  such  as  sugar, 
facilitate  the  creaming  process,  when  used  in  bakeries. 

2.58  Crismer  Test  —  This  test  determines  the  miscibility  of  the  oil  or  fat 
sample  with  a  standard  reagent  specified  in  the  test.  The  values  obtained 
are  characteristics  within  certain  limits  for  each  type  of  oil. 

2.59  Critical  Solution  Temperature  —  Critical  solution  temperature  is 
the  temperature  at  which  fatty  oil  becomes  completely  soluble  in  certain 
organic  solvents  and  affords  some  indication  of  the  character  of  the  oils. 

2.60  Crude  Natural  Vegetable  Oil  —  It  is  the  oil  which  is  extracted  from 
the  seeds  or  fruits  or  other  oil  bearing  material  from  vegetable  sources, 
through  mechanical  procedures  or  through  the  use  of  solvents  and 
separated  from  the  vegetable  remnants  of  the  raw  material  employed  in 
the  extraction,  contains  only  the  elements  proper  of  the  oil  and  which 
correspond  to  the  composition  of  the  seed,  fruit  or  other  oil  bearing 
material  subjected  to  the  process  of  oil  recovery. 

10 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.61  Crystal  Transformation  —  Crystal  transformation  is  the  change  in 
a  packaged  shortening,  which  results  in  formation  of  a  grainy  soft  pro- 
duct, which  may  lose  incorporated  gas.  It  is  caused  by  improper 
hydrogenation,  poor  formulation,  unstabb  hard  fat  used  for  texturising 
or  wrong  chilling  condition. 

2.62  Cutting  Oil  —  Cutting  oil  is  a  liquid  mixture  containing  oil,  applied 
to  a  cutting  tool  to  assist  in  the  machining  operation  by  washing  away 
the  chips  or  serving  as  a  lubricant  or  coolant.  It  may  be  based  on 
vegetable  oil  or  mineral  oil. 

2.63  Deacidification  —  Deacidification  is  the  general  term  for  all  the 
processes  carried  on  to  the  oil  or  fat  for  removal  of  free  fatty  acids  from 
them. 

2.64  Decortication  —  It  is  the  process  of  removal  of  hulls  or  shells  from 
seeds  by  mechanical  means. 

2.65  Degummed  Oil  —  It  is  the  product  resulting  from  washing  crude 
vegetable  oil  with  water  and/or  steam  for  a  specified  period  of  time  with 
or  without  the  addition  of  degumming  agents  and  then  centrifuging  oil/ 
water  mixture  to  remove  the  phosphatides,  etc. 

2.66  Degumming  —  Degumming  is  the  name  given  to  a  treatment  given 
to  the  oil  or  fat  for  removal  of  gums. 

2.67  Dehulling  —  Dehulling  is  the  process  of  separation  of  hulls  from 
meal. 

2.68  Dehydrated  Castor  Oil  —  Commonly  abbreviated  as  DCO,  is  castor 
oil  which  undergoes  dehydration  on  heating  with  or  without  catalysts  to 
produce  an  oil  which  has  drying  property. 

2.69  Delintlng  —  Delinting  is  the  process  of  removing  adhering  fibres 
from  ginned  cottonseed.  The  equipment  used  for  this  purpose  are  known 
as  delinters  sometime  abbreviated  as  only  linters. 

2.70  Density  —  Density  of  a  substance  is  the  ratio  of  its  mass  to  its 
volume.  For  oils  and  fats,  it  is  expressed  in  grams  per  millilitre,  at 
specified  temperature. 

2.71  Deodorisation  —  Deodorisation  also  sometime  known  as  vacuum 
steam  distillation,  is  the  process  designed  to  remove  all  oxidative  cleav- 
age products  that  impart  an  odour  or  flavour  to  the  oil.  It  may  also 
remove  free  fatty  acids,  tocopherols,  sterols  and  oth-r  minor  compo- 
nents, both  useful  and  of  undesirable  nature.  Deodorisation  occurs, 
simultaneously  with  deacidification  when  it  is  done  by  steam  distillation 
by  the  process  of  physical  refining. 

11 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.72  Deoiled  Meal  —  It  is  the  name  given  to  residual  material  left  over, 
when  oil  is  extracted  by  a  solvent  from  any  oil  bearing  material. 

2.73  Diene  Value  —  Diene  value  is  an  index  of  conjugated  unsaturated 
linkages  expressed  in  terms  of  the  equivalent  number  of  centigrams  of 
iodine  per  gram  of  the  sample, 

2.74  Diglycerides  (  Diacyl  Glycerols  )  —  These  are  the  esters  of  glycerol 
having  two  hydroxy  1  groups  of  glycerol  combined  with  two  fatty  acids 
and  one  hydroxyl  group  remaining  unesterified. 

2.75  Dilation  —  The  dilation  of  a  fat  is  the  isothermal  expansion,  due 
to  change  of  stage  from  solid  to  liquid,  of  the  fat,  which  has  previously 
been  solidified  under  precisely  prescribed  conditions.  It  affords  an 
empirical  indication  of  the  amount  of  crystalline  matter  in  the  fat,  at 
that  temperature. 

2.76  Distillation  —  A  method  of  separating  volatile  and  non-volatile 
components  of  mixture  by  vaporisation  an^  condensation. 

2.77  Drier  —  A  substance  used  to  accelerate  the  drying  of  paints, 
varnishes,  etc,  by  catalysing  the  oxidation  of  drying  oils  or  synthetic  resin 
variiishes  is  known  as  drier.  The  usual  driers  are  salts  of  metals  with  a 
valence  of  two  or  more  and  unsaturated  organic  acid.  Paste  driers  ^re 
commonly  the  metal  salts  dispersed  in  a  drying  oil. 

2.78  Drop  Point  —  Drop  point  of  a  fat  is  the  temperature  at  which  the 
first  drop  falls  from  the  cup  under  the  specified  conditions  of  the  test. 

2.79  Drying  Oils—  Are  those  which,  when  applied  as  a  thin  film,  readily 
absorb  oxygen  from  the  air  and  polymerise  to  form  a  relatively  tough, 
elastic  film.  Examples  are  natural  vegetable  oils  such  as  linseed,  tung, 
soyabean  oils  and  dehydrated  castor  oil.  The  drying  oils  have  high 
iodine  value. 

2.80  Drying  Time  —  Drying  time  is  the  time  required  under  the  condi- 
tions of  the  test,  for  the  oil  film  to  dry  up  as  the  end  point  described  in 
the  test. 

2.81  Edible  Flour  —  Edible  flour  is  the  name  given  to  ground  material 
prepared  from  deoiled  meal,  which  is  derived  from  oil  cake  obtained 
either  by  single  processing  of  good  quality  edible  oil  seeds  or  as  a  result 
of  direct  extraction  oil  from  such  oil  seeds- 

2.82  Elaidic  Acid  —  Is  the  trans-isomer  of  oleic  acid  (Cis-  -Cis  monoenoic 
fatty  acid). 

12 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 


H       H  H 


I         I  f 

CHs  (CH,);  C  =  C  (CHa),  COOH  ^  CH3  (CHa);  C  =  C  (CHa);  COOH 
(Oleic  acid)  (Elaidic  acid)    I 

H 

2.82.1  EstoUde  —  Is  the  term  generally  used  for  internal  anhydrides 
formed  during  the  heating  or  chemical  treatment  of  hydroxy  fatty  acids 
such  as  ricinoleic  acid  present  in  castor  oil. 

2.83  Elaidinization  —  Indicates  the  conversion  of  any  unsaturated  fatty 
acid  or  related  compound  from  the  geom-^tric  d5-isomer  to  the 
corresponding  trans  form. 

2.84  Elastomers  —  Materials  that  can  be  stretched  repeatedly  to  1 50 
percent  or  more  of  their  initial  length  and  thereafter  return  rapidly  and 
with  force  to  approximately  their  original  length. 

2.85  Eleostearic  Acid  —  Contains  3  conjugated  double  bonds  and  has 
the  molecular  formula  CH3  (  CH2)3  (  CH=CH  )3  (  Cn^)^  -COOH.  Its 
glycerides  are  commercially  present  in  tung  oil  and  it  is  known  to  exist 
in  two  isomeric  forms. 

2.86  Emulsifying  Agent  —  A  material  which  increases  the  stability  of  a 
dispersion  of  one  liquid  in  another.  "Emulsifying  Agents"  or  "Stabilising 
Agents"  have  been  defined  as  substances  which  when  added  to  food  are 
capable  of  facilitating  a  uniform  dispersion  of  oils  and  fats,  in  aqueous 
media  or  vice  versa  and  for  stabilising  such  emulsions. 

2.87  Epoxidised  Oils  —  Are  oils  obtained  by  treating  oils  with  peracetic 
acid  preformed  or  formed  in  situ  by  reaction  between  hydrogen  per- 
oxide and  acetic  acid  in  the  presence  of  a  catalyst.  They  are  used  as 
plasticisers  and  stabilisers,  for  example,  vinyl  for  resins. 

2.88  Essential  Fatty  Acid  —  Essential  fatty  acids  fulfil  vital  physiologi- 
cal functions  in  the  body  but  cannot  be  synthesised  from  simple  precur- 
sors. They  are  therefore  required  in  the  diet.  Linoleic  acid  and 
linolenic  acid  are  synthesised  only  in  plants  and  are  the  true  naturally 
occurring  essential  fatty  acids.  According  to  latest  view,  linoleic  acid  may 
be  kept  under  naturally  occurring  essential  fatty  acids  because: 

a)  it  is  not  synthesised  in  the  body; 

b)  it  is  a  precursor  for  synthesis  of  substances  like  prostaglandins; 
and 

c)  it  also  gives  rise  to  the  formation  of  linoleic  acid  (other  acids 
considered  essential  till  recently). 

Arachidonic  acid  occurring  in  animal  oils   and    fats    is    aljso   an 
important  essential  fatty  acid. 

13 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.89  Essential  Oil  —  Is  an  odoriferous  volatile  oil  derived  from  the 
leaves,  flowers  or  twigs  of  the  plants  and  with  herbs  and  spices,  etc. 
Essential  oils  find  application  in  perfume  and  flavours  and  chemically 
they  are  different  from  fixed  oils. 

2.90  Ester  Value  —  Ester  value  is  the  number  oi  milligrams  of  pota- 
ssium hydroxide  required  to  saponify  the  esters  contained  in  1  gram  of 
the  fat. 

2.91  Esterification  —  Esterification  is  the  condensation  of  an  alcohol 
and  acid  to  form  an  ester  with  the  release  of  a  molecule  of  water. 

2.92  Expression  —  Expression  is  the  process  of  removal  of  liquid  from 
a  solid  by  mechanical  pressing.  The  devices  commorjly  used  for  express- 
ing oil  are  commonly  known  as  'Expellors'  and  the  oil  so  recovered  is 
known  as  expellor  oil. 

2.93  Fats  ~  Fats  are  the  esters  of  glycerol  with  higher  fatty  acids. 
There  is  no  chemical  difference  between  a  fat  and  oil,  the  only  distinction 
being  that  fats  are  solid  at  room  temperature  and  oils  are  liquid. 

2.94  Fat  Liquoring  Agent  —  Fat  liquoring  agent  is  the  term  commor-ly 
used  for  oil  in  water  emulsion  usually  made  from  raw  oils,  made  soluble 
by  dispersing  agent  such  as  sulphorated  oils. 

2.95  Fat  Bloom  —  Is  the  name  given  to  change  in  crystal  structure,  that 
causes  bloom  in  chocolate  coatings,  a  defect  which  gives  a  white  haze  or 
even  open  grain  on  an  original  smooth  glossy  surface. 

2.96  Fatty  Acids  —  The  carboxylic  acids  derived  from  or  contairiCd  in  a 
vegetable  or  animal  fat  or  oil.  All  fatty  acids  are  composed  of  a  chain 
of  alkyl  groups  containing  from  4  to  22  and  even  sometimes  higher 
carbon  atoms  (  usuaily  even  numbered  )  and  characterized  by  a  terminal 
carboxylic  radical  — COOH.  Fatty  acids  may  be  saturated  or  unsaturated 
and  either  solid,  semi-solid  or  liquid.  They  are  classed  among  the  lipids 
alongwith  waxes,  sterols,  etc.  Saturated  acids  do  not  have  any  double 
bond,  most  important  of  them  being  butyric  (  C4),  lauric  (Ci^),  palmitic 
(  Cis )  and  stearic  (  Qs  )•  Most  common  unsaturated  fatty  acids  are 
oleic  (  Cig:i  ),  linoleic  (  Ci8;2 )  and  linolenic  (  Cig.-a )  with  one,  two  and 
three  double  bonds  respectively  (that  is  mono-,  di-  and  tri-enolic  acids). 
In  addition  to  the  comman  fatty  acids,  some  natural  fatty  acids  have 
different  structures  such  as  triple  bonds,  hydroxyl  or  ketone  groups  or 
epoxy  and  cyclopropane  rings.  Linoleic,  linolenic  and  arachidonic  acids 
are  called  as  essential  fatty  acids  because  they  are  necessary  nutrients 
that  are  not  synthesised  in  the  human  body. 

2.97  Fatty  Acid  Pitch  —  A  by-product  residue  obtained  from: 
a)    Soapstock  and  candle  stock  manufacture; 

14 


IS  :  11476  - 1985 

b)  Refining  of  vegetable  oils; 

c)  Refining  of  refuse  greases; 

d)  Refining  of  wool  greases;   and 
c)  Fatty  acid  distillation. 

It  consists  of  polymerised  fats  and  fatty  acids,  neutral  oil,  unsaponi- 
fiable  matter,  etc. 

2.98  Fatty  Alcohols  —  These  long  chain  unbranched  primary  aliphatic 
alcohols,  RCHaOH,  having  higher  molecular  mass.  Examples  are  cetyl 
alcohol,  lauryl  alcohol,  oJeyl  strearyl  alcohol,  etc. 

2.99  Fatty  Amine  —  A  normal  aliphatic  amine  derived  from  fats  and 
oils.  May  be  saturated  or  unsaturated,  primary,  secondary  or  tertiary, 
but  the  alky  I  groups  are  straight  chain  and  have  an  even  number  oT 
carbons  iff  each.    The  length  varies  from  Cs  to  C22  carbon  atoms. 

2.100  Fatty  Esters  —  These  are  compounds  generated  during  the  process 
of  esterification  by  the  combination  of  fatty  acids  and  alcohol  in  the 
presence  of  a  catalyst  like  boron  trifloride  (  BF3 )  sodium  methoxide 
(<  MeONa  ),  sulphuric  acid  (  H2SO4 ),  etc. 

2.101  Fatty  Matter  —  The  term  is  used  by  analytical  chemists  to  describe 
the  fatty  component  of  a  complex  food  such  as  milk,  cake  or  seed. 

2.102  Fatty  Nitrite  —  An  organic  cyanide  derived  from  fatty  acids. 

2.103  F.A.C.  Colour  —  The  colour  standards  standardized  on  the  basis 
of  colour  comparison  against  standards  of  definite  colour  composition. 

2.104  Filtration  —  Filtration  is  the  process  of  separating  suspended 
solids  from  a  liquid  by  forcing  the  mixture  through  a  porous  barrier. 

2.105  Fire  Point  —  Fire  point  is  the  temperature  at  which  a  substance, 
when  ignited  begins  to  burn  freely  after  withdrawal  of  ignition  agent. 

2.106  Fish  Oil  —  Fixed  oils  extracted  from  the  entire  body  of  the  fish 
by  cooking  and  compressing  The  solid  product  obtained  by  pressing 
or  decantation  of  fish  oils  are  known  as  fish  stearin. 

2.107  Fixed  Oils  —  The  term  is  used  for  oils  and  fats»  which  cannot 
easily  be  distilled  without  decomposition,  which  are  not  volatile  and 
which  cannot  be  carried  off  by  superheated  steam.  Vegetable  oils, 
animal  fats  and  marine  oils  processed  individually  or  in  blends  to  remove 
certain  objectionable  constituents  are  known  as  processed  fixed  oils. 

2.108  Flash  Point  —  Flash  point  is  the  temperature  at  which  the  liquid 
gives  a  vapour  sufficient  to  form  an  ignitable  mixture,  with  the  air  near 
the  surface  of  the  liquid  or  within  the  test  vessel.    In  oils  and  fats,   it  is 

15 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 


particularly  important  to  check  the  presence  of  extractioa  solvent  like 
hexane  in  extracted  oil  or  deoiled  meal. 

2.109  Flavour  Reversion — Is  the  phenomenon  of  development  of 
flavour  and  odour  in  a  product,  after  its  initial  deodorisation  to  complete 
biendness.  It  is  strictly  an  organoleptic  observation  and  is  caused  by 
changes  in  substances,  which  have  been  oxidised  prior  to,  but  not 
removed  by  deodorisation. 

2.110  Flow  Point  -—  Flow  point  of  a  fat  is  the  temperature,  at  which  it 
forms  an  approximately  hemi-spherical  protuberance  at  the  orifice  of  the 
cup  under  the  specified  conditions  of  the  test. 

2.111  Foots  —  The  term  is  generally  used  for  non  oily  matter,  that  will 
settle  out  on  storage. 

2.112  Fractionation  —  Fractionation  is  the  process  applied  to  oils  and 
fats  to  separate  into  two  or  more  fractions  with  different  melting  paints. 

2.113  French  Dressing  —  French  dressing  is  the  separable  liquid  or 
emulsified  viscous  food  prepared  from  vegetable  oils.  It  contains  not 
less  than  30  percent  by  mass  of  vegetable  oil.  A  good  french  dressing 
may  contain  55  to  65  percent  of  oil. 

2.114  Fuller's  Earth  —  A  natural  porous  absorptive  and  colloidal 
aluminium  silicate;  containing  some  magnesia  and  a  little  iron.  It  is 
clay  like  in  character  and  used  as  such  or  after  activation  for  bleaching 
of  oils  or  fats. 

2.115  Gardener  Break  Test  —  The  test  determines  the  material  which 
under  the  specified  conditions  separates  from  the  oil  and  is  rendered 
insoluble  in  carbon  tetrachloride. 

2.116  Gardener  Colour  Stand artis  —  Are  used  to  evaluate  the  colour  of 
drying  oils,  the  comparison  being  made  in  the  manner  prescribed.  The 
standard  colours  are  prepared  from  solutions  of  inorganic  compounds. 

2.117  Gel  Time  —  Of  a  drying  oil  is  the  time  required  for  the  oil  to 
form  a  solid  gel  under  specified  conditions  of  temperature. 

2.118  Ghee  —  Is  the  name  given  in  India  to  clarified  butter  made  from 
milk,  from  which  moisture,  casein  and  other  constituents  have  been 
removed  by  melting,  decanting  and  heating. 

2.119  Glycosides  —  A  class  of  organic  compounds  which  can  be  hydro- 
lysed  by  action  of  enzymes,  acids  or  alkalies  into  a  sugar  and  other 
substances  known  as  aglycones. 

16 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.120  Gossypol  —  Is  the  name  given  to  a  natural  polyphenol  (CaoHaoOs) 
occurring  in  cottonseed  oil. 

2.121  Granularity  —  It  is  the  agglomeration  of  crystals  resulting  in  the 
formation  of  granules  generally  visible  to  naked  eye.  Vanaspati  and 
ghee  are  common  products  where  granular  structure  is  considered  as  a 
quality  parameter. 

2.122  Gums  —  A  variety  of  substances  of  ill  defined  chemical  composi- 
tions obtained  from  vegetable  sources. 

2.123  Halphen's  Test  —  This  test  detects  the  presence  of  cottonseed  oil 
and  other  oils  and  fats  containing  fatty  acids  of  cyclopropenoid  structure 
in  vegetable  or  animal  fats  and  oils.  A  concession  may  be  left  for  a 
slight  positive  reaction  which,  sometimesis,  shown  by  cow's  or  buffalow's- 
milk  fat,  fed  on  cotton  seed  and  sesame  oil  cakes. 

2.124  Heat  Stability  Test  —  Heat  stability  test  measures  the  darkening 
in  colour  of  fatty  acids  on  the  Gardener  scale,  when  they  are  heated 
under  specified  conditions  in  presence  of  nitrogen.  This  is  particularly 
important  in  case  of  fatty  acids  used  by  alkyl  producers. 

2.125  Holders  Test  —  Is  the  name  given  to  the  test  for  detection  of 
presence  of  mineral  oil  in  oils  and  fats.  The  test  is  based  upon  the 
development  of  haziness  or  turbidity  by  mineral  oil,  under  the  conditions 
described  in  the  test.  The  test  findings  need  confirmation  by  thin  layer 
chromatography. 

2.126  Hydraulic  Pressing  —  Hydraulic  pressing  is  the  process  of  recover- 
ing oil  from  certain  oil  bearing  material  by  intermittent  pressing  in  a 
hydraulic  press  after  suitable  pre-treatment. 

2.127  Hydrogen  Iodine  Value  —  Hydrogen  iodine  value  is  defined  as  the 
iodine  equivalent  of  the  hydrogen  absorbed  per  gram  of  fat.  This  is 
generally  abbreviated  to  the  term  hydrogen  value. 

2.128  Hydrogenation  —  Hydrogenation  is  a  process  in  which  hydrogen 
atoms  are  added  at  the  double  bonds  of  unsaturated  fatty  acids  under 
conditions  of  high  temperature  and  pressure  in  the  presence  of  a  suitable 
catalyst,  usually  nickel.  During  the  course  of  this  process,  the  double 
bonds  of  the  fatty  acids  in  the  triglyceride  become  saturated,  which 
results  in  a  physically  harder  product  more  resistant  to  oxidation,  with 
resultant  increase  in  melting  point.  The  process  is  sometime  referred 
to  as  *Hardening'. 

2.129  Hydrolysis  —  Hydrolysis  is  the  process  of  splitting  of  an  ester  by 
water  when  free  alcohol  and  acids  are  formed. 

17 


IS:  11476-1985 

2.130  Hydrolytic  Rancidity  —  Hydrolytic  rancidity  is  the  process  whicli 
resu'ts  from  the  liberation  of  fatty  acids  from  glyceride  molecule*  in  the 
presence  of  moisture  and  heat.  Coconut  oil  is  the  typical  example  which 
develops  soapy  flavour  after  hydrolytic  rancidity. 

2.131  Hydroxy!  Value  —  The  number  of  milligrams  of  potassium 
hydroxide  required  to  neutralize  the  acetic  acid  capable  of  combining  by 
acetylation  with  one  gram  of  the  oil  or  fat.  Hydroxyl  value  is  equi- 
valent to  the  hydroxyl  content  of  the  material  based  on  the  weight  of  the 
unacetylated  fat. 

2.132  Industrial  Vegetable  Oil  —  It  is  the  vegetable  oil  which  in  the 
material  slate  or  when  subjected  to  suitable  procedures  possesses 
properties,  which  make  it  apt  for  particular  uses,  excluding  food 
purposes. 

2.133  Insoluble  Impurities  ~  Dirt,  meal  and  other  foreign  substances 
which  are  insoluble  in  kerosine  and  petroleum  ether  under  the 
conditions  of  the  prescribed  lest. 

2.134  Interesterification  —  Interesterification   refers  to  an  exchange  of 

acid  or  alcohol  groups  by  esters.  This  is  sometime  also  called  ester 
interchange  or  trans  esterification. 

2.135  Iodine  Value  —  The  iodine  value  of  the  oil  or  fat  gives  an  indica-v 
tion  of  the  degree  of  unsaturaiion  of  the  constituent  fatty  glycerides. 
Wij's  method  is  applicable  to  all  normal  oils  and  fats  not  containing 
conjugated  systems.  Iodine  value  (Wij's)  is  the  number  of  grams  of 
iodine,  absorbed  per  100  grams  of  the  oil  or  fat,  when  determined  by 
using  Wij's  solution. 

2.136  Isomcrisation  —  Is  defined  as  ihe  rearrangement  of  the  structural 
configuration  of  a  molecule  without  changing  its  molecular  mass.  In 
the  case  of  oils  and  fats,  during  the  hydrogenation  of  fats,  both  positional 
and  geometric  isomers  are  formed  in  addition  to  the  saturation  of  the 
double  bond  and  isomcrisation  is  very  important  in  relation  to  the 
consistency  of  partially  hydrogenated  fats.  Isomers  of  oleic  acid  are 
sometime  termed  as  iso- oleic  acids  and  are  characterised  by  an  increase 
in  melting  point  of  the  original  acid. 

2.137  Isomerism  —  Isomerism  is  the  phenomenon  in  which  compounds 
having  same  molecular  formula  exhibit  difierent  physical  and  chemical 
properties.  Such  compounds  are  known  as  isomers.  Positional  isome- 
rism results  from  the  difference  in  the  position  occupied  by  the  same 
functional  group  in  the  mo'ecule.  Geometrical  isomerism  or  cis-irans 
isomerism  occurs  in  unsaturated  molecules,  which  contain  two  unsymme- 
trically  substituted  groups  to  the  double  bond-    A  molecule  in  which 

18 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

the  ethylenic  groups  are  known  to  be  on  the  same  side  of  the  plane 
joining  the  unsaturated  carbons  is  termed  as  cis-  and  otherwise  in  trans- 
lorm 

R  R  R  H 

\  /  \  / 

c      =      c  c      =      c 

/  \  /  \ 

H  H  H  R 

Cis  Trans 

2.138  lUPAC  —  International  Union  of  Pure  and  Applied  Chemistry  — 
the  standard  methods  of  oils  and  fats  section. 

2.139  Kreis  Test  -  A  qualitative  test  for  detection  of  incipient  rancidity, 
based  on  the  reaction  between  phloroglucinol  and  some  constituents 
formed  in  the  fat,  probably  epihydrin  aldehyde 

2.140  Krischner  Value  —  Krischner  value  is  the  number  of  milli litres  of 
0*1  N  aqueous  alkali  solution  required  to  neutralise  the  water-soluble 
volatile  acids  which  form  water  soluble  silver  salt,  isolated  from  5  grams 
of  the  oil  or  fat  under  prescribed  conditions. 

2.141  Lanolin  -  Lanolin  is  a  purified,  unctuous,  fat  like  substance 
obtained  from  the  wool  of  sheep. 

2.142  Lard  —  Lard  means  the  rendered  fat  from  hogs  and  shall  not 
contain  more  than  1  percent  of  substance  other  than  fatty  acids  ard  fats. 
It  is  offered  commercially  in  different  grades.  Neutral  lard  is  the  highest 
quality  and  obtained  by  rendering  at  temperature  below  50°C.  Leaf 
lard  is  another  grade  produced  by  water  rendering  in  autoclaves  at 
100°C.  Choice  lard,  prime  steam  lard  are  some  of  the  inferior  grades 
produced,  liquid  lard  oil  and  lard  stearin  are  prepared  by  chilling  and 
pressing  of  lard. 

2.143  Lard  Oil  —  Is  a  product  obtained  by  the  cold  pressing  of  lard  or 
of  other  rendered  pig  fat. 

2.144  Lard  Stearin  —  Is  the  solid  white  fat  left  after  lard  or  other 
rendered  pig  fat  has  been  pressed. 

2.145  Lea  Value  —  This  is  sometime  used  for  measurement  of  rancidity 
due  to  peroxides.  It  is  expressed  in  millimoles  peroxide,  oxygen  per 
kg  fat.     Numerically  peroxide  value  is  twice  as  great  as  the  lea  value. 

2.146  Liebermann  Stoich  Reaction  —  This  test  based  upon  addition  of 
acetic  anhydride  and  sulphuric  acid  is  used  for  detection  of  rosin,  when 
!t  temporarily  produces  a  red-vio!et  colour.  The  test  is  not  reliable  in 
presence  of  some  sterols,  wool  fat  and  fatty  acids  from  sulphur  oils. 

19 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.147  Limed  Oil  —  Limed  oil  or  calci  coaters  represent  a  special 
modification  of  heat  bodied  oils  used  in  paint  industry. 

2.148  a)  Linoleic  Acid  (  CigH^.^Oj  )  —  It  is  an  octadeca-dienoic  (  having 
two  double  bonds  )  fatty  acid.  It  is  the  most  usual  form  of  dethenoid 
Ci8  acids  found  in  oils  and  fats.  It  occurs  in  *semi-drying'  or  *drying' 
classes  of  seed  oils  and  is  a  major  component  of  the  mixed  fatty  acids 
obtained  from  seed  fats  of  safflower,  sunflower,  soybean,  etc.  This  has 
been  regarded  as  an  essential  fatty  acid. 

b)  Linolenic  Acid  (  CigHaoO^  )  —  It  is  an  octaxieca-trienoic  (  having 
three  double  bonds  )  fatty  acid.  It  is  the  most  usual  form  of  triethenoid 
Ci8  acid  found  in  oils  and  fats.  It  occurs  in  varying  but  appreciable 
proportions  in  *drying'  class  of  seed  oils  like  linseed,  rubber  seed,  perilla 
seed,  etc. 

2.149  Linoxyn  —  A  semi  solid  rubbery  product,  which  is  a  highly 
oxidised  linseed  oil  used  in  the  manufacture  of  linoleum. 

2.150  Lipase  —  These  are  the  enzymes  which  hydrolyse  the  esters  of 
glycerol. 

2.151  Lipid  —  An  inclusive  term  for  fats  and  fat  derived  materials.  It 
includes  all  substances  which,  are: 

a)  Relatively  insoluble  in  water  but  soluble  in  organic  solvents  like 
benzene,  chloroform,  acetone,  ether,  etc; 

b)  Related  either  actually  or  potentially  to  fatty  acid  esters,  fatty 
alcohols,  sterols,  waxes,  etc;  and 

c)  Utilisable  by  the  animal  organism. 

They  are  one  of  the  chief  structural  components  of  living  cells. 

2.152  Lipolysis  —  Lipolysis  is  Ihe  process  of  hydrolysis  of  the  glycerides 
in  germinating  seeds  or  other  oil  bearing  material  to  form  free  fatty 
acids  due  to  the  action  of  lipase. 

2.153  M.I.U.  —  It  is  the  combined  content  of  non-fatty  material  present 
in  a  fat,  namely  moisture  ( M ),  insoluble  impurities  (  I )  and 
unsaponifiable  matter  (  U  ). 

2.154  Mackey's  Test  —  Mackey's  test  is  based  on  the  temperature  rise 
due  to  oxidation  of  the  acid  when  absorbed  in  cotton  in  a  wire  mesh 
cylinder  through  which  air  is  circulated.  The  test  indicates  the  relative 
oxidative  stability  of  certain  fatty  acids  such  as  oleic  acid  and  is  some- 
times used  to  ascertain  the  suitability  of  fatty  oils  to  be  applied  to 
textiles. 

20 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.155  Maleic  Oils  —  Are  obtained  by  treating,  for  example,  soybean  oil 
with  limited  amount  of  maleic  anhydride  at  a  temperature  of  200°C  or 
more  in  conjunction  with  sufficient  polyhydric  alcohol  to  esterify  the 
extra  acid  groups.  Maleic  oils  so  obtained  have  good  drying  properties. 

2.156  Margarine  —  Is  the  name  used  for  the  product,  which  is  an 
emulsion  of  edible  oils  and  fats  with  water,  which  resembles  table 
(  creamary  )  butter  in  consistency  and  appearance.  The  product  is 
generally  required  to  conform  to  the  standards  of  quality  laid  down  by 
the  enforcing  authority.  Number  of  varieties  are  now  being  offered  to 
the  consumer,  with  special  characteristics.  Table  margarine  is  a  butter 
substitute  with  a  consistency  suitable  for  spreading  within  the  widest 
possible  temperature  range.  Whipped  margarine  is  the  normal  type,  but 
which  has  been  softened  by  incorporating  nitrogen.  Puff  pastry  marga- 
rine is  a  special  type  specifically  made  for  production  of  puff  and  pastry. 
The  structure  of  this  type  is  composed  of  thin  laminates. 

2.157  Matter  Insoluble  in  Chloroform  —  Represents  mineral  contamina- 
tion, since  all  the  materials  naturally  occurring  in  oils  are  soluble  under 
the  conditions  described  in  the  test, 

2.158  Mayonnaise,  Mayonnaise  Dressing  —  Consist  of  mixture  of  vege- 
table oils  with  egg,  vinegar  and  other  permitted  ingredients.  The 
minimum  percentage  of  vegetable  oils  is  specified  to  be  65  percent  in 
some  of  the  international  specifications  for  such  products.  A  variety  is 
popularly  known  as  salad  dressing  which  contains  35  percent  as  minimum 
percentage  of  vegetable  oil,  specified  in  some  of  the  International 
-Standards.    They  arc  difi'erent  from  salad  oils. 

2.159  Meal  —  The  product  resulting  from  the  oil  bearing  seeds  or  other 
material  after  the  removal  of  part  of  oil  by  pressure  or  solvent  extraction. 
Where  the  residual  oil  in  the  meal  is  less  that  is  about  1  percent  it  is 
termed  as  defatted  meal. 

2.160  Mechanical  Pressing  —  Mechanical  pressing  is  a  continuous  press- 
ing process,  at  elevated  temperature  using  expellers  or  screw  presses, 
which  utilises  a  warm  shaft  continuously  rotating  within  a  pressing 
cylinder  or  cage  to  express  the  oil  from  oil  bearing  seed  or  other  material 
after  suitable  processing  or  pretreatment. 

2.161  Melting  Point  —  Melting  point  of  a  pure  substance,  which  consists 
of  a  single  constituent  only,  is  the  temperature  at  which  its  liquid  and 
solid  phases  are  in  equilibrium  under  a  pressure  of  one  atmosphere. 
Natural  oils  or  fats  do  not  consist  of  single  constituents,  instead  they  are 
complex  mixtures  containing  several  components  and  they  exhibit  a 
melting  behaviour  different  from  that  of  pure  compounds.  The  term 
melting  point  does  not  imply  the  same  characteristics  that  it  does  with 

21 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

pure  crystalline  substances.  Fats  pass  through  a  stage  of  gradual  soften- 
ing before  they  become  completely  liquid.  The  melting  point  is  there- 
fore defined  by  the  specific  conditions  and  the  method  by  which  it  is 
determined.  A  variety  of  techniques  are  employed  to  measure  the 
melting  points  of  fats  and  a  variety  of  methods  such  as  melting  point 
closed  capillary  tube  method,  melting  point  open  capillary  tube  method, 
melting  point  ^^i  ey's  method,  melting  point  obbelobide  method  (  soine- 
time  designated  as  flow  and  drop  point  ),  melting  point  photo  electric 
method,  s'ip  point,  cogeal  point,  setting  point,  elc,  are  used  to  determine 
such  related  values.  In  case  of  capillary  slip  method,  it  is  the  tempera- 
ture at  which  the  oil  or  fat  softens  or  becomes  sufficiently  fluid  to  slip  or 
run  whereas  in  case  of  closed-tube  complete-fusion  method,  it  is  the 
temperature  at  which  the  oil  or  fat  becomes  perfectly  clear  and  liquid. 

2.162  Moisture  and  Volatile  Content  -—  Moisture  and  volatile  content  is 
the  loss  in  mass,  which  the  product  to  be  analysed  undergoes  on  heating 
at  105°C,  under  the  operatmg  conditions  of  the  lest. 

2.163  Molecular  Rearjrangement  --  Molecular  rearrangement  is  a  process 
used  to  alter  the  physical  characteristics  of  an  oil  by  redistributing  the 
fatty  acids  on  the  glycerol  molecule. 

2.164  Monoglycerides  —  These  are  the  esters  of  glycerols  combined  with 
one  fatty  acid  with  two  hydroxyl  groups  of  the  giycerol  remaining  free. 
These  are  used  as  emulsifiers  in  margarine  and  ice-cream,  etc,  to  help  the 
uniform  dispersion  of  oil  and  water. 

2.165  Morpho^.ogy  —  The  term  is  generally  used  to  denote  the  general 
relation  of  the  physical  behaviour  and  performance  of  fats,  oihr  and 
shortenings  to  iheir  crystal  structure  and  molecular  configuration  of  their 
triglyceride  componen.s. 

2.166  MuciliKge  —  Muciliagi  in  oils  and  fats,  is  often  an  evasive  material, 
not  shown  up  in  the  impurities  test,  but  which  can  still  have  a  bearing 
on  the  subsequent  processing  and  properties. 

2.167  Muiton  Fat  —  Mutton  fat  means  fat  obtained  from  carcass  of 
sheep  or  goat. 

2.168  Neat's  Foot  OiS  —  Is  the  term  com.merciany  used  for  oils  from  the 
feet  of  the  ox  and  other  various  animals. 

2.169  Neutral  Vegetable  Oil  —  It  is  the  vegetab'e  oil  which  in  theratural 
state  or  when  subjected  to  suitable  procedures  have  a  minimum  ^  cid 
value  of  0"5  or  its  equivalent  expressed  in  percentage  of  oleic  acid,  that 
is  to  say  0*25  percent. 

2.170  Neutralisation  —  Neutralisation  is  the  process  of  removal  of  free 
fatty  acids  from  fats  and  oils,  by  neutralisation  with  bases,  such  as  caustic 

22 


IS  :  11476  - 1985 

soda,  soda  ash  and  other  reagents.  The  process  when  applied  to  crude 
oils  is  generally  termed  as  pre-neutralisation  and  when  adopted  after 
hardening,  is  called  as  post-neutralisation.  The  neutralisation  process, 
when  done  in  the  presence  of  extraction  solvents,  such  as  hexane  is 
termed  as  miscella  refining  A  combination  of  po'ar  and  non-polar 
solvents  such  as  hexaie  and  alcohol  is  sometime  present,  at  the  time  of 
addition  of  bases  and  the  process  is  termed  as  doable  solvent  refining. 

2.171  Oil  Cake  •—  The  residue  obtained  after  the  expression  of  vegetable 
oils  from  oil  bearing  seeds. 

2.172  Oi!  Cloth  —  Is  a  special  coated  cloth  which  consists  of  a  woven 
canvas  (  jute  )  backing  coated  on  both  sides  with  several  layers  of  oil 
paint. 

2.173  Oil  Foots  and  Dregs  —  Oily  or  muciligenous  residues  resulting 
from  purification  of  oi  s.  They  are  used  in  the  manufacture  of  soaps 
and  lubricants. 

2.174  Oleic  Acid  —  Oleic  acid  is  pale  yellow,  oily  liquid  present  in  all 
vegetable  and  animal  oils  and  fats  in  g'yceride  form.  Chemically  oleic 
acid  contains  18  carbon  atoms  with  a  double  bond  at  9th  position  in 
cis-form.  Commercial  oleic  acid  is  a  mixture  consisting  chiefly  of 
oleic  acid  and  other  fatty  acids. 

2.175  Oleine  —  Comm:rcially  the  term  is  generally  used  for  liquid  fatty 
acid,  obtained  during  the  cold  pressing  of  stearic  acid.  In  technical 
sense,  it  is  used  for  triolein,  a  triglyceride  of  oleic  acid  occurring  in  most 
fats  and  oils. 

2.176  Oleo  Oil  ~  (  Edible  )  is  a  white,  or  yellowish  solid  fat  of  soft 
consistency  with  a  faint  smell  of  tallow  and  an  agreeable  flavour  and 
consists  mainly  of  the  glycerides  of  oleic  acid  (  tri-olein  ).  It  is  obtained 
by  pressing  of  tallow. 

2.177  Oleo  Stearin  —  See  'Tallow  Stearin'  under  2.250. 

2.178  Organoleptic  Test  —  This  test  refers  to  a  careful  testing  procedure 
by  experienced  personnel.  It  is  an  important  test  to  be  carried  on  all 
further  refined  oils,  both  in  regard  to  odour  and  taste. 

2.179  Oven  Test  —  Oven  test  is  an  accelerated  rancidity  development 
test  conducted  on  an  oil  or  fat  in  a  constant  temperature  oven  under  the 
conditions  prescribed  in  the  test.  A  common  test  generally  used  is 
Schasl  oven  test. 


23 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2J80  Oxidised  Acid  —  Oxidised  acids  are  the  acids  which  are  insoluble 
in  hexane  and  spluble  in  ethanol  under  the  specified  conditions  of  the 
test. 

2.181  Oxidised  Oil  —  It  is  the  oil  deteriorated  in  quality  due  to  attack 
by  atmospheric  oxygen. 

2.182  Oxirane  Oxygen  —  Oxirane  oxygen  is  the  oxygen  contained  in  the 
following  grouping: 

I       ! 

R  -  C  —  C  ~  R' 

\   / 
O 

This  is  titrated  directly  with  hydrogen  bromide  in  acetic  acid  as  per 
conditions  prescribed  in  the  test.  It  is  applicable  to  epoxidised  fatty 
material  and  epoxy  compounds  in  general. 

2.183  Oxy  Polymers  —  These  are  the  ill-defined  polymerisation  products 
of  oxidation,  formed  particularly  at  high  temperature  during  frying. 

2.184  Palm  Distillate  —  It  is  the  distillate  obtained  during  physical 
refining  of  palm  oil  and  includes  a  mixture  of  fatty  acids  and  entrained 
glycerides  along  with  odoriferous  compounds. 

1.185  Palm  Stearin  ~  It  is  the  solid  fraction  obtained  from  fractiona- 
tion of  palm  oil  by  a  process  of  dry,  detergent  or  solvent  fractionation. 

2.186  Palmitic  Acid  —  It  is  a  white  crystalline  solid.  It  has  a  molecular 
formula  C16H32O2  with  a  molecular  mass  of  256.  Technical  grade  pal- 
mitic acid  consists  chieily  of  palmitic  (  hexadecanoic  )  acid  and  very 
small  amount  of  stearic  (  octa  decanoic  )  acid. 

2.187  Palmolein  —  It  is  the  liquid  fraction  obtained  by  fractionation  of 
palm  oil. 

2.188  Fara-Anisidine  Value  —  Para  anisidine  value  is  defined  by  conver- 
sion as  100  times  optical  density  measured  in  1  cm  cell  of  a  solution 
containing  1  gram  of  the  oil  in  100  ml  of  a  mixture  of  solvent  and  the 
para  ansidine  reagent  under  the  conditions  of  the  test. 

2.189  P/S  Ratio  —  Is  the  ratio  of  pply  unsaturated  (  P  )  to  saturated 
(  S  )  fatty  acids  and  has  been  used  to  express  the  potential  of  dietary  fats 
to  reduce  elevated  serum  cholesterol  levels. 

2.190  Penetration  Value  —  Penetration  value  is  measured  by  allowing 
a  metal  cone  of  known  mass  and  angle  to  penetrate  the  sample  of  fat 
for  specified  time.  The  yield  value  (  C-Value  )  is  calculated  from  the 
penetration  depth  and  is  proportional  to  that  obtained  by  thumb  test. 

24 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.191  Peroxide  Value  —  Peroxide  value  is  the  quantity  of  those  sub- 
stances in  the  sample  cf  oil  or  fat,  expressed  in  terms  of  milliequivalent 
of  active  oxygen  per  kilogram,  which  oxidise  potassium  iodide  under  the 
prescribed  conditions  in  the  test,  normally  it  is  a  measure  of  peroxides 
formed  due  to  oxidation  of  the  oil  or  fat. 

2.192  Petrolatum  —  Petrolatum  is  a  purified  semisolid  mixture  of  hydro- 
carbons obtained  from  petroleum. 

2.193  Phosphatide  (  Phospholipid  _)  —  A  group  of  lipid  compounds  that 
yield  on  hydrolysis,  phosphoric  acid,  an  alcohol,  fatty  acid  and  a 
nitrogenous  base.  They  include  lecithin,  cephaline,  choline  found  in 
oils  and  fats. 

2.194  Phosphoric  Acid  —  It  is  the  name  given  to  ortho-phosphoric  acid 
having  the  formula  HaPOi.  These  are  commonly  used  in  oil  and  fat 
processing  as  degumming  agents  and  to  reduce  metal  contamination  such 
as  that  of  copper  and  iron. 

2.195  Physical  Refining  —  In  simple  terms,  physical  refining  may  be 
defined  as  free  fatty  acids  removal  by  the  action  of  high  temperature, 
high  vacuum  and  with  live  steam  applied  directly  to  the  oil.  Physical 
refining  also  frequently  referred  to  as  steam  refining,  may  more 
accurately  be  described  as  distillative  deacidification. 

2.196  Plastic  Range  —  Plastic  range  is  the  expression  frequently  used  in 
the  shortening  industry.  The  term  signifies  the  extent  of  temperature 
range  over  which  a  given  fatty  product  remains  workable,  as  opposed 
to  becoming  excessively  hard  or  soft.  This  is  determined  by  measuring 
consistency  of  three  or  four  samples,  each  previously  equiliberated  at 
a  different  temperature  so  as  to  cover  the  entire  range  of  workability. 

2.197  Plasticity  —  Plasticity  is  the  property  that  permits  permanent 
alteration  of  shape  and/or  size  by  slight  stress  and  without  rupture. 

2.198  Poienske  Value  —  The  number  of  miiiiiitres  of  01  N  aqueous 
sodium  hydroxide  solution  required  to  neutralize  the  steam  volatile 
water  insoluble  fatty  acids  distilled  from  5  g  of  an  oil  or  fat  under  the 
precise  conditions  specified  in  the  method.  The  Poienske  value  is  the 
measure  of  the  steam  volatile  and  water  insoluble  fatty  acids,  chiefly 
caprylic,  capric  and  lauric  acids,  present  in  the  oil  or  fat. 

2.199  Polybromide  Test  —  Polybromide  test  is  a  qualitative  test  for  the 
prerence  of  fatty  acids  with  more  than  two  non  conjugated  double 

bonds. 

2.200  Polymorphism  —  Polymorphism  is  the  ability  of  the  fat  to  exist  in 
number  of  different  crystalline  forms,  depending  on  how  the  molecule 
arrange  themselves  in  the  solid  state. 

25 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.201  Pour  Point  —  Pour  point  is  the  temperature  just  above  which  no 
movement  can  be  observed  as  the  sample  is  cooled  to  its  solidification 
point. 

2.202  Premier  Jns  (  Oleo  Stock  )  —  Is  the  name  given  to  the  best  edible 
quality  of  tallow.    Inferior  grades  are  known  as  beef  tallow. 

2.203  Preservatives  ~  These  are  the  substances  which  when  added  to 
food,  are  capable  of  inhibiting,  retarding  or  arresting  the  process  of 
fermentation,  acidification  or  other  decomposition  of  food. 

2.204  Prime  Bleachable  Summer  Yellow  —  It  is  a  term  applied  to  once 
tefined  cottonseed  oil  of  bieachaole  quality  which  after  bleaching  will 
contain  0"025  percent  or  less  free  fatty  acids,  a  very  small  quantity  of 
colour  bodies  and  water  and  volatile  matter  not  exceeding  0*1  percent- 

2.205  ProstagiaDdins  —  These  are  the  physiologically  active  compounds 
with  harmones  like  properties  that  are  made  by  the  animal  body  from 
certain  polyunsaturated  fatty  acids  like  linoleic  acid  ingested  in  the  diet. 

2.2C6  Protein  —  A  naturally  occurring  complex  high  polymer  of  amino 
acids  containing  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen  and  usually 
sulphur.  It  is  one  of  the  essential  constituents  of  all  living  things  and 
of  the  diet  of  animals  and  human  beings. 

2.207  Rancidity  —  Rancidity  is  the  phenomenon  of  spoilage  of  fats, 
resulting  in  deterioration  in  quality  and  flavour.  Oxidative  rancidity  is 
caused  by  combination  of  fat  with  oxygen.  Hydrolytic  rancidity  is 
caused  by  breakdown  of  the  fat  triglyceride  as  a  result  of  hydrolysis. 

2.208  Ratio  Number  —  Ratio  number  is  the  ratio  of  acid  value  to  ester 
value  and  is  indicated  in  the  case  of  vegetable  waxes. 

2.209  Refining  —  The  term  is  generally  used  for  the  treatments  given 
to  the  oils  or  fats  to  remove  their  colour,  free  fatty  acids,  odour  and 
other  impurities. 

2.210  Refining  Efficiency  —  Is  generally  considered  to  be  the  yield  of 
dry  neutral  refined  oil  as  a  percentage  of  the  available  neutral  triglyceride 
content  of  the  crude  oil. 

2.211  Refining  Factor —  It  is  the  ratio  of  percent  loss  to  percent  free 
fatty  acid  (  FFA  ),  corrected  for  moisture  and  impurities. 

2.212  Refining  Loss  —  The  percent  loss  from  the  original  quantity  of 
crude  oil  resulting  from  various  refining  processes.  The  loss  varies 
depending  on  free  fatty  acid  of  the  oil  and  other  impurities  removed 
during  refining. 

26 


18:11476-1985 

2.213  Refined  Oil  Edible  —  The  term  is  commonly  used  for  oils  sub- 
jected to  special  refining  processes  to  adopt  it  specially  for  use  in  food 
products.  The  processing  may  include  degumming,  bleaching,  chemical, 
physical  refining  and  deodorisation.  The  oiis  may  also  be  subjected 
to  other  treatments  such  as  winterisation,  de waxing,  depending  upon  the 
end  use.  Technical  grade  refined  oils  are  specially  refined  and  further 
processed  to  meet  the  requirements  and/or  specifications  for  a  definite 
industrial  use.  Refined  vegetable  oil  has  been  defined  as  any  edible 
vegetable  oil,  which  is  obtained  by  expression,  neutralised  with  alkali, 
bleached  with  absorbent  earth  and/or  activated  carbon  and  deodorised 
with  steam. 

2.214  Refractive  Index  —  The  refractive  index  of  a  medium  is  the  ratio 
of  speed  of  the  light  of  a  definite  wave  length  in  vacuum  to  its  speed 
in  the  medium.  The  selected  wave  length  is  the  mean  wave  length  of 
the  D  line  of  sodium  (  589'6  nm  ).  In  this  case  the  notation  is  at  t°C.  In 
general,  refractive  index  is  given  at  20°C  for  fats  which  are  liquid  at 
this  temperature  and  40  or  60°C  or  above  for  fats,  which  are  solid  at 
20°C. 

2.215  Reichert-Meissl  Value  —  The  number  of  millilitres  of  O'l  N 
sodium  hydroxide  solution  required  to  neutralize  the  steam  volatile, 
water  soluble  fatty  acids  distilled  from  5  g  of  an  oil  or  fat  under  the 
precise  conditions  specified  in  the  method.  Reichert-Meissl  Value  is  a 
measure  of  water  soluble,  steam  volatile  fatty  acids,  chiefly  butyric  and 
caproic  acids,  present  in  oil  or  fat. 

2.216  Rendering  —  The  term  is  generally  applied  to  the  treatment 
designed  to  remove  all  or  most  of  the  oil  from  fatty  animal  tissues  or 
other  material  with  a  high  ratio  of  oil  to  solid  matter.  Dry  rendering 
is  distinguished  from  wet  rendering  by  the  fact  that  exulsion  of  oil  or 
fat  is  accompanied  by  dehydration  of  the  fat  and  fatty  tissues,  so  that 
the  latter  are  essentially  dry  at  the  end  of  the  operation  whereas  in  case 
of  wet  rendering,  recovery  is  done  in  presence  of  large  amount  of  water. 
During  the  operation,  the  separated  fat  rises  to  the  top  of  the  aqueous 
layer  and  is  skimmed  off. 

2.217  Saponifiable  Matter  —  Material  which  can  be  saponified  by  caustic 
alkali  is  regarded  as  saponifiable  matter.  It  is  actually  a  calculated 
value  and  is  obtained  by  subtracting  the  sum  of  moisture,  impurities  and 
unsaponifiable  matter  from  100  percent. 

2.218  Saponification  —  Saponification  is  the  term  generally  used  for 
splitting  of  an  ester  by  alkali  into  soap  and  alcohols. 

27 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.219  Saponification  Equivalent  —  It  is  the  amount  of  fat  or  wax 
saponified  by  one  gram  equivaler.t  of  KOH  and  is  the  mean  gram 
equivalent  of  the  mixture  of  glycerides  or  wax  esters  present,  on  the 
assumption  that  the  latter  consists  exclusively  of  neutral  esters  of  these 
types.  In  such  cases,  it  is  related  to  saponification  values  by  the 
formula: 

Saponification  ^  56  100 

equivalent        Saponification  value 

and  affords  a  clear  indication  of  the  mean  molecular  magnitude  of  the 
esters  (  glycerides  or  otherwise  ).  In  actual  practice,  it  is  generally 
applicable  to  oils  or  fats  having  not  more  than  2  or  3  percent  of  free 
fatty  acids  and  less  than  1  percent  unsaponifiable  matter. 

2.220  Saponification  Value  —  Saponification  value  sometime  also 
mentioned  as  saponification  number  is  number  of  milligrams  of  caustic 
potash  required  to  saponify  one  gram  of  oil,  fat  fatty  acid  or  wax. 

2.221  Saponins  —  These  are  the  glycosides  that  dissolve  in  water  to 
form  colloidal  solutions,  which  froth  copiously.  On  hydrolysis  the 
saponins  yield  sugar  and  sopogenins. 

2.222  Salad  Oil  —  The  term  is  generally  used  for  oils,  which  will  remain 
substantially  liquid  in  a  refrigerator  at  0°  —  TC  and  produce  a  mayon- 
naise emulsion,  which  is  stable  at  low  temperature. 

2.223  Shale  Oil —  A  crude  oil  obtained  from   oil   shale  by  destructive 

distillation  followed  by  hydrotreating. 

2.224  Shortening  —  Shortening  are  semisolid  foods,  prepared  from  fats, 
oils  or  a  combination  of  both,  which  may  be  processed  by  hydrogenation 
or  other  modification  process  for  use  in  cooking,  baking  or  frying.  They 
may  contain  other  permitted  ingredients  such  as  emulsifiers,  antioxidants 
and  are  distinct  from  margarine,  which  also  contain  non  fat  tnaterial, 
such  as  water. 

2.225  Sludge  —  Sludge  is  the  solid  residue  left  out  in  the  tanks,  when 
crude  oils  are  stored  and  shipped  in  the  same.  These  are  also  sometime 
referred  to  as  'TANK  BOTTOM*  or  'FOOTS'. 

2.226  Soap  —  The  product  formed  by  the  saponification  or  neutralisa- 
tion of  fats,  oils,  waxes,  rosin  or  other  acids  with  organic  or  inorganic 
bases.  In  the  case  of  ordinary  soluble  soaps,  the  hydrogen  of  the 
carboxylic  group  of  the  fatty  acid  is  replaced  by  sodium  or  other  alkali 
metals.  Heavy  metal  soaps  (  sometime  mentioned  as  metallic  soaps  ) 
are  a  variation,  in  which  metals  heavier  than  sodium  are  used.  They 
are  not  water  soluble  and  used  mostly  for  industrial  applications  such 
as  lubricating  greases,  gel  thickners,  in  paint  driers,  etc. 

28 


iS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.227  Soapstock  —  Bye  products  of  oil  refining  produced  by  the 
neutralisatioD  of  free  fatty  acids  with  a  base  (  sodium  hydroxide  )  and 
consisting  of  a  mixture  of  crude  soap  and  neutral  oils  or  fats.  They  are 
used  in  soap  making. 

2.228  Solid  Fat  Content  —  It  is  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  solids 
present  in  the  sample.  It  is  measured  as  the  ratio  of  amount  of  liquid 
protons  present  at  a  given  temperature  to  the  total  amount  of  protons 
(both  liquid  and  solid  )  of  the  sample  under  the  conditions  of  the 
measurement.  Both  pulsed  and  wide  line  NMR  spectrometers  are  used 
for  the  measurement  of  Solid  Fat  Content. 

2.229  Solid  Fat  Index  —  Solid  fat  index  is  an  empirical  measure  of  solid 
fat  content  and  is  calculated  from  the  specific  volume  at  various 
temperatures,  using  a  dilatometric  scale  graduated  in  units  of  mi  x  1  000. 

2.230  Solvent  —  Solvent  is  a  substance  capable  of  dissolving  another 
substance  (  solute  )  to  form  a  uniformly  dispersed  mixture  (  solution  ) 
at  the  molecular  or  ionic  size  level. 

2.231  Solvent  Extracted  Oil  —  Means  any  vegetable  oil  obtained  fiom 
oil  bearing  material  by  the  process  of  extraction  with  a  solvent.  The  oil 
conforming  to  the  quality  requirements  of  semi-refined  and  refined  grade 
is  known  as  semi  refined  or  refined  grade  of  solvent  extracted  oil, 
respectively.  The  solvent  extracted  oil,  which  has  not  been  subjected 
to  any  of  the  refining  processes  and  conforms  to  the  specified  quality 
requirements  is  designated  as  raw  grade  I,  solvent  extracted  oil,  in 
Government  orders  on  standard  of  quality  for  refined  grade  of  solvent 
extracted  oils. 

2.232  Solvent  Extraction  —  Solvent  extraction  is  the  name  given  to  the 
process  of  recovery  of  oil  or  fat  from  any  oil  bearing  material,  with  the 
help  of  solvent.  The  solvent  most  commonly  used  in  the  oil  and  fat 
industry  for  oil  extraction  is  normal  hexane,  food  grade.  Solvent 
extracted  oil  means  any  oil  obtained  from  oil  bearing  material  by  the 
process  of  extraction  by  a  solvent.  The  deoiled  meal  for  edible 
purposes,  commonly  known  as  *solvent  extracted  edible  flour'  has 
been  defined  as  the  ground  material  obtained  from  specially  prepared 
deoiled  meal,  that  is,  the  residual  mateiial  left  over,  when  the  oilis 
extracted  by  a  solvent  from  oil  cake  immediately  following  the  single 
pressing  of  good  quality  edible  oil  seeds. 

2.233  Relative  Density  —  Relative  density  is  the  ratio  of  mass  of  any 
volume  of  a  substance  to  the  mass  of  an  equal  volume  of  water  at  4°C. 
The  specific  gravity  of  water  at  4'C  is  TO.  It  is  not  a  measure  of  the 
quality  of  oil  and  an  oil  that  deviates  sUghtly  in  relative  density  from 
the  specified  limit,  but  otherwise  conforms  is  usually  satisfactory. 

29 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.234  Splitting  —  Splitting  is  the  term  generally  used  for  the  process  of 
decomposition  of  glyceridcs  or  other  esters  by  hydrolysis.  Degree  of 
splitting  indicates  the  efficiency  of  splitting  and  is  defined  as  the  amount 
of  free  fatty  acids  expressed  as  percentage  of  total  amount  of  fatty  acid 
present. 

2.235  Stand  Oil  —  These  are  heat  polymerised  oils  made  by  heating  the 
processed  raw  oils  to  attain  a  specified  viscosity  at  the  desired  tem- 
perature. Blown  stand  oils  meaning  stand  oils'  that  have  been  blown 
with  air  at  some  stage  during  their  manufacture,  are  used  for  a  wider 
range  of  products.  When  two  or  more  oils  are  heat  treated  to  increase 
the  viscosity,  the  product  is  called  a  'Mixed  Stand  Oil'. 

2.236  Stearic  Acid  —  Stearic  acid  is  a  white  crystalline  solid  consisting 
chiefly  of  stearic  acid  (  octadecanoic  acid  )  and  very  small  amount  of 
palmitic  acid  and  oleic  acid.  It  is  commercially  available,  as  single, 
double  and  triple  processed  stearic  acid.  In  pure  form,  it  has  a 
molecular  formula  CisHsoOa  with  a  molecular  weight  of  284, 

2.237  Stearin  ~  The  term  is  generally  used  for  solid  pressed  residual 
acids  obtained  during  the  pressing  of  stearic  acid  at  ambient  temperature. 
In  technical  sense,  it  is  used  for  triglyceride  of  stearic  acid. 

2.238  Stearin  Pitch  —  Is  obtained  from  the  distillation  of  fatty  acids. 
It  consists  of  sticky  blackish  mass,  fairly  hard  sometime  elastic,  partly 
soluble  in  light  petroleum.  It  is  used  in  preparation  of  mastics,  water- 
proof paper  board  and  electric  insulators. 

2.239  Set-to-Touch-Time  —  Is  the  test  used  for  checking  the  drying 
characteristics  of  drying  oil.  It  is  defined  as  the  time  required,  under 
the  conditions  outlined,  for  the  oil  to  reach  a  point  where  the  adhesion 
to  an  external  object  is  less  than  the  internal  cohesion  of  the  film. 

2.240  Steam  Distillation  —  Is  a  simple  distillation,  where  vapourization 
of  the  charge  is  achieved  by  blowing  live  steam  directly  through  it.  The 
process  is  commonly  adopted  in  the  processing  of  oils  and  fats  to  remove 
the  volatile  odoriferous  components  from  an  oil  or  fat  and  is  termed  as 
deodourisation  or  steam  stripping  of  an  oil.  When  the  objective  is  to 
distil  off  the  fatty  acids  by  steam  stripping,  it  is  commonly  termed  as 
steam  deacidification  or  physical  refining. 

2.241  Sterol  —  A  group  of  unsaturated  monohydric  alcohols  with 
perhydrocyclopentanopbenanthrene  ring  system  as  basic  skeleton,  and  a 
high  molecular  mass.  They  exist  abundantly  both  in  the  animal  (  zoo 
sterol  )  and  vegetable  (  Phytosterol  )  kingdom.  Cholesterol  is  the  most 
important  sterol. 

30 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.242  Sulphonated  Oil  —  A  vegetable  or  animal  oil/fat  which  has  been 
treated  with  suiphuric  acid  so  as  to  introduce  a  suipho-group  *S020H'. 
The  excess  of  acid  is  washed  out  and  the  oil  is  neutralised  with  alkali. 
These  oils  are  soluble  or  emulsifiable  in  water.  They  are  used  as  textile 
assistants,  cutting  oils,  leather  filling  agents,  floatation  agents,  etc. 

2.243  Sulphurised  Oils  —  All  oils  which  have  been  treated  with  sulphur 
or  sulphur  chloride  to  cause  polymerisation  in  the  molecule.  They  are 
used  for  antirust  paints  and  varnishes. 

2.244  Suet  —  Suet  or  beef  fat  means  fat  obtained  from  a  beef  carcass. 

2.245  Synergism  —  Synergism  is  a  chemical  phenomenon,  in  which  the 
effect  of  two  active  components  of  a  mixture  is  more  than  additive,  that 
is,  it  is  greater  than  the  equivalent  volume  or  concentration  of  either 
component  alone.  A  substance  that  induces  this  result,  when  added 
to  another  substance  is  called  a  synergist. 

2.246  Tall  Oil  —  It  is  a  byproduct  obtained  on  sulphite  digestion  of 
wood  pulp  during  kraft  paper  manufacture.  It  consists  mainly  of  rosin 
acids,  fatty  acids  and  other  unsaponifiable  materials.  Distilled  tall  oil 
products  containing  less  than  90  percent  fatty  acids  are  defined  as  'resin 
tall  oils'. 

2.247  Tall  Oil  Fatty  Acid  —  Tail  oils  other  than  crude  containing  at 
least  90  percent  of  fatty  acids  not  including  rosin  acids. 

2.248  Tallow  —  It  is  the  rendered  fat  obtained  mainly  from  beef,  sheep, 
goat,  etc,  carcass  trimmings  from  the  slaughter  house, 

2.249  Tallow  Oil  —  (  Inedible  oleo  oil  )  It  is  a  yellowish  liquid  which 
smells  of  tallow  and  is  used  for  soap  making  in  lubricants. 

2.250  Tallow  Stearin  —  It  is  also  known  as  oleo  stearin  (  pressed 
tallow  )  and  is  the  harder  part  which  remains  after  the  extraction  of 
oleo  oil  or  tallow  oil  and  consists  mainly  of  glycerides  of  stearic  and 
palmitic  acid. 

2.251  Tampering  —  Tampering  is  the  term  generally  used  for  the  process 
of  holding  the  packaged  shortening  for  a  few  days  at  the  temperature 
it  was  maintained  at  the  time  of  packing. 

2.252  Technical  Grade  Refined  Oils  —  These  include  a  wide  variety  of 
oils,  that  are  specially  refined  and  further  processed  to  meet  the 
requirements  or  specifications  for  a  definite  industrial  use. 

2.253  Texturising  —  Is  the  treatment  given  to  a  shortening  by  rapid 
cooling  in  a  scraped  surface  internal  chilling  machine  and  whipping  the 
cold  partially  crystallised  fat  with  air  or  nitrogen. 

31 


18:11476-1985 

2.254  TiDniDg  Oil  —  The  term  is  generally  used  for  oils,  used  in  the  tin 
plate  industry  to  give  a  protective  coating  to  prevent  atmospheric 
oxidation  of  the  hot  metal. 

2.255  Titre  —  The  highest  temperature  attained  under  standard 
conditions,  during  the  solidification  of  the  mixed  fatty  acids  obtained 
from  the  oil  or  fat. 

2.256  Thiocyanogen  Value  —  Thiocyanogea  value  is  a  measure  of  the 
unsaturation  of  fats  or  oils  and  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  equivalent 
number  of  centigrams  of  1  percent  iodine  adsorbed  per  gram  of  the 
sample.  It  is  applicable  to  all  normal  fats  and  oils  not  containing 
conjugated  system. 

2.257  Toasting  —  The  term  commonly  but  erroneously  applied  to  the 
processes  (  wet  )  of  cooking  of  meal  by  atmospheric  or  pressure  method, 
for  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  protein  efficiency  of  these  products  or 
improving  their  functional  property  and /or  improving  physical  texture. 

2.258  Tocopherols  —  These  are  the  natural  antioxidants  found  in 
vegetable  oils.  Tocopherols  are  also  known  as  Vitamin  E,  the  most 
active  of  them  being  a-tocopherol. 

2.259  Totox  Value  —  Totox  value  is  an  index  of  degree  of  oxidation  in 
which  the  peroxide  value  and  the  anisidine  value  are  combined. 

Totox  value  =  2  Peroxide  Value  +  Anisidine  Value 

2.260  Trans-Esterified  (  or  Interesterified  )  Oils  —  The  consistency  of 
an  oil  or  fat  can  be  increased  by  suitable  re-arrangement  of  the  fatty 
acid  radical  on  the  triglyceride  contained  in  the  product.  The  necessary 
interaction  and  re-arrangement  of  the  esters  is  stimulated  by  the  use  of 
catalysts. 

2.261  Unsaponifiable  Matter  —  The  fraction  of  substances  in  oils  and 
fats  which  is  not  saponified  by  caustic  alkali,  but  is  soluble  in  ordinary 
fat  solvents.  It  includes  the  higher  aliphatic  alcohols,  sterols,  pigments, 
hydrocarbons  and  resinous  matter. 

2.262  Vanaspati  —  Vanaspati  means  a  blend  of  deacidified,  bleached, 
subjected  to  process  of  modification  including  partial  hydroge nation 
and  deodorized  edible  vegetable  oils  with  specified  quantity  of  refined 
vegetable  oil(s)  meant  for  human  consumption. 

^OXE  _  However,  according  to  Vegetable  Oil  Products  (  Control )  Order,  1947, 
'Vanaspati'  means  hydrogenated  vegetable  oil  meant  for  human  consumption. 

2.263  Varnish  Linseed  Oil  —  Varnish  linseed  oil  is  a  brownish  yellow 
linseed  oil  free  of  break  when  tested  with  glycerol  and  has  an  acid  value 
below  0*5.    Water  white  varnish  linseed  oil  is  produced  by  bleaching 

32 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

the  alkali  refined  oil  with  adsorbents.  Another  type  of  refined  linseed 
oil  is  *Non  break  linseed  oil'  manufactured  by  aqueous  washing  of  raw 
linseed  oil. 

2.264  Vegetable  Oils  —  Vegetable  oils  are  the  oils  obtained  from  seeds, 
fruit  and  other  oil  bearing  material  of  vegetable  sources  and  are 
generally  considered  to  be  mixtures  of  mixed  glyccrides. 

2.265  Vegetable  Oil  Product  —  Means  any  vegetable  oil  subjected  to  a 
process  of  hydrogenation  in  any  form,  or  an  admixture  thereof  with  any 
substance  for  edible  purposes. 

2.266  Viscosity  —  Viscosity  is  the  internal  resistance  of  a  fluid  to  flow  at 
a  specified  temperature.  It  is  a  definite  measurement  for  the  consistency 
of  a  material. 

2.267  Votator  —  The  term  is  used  for  the  scraped  surface  tube  cooler 
and  similar  machinery  meant  for  cooling  and  crystallising  fats  and  their 
blends  for  production  of  texturised  fat  based  products  such  as 
shortening,  margarine,  etc. 

2.268  Wax  —  A  low  melting  organic  mixture  or  compound  of  high 
molecular  weight,  solid  at  room  temperature  and  generally  similar  in 
composition  to  fats  and  oils,  except  th&t  it  contains  no  glycerides.  Some 
are  hydrocarbons,  others  are  esters  of  fatty  acids  and  alcohol.  They  are 
classified  among  the  lipids  and  are  generally  non-greasy  to  touch.  The 
process  of  removal  of  wax  from  vegetable  oils  improves  the  clarity  of 
oil  and  is  mentioned  as  dewaxing. 

2.269  Whale  Oil  —  Is  a  marine  oil  obtained  from  whale  and  is  offered 
in  the  market  in  a  number  of  grades  depending  upon  the  quality  and  end 
use. 

2.270  Wiley*s  Melting  Point  —  Wiley's  melting  point  is  the  temperature 
at  which  under  the  conditions  of  this  test,  the  sample  disc  assumes  a 
spherical  shape  and  is  thus  an  index  of  the  temperature  at  which  the 
sample  is  melted. 

2.271  Winterising  —  Winterising  is  the  process  of  removing  from  the 
oil  certain  constituents  or  impurities,  which  though  soluble  at  medium 
and  high  temperature,  crystallise  and  make  the  oil  turbid  or  cloudy  in 
cold  weather. 

2.272  Wool  Combing  Oil  —  The  term  is  generally  used  for  oils  required 
as  lubricant  or  softener  for  the  woollen  fibre.  Treatment  with  such  oils, 
facilitates  the  passage  of  yarn  through  the  looms  and  reduces  its  liability 
to  snap  during  the  spinning  and  weaving  processes. 

33 


IS  :  11476  -  1985 

2.273  Wool  Fat  —  Is  the  fat  obtained  from  raw  wool  during  the  process 
of  'scouring'.     This  is  also  sometime  termed  as  wool  grease. 

2.274  Wool  Grease  —  Is  a  sticky  fat,  with  a  disagreeable  odour, 
extracted  from  the  soapy  water  in  which  the  wool  has  been  scoured  or 
cloth  fulled.  It  may  also  be  extracted  from  greasy  wool  by  means 
of  volatile  solvents.  Chemically  it  is  a  wax  rather  than  fat  due  to  its 
non  glyceride  character.  When  wool  grease  is  steam  distilled  and 
pressed  it  separates  into  a  liquid,  a  solid  and  a  residue. 

The  liquid  is  known  as  wool  grease  oleine  and  is  used  as  a  textile 
greasing  agent  in  spinning  mills. 

The  solid  part,  wool  grease  stearin  is  a  waxy  substance  and  is  used 
in  leather  industry,  preparation  of  lubricants,  etc 


34 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  1 10002 
Telephones:  323  0131 ,  323  8375,  323  9402 
Fax  :  91  11  3234062,  91  11  3239399 

Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  Offices) 

Central  Laboratory :  Telephone 

Plot  No.  20/9,  Site  IV,  Sahtbabad  Industrial  Area,  Sahibabad  201 01 0  8-77  00  32 

Regional  Offices: 

Central :  Manak  Bhavan.  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  1 1 00O2  323  76  1 7 

*Eastem  :  1/14  CIT  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I.P.  Road,  Maniktola,  CALCUTTA  700054  337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  60  38  43 

Southern  :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001 13  235  23  15 

tWestern  :  Manakalaya,  E9,  Behind  Marol  Telephone  Exchange,  Andheri  (East),    832  92  95 

MUMBAI  400093 
Branch  Offices:: 

Pushpak',  Nurmohamed  Shaikh  Marg,  Khanpur,  /UHMEDABAD  380001  550  1 3  48 

tPeenya  Industrial  Area,  1st  Stage,  Bangalore-Tunrtkur  Road,  839  49  55 
BANGALORE  560058 

Gangotri  Complex,  5th  Ftoor,  Bhadbhada  Road,  T.T.  Nagar,  BHOPAL  462003  55  40  2 1 

Plot  No.  62-63,  Unit  VI,  Ganga  Nagar,  BHUBANESHWAR  751001  40  36  27 

Kalaikathtr  Buildings,  670  Avinashi  Road,  COIMBATORE  641037  21  01  41 

Plot  No.  43,  Sector  16  A,  Mathura  Road,  FARIDABAD  1?1001  8-28  88  01 

Savitri  Complex,  1 16  G.T.  Road,  GHAZIABAD  201 001  8-71  19  96 

53/5  Ward  No.29,  R.G.  Barua  Road,  5th  By-lane,  GUWAHATI  781 003  54  1 1  37 

5-8-56C,  L.N.  Gupta  Marg,  Nampatly  Station  Road,  HYDERABAD  500001  20  10  83 

E-52,  Chitaranjan  Marg,  C-Scheme,  JAIPUR  302001  37  29  25 

1 17/41 8  B,  Sarvodaya  Nagar,  KANPUR  208005  21  68  76 

Seth     Bhawan,    2nd    Floor,    Behind     Leela    Cinema,    Naval    Kishore    Road,    23  89  23 
LUCKNOW  226001 

Patliputra  Industrial  Estate,  PATN A  80001 3  26  23  05 

T.C.  No.  14/1421 ,  University  P.  O.  Palayam,  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM  695034  6  21  17 

Inspection  Offices  (With  Sale  Point)  : 

Pushpanjali,  1st  Floor,  205-A,  West  High  Court  Road,  Shankar  Nagar  Square,     52  51  71 
NAGPUR  44001 0 

Institution  of  Engineers  (India)  Building  1 332  Shivaji  Nagar,  PUNE  41 1 005  32  36  35 


*Sales  Office  is  at  5  Chowringhee  Approach,  P.O.  Princep Street,  27  10  85 

CALCUTTA  700072 

tSales  Office  is  at  Novelty  Chambers,  Grant  Road,  MUMSAt  400007  309  65  28 

tSales  Office  is  at  'F'  Block,  Unity  Building,  Narashimaraja  Square,  222  39  71 

BANGALORE  560002 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi,  India 


