**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 12274 (1987) : Safety requirements for electronic flash 
apparatus for photographic purposes [LITD 7: Audio, Video 
and Multimedia Systems and Equipment] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



rS: 12274 -1987 
lECPub491 (1984) 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 



SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR 

ELECTRONIC FLASH APPARATUS FOR 

PHOTOGRAPHIC PURPOSES 



UDC 771'448'6 : 614-8 



® Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

O' 14 December 1988 



E 
3 

cr 
W 



U 



d^ 



UDC 77V448-6: 614-8 



18:12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 ( 1984 ) 



India:- Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR 

ELECTRONIC FLASH APPARATUS FOR 

PHOTOGRAPHIC PURPOSES 



National Forev;oril 



This Indian Standard, which is identical with lEC Pub 491 { 1984 } 'Safety requirements for 
electronic flash apparatus for photographic purposes', issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission ( lEC ). was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of 
the Radio Communications Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommu- 
nication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those used 
in Indian Standards; attention is specially drawn to the following: 

a) Comma {,) has been used as decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current 
practice is to use a point ( • ) as the decimal marker. 

b) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

c) For the purpose of the Indian Standard, only the metric dimensions are applicable. 
Gross Reference 



International Standard 

TEG Pub 27 Letter symbols to be used in 
electrical technology 

lECPub 68-2-2 (1974) Basic environ- 
mental testing procedures, Part 2: 
Tests — Tests B: Dry heat 

lEC Pub 68-2-3 ( 1969 ) Test Ca: Damp 
heat, steady state 



lEG Pub 68-2-6 (1982) Test Fc 
guidance: Vibration ( sinusoidal ) 



and 



lEC Pub 83 ( 1975 ) Plugs and socket- 
outlets for domestic and similar general 
use standards 

I EG Pub 167 1964 ) Methods of test for 
the determination of the insulation 
resistance of solid insulating materials 

lEG Pub 227-2 ( 1979 ) Polyvinyl chloride 
insulated cables of rated voltages up to 
and including 450/750 V, Part 2 Test 
methods 

lEG Pub 245 Rubber insulated cables of 
rated voltages up to and including 450/ 
750 V 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS : 3722 Letter symbols and signs used in 
electrical technology ( series ) 

IS : 9000 Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 3 Dry heat test 

IS : 9000 ( Part 4 )-1979 Basic environ- 
mental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 4 D imp heat 
( steady state ) 

IS : 9000 ( Part 8 )-1981 Basic environmental 
lasting procedures for electronic and 
electrical items: Part 8 Vibration ( sinu- 
soidal ) test 

IS ; 1293-1967 Three-pin plugs and socket 
outlets ( first revision ) 

IS : 2259-1963 Methods of test for determi- 
nation of insulation resistance of solid 
insulating materials 

IS : 694-1977 PVG insulated cables for 
working voltages up to and including 
1 100 volts ( second revision ) 

IS : 9968 Elastomer insulated cables ( series ) 



Adopted 29 October 1987 



© December 1988, BIS 



Gr 14 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAflADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI H0002 



IS t] 2274 -1987 
lEC Pub 491 ( 1984 ) 

lEC Pub 249-1 ( 1982 ) Base materials for 
printed circuits, Part I Test methods 



lEC Pub 260 ( 1968) Test enclosures of 
non- injection type for constant relative 
humidity 

lEC Pub 317 Specification for particular 
types of winding wires 

lEC Pub 320 ( 1981 ) Appliance couplers 
for household and similar general pur- 
poses 

lEC Pub 417 ( 1973 ) Graphical symbols 
for use on equipment. Index, survey 
and compilation of the single sheets 

lEC Pub 536 ( 1976 ) Classification of 
electrical and electronic equipment with • 
regard to protection against electric 
shock 

TEC Pub 598-2-9 ( 1970 ) Luminaires, 
Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section 9 — Photo and film luminaires 
( non-professional ) 

lEC Pub 664 ( 198.0 ) Insulation coordi- 
nation within low-voltage systems 
including clearances and creepage 
distances for equipment 

The Radio Communications Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following 
lEC Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this Indian 
Standard: 



IS : 5921 ( Part 1 )-1983 Metai-ciad base 
material for printed circuits for use in 
electronic and telecommunication equip- 
ment: Part 1 General requirements and 

tests {first revision ) 

IS : 9002 (Part 6 )-1980 Equipment for 
environmental tests for electronic and 
electrical itenis: Part 6 Constant relative 
hunvidity chamber ( non-injection type ) 

IS : 4800 Enamelled round winding wires 

( series ) 

IS : 3010 Appliance-connectors and appliance 
inlets ( non -reversible three-pin type ) 
( series ) 

IS : 2032 Graphical symbols used in electro- 
technology { series ) 

IS : 9409-1980 Classification for electrical 
and electronic equipment with regard to 
protection against electric shock 

IS : 10322 Luminaires ( series of 6 standards ) 



SP 39 Insulation coordination within low 
AToltage systems including clearances and 
creepage distances for equipment ( wvder 
print ) 



lEG Pub 127 ( 1974 ) 
lEC Pub 173 { 1964 ) 
lEC Pub 227-1 ( 1979 ) 

lEC Pub 249-2 ( 1970 ) 
lEC Pub 799 (1984) 
ISO 306-1974 



Cartridge fuse-links for miiiiature fuses 

Colours of the cores of flexible cables and cords 

Polyvinyl chloride insulated cables of rated voltages up to and includ- 
ing 450/750 V, Part 1 : General requirements 

Base materials for printed circuits. Part 2: Specifications 

Cord sets 

Plastics — Determination of the Vicat softening temperature of 
thermo-plastics 



IS : 12274-1987 
IECPub491 (1984) 



1 . Scope 

1.1 This standard applies to the following electronic flash apparatus for photographic purposes, 
having a stored energy not exceeding 2 000 J, together with associated apparatus and not 
intended to be subjected to dripping or splashing: 

— apparatus of the single-flash type which can have more than one flash head operating at 
the same time; 

— apparatus for the illumination of sequential photographic exposures; 

— battery chargers and supply units to be used in connection with electronic flash apparatus 
for photographic purposes. These auxiliary units may form a part of the mains plug; 

— accessories, such as light regulators and slave units, specified in the instruction leaflet. 

This standard does not apply to stroboscopes. 

As long as no appropriate requirements exist for apparatus having a stored energy exceeding 2000 J, this standard 
n^ay be used. \h so far as it is appHcable. 

Additional requirements may be necessary, e.g. for explosion and thermal radiation. 

With regard to the supply, the following categories are covered: 

— mains-operated apparatus; 

— battery-operated apparatus; 

— apparatus having a combination of mains and battery supply. 

This standard is intended to cover apparatus which can be used both in moderate and tropical climates. 

For the modelling lamps combined with electronic flash apparatus for photographic purposes, additional 
requirements may be taken from 1 EC Publication 598-2-9: Luminaires. Section Nine Photo and Film Lummatres 
f^N on-professional), as far as applicable. 

1 .2 This standard does not apply to apparatus designed for a rated supply voltage exceeding 250 V 
(r.m.s.) against earth. 

1.3 This standard is concerned with safety only and not with the other properties of the apparatus 
(see Clause 3). 



2. Definitions 

The following definitions apply for the purpose of this standard: 

2.1 The type test of a product is the complete series of tests to be carried out on a number of 
specimens representative of the type, with the object of determining whether a particular 
manufacturer can be considered to be able to produce products meeting the standard. 

2.2 By hand denotes that the operation does not lequire the use of a tool, coin or any other object. 



(!EC page 9) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



2.3 Accessible pan denotes a part which can be touched by the standard test finger (see Sub- 
clause 8.1.1). 

Any accessible area of a non-conducting part is considered as being covered with a conductive layer (see Sub- 
clause 4.3.1). 

2.4 Live part denotes a part, contact with which may cause a significant electric shock (see 
Sub-clause 8.1.1). 

2.5 Creepage distance denotes the shortest distance along the surface of an insulation material 
between two conductive parts. (According to I E C Publication 664: Insulation Co-ordination 
within Low-voltage Systems Including Clearances and Creepage Distances for Equipment.) 



2.6 Clearance denotes the shortest distance in air between two conductive parts. 



2.7 Supply mains denotes any power source with an operating voltage of more than 34 V (peak) 
which is npt used solely to supply the equipment specified in Sub-clause 1.1. 



2.8 Rated supply voltage denotes the mains voltage for which the manufacturer has designed the 
apparatus. 

2.9 Part directly connected to the supply mains denotes a pan of an apparatus which is in electrical 
connection with the supply mains in such a way that a cor ncclion between the part and either 
pole of the supply mains causes in that connection a current equal to or greater than 9 A. 

A current of 9 A is chosen as the minimum rupturing current ofa 6 A fuse. 

In tests to determine which parts arc directly connected to the supply mamb. fuses in the apparatus arc not 
short-circuited. 

2.10 Part conductively connected to the supph mains denotes a part of an apparatus which is in 
electrical connection with the supply mains in such a way thai a connection through a 
resistance of 2 000 Q between the part and either pole of the supply mains causes in that 
resistance a current greater than 0.7 mA (peak), the apparatus not being connected to earth. 

2.11 Supply unit denotes an apparatus which takes energy from the mains and from which one 
or more other apparatus are fed. 

2.12 Battery charger denotes an apparatus which is directly fed from the supply mains and which 
provides energy in the form necessary to charge a battery. 

2.13 Terminal device denote? a part of an apparatus by which connection is made to external 
conductors or other apparatus; it may contain several terminal contacts. 

2.14 Thermal release denotes a device which prevents the maintenance of excessively high 
temperatures in certain parts of the apparatus by disconnecting those parts from their supply. 

2.15 Safety switch denotes a device which interrupts the supply when a cover is opened. 



2.16 Printed board denotes a base material cut to size, containing all holes and bearing at least 
one conductive pattern. 



(lECpage 11) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



2.17 Conductin pattern denotes a configuration formed by electrically conductive material of a 
printed board. 

2.18 Class I apparatus denotes an equipment in which protection against electric shock does not 
rely on basic insulation only, but which includes an additional safety precaution in such a way 
that means are provided for the connection of accessible conductive parts to the protective 
(earthing) conductor in the fixed wiring of the installation in such a way that accessible 
conductive parts cannot become hve in the event of a failure of the basic insulation. 

Such appjuaius may have parts consisting of Class II construction. 

2. 19 Class II apparatus denotes an equipment in which protection against electric shock does not 
rely on basic insulation only, but in which additional safety precautions, such as double 
insulation or reinforced insulation, are provided, there being no provision for protective 
earthing or reUance upon installation conditions. 



2.20 Basic insulation denotes an insulation applied to live parts to provide basic protection against 
electric shock. 

2.21 Supplementary insulation denotes an independent insulation applied in addition to basic 
insulation in order to provide protection against electric shock in the event of a failure of the 
basic insulation. 

2.22 Double insulation denotes an insulation comprising both basic insulation and supplementary 
insulation. 

2.23 Reinforced insulation denotes a single insulation system applied to live parts which provides 
a degree of protection against electric shock equivalent to double insulation under the 
conditions specified in this standard. 

The term "insulation system" does not imply that the insulation should be one homogeneous piece. It may comprise 
several layers which cannot be tested singly as supplementary or basic insulation, 

The definitions given in Sub-clauses 2.18 to 2.23 are according to I EC Publication 536: Classification of Electrical 
and Electronic Equipment with Regard to Protection against Electric Shock. 



3. General requirements 

The apparatus shall be so designed and constructed as to present no danger, either in normal 
use oi under fault conditions, providing particularly: 

— personal protection against electric shock; 

— personal protection against the effects of excessive temperature; 

— protection against fire. 

In general, compliance is checked under normal operating conditions and under fault conditions 
specified in Sub-clauses 4.2 and 4.3, by carrying out all the tests indicated. 



(!EC page B^ 



IS ' 12274-J987 
IECPub491 (|084> 



4. General conditions for tests 

4.1 Conduct oj tests ' 

4.1.1 Tests according to this standaid are type tests. 

4.1.2 All tests are carried out on one and the same apparatus and in the order of the clauses as far 
as this is possible. , ' 

4.1.3 Unless otherwise specified, tests are made under normal operating conditions at an ambient 
temperature within the range of 15 °C to 35 '^C, a relative humidity of 45% to ^5% and an air 
pressure of 860 mbar to 1 060 mbar. , 

4.1.4 Unless otherwise specified: 

— waveforms are substantially sinusoidal; , 

— measurements of voltages and currents are carried out with instruments which do not 
appreciably affect the values to he measured. 

4.1.5 Test requirements are based on the u^e of fully charged rechargeable batteries or dry batteries 
in afresh condition. 

4.2 Normal operating conditions 

Normal opcr^.iing cofhditions are consko^reti to consist of the most unfavourable combination 
of the following conditions : |' ■ 

4.2.1 Any position of normal use of the apparatus. 

4.2.2 A supply voltage of 0.9 times or I.] times any rated supply voltage for which the apparatus is 
set. 

For apparatus having a rated .supply voltage range not recjuiring the adjustment of a voltage^ 
setting device, a supply voltage of 0.9 times the lower limit or 1. 1 times the upper timit of the 
rated supply voltage range; if considered necessary, a .supply voltage of 0.9 times or J.J times 
a nominal .supply voltage within the range marked on the apparatus. 

Any rated frequency of the supply voltage. 

for battery-operated apparatus, the specified battery in a fully charged state or in fresh 
condition. 

The apparatus operated on each type of supply for which it is designed. 

4.2.3 Any position of controls which are accessible to the user for adjustments by hand, exceplyoltage 
setting devices complying with Sub-clause J3.6. 

4.2.4 Connection or not of flash heads, capacitors and other accessories. 

4.2.5 Apparatus which can be used either while connected to the mains or with its own supply 
connected to the mains or not. 

4.2.6 Any protective earth terminal being connected to earth or not, and either pole of the isolated 
supply source, used during the test, being earthed. 



(lEC page 15) s 6 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (19S4) 



4.3 Fault condi lions 



Operatiof: wuicr fault i auditions denoics fiui:. ./, adfiiii.^n to.titc norma' nperaiiiig conditions 
mentioned in Sub-clause 4.2. each of the foIi'h\u.,: co.i ::-'o>:s is ap'^iud in turn and, associated 
witn it. those other fault conditions wiuch arc c ■(■/ical ccnseqwnce. 

Exanu.iation of the oppfiratus ind its circuc diagram will generally show the fault conditions 
which should he applied. These are applied m sequeiice in die order which is most convenient. 

4.3.1 Short-circuit across crcepage distances and clearances if they are less than the values indicaxed 
by cwve A in Table I. ' 

If an imulntmg part contains a groove of less than I mm width, the creepage distance is not 
measured over die surface of the groove .v :/ only across its width. 

If a clearance con.sists of two or more ai> gaps in series separated by c.mductive pails. cJi ■ 
gap of less than J mm width is ignored in computing the total distance unless the total du^tance 
as required in Table I is less than I mm. However, individual gaps of less than 0.5 mnrarc ignored. 

\ 
This does noi imply thai dimension. il reqi^ircaiems nl insulations specified in Sub-clause> 8.3. ■' and 8..'^. 8 can he 
ignored. 

If an insulating barrier consists of two parts separai-'d by a capillary slit, the path alonj: the sla she uld be ■.;!'' en 
into account when measuring creepage distances and clearances. 

The specified creepage distances and clearances arc the minimtm actual separations taken into -ccomt tolerances 
in assemblies and piece oarls. ^ 

Guidance for the determination of creepage distances and clearances involving cnameticd wires is given in 
Sub-clause 4.3.3. 

In the determination of creepage distances and clearances between accessible parts md live 
parts, when using the standard test finger, any accessible zone of a non-conductive part is 
considered as being covered with a conductive layer (.see Figure I, page 90, as an example). 

The voltages mentioned in Table I are determined with the apparatus connected to the rated 
supply voltage after the steady slate lias been reached. 

Creepage distances and clearance's arc measured with conductors and plugs in their normal 
positions. ^ > 

Between conductors, one of which /)iav he directly or conductivcly connected to one pole of 
the supply mains, which are on a prinicd hoard complying with the pull-off and peel strength 
requirements specified in I EC Publication 249'} . Base Materials for Printed Circuit:., Part I : 
Test methods and I EC Publication 249-2 : Part 2 : Specifications . the requirements for creepage 
distances and clearances are modi fed. 

The dimensions of Table I are replaced by the values calculated from the firmula: 

V " 
log £? ■= 0.78 log — — , with a minimum of 0.5 mm. 

300 

where d is the distance in millimetres and the peak value of the voltage in volts. The.se distances 
can be determined by reference to Figure 7. page 97. 

This reduction in creepage distances and clearances is permitted only as far as overheating is 

concerned (see Sub-clause 10.2), 

The reduced values above apply to the conductors themselves, but not to mounted components or associated 
soldering terminals. 

Coverings ofiacqucr or the like on printed boards arc ignored when calculating the distances. 



(IFCpage 17) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Table I 



10 

8 
















< 










^ 


/ 


/ 
























1 


^■ 


A anri n ■ 




















I ! 


y^ 


1 


JIJ 
















J 




1 1 


y^ 


1 ) 


6 




















! j 


1^^ 


, 


















> 






'V 


p^ 






4 














/ 






A" 








3 

2 

.■ 1 












h— 1 






V 


X 




_ i 


j 


1 


For r 
insul 

1 


einforc 
ation 


ed 
nly 


Iv^ 


/^ 


/^ 








i 


1 

! 

! 






y 




y 


\ 


^^A 


For ba; 
fault CO 


sic and 
ndition 

1 


supplem 
testing 

1 


1 ■ 

entary insulation and 


1 










/T 










1 




■ T " 






1 




/ 












t 








! i 


y 




J _ 










1 










■> 




















' 




> 


^ 




















1 


















































i 




i 




; 












^ 






■ 




I 








\ 


























1 





10 20 40 6080 100 200 400G008001000 2000 4QpO 

Peak value of the voltage, in V 

2(>l t76 



I or parts conductivcly connected to the supply mains nith voltages in the range of 220 V to 
2?[/ V ir.m.s.) . the dimensions are equal to those related to 354 V peak. 

For voltages over 4 000 V peak, the voltage test is used to determine whether the creepage 
distances or clearances shall be short-circuited or not (see Sub-clause 9.2 j. 

A voltage across the basic insulation is determined by short-circuiting the supplementary 
insulation and vice versa. 

The graphs of Table I are defined by the following : 

Curve A: 34 V corresponds to 0.6 mm 
354 V corresponds to 3.0 mm 

Curve B: 34 V corresponds to 1.2 mm 
354 V corresponds to 6.0 mm 

Under certain conditions, the distances may be reduced as given in Sub-clauses 4.3.3 and 8.3.5. 



(if X page 19) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



4.3.2 Shon-ciradt across or, if applicable, interruption of semiconductor devices and interruption of 
filaments of lamps. 

Short and open circuiting of glow-discharge lamps i used for indication or regulation). 

4.3.3 Short-circuit across insulation consisting of covering of lacquer, enamel or textile. Such 
coverings are ignored in assessing the creepage distances and clearances specified in Table I. 
However, if enamel forms the insulation of a wire and withstands the voltage test prescribed for 
Grade 2 in Clause 13 of I EC Publication 317: Specifications for Particular Types of Winding 
Wires, it is considered as contributing I mm to those creepage distances and clearances. 

This sub-clause does not imply a need to short-circuit the insulation between turns oT coils, insulating sleeves or 
tubings. 

4.3.4 Short-circuit across electrolytic capacitors. 

4.3.5 Short-circuit across insulating parts, the short-circuiting of which might cause an infringement 
of the requirements regarding protection against electric shock or overheating, with the exception 
of insulating parts which comply with the requirements of Sub-clause 9.2. 

4.3.6 Short-circuit or disconnection, whichever is more unfavourable, of capacitors, resistors or 
inductors other than transformers and motors, the short-circuiting or disconnection of which 
might cause an infringement of the requirements regarding protection against electric shock or 
overheating. 

These fault conditions do not apply to: 

a) resistors complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses JO. 2 and 1 3. 1 

b) inductors complying with the requirements of Sub-clause 1 3. 8. J 

c) capacitors complying with the requirements of Sub-clause 13.2, provided that the voltage at 
their terminals does not exceed 354 V (peak) 

Requirements for capacitors which need not be short-circuued or disconnected when checking the protcciion 
against overheating are under consideration. 

d) self-healing capacitors (e.g. of the metallized paper type) as far as overheating is concerned. 

In order to determine which are the insulating parts and the components (see Sub-clauses 4.3.5 and 4.3,6), the 
shart-pircuiting or disconnection of which might cause an infnngemenl of the requirements regarding protection 
against electric shock or overheating, the apparatus is inspected and its circuit diagram is studied. 

4.3.7 Loosening, by a quarter of a turn, unlocked screws or similar devices which are used for fixing 
covers over live parts. 



4.3.8 For battery chargers and supply units: connection of the most unfavourable load impedance to 
the output terminals, including short circuit. 

4.3.9 For battery chargers and supply units: connection to a supply voltage of 250 V a.c, independent 
of the rated supply voltage or voltages of the charger or unit and with the voltage setting device, 
if any, set at the most unfavourable position. \ 



4.3.10 Stopping of forced cooling. 



(lECpage21) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



4.3.1 1 Locking of moving parts of apparatus provided with: 

— motors having a locked rotor torque smaller than the full load torque; 

— motors with moving parts which can be jammed by mechanical failures or by handling of the 
equipment, if such a failure or handling is probable. 



4.3. 12 Continuous operation of motors, relay coils or the like, intended for short-lime or intermittent 
operation, if continuous operation may occur accidentally. 



5. Marking 

5. 1 General 

The apparatus shall be marked in accordance with the requirements of Sub-clauses 5.2 
and 5.3. 

The marking shall be: 

— easily discernible on the apparatus when ready for use, in such a way that there can be 
no misunderstanding; 

— indelible and legible. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by the following test. 

The marking shall not be removed when rubbed lightly with a piece of cloth soaked with 
perroleum spirit or water. 

The informadon should preferably be put on the exterior of the apparatus. Ii is. however, permissible to put it on 
another place that is easily accessible by hand, provided that the location of the marking is given in the instructions 
for use. 

Letter symbols for quantities and units shall be in accordance with I EC Publication 27: 
Letter Symbols to be Used in Electrical Technology. 

Graphical symbols shall be in accordance with I EC Publication 417: Graphical Symbols 
for Use on Equipment. Index, Survey and Compilation of the Single Sheets. 

Fuse holders shall be marked in accordance with Sub-clause 13.3.2. 

Mains switches shall be marked in accordance with Sub-clause 13.4.3. 



Compliance is checked by inspection. 

5.2 Identification 

The apparatus shall be identified by: 

a J manufacturer's name or registered trade mark* 
bj mode! number or name. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 



It is not prohibited lO mark Class II apparatus with ihc double square symbol [Dj (4!7-IEC-5l7f). 

This symbol shall be so placed that it will be obvious that it is a part of the technical information and is unlikely 
to be confused with ihc maker's name or trade mark. 



(IECpage23) 10 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



5.3 Supply 

The apparatus shall be marked with the following information: 

a) Nature of supply: 

— a.c. only with the symbol -'-v^; 

— d.c. only with the symbol — or rrr (for battery apparatus only). 

b) Rated supply voltage or range of the rated supply voltages which can be applied without 
operating a voltage setting device, unless the apparatus is suppHed from a separate supply 
unit only. 

.cj Apparatus which can be set to different rated supply voltages shall be so constructed that 
the indication of the voltage to which the apparatus is set is discernible on the apparatus 
when ready for use.. If the apparatus is so constructed that the user can alter the supply 
voltage setting, the action of changing the setting shall change also the indication. 

For batien chargers and supply units which form pari of a mains plug, it is permitted that the indication of the 
voltage to which the apparatus is set is on the engagement face of the plug. 

d) Rated mains frequency (or range of frequencies) in hertz, if safety is dependent on the use 
of the correct mains frequency. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 
5.4 Instructions for use 

5.4.1 Battery chargers and supply units shall be accompanied by an instruction leaflet in which 
shall be indicated the type of flash apparatus with which it is to be used. 

The flash apparatus shall be accompanied by an instruction leaflet in which shall be 
indicated the type of supply unit or batter>' charger with which it is to be used. 

It is also permitted to give this information on the devices themselves. 
Compliance is checked by inspection. 

5.4.2 The instructions for use shall state that the apparatus shall not be exposed to dripping or 
splashing. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

5.4.3 The instructions for use shall contain a warning to the effect that: 

— batteries shall not be exposed to excessive heat such as sunshine, fire or the like, 

— dry batteries shall not be subjected to charging. 
Compliance is checked by inspection. 

5.5 Terminal devices 

Terminal devices shall be marked with the following symbols: 
a) protective earth terminal, if any: (J) (417-IEC-5019). 

1 1 (lEC page 25) 



lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



b) terminal devices which are live under normal operating conditions, with the exception of 
terminals for mains supply and mains socket-outlets: l\ (4I7-IEC-5036). 

The flash shall point to the terminal device. 

This symbol may only be used lo indicate the existence of a live terminal and may not be used to label non-live 
lermmals for the purpose of avoiding more stringent insulation requirements. - 

Compliance is checked by inspection. J he marking of a protective earth terminal need not be 

discernible from the outside (see Sub-clause 14.4). 

For information purposes, it may be useful lo mark apparatus suitable for both a.c. and d.c. with the symbol: 7^ 
(417-IEC-5033). 



6. Heating under normal operating conditions 

6.1 In normal use, no part of the apparatus shall attain an unsafe temperature. 

Compliance is checked by monitoring the temperatures under the conditions specified below 
and immediately after they have been applied. 

II trie upparaius can tfC mains-opci'uteu, it is sy\itcrieu on /or a pcriou o/ t ii widtout fiasrung ,' 
if only battery or rechargeable battery is supplied, it is switched on for 30 s. 

Thereupon as many consecutive flashes as can be produced, with a maximum of 40, are made 
as quickly as possible. The rate of flashing is determined by the indicator or, if no indicator, by 

llii> ttiti/iiriirit/l y/^jl r/irr/' />ii ll-i/' ////(.-/> /■fin/i/'itofi,.; W'hictl sh')uhl h'' '^^'! <i (>^ til'' ma^'IflViHl 0''"t' ^'/il t fi<r/t 

The apparatus is supplied at its rated voltage. 

A battery charger is connected for 4 h lo a fully discharged rechargeable battery for which 
the charger has been designed. 

Temperatures arc deternuned: 

— m the case of windings, by the resistance method: 

— in other cases, by any other suitable method. 

Care should be taken that durmg the measurement of the resistance of wmdme>. the influence of circuits ot loads 
connected to these windmgs is negligible. 

Temperature rises shall not exceed the values given in column I of Table H. 

6.2 Insuialinf material sunnortin'^ narls conductivelv connected to the sunnK mains shal! be 
resistant to heal if, in normal use, these parts carry a current exceeding 0.5 A and might 

^UUJI|^UL^ OUL/OlUiJ i(Ui IlWUt VJUV K\J ilk ^\j^^ 1 W V I \^yj li LCiVL. 

In those cases where two groups of conductors, each supported by insulation parts, can be 
rigidly connected or joined together (e.g. by plug and socket), one only of the insulating parts 
shall meet the test. Where one of the insulating parts is fixed in the apparatus, this part shall 
meet the lest. 

Compliance is checked by subjecting the insulating material to the lest specified under a) in 
Note 6 to Table II. 

The softening temperature of the in.sulating material shall be at least 150 ' C. 

Examples of parts which might dissipate substantial heat in normal use arc contacts of switches and of voltage 
adaptors, screw tcrmmais and fuse holders. 



(U-:CnaBe27> \1 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Table II 



Parrs of the apparatus 


Permissible temperature ri.se K 


Normal operating 
conditions 

I 


Fault 

conditions 

II 


External parts 

Metal parts knobs, handles, etc. 

enclosure (note 1 ) 
Nori'metallic parts knobs, handles, etc. (note 2) 

enclosures (note 1 . note 2) 


JO 
40 
50 
60 


65 
65 
65 
65 


Inside of enclosures of insulating material 


(note 3) 


(note 3) 


Windings (note 4) 

Wires insulated with non-impregnated silk, cotton, etc. 

Wires insulated with impregnated silk, cotton, etc. 

Oleoresinous enamelled wires 

Wires enamelled with polyvinylformaldehyde or polyurethane resins 


70 

711 

*5 . 


75 
100 
135 
150 


Core laminations 


As lor I he relevant windings 


Supply cords and wiring 

insulated with ordinary polvvinyl chloride itiotc H) 

noi under mechanical stress 

under mechanical stress 

Insuhacd with natural rubber 


4'y 
4'y 


100 

am 

100 


Other insulations ( note 4 . note 7 1 except ihcrmoplasiic 

Non-impregnated paper 

Non-impregnated cardboard 

Impregnated cotton, silk, paper and textile, urea resins 

Lammates. bonded with phenolformakk'hvdc resins, phcnolformat- 

dehvde mouldings with cellulose fillers 

Phenolformaldehydc mouldings with mineral fillers 
Laminates bonded with epoxy resins 
Natural rubber 


7// 

^.' 

120 

4? 


70 

m) 

90 

no 

130 
150 
100 


Thermoplaslic materials (note 5) 


(noted) 



The values of the temperature rises are based upon a maximum ambient temperature of 35 C, but the measurements 
arc made under normal operating conditions. 



Notes I. ~ For areas having no dimension exceeding 5 cm and which are not likely to be touched in normal use. 
temperature rises up to 65 K are allowed under normal operating conditions. 

2. — If these temperature rises are higher than those allowed by the class of the relevant insulating material, the 

nature of the material is the governing factor. 

3. — The permissible temperature rises fur the inside of enclosures of insulating material are those indicated for 

the relevant materials. 



13 



(lEC page 29) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



4. — For the purpose ot this standard, the permissible temperature nses are based on the recommendations in I EC 

Publication 85: Thermal Evaluation and Ciassifieation of Eleetricul hisuUuion. The materials t/uorcc/ above 
are shown only as examples. If materials other than those listed in I EC Publication 85 are used, the 
maximum temperatures should not exceed those which have been proved to he satisfactory. 

5. — Natural and synthetic rubbers are not considered as being thermoplastic materials. 

6. — Due to their wide variety, it is not possible to .specify permissible temperature rises for thermoplastic 

materials. While the matter is under consideration, the following method shall be used: 

a) a softening temperature of the material is determined on a separate specimen, under the conditions 
specified in ISO Standard 306, modified as follows: 

— the depth of penetration is 0,1 mm; 

— the total thrust of 10 N (I kgf) is applied before the dial gauge is set to zero or its initial reading noted. 

b) the temperature limits to be considered for determining the temperature rises are: 

— under normal operating conditions, a temperature 10 C lower than the softening temperature as obtained 
under a) ; 

— under fault conditions, the softening temperature itself. 

7. — The table does not apply to materials used in the construction of resistors. 

8. — The possibility of raising the values for wires ana cables msutated with heat-resistant polyvinyl chloride is 

under consideration. 



7. Resistance to deformation at elevated ambient temperatures 

The enclosure of the apparatus shall be sufficiently resistant to deformation at elevated 
temperatures. 

Compliance is checked by the following test. 

The apparatus is subjected for a period of two days (48 h) to the test prescribed in I EC 
Publication 68-2-2: Basic Environmental Testing Procedures, Part 2, Tests — Tests B: Dry heat, 
Test Bh, at a temperature of 70 ±2 C. 

After this treatment, the apparatus shall show no damage in the sense of this standard. 



8. Shock hazard under normal operating conditions 

8.1 Testing on the outside 

8.1.1 General 

Accessible parts and terminals for the connection to the synchronizer of the camera shall 
not be live. 

In order to determine whether a part is accessible (see Sub-clause 2.3) , the jointed test finger 
according to Figure 2a, page 91, or the rigid test finger according to Figure 2b, page 91, is applied 
in every possible position, in case of doubt with a maximum force of 30 N (3 kgf). The test is 
carried out on all outer surfaces. 

(lEC page 31) 14 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



The force shall be so exerted by the tip of the test finger as to avoid wedge or lever action. 

A rigid test finger loaded as above should be applied around any opening, or at any place where deformation could 
cause an opening. At the same time, a jointed test finger is applied without force to deiennine if live parts have become 
accessible. 

During the tests, the distances between accessible metal parts and live parts shall become not 
less than the values given in Table I, live parts shall not become accessible. 

An electrical contact indication with a voltage of approximately 40 V is recommended to show contact with 
conductive parts. 

In order to verify that a part or terminal contact is not live, the following measurements are 
carried out between any two parts or contacts, then between any part on terminal contact and 
either nole of the supply source. 



1 lie measurements are uiso carrieu out z s ujier witnurawai oj piu^s anu/or connectors jrom 
the corresponding socket-outlets or connector sockets. 

If possible, flashing is made during the measurements. 

The part or terminal contact is not live if: 

ffnw^ ^^^h rxnv* nv r^nvtirtft iltr, r^tirmwtt wvtnytr 

does not exceed 0.7 mA (peak) a.c. or 2 mA d.c. and moreover: 






— for voltages between 34 V (peak) and 450 V (peak) , the capacitance does not exceed 0.1 p.F, 

— for voltages between 450 V (peak) and 15 kV ^ peak), the discharge docs not exceed 
45 piC. 

For frequencies above } kHz, the limit of 0.7 mA f peak J is multiplied by the value of the 
frequency in kilohertz, but shall not exceed 70 mA (peak). 

The values indicated for the capacitances arc rated values. 

The lest establishes that if the voltage at the part exceeds 34 V (peak) a.c. or 100 V d.c, the source impedance is 
such that a current greater than 0.7 mA (peak) a.c. or 2 mA d.c. cannot be drawn through a resistance of 5000T) il. 



8.1.2 Operating shafts 

Operating shafts shall not be live. 
Compliance is checked by measurement. 

8.1.3 Ventilation hole 

Ventilation and other l.^les over Uve parts shall be so designed that a suspended foreign 
body (for example a necklr.ce) introduced into the apparatus shall not come into contact with 
any Uve part. 

15 (IECpage33) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Compliance is checked by inserting through the holes a metal test pin with a diameter of 4 mm 
and a length of 100 mm. The test pin is suspended freely from one end, the penetration being 
limited to its length. During the test, the apparatus is held in any position. 

The test pin shall not become live. 

8.1.4 Mains voltage adjustment 

There shall be no risk of electric shock during the operation of changing the voltage, or 
nature of supply, either by hand or by a tool which does not involve the removal of a cover. 

Compliance is checked by making the tests described in Sub-clause 8. Li or by a test made 
with the appropriate tool. 

8.1.5 Withdrawal of mains plug 

Apparatus intended to be connected to the supply mains b\ means of a m^ins plug shall 
be so designed that there is no risk of electric shock when touching the pins or contacts of 
the plug after its withdrawal from the socket-outlet. 

Compliance is checked by the following test. 

The apparatus is operated under normal operating conditions. 

The mains switch, if any, is then moved to the off-position, unless it is more unfavourable to 
keep it in the on-position, and the apparatus is disconnected from the supply mains by means of 
the plug. 

Two seconds after withdrawal of the plug, no pin shall he live, the measurement being made 
according to Sub-clause 8.1.1 , between a pin and any other contact of the plug. 

In order to reasonably cover the most unfavourable situation the test may be repeated up to 
ten times. 

8.2 Testing after removal of protective covers 

A part which is exposed by the removal by hand of a cover shall not be live. 

Compliance is checked by application of the tests of Sub-clause 8.1.1. 

Any removable part of a voltage scuing device is considered lo be a proteaivc cover (sec Sub-clause 8.3.1). 

8.3 Constructional requirements 

8.3.1 The insulation of live parts shall not be provided by hygroscopic materials, such as 
non-impregnated wood, paper and similar fibrous materials. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and, in case of doubt, by the following test. 

A specimen of the material, as specified in Clause 9 oflEC Publication 167 : Methods of Test 
for the Determination of the Insulation Resistance of Solid Insulating Materials, is subjected to 
the test prescribed in I EC Publication 68-2 3: Part 2, Tests — Test Ca: Damp Heat, Steady 
State, (temperature 40 ± 2''C, relative humidity: 90% to 95% j , the conditioning period being 
four davs (96 h). 

After this test, the specimen shall withstand the tests of Sub-clause 9.2. 
If necessary, the test is made on more than -one specimen. 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



.3.2 The apparatus shall be so constructed that there is no risk of an electric shock from accessible 
parts or from those parts rendered accessible following the removal by hand of a cover. 
However, internal parts in a battery compartment which become accessible, either with or 
without a tool, when replacing the batteries, shall be insulated from live parts by at least basic 
insulation. 

Apparatus having a stored energy not exceeding 150 J shall be of Class 11 construction (see 
Sub-clause 8.3.4). 

For apparatus having a stored energy above 150 J, Class I and II construction is permitted. 

Terminals for the connection to the synchronizer of the camera shall be insulated from live 
parts according to Sub-clause 8.3.4. 

Compliance is met by either satisfying Sub-clause 8.3.3 or Sub-clause 8.3.4. 



.3.3 For Class I apparatus, the accessible metal parts (except for those parts of the apparatus 
which are of Class II, see Sub-clause 2. 18) shall be separated from live parts by basic insulation 
meeting the requirements of Item a) of Sub-clause 8.3.4. 

TTiis requiremeni does noi apply lo insulation ihe short-circuiiing of which does not cause any shock hazard eg 
if one end of a secondary winding of a separating transformer is connected lo an accessible meial part, the other end 
need not meet any special insulation requirement with regard to the same accessible metal part. 

Class I apparatus shall be provided with a protective earth terminal or contact to which 
accessible metal parts shall be reliably connected, except those msulalcd from live parts by 
insulation meeting the requirements of Sub-clause 8.3.4 or those which are protected from 
becoming live by a metal part reliably connected to the protective earth terminal. 

Examples of such a metal part arc a metal screen in a transformer between the primary and the secondary windings 
(see Sub-clause 13.8.3), a metal chassis, etc. 

.3.4 For Class II apparatus, the accessible parts shall be insulated from live parts either by double 
insulation specified under Item a) or by reinforced insulation specified under Item h). 

This requirement does not apply to insulations, the short-circuiting of which does not cause any shock hazard e.g. 
if one end of a secondary winding of a separating transformer is connected to an accessible mcial part, the other end 
need not meet any special insulation requiremeni with regard to the same access-hie metal part. 

A component complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses 13.1 or 13.8 may bridge 
basic, supplementary, double or reinforced insulations. Basic and supplementary insulations 
may each be bridged by a capacitor complying with the requirements o^ Sub-clause 13.2. 

Double or reinforced insulations may be bridged by a single capacitor complying with the 
requirements of Sub-clause 13.2 if an appropriate a'nd reliable procedure is employed lo check 
the uniformity and continued conformance to the relevant specification for the current 
production. Alternatively, two capacitors of the same nominal. value in series, each complying 
with the requirements of Sub-clause 13.2, are required. Moreover, the external insulation of 
a capacitor of the insulated type shall not bridge reinforced insulation or double insulation 
used in the construction of the apparatus, unless the exteriial insulation of this capacitor meets 
the requirements of Sub-clause 8.3.7. 



17 (TEC page 37) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



a) If accessible parts are separated from live parts by basic insulation and supplementary 
insulation, the following shall apply. 

Each of these insulations shall comply with the requirements of Clause 9 and with the 
requirements for creepage distances and clearances specified in Sub-clause 8.3.5. 
Interna! insulations not complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses 8.3.6 and 8,3.7 
or 8.3.8 are neglected when computing the creepage distances and clearances. 

b) If accessible parts are separated from live parts by reinforced insulation, the following 
shall apply. 

The insulation shall comply with the requirements of Clause 9. Moreover, it shall comply 
with the requirements for creepage distances and clearances specified in Sub-clause 8.3.5. 
Internal insulations not complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses 8.3.6 and 8.3.7 
or 8.3.8 are neglected when computing 'the creepage distances and clearances. 

An example of assessment of reinforced insulation is given in Figure 1 1, page 101. 

.3.5 Creepage distances and clearances shall be not less than the values indicated in Table I, 
except that they may be reduced by 1 mm if all the following three conditions are met: 

— they are not between accessible metal parts of an enclosure and live parts, if such external 
forces, as can be expected in normal use, including transportation, may reduce them, 

— they are maintained by rigid construction, and 

— their insulation properties are not likely to be significantly affected by any deposition of 
conductive dust produced inside the apparatus, for example by the carbon brushes of 
commutator motors. 

The minimum creepage distances and clearances shall not be reduced below two-thirdS of 
the values given by the curves of Table I, after taking into account any reduction allowed for 
wire enamel according to Sub-clause 4.3.3, with a minimum of 0.5 mm for basic insulation 
and supplementary insulation, and with a minimum of I mm for reinforced insulation. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement. 

The creepage distances and clearances are measured whilst a force of 2 N is applied to any 
live part (including live wires) and to any internal part connected to accessible parts f including 
wires connected to them) and at the same time a force of 50 N by means of the rigid test finger 
being applied to any point on the outside of the enclosure. 



.3.6 Insulating layers on live parts, or on the inside surface of accessible metal parts or on any 
other internal metal part, are deemed to provide adequate protection if they withstand the 
following three tests in the order given. Such layers may be used as reinforced insulation, 
provided that they are not under such mechanical stress which, at the normal operating 
temperature, would be hkely to lead to deformation or deterioration of the insulating material. 

Ageing test. 

The coated part is subjected to the test prescribed in I EC Publication 68-2-2: at a temperature 
of 70 ± 2 ^C and for a period of seven days (168 h). 



(lEC page 39) 18 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 

After this treatment, the part is allowed to cool at room temperature and inspection shall show 
that the layer has not loosened or shrunk away from the base material. 

Impact test. 

The part is then conditioned, for a period of 4 h, at a temperature of —10 ±2 °C. 

While still at this temperature, the layer is subjected to a blow applied to any point of the layer 
that is likely to be weak, from a spring-operated impact hammer as shown in Figure 4, page 94. 

After this test, the layer shall not be damaged; in particular, it shall show no cracks visible 
to the naked eye. 

Scratch test. 

Finally,' the part at the highest temperature attained under normal operating conditions is 
subjected to a scratch test. 

The scratches are made by means of a hardened steel pin, the end of which has the form of 
a cone having a top angle of 40°, its tip being rounded with a radius of 0.25 ± 0.02 mm. 

Scratches are made by drawing the pin along the surface at a speed of about 20 mmjs as shown 
in Figure 5, page 95. The pin is so loaded that the force exerted along its axis is 10 ± 0.5 N. 
The scratches are at least 5 mm apart and at least 5 mm from the edge of the specimen. 

After this test, the layer shall neither have loosened nor be pierced, and it shall withstand a 
dieleciric strength test as specified in Sub-clause 9.2, the test voltage being applied between the 
base material and a metal foil in contact with the layer. 

The lesis may be made on a separate specimen of the cxijaied part. 

More stringent tests which are necessary for insulating layers on the outside of metal parts are under consideration. 

8.3.7 a) The insulation between Hve conductors in wires or cables and accessible parts, or between 
live parts and conductors in wires or cables connected to accessible metal parts, shall have 
a thickness of at least 0.4 mm if made of polyvinyl chloride. Other materials are allowed 
provided that they withstand the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 and 
that their thickness ensures an equivalent mechanical strength, where the construction 
so requires. 

b) In Class II apparatus, double insulation shall be provided between accessible parts and 
conductors in wires or cables conductively connected to the supply mains. In the case 
of conductors in wirres or cables connected to accessible metal parts, double insulation 
shall be provided between these conductors and parts conductively conneicted to the 
supply mains. 

Either the basic insulation or the supplementary insulation shall have a thickness of at 
least 0.4 mm. The other insulation may be thinner, even if made of polyvinyl chloride, 
provided that it withstands the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 for basic 
insulation or supplementary insulation. 

If double insulation consists of two layers which cannot be tested separately, it shall 
withstand the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 for reinforced insulation. 

The enamel layer of a wire complying with I EC Publication 317, grade 2, is acceptable 
as one of the insulating layers, provided that the combination of the insulations 
withstands the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 for reinforced insulation. 



19 flECpagc4I) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



The lest voltage of Sub- clause 9.2 is applied between the conductor and a metal foil wrapped 
.tightly around the insulation of the wire over a length of 10 cm. 

In the case of insulating sleeves, the test voltage of Sub-clause 9.2 is applied between a metal 
rod inserted into the sleeve and a metal foil wrapped tightly around the sleeve over a length of 
10 cm. 



.3.8 Insulations other than those mentioned in Sub-clauses 8.3.6 and 8.3.7 are considered to.be 
satisfactory if they comply with the following: 

Basic insulation and supplementary insulation shall each withstand the dielectric strength 
test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 unless the thickness of the insulation is at least 0.4 mm. 

For double insulation either the basic insulation or the supplementary insulation shall have 
a thickness of at least 0.4 mm. 

Reinforced insulation shall have a thickness of at least 2 mm. A thinner insulation is 
allowed, provided that it has a thickness of not less than 0.4 mm. and that it is not subjected 
to a mechanical stress which, at normal operating temperature, would be likely to lead to 
deformation or deterioration of the insulating material. In addition the insulating material 
shall withstand the dielectric strength tQSt specified in Sub-clause 9.2. 

These requirements do not apply to transformers complying with Sub-clau<;r' 13.8. 

5.3.9 The construction of the apparatus shall be such as to prevent short-circuiting of insulations, 
between live parts and accessible metal parts or parts connected to them, due to accidental 
loosening of screws, etc. 

The requirement is deemed to be met if the apparatus withstands the tests specified in 
Clause 11. 

^.3.10 The construction of ihe apparatus shall be such that, should any wire become detached, 
the creepage distances and clearances are not reduced below^ the values specified in 
Sub-clause 8.3.4 by the natural movement of a detached wire. 

This requirement does not apply if there is no risk of a wire becoming detached. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement. 

Examples q\ methods deemed to prevent a wire end from becoming detached arc: 

a) the conductor of the wire is anchored to the tag befpre soidcring. unless breakage close to the soldering place 
is likely to occur as a result of vibration; 

b) wires are twisted together in a reliable manner; ■ 

c) wires are fastened together by insulating tape, sleeves or the like; 

d) the conductor of the wire is inserted into a hole in the printed board before soldering, the hole having a diameter 
slightly greater than that of the conductor; 

e) the conductor of the wire is securely wrapped around the terminal by means of a special tool: 

f) the conductor of the wire is crimped to the terminal by means of a special tool. 

The methods of Items a) to/; apply to internal wires and the methods of Items u) to c) to external flexible cords. 

In case of doubt, the vibration test of Suh-clause 11.1.2 is carried, out to verify compliance. 

It IS assumed that not more than one connection will become detached at the same time. 
An accidental contact between detached ends of live wires and parts of the enclosure made of materials similar 
to those listed in Sub-clause 8.3.1 is allowed. 



(lEC page 43) 20 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984> 



8.3.1 1 The construction of the apparatus shall be such that, if a. test finger can partly enter the 
apparatus through a hole in the enclosure (see Figure 1. page 90). the tip of the test finger may 
be separated from any live parts by basic insulation only, provided contact cannot be made 
with the insulation material. 

The basic insulation may be provided by a clearance having a value according to curve A 
of Table I. 

Compliance is checked by measurement. 



9, Insulation requirements 

9.1 Moisiure treatment 

The safety of the apparatus shall not be impaired by humid conditions which may occur 
in normal use. 

Compliance is checked by the humidity treatment described in this sub-clause, followed 
immediately by the tests of Sub-clause 9.2. 

Electrical components, covers and other parts, which can be removed by hand, are removed 
and subjected, if necessary, to the humidity treatment with (he main part. 

Apparatus are subjected to the test prescribed in I EC Publication 68-2-3 f temperature : 
40±y C, relative humidity: 90% lo 95%), 

Before being placed in the chamber, the apparatus is brought to a temperature between 40 C 
and 44 C. 

The apparatus is kept in the chamber for five days (120 h). 

In mosl cases, Ihe apparatus may be brought lo the specified icmpcralurc by keeping il at this tcmpcralurc for at 
least 4 h before the humidity treatment. 

Some methods of achieving the specified relative humidities arc described in ! EC F-'ubhcation 260: Test -Enclosures 
of Non-lnjcction Type for Constant Relative Humidity. 

The air in the chamber must be stirred and the chamber must be so designed thai mist or condensed water will 
not precipitate onto the apparatus. 

After this treatment, the apparatus shall show no damage in the sense of this standard. 



9.2 Insulation resistance and dielectric strength 

Insulation shall be adequate. 

Compliance is checked by the following tests and, unless otherwise stated, i nmedialely after 
the moisture treatment according to Sub-clause 9.1. 

The insulations listed in Table HI shall he tested: 

— for insulation resistance with 500 V d.c. ; 

— for dielectric strength as follows: 

Insulations stressed with d.c. ( plus any ripple ) voltage arc tested with a d.c. voltage. Insulations 
stressed with a.c. voltage are tested with an a.c. voltage at tnains frequency. Where corona, 
ionization, charge effects or the like may occur, a dx. test voltage is recommended. The test 
voltages are applied for 1 min. 

21 (lECpage45) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



The nicasuremcm oj the insulation resistance and the dielectric strength lest are made in the 
humidity cabinet, or in the room in witicii the apparatus nas hrou^iht to the prescribed 
temperature . after ihe reassembly of those parts which mar have been removed. 

The apparatus is deemed to comply v.'ith the requirement if the insulation resistance measured 
after J min is not less than the values given in Table III and no fiashover or breakdown occurs 
during the dielectric strength test. 

When testing enclosures of insulating material, foil is pressed lightly against accessible parts. 

The test is not made on insulation the short-circuiting of which does not cause any shock 
hazard, e.g. in case one end of a secondary winding of a separating transformer is connected to 
an accessible metal part, the other end need not meet any special insulation requirement with 
regard to the same accc ^..ible metal part. 

Resistors and capacitors complying with Sub-clauses 13.1 and 13.2 respectively , connected in 
parallel with the insulations *o he tested, are disconnected. Inductors and windings, which 
otherwise would prevent the test from being made, are also disconnected. 

In the case of apparatus with high-frequency pulse ignition, the ignition pulse is ignored in 
computing the test voltage if the duration of the pulse does not exceed 1 ms. 



Table III 



Imuialion 



Insulation 
ri'si.slanci' 



A.C. lest votiage 
(peak) or d.c. 



1 . Between the poles of the circuit directly connected to the 
.supply mains. 



MQ 



2 U 4 1411) V 



2. Between parts separated hy basic insulation or by 
supplementary insulation. 



2 MQ 



Curve A (sec Future 9) 



3. Between parts separated by reinforced insulation. 



4 MQ 



Curve B (see Fijiure 9, 



The voltage is the highest peak value occurring across the insulation wider normal and fault conditions, the 
apparatus being connected to the rated .supply voltage. The voltage across the basic insulation is to be determined with 
the .supplementary insulation short-circuited and vice versa. 

In respect of mains voltages in the range 220 V to 250 V (r.m.s.) the test voltages are 2 120 V peak for basic and 
.supplementary insulations and 4 240 V peak for reinforced insulation. 

Curves A and B of Figure 9, page 99, are defined by the following points : 

Operating voltage Test voltage 

(peak) (peak) 

Curve A Curve B 

34 V 707 V 1410 V 

354 V 4 240 V 
1410 V 3 980 V 

JO kV 15 kV 15 kV 

50 kV 75 kV 75 kV 

Between conductors on a printed hoard, described in Suh-cluu.se 4.3.1 , the a.c. test voltage is 3 U with a minimum of 
707 Vpeak. 



Accessible metal parts may be connected together during the dielectric strength lest. 
An instrument to carry out the dielectric strength test is described in Figure 8, page 98 



(lEC page 47) 



22 



■S : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



10. Fault conditions (see Sub-clause 4.3) 

10. 1 Shock hazard 

Protection against electric shock shall still exist when the apparatus is operated under fault 
conditions. 

Compliance is checked by making the tests described in Siih-ciauscs 8.1 and 8.2, modified as 
shown below, under fault conditions. 

For terminal contacts, the permissible current is increased to 2.8 niA (peak). 

The fault condition described in Sub-clause 4.3.9 shall be maintained until steady state has been 
reached, but not for more than 4 h. 

If short-circuiting or disconnecting a resistor or a capacitor causes an infringement of the 
requirements, the apparatus is not deemed to be unsatisfactory, but the relevant part shall comply 
with the requirements of Clause 13. 

If, during the tests, an insulation mentioned in Table III is subjected to a voltage exceeding 
the voltage occurring under normal operating conditions, and if this increase involves a higher 
test voltage according to Sub-clause 9.2, this insulation shall withstand a test for dielectric 
strength at the higher voltage, unless the higher voltage is due to the short-circuiting or 
disconnection of a resistor or a capacitor complying with the requirements of Clause 13. 

h is advisable to identify beforehand all the component parts to be tested with a higher lesl voltage in order to 
avoid more than one moisture ireaiment. 

10.2 Heating 

When the apparatus is operated under fault conditions, no part shall reach such a 
temperature, nor shall flammable gases be liberated to such an extent, that there is a danger 
of fire to the surroundings of the apparatus. Any heat developed in the apparatus shall not 
impair its safety. 

Compliance is checked by subjecting the apparatus to a heating test under fault conditions. 

The temperature rises shall not exceed the values given in Table II, column II. However, higher 
temperature rises are allowed for windings and coil formers, provided that a failure of their 
insulation does not cause an infringement of the requirements regarding protection against 
electric shock, and that no flammable gases are liberated during the lest. 

It the temperature is limited by the operation of thermal releases, fuses or j using resistors, the 
temperatures are measured 2 min after the operation of the device. 

If no temperature-limiting device operates, the temperatures are measured after a steady state 
has been reached, but not later than after 4 h operation of the apparatus. 

If the temperature is limited by fuses, the following additional test is carried out in case of 
doubt: 

The fuse-link is short-circuited during the test and only the current through this short-circuit 
link, under the relevant fault conditions, is measured: 

— if this current remains less than 2.1 times the rated current of the fu.se- 1 ink, the temperatures 
are measured after a steady state has been reached, hut not later than after 4 h operation 
of the apparatus; 



23 (I EC page 49) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



— if this current is either immediately 2 J times the rated anrem of the fuse-link or more, or 
after a period of tinic reaches this value, hot!] the fuse-link, and short-circuit link are removed 
at that moment and the temperatures arc measured 2 min after the remo\al. 

In case of doubt the maximum resistance value of the fuse-link shall be taken into account when 
establishing the value of the current. 

The above test is based on the fusing characleristics specified sn ! bC Publication 127: Cartridge Fuse-links for 
Miniature Fuses, which also gives the information necessary to calculate the maximum resistance value. 

In determining the current through the fuse, consideration should be given to the fact that this current may var\ 
as a function of time. It should be measured therefore as soon as possible a.ter switching on, taking into consideration 
the heating time of the apparatus, especially where electronic lubes are used. 

Temperatures are measured as indicated in Clause 6, except that, for parts so enclosed or 
located in die apparatus that internal flames cannot ignite materials •vutside the enclosure, the 
effect is checked by measuring the temperature of the enclosure of the part of the apparatus, 
\shich^er applies. 

Melting of insulation materials not of importance within the meanmg of this standard is disregarded. 

To check whether gases liberated from component parts are flammable or not, a test with a 
high-frequency spark generator is made. 

If a temperature rise exceeding the value given in Table II is due to short-circuiting an 
insulation, the apparatus is not deemed to he unsatisfactory hui this insulation shall withstand 
a dielectric strength test as described in Suh-clau.se 9.2 preceded by the moisture treatment 
according to Sub-clause 9.1. 

If a temperature rise exceeding the value given in Table II ts due to short-circuiting or 
disconnecting a resistor, a capacitor or an inductor, the apparatus is not deemed to be 
unsatisfactory if the resistor, the capacitor or the ifiductor complies with the requirements of 
Clause 13 (see Sub-clause 4.3.6). 

If a temperature rise exceeding the values of Table II is due to the disconnecting of a resistor, 
the overload test specified in Item b) of Sub-clause 13.1 is repeated on the resistor mounted in 
tile apparatus, including the connections made by the manufacturer. During this test, the 
connections shall not fad. 

If a temperature rise on a printed board at one or more small areas, the total area of which 
does not exceed 2 cm^ for each fault condition; exceeds the values given in Table If the apparatus 
is not considered to be unsatisfactory, provided no flammable gases are liberated during the test 
and, in addition, the printed board shall withstand the following flame test: 

The test is made according to Sub-clause 4.3 of I EC Publication 249-1 modified and 
supplemented as follows: 

— the pre-conditioning in standard atmospheric conditions as prescribed in Sub-clause I.I.I is 
deleted; 

— treatment of the specimens as prescribed in Sub-clause 4.3.3.3, first paragraph, is made at 
125 ±5 C. during 24 h: 

The average burning time of the four specimens shall not exceed 15 s, irrespective of the 
thickness of the base material. 

To verify compliance with the requirements of this sub-clause, it may be necessary to repeat the dielectric strength 
or insulation test. 



(lEC page 51) 24 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



1 1 . Mechanical strength 

11.1 Complete apparatus 

The apparatus shall have adequate mechanical strength and be so constructed as to 
withstand such handling as may be expected in normal use. 

Compliance is checked by the following tests. However, devices forming a part of the mains 
plug are only subjected to the impact test as described in Sub-clause 11.1.3. 

11.1.1 Bump test 

The apparatus is placed on a horizontal support of wood which is allowed to fall 50 times from 
a height of 5 cm onto a wooden table. 

After the test, the apparatus shall show no damage in the sense of this standard. 

11.1.2 Vibration test 

The apparatus is subjected to a vibration endurance conditioning by sweeping, as specified in 
I EC Publication 68-2-6: Part 2: Tests — Test Fc and Guidance: Vibration (sinusoidal). 



The apparatus is fastened in its normal position of use to the vibration-generator by means 
of straps round the enclosure. The direction of vibration is vertical and the .severity is: 

— Duration: 30 min 

— Amplitude: 0.35 mm 

— Sweep frequency range: 10 Hz, 55 Hz, 10 Hz 

— Sweep rate: approximately one octave per minute 

After the test, the apparatus shall show no damage in the sense of this standard: in particular. 

.... _ -_.;„.. - . ./.- / :. ..4...l.:,.u ..,:^l,, ;.,._„;- ^../: /.,.// / / y 

rit' (.iVftrnSLtiun ut j/ui t inv HJU.'n:iiiii^ n/ miiifi fni^rn irnjjuir .Mfjcii miuh huvl' nnf,s\.-ni:u. 



1 1.1.3 Impact test 

The apparatus is held firmly in the hand and is subiecied to three blows from a spring-operated 
impact hammer as shown in Figure 4, page 94, applied to every point of the exterior that protects 
live parts and is likely to be weak, including handles, Ic'-er.s. switch knobs and the like, by pressing 
the hammer nose perpendicularly to the surface. 

This test is also made on signal lamps and their covers, hut only if they protrude from the 
enclosure by more than 5 mm or if the individual projected surface area exceeds 1 cm'. 

Flash tubes and incandescent lamps, other than signal lamps, are excluded from the impact 
test. 

After the test, the apparatus shall withstand the dielectric strength test of Sub-clause 9.2 and 
shall show no damage in the sense of this standard: in particular, live parts shall not have become 
accessible, enclosures shall show no visible cracks and insulating barriers shall not have been 
damaged. 

Damage to the finish, small dents which do not reduce crecpage distances or clearances below the specified values, 
cracks which are not visible to the naked eye, and surface cracks in fibre-reinforced mouldings and the like arc ignored. 



25 (lEC page 53) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



12. Pans connected to the supply mains 

1 2. 1 Creepage disuinces and clearances between pans dn cciiv connecicd lo the supply mains shall 
have ai least the values given by curve A of Tabic 1. 

Conipliaucc is checked by inspection. 

12.2 The msulaiing materials referred to in Sub-clause 6.2 shall be resistant to fire. 

A lex*, is under consideration. 



13. Components 

'A nc::. components are part of a range of values it is usualh not necessary lo test every value within that range. 
!f ir:i> range of values consists of several technologically homogeneous sub-ranges, the sample should be 
representative of each of these sub-ranges. Moreover, it is recommended, where possible, to rnakc use of (he concept 
ol" siructuraliy similar components. 

n . 1 Resisiors 

Resistors the short-circuiting or disconnecting of which would cause an infringement of the 
requnements for operation under fault conditions (sec Clause 10). shall have an adequate 
stable resistance value under overload. 

Such resistors shall be positioned inside the enclosure of the apparatus. 

Compliance is checked by the tests of Item aj or of It em h), carried out on a sample of ten 
specimens. 

Bet ore the tests of Item a) or Item b), the resistance of each specimen is measured and the 
sample is. then suhjvcted to the damp heat test prescribed in I EC Publication (}H-2~3. severity 
2! davs. 

a . Far resistors connected between live parts and accessible metal parts, the ten specimens are 
iu:h subjected to 50 discharges at a maximum rate of I2inun.from a I nF capacitor chari^cd 
to Id k]'. in a test circuit as shown in Fii^ure 3a. page 92. 

After this test, the value of resistance shall not differ more than 5()'/o from the value measured 
heiore the damp heat test. 
\o failures are allowed. 

b For other resistors, the ten specimens are each subjected to a voltage of such a value that the 
current through it is 1.5 times the value measured through a resistor, having a resistance equal 
i(> the specified nominal value, which is fitted to the apparatus, when operated under fault 
conditions. During the test the voltage is kept constant. 

The value of resistance is mea .ured when steady state is attained ami shall not differ more 
than 30% from the value mea.su red before the da tup heat lest. 
So failures are allowed. 

For re.sistors connected between live parts and accessible metal parts, the creepage distances 
and clearances between end-cap terminations .shall comply with the requirements of Sub- 
clause 8.3.4. 

Resistors with internal end-lead terminations are only allowed if the internal spacings are 
clearly and precisely defined. 

Compliance is checked hy measurement and inspection. 



(lEC page 55) 26 



IS : 122741987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



13.2 Capacilors 

13.2.1 Capacitors and resistor-capacitor units, the short-circuiting or disconnccnng o^ which 
would cause an infringement of the requirements under fault conditions with regard to shock 
hazard, shall have adequate dielectric strength. 

Compliance is checked by the folhning tests. 

13.2.2 General 

For capacitors and units comprising capacitors with shuni resistors, a sample af30 components 
is required. All 30 are subjected to the initial resistance measurement (Sub-clause 13.^.3). A 
sample of ten is then subjected to the surge test (Sub-clause 13.2.4). another sample of ten is 
subjected to the endurance test (Sub-clause 13.2.5), and the remaining ten are subjected to the 
humidity test (Sub-clause 13.2,6). 

13.2.3 Initial resistance 

13.2.3,1 The resistance measured between the terminals of a component comprising a capacitor and 
a shunt resistor shall be not less than 0.5 MQ, nor more than 4 MQ. 

The insulation resistance of a capacitor (where there is no shunt resistor), measured at 500 V 
(d.c. I maintained for 2 min, shall be not less than 1 000 MQ. 



13.2.3.2 The sample of 30 is to be measured, and the resistance of each component is to be within 
the .specified limits. 

13.2.4 Surge test 

13.2.4.1 A component .shall be subjected to 50 discharges at a maximum rate of ^jmin, from a I nF 
capacitor charged to 10 k V. 

After the test: 

a) the resistance between the terminals of a component comprising a capacitor and a shunt 
resistor shall not have changed by more than 50% of the value measured before the test ; 

b) the insulation resistance of a capacitor (when there is no shunt resistor), measured at 500 V 
(d.c.) , maintained for 2 min, shall be not less than 500 MQ; 

c) the component shall withstand without breakdown , for a period of 1 min, a 2000 V (r.m.s.) 
alternating voltage of mains frequency , applied between the terminals of the component and, 
for an insulated component, between the terminals connected together and the case, or a metal 
foil wrapped closely around the body of the component, but maintaining a 3 mm distance 
between the foil and each component terminal. The test voltage is to be obtained in the manner 
specified in Sub-clause 13,2.4.4. 

13.2.4.2 The circuit to be used in performing the surge test is shown in Figure 3a) , page 92. 

1 3.2.4.3 If the component under test contains a resistor which would dissipate more than 0.5 W during 
the tests of Item c) of Sub-clause 13.2,4.1, the component is to he cooled during the test by 
immersion in a bath of silicone, oil or mineral oil. 

27 (lEC page 57) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (W84) 



1 3.2.4.4 Tiic lest voltage specified in Item c) of Sub-clause 13.2 A J shall be obtained from a suitable 
transformer, the output voltage of which can be adjusted. The voltage is to he increased gradually 
from zero, at a rate of 75 Vjs until the required test value is reached, and is to be held at that 
value for 1 min. 

13.2.4.5 A sample often components is subjected to the surge test with no failures permitted. If one 
component fails, an additional sample often components is tested, all of which shall then comply 
with the surge test. If more than one of the first sample fail or if one or more of the second sample 
fail, the components are deemed not to be satisfactory. 



13.2.5 Endurance test 

13.2.5.1 After 1500 h of operation of a component under the conditions described in 
Sub-clause 13.2.5.2: 

a) the resistance between the terminals of a component comprising a capacitor and a shunt 
resistor shall not have changed more than 50% of the value measured before the test; 

b) the insulation resistance of a capacitor (where there is no shunt resistor), measured at 500 V 
(d.c.i maintained for 2 min, shall be not less than 500 MQ; 

c) the component shall satisfy the test of Item c) of Sub-clause 13.2.4.1. 

13.2.5.2 The components are placed in a circulating air oven for a period of 1 500 h. The air in the 
oven is maintained at a temperature of 85 ±2 C and a relative humidity of 50% or less. 
Throughout the test, the components are subjected to a 500 V (r.m.s. ) alternating voltage of 
mains frequency, except that once each hour the voltage is increased to 1 000 V (r.m.s.) for 0.1 s. 
A fuse or other device of suitable sensitivity is connected in the supply circuit to each component, 
to indicate a failure, either permanent or of short duration. After 1 500 h, the components are 
allowed to cool to ron.n temperature before being tested as described in Sub-clause 13.2.5.1. 



13.2.5.3 A sample of ten components is .subjected to the endurance test with no failures permitted. 
If one component fails, an additional sample often components is tested, all of which shall tlien 
comply with the endurance test. If more than one of the first sample Jail or if one or more of the 
second sample fail, ilie components are deemed not to be satisfactory. 



13.2.6 Humidity test 

13.2.6.1 A component shall be subjected to the test prescribed in I EC Publication 68-2-3, severity 
21 days. 

13.2.6.2 After recovery: 

a) the resistance between terminals of a component comprising a capacitor and a shunt resistor 
shall not have changed by more than 50% of the value measured before the test; 

b) the insulation resistance of a capacitor (when there is no shunt resistor) , measured at -500 V 
(d.c), maintained for 2 min, shall be not less than 300 MQ; 

c) the component shall satisfy the test of Item c) of Sub-clause 13.2.4.1. 

(lEC page 59) 28 



IS : 12274-1987 
I£C Pub 491 (1984) 



13.2.6.3 A sample oj ten components is subjected to the humidity test with no failures permitted. If 
one component fails, an additional sample of ten components is tested, ail of which shall then 
comply with the humidity test. If more than one of the first sample fail or if one or more of the 
second sample fail, the components are deemed not to be satisfactory. 



13.3 Fusing and interrupting devices 

13.3.1 Thermal releases shall have adequate rupturing capacity. 

Compliance is checked by a test in which are established such conditions as are necessary to 
cajuse the release to operate. During the test, repeated ten times, no sustained arcing and no 
damage in the sense of this standard shall occur. 

If by construction the release element is destroyed by operation, the test is made on ten 
individual elements. 

13.3.2 Fuse-links used in order to prevent the apparatus from becoming unsafe within the sense 
of this standard shall comply with I EC PubH cation 127 unless they have a rated current 
oiitsjde the range specified in that standard. 

The rated current and symbol relative to the pre-arcing lime/current characteristic of the 
fuse-hnk shall be marked on its holder or close to it, in the order given in I E C Publication 127. 

Fuse-holders so designed that fuse-links can be connected in parallel in the same circuit, 
shall not be used. 

Compliance is checked by the tests of Sub-clause JO. 2 and by inspection, 

13.3.3 Fusing resistors shall have adequate rupturing capacity. 

Compliance is checked during the tests under fault conditions (see Sub-clause 10.2). 



13.3.4 If live parts are rendered accessible during replacement of fusing or interrupting devices, 
access to such parts shall not be possible by hand operation only. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

13.4 Mains .switches 

13.4.1 Mains switches, rf any, shall disconnect all parts of the apparatus from all poles of the 
supply mains with the exception of the protective earth conductor. 

However, fuses, interference suppression coils, capacitors and discharge resistors between 
mains poles need not be disconnected. 

Disconnection from all poles is not necessary if the apparatus is so constructed that, with 
the switch in the off position, no capacitor, except those between the mains poles, can remain 
under mains voltage stress. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

29 (IECpage6I) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



irv4.2 Marns switches shall have adequate making and breaking capacity and shall be so 
constructed that the moving contacts can come to rest only in the "on" and in the "off" 
positions. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by one of the following endurance tests: 

a) the switch, tested as part of the apparatus working under normal operating conditions, is 
subjected to: 

— 5000 cycles of operation when used on apparatus having a stored energy not exceeding 
150 J, or 

— 10 000 cycles of operation when used on apparatus having a stored energy exceeding 150 J. 

Both tests are carried out at a rate of one cytle per minute, the duration of the "on-had" 
period being 50 s and the "off-load" period being 10 s. During the "off-load" period the flash 
capacitor is discharged with a time constant of 1 s. 

b) the switch, tested as a general purpose component in a circuit as shown in Figure 10, page 100, 
is subjected to: 

— 5000 cycles of operation when used on apparatus having a stored energy up to 150 J and 

— 10000 cycles of operation when used on apparatus having a stored energy in excess of 
150 J. 

Both tests are carried out at a rate of seven cycles per minute, the duration of the "on-load" 
and "off-load" periods being equal for each cycle. 

The actuating member of the switch is operated so as to simulate normal use. 

After the test, the switch shall show no damage in the sense of this standard and shall still be 
capable of operating as originally intended. In particular, ii shall show no deterioration of the 
enclosure and insulations, no loosening of electrical connections or mechanical fixings and no 
.seepage of .sealing compound. It shall then comply with the tests of Suh-clau.ses 13.4.2.1 and 
13.4.2.2 in the order given. 

The tests are made on three specimens. 

If one of the .specimens fails in either of the tests of Suh- clauses 13.4.2.1 or 13.4.2.2, the tests 
of these sub-clauses are repeated on three new .specimens, no failure being allowed. 



3.4.2.1 The switch shall be so constructed that the temperature rise under normal operating 
conditions is not excessive. 

■Compliance is checked by the following test: 

Following the endurance conditioning according to Item a) of Sub-clau.se 13.4.2, the switch 
is loaded for 1 h with the rated mains current of the flash apparatus (see Sub-clause 13.4.4). 

Following the endurance conditioning according to hem h) of Suh- clause 13.4.2, the switch 
is fitted with conductors having a nominal cross-sectional area of 0.75 mnr and is then loaded 
for 1 h with its rated current. 

In both cases, the current is passed through the specimen by means of an auxiliary switch. 



(I EC page 63) 30 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



The temperature of the terminals is determived by means of mcbin^ particles or similar 
indicators, or by means of thermocouples which are so chosen and positioned that they have 
negligible effect on the temperature being determined. 

The temperature rise shall not exceed 55 K during the 1 h period. 

13.4.2.2 The switch shall have adequate dielectric strength. 
Compliance is checked by the foilo\^'ing tests: 

— the switch shall withstand, in the "on" position, a dielectric strength test as specified in 
Sub-clause 9.2, without being previously subjected to the moisture treatment, the test voltage 
being decreased by 500 V r.m.s. (700 V peak J. The voltage is applied between live parts and 
those parts which become accessible when the switch is mounted in an apparatus, and, in 
addition, between the poles in the case of an all-pole mains switch: 

— the switch shall withstand, in the "off" position, a dielectric strength test as specified in 
Sub-clause 9.2, without being previously subjected to the moisture treatment, the test voltage 
being 1000 V r.m.s. (1 410 V peak ) across each contact gap. During the test, any capacitor 
or resistor in parallel with the contact gaps is disconnected. 



13.4.3 Switches shall be identified unambiguously. 

Where switches are submitted for testing for subsequent use as general purpose components 
applicable to this standard, they shall comply with the relevant test of Sub-clause 13.4.2 as 
well as the requirements of the clauses of this standard where applicable. The switches shall 
be marked with type reference, manufacturer's name or trade mark, rated voltage, rated 
current and erther the rated peak surge current or the ratio between the rated peak surge 
current and the rated current. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by the relevant tests. 

Examples of marking of general purpose switches: 

2/8 2 4x 

2 A/8 A 250 V - or 2 A/4x 250 V - 

The preferred rated currents arc 1 A, 2 A and 5 A. 

The preferred values of ihe ratio between the rated peak surge cunenl and the rated current arc 2, 4, 8. J 6. 32, 
and 64. 

Where the ratio is quoted, this number is followed by the sign x. 

The values for the rated voltage are 130 V and 250 V. 

13.4.4 The characteristics of the switch, with reference to the marking, shall be appropriate for 
the function of the switch in the apparatus under normal operating conditions. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by measurement. 

The rated mains current of a flash apparatus is determined by the following formula: 



I, = 1/3 h' + hh + /V 



where: 

1q = maximum mains current (peak value) immediately after a flash has been made 

/, = maim current (peak value) at the end oj the re-charge period of the flash capacitor. The end of the re-charge period 
/.T determined hy the indicator or, if there is no indicator, by the measured voltage on the flash capacitor, which 
shall he 85% of the maximum peak voltage, the apparatus supplied at its rated mains voltage . 



31 (lECpage65) 



IS : 12274-1987 
I£C Pub 491 (1984) 



The apparatus is operated under normal operating conditions except that the apparatus is 
connected to its rated supply voltage. 

Iq and 1 1 are measured when the apparatus is ready for flash operation and has been connected 
to the mains supply for at least 30 min. 

The peak surge current is the maximum peak value of the mains current when the flash 
apparatus is switched on, after the flash capacitor has been discharged completely. Current spikes 
up to iOO fis duration are disregarded. 

The measured peak surge current and calculated rated mains current (I J shall not exceed the 
marked current rating of the mains switch. 

13.5 Safety switches 

Safety switches if any shall disconnect the apparatus from all poles of the mains and shall 
operate satisfactorily, even if the enclosure of the apparatus is opened slowly. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test, without, however, trying to maintain 
an arc. 

13.6 Voltage-setting devices 

The apparatus shall be so constructed that changing the setting from one voltage to another 
or from one nature of supply to another is unlikely to occur accidentally. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 

Changing of the setting which necessitates consecutive movements by hand is deemed to comply with this 
requirement. 

13.7 Batteries 

If screws are used to fasten covers of battery compartments, these screws shall be captive. 

The battery shall be so arranged that there is no risk of accumulation of flammable gases. 

Apparatus containing batteries holding liquid shall be so designed that insulations cannot 
be impaired by leakage of the liquid. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

13.8 Windings 

13.8.1 Inductors 

Inductors, the short-circuiting or disconnecting of which would cause an infringement of 
the requirements for operation under fault conditions (see Clause 10), shall have adequate 
overload capacity. 

Compliance is checked by the following test. 

When the inductor has reached the temperature which occurs after use of the apparatus for 
4 h under normal operating conditions, it is connected for J min to an a.c, voltage of twice the 
value and twice the frequency of the voltage applied under normal operating conditions. 

During the test, no defect is permitted. 

For inductors subjected to pulses, tests are under consideration. 

(lEC page 67) 32 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



13.8.2 Insulation of windings 

Separating transformers, induction motors where the power is supplied to the stator only, 
relay coils and as far as applicable, autotra sformers, are considered to provide reinforced 
insulation between live parts and accessible meu.i parts or parts connected to accessible metal 
parts, if they are so constructed that their use will not impair the protection against electric 
shock. 

The requirement is met when these components satisfy either the constructional requirements 
and dielectric strength test of Item a) or the test and constructional requirements of Item h) . 

a) All creepage distances and clearances shall comply with the requirements of Sub-clause 8.3.5 
for reinforced insulation. 
The coil-formers providing reinforced insulation shall have a thickness of at least 0.4 mm. 

For separating transformers. 

— Partition walls providing reinforced insulation shall have a thickness of at least 0.4 mm. 

— When a single coil-former with separate partition walls is used, special measures shall 
be taken. An example is by using an insulating film covering the slit where the partition 
wall meets the coil-former, in order to prevent reliably any conductive connection between 
the primary and secondary windings, even when a wire breaks within the winding. 

— When the windings arc positioned concentrically, there shall be reinforced insulation 
between the primary and secondary windings. However, the reinforced insulation may 
consist of three separate layers, provided that each combination of two layers placed in 
contact between the two metal pins as shown in Figure 8, page 98, can withstand the 
dielectric strength test of Table III, Item 3, without being previously subjected to the 
humidity treatment. Special mesures shall be taken to prevent a wire or a broken end of 
a wire slipping off the outer windings onto the inner windings, or vice versa. 



— The insulation between the primary and secondary windings and between the primary 
windings and the iron core, if the iron core is connected to accessible metal parts, and 
between secondary windings and the iron core, if the iron core is connected to live parts, 
shall withstand the dielectric strength test of Table III, Item 3. immediately after having 
been ,subjected to the humidity treatment specified in Sub-clause 9.1 . 

For other components: 

— The insulation between the live windings and accessible metal parts, or parts intended to 
be connected to accessible metal parts, shall withstand the dielectric strength test of 
Table III, Item 3, immediately after having been subjected to the humidity treatment 
specified in Sub-clause 9.1. 

b) Three specimens of the component are subjected to seven cycles, each consisting of the 
following sequence of tests, with a recovery period of 24 h in ambient conditions between each 
cycle. 

The specimens are placed in an oven for a period of 72 h at a temperature equal to the value 
of the temperature rise as determined by the lest of Sub-clause 6.1 plus 70 "C. For separating 
transformers a voltage of 500 Vr.m.s. is applied between the primary and secondary windings. 



33 HEC page 69) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



After 24 h recovery at ambient conditions, tiie specimens are subjected to the test prescribed 
in I EC Publication 68-2-6. with the foUowing parameters: 

Duration: 3 min 

Amplitude: 1.2 mm 

Frequency: 55 ± 5 Hz 

Direction: vertical 

During. the vibration test, the specimens are positioned and fixed as in the apparatus. 

After the vibration test, the specimens are subjected to the humidity treatment specified in 
Sub-clause 9.} for a duration of 48 h. 

For separating transformers after each humidity exposure, the insulation between the primary 
and secondary windings and between the primary windings and the iron core, if the iron core is 
connected to accessible metal parts, and between secondary windings and the iron core, if the iron 
core is connected to live parts, shall withstand the dielectric strength test of Table III, Item 2. 

V 

For other components , after each humidity exposure, the insulation between the live windings 
and accessible metal parts, or .parts intended to he connected to accessible metal parts, shall 
withstand the dielectric strength test of Table III, Item 2. 

The specimen is deemed to he satisfactory if no fiashoxer or breakdown occurs during the 
dielectric strength test at the end of each cycle. 

Separating transformers shall moreover comply with one of the following requirements: 

— tlw cod-former and the partition wall between the relevant windings shall consist of one piece 
part (e.g. one moulded part J , or 

— when a single coil-former with separate partition walls is used, special measures shall be 
taken. An example is by using an insulating film covering the slit where the partition wall 
meets the coil-former, in order to prevent reliably any conductive coniwclion between the 
primary and .secondary windings, even when a wire breaks within the winding, or 

— when the windings are positioned concentrically on a single coil-former , thev shall be 
separated by a barrier and special measures shall be taken to prevent a wire or a broken end 
of a wire slipping off the outer windings onto the inner windings, or vice versa. 

4 component complying with these requirements is not inspected as regards the internal 
crecpage distances, internal clearances and distances through i, sulations. 

13.8.3 Transformers intended to provide protection by earthing 

Transformers intended to provide proieciion by earthing (see Sub-clause 8.3.3) shall comply 
with ine following requirement. 

A metal screen intended to be connected to the safety earth terminal of an apparatus shall be 
positioned between the primary and .secondary windings in .such a way that it effectively prevents 
the primary voltage being applied to the .secondary winding in the case of an insulation faidl. 



<IF.Cpage7l) H 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



13.9 Moiors 

i^.^.i itujivjio oiiaii L/^^ avj v,\jiii3Li uv^i J ao i.*j uiv,\v.iiL, ill v..\Lv.iiuE.u ii\jiiiiai ua*,^, aiiv V^lt^V^Ll lV^a.1 VJl 

mechanical failure impairing compliance with this standard. The insulation r' all not be 
affected and contacts and conaeciions shall be such that they do not work loose by healing, 
vibration, etc. 

Compliance is checked by the following tests carried out on the apparatus under normni 
oneratinf^ conditions. 

a J The motor is connected to LI times the rated supply voltage and to 0.9 times the rated supply 
voltage, each time for 48 h. Motors for short-time or intermittent operation are connected 
for periods in accordance with the operating time if limited by the construction of the 
apparatus. 

In the case of short-time operation, suitable cooling intervals are inserted. 

U may be convenient to carry out this test immediately after the test of Sub-clause 6.1. 

b/ The motor is started 30 times while connected to 1.1 times the rated supply voltage and 50 
times while connected to 0.9 times the rated supply voltage, each period of connection being 
at least 10 times the period from start to full speed, but not less than 10 s. 

The intervals between starts shall be not less than three times the period of connection. 

c. In addition, a motor provided with a centrifugal or other automatically operated stoning 
switch, is started 5000 times at 0.9 times the rated supply vuliagc. During the test, additional 
ventilation may he used. 

If the apparatus provides for more than one speed, the test is carried out at the most 
unfavourable speed. 

.After these tests, the motor shall withstand the dielectric strength test of Sub-clause 9.2. no 
,..>. ,.,,v..^ -/,„// /,,,.,.. 1... ......... .J ,..,,/ f/,,.-., ,./,,.// k.. .,,. .L,t.„-;...-.,,;,.„ ,-.,,r,,,;,.,-.,„ */,„ ,..,/;.,,. 

L i'lifiv 1^ I tint .ifitiii /Jijif £(<'t/.ii:f ILH uiiu (fjLri .■milhi i/l m/ i^t. t^ i n^i i ' • nfii iiiij/Ltii iiif^ mi. .ih/l(V. 

For inducUon motors with power supplied to the stator only, see also Sub-clause 13.8.2. 

13.9.2 Moiors with rotating windings placed in grooves and subjected to a voltage over 34 V 
(neaki shall have creenMce distances and clearances of at least: 

— 2 mm for insulation between iron cores and windings of enamelled wires; 

— 4 mm for insulation between iron cores and accessible parts. 

Compliance is checked by measurement. 

13.9.3 Motors shall be so constructed or mounted that wiring, windings, commutators, slip-rings, 
insulations, etc., are not exposed to oil, grease or other substances having a deleterious effect. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

13.9.4 Screw-type brush caps snail be capable of being screwed home to a shoulder or similar 
abutment and shall engage by a minimum of three full threads. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 



35 (lEC page 73) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



13.9.5 Moving parts liable to cause personal injury shall be so arranged or enclosed as to provide 
in normal u<e adequate protection against this danger. Protective enclosures, guards and the 
like shall have adequate mechanical strength. The" shall not be removable by hand. 

Compliaitce is checked by inspection and by manual test. 

13.9.6 Series motors shall have adequate mechanical strength. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by connection to 1.3 times the rated supply voltage 
for I min with the lowest possible load. 

After the test, windings or connections shall not have loosened and there shall be no other 
deterioration impairing the safety of the motor. 



14. Terminal devices 

14.1 Plugs and sockets 

14.1.1 Plugs and appliance couplers for the connection of the apparatus to the supply mains and 
socket-outieis for providing mains power to other apparatus shall comply with the relevant 
specifications for plugs and socket-outlets and for appliance couplers. 

Plugs and appliance couplers which are live, although not intended for the connection of 
the apparatus to the supply mains, shall comply with I EC Publication 83: Plugs and 
Socket-ouiiets for Domestic and Similar General Use. Standards, and 1 EC Publication 320: 
Appliance Couplers for Household and Similar General Purposes, respectively, as far as 
applicable, with the exception of the shape and dimension.^. 

They shall not be compatible with mains plugs, mains socket-outlets and appliance couplers. 

Mains socket-outlets mounted on Class II apparatus shall only allow connection to these 
outlets of ether Class 11 apparatus. 

Mains socket-outlets mounted on Class I apparatus shall either allow connection of Class 11 
apparatus only or shall be provided with protective earth contacts which arc reliably 
connected lo protective earth terminals or contacts. 

Compliance is checked According to the relevant specification and by inspection. 

14.1.2 Connectors not intended for the mains supply shall not be interchangeable with the mains 
plugs, socket-outlets or appliance couplers, complying with the relevant specifications. 

Compliance is checked according to the relevant specification and by inspection. 

14.2 Devices forming a part of the mains plug 

14.2.1 A device provided with pins intended to be introduced into fixed socket-outlets shall not 
impose undue strain on these socket-outlets. 

Compliance is checked by engaging the device, as in normal use, with the socket-outlet of a 
test apparatus as shown in Figure 6, page 96. The balancing arm of the test apparatus pivots about 
a horizontal axis through the centre lines of the contact tubes of the socket-outlet at a distance 
of 8 mm behind the engagement face of the socket-outlet. 

(lEC page 75) 36 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



With the device not in engagement , the balancing arm is in equilibrium, the engagement face 
of the socket-outlet being in the vertical position. 

After the device has been engaged, the torque to he applied to the socket-outlet to maintain 
its engagement face in the vertical plane is determined by the position of a weight on the balancing 
arm. The torque shall not exceed 0.25 Nm. 

This lest is compatible with the test described in the 1 E C standard for plugs and socket-outlets for household and 
similar purposes — Pari 1 (in preparation). 

The testing device shown in Figure 6, page 96. is intended for the testing of devices forming a part of the mains 
plug with dimensions in accordance with plugs of Group C in 1 EC Publication 83. 

For devices forming a part of the mains plug with dimensions of Group A or Group B in I EC Publication 83, 
ottier lest devices and requirements may be necessary. 

14.2.2 The device shall comply with the standards for the dimensions of t lains plugs. 

Compliance is checked by measurement in accordance with the relevant standard. 
The dimensions of some types of mains plugs are specified in I EC Publication 83. 

14.3 Terminals for external flexible cords 

14.3.1 Terminals shall be so located or shielded that even if a strand of a conductor should escape 
from a terminal, there is no risk of accidental contact between live parts and accessible metal 
pans. 

A free strand of a live cond ctor shall not touch any accessible metal part and a strand of 
an earthing conductor, if any, shall not touch any live part. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by the following test. 

An 8 mm length of insulation is removed from the end of a stranded conductor having the 
nominal cross-sectional area specified in Clause 15. which is then connected to the .terminal with 
one strand free. 

The free strand is bent in every possible direction without tearing back the insulation and 
without bending the strand around barriers and it shall not make contact prohibited hy the 
requirement. 

14.3.2 Screw terminals shall be so fixed that they will not work loose when the screwr are tightened 
or loosened. 

Compliance is checked by connecting and disconnecting ten times a conductor of the specified 
maximum cross-sectional area. 

The value of the torque to be applied shall be 2(3 of the value given in Table V. 

Screw terminals may be prevented from working loose by two fixing screws, by fixing with one screw in a recess 
without appreciable play, or by other suitable means. 

14.3.3 Screw terminals shall allow connection to be made with sufficient contact pressure without 
damaging the conductors. Furthermore, they shall allow a conductor to be connected without 
special preparations (e.g. soldering of the end of the conductor, use of cable lugs or bending 
of eyelets) and they shall prevent the bare conductors from slipping out when the screws are 
tightened. 

Compliance is checked by inspection of the conductor after it has been fitted 'ccording to 
Sub-clause 14.3.2 for the first time. 



37 (lEC page 77) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



14.3.4 The supply conductors and the earthing conductor of a non-detachable mains cord or cable 
shall not be soldered directly to the conductors of a primed board. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

14.4 Protective earth terminal 

If an apparatus is provided with a protective earth terminal the following shall apply: 

a) for apparatus provided with a connector socket for the mains supply, the protective earth 
contact shall be an integral part of this socket; 

b) for apparatus to be connected to fixed wiring or provided with a non-detachable flexible 
cord or cable, the protective earth terminal shall be adjacent to the mains terminals. 

The protective earth conductor shall be connected to a screw terminal, to a soldered 
termination or to another device of comparable effectiveness. 

The protective earth terminal shall be of a robustness at least equal to that of the mains 
terminals and of a type such that the same tools can be used for the connection of the 
conductors. 

All parts of a protective earth terminal shall be such thai there is no danger of corrosion 
resulting from contact with the copper of the earth conductor or with any other metal part. 

A protective earth terminal shall comply with the requirements of Sub-clause 14.3. In 
addition, cither the screw or the body shall be of brass or of other metal no less resistant to 
corrosion and the contact surfaces shall be bare metal. U shall not be possible to loosen the 
scre\\ by hand. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 

Requirements and tests for connecting means lUhcr than screw terminals and soldered icrmmations arc under 
consideration. 

The connection between the protective earth icrmmals and parts required (sec 
Sub-clause 8.3.3) to be connected thereto shall be of a low resistance. 

Compliance is checked by the following test. 

A current of JO A derived from an a.c. source with a no-load voltage nc/t exceeding 6 V is passed 
for ] min between the protective earth terminal and each of the accessible metal parts in turn. 

The voltage drop between the protective earth terminal of the apparatus and the accessible 
metal part is measured and the resistance is calculated from the current and this voltage drop. 

The resistance of the flexible cord is not included in the resistance measurement . 

The resistance shall not exceed 0.5 Q. 

Care is taken that the contact resistance between the tip of the measuring probe and the metal part under test does 
not influence the test results. 

In the case of a low rated supply voltage, a reduced resistance value may be necessary, 
(lEC page 79) 38 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



15. External flexible cords 

15.1 Mains supply flexible cords shall comply with I EC Publication 227: Polyvinyl Chloride 
Insulated Cables of Rated Voltages up to and including 450750 V, or I EC Publication 245: 
Rubber Insulated Cables of Rated Voltages up to and including 450/750 V. 

A non-detachable mains cord shall be of the same type as prescribed for cords sets in I EC 
Publication 799: Cord Sets. 

Compliance is checked by testing mains supply flexible cords according to I EC 
Publications 227 or 245 and by inspection. 

In some countries, non-sheathed flexible cords are allowed. 

Non-detachable flexible cables and cords of Class I apparatus shall be provided with a 
green/yellow core, connected to the protective earth terminal of the apparatus and if a plug 
is provided, to the protective earth contact of the plug. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

The colour code for cores of flexible mains cords is contained in I EC Publication 173: Colours of the Cores of 
Flexible Cables and Cords. 

15.2 Conductors of mains supply cords shall have such a cross-sectional area that when a 
short-circuit occurs at the apparatus end of the cord, the protective devices in the electrical 
installation operate before the cord overheats. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 

A consequence of this requirement is that ihc minimum required cross-scciional area for such conductors depends 
on the local wiring rules. 

A nominal cross-sectional area of 0.75 mm' will satisf) ail national standards with the exception of those valid 
in the United States of America and Canada, whcjc a nominal cross-sectional area of 0.8! mm- is required 

A nominal cross-sectional area of 0.5 mm- is allowed provided the cord is non-dclachablc. the maximum current 
consumption does not exceed 2 A and the flexible cord is not longer than 2 m. 

15.3 Conductors of flexible cords used as connection between the apparatus and other apparatus 
used in combination with it, shall have a cross-sectional ^rea such that the temperature rise 
of the insulation under normal operating conditions and under fault conditions shall not be 
excessive. 

Compliance is checked by inspection. In case of doubt, the temperature rises of the insulation 
are determined under normal operating conditions and under fault conditions; the temperature 
rises shall not exceed the values given in the appropriate columns of Table II. 



15.4 a) Flexible cords used as connection between the apparatus and other apparatus used in 
combination with it, and comprising live conductors, shall have adequate dielectric 
strength. 

Compliance is checked by the following test: 

A specimen of the cord, 5 m long, is immersed for 24 h in water at a temperature of 20 ± 5 ''C, 
a length of about 10 cm at each end of the specimen being kept above the water. A test voltage 
of 4 U or 2820 V (peak), whichever is the higher, is then applied for 15 min between each live 
conductor and the water. 



39 (lEC page 81) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



/// addition, this voltage is applied between each live conductor and each conductor intended 
to he connected to accessible metal parts of the apparatus. 

No breakdown shall occur during the tests. The voltage U is the higher value occurring across 
the insulation either under normal operating conditions or under fault conditions. 

If a length of 5 m of cord cannot be obtained, the longest available piece is used. 

b) Flexible cords used as connection between the apparatus and other apparatus used in 
combination with it, and comprising live conductors, shall withstand flexing and other 
mechanical stresses occurring in normal use. 

Compliance is checked by the flexing test given in Sub-clause 5.6.3.1 of I EC 
Publication 227-1: Part 1: General Requirements, and in Sub-clause 3.1 of 1 EC Publi- 
cation 227-2: Part 2: Test Methods, except that the following table applies: 



Table IV 



Overall diameter (D) of the flexible cable or cord 
(mm) 


Mass 
(kg) 


Pulley diameter 
(mm) 


t>^ 6 

6<Z)^12 

12<D^20 

1 


1.0 
1.5 
2.0 


60 
120 
1X0 



The carrier moves to and fro 15000 times (30 000 movements). 

The voltage between the conductors is U, as defined in Item a) of Sulf-clausc 15.4. 

.After the test, the specimen shall withstand the dielectric strength test specified in Item a) of 
Sub-clause M.4. 

5.5 The apparatus shall allow the external flexible cords, comprising one or more live conductors, 
to be so connected that the connecting points of the conductors arc relieved from strain, that 
the outer covering is protected from abrasion, and the conductors arc prevented from twisting. 

Moreover, it shall not be possil" .e to push an external cord back into the apparatus through 
its aperture if this involves danger. 

The method by which the relief from strain and the prevention of twisting is provided shall 
be Clearly^seen. 

Makeshift methods, such as tying the cord into a knot or tying the cord with a string, are 
not permitted 

The devices for strain and twist relief shall either be made of insulating material, or have 
a fixed covering of insulating material other than natural rubber, if an insulation fault of the 
cord or the conductor may make accessible metal parts live. 

For Class I apparatus, the arrangement of the terminals for the mains supply flexible cord, 
or the length of the conductors between the device for strain and twist relief and the terminals, 
shall be such that the live conductors become taut before the conductor connected to the 
protective earth terminal, if the cord slips out of the device for strain and twist relief. 



(lEC page 83) 



40 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Compliance is checked by inspection and by the foUowing lest. 

The apparatus is fitted with the flexible cord, the devices for strain and twist relief being 
appropriately used. The conductors are introduced into the terminals, and the terminal screns, 
if any. are slightly tightened, so that the conductors cannot easily change their position. 

After this preparation, pushing the cord further into the apparatus shall not be possible or shall 
cause no danger. 

A mark is made on the cord, under strain, near the aperture, and the flexible cord is subjected 
100 times to a pull of 40 N (4 kgf) for a duration of 1 s each. The pull shall not be applied in 
jerks. 

Immediately afterwards, the cord is subjected for a period of 1 min to a torque of 0.25 Nm 

(2.5 kgf -cm). 

During the test, the cord shall not be displaced by more than 2 mm, the measurement being 
made while the cord is still under strain; the ends of the conductors shall not be noticeably 
displaced in the terminals and no damage to the flexible cord shall be caused by the devices for 
strain and twist relief 

The test is made with the type of flexible cord attached to the apparatus. 

15.6 Inlet openings for flexible cables or cords shall be in insulating material or be provided with 
bushings of insulating material, which is substantially free from ageing effects under 
conditions of normal use. The openings shall be so shaped that there is no risk of damage to 
the cable or cord during its introduction and subsequent movements. 

Compliance is checked by inspection, by fitting flexible cords and by the following test. 

Bushings of insulating material are subjected to an ageing test for 10 days (240 h) at a 
temperature 30 C above the temperature to which they arc subjected under normal operating 
conditions, with a minimum of 70 C. 

After the test, the bushing is subjected to the dielectric strength test of Sub-clause 9.2, the lest 
voltage being applied between a metal rod of the same section as the cord, inserted instead of 
the cord, and the metal part in which the hushing is fixed. 

16. Electrical connections and mechanical fixings 

16.1 Screw terminals providing electrical contact and screw fixings which during the life of the 
apparatus will be loosened and tightened several times shall have adequate strength. 

Screws exerting contact pressure and screws with a diameter less than 3 mm which form 
part of the above-mentioned screw fixings shall screw into a metal nut or a metal insert. 

However, screws with a minimum diameter of 1.8 mm are allowed, without a metal nut or 
a metal insert, provided: 

— they are not used for electrical connections; 

— they are not intended to be operated by the user; 

— the fixing of a single part is made by more than two screws. 

Screw fixings which during the life of Ihe apparatus will be loosened and tightened several limes include terminal 
screws, screws for fixing covers (as far as they must be loosened to open the apparatus), screws for fjxing handles, 
knobs and the Hke. 



41 (lECpageSS) 



IS : 122(74-1987 
lEC Pull 491 (1984) 



Compliance is checked by the following test. 

The screws are loosened and then tightened, with a torque according to Table V; 

- five times in the case of screws operating in a thread in metal, 

- ten times in the case of screws operating in wood or in a thread in insulating material. 
In the latter case, the screws are to be completely removed and reinserted each time. 

The screws shall not be tightened in jerks. 

After the test, there shall be no deterioration impairing tiie safety of the apparatus. 

The material in which the screws are inserted is verified by inspection. 

Table V 



Nominal diameter of screw 

(mm) 


Torque 

(Nm fkgf-cm)) 


Screws with heads 


Screws without heads 


1.8 

2.2 

2.5 

3 

3.5 

4 

5 

6 


0.2 (2) 
0.3 (3) 
0.4 (4) 
0.5 (5) 
0.8 (8) 
.1.2 (12) 
2.0 (20) 
2.5 (25) 


0.10 (1.0) 
0.15 (1.5) 
0.20 (2.0) 
0.25 (2.5) 
0.4 (4) 
0.7 (7) 
^ 0.8 (8) 



16.2 Means shall be provided to ensure the correct introduction of screws into female threads in 
non-metallic material, if they will be loosened and tightened several times during the life of 
the apparatus and contribute to safety. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 

This requirement is deemed to be met if inlroduclion in a slanting manner is prevented, e.g. by guiding the screw 
in the part to be fixed, by a recess in the nut or a lead to the screw. 

16.3 Screws or other fixing -devices intended to fix covers or the like, shall be captive in order to 
prevent replacement during servicing by screws or other fixing devices, which might cause a 
reduction of creepage distances or clearances between accessible metal parts and live parts, 
below the values given in Table I. 

Such screws need not be captive if, when replaced by screws having a length of ten times 
their nominal diameter, the distances are not less than those stated in Table I. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement. 

16.4 Electrical connections in parts directly connected to the supply mains (see Sub-clause 2.9) 
shall be so designed that contact pressure is not transmitted through insulating material other 
than ceramic, unless there is sufficient resiliency in the metallic parts to compensate for any 
possible shrinkage of the insulating material 

Compliance is checked by inspection. 



(lEC page 87) 



42 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



16.5 A screw or rivet which fixes together parts directly connected to the mains, carrying a current 
of more than 20 mA, and which serves also as a mechanical fixing, shall be locked against 
loosening. 

Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 

Sealing by compound or the like provides saiisfaclon. locking only for screw cdnneclions not subject to torsion. 

For rivets, a non-circular shank or an appropriate notch nnay be a sufficient guard against rotation. 

16.6 Cover-fixing devices, other than screws, shall have adequate mechanical strength, if the safety 
of the apparatus might otherwise be impaired. 

The locked anfl unlocked positions of these devices shall be unambiguous, and it shall not 
be possible to unlock them inadvertently. 

Compliance is checked by inspection, by operating the device and by the following test, usually 
applicable to those devices whose operation is effected by a combination of rotary and linear 
movements. 

The device is locked and unlocked and the torques or forces necessary are measured. With the 
device in the locked position, a torque or force of twice the value necessary to lock the device, 
with a minimum of 1 Nm (10 kgf- cm) or 10 N (I kgf) is applied in the locking direction, unless 
it is unlocked by a smaller torque or force in the same direction. 

This operation is performed ten times. 

The torque or force necessary for unlocking the device shall be at least 0.1 Nm (1 kgf- cm) 
or 1 N (0.1 kgf). 

After the test, the device .'ihall show no deterioration impairing the safety of the apparatus. 
For certain types of locking devices, different tests may be necessary. 



43 (lEC page 89) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Enclosure 



Point from which creepage 
distances are measured 



Clearance 



Live part 




^Test finger 



Fictitious conductive layer 



Rcf.: Sub-cluusc 4.3.1. 



Fig. 1, Accessible parts. 



(lEC page 90) 



44 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 




Dimensions in »iiliinu'liv.\ 

Tolerances: 
on angles: ±5' 
on linear dimensions 

less than 25 mm: __ „ . ^, 

over 25 mm: ±0.2 
Ref.: Sub-clause 8.1.1. 

Fig. 2a y Jointed test finger. 



Spherical 



419174 



(V~ 



80 



20 





470174 



Dimensions of ihc fingertip: 
see Figure la}. 
Dimensions in miUimcirvs 
Ref.: Sub-clause 8.1.1. 

Fig. lb) Rigid test finger. 



45 



(fEC page 91) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



A B 



^,..,_(V) ±^, 



Ri 



d> 



"1 r^ 



I r-J 



I 1 



R2 




C, = I nF 


R3 = 100 Mil 


R, = 1 kn 


R4 = 0,1 Mn 


Rj = 4 MO 


Rj = 15 MO 



(R2 is used only when the tests of 
Sub-clause 13.2 are performed on a 
component comprising a capacitor only.) 

The switch S is a critical part of the circuit. 
It shall be so designed that as little as 
possible of the available energy is dissipated 
in arcing or inadequate insulation. An 
example of such a switch is given in 
Figure 3b). 

The component X under test is connected to 
the terminals C and D.^ Optionally the 
voltage divider R3, R4 may be provided so 
that an oscilloscope connected across R4 
permits the observation of the voltage 
waveform across the component under test. 
This voltage divider is compensated so that 
the observed waveform corresponds with 
that across the component under test. 



References. Sub-clauses 13.1 and 13.2. 



Fig. 3a) Circuit for surge tests. 



(lEC page 92) 



46 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



y 



Coil 



/" 



o ^ 



Switch controlled by a motor or any 
other appropriate device 



Plunger 






u 



L 



Coil 



Rod of insulating material 




KU 



I R I 



The switch (S in Fip;ure ltd)) comprises the 



JuiJVv'vvnig jjai to . 



The brass pillars A and B support circular 
electrodes E spaced at a distance of 15 mm; 
Kr is a brass sphere of 7 mm diameter and 
is supported on a rigid rod of insulating 
material approximately 1 50 mm long. 

A. B and K are connected as shown in 
Figure 3a j, K by means of a flexible wire. 



L.are must De taKen to avoid bouncing of 
sphere K. 



Fig. Zh) Examnle of a switch to be used in the circuit for surae tpsts 



47 



(lEC page 93) 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Release nose 



Release bar 



Release-mechanism spring 
Release jaw 




Hammer shaft 



Hammer spring 



The apparatus consists of three main parts: the body, 
the Striking element and the spring-loadedrelease nose. 

The body comprises the housing, the striking element 
guide, the release mechanism and all parts rigidly fixed 
thereto. The mass of this assembly is 1 250 g. 

The strikmg element comprises the hammer head, the 
hammer shaft and the cocking knob. The mass of this 
assembly is 250 g. 

The hammer head has a hemispherical face of radius 
1 mm andisof polyamidchavinga Rockwell hardness 
of R 100; 11 is fixed to the hammer shaft in such a way 
that the distance from its tip to the plane of the front 
of the nose, when the striking clement is on the pomt 
of release, is 20 mm 

The nose has a mass of 60 g and the nose spring is such 
that n exerts a force of 20 N when the relcak" .laws are 
on the point of releasing the strikmg element. 

The hammer spring is adjusted so that the product of 
the compression, in millimetres, and the force excrlcd. 
in newions, equals I ()00. the compression being 
approximately 20 mm. With this adjusin-rcni. the 
impact energy is 0.5 + 0.05 Nm. 

The release mcchanistn springs are adjusted so that 
they cxeri just sufficient pressure to keep the release 
jaws in the closed position. 

The apparatus is cocked by pulling the cocking knob 
back until the release jaws engage with the groove in 
the hammer shaft. 

The blows are applied by pushing the release nose 
against the sample in a direction perpendicular to the 
surface at the point to be tested. The pressure is slowly 
increased so that the nose moves |)ack until it is in 
contact with the release bajs, which then move to 
operate the release n^echanism and. allow the hammer 
to strike. 

Rcf.: Sub-clauses 8.3.6^and 11.1.3. 



Fig. 4, Test hammer. 



Cocking knob 



(!EC page 94) 



48 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 




Direction of movement of the pin 



Specimen unaer test 



The pin is in the plane A B C D which is perpendicular to the specimen under test. 

Rcf.-. Sub-clause 8.3.6. 



Fig. 5. Scratch test for insulating layers. 



49 



(lEC page 95) 



IS : 12274-1987 
!£C Pub 49! (1984) 



V 




'"iiMii Mill I!" !i:i;:Trr 



-^III.I . IUI- 



Balancing arm 



Weight 



Ci, 



I — iiii rmi: 



■I III 
■IIII 




specimen 




:i3/K.t 



Ref.: Sub-clause )4.2. 



Fig. 6. Testing device for apparatus forming a part of the mains plug. 



riEC page 96) 



50 




5 6 7 a 9 too 



Kcl.; Su'b uluusi 



5 6 7 8 9 1 000 



i !'rS'">i: 7 Peak vaJue of the operating volt-ige, in voUs 



■cs Si 



t-^ SO 



*Molnl pin having a 
ntacc nf inn fi 



Metal frame holding the upper pin in an upright \ y 
Dosition and ailowinq it to move up and down \ / 



WW 
C Ki 

N- SO 

00 

4k 




The edges of the test pin rounded 
with a radius of 0.5 mm 



Terminals for test voltage 



Insulating base 



26Jl7fi 



Ref.: Sub-clauses 9.2 and f3.8.2rji. 

Fig. 8. Dielectric strength test instrument. 





1UU uuu 
50 000 

10000 
5000 

1 000 










— ^ L — j _ 








.. 














■^^ 




































J 


f^ 














-i — 


i 


















> 


;^ 


















H . 


















/ 














^^_ 




1 

! 


















i-^— 
















1 




-^\\ 














# 


^i* A et B 
/ A and B 

- 




















— , 












?^ 


^ 
















a. 




- 






1 




^ 




> 




















> 
c 












,0^ 






^^^^ 






1 














o 

« 

o 










'-f^ 




^ 






























X 

^ 




yA 






1 — 1- 
























500 " 

100 - 
10 

R 






-^ 

















































































\ 












— |. 
































































— 














, , __ 


i 

1 










IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984 




ef.: Sub-cJa 


use 9.2 


-Ti 


SO 

iblc 


100 

III 






500 
Operatir 

FiCJURI 


1 000 
ig voltage in V {\ 

i 9 


)eak) 




5 000 


10000 




50 000 100 000 
(peak value) 

.■<SJ/76 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 




I 

V 



"Specimen under test 



The circuit values are: 



Ri = — where E is the rated voltage and / is the 
rated current. 



R "1 
Rj = — '-^— where X is the ratio between the rated 

^ peak surge current and the rated r.m.s. 



current. 



«00„ 



CRj = 2 5(K) us 

D = a silicon rectifier 



The circuit elements and the source impedance arc 
chosen so as to ensure a 10% accuracy of the rated 
peak surge current and the rated current. 

Rcf.; Sub-clause 13.4.2/?;. 



Fig. 10. Circuit for mains switch testing. 



(lEC page 100) 



54 



IS : 12274-1987 
lEC Pub 491 (1984) 



Supply mains 



<.-i 



-Ob 



i 




Electrically separated accessible 
parts 



The diagram shows a separating mains transformer T, 
where point "a" is live relative to point "b". If "a"' and "b" 
are inside the apparatus, the sum of the distances x and y 
is taken into account for the purpose of checking 
compliance with Sub-clause 8.3.4. 

Reference: Sub-clause 8.3.4 



Fig. 11. Example of assessment of reinforced insulation. 



55 



(lECpage 101) 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 3 31 01 31 3 31 13 75 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafer Marg, 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 
3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 



♦Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme Vlt M, V. I. P. Road, 
Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 
CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, 
MADRAS 6001 13 

tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 
AHMADABAD 380001 

tpeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 
BANGALORE 560058 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, 
T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, 
GUWAHATI 781 003 

5-8-560 L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 
HYDERABAD 500001 

R1 4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam, TRIVANDRUM 695034 

Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 

Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 
NAGPUR 440010 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 
PUNE411005 



36 24 99 

2 18 43, 3 16 41 

41 24 42. 41 26 19, 41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 

2 63 48, 2 63 49 

38 49 65, 38 49 56 

6 67 16 

5 36 27 
3 31 77 



23 10 83 

6 34 71, 6 98 32 

21 68 76, 21 82 92 

6 23 05 

6 21 04, 6 21 17 



251 71 
5 24 35 



*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Cliowrinahes Approach P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 27 68 00 

tSales Office in Bombay is at Noveltv Chambers. Grant Road, Bombay 400007 89 66 26 

:]:Sales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Naraslmharaja Square, Bangalore 560002 22 39 71 



Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India 



