**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10700 (1983) : Methods of measurement for magnetic tapes 
for video recording and reproduction [LITD 7: Audio, Video 
and Multimedia Systems and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



15:10700-1993 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

MAGNETIC TAPES FOR VIDEO RECORDING 

AND REPRODUCTION 



UDC eBl&40aS-84 : 621 '397 ; 621*3 17'3 




tJ Copyright J9S4 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

M.\\.\K fJHAV^^V, bt ilAllADUR SHAH ZAlTAR MARG 

^fEW DELHI llimi 

CJr 4 Jammry 1^84- 



1$ : lo^do -idsi 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

MAGNETIC TAPES FOR VIDEO RECORDING 

AND REPRODUCTION 

Recording Sectional Committee, LTDG 23 

Chairman Representing 

Shri B. N. Banerjee Directorate General of All India Radio, New 

Delhi 

Members 

Sum N.J. Naib ( Alternate to 
Shri B. N. Banerjee ) 
Shri D. Anbalagak Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri D. S. Gill ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. P. Bhattacharva Department of Teaching Aids, New Delhi 

Dr A. F. Ghhapgar National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri P. H. Ganatra Vimal Enterprises Ltd, Umbergam 

Shri K. L. Gakg Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shri R. V. Narayanan ( Alternate) 
Shri D. K, Ghosh The Gramophone Co of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Arun 13agiii ( Alternate) 
Shri R. G. Gupta Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shri P. N. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
CoL L. G. Ketkar Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Col G. Pv. Mahadevan ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. G. Khot Railway Board, New Delhi 

Shri S.Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. D. Luthra Polydor of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. G. Mazumdar General Electronics of Haryana Pvt Ltd, 

Faridabad 
Shri M. N. Mehtani Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi 

Shri S. S. Swani ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. C. Mukherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Bhattacharaya ( Alternate) 
Shri S. G. Patel Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. D. Pay ate Central Electronics Engineering Research Insti- 

tute (CSIR), Pilani 

Shri M. R. Kapook ( Alternate ) 

( Contifued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10700 - 1983 



( Continued fro. n page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri a. V. Ramak 
Shbi p. D. Rao 

Dr C. S. R. Ra.o 



Shbi P. 
Skbi p. 



V. Krishna Redpi 
S. Sachuev 



Shri A. Das Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. G, Jain, 
Head ( Electronics ) 



Representing 

Films Division, Bombay 

Electronic Component Industries Association 
(ELGINA), New Delhi 

Research Department, All India Radio, New 
Delhi 

Film & TV Institute of India, Pune 

Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and 
The Radio Electronic & Television Manufac- 
turers' Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 

Director General, I SI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri Pavan^Kumab 
Assistant Director ( H-lectronics ), 1SI 



IS ! 10700 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT FOR 

MAGNETIC TAPES FOR VIDEO RECORDING 

AND REPRODUCTION 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 September 1983, after the draft finalized by the Recording Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the methods of measurement for evaluation of 
the properties of magnetic tapes for video recording and reproduction. 

0.3 While preparing this slandard, assistance has been derived from 
lEG Doc: 60 B ( CO. ) 44 ' Draft — Measuring methods for video tape 
properties ', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard describes the methods of measurement for determining 
the physical, mechanical and electrical performance characteristics of 
magnetic tapes for video recording and reproduction. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in 
IS : 1885 ( Part 48/Sec 1 )-1978t shall apply. 

3. CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENTS 

3.1 All properties, if not otherwise specified, shall be measured at a 
temperature of 25 ± 1°C, in a humidity of 48 percent to 52 percent and 
an atmospheric pressure between 86 kPa and 106 kPa. The test sample to 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

•fElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part 48 Recording, Section 1 Tape recording. 



IS : 10700 - 1983 

be measured has to be stored for 24 hours at the above conditions to assure 
correct testing results. This is defined as the standard environment for 
this document. 

4. TESTS FOR MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

4.1 Tape Width — The tape, covered with a glass, shal^ be measured 
without tension at a minimum of five different positions along the tape 
using a calibrated microscope or profile projector having an accuracy of at 
least 1/400 mm = 2*5 (xm. The average of the five readings gives the tape 
width. 

4*2 Tape Thickness — The tape thickness shall be obtained by placing 
ten sections of tape from the sample on top of each other in a suitable 
manner, measuring with a micrometer gauge and dividing the reading by 
ten. 

4.3 Tensile Tests 

4.3*1 The measurements shall be made in accordance with Appendix A. 
The length of the test sample shall be 200 mm. The rate of elongation 
for all tensile tests shall be 100 mm/min ±10 percent. 

4.3.2 Breaking Strength — The sample shall be loaded until the breaking 
point of the sample is reached. The force at that point gives the breaking 
strength of the tape. 

4.3.3 Yield Strength ( F 5% ) — The yield strength ( F 5% ) is the 
force necessary to produce five percent elongation of the tape. 

4.4 Residual Elongation 

4.4.1 To measure the residual elongation a test sample approximately 
1 m long shall be subjected to a tension of 50 N/mm^ over the total cross 
section for a period of 3 minutes. 

4.4.2 The sample shall then be measured with negligible force 
( 0*25 N ) three minutes after the load has been removed. 

4.4.3 The residual elongation is given as a percentage of the original 
tape length. 

4.5 Longitudinal Shrinkage 

4.5.1 A test sample ( approximately 1 metre long ) shall be stored in 
the standard environment for 48 hours. It shall then be vertically suspen- 
ded and loaded with 0*25 N force. The length of the test sample, three 
minutes after the load has been applied, gives the original tape length. 

4.5.2 The environment shall then be changed to 5C°C and 13 percent 
relative humJdity for a period of 18 hours. Three hours after restoring the 



is : 10700 - 1983 

standard environment the shrinkage of the sample shall be measured and 
expressed as a percentage of the original tape length. 

4.6 Coefficient of Elongation in Humidity 

4.6.1 A test sample ( approximately one metre long ) shall be stored in 
the standard environment for 48 hours. It shall then be vertically suspen- 
ded and loaded with 0*25 N force. The length of the test sample, three 
minutes after the load has been applied, gives the original tape length. 

4.6.2 After increasing the relative humidity by 30 percent for a period 
of 18 hours the elongation shall be measured and expressed as a percentage 
of the original tape length. 

4.7 Transverse Cupping 

4.7.1 Transverse cupping of the tape is generally the result of contrac- 
tions of the coated dispersion during drying. It may also be due to a 
differential absorption of moisture by base and coating. It takes the form 
of a concavity on the coated side. Cupping leads to poor winding 
properties of the tape and tends to impose unequal strains over the tape 
width. It is also impossible to ensure the essential intimate contact 
between the tape and head all over the tape width when pronounced 
cupping is present without subjecting the tape to undesirable tension 
during use. 

4.7.2 Test Procedure — The tape samples are exposed for a duration of 
12 hours each: 

a) first at a temperature between 38°C and 42°G and humidity of 
less than 15 percent, 

b) and then, at a temperature between 38°C and 42°G and relative 
humidity between 90 and 100 percent. 

At the end of the period of exposure the cupping shall be measured 
with goniometer or any other suitable instrument. 

4.7.3 A tape sample 10 mm in length shall be placed, concave side 
down, on a smooth flat surface. Transverse cupping is the maximum 
departure of the tape sample from the flat surface. The time between 
cutting the tape and the measurement shall be at least one hour. 

4.7.4 The tape sample and the test surface shall not be charged 
electrostatically. 

4.8 Longitudinal Curvature 

4.8.1 Static Longitudinal Curvature — A tape sample one metre long shall 
be allowed to unroll and assume its natural curvature on a flat surface. 



IS : 10700 - 19d3 

The maximum deviation of the edge of the tape from a straight line 
joining the extremities of the tape sample is the static longitudinal 
curvature. 

4.8*2 Dynamic Measurement of Longitudinal Curvature — The test sanaple 
shall be measured in a test arrangement according to Fig. lA and IB. The 
variation of the tape edge shall be measured with a light sensor through a 
slot of 1 mm width, in the area of the lower tape edge. The output 
signal is proportional to the variations of the tape edge. The variation of 
each edge shall be measured and the worst value shall be reported. 



400 



, if HOLD-BACK TENSION 

^ ~^{Vy^ 0-25 N 



50 




90<» 



f- 



50 



I 



^ 



tBtr 



^r^ 



50 



50 

i_ 



* MAY BE VARJEO TO SUIT 
A PARTICULAR APPLICATION, 
IF REaUIRED. 



-LIGHT SENSING 
SYSTEM 



%. 



10-5 



B 

\90« 



Ik 



-#- 



80 ■ 



■ CAPSTAN PULLINS 
FORCE 



Fig. 1A Test System for Dynamic Measurement of 
Longitudinal Curvature 



IS : 10700 - 1983 



ai 



if^ 



:g x+0'2( 



Kiiire] 



TAPE 
EDGF 



m 



.__! 



W -TAPE WIDTH 

X -TAPE ENTRANCE{OR EXIT) GIVEN BY THE 
SUPPLY REEL (OR TAKE UP REEL ) 



Fig. IB Test System for Dynamic Measurement of 
Longitudinal Curvature 

4.9 Coefficient of Friction 

4.9,1 Quasi-static Friction of the Coating Side 

4.9.1.1 The test drum shall be a steel cylinder as shown hi Fig. 2 
having a diameter 100 mm and a surface roughness Ra = 0*25 /xm in 
accordance with IS : 3073-1967*. For particular applications a drum of 
different material and different surface roughness may be used. The druna 
shall be cleaned with tetrahydrofuran before starting the test. 

4*9.1.2 Procedure — The test sample with its coating side facing the 
test drum shall be pulled over the drum for 2 minutes at a velocity of 
5 cm/min. After a short pause the procedure can be started under the 
same conditions and registered. 

1 . i^i 



Coefficient of friction a = — 

a 



I. 



where 

a ~ angle of wrap around the drum ( 77 ) in radians. 
Fi == 0-5 N load, and 
Fg = jPi + friction 
( Values of velocity and load are chosen for practical reasons ). 



♦Assessment of surface roughness. 



IS : 10700 - 1983 



4.9.2 Quasi-static Friction of the Reverse Side 



4.9.2.1 The drum shall be replaced by a steel pin of 8 mm diameter 
and a surface roughness Ra = 0*07 fim ( see Fig. 2 ). For special applica- 
tions a pin of different rnaterial and different surface roughness may be 
used. The test procedure shall be as in 4.9.1 except that the reverse side 
of the tape is facing the pin surface. 



TAPE- 



LOAD 
0-5 N- 




FiG. 2 Test System for Measurement of Qjuasi Friction 



IS:W700-19B3 



4»9«3 Dynamic Friction of the Coating Side 

4.9.3.1 The dynamic friction shall be measured with the equipment 
shown in Fig. 3. This machine is capable of varying the speed in the 
range from 0'5 cm/s to about 20 crn/s. For the material of the drum and 
the pin, see 4.9.1 and 4.9.2. 




SOURCE 
TENSION 



CONSTANT TENSION 
REGULATOR 



./. 110 mm 



Fro. 3 Test System for Dynamic Measurement of Friction 

4.9.3.2 When a tape is run from 0*5 cm/s to approximately 20 cm/s 
the maximum value of ^ and the speed at which the maximum value is 
obtained shall be noted. 

4.9.3.3 From the diagram of friction versus speed, the coefficient of 
friction shall be calculated at two speed values, namely at the speed at 
which Fg has its maximum and at a specified speed characteristic for the 
recording equipment. 



9 



IS: 10700-1983 

4.9.3.4 The frictional characteristics can be expressed by the values; 

a) The maximum value of friction and the corresponding speed, and 

b) At a certain speed to be specified. 

4.9.4 Dynamic Friction of Reverse Side 

4.9.4.1 For measurement on the reverse side, the test procedure shall 
be same as in 4.9.3 except that the reverse side is facing the pin. 

4.10 Layer-to-Layer Adhesion 

4.10.1 A tape one metre in length shall be wound on a glass tube of 
36 mm diameter at a tension of 50 N/mm^ with one end of the tape fixed 
to the glass tube. 

4.10*2 The wound test piece shall be kept at a temperature of 45 ± 3®G 
and relative humidity of 80 percent for 4 hours, and afterwards in the 
standard environment for 24 hours. 

4.10.3 For some special applications requiring more stringent test 
conditions, the tape sample is wound on a 22*7 mm diameter tube of non- 
oxidizing material and exposed to a temperature/relative humidity condi- 
tion of 54°G and 84 percent relative humidity for 16 hours and afterwards 
und^r the standard environment for 24 hours. 

4.10.4 Finally, the test piece shallbe unwound slowly with a 0*1 N 
load at the end. Then any tendency for tape sticking and delamination 
of the magnetic coating shall be observed. 

4.11 Video Head Wear 

4.11.1 Tape tension, head mounting, tip protrusion and all other 
machine parameters shall be controlled in accordance with the specification 
of the recorder used. 

4.11.2 Before starting the test, one roll of the tape type to be tested 
in run for 5 hours on a new head for the purpose of contouring. Another 
roll of the same tape type shall be run for 100 passes of at least 45 minutes 
per pass and the decrease of head protrusion shall be measured by means 
of a suitable instrument. The decrease of head protrusion is a measure of 
head wear. The playing time of the test sample shall be stated. 

5. TESTS FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC AND ELECTRICAL 
CHARACTERISTICS 

5,1 Coercivity ( Hq ) and Retentivity ( Br ) 

5.1.1 Coercivity and retentivity shall be measured by using a dynamic 
B ~~ H versus H hysteresis loop tracer. The frequency and the field 
strength used shall be stated. 

10 



IS : 10700 - 198^ 

3.2 Coating Resistance 

5.2,1 Two electrodes shall be set apart corresponding to sample width 
as shown in Fig. 4. The cross section of each electrode shall be a quarter 
of a circle of radius 1 cm. 



ELECTRODES-/ 

/ 




SOH/mrrt 
Fig. 4 Test Set Up for Coating Resistance 



5.2.2 The test sample shall be placed across the electrodes, with the 
longitudinal direction of the tape perpendicular to the electrodes and with 
the magnetic coating of the tape in contact with the electrodes, 

5.2.3 Next, two weights producing a tension of 5 N/mm^ shall be 
suspended one at each end of the test sample. Then the electrical resis- 
tance between the electrodes shall be measured by a suitable instrument. 
The coating resistance is defined as that electrical resistance. 

5.3 TESTS FOR VIDEO CHARACTERISTICS 

5.3.0 The type of machine used shall be stated. It shall be set up in 
accordance with specification of the manufacturers instruction manual. 

5.3.1 Writing Current for Maximum RF Output — -During recording of a 
100 percent white level video signal the writing current is varied. After 
switching over to playback, the RF output representing the 100 percent 
white level is measured in the FM channel, ahead of any AGG or limiting. 
The writing current giving the maximum output is the writing current for 
maximum RF output. 

5.3.2 RF Output-Luminance — The RF output is the maximum RF level 
obtained at the writing current described in 5.3.1. 



11 



t^ I lO'^OO - 196^ 

5.3.3 RF Output-Chrominance — Under consideration. 

5.3.4 Video Signal-to-Moise Ratio — Under consideration. 

5.3.5 Frequency Response in the FM Channel — Frequency response is the 
ratio expressed in dB of the playback output level resulting from the 
frequency corresponding to the synchronizing pulse tip and the output at 
the frequency corresponding to the white level. 

5.3.6 Chrome Noise — Under consideration. 

5.3.7 Drop-Out 

5.3.7.1 A recording is made in accordance with 5.3.1. 

5.3.7.2 A drop-out is a momentary random signal reduction in the 
amplitude of the RF signal recovered from the tape. With the use of elec- 
tronic drop-out counting equipment, the number and summarised time of 
drop-outs during each 1 minute are recorded. 

5.3.7.3 The drop-out to be counted is any defect which creates a 
specified loss expressed in dB in the unlimited RF playback level for a 
specified time expressed in microseconds. The values used for depth and 
width shall be stated as well as the head tip height. 

5.3.8 Signal Wear 

5.3.8.1 A recording is made in accordance with 5.3.1. The unlimited 
RF output is measured on playback during the first and the fiftieth pass. 
The playing time for each pass shall be at least 5 minutes. The change of 
RF output expressed in dB is a measure of signal wear. 

5.3.9 Tape Life 

5.3.9.1 Two identical video tape recorders shall be used for this test. 
Tape tensions head mounting, tip protrusion and all other machine para- 
meters shall be controlled in accordance with the machine manufacturer's 
specifications. 

5.3.9.2 Using VTR A, the tape to be tested shall be recorded over at 
least a 10 minute section with a signal according to 5.3.1. This section is 
then replayed, the drop-out rate counted and the performance assessed. 

5.3.9.3 Using VTR B, the recorded section shall be then replayed 
for 100 passes. 

5.3.9.4 The procedure in 5.3.9.2 shall be repeated over exactly the 
same section of tape, that is the tape shall be recorded and its replay 
performance assessed. 

12 



IS : 10700 - 1983 

This is followed by a repetition of procedure in 5.3.9,3. 

ThiB process shall be continued, counting the total number of passes, 
until it is found that the tape under test no longer meets the performance 
requirements of the recorder system used to conduct the test. At this point 
the test shall be terminated. 

The total number of passes taken to reach this point is a measure of 
the usable tape life. 

5.3.10 Still Frame ( Stop Motion ) — One frame of a video track is scanned 
in stop mode until there is an obvious breakdown of the reproduced signal. 
The time taken to reach this point is a measure of stop motion capability 
of the tape. 

5.4 Tests for Audio Characteristics 

5.4.0 Provisions of 5.3.0 in addition to the following shall apply. 

5.4.0.1 All references to frequency /j are either 315 Hz or 1 000 Hz 
depending on the method and all references to frequency's ^ire either 7 kHz 
or 10 kHz depending on the method used. The bias current at which the 
following test is conducted shall be adjusted according to one of the follow- 
ing procedures at a level 15-20 dB below saturation ( see Fig. 5 ): 

a) The audio bias current shall be given by [ a -\- c )12^ where ' a ' 
and ' c ' are the bias current values at which the playback output 
at 315 Hz is 1 dB below the maximum obtainable playback output. 

b) The audio bias current shall be given by ( a + c )/2, where ^ a ' 
and ' c ' are the bias current values at which the playback output 
at 1 000 Hz is 1 dB below the maximum obtainable playback 
output. 

-c) When a signal of 1 kHz is recorded, the bias current should be 
that which gives a playback level 1 dB less than the maximum 
output; the measured current being greater than that which gives 
maximum output from the tape.( that is point c in Fig.. 5 ). 

The method used shall be stated. 

5.4.1 Audio Sensitivity — The playback output level obtained from th^ 
test sample on which a signal of frequency /'j is recorded at a level 15- 
20 dB below saturation shall be measured. Audio sensitivity is the ratio, 
expressed in dB, of the playback output level of a signal at a frequency /j 
from the test saniple to that of another tape, used as a reference recorded 
under the same conditions. 

5.4.2 Output Uniformity — ■ In the measurement of output variation, a signal 
of a frequency /i shall be recorded over the entire length of the test sample 
under the same conditions as in the measurement of the audio sensitivity. 

15 



IS : 10700 " 1983 

The output uniformity is the ratio in dB of the highest to the lowest play- 
back output level measured over the entire length of tape. 




a c 

BIAS CURRENT 

Fig. 5 Bias Current Adjustment 

5.4.3 Audio Frequency Response — A signal of frequency jfj and another 
signal of frequency /g shall be recorded on the test sample at the same input 
voltage which is equivalent to the playback output 20 dB below the satura- 
tion level at the frequency /j of the tape. Next, the playback output level 
at the frequencies/i and/2 shall be measured. The same procedure shall 
be repeated for the tape used as a reference. 

Audio frequency response difference between the two tapes is expressed 
by Z), where D — o? — d^, 

d = ( output in dB at/g — output in dB at fi ) for tape under 
test, and 

d^ = ( output in dB at/g — output in dB at /i ) for tape used as 
a reference. 

5.4.4 Erasability 

5.4.4.1 A signal of frequency /j shall be recorded on the test sample 
on a VTR which is in accordance with the machine manutacturer's specific- 
ation. A portion of the above mentioned recording shall be erased. 

The erasability is the ratio in dB of the playback output level of the 
non-erased portion to the residual playback output level of the erased 
portion. 

Both measurements shall be made using a suitable selective device. 



14 



t& : 10706 - I9d3 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.3.1 ) 

DETERMINATION OF TENSILE PROPERTIES 

A-1. GENERAL 

A-1.1 The tensile properties that can be measured by the procedures desc- 
ribed in this method include tensile stress at break and elongation at the 
yield point. 

A-2. APPARATUS 

A-2.1 Testing Machine — Testing machine with grips that can be separ- 
ated at the rate specified. 

A-2.1.1 Grips — Grips for holding the test specimen, one being attached 
to a fixed or essentially stationary member of the machine and the other to 
a movable member. The grips are self-aligning; that is, they are attached 
to the fixed and movable member respectively in such a manner that they 
will move freely into alignment as soon as any load is applied, so that the 
long axis of the test specimen will coincide with the direction of the applied 
pull through the centre line of the grip assembly. The test specimen is held 
in such a way that slip relative to the grips is prevented as far as possible. 
The grips may conveniently be of the kind that tighten automatically under 
load. 

A-2.1.2 Load Indicator — Suitable load-indicating mechanism capable of 
showing the total tensile load carried by the test specimen when held by 
the grips. This mechanism is essentially free from inertia lag at the specified 
rate of testing and indicates the load with an accuracy of ± 1 percent of 
the indicated value, or better. 

A-2.2 Extension Indicator ( When Required ) — Suitable instrument 
for determining, at any time during the test the distance between two fixed 
points or reference lines located within the middle parallel- sided part of the 
test specimen. It is desirable, but not essential, that this instrument should 
automatically record this distance ( or any change in it ) as a function of 
the load on the test specimen or of the elapsed time from the start of the 
test, or both. If only distance as a function of elapsed time is recorded, 
load-time data are also taken. The instrument is essentially free of inertia 
lag at the specified speed of testing and is accurate to ± 1 percent of strain 
or better. For the measurement of modulus of elasticity the instrument is 
capable of measuring the distance between the reference lines to an accuracy 
of ± 0*1 mm. 

A-i2.3 Micrometers — Screw micrometer reading to at least 0*02 nun for 
measuring the width and thickness of test specimens. 

15 



IS : 10^00 - i9d^ 

Dial-gauge micrometerj reading to at least 0*02 mm and provided 
with a flat circular foot that will apply a pressure of 0*01 to 0*03 N/mm^ to 
the test specimen, for measuring the thickness of test specimens of non-rigid 
materials. 

A-3. NUMBER OF TESTS 

A-3«l At least five test specimens are tested for each sample. 

A-3.2 Test specimens that do not break within the parallel position are 
discarded and further specimens are tested. 

A.4. SPEED OF MACHINE 

A-4,1 The speed of testing is the rate of separation of the grips of the 
testing machine during the test. The speed shall be 100 mm/min 
— 10 percent. 

A-5. PROCEDURE 

A-5.1 The thickness of test specimen is measured at several points to the 
nearest 1 percent with the dial-gauge micrometer described in A-2.3. The 
width is taken to be the width measured to the nearest 0*05 mm of the 
middle parallel-sided part. 

A-5.2 The test specimen is placed in the grips of the testing machine taking 
care to align the long axis of the test specimen and the grips with an 
imaginary line joining the points of attachment of the grips to the machine. 
The grips are tightened evenly and firmly to the degree necessary to pre- 
vent the test specimen from slipping during the test but not to the point 
where the specimen would be crushed. 

A-5.3 The extension indicator is attached. 

A-5.4 The speed is set at the specified value and the machine is started. 

A-5,5 The loads and corresponding deformation are rewarded at appro- 
priate and approximately even intervals of strain in the region of elastic 
behaviours. 

A=6, CALCULATION AND EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 

A-6.1 Tensile Stress at Break — The load in kilogrammes-force at break 
is divided by the original minimum cross-sectional area of the test specimen 
in square centimietre. The result shall be expressed in N/mm^ and reported 
to three significant figures. 

A-6.2 Percentage Elongation at Yield — The extension at the yield 
point is divided by the original distance between the reference lines and 
multiplied by 100. The percentage elongation at yield is reported to two 
significant figures. 

16 



