**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfSs-^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 11859:2004 

mr^ W^ (Reaffirmed - 2012) 

Indian Standard 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS — 
TURNING AND CLEARANCE DIAMETERS — 

METHODS OF TEST 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 65.060.10 



©BIS 2004 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

September 2004 Price Group 3 



Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, FAD 32 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and 
Agriculture Division Council. 

Turning and clearance diameter of agricultural tractors are important parameters which an operator should know 
while operating a tractor. This standard has been published to illustrate detailed method of test for determination 
of these diameters. 

This standard was first published in 1986 and was based on ISO 789-3 : 1982 'Agricultural tractors — Test 
procedures — Part 3 : Turning and clearance diameter' issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO). With the revision of ISO 789-3 in 1993, it has been decided to revise this standard also. 

In reporting the result of a test, made in accordance with this standard if the final value, observed or calculated, 
is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values 

(revised)' . 



IS 11859 : 2004 



Indian Standard 



AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS — 
TURNING AND CLEARANCE DIAMETERS 

METHODS OF TEST 



( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard specifies a method of determining the 
turning and clearance diameters of wheeled 
agricultural tractors. 

It applies to wheeled agricultural tractors having at 
least two axles fitted with pneumatic tyres. 

2 REFERENCE 

The standard given below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 

fS No. Title 

12363 : 1988 Recommendation on track width of 
agricultural tractors 

3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purposes of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Agricultural Tractor — Self-propelled wheeled 
machine having at least two axles, particularly 
designed to pull, push, carry and operate implements 
used for agricultural work (including forestry work), 
which may be provided with a detachable loading 
platform. 

3.2 Track (Tread) of Wheeled Tractor — Distance 
at ground level between two vertical planes passing 
through the centreline of ground contact of the tyres 
parallel to the median plane of the tractor with the 
wheels in the straight ahead position {see Fig. 1). 

In the case of dual wheels it is the distance at ground 
level between two planes passing through the 
centreline of the dual wheels. 

3.3 Wheel Base — Distance at ground level between 
two vertical planes passing through the centres of the 
front wheels and the rear wheels with tractor and 
wheels in the same straight ahead position {see 
Fig. 1). 



In the case of a tractor equipped with a rear tandem, it 
is the distance between two vertical planes passing 
through the centres of the front wheel and the vertical 
plane midway between the wheel centres of the two 
axles of the tandem. 

3.4 Turning Diameter — Diameter of the circular 
path described by the centre of tyre contact with the 
surface of the test site of the wheel describing the 
largest circle when the tractor is executing its sharpest 
possible turn under the test conditions described in 5 
{see Fig. 2). 

3.5 Clearance Diameter — Diameter of the smallest 
circle which will enclose the outermost points of 
projection of the tractor and its equipment while 
executing its sharpest possible turn {see Fig. 2). 

4 APPARATUS 

4.1 Tape Measures, of length greater than the turning 
and clearance diameters to be measured, having a 
tolerance within ± 0.5 percent. 

4.2 Plumb-Line, if required, for measuring clearance 
diameters. 

5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Test Area 

The test area shall be a compacted or paved dry surface 
affording good tyre adhesion, capable of displaying 
legible markings, and resistant to defacement by 
turning machines. The test surface shall be visually 
flat, with no more than 3 percent grade in any 
direction. 

5.2 Tractor Test Requirements 

5.2.1 Tyre and Wheel Equipment 

The tractor to be tested shall be in its operating state, 
and the attachments with which it is equipped and their 
positions shall be noted. 

The tyre, wheel and fender equipment shall be that 
commonly used in the country for which the tractor is 
intended, that is as specified by the manufacturer, and 
shall be stated in the test report. Generally dual 



1 



IS 11859 : 2004 





Fig. 1 Track (Tread) and Wheelbase of Wheeled Tractor 



wheeled tractors or tractors with added ballast should 
riot be tested unless it is the only specification 
presented by the manufacturer. Tyre pressures, tractor 
ballast and use of duals on front or rear shall be 
recorded in the test report. If steering and/or axle 
oscillation stops and fenders are part of standard 
equipment then these shall be positioned according to 
the manufacturer's insti-uctions. All the tyres shall be 
inflated to the pressure specified by the manufacturer 
for transport work. The -inflation pressure of tyres of 
same axle shall be ensured to be equal. 

5.2.2 Track (Tread) Setting 

Measurement of turning and clearance diameter may 
be made with standard track settings as specified by 
the manufacturer {see IS 12363). Additional 
measurements may be made at other track settings, if 
requested by the manufacturer as optional. 



5.2.3 Other Settings 

Tractors which have all wheels steerable, or which 
incorporate devices for disconnecting either or both 
axles, shall be tested in each operating condition in 
which the tractor is intended to be used. 

Results shall be recorded for each operating condition. 

Tractors which have more than one powered axle, and 
which have devices for disconnecting the power to any 
of the axles, shall be tested in each operating condition 
in which the tractor is intended to be used. 

Results shall be recorded for each operating condition. 

6 PROCEDURE 

6.1 Right-Hand Turn, Without Brakes 

6.1.1 Drive the tractor slowly forward while making 
its sharpest possible right-hand turn, that is, with the 
steering kept on full right-hand lock, at a speed not 



IS 11859 : 2004 




Fig. 2 Tractor Turning Configurations 



exceeding 2 km/h for at least one complete turn, until 
it is established that the minimum turning circle is 
bein^ described. 

6.1.2 Continue to drive the tractor slowly forward on 
the same lock for a further complete turn, at a speed 
not exceeding 2 km/h. At short regular intervals 
around the turn, mark on the ground those points 
coinciding with the centre of the tyre-to-ground 
contact area of the outermost wheel. Make the marks 
immediately behind this contact area and determine 
the position of each mark by visually projecting 
vertically downwards from the centre of the tyre tread 
width at points on the tyre circumference situated as 
close as possible to the ground. 

The marking may be done with or without stopping the 
tractor. The broken circle formed by the marks on the 
ground is the turning circle. 

6.1.3 During the turn described in 6.1.2, stop the 
tractor and drop a plumb-line to the ground from the 
outermost point of the tractor (that is, form the point 
of the tractor describing the largest circle). Clearly 
mark the point on the ground beneath the plumb-line: 
this point lies on the tractor clearance circle. 

6.1.4 Measure the diameter of the turning circle 
(see 6.1.2) at a minimum of three places spaced 



approximately equally around the circle. Calculate 
the average value of the diameter measured and report 
it as the minimum turning diameter, right-hand, 
without brakes. Alternatively, the diameter of the 
turning circle may be calculated as shown in Fig. 3 and 
reported in the same way. 

6.1.5 Measure and record the radial distance between 
the point on the tractor clearance circle {see 6.1.3) and 
the circumference of the tractor turning circle 
{see 6.1.2). Add twice this dimension to the minimum 
turning diameter and report the result as the minimum 
clearance diameter, right-hand, without brakes. 

6.2 Left-Hand Turn, Without Brakes 

Repeat the procedures described in 6.1 with the tractor 
driven forward while making its sharpest possible 
left-hand turn, that is, with the string kept on full 
left-hand lock. Report the results as the 'minimum 
turning/clearance diameter, left-hand, without 
brakes'. 

6.3 Right-Hand Turn, with Brakes 

Where applicable, repeal the procedure described 
in 6.1 with the inside non-steered wheel brake applied 
with a pedal effort sufficient to lock the wheel, subject 
to a maximum of 60 daN. 



IS 11859 : 2004 




D = 



2ABC 



V2 (a2 B^ + A^& + ^2^2) _ (^4 + b4 ^ (-^) 



Fig. 3 Calculation of Diameters from Measurements Between Three 
Approximately Equally Spaced Circumference Points 



Report the results as the minimum turning/clearance 
diameter, right-hand, with brakes. 

6.4 Left-Hand Turn, with Brakes 

Where applicable, repeat the procedure described 
in 6.3 with the tractor making its sharpest possible 
left-hand turn, that is, with the steering kept on full 
left-hand lock. 

Report the results as the minimum turning/clearance 
diameter, left-hand, with brakes. 

7 TEST REPORT 

A suitable test report form is given in Annex A. The 
test report shall include the following information: 

a) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

b) Type and model of tractor; 

c) Tractor ballast and front fender installation; 

d) Tyre sizes and pressures, in kPa; 



e) Wheelbase, in mm; 

f) Front and rear track (tread) widths of the 
tractor, in mm; 

g) Minimum turning diameters and the mini- 
mum clearance diameters, in metres, to two 
decimal places, as follows: 

1) Right-hand turn without brakes; 

2) Left-hand turn without brakes, and, if 
applicable; 

3) Right-hand turn with brakes; 

4) Left-hand turn with brakes; and 

5) Additional test conditions, if appropriate 
{see?,.13)\ 



h) 



Point of the tractor that determines the mini- 
mum clearance diameter, that is, one of 
points A to G in Fig. 2. The points shown in 
Fig. 2 are only for guidance and the actual 
points noted during the test should be 
recorded. 



A-1 TRACTOR 



Manufacturer's name and address : 



IS 11859 : 2004 



ANNEX A 
{Clause 7) 

SPECIMEN TEST REPORT 



Tractor make 



Model: 



Mass of tractor submitted for test: 
Description of ballast: 



Date of test: 



-kg 



A-2 TRACT (TREAD) SETTING 



Nominal 





Actual front 


Actual rear 




Wheelbase 




mm 


mm 




.mm 




_mm 


mm 


mm 




_mm 




.mm 



A-3 DRIVE WHEELS 



Two wheel (rear): 



Four wheel (equal front and rear): 
Fenders (front): Yes/No 
Oscillation stop position: 



. (unequal front and rear):. 



A-4 TYRES AND WHEELS 



Tyre size: 
Singles or duals: 
Tyre pressure: 
Wheel type: 



Front 



Rear 



kPa 



kPa 



IS 11859 : 2004 

A-5 TURNING AND CLEARANCE DIAMETERS 

NOTE — The point of the tractor which determines clearance diameter (A to G) is shown in Fig. 2. 



Track 

(tread) 

Nominal 


Minimum Turning Diameter 


Minimum Clearance Diameter 




With brakes 


Without brakes 


With brakes 


Without brakes 




Left 


Right 


Left 


Right 


Left 


Right 


Left 


Right 







































Comments: 



Measured by: . 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 32(1187). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 9402 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 1 3 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

/ 2323 7617 
\ 2323 3841 

r2337 8499, 2337 8561 
\2337 8626, 2337 9120 



{ 



60 3843 
60 9285 



J2254 1216, 2254 1442 
\2254 2519, 2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
\_2832 7891, 2832 7892 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



