**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISO 5nB 2 1191 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



Indian Standard 

CENTRIFUGAL, MIXED FLOW AHU AXIAL 

FUMPS — CODE FOR HYDRAUUC PERFORMANCE 

TESTS — PRECISION CLASS 



UDC i2r«71 



4C> BIS 1933 

BUREAU OF IWDIAN STAiaOAHDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 5 SAHADUR SMAH ZAFAH MARQ 
NEW DELHI 110005 



IS 13538: 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



Indian Standard 
CENTRIFUGAL, MIXED FLOW AND AXIAL 



r*kl I K Ji r^f^ 

ruiviro 



i^uuc rvjn niunMULiv-, rcnruniviMiNUC: 



TESTS — PRECISION CLASS 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical to ISO 5198 : 1987 'Centrifugal, mixed flow and axial 
pumps — Code for hydraulic performance tests ~ Precision class', issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization { ISO ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the 
recommendation of the Pumps Sectional Committee ( HMD 20 ) and approval of the Heavy 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those used in 
Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current 
practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian 
Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their 
place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International 
Standard 

ISO 31 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



units and 



units and 



IS 1890 (PartO) : 1983 Quantities 
symbols — General principles 

IS 1890 ( Part 1 ) : 1982 Quantities, 
symbols : Part 1 Space and time 

IS 1890 (Part 2) : 1982 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part ? Periodic and related phenomena 

IS 1890 (Parts) : 1982 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part 3 Mechanics 

IS 1890 ( Part 4 ) : 1982 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part 4 Heat 

IS 1890 (Parts) : 1983 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part 5 Electricity and magnetism 

IS 1890 (Parte) : 1983 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part p Light and related electromagne- 
tic radiations 

IS 1890 (Part 7) : 1983 Quantities units 
symbols : Part 7 Acoustics 

IS 1890 (Parts) : 1983 Quantities units 
smybols : Part 8 Physical chemistry 

mnlp(-iilar nhvcirs 

IS 1890 ( Part 9 ) : 1983 Quantities units 
symbols : Part 9 Atomic and nuclear physics 



and 

and 
and 

and 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Identical 
Identical 
Identical 
Identical 
Identical 
Identical 
Identical 



Identical 



Identical 



Identical 



( i) 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 6198:1987 

International 
Standard 



ISO 555 ( Part 1 ) 



ISO 1438 ( Since 
withdrawn in favour 
of ISO 1438/1 and 
ISO 4359 ) 

ISO 1438/1 
ISO 2548 
ISO 3534 
ISO 3555 
ISO 3846 



ISO 4359 



ISO 4373 



ISO 5167 



lEC 34-2 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



; 1983 Quantities units and 
Nuclear reactions and ioni- 



IS 1890 ( Part 10) 
symbols : Part 10 
zing radiations 

IS 1890 (Part 11 ) : 1982 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part 11 Mathematical signs and 
symbols for use in the physical science and 
technology ( first revision ) 

IS 1890 (Part 12) : 1983 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part 12 Dimensionless parameters 

IS 1890 (Part 13) : 1983 Quantities units and 
symbols : Part 13 Solid state physics 

IS 9163 (Parti ) : 1979 Dilution methods of 
measurement of steady flow ; Part 1 Constant 
rate injection method 



15 9108 : 1979 Liquid flow measurement in open 
channels using thin plate weirs 

IS 91 37 : 1 978 Code for acceptance test for cent- 
rifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps — Class C 

IS 7920 : 1985 Statistical vocabulary ( first 
revision ) 

IS 10981 : 1983 Code of acceptance test for 
centrifugal mixed flow and axial pumps — Class B 

IS 6059 : 1971 Recommendations for liquid flow 
measurement in open channels by weirs and 
flumes — Weirs of finite crest width for free dis- 
charge 

IS 6062 : 1 971 Method of measurement of flow of 
water in open channels using standing wave 

iiunm-iaii 

IS 4080 : 1967 Specification for vertical staff 
gauges 

IS 4477 ( Part 1 ) : 1967 Methods of measurement 
of fluid flow by means of venturi meters : Part 1 

Liquids 

IS 4889 : 1968 Method of determination of effici- 
ency of rotating electrical machines 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Identical 



Identical 



Identical 



Identical 



Technically 
equivalent 



Technically 
equivalent 

Not 

equivalent 

Not 

equivalent 

Not 

equivalent 

Technically 
equivalent 



Not 
equivalent 

Technically 
equivalent 

Technically 
equivalent 

Not 

equivalent 



The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of ISO 555 ( Part 2 ) and ( Part 3 ), ISO 2186, ISO 2975 ( Part 1 ). ( Part 2 ), 
(Parts), (Parte) and ( Part 7 ), ISO 3354, ISO 3966, 150 4185, ISO 4360, ISO 5168, 
ISO 7194, ISO 8316, lEC Pub 41. lEC Pub 193, lEC Pub 198 and lEC Pub 497 and decided that 
they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)'. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that 
of the specified value in this standard. 



(ii) 



CONTENTS 

Introduction 

1 Scope 

2 Field of application 

3 References 

Section one : General recommendations 

4 Definitions and symbols 

5 Specified duty 

6 General requirements for tests 

Section two : Measurement methods 

7 Measurement of rate of flow 

8 Measurement of head 

9 Measurement of speed of rotation 

10 Measurement of power input 

11 Measurement of pump efficiency by 
the thermodynamic method 

12 Cavitation tests — ••• ••• ^^ 

AnnexAt 

A Estimation and analysis of uncertainties ... ... — ^^ 

B Comparison of test results with specified duty ••• ••• ^^ 

C Thermodynamic properties of water and assessment of the accuracy of ... 65 

efficiency measurements by the thermodynamic method 

D Other cavitation tests •" "* •" '" 

E Friction losses ••■ •*• "' ^^ 



IS 13538 : 


;1M3 


ISO 6198 


:1887 




Page 


*4>* 


1 


• • » 


1 


• *• 


t 


... 


2 


• •* 


3 


• «■ 


10 


• •• 


10 




17 


■ •* 


21 


• «* 


38 


• ■• 


38 


• »* 


41 



(ill) 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Introduction 

This International Standard is the first of a set of International 
Standards dealing with performance tests of centrifugal, mixed 
flow and axial pumps (in the rest of the text referred to as 
"pumps"). 

It specifies precision class tests (former class A). Engineering 
class i and class II tests (former classes B and C) will be the 
subject of a further International Standard.'' 

The aims of these classes are quite different. 

The precision class is nnainty used for research, develop- 
ment and scientific purposes In laboratories, where an 
extremely high accuracy of measurement is important. 

The engineering classes are generally applied for acceptance 
tests. 

In most cases, engineering class II is adequate for acceptance 
tests. The use of engineering class I is restricted to special 
cases when there is a need to have the pump performance 
more precisely defined. However, there may be cases of high 
importance, in which even an engineering class I acceptance 
test will be judged inadequate for the precision required for 
defining pump performance. In these cases the use of the 
precision class may exceptionally be necessary for an accep- 
tance test. 

Attention must be paid to the fact that the accuracy required 
for a precision class test significantly increases the test costs by 
comparison with the costs for an engineering class test. 

Precision class tests may not always be practicable, even when 
great effort and expense are devoted to measurements. Perfor- 
mance tests to precision class specifications will be required, 
and are possible, only in suitable circumstances. Therefore 
both the purchaser and the manufacturer shall carefully ex- 
amine whether the accuracy required for a precision class test 
might be achieved either on site, on the manufacturer's test 
bed or in a mutually agreed laboratory. It should be noted that it 
may not be possible to guarantee precision class accuracy in 
advance of the tests. 

The purpose of this International Standard is to specify how to 
carry out a test with extremely high precision. 



This International Standard does not recommend any construc- 
tional tolerance nor any global tolerance for acceptance pur- 
poses; it is devoted to specifying and describing procedure and 
methods for accurately ascertaining the performance of a pump 
under the conditions in which it is tested. Contractual 
interpretation of the test results must be the subject of a special 
agreement between the parties concerned (see annex B). 

Pump performance may be greatly affected by the installation 
conditions, and this must be especially considered when 
drawing up the contract if a precision class test is to be carried 
out. 



1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies precision class perfor- 
mance tests for centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps. 

It defines the terms and quantities that are used and specifies 
general requirements for tests. It specifies ways of measuring 
the characteristic quantities of the precision class so as 
to ascertain the performance of the pump and thus provide a 



W\^l I I^UI IW^^I ■ 



tar\r*a onar^ifiaH in tKc 



contract. 



The structural details of pumps and the mechanical properties 
of their components lie outside the scope of this International 
Standard, 

This International Standard does not specify constructional 
tolerances, which are purely contractual. 



2 Field of application 

This International Standard gives recommendations for 
hydraulic performance testing of centrifugal, mixed-flow and 
axial pumps when these tests have to meet very special require- 
ments for research, development or acceptance of industrial 
high-tech, pumps, or when very accurate knowledge of perfor- 
mance characteristics is of prime importance. 

This International Standard also applies to models and proto 
types whether the pumps are tested on a test bench or on site if 
installation conditions so permit. 



1) At present, they are dealt with in IbO 254« and ISO 3555. 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 5198:1987 



It applies 

— either to the pump itself without fittings, which re- 
quires that the pump ends are accessible; or 

— to the whole assembly of pump and of all or part of its 
upstream and downstream fittings, which is the case for 
pumps with inaccessible ends (submerged pumps, etc.). 

NOTES 

1 Attention is drawn to the fact that nearly all Industrial needs are 
covered by the codes of acceptance testing of industrial classes I 
and II. 

2 Acceptance tests for site and model storage pumps are dealt with In 
lEC Publications 198 and 497. 



3 References 

ISO 31, Quantities, units and symbols. 

ISO 555, Liquid flow measurement in open channels — Dilu- 
tion methods for measurement of steady flow — 

Part I : Constant-rate injection method. 

Part 2: integration (sudden injection) method. 

Part 3: Constant-rate injection method and integration 
method using radioactive tracers. 

ISO 1438, Liquid flow measurement in open channels using 
thin-plate weirs and venturi flumes. 

ISO 1438/1, Water flow measurement in open channels using 
weirs and venturi flumes — Part 1: Thin-plate weirs. 

ISO 2186, Fluid flow in closed conduits — Connections for 
pressure signal transmissions between primary and secondary 
elements. 

ISO 2548, Centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps — Code for 
acceptance tests — Class C. 

ISO 2975, Measurement of water flow in closed conduits — 
Tracer methods — 

Part 7: General 

Part 2: Constant rate injection method using non- 
radioactive tracers. 

F^rtS: Constant rate injection method using radioactive 
tracers. 

Part 6: Transit time method using non-radioactive tracers. 

Part 7: Transit time method using radioactive tracers. 

ISO 3354, Measurement of clean water flow in closed con- 
duits — Velocity-area method using current-meters. 



ISO 3534, Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols. 

ISO 3555, Centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps — Code for 
acceptance tests — Class B. 

ISO 3846, Liquid flow measurement in open channels by weirs 
and flumes — Free overfall weirs of finite crest width (rec- 
tangular broad- crested weirs). 

ISO 3966, Measurement of fluid flow in closed conduits — 
Velocity area method using Pitot static tubes. 

ISO 4185, Measurement of liquid flow in closed conduits — 
Weighing method. 

ISO 4359, Liquid flow measurement in open channels — flec- 
tangular, trapezoidal and U-shaped flumes. 

ISO 4360, Liquid flow measurement in open channels by weirs 
and flumes — Triangular profile weirs. 

ISO 4373, Measurement of liquid flow in open channels — 
Water level measuring devices. 

ISO 5167, Measurement of fluid flow by means of orifice 
plates, nozzles and venturi tubes inserted in circular cross- 
section conduits running full. 

ISO 5168, Measurement of fluid flow — Estimation of uncer- 
tainty of a flow-rate measurement. 

ISO 7194, Measurement of fluid flow In closed conduits — 
Velocity-area methods of flow measurement in swirling or 
asymmetric flow conditions in circular ducts by means of 
current- meters or Pitot static tubes. 

ISO 8316, Measurement of liquid flow in closed conduits — 
Method by collection of the liquid in a volumetric tank. ^' 

lEC Publication 34-2, Rotating electrical machines — Part 2: 
Methods for determining losses and efficiency of rotating elec- 
trical machinery from tests (excluding machines for traction 
vehicles). 

lEC Publication 41 , International code for the field acceptance 
tests of hydraulic turbines. 

lEC Publication 193, international code for model acceptance 
tests of hydraulic turbines. 

lEC Publication 198, International code for the field acceptance 
tests of storage pumps. 

lEC Publication 497, International code for model acceptance 
tests of storage pumps. 



1 ) At present at the stage of draft. 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Section one: General recommendations 



4 Definitions and symbols 

4.1 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply. 



4.1.1 measuring system : System composed of a measuring 
instrument, including a transducer which picks up physical in- 
formation, and one or sevc.al elements in series transmitting or 
transforming the resulting signal. 

Such a system has a response function which can be illustrated 
by a gain response or a phase response curve over a frequency 
range. In particular, a filtering effect appears between the 
picked up physical quantity and the observed signal. This filter- 
ing effect is essentially characterized by a cut frequency. In 
most measuring systems which are used, the continuous com- 
ponent of the signal can pass and the cut frequency is then 
strongly related to the response time of the system. 



4.1.2 measuring instrument: Instrument, forming part of a 
measuring system, which transforms any physical quantity 
(pressure, speed, current, etc.) into a signal which can be 
directly observed (a mercury level, a point on a dial scale, a 
digital reading, etc.). 



4.1.3 first order statistical moment: mean value of a 
signal: Characterization of a random process x{t) by a first 
order statistical moment which generally is the mean /jj^ 
calculated over a period of time T given by the equation 



or the autocorrelation function, R^, given by the equation 



1 f' 



xU) dr 



NOTE — To calculate the mean value ot a signal or physical quantity, 
an integration period Tmuch longer than the response time of the cor- 
responding measuring system is usually chosen. 

To determine simultaneously the mean value of several signals of 
several physical quantities corresponding to the same operating point, 
the integration period Tis chosen by considering the longest response 
time among all the measuring systems which are used. 

According to the value of the integration period 7 chosen to calculate 
the mean value of the signals, the operating conditions will be deter 
mined to be either steady or unsteady 



4.1.4 second order statistical moment: variance or 
autocorrelation function : Characterization of a random pro- 
cess jr(/) by a second order statistical moment calculated over a 
time period 7" and for which can be chosen either the variance 
(7^ expressed as : 



1 r '* ' 
«xv('- T) = — V xU)[x{i + T)] 
T J I 



d/ 



-J. 



\xU) ^^^6l 



4.1.5 steady and unsteady process; Random process xU) 
Is said to be slightly steady or steady in a general sense 

when its first order statistical moment (mean ^^) and its second 
order statistical moment [variance a^, or autocorrelation func- 
tion R^ ii, T)] are not dependent on time /, at which the obser- 
vation begins nor on the period of time T during which the 
observation is made. 

Inversely, when the statistical moments are dependent on I or 
T, the physical phenomenon is said to be unsteady. 

When all statistical moments of the process x{/) (beyond the 
second order), which completely describe the statistical prop- 
erty of x{t), are not dependent on t and T, the process is then 
said to be strongly or strictly steady. 

NOTE — From a practical point of view and in this International Stan- 
dard, only slightly steady processes are considered (first and second 
order statistical moments). It should be noted that when the con- 
sidered process follows a normal or Gaussian distribution law, the first 
and second order statistical moments are sufficient to describe the 
statistical properties of the process completely and both concepts of 
strong or slight steadiness are then equivalent. 



4.1.6 steady operating conditions: The operating condi 
tions are said to be steady when the different signals delivered 
by the measuring systems and the physical quantities 
calculated from these signals have first order (mean fu^) and 
second order [variance aj^, or autocorrelation function /?^ 
(/, T)] statistical moments which do not depend on the time t 
at which the observation begins nor on the duration T during 
which the observation is made. 

NOTE — The random signal delivered by a measuring system can be 
found to be Steady only if the integration period Tis sufficiently long. 
This point is difficult to check for one is never calculated for a sufficient 
duration; this is why, from a practical point of view, only a steadiness 
with a certain confidence level is defined. 



4.1.7 unsteady operating conditions : The operating condi 
tions are said to be unsteady when the different signals 
delivered by the measuring systems and the physical quantities 
calculated from these signals have a first order (mean z^^,) or se- 
cond order [variance a^., or autocorrelation function H^ {t, T]] 
statistical moment which depends on the time t at which the 
observation begins or on the period / during which the obser- 
vation is made. 

NOTE — The dynamic component (see figurf; 1/ oi the picked up 
physical quantities has different origins 

a) a random oiigin: turbulence, white noise ut the electronic 
system, etc., 

b! a determinist origin' blade passing trequency, speed of rota- 
lion in connection with the electric network frequency, flow 
singularities, vibration modes, etc. 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 




r, is an insufficiently long integration period. The mean value, x, of x as estimated from T, will vary. 
T2 is a sufficiently long period. 

Figure 1 — Graph of the evolution of a phenomenon (supposed to be known) 



It is supposed that the possible unsteadiness of the operating 
conditions has a frequency lower than that corresponding to these 
phenomena (less than half the lowest encountered frequency); as a 
consequence, the integration period T will not be less than twice the 
period T corresponding to the lowest frequency mentioned above. 

4.1.8 fluctuations: Periodic or random evolutions of a 
phenomenon x(t) as a function of time, varying around a mean 
value and describing a physical quantity or a signal delivered by 
a measuring system. 

All evolutions having a period or a pseudo-period less than 
twice the integration period chosen to calculate the mean 
values are considered as fluctuations. Then the fluctuations 
can be considered as being "rapid" compared to the variations 
of the mean value (see 4.1.9). 

NOTE — Only fluctuations having a period or a pseudo-period higher 
than twice the response time of the corresponding measuring system 
can be detected. 



4.1.9 variations of the mean value (In unsteady 
operating conditions): Evolution of the mean value of a 
physical quantity or of signal delivered by a measuring system, 
between one reading and the next, in unsteady operating con- 
ditions. 

The variations of the mean values should show a period or a 
pseudo-period higher than twice the integration period T 
chosen to calculate the mean value. 



Then the variations of the mean value can be considered as 
being "slow" compared to fluctuations (see 4.1.8). 



4.1.10 readings: Visual observations allowing the recording 
of the value of the signal delivered by a measuring system. 

Two types of readings should be considered: 

a) the "quasi-instantaneous" reading of the signal, which 
is made during as short a time as possible (but not shorter 
than the response time of the measuring system 
considered); 

NOTE — The group of "quasi instantaneous" readings made 
during the integration period fallows the calculation of statistical 
moments (see 4.1 .3 and 4.1 .4). 

b) the "averaging reading" of the signal which is made 
over or at the end of tho integration period 7' depending on 
the measuring system, this "averaging reading" leads 
directly to the mean value of the signal. 



4.1,11 set of readings: Group of "quasi instantaneous" 
readings leading to the determination of the values of the dif 
ferent signal or physical quantities characterizing an operating 
point 



IS 13538 : 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



4.1.12 response time of a measuring instrument: Time 
interval between the instant when a stimulus is subjected to a 
spocifjed abrupt change and the instant when the response 
reaches and remains within specified limits of its final steady 
value. 

4.1.13 Prandtl number, Pr: 

A 

where 

fi is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid ; 
A is its thermal conductivity. 
(Definition taken from ISO 31/12.) 



4.2 Quantities, symbols and units 



Table 1 gives concepts and some of their uses in this Inter- 
national Standard, together with any associated symbols which 
have been allocated; it is based on ISO 31 . 



The definitions, particularly those given for kinetic energy coef- 
ficient, specific energy and NPSH may not be appropriate for 
completely general use in hydrodynamics, and are for the pur 
poses of this International Standard only. 



Table 2 gives an alphabetical list of symbols used, and table 3 
gives a list of subscripts. 



Table 1 — List of quantities (based on ISO 31} i' 



Quantity 



Definitional 



Symbol 



Dimension^' 



Unit 



Mass 

Length 

Time 

Temperature 

Area 

Volume 

Angular velocity 

Velocity 

Acceleration due to gravity*' 

Speed of rotation 

Density 

Pressure 



Kinematic viscosity 
Specific energy 
Power (general term) 
Reynolds number 
Diameter 

Flow rates 

Mass rate of flow 



Number or rotations per unit time 

Mass per unit volume 

Force per unit area. Unless otherwise specified all 

pressures are gauge pressures, i.e. measured with 

respect to atmospheric pressure. 

Energy per unit mass 



The mass rate of flow designates the externa) 
mass rate of flow of the pump, i.e. the rate of flow 
discharged into the pipe from the outlet branch of 
the pump. 

NOTE — Losses or abstractions inherent to the 
pump, i.e. . 

a) discharge necessary for hydraulic balancing 
of axial thrust; 

b) cooling of bearings of the pump itself; 

c) water seal to the packing, 

d) leakage from the fittings, internal leakage, 
etc., 

are not to be reckoned in the quantity delivered, On 
the contrary, if they are taken at a point before the 
flow measuring section, all derived quantities used 
for other purposes, such as ; 

e) cooling of the motor bearings; 

f) cooling of a gear box (bearings, oil cooler), 
etc.. 

should be added to the measured rate of flow. 



m 
I 
t 
9 
A 
V 



E 
P 
Re 
D 



M 

L 

T 



L2 

L3 
T-i 
LT ' 
LT-2 
T-1 
ML 3 
ML 1T-2 

L^T-' 

L2T-2 

ML2T-3 

dimensionless 

L 

MT 1 



kg 

m 
s 

m2 

m3 

rad/s 

m/s 

m/s^ 

S" ' 

kg/m^ 

Pa 

(1 bar = 10^ Pa; 

m^/s 

J/kg 

W 



kg/s 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198: 1987 



Table 1 — List of quantities (based on ISO 31)" (continued) 



Quantity 



Definitional 



Symbol 



Dimension^' 



Unit 



Volume rate of flow 



Mean velocity 



Local velocity 
Gauge pressure 



Atmospheric pressure 
(absolute) 

Vapour pressure (absolute) 

Head 

Height 



Reference plane 



Inlet impeller height (or eye 
height) 



Velocity head 



Velocity head coefficient 



Avatlahlfi velocity head 



Available velocity head coefti- 



Qv= — 



The outlet volume rate of flow is given by the 
equation 

Q 

For the purposes of this International Standard, this 
symbol may also designate the volume rate of flow 
in a given section^' of the pump outlet; it is the 
quotient of the mass rate of flow in this section by 
the density. (The section may be designated by 
subscripts.) 

The mean velocity of flow equal to the volume rate 
of flow divided by the pipe Cross section^' 



U 



1l 

A 



Velocity of flow at any point 

Any pressure used in this International Standard 
except atmospheric and vapour pressure ; the effec- 
tive pressure, relative to the atmospheric pressure. 
Its value is 

— positive if this pressure is greater than the 

atmospheric pressure; 

negative if this pressure is less than the 

atmospheric pressure. 



The energy per unit mass of fluid divided by gravita- 
tional acceleration. 

Elevation of a point above a reference plane. 

If the point is below the reference plane, z is 

negative. 

Any horizontal plane to be used as a datum for 
height measurement. A materialized reference plane 
may be more practical than an imaginary one for 
measurement purposes. 

The height of the centre of the circle described by 
the external point of the entrance edges of the first 
Impeller blades. In case of double inlet pumps, z^ >s 
the higher impeller height. 

The manufacturer should indicate the position of 
this point with respect to precise reference points on 
the pump. 

Height of fluid rorresponding to the kinetic energy 
per unit mass of fluid divided by gravitational ac 
celeration. Its value is given by the formula 

A coefficient relating velocity head in the section 
with the mean velocity in that section It is defined 
by the equation 

(. v3d/l 



(73 ..-1 
If v is constant, a 



1 



The part of the velocity head contributing to the 
total head. Its value is given by the formula 

o,, t/^/2 >; where 1 "^ «a ■•' " 
See 8.1.1.3 

A coefficient relating available velocity head in a 
section to the mean velocity in that section. 
See 811. 3 



QyiQ) 



L3T-1 



Pb 



LT-1 



LT-1 
ML-1 T-2 



ML-1 T-2 

ML 1 T-2 

L 



m3/s 



m/s 



m/s 
Pa 



Pa 

Pa 
m 



dimensionless 



dimensionless 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Table 1 — List of quantities {based on ISO 31)1' [continued) 



Quantity 



Definition2) 



Symbof 



Dimension^' 



Unit 



Total head (in section /) 



Inlet total head 
Outlet total head 
Pump total head 



Loss of head at intet 



Loss of head at outlet 



Net positive suction head ; NPSH 



Critical net positive suction head 



Total head in a given section, /', is usually calculated 
as: 

Pf, '-'J 

This equation assumes that pressure varies hydro- 

statically in the section and that compressibility of 

the liquid pumped may be neglected. 

See 8.1.1,2 concerning the correctness of this last 

assumption. 

Total head at inlet section 1 

Total head at outlet section 2 

Algebraic difference between outlet total head Wj 
and inlet total head //, : 

H = H^- H^ 

Separate evaluation of A/, and Wj is not always 
necessary. Other methods may even be recom- 
mended if compressibility is to be accounted for. 
See 8.1.1.2. 

The difference between the total head of the liquid 
at the measuring point, or possibly of the liquid 
without velocity in the suction chamber, and the 
total head of the liquid in the inlet section of the 
pump. 

The difference between the total head of the liquid 
in the outlet section of the pump, and the total head 
of the liquid at the measuring point. 

Inlet total head increased by the head (in flowing 
liquid) corresponding to the atmospheric pressure at 
the test location and decreased by the sum of the 
head corresponding to the vapour pressure of the 
pump liquid at the inlet temperature and of the inlet 
Impeller height, 

(NPSHI = H. ^ —- - ^^ ~ z^ 

NOTES 

1 To maintain consistency between precision class 
and engineering classes I and II, the arbitrary defini- 
tion of (NPSH) is the same. 

Therefore, in calculating (NPSH) values, the value 
of Cgi is taken to be equal to unity (see velocity head 
coefficient). 

2 Local velocity distribution may influence (NPSH) 
performance of the pump. Limitation of local veloc- 
ity variation is given in clause 12. 

3 It is necessary to rnake a distinction between 

- the (NPSH) required at given flow and speed 
of rotation for a given pump - this is specified 
by the manufacturer; 

the (NPSH) available for the same flow, 
which is inferred from the installation; 

- the cavitation test (NPSH). 

Subscripts may be used to differentiate these quan 
titles [for example (NPSH)^ when the value required 
by the pump is concerned, (NPSH), when the 
available value is concerned and (NPSH)^ when 
cavitation test (NPSHI is concerned). 

Net positive suction head associated with 
[2 + H(/2)] % either of head drop in the first stage 
or of the efficiency drop. 



«, 



H 



H, 



H 



J2 



(NPSH) 



(NPSH), 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 5198: 1987 



Table 1 — List of quantities (based on ISO 31 )i' (concluded] 



Quantity 


Definition^' 


Symbol 


Dimension^' 


Unit 


Type number 


A number defined by the eQuai\on 


A' 


dimensionless 




(gH-\3JA £'3/1 




where q'y is the volume rate of ftow per eye and H' 
is the head of the first stage. This quantity shail be 
calculated at the best efficiency point. 








Pump power input 


Mechanical power transmitted to the pump shaft. 


P 


iVIL2T-3 


W 


Driver power input 


Power input to driving unit. 


% 


ML2T-3 


W 


Pump power output 


The power transferred to the liquid at its passage 
through the pump 

P^ = QQySH = QqvE 


P. 


ML2T-3 


w 


Pump efficiency 


--'i 


n 


dimensionless 




Overall efficiency 




%' 


dimensionless 





1 ) Further symbols used in the thermodynamic method are given in table 9. 

2) In order to avoid any error of interpretation, it is deemed desirable to reproduce the definitions of quantities and units as given in ISO 31 and to 
supplement these definitions by some specific information on their use in this International Standard. 

3) M = mass, L = length, T = time, © = temperature. 

4) For precision class tests, the local values of g should be used. Nevertheless, in most cases, a value of 9,81 m/s^ would not involve significant 
error. The local value should be calculated by the equation 

g = 9,780 3 11 + 0,005 3 sin^^) - 3 x IQ-Sj 

Where (p and z are respectively the latitude, in degrees, and the altitude, in metres. 

5> Attention is drawn to the fact that in this case qy may vary for different reasons across the circuit. 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Table 2 — Alphabetical list of symbols 



Symbol 


Quantity 


Units 


A 


Area 


m2 


D 


Diameter 


m 


e 


Relative value of uncertainty 


- 


E 


Specific energy 


J/kg 


/ 


Frequency 


Hz 


g 


Acceleration due to gravity 


m/s2 


H 


Pump total head 


m 


«J 


Losses in terms of head of liquid 


m 


k 


Equivalent uniform roughness 


m 


K 


Type number 


dimensionless 


I 


Length 


m 


m 


Mass 


kg 


n 


Speed of rotation 


s-1 


(NPSH) 


Net positive suction head 


m 


P 


Pressure 


Pa 


P 


Power 


W 


<im 


Mass rate of flow 


kfl/s 


Qv 


Volume rate of flow 


m3/s 


Re 


Reynolds number 


dimensionless 


1 


Time 


s 


U 


Mean velocity 


m/s 


V 


Local velocity 


m/s 


V 


Volume 


m3 


z 


Height above reference plane 


m 


a 


Velocity head coefficient 


dimensionless 


n 


Efficiency 


dimensionless 


$ 


Temperature 


°C 


i. 


Universal coefficient for head loss 


dimensionless 


V 


Kinematic viscosity 


n>2/s 


e 


Density 


kg/m3 


<jj 


Angular velocity 


rad/s 



NOTE — See also clause 11. 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Table 3 ~ List of letters and figures used 
as subscripts 



Subscript 



1 

2 

a 

ac 

b 

c 

d 

e 

f 

gr 

H 

int 
M 
m 

mot 
P 

P 

r 
s 

sp 
t 

T 
u 
V 

V 

vis 



Designation 



inlet 

outlet 

available 

acoustic 

atmospheric 

critical 

drop 

effective (gauge) 

fully developed 

unit (overall) 

pump total head 

intermediate 

manometric 

mass 

motor 

pump power input 

pump 

required 

eye 

specified 

total 

translated 

useful 

volume 

vapour (pressure) 

visible 

efficiency 



5 Specified duty 



5.1 Main specification 

One or more of the following quantities may be specified under 
the conditions and speed or rotation stated in the contract: 

a) pump total head, H^^, at the agreed flow rate, qy^. or 
flow rate of the pump, Qy^^, at the agreed total head, H^. 

b) power input or efficiency of the pump or combined 
pump-motor unit at the specified qy^^, H^^ point. 

c) net positive suction head, (NPSH), required by the 
pump at the agreed flow rate qy^^ for a specified cavitation 
effect as defined, for example, in 12. 1 .3.2 at the agreed flow 
rate. 

d) other points of the H(qy) curve may be indicated by 
specifying either the total head at a reduced or increased 
flow rate, or the flow rate at a reduced or increased total 
head. 



5.2 Other specifications 

Unless specifically agreed othsnwise in the contract, the 
specified values are valid in the following conditions : 



a) unless the chemical and physical properties of the liquid 
are stated, it shall be tai<en that the points specified apply to 
clean cold water (see table 4); 



Table 4 — Specification of "clean cold water" 



Characteristic 


Unit 


max. 


Temperature 


"C 


40 


Kinematic viscosity 


m2/s 


1,5 - 10 « 


Density 


kg/m^ 


1050 


Non-absorbent free solid 






content 


kg/m3 


2.5 


Dissolved solid content 


Kg/m^ 


50 



b) the relation between the specified values under clean 
cold water conditions and the likely performance under 
other liquid conditions shall be agreed in the contract; 

c) specified values shall apply only to the pump as tested 
by the methods and in the test arrangements specified in 
this international Standard. 



6 General requirements for tests 
6.1 Organization of tests 

6.1.1 Place of testing 

Performance tests shall be carried out at the manufacturer's 
works, or alternatively at a place to be mutually agreed between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

Both purchaser and manufacturer shall be entitled to have 
representatives present at all tests and calibrations in order to 
verify that they are performed in accordance with this Inter- 
national Standard and any prior written agreements. 

6.1.2 Time of testing 

The time of testing shall be mutually agreed by the manufac 
turer and the purchaser. 

6.1.3 Staff 

Accurate measurements depend not only on the quality of the 
measuring instruments used, but also on the ability and skill 
of the persons operating and reading the measuring devices 
during the tests. The staff entrusted with effecting 
the measurements shall be selected just as carefully as the 
instruments to be used in the test, 

A chief of tests possessing adequate experience in measuring 
operations shall be appointed. Normally, when the test is car- 
ried out at the manufacturer's works, the chief of tests is a staff 
member of the manufacturing firm. 



10 



IS 13538: 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



All persons charged with effecting the measurements are 
subordinated during the tests to the chief of tests, who con- 
ducts and supervises the measurements, reports on test condi- 
tions and the results of the tests and then drafts the test report, 
All questions arising in connection with the measurements and 
their execution are subject to his decision. 

The parties concerned shall provide all assistance that the chief 
of tests considers necessary. 

6.1.4 State of pump 

When tests are not carried out at the manufacturer's works, 
opportunity shall be allowed for preliminary adjustments by 
both the manufacturer and the installer. 



6.1.5 Test programme 

Only the specified operational data shall forni the basis of the 
test; other data determined by measurement during the tests 
shall have merely an indicative (informative) function and this 
shall be stated if they are included in the programme. 



6.1.6 Test equipment 

When deciding on the measuring procedure, the measuring 
and recording apparatus required shall be specified at the same 
time. 

The chief of tests shall be responsible for checking the correct 
installation of the apparatus and its perfect functioning. 

Ail measuring apparatus shall be covered by reports showing, 
by calibration or by comparison with other International Stan- 
dards, that it complies with the requirements of 6.4. These 
reports shall be presented if required. 

The measuring devices used shall have valid calibration. 
Periodic calibration shall be performed by an entitled body. 
During the pump tests, the indications of the various in- 
struments shall be cross-compared to check that their calibra- 
tion is maintained. Generally after site testing or in case of 
dispute, new calibration shall be performed as soon as possible. 

6.1.7 Test report 

After actual scrutiny, the test results shall be summarized in a 
report signed either by the chief of tests alone, or by him and 
representatives of the manufacturer and of the purchaser. 

All parties to the contract shall receive a copy of the report as 
an essential condition for the completion of the contract. 

The test report shall contain the following information ; 

a) place and date of the performance test; 

b) manufacturer's name, type of pump, serial number, 
and if passible year of construction; 

c) specified characteristics, operational conditions during 
the performance test; 



d) specification of the pump's drive; 

e! description of the test procedure and the measuring 
apparatus used including calibration data; 

f) observed readings; 

g) evaluation and analysis of test results with calculation 
of measuring uncertainties according to 6.4, 6.B and 
annex A; 

h) conclusion : comparison of the test results with the 
specif iea duties (see annex B). 

All test records and record charts shall be initialled by the chief 
of tests and by the representatives of both the purchaser and 
the manufacturer, each of whom shall be provided with a copy 
of all records and charts. 

The evaluation of the test results shall be made as far as poss 
ibie while the tests are in progress and, in any case, before the 
installation and instrumentation are dismantled, in order that 
measurements regarded as suspect can be repeated without 
delay. 

6.2 Test arrangements 

The performance of a pump in a given test arrangement, 
however accurately measured, cannot be assumed to be a cor- 
respondingly accurate indication of its performance in another 
arrangement. 

Moreover, the conditions which permit the most accurate 
measurements to be taken are not necessarily those under 
which the pump may perform most satisfactorily nor those 
under which the user may ultimately reoulre it to perform. 

This International Standard therefore defines the conditions 
necessary to measure performance most accurately and 
discusses the errors which may be caused by failing to meet 
those conditions, in order that the interested parties may define 
the test arrangement most suited to the circumstances. 

Recommendations and general guidance about suitable pipe 
arrangements upstream of a measuring device are given in 
clauses 7 and 8; if necessary, they can be used in conjunction 
with International Standards on flow measurement in 
closed conduits concerning the different flow measurement 
methods. 

6.2.1 Standard test arrangements 

The most accurate measurement of head is possible when the 
flow at the measuring section has : 

a) an axialiy symmetrical velocity distribution; 

b) a uniform static pressure fii,stribution; 

c) freedo-, sN-on -.wirl induced by the installation. 

The ccmpk'Xv, 'low psrxerc': m po:h miei "ir/;- ;>■.,'!:-■ nif.'jsurii g 
sections may l^p in'kf-i'.rej .!)y ocii', it'-.- pumi- ..vr.t ••■,■ thi 
geometry oi "iir ^•■'.{'t&;:-'-'\-^. 



11 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



It is recommended that for standard test circuits leading from 
reservoirs with a free surface, or from large stilling vessels in a 
closed circuit, the inlet straight length, L, be determined by the 
equation : 

L > (1,5 /f + 5,5) D 

where 

L is the inlet straight length ; 

D is the pipe inside diameter; 

K is the type number. 

In a standard works or laboratory test rig, satisfactory condi- 
tions established by previous tests should be considered as suf- 
ficient proof for subsequent tests. 

If the inlet conditions are not satisfactory, this maybe remedied 
in one or more of the following ways ; 

a) increasing the straight length following the source of 
disturbance causing the flow maldistribution ; 

b) fitting an appropriate straightener or swirl remover 
(ISO 7194 gives a detailed description of the functional and 
geometrical characteristics of these devices.) 

c) changing the nature of, or removing, the source of 
disturbance. 

If none of these devices is practicable on site, precision class 
measurements cannot be made. 

NOTE — Attention Is drawn to the fact that In some particular cases 
where this International Standard applies to partial flow rale operation, 
for which pre-swirl occurs, the arrangements agreed upon for that part 
of the test installation at the suction side may modify the pump perfor- 
mance. 



c) fittings introduced for testing purposes and taken as 
forming part of the pump itself. 

Connection on the inlet and outlet sides of the whole combina- 
tion shall be made in accordance with 6.2. 



6.3 Test conditions 
6.3.1 Performance of tests 

In order to obtain consistent results having regard to the degree 
of accuracy to be achieved, the duration of the test shall be suf- 
ficient to take more particularly into account the response time 
(see 4,1.12) of measuring instruments and the relative 
steadiness .of each operating point, within the limits defined in 
table 5. 

The measurements shall be made under either steady operating 
conditions (see'4.1.6) or unsteady conditions (see 4.1.7) within 
the limits defined in table 5. 

The decision to make measurements when such conditions 
cannot be obtained shall be a matter of agreement between the 
parties concerned. 

When only one duty point is indicated for checking, at least five 
measurement points closely and evenly grouped around the 
duty point shall be recorded, for instance between 0,9 qy q 
and 1,1 Qy Q. 

When performance over a range of operating conditions is to 
be determined, a sufficient number of measurement points duly 
distributed shall be recorded, in order to establish the perfor- 
mance within the uncertainty stated in 6.4. 

If the test has to be carried out at a speed of rotation different 
from that specified, the limits stated in 6.3-3 shall be respected 
and the characteristics obtained at the actual speed of rotation 
can be translated to the specified speed of rotation; see 6.5.2.1 . 



6.2.2 Simulated test arrangements 

When pumps are tested under simulated site conditions, flow 
straighteners shall not be installed immediately before the 
pump. It is important that the characteristics of flow to the 
simulated circuit should be controlled, and that the flow 
should, as far as possible, be free from significant swirl induced 
by the installation and have a symmetrical velocity distribution. 
It necessary, the velocity distribution of the flow into the 
simulated circuit shall be determined by careful Pitot tube 
traverses, in order to establish that the required flow 
characteristics exist. If not, the required characteristics can be 
obtained by the installation of an adequate straightener (see 
ISO 7194); however, care shall be taken to ensure that the test 
conditions will not be affected by the high, irrecoverable 
pressure losses associated with efficient straightening devices. 

6.2.3 Pumps tested with fittings 

If specified in the contract, standard tests can be carried out on 
a combination of a pump and 

a) associated fittings at the final site installation; or 

b) an exact reproduction thereof; or 



6.3.2 Steadiness of operating conditions 

6.3.2.1 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard the following 
concepts (see 4.1) are used : 

— measuring system and instrument; 

— first order statistical moment, mean value of a signal; 

— second order statistical moment, variance and autocor- 
relation; 

— steady and unsteady phenomena; 

— steady operating conditions; 

— unsteady operating conditions; 

— fluctuations; 

— variations of the mean value (in unsteady operating 
conditions); 

— readings; 

— set of readings. 



1? 



IS 13538 : 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



6.3.2.2 Fluctuations of the signals delivered by the measuring 
systems and of the physical quantities determined from 
the signals 

The physical quantities considered in a test and especially those 
relating to the turbulent flow in the pipes or in the pump are 
naturally fluctuating ones. Nevertheless, the fluctuations which 
appear on the signals delivered by the measuring systems are 
only seen through the response function of these systems 
which leads to a partial or total filtering effect, and more par- 
ticularly to a damping effect over a given frequency range. 

Therefore measuring instruments with low inertia and a very 
short response time may give a fluctuating signal with large 
fluctuations at every operating point. Conversely, measuring 
instruments with high inertia and a long response time may give 
only small fluctuations and sometimes only in the abnormal 
operating range of the pump. 



6.3.2.2.1 Direct visual observation of the signals delivered by 
measuring systems 

To make a satisfactory direct visual observation, the maximum 
permissible amplitudes of fluctuations given in table 5 shall be 
respected for each measured quantity. 

Where the operating conditions of a pump are such that fluc- 
tuations of great amplitude occur, measurement may be carried 
out by providing, in the elements of the measuring system, a 
filtering or damping device capable of reducing the fluctuation 
amplitude to within the values given in table 5. 

As the damping may significantly affect the accuracy of the 
readings, a symmetrical and linear damping device, for example 
a capillary tube, shall be used. 

Where pressure measurements particularly are concerned the 
damping device shall comply with the specifications of 8.4. 1 .3. 



Table 5 — Maximum permissible amplitude of 

fluctuations as a percentage of mean value of quantity to 

be measured, for direct visual observation 



Measured quantity 


Maximum permissible 
amplitude of fluctuations 

% 


Rate of flow 
Head 
Torque 
Power 


+ 3 


Speed of rotation 


± 1 



When using a differential pressure device to measure flow, the 
maximum permissible amplitude of the fluctuation of the 
observed differential head can be ± 6 %. 

In the case of separate measurement of inlet total pressure 
head and outlet total pressure head, the maximum permissible 
amplitude of fluctuation should be calculated on the basis of 
the pump total head. 



6.3.2.2.2 Automatic recording or integration of signals 
delivered by measuring systems 

When the signals delivered by the measuring systems are 
automatically recorded or integrated by the measuring device, 
the maximum permissible fluctuation amplitude of these signals 
may be higher than the value given in table 5, if 

a) the measuring system used includes an integrating 
device carrying out automatically, with the required ac- 
curacy, the integration necessary to calculate the mean 
value as defined in 4.1.3; or 

b) the integration necessary to calculate the mean value 
may be carried out later on, from the continuous or sampled 
record of the analogue signal xit). (The sampling conditions 
should be specified in the test report.) 



6. 3.2. 3 Number of sets of readings or number of averaging 
readings 

The number of sets of readings or the number of averaging 
readings necessary to obtain consistent results having regard to 
the degree of accuracy required and within the limits of error 
stated in 6.4 is dependent on the steadiness of the operating 
conditions of the pump in the test installation. 

When several sets of readings have to be made, for the same 
operating point, only speed and temperature may be con- 
trolled. Throttle valve, water level, gland, and balance water 
settings shall be left completely unaltered. 

In order to determine whether the operating conditions are 
steady, it is necessary to check whether the different signals 
delivered by the measuring systems employed are steady, 
slightly steady or unsteady (see 4.1.6 and 4.1.7). 



6.3.2.3.1 Steady operating conditions 

Wh^n operating conditions are steady, the signals delivered by 
the measuring systems may be constant or present steady fluc- 
tuations. 

When the signal is constant only one set of readings or only 
one averaging reading may be taken at the considered 
operating point. 

When the signal fluctuates, the observer shall check that the 
operating conditions are steady before determining the quan 
tity to be measured, which requires several sets of readings or 
several averaging readings. 



6.3.2.3.2 Unsteady operating conditions 

In cases where the unsteadiness of test conditions gives rise to 
doubts concerning the accuracy of the tests, several sets of 
readings shall be taken for each operating point considered (see 
6.3.2.3). The difference between the mean values deduced 
from the repeated readings of the same quantities will be a 
measure of the unsteadiness of the test conditions, which are 
at least partly influenced by the pump under test as well as the 
installation. 



13 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



A minimum of three sets of readings shall be taken at unequal 
intervals at the chosen point and the mean value of each quan- 
tity and of the efficiency derived from each set of readings shall 
be recorded. The percentage difference between the largest 
and smallest mean values of each quantity shall not be greater 
than that given in table 6. It will be noted that a wider tolerance 
is permitted it the number of readings is increased up to the 
maximum requirement of nine readings. 

These tolerances are designed to ensure that the errors due to 
scatter, taken together with the systematic error limits given in 
plauses 7 to 12 will result in overall measurement errors not 
greater than those g./en in table 7. 

Table 6 — Limits of variation between repeated mean 

values of the same quantity (based on 95 % confidence 

limits as defined in annex A) 



Number 

of sets 

of readings 


Maximum permissible difference 
between largest and smallest 
mean values of each quantity 


Rate of flow 

Head 

Torque 

Power 

% 


Speed of rotation 


% 


3 
5 
7 
9 


0.8 
1.6 
2,2 
2,8 


0,25 
0,5 
0,7 
0,9 



The arithmetic mean of the mean values from all sets of 
readings for each quantity shall be taken as the actual value 
given by the test for the operating conditions considered. 

If the values given in table 6 cannot be reached, the cause shall 
be ascertained, the conditions rectified and a new complete set 
of readings made, i.e. all the readings in the original set shall be 
rejected. No reading or selection of readings in the set of 
readings may be rejected because it lies outside the limits given 
in table 6. 

Where the excessive variation is not due to procedure or in- 
strumentation errors, and cannot therefore be eliminated, the 
number of sets of readings shall be increased and the limits of 
error shall be calculated by statistical analysis {see annex A). 

It is unlikely that variations outside the requirements of table 6 
will occur for the majority of pump tests carried out under well 
controlled conditions, particularly in a laboratory or at the 
manufacturer's works. 

6.3.3 Deviation from specified speed 

A difference of + 20 % between the specified speed of 
rotation and the test speed of rotation measurement may be 
allowed for the determination of flow rate, head and pump effi- 
ciency. For (NPSH)^ measurements, the difference allowed 
between the test speed and the specified rotational speed shall 
be within the limits of ± 20 % provided that the flow rate is 
between 70 % and 120 % of the value corresponding to the 
maximum efficiency at the same speed. For cavitation ap- 
pearance tests, see annex D. 



Scale effects are not sufficiently established to permit precise 
performance forecasts outside these limits and therefore 
should be a matter of agreement. 

For a combined motor pump unit, the motor efficiency change 
between specified and test speeds shall be established at the 
time of agreeing the contract. 

6.3.4 Control of operating conditions 

The test conditions may be obtained, among other methods, 
by throttling at the outlet or possibly at the inlet or both at inlet 
and outlet. Nevertheless, control of the operating conditions by 
throttling at the inlet is not considered a normal test method. 
When throttling at the inlet, due consideration shall be given to 
the possibility of flow distortion, increase in turbulence, or of 
air coming out of the water, all phenomena which may affect 
the operation of the pump (see 12.2) or of the flow measuring 
device (see 7.1) or both. 

6.3.5 Tests carried out with a different liquid 

If the liquid used during the tests differs from the liquid pumped 
in normal operation, its kinematic viscosity and the speed of 
rotation of the pump shall be such that the mean friction coeffi 
cient A estimated for the whole pump does not differ by more 
than 5 % from its value in the conditions of use of the pump 
In the case of larger variations of the friction coefficient a, a 
conversion formula may be used by agreement between the 
parties. The variations of the Reynolds number : 



Ke 



D^s/2gfr 



where 

D-^ is the inlet diameter of the pump; 

// ' is the head generated by stage; 

shall be estimated from figure 29 and the admissible variations 
of the ratio n/v shall be deduced. 

The tests tor total head, flow rate and efficiency carried out 
under these conditions are valid as long as no cavitation ap- 
pears and compressibility is negligible. 



6.4 Measuring uncertainty 

6.4.1 General 

When the methods, instruments, and calibrations employed 
comply with this International Standard, the measurements ob 
tained represent, at the time, the best estimates of the true 
value ot the quantities being measured. Better, or more ac 
curate, estimates can be obtained only by gathering new data. 

It is essential that the parties concerned should establish, 
before the test, the range of uncertainty that can be tolerated. 
Strictly speaking, the measuring uncertainties can only be 
calculated when the results of the measurements are complete. 



14 



IS 13538 : 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



6.4.2 Level of confidence 

The uncertainty on a set of measurements of a single quantity 
depends on the confidence level attached to this uncertainty. 
The higher the confidence level, the higher the absolute value 
of the uncertainty and the higher the probability that any 
measurement falls within the uncertainty bandwidth. It is then 
necessary to specify the confidence level with which this uncer- 
tainty is evaluated, together with the permissible uncertainty. 
In this International Standard, the uncertainty is associated to a 
95 % confidence level, i.e. tnere is one possibility out of twenty 
that a reading lies outside the measurement uncertainty band- 
width <seo ISO 3534). 



6.4.5 Mean values 

The mean value of a large number of repeated measurements is 
a better estimate of the true value than the average of a smaller 
one, provided there is no systematic change with time of the 
measuring system or the measured quantity which cannot be 
corrected. When analysing test results, the chief of tests shall 
satisfy himself that no such tendency is present. 

6.4.6 Treatment of errors 

It is advisable to treat systematic and random errors separately 
as described in annex A. 



6.4.3 Uncertsinties of individusJ '^usntities 

In any one test, enough evidence is seldom available to make 
exhaustive analyses of all possible sources of error and deduce 
percentage confidence levels as described in textbooks on 
statistics. Where there is such evidence, it should be used, but 
in its absence estimates should nevertheless be made based on 
the available data together with past experience of the method 
of measurement. 

Strictly speaking, the uncertainty on each individual measured 
quantity {gy, H, P, t], etc.) can only be evaluated when the 
results of measurements are complete. 

The fact that the uncertainties used may be, at best, estimates 
in no way detracts from the value of defining agreed explicit 
terms in a contract using numerical quantities which can be 
processed in an unbiased way. 

For guidance, some values of the uncertainties which may be 
expected in satisfactory measuring conditions are given in 
clauses 7 to 11 dealing with the measurement methods of each 

,.■■ i.an+i+ii 4nH rv^^vimiinn i,.aliiA^ i*iKi,^K ^h^^MiliH t^j.\t Ka Avi^aa/HaH 

<^UU,il.l^7, UliU ■■■UnMilUKi VUIUW.. TWIMX,,. .JWUU.U •!»> b,W W,.>WW^W%.U 

for precision class tests are given in table 7. 

6.4.4 Errors 

The error of a measurement depends partly on the residual 
error in the instrument or measuring system at the start of the 
tests. At this time, all known errors will have been removed by 
calibration, careful measurement of dimensions, proper in- 
stallation, etc. The uncertainty still remaining is called 
systematic error, and always exists, however small. 

Another source of error arises from the non repeatability of 
measurements, which must always exist provided the readout 
equipment has adequate discrimination. Such errors may arise 
either from the characteristics of the measuring system, or 
from changes in the quantity being measured, or both. They 
are observed directly in the form of scatter readings, unlike 
systematic errors, which do not affect repeatability during the 
test. This second type of error is called random error. 

Repetition of a set of measurements using the same equipment 
can reduce the uncertainty introduced by random experimental 
errors, but has no effect on the systematic error. The latter can 
be reduced only if equipment of a higher standard of accuracy 
is used, or if the same equipment can be calibrated to a higher 
standard. The systematic error does not contribute in any way 
to the scatter of repeated observations. 



Table 7 — Maximum permissible limits of uncertainty^ 



Quantity 


Maximum 

permissible 

limit 

% 


Rate of flow 


+ 1,5 


Pump total head 

Pump power Input (direct method) 

Electrical power input by the motor-pump 

group 


±1 
+ 1,3 


Pump power input (determined from the 
efficiency of the motor) 


Speed of rotation 


± 0,2 
1 2 


Overall efficiency of motor pump unit 


Pump efficiency 


i 2,25 



1 ) This table gives, as guidance, maximum values of the uncertainties 
which may be obtained with the apparatus existing at the present time. 
These values are for normal site conditions : laboratory and works tests 
may be more accurate. 



6.5 Analysis of test results 

6.5.1 Test data required for the analysis 

The characteristics which may be specified by the manufac- 
turer are given in clause 5. 

The measurement methods of the quantities necessary for the 
calculation of these characteristics are given in clauses 7 to 12. 

6.5.2 Conversion of the test results to the specified 
conditions 

Such conversion serves to determine whether the performance 
specification would have been fulfilled if the tests had been 
conducted under the same conditions as those on which the 
performance specification is based. 

6.5,2.1 Conversion of the test results into data based on the 
specified speed of rotation or frequency 

All test data obtained at speeds of rotation other than the one 
specified shall be converted to the basis of the specified speed 
of rotation n^p. 



15 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 5198:1987 



If the deviation from this speed of rotation to the specified 
speed of rotation n^p does not exceed the permissible variations 
stated in 6.3.3, and if the deviation from test liquid to specified 
liquid is within the limits stated in 6.3,5, the measured data on 
the flow rate Qy, the total head H, the power input P, and the 
efficiency r], can be converted by means of the equations: 



Qy.T = Qy 



H, = U 



I \3 



If these tolerances, i.e. 1 % for frequency and 5 % for voltage, 
are exceeded, it will be necessary for the purchaser and the 
manufacturer to reach agreement. 



6.5.2.2 Tests made with (NPSH) different from that specified 

After correction for speed of rotation within the permitted limits 
(see 6.3.3), measured pump performance at a higher (NPSH) 
cannot be accepted to indicate performance at a lower (NPSH). 

After correction for speed of rotation within the permitted limits 
(see 6.3.3), measured pump performance at a low (NPSH) can 
be accepted to indicate performance at a higher (NPSH) pro 
vided that the absence of cavitation has been checked in ac- 
cordance with clause 12. 



Ii 



1 



and the results obtained for the (NPSH) can be converted by 
means of the equation: 



(NPSH)i 



(NPSH) \^ 
n 



The value jc = 2 may be used as a first approximation for the 
(NPSH) if the specified conditions given in 6.3.3 for the speed 
of rotation and tne flow rate have been fulfilled and if the 
physical state of the liquid at the entrance of the impeller is 
such that no awkward gas separation can affect correct opera- 
tion of the pump. If the pump operates near the cavitation 
limits, or if the deviation of the test speed from the specified 
speed exceeds the specifications given in 6,3.3, the phenomena 
may be influenced by factors such as thermodynamic effects, 
the variation of the surface tension or the differences in dis- 
solved or occluded air content. Values of exponent x between 
1,3 and 2^' have been observed and an agreement between the 
parties to establish the conversion formula to be used is man- 
datory. 

In the case of combined motor-pump units, or where the per 
formance specifications are with respect to an agreed frequen- 
cy and voltag? instead of an agreed speed, the flow rate, pump 
total head, power input, and efficiency data are subject to 
these conversion laws, provided that /i^^ is replaced by the fre- 
quency /..p and n by the frequency/. 

Such conversion, however, shall be restricted to the cases 
where the frequency during the test varies by no more than 
1 % from the frequency prescribed for the characteristics 
specified. If the voltage used in the test is no more than 5 % 
above or below the voltage on which the specified character- 
istics are based, the other operational data require no change. 



6.5.3 Presentation of test results 

The presentation of test results shall be made using the overall 
uncertainties computed from the test or alternatively using con- 
tractually pre-agreed values, chosen taking account of the 
agreed test method and conditions. 

Taking into account the total uncertainty on each coordinate, 
each measured operating point may be represented by an 
ellipse. The axes of this ellipse represent the total uncertainty 
for a confidence level of 95 %. They are calculated in annex A. 

The absolute values of the uncertainties are: 

~ for pump discharge + eoQ 

— for pump head 

— for pump input 

— for pump efficiency 



± e„H 
± e,J-> 



± f^'/ 



where e represents the fractional total error in the quantities 
being considered. 

After having determined the total uncertainties and drawn the 
ellipses for each measured point, an upper and lower envelope 
of the ellipses shall be drawn (see figure 21. 

The test result therefore is a band of measurement limited by 
the two envelopes. All points within this band are equally valid. 

Concerning adherence to specification, see annex B. 



1) See RUTSCHI, K., Messung und DrchzaNumrechnung des NPSH-Wortos bet Kreise/pumpen, Schweizer Ingenieur unci Architekt 39/80. 



16. 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 





a) H {q^) curve 



b) n [Qy] curve 



1 




C) P ((?^.) curve 
Figure 2 — Envelopes of the ellipses of total uncertainty for each measured point 

Section two: Measurement methods 



7 Measurement of rate of flow 



7.1 General 

The choice of the method for measuring the volume rate of 
flow Qy (see table 1) depends on a number of factors of which 
the following may. be cited : 

a) the \/a\ue of the flow rate to be measured; 

b) the type of test (on a model or on the full-size machine ; 
on a test platform or on site); 

c) practical conditions of installation and layout of the 
circuit; 

d> the accuracy desired; 

e) the cost of putting the method into operation and poss- 
ible time out of action. 



Table 8 sets out the methods which may be envisaged for each 
case, and the accuracy or systematic uncertainty that may be 
expected when they are used in good measurement conditions 
by experienced personnel and in accordance with existing Inter 
national Standards. In particular, the values of the uncertainty 
given in this table imply that the flow is steady and free from 
disturbance produced by the pump. It must be emphasized 
that the overall value of uncertainty for each case can 
only be determined after the tests. The methods mentioned 
vary considerably in accuracy, but they all have an estimated 
uncertainty of less than 2 % (at a confidence level of 95 %). By 
virtue of this and depending on test conditions, any one of 
them may be envisaged for precision class tests 

Other methods which are not indicated in table 8 may also be 
used subject to the following two conditions : 

— their systematic measurement uncertainty shall be 
determined and checked by periodic calibration using a 
primary method; 

— the resulting uncertainty shall be compatible with 
table 7. 



VI 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Table 8 — Methods for flow rate measurement 







Values as percentages 




System 

(at a 

Laboratory model 
tests 


atic measuring uncertainty 

confidence level of 95 % ) 


Measurement methods and standards 


Tests on ful 

on test 
platform 


-size pumps 
on site 


by weight (ISO 4185) 
Primary volumetric (ISO 8316) 
methods | travelling screen IIEC Publication 193) 


+ 0,1 to + 0,3 
± 0,1 to + 0.3 
+ 0,1 to ± 0,3 

+ 0,3 to ± 0,5 


+ 0,1 to ± 0,3 
± 0,1 to + 0,3 
+ 0,1 to + 0,3 

± 0,3 to i 0,5 


t 0.5 10 ♦ 15 
+ O.T) to t 1 


Differential pressure devices^' (ISO 5167 and ISO 2186) 
Turbine flowmeter'' 


Electromagnetic flowmeter' ' 


t 0,5 to ± 1 
+ 0,5 to + 1.5 


+ 0,5 to + 1 
+ 0,5 to + 1,5 


.' 1 to ' 1.5 

+ 1 to ± 2 
+ 1 to + 1,5 

+ 1 to + 2 

+ 1 to + 2 
±1 to ± 2 
+ 1 to ± 2 
+ 1 to + 2 


Calibrated weir by a primary method 

(ISO 1438/1, ISO 3846, 

ISO 4359, ISO 4360) by a secondary method 


Standardized orifice plate (ISO 5167 and ISO 2186) 


•1 to ± 1,5 


±1 to + 1.5 


Standardized venturi tube (ISO 2186) 


±1 to ± 2 


±1 to + 2 
±1 to ± 2 


w , ., ,, _. / by current meters (ISO 3354) 
Velocity area methods \ ^^ p,,^^ ^^^^ ,,5^ 395^, 

Tracer methods (ISO 2975 and ISO 555/1 to 3) | fransit"time 


1 1 to ± 2 



1) Calibrated by a primary method. 



7.2 Measurement by weighing 

ISO 4185 specifies two alternative methods: 

a) the "static weighing method" which cdnsists of diver- 
ting the flow alternately inside and outside the weighing 
tank; 

b) the "dynamic weighing method", where the weighing 
is made "in flight", the flow being directed permanently into 
the tank. 

The weighing method, which gives only the value of the 
average flow rate during the time taken to fill the weighing 
tank, may be considered the most accurate method of flow rate 
measurement. 

It is affected by errors relating to weighing, to measuring the 
filling time, and to the determination of the density taking into 
account the temperature of the fluid. There may also be errors 
in connection either with diverting the flow (static method) or 
with dynamic phenomena at the time of weighing (dynamic 
method). Furthermore, a buoyancy correction has to be made 
to the readings of the weighing machine to take account of the 
difference between the up-thrust exerted by the atmosphere 
on the liquid being weighed and on the reference mass used 
during the calibration of the weighing machine. 

With high quality apparatus, the systematic uncertainty on the 
measurement of the flow rate (at a confidence level of 95 % I 
may be in the region of 0,1 to 0,2 %. 

It should be noted that the weighing method requires large 
fixed installations which are only really practicable in a 
laboratory and for relatively low flow rates (less than 1,5 m^/s 
for instance). 



7.3 Volumetric method 

For the description of this method, see ISO 8316. 

The volumetric method approaches the accuracy of the 
weighing method and similarly only supplies the value of the 
average flow rate during the time it takes to fill the gauged 
capacity. 

The volumetric method is affected by errors relating to the 
calibration of the reservoir, the nneasurement of levels, the 
measurement of filling time, and also by errors in connection 
either with diverting the flow (static method) or with dynamic 
phenomena at the time of gauging (dynamic method). 
Moreover, the watertightness of the reservoir shall be checked 
and a leakage correction made if necessary. 

The calibration of the reservoir may be obtained by measuring 
the water level after successive volumes of water determined 
either by weighing or by means of a gauged pipette are poured 
into the reservoir tank. 

With high quality apparatus, the estimated uncertainty (at a 
confidence level of 95 %) may be in the region of 0, 1 to 0,3 %. 
However, in its normal form as described above, the volumetric 
method is subject to the same limitations as the weighing 
method. 

On the other hand, there exists a variant to the volumetric 
method which can be used on site and for larger flow rates, 
where a natural reservoir the volume of which has been deter- 
mined by geometrical or topographical procedures can be used 
as the gauged capacity (see lEC Publication 41). It must, 
however, be emphasized that the accuracy of this method is 
much less than that of the volunnetric method used in the 



IK 



1813538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



laboratory, notably on account of the inaccuracy in measuring 
the reservoir, uncertainty about possible leaks or inflows, and 
the difficulty of determining the levels and disturbances due to 
atmospheric conditions. Depending on the particular cir- 
cumstances (whether the reservoir is natural or artificial, the 
capacity of the reservoir compared to the flow rate to be 
measured, the stability of conditions over a relatively long 
period of time, etc.) the systematic uncertainty of a flow rate 
measured by this method may be estimated at 1 to 2 %. 



7.4 Travelling screen 

A description of this method and the conditions for its use are 
given in lEC Publication 193. 

Its principle, which Is close to that of the volumetric method, 
makes this a very accurate one, for it only requires the measure- 
ment of the dimensions of the channel, the level of the water 
and the moving time of the screen. 

However, as in 7.2 and 7.3, measurement by travelling screen 
requires large and very carefully maintained apparatus, so that 
it can only be used for laboratory tests or tests in the works on a 
full-size pump platform. It is particularly well adapted to the lat- 
ter type of test, as it enables relatively high flow rates to be ob- 
tained (around 3 m^/s, for example) with a systematic uncer- 
tainty (at a confidence level of 95 %) of about 0,2 to 0,3 %. 



7.5 Differential pressure devices 

For the construction, installation and use of orifice plates, 
nozzles and venturi tubes, see ISO 5167; for specifications on 
connecting piping for the manometer, see ISO 2186. Different 
types of standardized differential pressure devices are shown in 
figure 3. 

In particular, attention should be drawn to the minimum 
straight lengths to be adhered to upstream of the differential 
pressure device; these are specified in ISO 5167 for various 
configurations of piping. If it is necessary to place the differen- 
tial pressure device downstream of the pump (a case not 
covered in ISO 5167), the pump may be considered to create a 
disturbance in the flow equivalent to two elbows not in the 
same plane. However, when working away from the operating 
conditions corresponding to the best efficiency of the pump, 
the swirl of the flow produced by the pump can involve more 
severe conditions.. To overcome these it will be necessary to 
install, downstream of the pump, a swirl remover or flow 
straightener of one of the types given in ISO 5167, provided the 
straight lengths specified in this International Standard 
upstream and downstream of the straightener are complied 
with. 

It should also be noted that the diameter of the pipe and the 
Reynolds number must fall within the ranges specified in the 
International Standard for each type of device. 

In these conditions, if there is no special calibration, using the 
discharge coefficient indicated in the relevant International 
Standards may be considered to give a systematic uncertainty 



on the flow rate (at a confidence level of 95 %) of 1 to 1,5 %, 
for an orifice plate or an ISA 32 nozzle, and from 1 to 2 % for a 
long-radius nozzle or a venturi tube. 

If a departure is made from the standardized conditions, or if 
greater accuracy is required, the differential pressure device 
shad be calibrated in its particular conditions of use by means of 
one of the primary methods described in 7.2 to 7.4. In good 
measuring conditions, a systematic uncertainty (at a con- 
fidence level of 95 %) of approximately 0,3 to 0,5 % can then 
be obtained. 

When choosing between the various types of differential 
pressure devices, the following factors should be considered; 

a) the greatest accuracy for uncalibrated devices conform- 
ing to the relevant International Standards is achieved with 
orifice plates, the least with venturi tubes; 

b) head loss is much lower for venturi tubes than for 
orifice plates and nozzles (about five times as low, given an 
equal differential pressure) ; 

c) the straight lengths required are much smaller for 
classical venturi tubes than for orifice plates, nozzles and 
venturi nozzles; 

d) building and positioning is much simpler for an orifice 
plate than for a nozzle or a venturi tube — the latter requires 
a large distance between flanges; 

e) in the case of orifice plates, a significant error can arise 
if buckling of the plate occurs due to the existence of a large 
differential pressure across the plate. 

7.6 Weirs 

The specifications for thin-plate weirs and measuring flumes 
are given in ISO 1438/1 and ISO 4359 and those for various 
types of broad-crested weirs in ISO 3846 and ISO 4360. Figure 4 
shows the different types of standardized structures 
schematically. 

However, even for rectangular thin-plate weirs, which are the 
best known and the most stable, the uncertainty which sur- 
rounds the normalized discharge coefficient is not compatible 
with the accuracy being sought in this International Standard 

On '^he other hand, if it is possible to calibrate the weir in its 
position in the exact conditions of use since great sensitivity to 
velocity distribution in the approach channel exists and 
periodically to check this calibration by means of one of the 
primary methods described in 7.2 to 7.4, for laboratory or plat- 
form tests a flow rate measurement with an estimated uncer- 
tainty (at confidence level of 95 %) of about 0,5 to 1,5 % may 
be attained. For on-site tests, calibrating the weir by means of 
one of the methods described in 7.8 or 7.9 can lead to a 
systematic uncertainty of 1 to 2 % 

To achieve this, however, great care must be taken to maintain 
the weir in perfect condition; it may be noted that it is easier to 
conserve and check the sharpness of the edge of a thin-plate 
weir than the roughness of the sill and walls of a broad-crested 
weir or a measuring flunne. 



19 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Orifice plate 

(with corner taps, D and D/2 taps, 
or flange taps) 



pTTTli- ^^ / / ^ ? / / // ; t4\ JIA \ s \ \ k\ s s;v,'>\ 



^^F^tr^ i' ^ ' ' ' ' ' '• ' " ■ 



Nozzle 

(long radius or "ISA 32" 



I.' ^ J .• ^ ^ J ^ ^ ^ J 



J 



\'^^ / ^^^// , / ^/ ,{ 



H 



iP': \\\ \\ \ \ \ •. r:; 







Clawical 

Venturi tube 



f^ . WT-^ k I k ■. ■. ^-^ 



4ff 




■- ^ ■- ^ '■ '- '- *■ ^ 



■^ s Mrr^ 




■■■'■'■'■ ^ 




Venturi nozzle 




Figure 3 - Different types of standardized differential pressure dGvicts (see ISO 5167) 



20 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



7.7 Turbine meters and electromagnetic 
flowmeters^' 

Though quite different in conception, these two types of 
flowmeter have nnany points in common with regard to prac- 
tical conditions of use. 

In no circumstances should they be used unless calibrated 
beforehand by means of one of the primary methods described 
in 7.2 to 7.4. Although these devices do not require very long 
upstream straight pipe lengths, in general it is desirable that the 
conditions of calibration should reproduce the circuit con- 
figuration in which they will be used. If they are installed per- 
manently on a test platform, the possibility of a periodic check 
on their calibration must be taken into account. In these condi- 
tions, a flow rate may be obtained with a systematic uncertain- 
ty (at a confidence level of 95 %) of about 0,3 to 0,5 % for 
turbine flowmeters and 0,5 to 1 % for electromagnetic 
flowmeters. 

NOTE — The fact that these flowmeters send an electric signal direct 
makes their Integration Into an automatic measuring system particu- 
larly easy. 

7.8 Velocity area methods 

ISO 3354 and ISO 3966 specify methods for discharge 
measurements in closed conduits by means of current meters 
and Pitot tubes respectively. They give all the specifications 
considered necessary concerning conditions for application, 
choice and operation of the apparatus, the measurement of 
point velocities and the calculation of the flow rate by graphical 
or numerical integration of the velocity distribution. 

In the most favourable measuring conditions, the systematic 
uncertainty in the measurement of the flow rate (at confidence 
level of 95 %) is 1 to 2 %. 

The main disadvantages of these methods are that 

a) they require fairly long straight lengths to ensure a 
regular velocity distribution; 

b) with current meters, they can only be used in large 
diameter pipes; 

c) it is rather difficult to put them into operation; as a 
result the installation may not be available for several days. 

On the other hand, the velocity integration method is often the 
only one that can be applied when testing pumps with large 
flow rates. 

Among precautions to be taken, it should be particularly en 
sured that the support of the current meters or Pitot tubes does 
not create excessive obstruction in the pipe. 

Furthermore, except in very -long pipe installations, it is 
preferable that the measuring section should be placed 
upstream of the pump in order to avoid too much turbulence or 
swirling flow. 



Where the plant comprises a sufficiently long artificial open 
channel, the discharge may be measured by the velocity area 
method using current meters in this channel (see lEC Publica- 
tion 198). 

7.9 Tracer methods 

The various parts of ISO 2975 apply to the measurement of the 
flow rate in pipes, by both the dilution method (constant rate 
injection) and the transit time method (also called the salt 
velocity method); each method uses either radioactive or non- 
radioactive tracers. Furthermore, ISO 555/1 to 3 specifies dilu- 
tion methods for discharge measurements in open channels. 

These methods have the advantage of being usable for a very 
wide range of flow rates, and some of them only require 
minimal interference with the pipe. The length required in some 
cases to ensure adequate mixing of the solution injected can in 
practice be reduced on the one hand by injecting into the suc- 
tion pipe of the pump which is then used as a mixer or on the 
other hand by increasing in each section the number of injec- 
tion positions and sampling or measuring positions. 

These methods should only be used by trained staff and it may 
be noted that the use of radioactive tracers is subject to certain 
constraints 

It may be considered that the systematic uncertainty in the 
determination of the flow rate lat a confidence level 95 %) with 
these methods is from 1 to 2 % , 



8 Measurement of head 

8.1 General 

8.1.1 Principles of measurement 

8.1.1.1 Total head and specific hydraulic energy 

Although expressed as a height of pumped liquid column, the 
pump total head, H. calculated in accordance with its definition 
given in table 1 , represents in actual fact the energy transmitted 
by the pump per unit weight of liquid. 

This concept of specific energy may replace the one of head 
and its use is to be recommended, since for instance the 
column of liquid representing the total head is not exactly the 
difference in height that may be read at a liquid column (sup- 
posing no difference in elevation or available kinetic energy 
between inlet and outlet). This discrepancy is due to liquid 
compressibility and atmospheric pressure related to elevation. 

8.1.1.2 Effect of liquid compressibility on total head evaluation 

Total head is in fact the maximum amount of mechanical 
energy per unit weight that may be released in bringing the 
liquid from its actual conditions to reference conditions. 



1) These will form the subject of a future International Standard. 



21 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Thin-plate weirs 
(see ISO 1438/1) 




T^ 



Rectangular 
full-width weir 



Rectangular notch 



Triangular notch 



Broad-crested weirs 
(see ISO 3846) 



Rectangular profile 
weir with sharp 
upstream edge 



Da/*tanni liar nrnfila 

weir with rounded 
upstream edge 



Triangular profile weir (see ISO 4360) 



/ 
/ 






/77777V7T, 






~teg- 



,/////// 



/. 





-\\\v\Vx\\Vx'\\'- 




v<<:(;v<:?^ 



Standing wave flume (with rectangular, trapezoidal or U-throat) 
(see ISO 4359) 



U^A 


MM^i^^M^^\ 


f^ 


1 
1 

V/// 


mmm^. 


^/// 



NOTE — The accuracy required in this International Standard can only be achieved if the discharge coefficient of such devices is determined by 
individual on-site calibration; thus it is not permitted to use the values of coefficients as they are given in the relevant International Standards. 

Fiqure 4 — Different tvpes of standardized weirs and flumes 



22 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Reference conditions are generally sea level and standard 
atmospheric pressure, but within the frame of a test where only 
differences in energy level are of concern, other reference con- 
ditions may be chosen, for example floor elevation and at- 
mospheric pressure at the time of test. 

For liquid at elevation Zj at the pressure />e/- with velocity U, and 
g being constant, the correct evaluation of total head is given 
by the equation : 

1 t f»' dp 



8 Jp,Q 2g 



This integration is to be evaluated for an isentrbpic process. 
Tables and formulae may be found giving the value of this 
integral for water. 

Generally speaking, q varies with pressure and temperature, 
therefore evaluation is not straightf onward. However, pressure 
dependence is low and nearly linear and one may write 

//,- = Zl + + Oai 

' ' (e, + eo)g 2g 

This approximation holds for water up to 40 "C and up to 
15 MPaD. The definition of total head given table 1 is a com- 
plementary simplification based on the assumption that 

Si =^ Qo 

It is the responsibility of the chief of tests to decide whether 
compressibility may be fully neglected in relation to the accep- 
table uncertainty allowed by each specific tests. 



Direct evaluation of pump total head is recommended 
where compressibility cannot be disregarded, due to the 
following 



g ^ Po e g ^ Po Q g ^ Pe} Q 



This calculation requires analytic expression of the state func- 
tion V =f[p)- However, if linearization is possible, the following 
will be valid : 



1 (^''^ _ 



•Pt2 

where 



2(/?e2 - Pel) 



^1 is unit mass of fluid at p^, and 6^ ; 
Q2 is unit mass of fluid at /»^ and ^1. 

NOTE — The temperature at the end of the reversible process is 
slightly different from $-\. The error due to neglecting this difference 
does not exceed 0,1 % on efficiency when the pressure Is less than 
150 bar and the temperature is less than 250 °Q (see 11.2). 



8.1.1.3 Available velocity head 

The velocity head prevailing in a measuring section cannot be 
fully converted into total head. This is especially the case at the 
pump outlet [see section (2) of figure 5]. 




Figure 5 — Determination of available velocity head 



1) 1 MPa = 10 bar 



13 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



In section (3) of figure 5, further downstream, part of the 
velocity head remains as such, part is converted into a pressure 
increase Ap and the remainder is dissipated as friction within 
the flow. 

This friction is due to velocity rearrangement and is definitely 
unavailable to the user. Available velocity head is then given by 
the equation 



a^i-— = — + fl!3 — - + //j2 



«2 



2g 



Wp 



where Hf is the friction loss caused by velocity rearrangement. 

Where practicable, 0^2 shall be evaluated from the static head 
line plotted from measurements in successive sections, as 
shown in figure 5. Where this is not possible it may be assumed 
that 0^2 = 02 ^^^ '^s value may be evaluated from the deter- 
mination of the velocity distribution in section (2) (see 8.2.4.2). 

8.1.1.4 Loss of head between inlet or outlet sections 
and measuring sections 

The various quantities specified in the definition of head (see 
table 1} should as a rule be determined in the inlet section Si 
and the outlet section S2 of the pump (or of the pump set and 
fittings which are the subject of the tests); practically, for 
reasons of convenience and of measurement accuracy, the 
measurements are generally carried out in cross-sections S'l 
and S2 some way upstream from Si and downstream from Sj 
(see figure 6). Thus, account shall be taken of the friction 
losses in the pipe, i.e. //j^ between S'l and Si and //jj 
between S2 and Sj (and possibly for the local head losses), and 
the pump total head is given by the equation 

where //'i and H'2 are the total head at S'l and 82. 




Total 
head line 



Figure 6 — Datsrminatron of pump total head 



Some requirements concerning the definition of the measuring 
sections in various types of installations and a method of 
estimating the head losses are given in 8.2. 



8.1.2 Various methods of measurement 

Depending on the installation conditions of the pump and on 
the layout of the circuit, the pump total head may be deter- 
mined either by measuring the inlet and outlet total heads 
separately, or by measuring the differential pressure between 
inlet and outlet and adding the differences in velocity head, if 
applicable, taking into account potential head and density 
variations due to the measuring system. 

Total heads may also be deduced either from pressure 
measurements in conduits or frorti water level measurements in 
basins. 

The selection of the measuring section, the various measuring 
devices which can be used and the determination of the veloci- 
ty head for each of these cases are dealt with in 8.3 and 8.4. 



8.1.3 Uncertainty of measurement 

The uncertainty of the pump total head measurement shall be 
obtained by combining the estimated uncertainties of each 
term of which it is composed; thus the manner of conducting 
this calculation depends on the methods of measurement 
used: separate measurements of the inlet and outlet total head 
or differential measurement between the pump ends, pressure 
or water level measurement and type of apparatus. It is 
therefore possible to give only general information on the 
various errors involved. 



8.1.3.1 Errors in potential energy values 

The elevations, referred to an arbitrary reference plane, of the 
central point of the measuring sections as well as those of the 
zero or the reference point of the various sets of measuring ap- 
paratus are given by surveying processes which are generally 
very accurate. The uncertainty of these components may be 
regarded as negligible compared to other sources of error. 



8.1.3.2 Errors in kinetic energy values 

These are dependant on the one hand on the uncertainty in the 
mean velocity in the measuring sections, and thus of the deter 
mination of the cross-sectional areas and principally on the 
method of flow rate measurement used; and on the other hand 
on the uncertainty in the evaluation of the velocity head coeffi 
cient flg, which is a function of the flow conditions (see 8.2.4). 
These errors may become more significant in pumps generating 
a low total head. 



8.1.3.3 Errors in water level measurements 

Apart from the errors which can be due to the unsteadiness and 
to slope of the water level, errors in water level measurements 
are dependent principally on the measuring apparatus used. 



2C 



1913538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



For guidance only, a rough estimate of the uncertainties due to 
the apparatus (see 8.3.2) may be taken as follows : 

— staff gauges, plate gauges: ±10 to 20 mm; 

— float gauges, bubbler apparatus: ± 5 to 10 mm; 

— liquid manometers, point or hook 

gauges : ± 1 to 3 mm. 

8.1.3.4 Errors in pressure measurements 

If every precaution related to pressure tappings and connecting 
pipes has been taken, and if the measurements are not falsified 
by undue pressure fluctuations, the following estimates of 
systematic uncertainties due to the apparatus (see 8.4.2) may 
be used for guidance : 



~ liqu id man ometers : 

— dead-weight manometers, 
pressure weighbeams: 

— spring pressure gauges: 

— pressure transducers: 



+ 0,2 to 1 %; 

± 0,05 to 0,5 %; 
± 0,5 to 1 %; 
± 0,2 to 1 %. 



8.2 Definition of the measuring sections 

8.2.1 General case of a pump tasted alone 

In most cases, the purpose of the tests is to check the hydraulic 
performance of the pump, without any upstream or down- 
stream fittings; thus it is desirable, as far as possible (see 
8.2.3), to measure the pump total head as close as possible to 
the inlet and outlet flanges of the pump as described in 8.2.1 .1 
and 8.2.1.2. 

8.2.1.1 Inlet measuring section 

If the pipe connecting the pump to the source of supply is not 
considered as part of the pump, the inlet measuring section 
shall be established, if practical conditions allow, in this 
pipework at a distance preferably equal to at least two 
diameters from the pump inlet flange, in a straight parallel sec- 
tion in which the flow conditions are as nearly as possible those 
specified in 6.2.1. Errors may arise if such is not the case, for 
example if a pre-swirl of the flow occurs at partial loads or if the 
layout of the circuit induces an asymmetrical or swirling flow 
pattern, in such circumstances, an investigation of the flow 
conditions may be necessary according to 8.2.4.2. 

However, in some cases, it may be advisable to measure the 
inlet total head either in the suction pipe at some distance from 
the inlet flange or even in the free level reservoir from which the 
pump is supplied. In both cases, it is necessary to take into ac- 
count the head losses //j^ between the measuring section and 
the inlet flange, calculating them according to 8.2.5. 

When the head is obtained by water level measurement, errors 
may arise if the free surface is unsteady (for example if surging 
or waves exist), or if there are locally high velocities, or if vor- 
tices occur near the pump intake; the location of measurement 
shall be selected and appropriate arrangements shall be used 



(see 8.3.1) so as to minimize these influences. Due allowance 
shall be made for the velocity head at the measuring location (if 
it is not negligible compared to the pump total head) and for the 
pressure acting on the surface (generally the atmospheric 
pressure). 

8.2.1.2 Outlet measuring section 

If the pipe into which the pump discharges is not considered as 
part of the pump, the outlet measuring section shall be 
established, if the practical conditions allow, in this pipework at 
a distance of at least 2 diameters from the pump outlet flange, 
in a straight parallel section. 

Errors may arise in the case of asymmetric or swirling flow 
conditions in the measuring section; such a flow maldistribu- 
tion is a reflection of the inadequacy of the pump to straighten 
the flow after it passes out of the impeller into the casing. This 
is often inevitable at flow rates other than that for which the 
pump was designed, especially for pumps of high type number. 
It may be possible to extend the flow range over which head 
measurement is possible within the accuracy required for preci- 
sion class tests by establishing the measuring section further 
downstream and making allowance for the head losses Hj2 be- 
tween the outlet flange and the measuring section calculated 
according to 8.2.5. In order to ensure that the velocity distribu- 
tion is satisfactory or to assess the kinetic energy coefficient to 
be applied, an investigation of the flow conditions at various 
loads may be necessary according to 8.2.4. 

For pumps which discharge directly into a free surface reservoir 
through pipework which may be considered as part of the 
pump, the outlet total head is obtained from water level 
measurement in the reservoir; the same remarks as in 8.2.1.1 
shall then apply. 

8.2.2 Pump tested with fittings 

If the tests are on the combination of the pump and the whole 
or part of its upstream and downstream connecting fittings, 
these being considered an integral part of the pump, the provi- 
sions of 8.2. 1 apply to the inlet and outlet flanges of the fittings 
instead of the inlet and outlet flanges of the pump. This pro- 
cedure debits against the pump all head losses caused by the 
fittings. 

8.2.3 Pump with inaccessible ends 

If it is impossible to gain access either to the inlet or outlet of 
the pump, or to both sides (this case occurs particularly where 
the tests are carried out on site), the measuring sections shall 
be located under the best local conditions; it shall be arranged 
by mutual agreement 

— whether the tests will apply to the combination of the 
pump and of the part of the circuit included between the 
measuring cross-sections, in which case the requirements 
of 7.2.2 apply; 

— or whether the pump total head shall be deduced from 
the total heads as evaluated at the measuring cross-sections 
by adding the head losses //j, and /■/j2 on both sides of 
the pump, these losses beinq ca!cu!ated in accordance 
with 8.2.5. 



25 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 




u< ^' Pi ^ ^2 



Figure 7 — Examples of total head determination by water level measurements 



16 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 






u 



u 



A. 



V J 




a) Wadge-shaped probe 



b) Cytindrical probe 



Figure 8 — Examples of yaw probes 



7,7 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



8.2.4 Choice of the measuring sections and effect 
of flow conditions 

8.2.4.1 Choice of the measuring sections 

Special attention shall be given to the location of water level or 
pressure-measuring sections. In pump installations, where the 
pressure distribution and the velocity distribution at the inlet 
and outlet of the pump are such that the calculation of the 
pressure head and the velocity head from the mean values 
measured in these sections would result in a significant error in 
the determination of the pump total head, other measuring sec- 
tions further upstream or downstream shall be used (see 8.1.1). 

For pressure measurements in a pipe, the measuring section 
should be arranged in a straight pipe section of constant cross- 
section extending five diameters upstream and two diameters 
downstream from the inlet measuring section and two 
diameters upstream and one diameter downstream from the 
outlet measuring section. If the available straight length is not 
sufficient (for example in the case of a rather short inlet 
bellmouth), this length should be divided between upstream 
and downstream parts of the measuring section so as to take 
the best possible advantage of the actual conditions (for exam- 
ple in the ratio of 2 to 1 approximately). Sections where the 
velocity pattern is seriously distorted by an elbow, valve, any 
other flow disturbance or by the vicinity of the pump itself 
should be avoided. 

For water level measurements, the measuring location should 
be selected so that 

— either the velocities in the measurement area of the 
reservoir are very small, and thus the velocity head is 
negligible [see figure 7 a)]; 

— or the cross-sectional area used to calculate the velo- 
city head is sufficiently well defined and readily measurable 
(see figure 7 b)). 

8.2.4.2 Investigation of the velocity distribution 

When the inlet or outlet total head is obtained by pressure 
measurements in conduits, it is generally unnecessary to deter- 
mine the velocity distribution across the measuring section. 
This is particularly the case where evidence of satisfactory con- 
ditions may be considered as established, either by previous 
tests carried out in the same test rig or if a straight length of 
conduit is used, sufficient to create a fully developed velocity 
distribution, provided the pump itself does not induce a pre- 
swirl in the suction pipe. 

Nevertheless, if such evidence does not exist and if the ratio of 
the velocity head to the pump total head is more than 0,02, an 
investigation of the velocity distribution in the manner here 
described shall then be necessary in order to ensure that the 
selected measuring section is suitable to accommodate 
measurements and also in order to allow an evaluation of the 
available velocity head coefficient, a^. 

In case of doubt, for example where the outlet measuring sec- 
tion is not very far from the outlet flange of the pump, checking 
the pressure distribution over the measuring section by using 
four pressure tappings (see 8.4.1.1 and 8.4.1.4) may be useful 
for deciding if an investigation of the velocity distribution shall 
be carried out. 



The investigation of the velocity distribution should comprise 
the determination of the direction and magnitude of the local 
velocity at a number of points along at least two diameters 
at right angles in the plane of the measuring cross-section. 
This may be accomplished in a number of ways using probes. 
Figure 8 shows an example of such a probe. For more details, 
see ISO 7194. 

Large and varying indicated yaw angles measured across the 
pipe diameter show the presence of three-dimensional flow and 
the probability of non-uniform pressure as well as velocity 
distribution; in these conditions, the measuring section is un- 
suitable for accurate head measurement. 

A measuring section where probing has been carried out will be 
considered as satisfactory if : 

— at no measurement point the velocity direction deviates 
by more than 10° from the axis of the pipe, 

— at no measurement point the value of the velocity is 
higher than twice the value of the mean velocity, 

— the pressures measured at the various pressure tap 
pings in the measuring section are satisfactorily balanced 
(see 8.4.1.4). 



8.2.4.3 Effect of pre-swiri induced by the pump 

Errors in the determination of the inlet total head can occur if at 
part load the pump induces a pre-swirl of the flow in the suction 
pipe; figure 9 illustrates such a case. These errors can be 
detected and corrected on the following basis. 



Gauge used for the 
determination of H, " 




Figure 9 — Example of installation with pre-swirl 

|f the pump draws from a free surface reservoir where the 
water level and the pressure acting on it are constant, the head 
losses between this reservoir and the inlet measuring section 
follow, in the absence of pre-swirl, s quadratic law with rate 
of flow and therefore the same holds true in respect of the 
inlet total head, //, = H\ - //j, (see figure 10). With higher 
rates of flow, measuring points ranged along a straight line, 
ff^ - A - Bq^, will be obtained; however, with lower rates of 



3t 



1813538:1993 
180 5198:1987 



Onset of pre-swirl 




Figure 10 — Correction of measured inlet total head 



flow the appearance of pre-swirl will result in errors both in 
pressure measurement and in velocity head evaluation, 
resulting in measurements deviating from this straight line. 

It is then agreed to adopt as the value of the inlet total head the 
value read on the interpolation of the straight line obtained at 
higher flow rates. This value is not the true value, free from 
errors of measurement of the total head existing in the 
presence of pre-swirl, but it is the value which would exist if 
pre-swirl were not to occur. This procedure may be justified by 
the fact that the energy in the form of pre-swirl is indeed pro- 
vided by the pump to which it is thus logical to attribute it. 

If the pump does not draw from a constant head reservoir, 
another measuring section shall be selected sufficiently far 
upstream where the pre-swirl is known to be absent and it is 
then possible to use the same reasoning for the head losses 
between the two sections (but not directly about the inlet total 
head). 

8.2.5 Head losses at inlet and outlet 

As stated in 8.1.1, it may be necessary to add to the measured 
pump total head the friction head losses and possibly the local 
head losses between the measuring sections and the pump 
flanges. Nevertheless, such a correction may be neglected if 



f/j, + //j2 < 0,001 5 H 



If the pipe between the measuring sections and the pump 
flanges is free from any fitting and of uniform circular cross- 
section, the friction head losses in a piece of pipe having a 
length / and a diameter D are given by the equation 

■^ Dig 

where A is given in turbulent flow by one of the following equa- 
tions 



D 
MRe <'Zi — (smooth pipe) : 

k 



2 log 



JO 






D D 

if 23 — < Re < 560 — (transition zone) : 
k k 




D 
iiRe > 560 - (rough pipe): 



A-'/2= -2log 



10 



3.7D 



where 



Re 



UD 



k is the equivalent uniform roughness. 

Annex E gives guidance orj how to check whether a correction 
needs to be made and on how to calculate this correction if 
necessary. 

For the friction head losses in pipes other than those of uniform 
circular cross-section and for the local head losses due to any 
irregularity in the pipe (bend, branch, valve, etc.), the correc- 
tion to be applied shall be the subject of mutual agreement 
before the tests. Nevertheless, by reason of the poor accuracy 
with which such head losses are known, it is desirable that no 
irregularity exists in the measuring range. 



1» 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



8.3 Water level measurement 

8.3.1 Arrangement of the measuring section 

At the measuring site, the flow shall be steady and there shall 
be no local disturbances. If the free water surface is disturbed 
by small waves or swell it may be necessary, depending on the 
type of measuring device used, to provide a stilling well or a 
stilling box. This may be, for example, a well in the wall of the 
conduit in communication with the flow through a connecting 
pipe leading to the conduit through a perforated plate flush 
to the wall, or else a vertical pipe immersed in the flow, the 
bottom of which is formed by a perforated plate; the holes of 
the plate shall be small enough (about 3 to 5 mm in diameter) to 
damp the pressure fluctuations. 

It is advisable to use at least two measuring points in each 
cross-section. 



8.3.2 Measuring apparatus 

Various types of water level measuring apparatus may be used, 
according to the circumstances (free surface accessible or not, 
steady or disturbed, etc.) and to the required accuracy in 
regard of the pump total head. The most commonly used 
devices are: 

al vertical or inclined gauges, fixed along a wall; 

b; point or hook gauges, for which a stilling well and a 
supporting frame set close above the free surface are essen- 
tial; 

c) plate gauges, consisting of a horizontal metal disc 
suspended from a graduated steel-ribbon tape; 

d) float gauges, which must be used in a stilling well; 

e) liquid manometers in absolute or differential form, as 
described in 8.4.2.1 ; 

f) bubbler apparatus, using a purge of compressed air; 

g) immersed pressure transducers. 

The three last types are particularly suitable where the free sur- 
face is inaccessible. 

See ISO 4373 for a description of these types of apparatus. 

8.4 Pressure measurements 

S.4.1 Arrangement of the measuring section 

8.4.1.1 Number and location of pressure tappings 

As a rule four static pressure tappings at the wall shall be pro- 
vided at each measuring section. In circular pipes, they shall be 
located on two diameters at right angles to each other; the tap- 
pings should not be located at or near the highest nor the 
lowest point of the cross-section in order to avoid air pockets or 
dirt accumulation in the pressure connections. In rectangular 
pipes, the tappings shall be located at the quarter and three- 
quarter points of the vertical walls. 



However, if it has been established that the flow conditions are 
favourable (see 8.2.4.2), or if the velocity head does not exceed 
1 % of the pump total head, only two tappings located 
diametrically opposite may be used by mutual agreement. 



8.4.1.2 Shape and size of pressure tappings 

The cylindrical bore of the pressure tapping opening in the 
conduit boundary should have a diameter between 3 and 6 mm 
or equal to 0,08 D, whichever is the smaller, and should have 
a minimum length of 2,5 times its diameter 'figure 11). The 
bore shall be free from burrs and irregularities, and normal to 
the inner wall of the pipe; it shall be rounded off by a radius 
r < rf/4 or at least a small chamfer. 

The surface of the pipe shall be smooth in the vicinity of the 
tappings for a length at least equal to the smaller of these two 
values : 

- 400 mm or 2D upstream 

— 150 mm or ID downstream 

The tappings shall be located as far as possible from any ir- 
regularity of the pipe, such as welded joint. 

The material of the pipe shall be resistant to abrasion, corrosion 
or chemical reaction with the liquid being pumped; failing this, 
a metal plate which is unaffected by the liquid shall be fastened 
in the wall, flush with it, through which the tapping shall be 
drilled (figure 12). 



8.4.1.3 Connecting pipes and damping devices 

Connecting pipes leading from each pressure tapping shall be 
at least equal in bore to the bore of the tapping. 

The pressure tappings of each measuring section shall be con- 
nected through individual shut-off valves to a ring manifold of 
cross-sectional area not less than the sum of the cross 
sectional areas of the tappings, so that the pressure from any 
tapping may be measured if required (figure 13). 

Any high point in the line of the connecting pipes shall be fitted 
with a purging valve to avoid trapping of air bubbles during 
measurements. Piping shall be carefully checked to avoid any 
leak, no matter how small. Whenever possible, it is recom 
mended that transparent tubing in plastic material be used. 
ISO 2186 gives detailed indications as to the connecting pipes 

Where it is necessary to reduce the amplitude of oscillations, 
damping devices may be inserted into measuring instruments 
or their connecting lines. In order not to falsify the time mean 
of the fluctuating pressure, it is necessary that the damping 
be symmetrical and linear; this can be achieved by means of 
a capillary tube located in the manometer liquid. Bending or 
pinching the flexible connecting pipes or inserting any asym- 
metrical nozzle, needle valve, gate valve, etc., shall be ab- 
solutely forbidden. Moreovijr. in the case of a differential 
manometer, it may be necessary to balance the damping of the 
two circuits. Additional information on how to deploy and 
check damping devices is given in ISO 3966. 



n 



Thick wall 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



d - 3 to 6 mm, or 0,08 D 
I > 2,5d 
r < dia, 




Thin wall 




Figure 11 — Examples of pressure tappings in metallic wall 



V^ • 



r 



c 






V 



r 



' ) 



400mm 



JSOmnfi ^ 



Piniira 17 Pvamnls nt nracoiiro tnnninn in rnriRratn uuall 







Figure 13 — Pressure tappings connected through ring main to pressure gauge: 

a) purging; b| pressure gauge; c| drainage. 



It 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



8.4.1.4 Checking of pressure measurements 

Whenever possible, pressure readings shall be checked before 
and after the tests by comparison with headwater elevation 
under static conditions in the conduit. 

In normal operation, the difference between the pressure 
measured at any one tapping and the average of the pressures 
measured at all tappings of the measuring section shall not 
exceed 0,5 % of the pump total head nor half the velocity head 
in the section. When the pressure tappings are used for NPSH 
measurements, this difference shall not exceed 1 % of the 
NPSH value nor half the velocity head. 

If any pressure tapping appears to be in error, and if this cannot 
be attributed to the flow pattern (see 8.2.4.2), the source of the 
discrepancy shall be determined and removed; if this is not 
possible, the tapping concerned shall be eliminated. 

8.4.2 Measuring apparatus 

8.4.2.1 Liquid column manometers 

Liquid column manometers are used to measure comparatively 
low pressures. Under these conditions, compressibility effects 
on the manometer liquids are small and can be ignored. The 
length of the liquid column may be modified by providing an 
inclined manometer or by using one manometric liquid with 
suitable density in place of another; the most commonly used 
liquids are water and mercury, but others may also be used 
such as ethyl tetrabromide (C2H2Br4), carbon tetrachloride 
(CCI4), diiodomethane (CH2I2), some metallic bromides or 
iodides, etc. if possible, the use of liquid columns less than 
100 mm high shall be avoided; if this is impossible, attention 
shall be specially drawn to the errors of measurement. 

In order to minimize capillarity effects, the bore of the 
manometer tubes shall be at least 8 mm for mercury gauges 
and 12 mm for water and other liquid gauges. The cleanliness 
of the liquid in the manometer and of the internal surface of the 
tubes shall be maintained to avoid errors due to variation of sur- 
face tension. 

The design of the manometer shall be such that parallax errors 
are minimized. 

Liquid column manometers may be either open ended, or 
closed with the air in. the circuit connecting both limbs com- 
pressed to the amount required to permit the differential head 
to be read on the scales, or formed by a U-tube filled with the 
manometric liquid. In the first case, pressures are measured 
from a fixed reference plane and above the surrounding 
atmospheric pressure which is taken as constant. The two last 
types allow the pump total head to be obtained from a single 
differential measurement. 

The use of some typical liquid column manometers is shown 
diagrammatically in figures 14 and 15, to which reference 
should be made for the calculation equations. 

8.4.2.2 Dead-weight manometers 

For pressures exceeding the possibilities of the liquid column 
manometer, a dead weight or piston manometer is of practical 



use whether in its simple or in its differential form. However, it 
can only be used beyond a minimum pressure corresponding to 
the weight of the rotating assembly. 

The effective diameter d^ of the simple type manometer can be 
taken as equal to the arithmetic mean of the piston diameter d^, 
measured directly, and of the cylinder diameter d^; it can then 
be used for calculating pressures without further calibration if 
the following condition is satisfied before testing : 



dr.- d, 



dr. +• c/n 



S < 0.1 % 



Friction between the piston and cylinder may be practically 
eliminated by rotating the piston at a speed not less than 
30 r/min. 

It is desirable to check the dead-vveight manometer by 
comparison with a liquid column manometer to determine the 
effective piston diameter in a pressure range to be as wide as 
possible. 

Similar principles apply to the differential type weight 
manometer. For the measurement of variable pressures it may 
be advantageous to use a weight manometer mounted in series 
with a liquid column manometer (see figure 16) or a special 
weight manometer incorporating a liquid column manometer, 

8.4.2.3 Pressure weighbeam 

An extension of the dead-weight manometer is the pressure 
weighbeam, which comprises a weighbeam mounted on fric- 
tionless pivots and bearing on a weight manometer. The force 
exerted on the piston of the weight manometer is balanced by a 
jockey weight moving along the weighbeam (see figure 17). 
The operation of the weighbeam and jockey weight may be 
manual or automatic by means of a servo-motor and a screw. 
The sensitivity, repeatability and accuracy of such a device shall 
be checked against a manometer without a servo-balancing 
system wherever possible. 

8.4.2.4 Spring pressure gauges 

This type of gauge uses the mechanical deflection of a loop of 
tube, plain or spiral (Bourdon dial gauge) or a membrane to in 
dicate pressure. 

For precision class tests, it may be used, by mutual agreement, 
provided: 

a) the gauge is of the highest precision; 

b) it is used within its optimum measuring range (usually 
from 60 to 100 % of its full scale); 

c) the interval between two consecutive scale graduations 
corresponds to not more than 2 % of the pump total head. 

The gauge shall be calibrated against standards before and 
after the tests. 

Figure 18 shows diagrammatically the use of such gauges and 
the corresponding calculation formulae. 



» 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



"iM 



W2 = ^2,*-^U22-^2l)*-^ 



> 2 pipe diameters 
(see 8.2.1.2) 

> 2 pipe diameters 

(see 8.2.1.1) -] ^ 



Air vent 




Reference plane (centreline 
of shaft, in the case of 
a horizontal pump) 



Possible residue 
of pumped liquid 



a) Pump inlet under vacuum 

> 2 pipe 
diameters 
(see 8-2.1.1) 



=Saiu„-z„).Siilil.(r,,-z,3) 




W,= ^U„-.,).?^..„ 



Position of -"' 
reference plane 



C 



"2 Tube containing air 



fi:'.:'i.>*.'.i-,'„'.-f-Al Tube containing 
pumped liquid 

■■■■■i^B Tube conruining 
manometric liquid 

The drawings show the principles, 
taut not full technical details 



b) Pump inlet under pressure 



Figure 14 - Test of a centrifugal pump by means of liquid column gauges 



33 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 




Pi 



2s 



a) Air-water differential manometer 




b) Mercury differential manometef 



The drawings show the principles but not fulf technical details. 

These equations are valid only if j?^ = q^ which can never be assumed for precision class tests. 

Figure 15 — Direct measurement of pump total head 



34 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



/)2 =^2~'^M 



K.I 






® © (D-xl 



1 






© 




Ap Differential pressure 

(^T) Acting masses, m 

Cl) Differential-pressure measuring device 



(3) Water 

(4) Oil 



Pm^ Pi + esh\ - P + Qoi\g^fJ2 - ''1' + ^^''l + ^/' 
4mg 



where p = 



'^^'e 



with d„ = 



dc + dp 



Figure 16 — Dead-weight manometer with stabilization by differentiai pressure measurement 

(transducer or liquid manometer) 



35 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 




P = Qr\i 



{V) Weighbeam 

(Z) Frictioriless pivot 

^3) Jockey weight, mass m 

C^\ Measuring screw 

(^ Servo-motor 



® (Z) ® ^'^'^^"'^ contacts 

(b) Counter 

(W) Piston, cross-section s 

Ce) Zero point 

Cz) Altitude of the point pressure of which is to be found 



Figure 17 — Pressure weighbeam 



36 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 5198:1987 






Atmospheric — i 



a) Arfangement for determining reference plane 

of Bourdon type gauge 




Reference plane of 
the manometer 



Air vent 



Pressure reading p2 



Pressure 
reading /?, 



Air vent 



Gauge reference 
plane 




Drain 






Reference plane (centreline of shaft, 
in the case of a horizontal pump) 



b) Pump Inlet under vacuum 



Pressure reading /jj > 



c) Pump inlet under pressure 



> 2 pipe diameters 
(see 8.2.1.1) 




^1=7^*^1^ 



oc^^ U{ 



9^9 ' ^9 



c 



3 Tube containing air 



l^n.'nwjmA.giJiiaj Tube containing pumped 
liquid 

The drawings show the principles 
but not full technical details. 



Rgure 18 — Tast of a centrifugal pump by mean* of a Bourdon gauge 



37 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



8.4.2.5 Other types of manometers 

There is a wide diversity of pressure transducers, absolute or 
differential, based upon the variation of various mechanical 
and/or electrical properties. They may be used by mutual 
agreement provided the required accuracy, repeatability and 
reliability are achieved, the transducer is used within its 
optimum measuring range and the transducer together with its 
electronic equipment are calibrated before and after the test 
against pressure standards of adequate accuracy. 

Other methods which are not listed may also be used subject to 
the following two conditions : 

— their systematic uncertainty shall be determined and 
checked by periodic calibration using a primary method; 



[ Ul IVaCI hCIII 



with table 7. 



9 Measurement of speed of rotation 

As far as possible the speed of rotation shall be measured 
directly by counting the number of revolutions during a known 
time interval with a tachometric dynamo or alternaitor, or an op- 
tical or magnetic counter linked to a frequency meter. In the 
case of an a.c. motor-driven pump, if the speed cannot be 
measured directly, it can be determined by measuring the 
mains frequency and the slip of the motor, for example with a 
stroboscope or an induction coil. 

The uncertainty of measurement of the speed obtained with an 
electronic counter or any other device with an equivalent preci- 
sion class is generally about ± 0,05 % to ± 0,2 %. 



10 Measurement of power input 

10.1 General 

The pump power input, P (see table 1 ), shall be measured by 
one of the following methods: 

a) indirectly, by subtracting the various electrical and 
mechanical losses from the measured electrical power input 
to the driving motor; 

b) directly by determination of the speed and torque at the 
pump shaft. This method can be applied to any form of 
driver. 

The accuracy required for precision class testing is such that 
the tests shall be carried out according to laboratory methods 
by suitably qualified personnel who fully understand the test re- 
quirements. 

The measuring apparatus and test procedure shall be such that 
the accuracies required for precision class tests are achieved. It 
must be realized, however, that normal facilities on a manufac- 
turer's test bed are unlikely to be satisfactory for this class of 
test. 

Where the power input to an electric motor coupled to an in- 
termediate gear, or the speed of rotation and torque measured 
by a dynamometer between gear and motor are used as a 
means for determining the pump power input, the losses due to 



the gear are determined by the calorimetric method applied to 
the cooling liquids of the gear unless otherwise agreed. 

10.2 Indirect method 

Since the motor coupled to the pump acts not only as a driving 
machine but as a device for measuring power, the losses 
should be determined accurately under the conditions of load, 
voltage, power factor, speed, temperature, etc., of the pump 
test. These losses may then be different from those obtained 
under standardized conditions for the measurement of the 
losses of the electric motors. 

The losses of an electric motor shall only be determined by a 
specific test if the uncertainty of the assessment of these losses 
under test conditions by means of the available data cause an 



■ i^aou I wr I ■«#■ I h Xif I hi IV* j 



tyt ^vyvwt>> w 



than the values specified by this International Standard. Clause 
10.2.1 gives necessary details for this measurement. 

10.2.1 The efficiency of the electric motor shall be determined 
taking into account all the losses specified In I EC Publication 
34-2 {provided that it does not contradict the specifications of 
this International Standard). When lEC Publication 34-2 does 
not give details of the procedure to be followed for these 
measurements, the procedure shall follow the regulations of 
one of the official national codes in existence, chosen by com 
mon accord between the parties at the time the pump is 
ordered, and taking into account the obligatory requirements of 
10.2.2. 

Generally the efficiency of an electric motor is determined by in- 
direct measurement, consisting essentially of measuring the 
aggregate losses of the machine (total losses), and in assuming 
that these losses represent the difference between the electric 
power input absorbed and the mechanical power output. In 
practice, the determination of the above "total losses" Is 
generally accompiisi i€u uy me individual measuremeni or^ 
calculation of the various categories of losses and by their sum- 
mation. Thus this method of measuring efficiency is said to be 
by "separate losses". 

10.2.2 Measurement of the electrical power input shall be 
made at the motor terminals if at all possible. If this cannot be 
done, the measured power shall be decreased by the losses oc- 
curring between the motor terminals and the location of the 
measuring device; these losses are determined by calculation, 

During pump tests, the motor shall operate, as far as possible, 
at its nominal voltage; in the case of an a.c. machine at its 
nominal frequency and for a synchronous machine at a power 
factor equal to unity. If these conditions cannot be fulfilled, due 
allowance shall be made in calculating the losses and cor 
responding inputs, and in estimating the probable error in the 
measurements. 

The electric power shall be measured by means of accuracy 
class wattmeters or by watt hour meters; they shall be 
calibrated and fed if necessary by accuracy class instrument 
transformers. The accuracy of the measurement of the power 
input to an electric motor on site or on a test rig will not be 
better than ± 0,2 %, this value depending on the accuracy 
class of the instrument transformers the accuracy of which 
shall not be inferior to that of the instruments. 



1813538:1993 
180 5198:1987 



P^^f^ 



mw 




I Potential commutator 

II Current commutator 



Frgure 19 — Measurement of the power at the terminals of a motor: three wattmeter method 



The accuracy of these devices shall permit the whole measuring 
channel to comply with the requirements of table 7. 



If the neutral of a three-phase motor is brought out and con- 
nected to the network or to earth, it will be obllnatoru to use the 
three wattmeter (or watt-hour meter) method (see figure 19). 



If the neutral of the motor is brought out but not connected to 
the network or the earth during the test, either the three watt- 
meter (or watt-hour meter) method or the two wattmeter (or 
watt-hour meter) method may be used. The three wattmeter 
method is recommended. If the neutral of the motor is not 
brounht out, the two wattmeter (or watt-hour meter) method 
shall be used (see figure 20). 



RU^) 



T[It)Urt 




I Potential commutator 

II Current commutator 



Figure 20 — Measurement of the power at the terminals of a motor: two wattmeter method 



19 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 5198:1987 



It may be necessary to allow for temperature correction in the 
above instruments. In the case of very great temperature fluc- 
tuations, it may be advisable (particularly for watt-hour meters) 
to place the instruments in a constant-temperature enclosure. 

In addition to the measurement of input at the terminals, 
voltage, current per phase, excitation voltage and excitation 
current shall be measured by suitable accuracy class in- 
struments. The temperature in the stator winding and other 
factors necessary to establish the losses and input of the 
machine under the test conditions shall also be measured. Dur- 
ing measurement of the power input of an asynchronous 
motor, the slip value should be determined (by measuring the 
leakage flux or by means of stroboscopic measurement). 

If the power is measured by direct reading instruments, the 
number of readings will depend on the duration of the test and 
fluctuations in the load. The number of readings shall be suffi- 
cient to permit as accurate a calculation as possible of the mean 
power over the duration of the tests. It is recommended that 
the various wattmeters used in the measurement of power 
should be read simultaneously. 

If the power is measured by watt-hour meters, they shall 
be used simultaneously with direct reading wattmeters and 
checked against them in the course of each measurement. The 
duration of the recording of the integrating devices shall be 
measured by means of stop-watches or other time-measuring 
devices sufficiently accurate to permit the determination of the 
time to at least 0, 1 % . The power shall be measured during the 
same period in which the flow through the pump is measured. 

Because of the possible inaccuracies in shunts used for 
measuring direct currents of high intensity, the degree of 
accuracy obtained in the measurement of direct current power 
may be considerably lower than achieved in the measurement 
of alternating current. 

Because of the accuracy required for the electric measuring 
instruments {including the instrument Xransloimets'l , the usua\ 
switchboard types are not to be used for precision class tests. 

Similarly the instrument transformers supplying the watt- 
meters, watt-hour meters, or other electrical measuring 
instruments specially installed for the tests, shall be used solely 
for that purpose and may not be used to supply at the same 
time the measuring and protective circuits, etc., of the plant. 
An exception may be made to this rule only if, by agreement 
between the parties, it is decided (and possibly checked by 
calibration) that the same degree of accuracy can be obtained 
with the use of certain switchboard instrument transformers (in 
view of their accuracy class, their effective load and their 
conditions of use), as can be obtained with the use of the 
independent set of instruments and transformers specially 
reserved for the test specified above. 



10.3 Direct method 

The power input to the pump may be measured by torque reac- 
tion dynamometer or by torsion dynamometer. Both methods 
involve the simultaneous measurement of net torque and shaft 
speed. The torque on the reaction dynamometer is determined 
by the effective force applied to the dynamometer arm and 
radius at which it is applied. For the torsion dynamometer 
(torque tube) the torque shall be computed by means of a 
previous calibration. 



To obtain the true power input, due allowance shall be made 
for parasitic torque losses as specified in 10.3.2. 

10.3.1 The torque reaction dynamometer consists of an elec- 
tric motor with its casing and field windings mounted on 
separate bearings from the rotating shaft, so that the whole 
casing is free to rotate but is restrained by means of a torque- 
measuring system. The torque delivered by the shaft is bal- 
anced by an equal and opposite torque reaction on the casing, 
and it is this that is measured either by means of a weight or by 
some other high-accuracy mechanical or electrical system. 

10.3.2 Torque errors in torque reaction dynamometers may 
be avoided if the following precautions are taken. 

a) It is necessary to limit the rotational movement of the 
dynamometer or to have a fixed balance point. 

b) The dynamometer shall be so constructed that the 
cooling fluid enters and leaves so as to avoid torque errors 
due to tangential velocity components. Similar precautions 
shall be taken regarding winding. Flexible pipe connections, 
if used, shall impose no tangential restraint when under 
pressure. Dash pots, if used, shall be demonstrated to 
impose equal resistance to motion in either direction, 

c) Electrical connections to the dynamometer shall impose 
no noticeable tangential restraint. Braided flexible copper 
leads or mercury pots are suitable for this purpose. 

d) The effective radius arm of the dynamometer shall be 
measured with an error not exceeding ± 0,1 %. The inac- 
curacy of the force-measuring system shall not exceed 
± 0,1 % of the reading. It shall be checked against certified 
weights in the direction of both increasing and decreasing 
load. In the case of vertical shaft machines, and sometimes 
others, metal tapes and frictionless pulleys are used for 
app^V^t^g ^^e Xorque ba\anc\ng weights. 

Before and after tests, the dynamometer and linkage shall be 
carefully checked. 

10.3.3 The torsion dynamometer (or torque tube) comprises a 
length of shafting the torsional strain of which, when rotating 
at a particular speed and delivering a certain torque, is 
measured by some convenient method. Some torsion dynamo- 
meters use optical techniques to measure angular strain, others 
use capacitance, inductance or wire resistance strain gauges as 
electrical transducers. Whatever type of torsion dynamometer 
is used, it shall be calibrated before and after the tests against 
some primary method. The design of the dynamometer shall be 
such that speed and temperature will not influence the torque 
reading, or such that this influence can be measured quan 
titatively either by experiment or by means of a special device 
designed for this purpose. 

High accuracy in any measuring equipment is virtually useless 
unless it can be checked and proved quickly and easily by the 
user to his own satisfaction. With careful calibration and use, 
± 0,25 % of the actual reading can be achieved over the range 
15 to 100 % of full scale, improving toward the highsr end of 
the scale. It is generally impossible to check a torsion 
dynamometer directly against a reliable reference when it is 
running under load. 



40 



IS 13538: 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



Examples of the strain gauged types are torque tubes with slip 
rings and d.c. excitation and those with inductive couplings 
and a.c. energization. The slip ring type can provide high ac- 
curacy, of the order of 0, 1 % of their full load, but require more 
care and maintenance than the inductive coupling type which 
are essentially for higher speeds but are also more suitable for 
permanent installations where the accuracy requirements are 
not stringent. 

The systematic uncertainty of torque measurement is most 
generally of the order of ± 0,15 % of the maximum torque, 
arising from the following sources: 

calibration, + 0,1 %; 

— sensitivity, ± 0,1 %; 

- reading, ± 0,05 %. 

11 Measurement of pump efficiency by the 
thermodynamic method 

11.0 Introduction 

This clause serves as a basis for the measurements to be made 
on pumps and for the computation of pump efficiency, rj (see 



table 1), by applying the thermodynamic method. This method 
is based on the evaluation of the energy per unit mass of water 
received by water from a pump shaft. It may be determined 
by measurements of the performance variables (pressure, 
temperature, velocity and level) and from the thermodynamic 
properties of water. 

Technological aspects of instrumentation are dealt with in a 
general way taking into account the fact that the apparatus 
presently available varies widely and may possibly become 
obsolete in the future. 

The only requirements of instruments are to satisfy conditions 
stipulated in this International Standard (accuracy, heat 
exchange, etc.). 

Due to the lack of uniformity in values measured at the inlet and 
outlet sections of the machines, the limitations of measuring 
equipment and the relatively high magnitude of the correction 
terms originating from the imperfect measuring conditions, the 
scope of this method is limited and it can only be used for pump 
total heads in excess of 1CX) m. However, under highly 
favourable conditions, the range could be extended by mutual 
agreement to cover lower heads subject to an analysis of the 
accuracy of the measurements. 



4i 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



11.1 Terms, definitions, symbols and units 

In addition to the terms defined in table 1, the terms given in table 9 also apply. 

Table 9 — Terms, definitions, symbols and units (thermodynamic method) 





Term 


Definition 


Symbol 


Unit 


11.1.1 


Hydraulic energy per unit 
mass" 


The necessary energy per unit mass for the fluid to pass over from 
state 1 at the pump inlet to pressure P2St the pump outlet when the 
pump is operating without losses. Under experimental conditions 
allowing the thermodynamic method to be used, the specific hy- 
draulic E^ can be determined by means of the equation : 

The measurement points for determining £j, are marked : 
1, 2, in figure 21. 


£h 


J /kg 


11.1.2 


Mechanical energy per unit 

mass" 


The energy per unit mass received by water from a pump in the case 
of actual operation 

En^ = 0[P2^ ~ P^^) + £> t^2i - ^'n* + 

«a2 C^JI ~ "al till , , » ,. 

+ ii- 21 ^ a1 n + ^ ,j^^ ^ ,^^) ^ ^^ 

The measurement points for determining E^ are marked: 
11, 21, 22, in figure 21. 


£m 


J/kg 


11-1.3 


Corrective term for energy due 
to secondary phenomena 


A£^ is calculated according to the recommendations given in 11 .3. 


A£m 


J/kg 


n.1.4 


Energy per unit mass 
corresponding to 
contractual losses 


Energy per unit mass corresponding to contractual losses in the 
machine which are not removed by water between the measuring 
sections (for example losses through bearings, where applicable) 


. £■. 


J/kg 


11.1.5 


Pump efficiency^' 


£h 




n 




'^ E^^E, 


11.1.6 


Volume per unit mass^' 


Volume per unit mass 

V =1 
'" Q 


CI 


m3/kg 
m3/kg 


11.1.7 


Isothermal factor"" 


Factor characterizing a thermodynamic property of water 
idh\ bV^ 


11.1.8 


Specific heat capacityS' 


specific heat capacity at constant pressure 


a 


Jkg-'-K 1 
m3/kg 


11.1.9 


Mean value of o^' 


Values of a and r^ 
corresponding to 


the mean value, p, where 

jr _ Pu + Pn 
^ 2 

and the mean value, 0, 
where 

^ = 2 


11.1.10 


Mean value of Cp^^ 


-'>' 


J kg-1-K-i 


11.1.11 


Mean value of K^^i 


Value ^f V^ corresponding to the mean value jj and to the mean 
value $ where : 

p ~ ^ andO ~ ^ 


"^n, 


m3/kg 


11.1.12 


Shaft power 


Shaft power corresponding to mechanical energy per unit mass 

Pm = ^2 ^V ■E'rn = 7m ^n, 


P^ 


W 



1) Use of the term "energy per unit mass" is considered to be preferable to "energy per unit weight" because it offers a more general meaning. 
Nevertheless, energy per unit weight (i.e. specific head for the installation considered! can be used as a basis. Conversion of numerical values express- 
ing energy per unit mass into head is ensured by dividing the former by k, the mean value for acceleration due to gravity between the extreme levels of 
the installation. 

2) Under experimental conditions allowing the thermodynamic method to be used, it can normally be assumed that ffgi = 0,2 = 1 (see 8.1 1.1! 
3! Values for p /=— 1 are given in table 16. 

4! Values for a are given in table 15. 

5) Values for c^ are given in table 17. 

6) Fractional error in E^ and i'j, attributable to the adoption of mean values F. V^ and F^, instead to exact integrals I for pressures between and 
300 bar (30 MPa) and temperatures between and 150 °CI does not exceed 0,4 x 10 3. 



42 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



11.2 Principle 

The thermodynamic method results from the application of the 
principle of conservation of energy (first law of thermo- 
dynamics) to a transfer of energy between water and the 
machine through which it is flowing. 

In the case of actual machine operation, the energy per unit 
mass received by water from a pump shaft may be determined 
by measurement of the performance variables (pressure, 
temperature, velocity and level) and from the thermodynamic 
properties of water. This exchange of energy will be referred to 
as "mechanical energy per unit mass" (see 11.1,2 and 11.4). 

In the case of ideal operation (100 % efficiency), i.e. frictionless 
flow, the same application can be used for calculating the ideal 
energy per unit mass received from a pump shaft. Such energy 
is dependent solely upon the properties of the water and the 
characteristics of the plant. It is referred to as "hydraulic energy 
per unit mass" (see 11.1.1 and 11.5). 

The need to measure mass rate of flow, which is a difficult and 
expensive measurement, is eliminated by using the two values 
of energy per unit mass calculated as above. (Inversely, using 
the thermodynamic method together with measuring the 
power input may allow to determine the flow rate without its 
direct measurement is needed.) An assessment of the flow rate 
is sufficient for calculating kinetic energies in section 1 and 
section 2 and secondary corrective terms. A procedure by trial 
and error can be used, if required, to reduce the uncertainty on 
flow rate. 

The above principle presupposes that all losses in hydraulic 
.machines are dissipated in the main flow. Generally, friction 
losses in the seals and bearings are dissipated differently and a 
corresponding correction shall be made to mechanical energy 
per unit mass (see 11.3.1). 

The determination of the hydraulic energy per unit mass uses 
the computation of the integral \ I/„ dp (see 8.1 1 .2). 



prises only a single inlet and a single outlet of water. In fact, 
there can be the following supplementary Inlets and outlets : 

— leak-off at the balance disc; 

— injection into the seals; 

— extraction from the seals; 

- leak-off at the seals. 

It is then convenient to break down the fluid flow into a number 
of elementary circuits, /, each of them having one inlet 
(subscript e) and one outlet (subscript s). The correction term 
AEf^ to be introduced is then given by the equation 



AE„ 



L (Pi 



Ul 



Ul 



-+ ii (z^i - zj 



where the difference between enthalpy h^ at the outlet and 
enthalpy h^ at the inlet is determined from pressure and 
temperature measurements, either by means of the tables or 
basic formulations, or by the equation 

and where (p, is the ratio of the mass flow rate, q,„„ of the cir 
cult Involved to the main outlet mass flow rate </,„2. 



'P, = 



Qmi 



This calculation takes strictly into account all the frictions be- 
tween the fluid and the pump shaft at the balance disc or at the 
seals. 

It should be noted that the energy per unit mass corresponding 
to the losses in the bearings is given by the equation 



In practice, there are two ways to calculate this integral from 
the thermodynamic properties of water : 



2^ 



^m djP = /'2.S - ^ 



In the range of normal efficiency for pumps covered by this 
International Standard and in the range of pressures and 
temperatures defined by the tables given in annex C, the dif- 
ference between these two calculations is not significant. The 
approximation ^ -■ fl^ may similarly be made 






where 

</,„h is the mass flow rate of the oil supplying the pump 
bearings; 

c^jf, is its specific heat capacity 

An example of decomposition of the fluid flow in the case of a 
feed pump of vapour thermal cycle is shown in figure 23 b). The 
correction energy term AE^ and the loss in the beamings £, are 
indicated in the legend. 



11.3 Correction energy terms 

11.3.1 Particular flow arrangements 

The equation for the mechanical energy per unit mass, £^, in 
table 9 relates to the very simple case where the machine com- 



11.3.2 Heat transfer with the surroundings through 
the walls 

Only heat transfer;-, whtire trie vj.'Ai'.i n"'!ir>''d is involved are 
dealt with heft. 



43 



1813538:1993 
180 5198:1987 



High pressure 
Section 2 



Low pressure 
Section 1 




Flow 



Variant : Absence of 
free surface fevel 



Variant : Free surface level 



^^ Isolation or expansion orifices 

NOTE — For use of one or other of the operating procedures for determining mechanical energy per unit mass, see 1 1 .4. 

Figure 21 — General schematic diagram of measuring vessels 



hi 




\ 9, ^11 



Figure 22 — Enthalpy ih) - entropy is) - thermodynamic diagram water 



44 



a) 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 









3 

Y 


, Water 






1 




1 

5 






1- t 



T7 



r 




Oil 



▼8 
▼7 



r 



-Oil 



▼ 8 



1 pump suction 

2 pump discharge 

3 injection into the seals 

4 leak-off at the balance disc and extraction from the seals HP 

5 extraction from the seals BP 

6 leak-off at the seals 

7 bearings oil inlet 

8 bearings oil outlet 

Correction energy terms and loss in the bearings, the variations of kinetic and potential energy being neglected: 

\E^ = «7i4 (/r4 - /»i) + ii-iB (As - >J,) + V>M '■f'4 - /Is' •*" «'35 "'; " ''s' + I'X "Je " ^3* 

where 

Figure 23 — Example of deco.nposition of the fluid flow in a pump 

<case of a boiler feed pump of vapour thermal cycle) 



45 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



The heat transfers through the metal walls give rise to the 
following correction 






OJ 



where 



where 



Cp is the mean specific heat capacity at constant pressure, 
e)(pressed in joules per kilogram per kelvin; 

dO/dt is the temperature gradient, expressed in kelvins per 
second ; 



P' is the power, expressed in watts per square metre per 
kelvin, exchanged; from experience, P' is considered equal 
to10W-m-2.K-i; 

g„2 'S the mass flow rate, expressed in kilograms per 
second, of the water; 

A is the area, in square metres, of the exchange surface; 

6q is the temperature, in degrees Celsius, of the ambient 
air; 

0g is the temperature, in degrees Celsius, of the water in 
the pump. 

If there is considerable dripping, the resulting increase of heat 
exchange (in practice always less than about four times) shall 
either be calculated from the air and water temperatures and 
the relative air humidity or efficiently depressed by sufficient 
heat insulation of the metal surfaces by screening jackets. 

Calculation of condensation influence can be made with suffi- 
cient accuracy by increasing the correction Afp^ for the "dry" 
heat exchange in the proportion y/ given by the equation 



1 



V 



where 



1 - 2 490AX/A/) 



t is the transit time, in seconds, of water between the inlet 
and outlet sections of the machine; 

^1 is the transit time, in seconds, of drawn-off water be- 
tween the inlet section and measuring vessel ; 

/2 is the transit time, in seconds, of drawn-off water 
between the outlet section and measuring vessel. 

The cyclic variations of temperature which may be observed in 
the boiler feed pumps of thermal power stations can reach 
0,05 K/min. In such cases, to avoid a large measurement error, 
measurements shall be taken at intervals of about 1 s. 



11.3.4 Lintiitation of corrections 

Measurements shall be considered non-valid whenever the cor- 
rections obtained from the measuring procedures or calcula- 
tions given in 11.3.2 and 11.3.3 exceed the following limits in 
relation to E^'- 

a) heat exchange between water in the measuring circuit 
and surroundings (see 11.3.2) at inlet or outlet: 1 %; 

b) sum of the corrections detailed in 11.3.2 and 11.3.3: 
1,5%. 



Ah is the air enthalpy difference, expressed in kilojoules 
per kilogram; 

Ax is the difference in relative water content of the air, ex- 
pressed in kilograms per kilogram. 

The differences are between the condition of the humid air sur- 
rounding the pump and that of the saturated air at the metal 
surface temperature and shall be taken from a normal Mollier 
diagram for humid air. 

11.3.3 Instability of energy at inlet 

It is recommended that any inflow of water or energy to the in- 
let conduit (for example a conduit near a heat source) should be 
avoided. Moreover, if the same conduit supplies several units, 
the operating point of the pumps not under test shall be main- 
tained constant. 

A slow and continuous variation of temperature of less than 
0,005 K/min during one test is admissible. Nevertheless, a 
suitable correction shall be applied to E^ according to the 
equation 

d^ 



Afm ^ C, 



d/ 



it - t-^ + I2) 



11.4 Procedure for measurement of mechanical 
energy per unit mass 

11.4.1 General 

The main difficulty to be overcome in determining the 
mechanical energy per unit mass lies in the accurate determina- 
tion of the mean fluid temperatures on both sides of the pump. 

It can however be noted that, when the diameters of sections 1 
and 2 are similar, the absolute measurement errors do not have 
a great effect upon the determination of the temperature dif- 
ference, as long as the measuring probes are of identical design 
and are similarly set up. 

On the other hand, when the diameters of the sections 1 and 2 
are very different, the velocities C/^ and (/^ are different and a 
differential heating may bias the probes. Then it is necessary to 
apply a correction to take this effect into account at least when 
the pump total head is low. 

Moreover, the flows in conduits being turbulent ones, it is 
necessary to establish the temperature profiles in the measur- 
ing sections in order to determine the mean temperatures of the 
fluid. 



46 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



When the temperature difference between inlet and outlet of 
the pump is sufficiently high, the energy E^ is determined by 
direct measurements by means of probes mounted in the flow. 
in this case, pressurespn andp2i ^nd temperatures a^^ and 021 
used in 11 .1 .2 for the definition of f^ are simply substituted by 
P\' Pi- ^i 3"d ^2- 

In case of difficulty in carrying out direct measurements in the 
flow with the required accuracy, the energy E^ is determined 
by indirect measurements by means of specially designed 
vessels with tappings for determination of pressure and 
temperature (see 11.6.2). When the measuring sections are 
under pressure, the procedure consists of extracting a sample 
flow, generally of between 0,1 and 0,5 dm^/s, by a total head 
probe. The water thus extracted is led to the measuring vessel 
through sn insulated pipe to ensure that the heat exchange 
with the exterior, estimated in accordance with the procedure 
described in 1 1 .3.2, gives rise to a correction not exceeding the 
limit fixed in 11.3.4. This sampling is valid if the recommenda- 
tions given in 1 1 .6.2. 1 regarding extraction points are followed. 

The 1/2/2 and $z terms are of minor importance and their deter- 
mination calls for no particular remarks. It should be noted that 
levels Zyy and Z2i are those of the middle points of the measur- 
ing vessels. Pressure values are expressed with reference to 
these levels. U\\ and C/21 are similarly measured in the vessels. 

Other terms defining E^ shall be determined by one of the 
operating procedures described in 11.4.2 to 11.4.5 which are 

nrartifal v/:«riatinn<: n\ the mothnH Thp cplprtinn nf nnnraTinn 

procedure should be based upon machine characteristics and 
the quality of measuring apparatus available. 

At pump inlets, it may be useful, depending upon the selected 
operating procedure, to reduce water pressure within the 
measuring vessel to atmospheric pressure. 



11.4.2 "Without expansion" operating procedure 

This procedure may be used when the temperature difference 
between inlet and outlet of the pump is sufficiently high. 

It brings into play either direct measurements by means of 
probes mounted in the flow, or indirect measurements by 
means of vessels supplied by water extractions with minimum 
expansion between pipe and vessel. 

If the enthalpy calculation is not accurate enough, the terms for 
E^ given in 11.1.2 are determined as follows: 






.\ rajiiiirac a nrfi/^ieinn m9nnm0ti»r i<m^ 

,, .BVf.<..www K•^^'■^'— ■ 

11.6.1.2); values of a are given in table 15 
(annex C); 

Cp (^21 ~ ^11' requires measurement of ^21 - "^ii ^'^^ re- 
quisite accuracy (see 11.6.1.1); values of Cp 
are given in table 17 (annex C). 

The thermometer plays a very important role In this procedure. 
It shall be very sensitive and reliable, and calibrated 
beforehand. Whenever this procedure is adopted, "partial ex- 
pansion" procedure (see 11.4.3) for one test point or in $itu 
calibration of the thermometer will be undertaken for checking 
purposes (see 11.4.6). 



(^21 - ^11) aid (p2-\ - /?n) shall be measured simultaneously 
and at regular intervals. 

The temperature difference between the inlet and outlet of the 
pump shall be determined to within 0,020 °C when this dif- 
ference is greater than or equal to 3 °C. It shall be determined 
to within at least 0,005 °C when this difference is less than or 
equal to 1 °C. 



11.4.3 "Partial expansion" operating procedure 

This procedure may only be used when the pressure at the 
pump inlet is sufficient to ensure that the temperature of the 
water expanded to atmospheric pressure in the measuring cir- 
cuit is at least equal to that of the water at the pump outlet. 

An expansion valve is located in the sampling circuit between 
the inlet pipe and the corresponding measuring vessel. The 
adjustment of the valve should be very fine and stable such 
that, by partial expansion, temperature equality is achieved in 
the measuring vessels at the intake and outlet. Thus, in the 
expression for E^, the term 0^(^21 ~ ^ii' becomes zero and 
the determination of E^ essentially entails the measurement of 
</'2i "Pill with an accurate manometer (see 11.6.2.2). The 
thermometer shall be highly sensitive and reliable (see 
1 1 .6.2.3). Its purpose is to record temperature equality. In prac- 
tice, it is desirable to establish graphically the correspondence 
between (p2i - P11) and (^21 ~ ^ii'- ^ cHxen as not, p■^■^ is 
oractlcallv invariant and onlv /7i< nnnH hf> mi:!a&iirAH Thn 
pressure value used for calculation is that obtained by graphical 
extrapolation for a nil difference of temperature. 

In all cases where temperature equality cannot be obtained, it is 
possible to work by graphical extrapolation provided that the 
range of pressure involved by extrapolation is small compared 
with the pressure range accurately measured. 



11,4.4 "Auxiliary expansion" operating procedure 

This procedure is a variant to that described in 1 1 .4.3. But, in 
contrast, it may be used even if the pump inlet pressure is insuf- 
ficient. 

The pressure /?!) corresponding xo the equality of temperatures 
d^^ and ^21 is not measured, but determined on the basis of a 
comparative expansion of the outlet extracted water in such a 
way that the temperature variation of the expanded water is 
equal to that of the water crossing the machine (deviation 
method). 



11.4.5 "Total expansion" operating procedure 

This procedure is used mainly when the pump inlet pressure is 
equal to the atmospheric pressure. 

An expansion valve is located in the sampling circuit between 
the outlet pipe and the corresponding measuring vessel. The 
adjustment of the valve allows the water expansion until a 
pressure equal to that at the pump inlet. Thus, in the ex- 
pression for £m, the term a (p2i - Pn) becomes zero and 
the determination of £^ essentially entails the measurement of 

(021 - ^1l)- 



47 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



This operating procedure is generally less accurate because the 
measurement of the temperature is more difficult than the 
measurement of the pressure. Moreover, Cp is less weii-known. 



11.4.6 Expansion procedure for differential 
thermometer calibration 

Two thermometric gauges are placed in two vessels separated 
by an expansion valve through which water flows after having 
been withdrawn from the conduit. As the efficiency of the 
whole of the expander unit is zero, the transfer of mechanical 
energy per utiit mass is zero and thus 

+ ::; + * f^2i - ^22' = 



or 



9y) — ^51 = 



(^^P2^ - P22> + t<f/|i - U22)/2] + g {Z2^ - Z22) 



'22 



21 



11.6.1.1.2 Thermometers protected by thermometric pockets 

As fluid pressures are generally high, thermometric probes are 
often placed in thermometer pockets. 

The thermometer pockets and the external insulation of bosses 
and thermometers shall be identical in pairs in order to eliminate 
the possible errors in the determination of temperature dif- 
ferences. 

For point measurements, care shall be taken to ensure thermal 
contact between the thermometer end and the pocket bottom, 
if possible using a support spring. 

For exact temperature measurements, the pocket may be filled 
with a liquid having good thermal properties (water, oil, 
silicone, etc.). 



11.6.1.1.3 Number of temperature measuring points — 
Temperature distribution 



Thus, the difference in temperature between the two vessels is 
known and the thermometer may be calibrated for use in the 
operating procedures described in 11.4.2. 

For this procedure, it is essential that expansion shall be pro- 
gressive and stable, the vessels be perfectly thermally insulated 
from the exterior, suspended material content in the water shall 
not exceed 0,1 g/dm^ and that dissolved gas content shall be 
below the saturation point. If the expander operation is 
satisfactory, the calibration is kept when the thermometric 
gauges are inverted. 

11.5 Determination of hydraulic energy per unit 
mass 

This energy per unit mass is represented by the expression 
given in 11,1 and is determined by sepacate measurement of 
the (/2/2 and gz terms, and by determining V„, [p2 - p^) or 
(/i2s - AiHSee11.2.> 

Conditions governing the measurement of p, and pi are given 
in 8.4, and g values are given in table 1 . 



The mean temperature, 9,^, of a fluid of approximately constant 
density in a cross-section of area A is given by the equation 



e„ = 



Ov^dA 



v^dA 



wnere v^ is tne axial component of the local velocity in the ele- 
ment of section dA . 

When the Prandtl number (see 4.1 .13) is close to unity and for a 
small temperature difference between the centre and the wall 
of the pipe, the velocity and temperature distributions can be 
considered identical, to a first approximation. 

Under such conditions, the value of ^rn can be expressed as the 
arithmetic mean of the temperatures taken at a given number of 
points of the profile provided these points are located at well- 
defined distances, r, from the pipe axis. Thus, for Reynolds 
numbers greater than 6 000, table 10 gives the ideal positions of 
the probes when their number varies from one to five. 



11.8 Measuring apparatus — Recommendations 
for use 

11.6.1 Direct measurements 

11.6.1.1 Measurement of main temperatures 

n.6.1.1.1 Thermometers directly immersed in the fluid 

As far as possible, the thermometers shall be directly immersed 
in the fluid. Their design shall take into account the 
characteristics of the fluid and the dynamic solicitations and 
resonance phenomena liable to involve their breaking. They 
shall be located far from any pipe irregularity. 

Where the temperature distribution at pump inlet and outlet 
has to be determined, the thermometers shall be in pairs and 
their settings identical. 



Table 10 — Idea! positions of probes 



Number of 
probes 


Distance from centre as a fraction 
of radius, 

r/R 


1 
2 

3 
4 
5 


0,72 

0,46; 0,86 
0.37; 0,67; 0,91 
0,34; 0,57; 0,75; 0,93 
0,27; 0,47; 0,70; 0,80; 0,94 



For flow measurements by the velocity area log-linear method, 
slightly different positions as defined in table 11 have been pro- 
posed. By experience, it appears that the difference between 
mean temperatures calculated in both cases has practically no 
influence on the test results. 



4« 



IS 13538: 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



Table 11 — Positions of probes (velocity area 
log-linear method) 



Number of 
probes 


Distance from centre as a fraction 
of radius, 

rlR 


2 
3 
4 
5 


0,42; 0,81 
0,36; 0,73; 0,94 
0,31; 0,63; 0,77; 0,96 
0,28; 0,57; 0,69; 0,85; 0,96 



11.6,1.1,4 Types of thermometer 

Any sensitive and accurate thermometer can be used for the 
thermodynamic method provided its calibration and stability 
ensure the desired accuracy in the measurement of the 
temperature difference. It is recommended to use a differential 
thermometer. 

This sensitivity and this accuracy shall be between 0,001 '^C 
and 0,020 °C according to the pump total head and the 
tempeT&ture of the water. 

They should not be unstable over a range of ± 5 °C about the 
trvaan temperature to be measured. This property shall be 
checked before and after each test. 

Measurements have been made with thermocouples, ther- 
mistors and quartz thermometers, but resistance thermometers 
are mostly used. 

If measurements are made far from the pump, the resistance 
thermometers should be of the four wire type to eliminate the 
resistance of connecting wires in an appropriate bridge mount- 
ing. 

Special care should be taken, in connecting the wires to the 
thermometer and measuring bridge, to minimize electromotive 
contact forces. An ac. or d.c. bridge can be used provided the 
direction of current is reversed for each measurement 
(automatically if possible) in the latter case. 

Thermocouples are suitable for measurement of the average 
temperature by series mounting. Such nnountings cannot be 
used, however, to evaluate energy space instability. 

A high speed data acquisition system overcomes the possibility 
of neglecting possible fluid temperature slidings. 



11.6.1.1.5 Thermortieter calibration 

A calibration accuracy of a few thousandths of a Celsius degree 
is difficult to obtain, but It is generally sufficient to proceed to 
relative calibration of the thermometers with respect to each 
other by comparison in a limited range and, if possible, to 
group them in pairs. 

The stability and homogeneity of calibration baths, of the ele- 
ment of comparison and of the measuring bridge performance 
shall correspond to the desired measuring accuracy. Each 
measurement shall be repeated at least once. 



11.6.1.2 Pressure measurements 

The precision manometer used shall allow an assessment of 
pressure to an accuracy of a* least 0,1 %. 



11.6.1.3 Auxiliary measurements for estimation of correction 
terms 

Measurements of temperature, flow rate or pressure in auxiliary 
circuits do not require as high an accuracy as the previous 
measurements. For example, calibrated thermocouples can be 
used for temperature measurements, and differential pressure 
devices, turbine meters, volumetric tanks, etc., for flow 
measurements. 



11.6.2 Indirect measurements 
11.6.2.1 Main measurements 

11.6.2.1.1 Sampling water circuits 

Water samples from the conduit shall be taken by means of a 
sampling probe fixed perpendicular to the conduit and pro- 
truding into the conduit. This probe shall have a perfectly 
smooth orifice at its end, of diameter equal to the internal 
diameter of the probe and pointing upstream. The distance of 
this orifice from the internal wall of the conduit shall be at least 
0,05 m and if possible 0,28 R (see 11 .6. 1 . 1 .3). 

At least two sampling points shall be provided, away from any 
disturbance, up to 1 m in diameter and more for bigger con- 
duits. The depth of the various probes may vary. A mean 
sampling may also be made by mixing samples taken at various 
points. 

The probe shall be designed to avoid vibration and rupture and 
marked such that the orifice can be correctly orientated and 
identified. 

The external diameter of the probe in the vicinity of the sam- 
pling holes may be chosen in the range 15 to 40 mm, the inter- 
na! diameter being at least 8 mm. In order to ensure sufficient 
mechanical strength, the external diameter may be increased 
gradually towards the wall provided it does not affect the flow 
essentially. 

NOTE — The measuring vessels should be designed so that the kinetic 
energy Of water Is converted into pressure energy and that pood mixing 
occurs before the flow passes around irie thennometer pockets. Par- 
ticular construction arrangements are necessary to avoid, as far as 
possible, heat transfer at the walls of these pockets or by the connec- 
ting wires: for example the wires shall be in contact with the walls 
under the insulation of the vessels. 

The expansion orifices shall ensure a high degree of flow stab- 
ility and when adjustable shall ensure steady progressive varia- 
tion in discharge. 

All the active elements of the sampling circuits (pipes, 
expanders, vessels} shall be carefully insulated so that the 
sampling flow is of constant total enthalpy; imperfections in 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



A/?C2 i 

A/7cz3 


i 










-k^'^ 




^ 






^ 


--T 


A/7cz2 






il 








^m^"'''^ ' 






^^ 






Correction 






yp^f 






~A£n 


< 




A/?cz1 


^-"''^^ 1 




" 


1 

Correct value of £"„ 


-, 


~1 















1/^1 



1/(72 



1/^, 



1/7 



q is the sampling flow common to all efflclencv test points 



NOTE — The figure is drawn in the case Of heat transfer from the surroundings to the circuit. In the opposite case, the slope of the line should be 
negative. 



Figure 24 — Example of graphic determination of the correction A£^ to allow for heat transfer 

in a sampling circuit 



the thermal insulation shall be tal^en into account by the follow- 
ing procedure : 

a) it is assumed, as a first approximation, that the rate of 
heat exchange with the exterior is constant, so that the 
value of total enthalpy AA^ varies linearly with the inverse 
value of the sampling flow rate ; 



b) this quantity A/i^ 
sampling flow rates; 



shall be measured for at least three 



c) a graph of AA„ as a function of the inverse of the flow 
rate permits, by interpolation, determination of the correc- 
tion A£'rn required to allow for heat transfer (see figure 24). 

This check shall be made for all points of the efficiency curve. 
However, if the correction is less than 0,2 % of E^, the number 
of measuring points for which these auxiliary measurements 
shall be made may be reduced by mutual agreement, 

It is recommended that the probe be checked in the following 
manner, as rupture is always possible, but difficult to see. The 



total pressure measured in the vessel, considering the probe as 
a total pressure tapping <when its orifice is located at a distance 
from the nearest wall equal to about 1 11 of the pipe diameter 
and with no sampling flow>, shall be compared with the sum of 
the static pressure measured at the wall plus the dynamic 
pressure, qW^IZ), measured in the pipe. Any significant dif- 
ference shall be considered as abnormal. 



11.6.2-1.2 Pressure measurements 

The manometer used shall permit direct reading of pressure 
with an accuracy of about 0,1 %. It is recommended that the 
same manometer shall be used for measuring £„, and fc'f, to 
minimize the effect of systematic error of the manometer. 



11.6.2.1.3 Temperature difference measurements 

The thermometer used shall directly indicate the temperature 
difference between measurement points. It shall be sensitive 
and accurate to at least 0,001 "C. 



50 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



11.6.2.2 AuxiiJarv measui-ements 

It is necessary to provide an apparatus to check the sampling 
flow with an accuracy of about 5 % . 

The temperature of the water drawn off shall be continuously 
monitored by thermometers of at least ± 0,05 °C accuracy. 
The use of a recorder is recommended. 



11.7 Accuracy of measurements 

11.7,1 Random errors and systematic errors 

Errors arising in determining each quantity which occurs in effi- 
ciency calculations include random components, the uncer- 
tainty of which at 95 % confidence level can be determined, 
and systematic components, for which only a maximum value 
can be estirruted. Nevertheless it is admissible to treat these 
errors as if they were ail random errors, by associating 
the systematic errors with an uncertainty equal to half the 
maximum estimated range of the error. For more details, see 
ISO 5168. 



11.7.2 General expression of uncertainty in 
efficiency 

The relative uncertainty, brfftj, in efficiency is obtained from 
the root mean square of the relative uncertainties in the 
numerator and denominator of the efficiency expressions given 
in 1 1 , 1 .5. Disregarding the error in E^ in these expressions gives 



8^ 






i;2 



The relative uncertainties in hydraulic and mechanical energy 
per unit mass themselves arise from several sources : 

— determination of the main quantities involved in f^, and 

— determination of corrections allowing for secondary 
phenomena in the calculation of E^. 

For more detailed information on analysis, propagation and 
evaluation of these errors, see annex C 

As a guide, it may be assumed that the uncertainty in efficiency 
measurement carried out by experienced staff in satisfactory 
experimental conditions lies between 0,5 to 1 %, if the pump 
total head exceeds 100 m. This limit may be lower if the uncer- 
tainty given in table 7 is agreed. 



12 Cavitation tests 

12.1 General 

12.1.1 When a contract specifies a (NPSH) a test may be con- 
ducted to verify that the jNPSH) required by the pump is equal 
to or less than the specified INPSH). 



Whilst primarily the object of cavitation tests specified in this 
International Standard is the verification of certain performance 
guarantees, it is recommended that the same principles and 
methods be applied for research tests. 

12.1.2 Cavitation tests will in most cases be conducted with 
clean cold water. Cavitation tests in water cannot accurately 
predict the behaviour of the pump with liquids other than clean 
cold water. 

The following methods are for liquids for which the vapour 
pressure is single-valued. Mixed hydrocarbons and other liquids 
where vapour pressures cannot be defined by a single value at 
the test temperature are excluded. 

Cavitation may affect the behaviour of a pump in several ways. 
It may cause noise, vibration, material damage and alteration of 
performance, as defined by changes of head, rate of flow, effi- 
ciency, etc. 

In no case shall the cavitation tests be used to ensure that the 
pump will be free from cavitation erosion during its service life. 

Measurenwnts not relating to the hydraulic performance of 
the pump such as noise and vibrations are not covered by this 
International Standard. 

Assessments of cavitation performance shall be made on a 
head drop or efficiency drop basis at a given rate of flow or on a 
drop in rate of flow or efficiency basis at a given total head. 

Other methods such as cavitation visualization and sound 
pressure measurements which are still subject to research and 
not yet generally accepted, are described in annex D. 

12.1.3 There are different types of cavitation tests. 

12.1.3.1 A check may be made to show that the hydraulic 
performance of the pump is not affected by cavitation at the 
specified duty and (NPSH). 

The pump meets the requirement if a test at a higher (NPSH) 
gives the same total head and efficiency at the same rate of 
flow. 

12.1.3.2 In other cases, cavitation performance is explored 
more fully by reducing INPSH) until measurable effects are 
noted. 

This type of test may be conducted either to check the require- 
ment of the pump or as a research test. 

From such a test, the behaviour of the pump at various depar- 
tures from the specified (NPSH) may be judged. For instance, 
the following cavitation extent may be characterized by cor- 
responding values of the (NPSH) : 

a) the beginning of performance alteration, (NPSH)^,; 

b) 2 + - j % reduction in total head, (NPSH)^.: 

c) X % reduction in total head, INPSH)^. 



51 



IS 13538 : 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



d) X % reduction in efficiency, INPSH)^; 

e) blockage of flow rate by fully developed cavitation, 
(NPSH)f. 



If not otherwise agreed, a drop of 12 + ^ I % in total head shall 

be used unless it is shown that connparisons on this basis are 
invalid. 

In the case of multistage pumps, only the head generated by 
the first stage shall be considered whether actually measured or 
estimated. 



12.2.1.3 Condition of the test liquid 

The liquid shall be dean and clear and should not contain solid 
matter (see table 4). 

The total gas content, including both entrained and dissolved 
gas of the liquid used in the test rig, should be known for the 
test. It shall be taken at the inlet close to the pump. Present ex- 
perience in closed circuits indicates that the influence of air 
content on a cavitation test in water nnay be neglected if the 
total air content at standard conditions of pressure and 
temperature [15° C, absolute pressure 1 bari'], is not less than 
2 parts by volume in 1 000 and if the pump works in practice 
with normal industrial water. 



12.2 Test installations 
12.2.1 General test conditions 

12.2.1.1 General characteristics of the circuit 

The circuit shall be such that when cavitation appears in the 
pump, it shall not occur elsewhere to an extent where it affects 
the stability or the satisfactory operation of the installation or 
the measurement of the pump performance. 

Cavitation or gas released by cavitation in the pump shall not 
affect the functioning of the instrumentation, particularly the 
flow measuring device. 

The measuring conditions on the cavitation test rig, whether 
this be the same as the rig used for the determination of the ef- 
ficiency curves or not, shall conform to the conditions specified 
in this International Standard. 

The types of installations described in 12.2.2 may necessitate 
special flow control valves at the inlet and outlet to avoid 
cavitation in these items influencing results. 

Cavitation in the flow through a flow control valve can 
sometimes be prevented by using two or more control devices 
connected in series or by arranging for the flow control valve to 
discharge directly into a closed vessel or a tank of large 
diameter interposed between the control and the pump inlet. 

Baffles and means of extracting air from such a vessel may be 
needed, especially when the (NPSH) is low. 

When a flow control valve is partially closed the pipe shall be 
full of liquid at the position of the inlet pressure tappings. 

12.2.1.2 Viewing conditions 

Whatever the type of circuit used, it is recommended where 
possible that provision be made for visual observation of the 
condition of the water, with particular reference to the bubble 
content coming into the pump, and the cleanliness both at the 
inlet of the pump and upstream of the flow measuring device. 



Conversely, to avoid degassing in any part of the pump, 
liquid of the circuit should not be supersaturated. 



the 



De-aaration ofliquid used for a cavitation test is necessary if 
the pump is to be used in practice with de-aerated liquid. 

It is possible to examine the influence of gas content by repeti- 
tion of the same test run under different gas content conditions 
as permitted by the test installation. 

To avoid any degassing in open or closed circuits, an increase 
of general pressure level may be required (see 12.2.1.1). 



12.2.1.4 Flow conditions 

The general flow conditions specified in this International Stan- 
dard, especially at the inlet of the pump, shall be fulfilled. 



12.2.2 Types of installation 

The following types of installations may be used. 



12.2.2.1 For liquids where the error in temperature measure- 
ment produces an error in determining the liquid head 
equivalent to vapour pressure of less than ± Q,10 m or ± 2 % 
of the measured (NPSH) whichever is the higher, the installa- 
tions shown in figure 25 are acceptable. 



12.2.2.1.1 The pump is installed in a closed pipe loop as 
shown in figure 25 a) in which the pressure level or, by altera- 
tion of temperature, the vapour pressure may be varied without 
changing the pump head or rate of flow until cavitation occurs 
in the pump. 

Arrangements for cooling or heating the liquid in the loop may 
be needed in order to maintain the required temperature, and a 
gas separation tank may be also required. 

A liquid recirculation loop may be necessary to avoid unaccep- 
table temperature differences in the test tank. 



1) 1 bar = 0,1 MPa 



S2 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



The tank shall be of sufficient size and so designed as to pre- 
vent the entrainment of gas in the pump inlet flow. Additionally 
stilling screens may be needed in the tank if the average velo- 
city exceeds 0,25 m/s. 

12.2.2.1.2 The pump draws liquid through an unobstructed 
suction pipe from a sump in which the level of the free liquid 
surface may be adjusted. [See figure 25 b).] 



12.2.2.1.3 The pressure of the liquid entering the pump is 
adjusted by means of a flow control valve installed in the inlet 
pipe at the lowest practical level. [See figure 25 c).] 



b) The physical separation or Van Slyke method has the 
advantage of permitting the extraction of the quantity of 
air contained, whether in dissolved or occluded form, by 
cascading the sample under vacuum in an insulated column. 
The method is relatively rapid, but necessitates working on 
small volume samples. 

c) Gas content recorders (as used in thermal power plants) 
permit a continuous recording of the total gas content, but 
must be adapted to the range of use in the laboratory where 
the water is usually saturated, whereas it is nearly gas-free 
in a thermal power plant. 

NOTE — The above-mentioned methods are hardly operational in- 
dustrially. 



12.2.2.2 For liquids where the error in temperature measure- 
ment is greater than that specified in 12.2.2. 1 , the determina- 
tion of (NPSH) by direct measurement as described in 12.3.2.4 
shall be used by agreement. 



12.3 Determination of the (NPSH) required by 
the pump 

12.3.1 Methods of varying (NPSH) 

The tests specified in 12.1.3 can be conducted in any of the 
installations shown in figure 25 and 26 according to one of the 
different methods indicated in figure 27. 

It is possible to vary two control parameters and thus keep flow 
rate constant during a test, but this is usually more difficult. 

12.3.2 Measurement methods 

12.3.2.1 Measurement of pump head, flow rate and speed of 
rotation 

The recommended methods in clauses 7 to 9 regarding the 
measurement of head, outlet flow rate and speed of rotation 
shall be applied during cavitation tests unless otherwise agreed. 
For tests in accordance with 12.2.2.2, the (NPSH) shall be 
directly measured using a liquid column gauge. 

Particular care is needed to ensure that in the measurement of 
flow, cavitation does not affect the accuracy of the flowmeter. 
Ingress of air through joints and glands should be avoided. 

12.3.2.2 Measurement of gas content 

Gas content measurement, a requirement of all precision class 
cavitation tests, may be made by any method shown to give an 
error in measurement of less than ± 10 % when applied to 
saturated water. 

a) The Winkler method enables the determination by 
iodometry of the dissolved oxygen content of the water. It is 
comparatively accurate, but necessitates titrated solutions 
which are difficult to keep and requires sampling without re- 
aeration of the specimen. It only yields the value of dis 
solved air content by calculation. 



12.3.2.3 Measurement of temperature 

For the installations described in 12.2.2.1, the vapour pressure 
of the test liquid entering the pump shall be determined with 
sufficient accuracy to comply with 12.3.2.5. When the vapour 
pressure is derived from standard data and the measurement of 
the temperature of the liquid entering the pump, the necessary 
accuracy of temperature measurement may have to be 
demonstrated. 

The active element of a temperature-measuring probe shall be 
not less than one-eighth of the inlet pipe diameter from the wall 
of the inlet pipe. If the immersion of the temperature-measuring 
element in the inlet flow Is less than that required by the instru- 
ment manufacturer, then a calibration at that immersion depth 
may be required. 

Care shall be taken to ensure that temperature measuring 
probes inserted into the pump Inlet pipe do not influence the 
measurements of inlet pressure. 

12.3.2.4 Determination of (NPSH) by direct measurement 

The pump is installed In a closed loop in which a free surface is 
maintained at vapour pressure by allowing liquid to flash into a 
tank in a secondary circuit (see figure 26). The (NPSH) is then 
measured directly on a liquid level column gauge mounted on 
the cavitation bottle, due account being taken of the inlet pipe 
head loss which, if below 0,05 m can be considered of negligi- 
ble influence on the (NPSH) value being nrreasured. 

Changes in (NPSH) can be accommodated by bleeding liquid 
from the cavitation bottle to a separate storage tank. Care 
needs to be taken, however, when returning such liquid to the 
main circuit, and adequate mixing shall be allowed to occur so 
that true vapour pressure conditions are established at the free 
surface. 

12.3.2.5 Limits of error in determination of (NPSH) 

The maximum limits of error In (NPSH) measurements deter- 
mined by the above methods shall be + 3 % of the measured 
(NPSH), or ± 0,15 m whichever is the greater. 

For (NPSH) tests with fluid temperature over the saturation 
temperature at ambient pressure, an exact error calculation 
shall be made and agreement reached between the manufac 
turer and the purchaser about the acceptability of the measur- 
ing uncertainties obtained. 



53 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198: 1987 



To vacuum or 
pressure control 



Spray nozzle for 
liquid de-aeration 



Cavitation 
bottle 



Stilling screens^ 



Cooling or , 
heating coils-/ 




xn I. 



-Flowmeter 



Measuring point of 
gas content 



Isolating valve open 
during the test 



i r 



3^ 

"""^ Pump 



NOTE — Cooling by means of a coil may be replaced by an injection of cool water above the liquid free surface and an extraction of heated water. 
a> Variation of (NPSH) in a closed loop by control of pressure or temperature 



Adjustable liquid level 



To flowmeter, flow 
control valve and 
measurement of 
gas content point 

r 




To flowmeter and 
measurement of 
gas content point 



Pump 




b) Variation of (NPSH) by control 
of liquid level at inlet 



c) Variation of (NPSH) by means of a 
flow control valve at inlet (to avoid) 



NOTE — The drawings show the principle but not full technical details. 

Figure 25 — Cavitation tests 



54 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



To flash tank 



From storage tank 
(if necessary) 




Flowmeter 



Cooling or heating coils 



Isolating vaive open during the test 
Cavitation bottle 



>- 



Pump 



Recirculation pump 
(If necessary) 



a) Measurement method by level gauge In the cavitation tank 



To flash tank 



From storage tank 
(if necessary) 




Recirculation pump 
(if necessary) 



(NPSH) direct measurement 
by manometer or differential 
pressure gauge 



b) Measurement method by gauge manometer 
NOTE — The drawings show the principles but not full technical details. 

Figur* 28 — C«vit«tion test* — Direct m««*ur«m«nt method 

[no assessment of (NPSH) from temperature measurement] 



55 



Type of 
installation 



Open sump 



Open sump 



Open sump 



Open 
sump 



Open 
sump 



Closed 
loop 



Closed 

loop 



Closed 
loop 



Closed 
sump 
or loop 



w w 


o 


.^ 


01 


<*> 
01 


ir> 


u 


00 


tJU 


_^ 


_i 


S5 


10 



Independent 
vBriable 



Inlet flow control 
valve 



Outlet flow control 
valve 



Water level 



Inlet flow 

control 

valve 



Water level 



Pressure in 
the tank 



Temperature 

tvapour 

pressure) 



Pressure 
reference 



Temperature 

(vapour 

pressure) 



Constant 



Outlet flow control 
valve 



Inlet flow control 



Inlet and outlet flow 
control valve 



Flow rate 



Flow rate 



Flow rate 



Flow rate 



Inlet and outlet flow 
control valve 



Quantities the 
variation of 
which is depen- 
dant on control 



Head, flow rate, 
(NPSH], water level 



Head, flow rate, 
(NPSH I, water level 



Head, flow rate, 
<NPSH) 



Outlet flow 

control 
valve (for 
constant 
flow rate), 
head, 
(NPSH! 



(NPSH), 
head, outlet 
flow control 
valve 



Head 

characteristic 

curve 



I, (2+-)/y/ioo 
^2 



H 



{NPSHI 

characteristic 

curve 



■1 



4 (2+^)/y/ioo 




^ 








H 







y 



/^ 




Heat, 
(NPSH), 
outlet flow 
control 
valve (for 
constant flow 
rate, when 
head begins 
to drop) 



(NPSH), 
head, outlet 
flow control 
valve (for 
constant 
flow rate 
when head 
begins to 
drop) 



Head, 
flow rate, 
(NPSH) 



After 
onset of 
cavitation 



r(2*y)/y/100 




{iJ^H/m 




Figure 27 — Methods of determining required (NPSHI for (^HIH = {2 + 



% 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Annex A 



Estimation and analysis of uncertainties 



A.I General 

The degree of uncertainty in any measurement (for example the 
efficiency of a pump) can properly be found only by a special 
examination of all the sources and contributory causes of error 
in the test arrangement and equipment being used, and fluc- 
tuations and variations of the phenomenon being measured. It 
is usually not practicable to make an exhaustive study of this 
sort for every measurement taken, and so assessments of 
reliability of measurements will be more or less exact depending 
on the amount of evidence available and the analysis made. 
What is required is a conclusion that the value indicated by the 
measurements is unlikely to have differed from the true value 
by more than a stated amount. 

Both systematic and random experimental errors or uncertain- 
ties shall be taken into account, and it is important to remember 
that observations of unsteady phenomena, such as those en- 
countered in pump testing, are not necessarily exactly 
repeatabte. For this reason, precision class accuracy cannot be 
guaranteed in advance of the tests, even with the highest stan- 
dards of instrumentation and calibration. Non-repeatability of 
results arising from the pump and/or its installation may make 
it impossible, or meaningless, to represent characteristics by 
mean lines drawn through the scattered points. 

In this case, the contracting parties shall agree on the ar- 
rangements to be made (improvement of the test conditions, of 
the methods, etc.). 



A-2 Analysis of errors 

This International Standard is mainly concerned with the 
measurement of the basic quantities, pump head, discharge, 
torque and shaft speed (or input power) at one set stable test 
condition at a time. 

The concept of a stable test condition implies that during a test 
these quantities will remain virtually constant until the circuit 
resistance or speed is deliberately altered. To obtain the pump 
characteristics, pump head, input power and efficiency are 
plotted against flowrate, using results from a number of dif- 
ferent test conditions. The uncertainties will change for each of 
these conditions, and repeated sets of readings will be taken for 
those points for which it is considered important to calculate 
uncertainties, or where a single measuring point appears to dif- 
fer from the trend of measuring points taken at other condi- 
tions. 

This is the normal type of pump test, and this annex deals with 
the method used to calculate the uncertainties of the results of 
each test condition studied in such circumstances. 



A.3 Estimation of the uncertainty associated 
with random errors 

If the scatter of repeated observations of the same quantity 
about a mean value occurs in a truly random manner, then a 



sufficiently large number will tend to be grouped in a pattern 
known as the normal or Gaussian distribution of error. Other 
patterns are possible, but in the absence of evidence to the 
contrary, random variation with the consequent normal 
distribution will be assumed. 

If a set of n repeated observations, Xj (/ = 1, 2, 3 ..., n). of the 
same quantity is considered, in which the normal distribution of 
errors occurs, then the arithmetic mean, x, is given by the 
equation 



^ = I E ^' 



(1) 



;■ = 1 



and the standard deviation, s, of these observations is: 



;r^Z'-'-^^ 



(2) 



As n increases, the values of jc tend to approach the true mean 
value of the instrument readings within its fundamental limits of 
precision. For example if a pressure of 50 units is to be 
measured on a gauge with 1 unit graduations, the true mean 
value can be established to within approximately ± 0,5 units, 
but not within say ± 0,05 units for which an instrument of 
greater precision would have to be used, 

If rt were sufficiently large and the variations were normally 
distributed, it would be found that if, a priori, a certain percen- 
tage (the confidence level) of readings is required to be 
grouped around the mean value within certain limits (con- 
fidence interval), these limits would be related to the standard 
deviation s given by equation (2). As an example, if the con- 
fidence level were 95 % the odds are 19 to 1 that any single one 
of the observations will lie within these limits. 

If the confidence level were 99 %, these limits would be much 
wider since 99 % of the readings would be required to lie within 
these limits. 

For practical pump tests, a 95 % confidence level is generally 
accepted as providing sufficient certainty and is used 
throughout this International Standard. The arithmetic mean of 
a small number of consecutive measured values of the same 
quantity will, in general, differ by a greater amount from the 
true mean value than would the arithmetic mean of a larger 
number of consecutive readings. 

For values ot n less than 30 the assumption of a normal 
distribution becomes invalid. Siowever, smjil (or exact) sam- 
pling theory may t>e applied '^tudeniVi .' distribution gives the 
probability of th,i rr.itsn value nf /. readings iying between 
chosen limits x ii:-'-/n where ( is a function on n as given in 
table 12, for a 66 % -onfidence level. 



S7 



1813538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



Table 12 — Values of Student's / distribution 



Table 13 — Values of ^/n// 



n 


t 


3 


4,30 


4 


3,18 


5 


2,78 


6 


2,57 


7 


2,45 


8 


2,36 


9 


2,31 


10 


2,26 


11 


2,23 



n 


/ 


12 


2,20 


13 


2,18 


14 


2,16 


15 


2,14 


16 


2,13 


17 


2,12 


18 


2,11 


19 


2.10 


20 


2,09 



n 


V^/r 


n 


y/^/t 


3 


0,403 


12 


1.575 


4 


0.629 


13 


1,653 


5 


0,804 


14 


1,732 


6 


0,953 


15 


1,810 


7 


1,080 


16 


1,878 


8 


1,198 


17 


1,945 


9 


1.299 


18 


2.011 


10 


1,399 


19 


2,076 


11 


1,487 


20 


2,140 



The procedure, therefore, to determine the uncertainty at a 
95 % confidence level due to the scatter of experimental results 
about the mean is as follows: 

a) determine the mean value, x, of the readings, using 
equation (1); 

b) calculate the standard deviation, s, from the value of x 
so obtained, and using equation {2); 

c) multiply this value of ,r by the appropriate value of 

The answer so obtained will indicate within what limits 95 out 
of 100 mean values obtained under identical conditions might 
be expected to lie with respect to the true mean indicated 
values of the instrument being used. 

The random uncertainty ts/-\fn''s denoted by e^. 

In order, therefore, to check the random error for a single stable 
test condition, a number (at least three) of readings of each 
quantity should be made at that condition. 

The readings should be synchronized, i.e. head, flow, torque 
and speed readings should be made simultaneously. If one or 
more of the readings are being time-averaged mechanically or 
electrically over a period (for example weightank or revolution 
counter), the other readings should be observed over the same 
period, and their average for that period recorded. 

In order to restrict the number of repeated readings, it is helpful 
to have previous agreement between the parties to the test 
concerning the amount of uncertainty arising from scatter that 
can be tolerated. If the measurements or results are contained 
within a specified band, they may be accepted without further 
repetition or analyses. 

If the agreed random error tolerance is + £ then a permissible 
standard deviation can be expressed for different numbers of 
test points by applying the condition 



The possibility exists that one reading may deviate much more 
widely from the mean than the remainder in the set. Suppose 
the value of this reading \sxf. The following test should be used 
to determine whether or not it may be rejected. 

a) Estimate the mean, Fand the standard deviation, s. for 
the whole set, including the suspect reading. 

b) Calculate the ratio R = {x, ~ x)/$ between the devia- 
tion of the suspect reading from the mean, x, and the stan- 
dard deviation, s (i.e. calculate the "number of standard 
deviations" by which the suspect reading differs from the 
mean). 

Only if this ratio ("number of standard deviations") exceeds the 
value given in table 14 may the suspect reading be rejected- 
Note that if a reading is rejected, n is then reduced by 1 , and x 
and s shall be recalculated. The final value of n shall not be less 
than 3. 

Table 14 — Maximum permissible value of ratio R 
(number of standard deviations) 



n 


R 


3 


1,15 


4 


1,48 


5 


1.71 


6 


1,89 


7 


2,02 


8 


2,13 


9 


2,21 


10 


2,29 


n 


2,36 



n 


R 


12 


2,41 


13 


2.46 


14 


2,51 


15 


2,55 


16 


2,59 


17 


2,62 


18 


2,65 


19 


2,68 


20 


2.71 



ts 



< £ 



It is preferable, whenever possible, to estimate random errors 
from repeated readings at one or more selected stable test con- 
dition, as described here, rather than to try to deduce them 
from the scatter about a mean line of points taken from single 
sets of readings at a number of test conditions. Clause A. 6 
gives general guidance on procedures for curve-fitting. 



that is 



5 < 



; V"" 



(3) 



Values of y/TT/t are given in table 13. 



A. 4 Estimation of uncertainty associated 
with systematic errors 

All known corrections may be applied to the value of an instru- 
ment reading taken in perfectly steady conditions without any 
observer error, and yet it may still differ from the true value of 



5» 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



the quantity being measured. This residual uncertainty is called 
systerpatic error, and arises from the limitations of calibration, 
change of installation compared with calibration conditions, 
and inherent and constructional limitations of the instrument 
itself. 

The uncertainty associated with systematic errors cannot be 
assessed experimentally without changing the equipment or 
conditions of measurement. Whenever possible this should 
be done since the alternative is to make a subjective judgement 
on the basis of experience and consideration of equipment in- 
volved. 



Alternatively some instruments such as differential pressure 
flowmeters are covered by national and Interrlationai Standards 
which give details of construction and use, together with co- 
efficients, corrections, and uncertainties. 

Values given in clauses 7 to 12 are based on experience and 
judgement and are the likely ranges of the systematic uncer- 
tainty, at a 95 % confidence level, for the methods employed. 
These should be used only as a guide for the estimation of the 
systematic uncertainties and read in conjunction with the ap- 
propriate clauses of this International Standard and the relevant 
standards for each method. 



The first step in the estimation of systematic uncertainty is to 
identify those aspects of the measurement that can affect its 
value; the second step is to allocate uncertainty limits to allow 
for each of these effects. For example if the independent 
variables (such as density, temperature, datum height, velocity 

head) for calculating the head, H, are denoted X'\, X^ X^, 

then: 



H - f (A"-!, X^, ■■■, Xfy) 



... (4) 



Then the standard deviation, 5^, of H, due to the standard 
deviations arising from uncertainties in the individual variables, 
is given by; 



(5) 




provided the variables are mutually independent. 
If f is a linear function 



Sh = 



(6) 



I = 1 



and thus the confidence limits, e^, of systematic error at a 95 % 
confidence level, are given by 



?s« 



^ixi 



(7) 



where fg/^ = 1,96 5/y 

In practice it is riecessary to draw largely from past experience 
and published data to arrive at an estimate of systematic uncer- 
tainty in the measurement of any one quantity. Often it is poss- 
ible to have an instrument calibrated by a recognized national 
authority who will include, with the calibration certificate, the 
uncertainty at the 95 % confidence level or the standard devia- 
tion of the results of the calibration. 

Even if the instrument is calibrated locally, it must be against 
some secondary standard the limits of error of which must be 
known if the calibration is to be meaningful. 

At least two calibrations are necessary, one before and one 
after the test, but it is preferable to have a history of a number 
of calibrations than to rely on only previous calibration. 



A.5 Combination of random and systematic 
uncertainties 

There is no universally accepted method of combining random 
and systematic uncertainties. Although it is of value to list 
syi;tematic and random uncertainties separately, this would be 
confusing when related to specified conditions. The overall 
error in any one quantity shall be obtained using the square law 
propagation method 



V^^F^? 



(8) 



The systematic error is entirely controlled by the choice oi 
measuring method and the characteristics of the installation, 
for example the value of the kinetic energy calculated using the 
mean velocity can differ from its true value if the velocity 
distribution of the measuring section is not sufficiently regular. 
Random error is, however, influenced by the care taken during 
measurement, the number of measurements taken and the site 
conditions. 



A.6 Estimation of errors from scatter 
around a fitted curve 

Computer programs are available for fitting curves to test data, 
and these may be used to advantage in a contractual situation 
where two or more people have interests in the interpretation of 
the test results. 

Fitting a mathematical curve to such data imposes constraints 
over and above those implicit in the data, and the choice of 
curve itself may therefore become the subject of conflicting 
interests. 

With a limited number of test conditions, especially if none are 
repeated, a cortiplicated curve passing through each of the 
points may well be a worse estimate of the true mean curve 
than a simpler expression about which the test data are scat- 
tered. 

Curve fitting for acceptance test purposes is best confined 
to a fairly narrow range of duties (say ± 10 %> around the 
condition specified for acceptance. As many repeats, or near 
repeats, as are technically and/or economically feasible should 
be made wirnin this range. Usually it will be found that, within 
such a range, slrmpie low order polynomials may be fitted, such 
that the fitting ot a polynonnal one or more order higher results 
in no iL'iva'\'.3'ie mth rttpnort to chf, i..(.jnfidpnce limits obtained 
at the speciis^fl ;;'iv ^>u,i\*, 



59 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



End conditions can be imposed on such a curve by "spline-fit" 
programs linking a simple curve covering one range to similar 
curves over adjacent ranges on either side. 



If it becomes apparent that the range selected contains 
characteristics with inflexions, discontinuities, or other 
singularities, it may be necessary to narrow or shift the range so 
as to investigate thoroughly the true curve shape. Figure 28 
gives an example. 



H 



Area requiring clarification 







iV- 



^v 



Figure 28 — Example of a discontinuity 



m 



IS 13538: 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



Annex B 



Comparison of test resutts with specified duty 



B.O introduction 

This International Standard does not specify any constructional 
tolerance nor any global tolerance for acceptance purposes, 

Nevertheless, after these points have been agreed in the con- 
tract, it remains necessary to compare the results of 
measurements with the specified duty, tatting into account 
both the uncertainties of measurement and the agreed 
tolerances. This annex gives different possible methods of 
comparison which may be used as a guide. Positive and 
negative tolerances have been used though this may not always 
be the case. 



B.I Comparison of test results with 
specified quantities at a given flow rate 

B.1.1 Pump total head 

The specification on head is met if, on the graph of H{qy), the 
band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects or touches 
the tine AB shown in figure 29, where c^is the agreed tolerance 
on the total head, //. 



^spH-^r?) 




Pigurs 30 — Graph for comparison of measured efficiency 
with that specified at a given flow rate 



2^sp^//- 



H 



^sp(1-W 




Figure 29 — Graph of comparison of measured total 
head with that specified at a given flow rate 



B,1.2 Efficiency 

The specification on efficiency is met if, on the graph of rfltfy}, 
the band of measurement as defined in 6,5.3 intersects, 
touches or is higher than the line AB shown in figure 30, where 
l^ i$ the agreed tolerance on efficiency, t]. 



B.1.3 Power Input 

The specification on power input is met if, on the graph of 
Piqyi, the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, 
touches or is lower than the line AB shown in figure 31, where 
fpis the agreed tolerance on power input, P. 



P P 

'sp 



RpiUtp 




Figure 31 
in 



J I — Graph for comparison of measured power 
iput with that specified at a given flow rate 



til 



IS 13538: 
ISO 5198 



1993 
1987 



B.2 Comparison of test results with the 
specified quantities at a given total head 

B.2.1 Flow rate 

The specification on flow rate is met if, on tlie graph of Hiqy), 
the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects or 
touches the line AB shown in figure 32, where t^ is the agreed 
tolerance on flow rate, gy. 







Figure 32 — Graph for comparison of measured flow rata 
with that specified at a given total head 



B.2.3 Power input 

The specification on power input is met if, on the graph of 
H{P), the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, 
touches or is to the left of the line AB shown in figure 34, where 
tp is the agreed tolerance on power input, P. 



R 



sp 



H 




Ps, ?p(1^*>) 



Figure 34 — Graph for comparison of measured power 
input with that specified at a given total head 



B.2.2 Efficiency 

The specification on efficiency is met-if , on the graph of H{r)), 
the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, 
touches or is to the right of the line AB shown in figure 33, 
where t^ is the agreed tolerance on efficiency, ij. 



8.3 Comparison of test results with a 
specified duty point 

B.3.1 Flow rate and total head 




Figure 33 — Graph for comparison of measured efficiency 
with that specified at a given total head 



The specification on the duty point igy^p, H^p) is met if, on the 
graph of Hiqy), the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 
intersects or touches the rectangle ABCD shown in figure 35, 
where (^ and t^ are agreed tolerances on flow rate, Qy, and 
total head, H, respectively. 

All points which lie simultaneously in the band of measurement 
and in the rectangle ABCD are delimited by DEF of figure 35. 
All the points of this zone are equally valid and conform to the 
specification. 



B.3.2 Efficiency 

The zone DEF delimited in figure 35 determines a range of flow 
rate. That part of the band of measurement on the graph of 
rjiqy), situated in this range of flow rate delimits a zone GHIJ. 
All points of this zone are equally valid. 

The specification on efficiency is met if the zone GHIJ in- 
tersects or touches or is higher than the rectangle A'B'C'D' 
shown in figure 36, where t^ and r^ are agreed tolerances on 
flow rate, qy, and efficiency, n respectively. 



62 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



B.3.3 Power input 

The zone DEF delimited in figure 35 determines a range of flow 
rate. That part of the band of measurement on the graph of 
P{qy), situated in this range of flow rate delimits a zone KLMN. 
All the points of this zone are equally valid. 

The specification on power input is met if the zone KLMN 
intersects, touches or is lower than the rectangle ABCD shown 



in figure 37, where (^ and tpare agreed tolerances on flow rate, 
qy, and power input, P, respectively. 

NOTE — In the case where is no agreed tolerance, the line AB in 
figures 29 to 34 or the rectangle ABCD in figures 35 to 37 Is reduced to 
a point. 

The relevant specification is met if this point lies within the corre- 
sponding band of rneasurement or on the upper or lower limiting curve 
of the band. 



H 










Figure 35 — Grdph for connparlson of flow rate and total head 
with a specified duty point 



^sp(T-^ 




^i/sp<^-''?Wksp ^/sp^^^^?^ 



Figure 36 — Graph for comparison of flow rate and efficiency 
with a specified duty point 



(3 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



p p 

'sp 




'7^ 



Figure 37 - Graph for comparison of ftow rate and power input 
with a specified duty point 



64 



1813538:1993 
180 5198:1987 



Annex C 

Thermodynamic properties of water and assessment of the accuracy of 
efficiency measurements by the thermodynamic method 



C.I Tables of thermodynamic properties of water 

Values of coefficients a. q and c^ are given in tables 15 to 17 as a function of temperature and pressure at intervals from to 275 "^C 
and from 1 to 300 bar H, 



Table 15 — isothermal coefficient, a dO^-'m^/lcg) 



^*»s^^^ Temperaturs 

Pressure ^\^^ 
bar ^v. 





5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 





1,018 6 


0,995 9 


0,975 4 


0,957 1 


0,941 1 


0,926 5 


0,912 4 


0,899 


20 


1,015 3 


0,993 2 


0,973 1 


0,955 2 


0,939 4 


0,925 


0,911 1 


0,897 9 


40 


1,012 1 


0,990 5 


0.970 8 


0.953 2 


0,937 7 


0,923 5 


0,909 8 


0,896 7 


60 


1,0089 


0.987 8 


0,968 6 


0,951 3 


0.936 


0,922 


0,908 6 


0,895 6 


80 


1,0058 


0,985 2 


0,966 3 


0,949 4 


0,934 3 


0,920 6 


0,907 3 


0,894 5 


100 


1,002 7 


0,982 6 


0.964 1 


0,947 4 


0,932 7 


0,919 1 


0,906 


0,893 4 


120 


0,999 7 


0,980 


0,961 9 


0,945 6 


0,931 


0,917 6 


0,904 7 


0.892 3 


140 


0,996 8 


0,977 4 


0.959 7 


0,943 7 


0,929 4 


0,916 2 


0,903 5 


0.891 2 


160 


0,993 8 


0.974 9 


0.957 6 


0,941 8 


0,927 7 


0,914 7 


0,902 2 


0,890 1 


180 


1 0,990 9 


0,972 4 


0,955 4 


0,940 


0,926 1 


0,913 3 


0.900 9 


0,889 


200 


0,988 1 


0,970 


0,953 3 


0,938 1 


0,924 5 


0,911 9 


0,899 7 


0.887 9 


220 


0.985 3 


0,967 6 


0.951 2 


0,936 3 


0,922 9 


0,910 5 


0.898 6 


0,886 9 


240 


0,982 5 


0.965 2 


0,949 1 


0,934 5 


0,921 3 


0,909 1 


0,897 2 


0,885 8 


260 


0,979 8 


0,962 8 


0,947 1 


0,932 7 


0,919 7 


0,907 7 


0,896 


0.884 7 


280 


0.977 2 


0,960 5 


0,945 1 


0.930 9 


0,918 2 


0,906 3 


0,894 8 


0,883 7 


300 


0,974 5 


0.958 2 


0,943 


0,929 2 


0,916 6 


0,904 9 


0,893 6 


0.882 6 



1) 1 bar = 0,1 MPa 



65 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



Table 15 — Isothermal coefficient, a (10"^ m^/kg) {continued) 



'"^v^Temperature 

Pressure ^\^ 
bar ^X.^^^ 


40 


45 


50 


55 


60 


65 


70 


75 





0,886 1 


0,873 9 


0,862 3 


0,851 1 


0.840 


0,828 8 


0,817 8 


0,806 7 
0,806 7 
0,806 6 
0,806 6 
0,806 5 


20 


0,885 2 


0.873 1 


0,861 7 


0,850 6 


0,839 5 


0.828 5 


0,817 6 


40 


0,884 2 


0.872 3 


0,861 


0,850 


0,839 1 ^ 


0,828 2 


0,817 4 


60 


0,883 3 


0.871 5 


0,860 3 


0,849 5 


0,838 7 


0,827 9 


0.817 2 


80 


0,882 3 


0,870 7 


0,859 7 


0,848 9 


0,838 3 


0,827 6 


0.817 1 


100 


0,881 4 


0,869 9 


0,859 


0,848 4 


0,837 8 


0,827 3 


0.816 9 
0,816 7 
0,816 5 
0,816 3 
0,816 
0,815 8 
0,815 6 


0,806 4 
0,806 4 
0,806 3 ~ 
0,806 2 
0,806 1 
0,806 
0,805^ ~ 


120 


0.880 4 


0,869 1 


0.858 3 


0,847 8 


0,837 4 


0,827 


140 


0,879 5 


0.868 3 


0,857 6 


0,847 3 


0,837 


0,826 7 


160 


0,878 5 


0.867 5 


0,857 


0,846 7 


0,836 5 


0,826 4 


180 


0,877 6 


0,866 7 


0,856 3 


0,846 2 


0,836-1 


0,826 1 


200 


0.876 7 


0,865 9 


0,855 6 


0,845 6 


0,835 7 


0.825 7 


220 


0.875 7 


0,865 1 


0,855 


0,845 1 


0,835 2 


0,825 4 


240 


0.874 8 


0,864 3 


0,854 3 


0,844 5 


0,834 8 


0,825 1 


0.815 4 


0,805 7 


260 


0,873 9 


0,863 5 


0,853 6 


0,844 


0,834 3 


0.824 7 


0,815 1 


0,805 6 
0,805 5 
0,805 3 


280 


0,873 


0.862 7 


0,853 


0,843 4 


0,833 9 


0.824 4 


0,814 9 
0,814 7 


300 


0,872 1 


0,862 


0,852 3 


0,842 8 


0.833 4 


0.824 



^V,^^ Temperature 

Pressure ^V. 

bar ^s^ 


80 


85 


90 


95 


100 


105 


110 


115 





0,795 8 


0,784 9 


0,774 1 


0,763 1 


0,751 8 


0,740 8 


0,728 9 


0,716 6 
0,717 7 ~ 
0,718 7 
0,719 7 
0,720 6 
0,721 5 
0,722 4 
0,723 3 
0,724 1 


20 


0,795 9 


0,785 1 


0,774 4 


0,763 6 


0,752 4 


40 


0,795 9 


0,785 3 


0,774 7 


0,764 


0,753 


0,741 6 


0,729 8 
0,730 7 


60 


0,796 


0,785 5 


0,775 


0,764 4 


0,753 5 


0,742 3 


80 


0.796 


0,785 6 


0,775 3 


0,764 8 


0,754 1 
0,764 6 


0,742 9 ' 
0,743 6 


0,731 5 
0,732 3 
0,733 


100 


0.796 1 


0,785 8 


0,776 6 


0,765 2 


120 


0,796 1 


0.785 9 


0,775 8 


0,765 6 


0,755 1 


0,744 2 


140 


0,796 2 


0,786 1 


0,776 1 


0,766 


0,755 5 


0,744 8 


0,733 8 


160 


0.796 2 


0,786 2 


0,776 3 


0,766 3 


0,756 


0,745 4 


0,734 5 
0,735 2 


180 


0,796 2 


0,786 3 


0,776 5 


0,766 6 


0,756 5 


0,746 


200 


0,796 2 


0,786 4 


0,776 8 


0,767 


0,756 9 


0,746 5 


0,735 9 


0,724 9 


220 


0,796 2 


0.786 5 


0,776 9 


0,767 3 


0,757 3 


0,747 1 


0,736 5 


0,725 7 
0,726 5 


240 


0,796 2 


0,786 6 


0,777 1 


0,767 6 


0,757 7 


0,747 6 


0,737 2 


260 


0,796 1 


0.786 7 


0,777 3 


0,767 8 


0,758 1 


0,748 1 


0,737 8 


0,727 3 
0.728 
0.728 7 


280 


0.796 1 


0,786 8 


0,777 5 


0,768 1 


0,758 5 


0,748 6 


0,738 4 


300 


0,796 1 


0,786 8 


0,777 6 


0,768 3 


0,758 8 


0,749 


0,739 



66 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Table 15 — Isothermal coefficient, a {}Q~^ m^/kg) {continued) 



^\^^ Temperature 

Pressure ^\^ 
bar ^v^ 


120 


125 


130 


135 


140 


145 


150 


155 





- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


20 


0,704 


0,690 9 


0,677 5 


0,663 6 


0,649 4 


0,634 6 


0,618 9 


0,602 5 


40 


0.705 2 


0,692 3 


0,679 1 


0,665 4 


0,651 4 


0,636 8 


0,621 5 


0,605 3 


60 


0,706 4 


0,693 7 


0,680 6 


0,667 2 


0,653 4 


0,639 


0,623 9 


0,608 1 


80 


0,707 5 


0,695 0- 


0,682 1 


0,668 9 


0,655 3 


0,641 1 


0,626 3 


0,610 7 


100 


0,708 6 


0,696 3 


0,683 6 


0,670 5 


0,657 1 


0,643 2 


0,628 6 


0,613 3 


120 


0,709 7 


0,697 5 


0,685 


0,672 1 


0,658 9 


0,645 2 


0,630 9 


0,615 8 


140 


0.710 7 


0,698 7 


0,686 4 


0,673 7 


0,660 7 


0,647 2 


0.633 


0.618 2 


160 


0,711 8 


0,699 9 


0,687 7 


0,675 2 


0,662 4 


0,649 1 


0,635 2 


0,620 6 


180 


0.712 7 


0,701 1 


0,689 


0,676 7 


0,664 1 


0,651 


0,637 3 


0,622 9 


200 


0,713 7 


0,702 2 


0.690 3 


0,678 2 


0,665 7 


0,652 8 


0,639 3 


0,625 2 


220 


0.714 6 


0,703 3 


0,6916 


0,679 6 


0,667 3 


0,654 6 


0,6413 


0,627 4 


240 


0,715 6 


0,704 3 


0.692 8 


0,681 


0,668 8 


0,656 3 


0,643 2 


0,629 6 


260 


0,716 4 


0,705 3 


0,694 


0,682 3 


0,670 3 


0,658 


0,645 1 


0,6316 


280 


0,717 3 


0,706 3 


0,695 1 


0,683 6 


0,671 8 


0,659 6 


0,648 9 


0,633 7 


300 


0,718 1 


0,707 3 


0.696 2 


0,684 9 


0,673 2 


0,6612 


0,648 7 


0,635 7 



^V.^^ Temperature 

Pressure ^v.,^^ 
bar ^N.,,^^ 


160 


165 


170 


175 


180 


185 


190 


195 





- 


- 


- 


- 


- ' 


- 


— 


- 


20 


0,585 3 


0,567 2 


0,548 3 


0,528 5 


0.507 4 


0,484 3 


0,459 4 


0,432 5 


40 


0,588 4 


0.570 7 


0,552 1 


0,532 8 


0,512 1 


0,489 6 


0.465 4 


0,439 2 


60 


0,591 4 


0,574 1 


0,555 9 


0,536 9 


0.516 7 


0.494 8 


0,471 1 


0,445 6 


80 


0,594 4 


0,577 3 


0,559 5 


0,540 9 


0.521 1 


0,499 7 


0,476 6 


0,451 8 


100 


0,5973 


0,580 5 


0,563 


0,544 8 


0.525 4 


0,504 5 


0.481 9 


0.457 8 


120 


0,600 1 


0,583 6 


0,566 5 


0,548 6 


0,529 6 


0,509 1 


0.487 1 


0,463 5 


140 


0,602 8 


0,586 6 


0,569 8 


0,552 2 


0.533 6 


0,513 6 


0,492 1 


0,469 1 


160 


0,605 4 


0,589 6 


0.573 


0.555 8 


0.537 6 


0,518 


0.496 9 


0,474 5 


180 


0,608 


0,592 4 


0,576 2 


0.559 3 


0,541 4 


0,522 2 


0,501 7 


0,479 7 


200 


0,610 5 


0,595 2 


0,579 2 


0.562 7 


0,545 1 


0,526 3 


0,506 2 


0,484 8 


220 


0,613 


0,597 9 


0,582 2 


0.565 9 


0,548 7 


0,530 3 


0,610 7 


0.479 7 


240 


0,615 3 


0,600 5 


0,585 1 


0,569 1 


0,552 3 


0.534 2 


0,515 


0.494 5 


260 


0,617 7 


0,603 1 


0,588 


0,572 3 


0,555 7 


0,538 


0.519 2 


0.499 2 


280 


0,619 9 


0,605 6 


0,590 7 


0.575 3 


0,559 


0,541 7 


0.523 2 


0,503 7 


300 


0,622 1 


0,608 


0,593 4 


0.578 2 


0,562 3 


0.545 3 


0,527 2 


0,508 



67 



IS 13538: 1993 
iSO 5198: 1987 



Table 15 — Isothermal coefficient, a (10 ^ rri'^/kg) [concluded] 



^^s^^^ Temperature 

Pressura^'\^^^ 
bar ^\^^ 


200 


205 


210 


215 


220 


225 


230 


235 





- 


- 






- 


- 


0.199 4 
0.213 3 
0,226 6 
0,239 2 
0,251 3 
0.262 9 
0,274 1 
0.284 8 
0,295 1 
0,305 
0,314 6 


-- 

0,150 9 
0,1669 
0,182 
0.196 4 
0.210 1 
0,223 2 
0,235 7 
0,247 7 
0,259 3 
0.270 4 
0,281 1 
0,291 4 
0,301 3 
0.310 8 


20 


0,403 7 


0,372 8 


0,339 9 


- 


0.279 5 


- 


40 


0,411 2 


0,381 3 


0,349 4 


0.315 5 


0.241 5 


60 


0,418 4 


0,389 3 


0,358 4 


0.325 5 


0.290 7 


0,254 


80 


0,425 3 


0,397 


0,367 


0,335 1 


0.301 4 
0,311 6 


0,265 8 
0.277 1 


100 


0,432 


0,404 5 


0,375 3 


0,344 3 


1.20 


0,438 4 


0,411 6 


0.383 2 


0,353 2 


0,321 4 
0,330 9 


0.288 
0.298 4 
0.308 4 


140 


0,444 6 


0,418 5 


0,390 9 


0,361 7 


160 


0,450 6 


0,425 2 


0,398 3 


0.369 9 


0,340 
0,348 7 


180 


0,456 4 


0,431 7 


0,405 5 


0,377 9 


0,318 1 
0,327 4 


200 


0,462 1 


0,437 9 


0,412 4 


0,385 5 


0,357 2 


220 


0,467 5 


0,444 


0,419 2 


0,392 9 


0.365 4 


0,336 4 


240 


0,472 8 


0,449 9 


0,425 6 


0,400 1 


0,373 3 
0,380 9 


0,345 1 


260 


0,478 


0,455 6 


0,431 9 


0,407 


0,353 4 


0,323 9 
0,332 8 
0,341 4 


280 


0,482 9 


0,461 1 


0,438 


0,413 7 


0.388 2 


0,361 5 


300 


0,487 8 


0,466 4 


0,443 9 


0,420 2 


0,395 4 


0,369 3 



^Vi,^^ Temperature 

Pressure ^\^^ 
bar ^\,^^ 


240 


245 


250 


255 


260 


265 


270 


275 





- 


- 


- 


- 


--- 


- -' '- 


— 

0,288 3 
0,250 

- 0,214 6 

- 0,181 7 

- 0,151 

- 0,1222 

- 0,095 1 

- 0,069 5 

- 0,045 4 

- 0,022 5 

- 0,000 9 
0,019 7 


0,379 3 
0,335 8 
0,295 7 
0,258 6 
0,224 
0,191 7 

- 0,161 3 
0,132 7 
0,1058 
0,080 4 
0.056 3 

- 0,033 5 


20 


- 




- 


- 


40 


0,095 9 


0,034 4 


- 




_ 


0,239 9 

- 0,203 4 

- 0,169 9 
0,138 8 


60 


0,114 5 


0,056 1 


- 0.008 4 


- 0,079 2 


- 0,156 3 

- 0,124 6 

- 0,095 4 

- 0,068 1 

- 0,042 6 ' 


80 


0,132 


0,076 4 


0,015 2 


- 0,051 8 


100 


0,148 5 


0,095 5 


0,037 2 


0,026 4 


120 


0,164 2 


0,113 5 


0,057 9 


- 0,002 6 


140 


0,179 1 


0,130 5 


0,077 4 


0,019 8 


0,109 7 


160 


0,193 3 


0.146 7 


0,095 9 


0,040 8 


- 0,018 6 


- 0,082 6 


180 


0,206 9 


0,162 2 


0,113 5 


0,060 8 


0,004 


- 0,057 

- 0,032 9 
- 0,010 1 

0,011 5 
0,031 9 
0,051 4 
0,069 8 


200 


0,219 9 


0,176 9 


0,130 2 


0,079 7 


0,025 3 
0,045 6 
0,064 8 
0,083 ■>~ 
0.1005 
0,117 1 


220 


0,232 4 


0,191 


0,146 1 


0,097 6 
0,1148 
0,131 1 


240 


0,244 4 


0,204 5 


0,161 3 


260 


0,255 9 


0,217 4 


0,175 8 


280 


0,267 


0,229 8 
0,241 6 


0,189 7 


0,146 6 
0,161 4 


300 


0,277 6 


0,202 9 



6ft 



Table 16 — Density, g ikg/vn^) 



IS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



^»s^^^Tem perature 

Pressure ^\^^ 
bar ^\^_^ 





5 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 



20 


999,8 
1 000,8 


999,9 


999,7 


999.1 


998,2 


997,0 


995,6 


994,0 


1 000,9 


1 000,6 


1 000,0 


999,1 


997,9 


996,5 


994,9 


40 

60 
~ 80 


1 001,8 


1 001,9 


1 001,6 


1 000,9 


1 000,0 


998.8 


997,4 


995,8 


1 002,8 
1 003,8 


1 002,8 


1 002,5 


1 001,8 


1 000,9 


999,7 


998,3 


996,6 


1 003,8 


1 003,4 


1 002,7 


T 001,8 


1 000,6 


999,1 


997,6 


100 


1 004,8 


1 004,8 


1 004,4 
1 005,3 


1 003,7 


1 002.7 


1 001.5 


1 000.0 


998,4 


120 
140 


1 005,8 
^ 006,8 


1 005,7 


1 004.6 


1 003.6 


1 002,3 


1 000.9 


999,2 


1 006,7 
1 007,6 


1 006,2 
1 007,2 


1 005,5 


1 004,5 


1 003,2 


1 001.7 


1 000,1 


160 
180 
200 
220 
240 


1 007,8 
1 008,8 
1 009,7 


1 006,4 


1 005,4 


1 004,1 


1 002,6 


1 000,9 


1 008.6 


1 008,1 


1 007,3 


1 006.2 


1 005,0 


1 003.5 


1 001,8 


1 009,5 


1 009,0 


1 008,2 


1 007,1 


1 005,8 


1 004,3 


1 002,6 


1 010.7 


1 010.5 


1 009,9 


1 009,1 


1 008,0 


1 006.7 


1 005,2 


1 003,5 


1011.7 


1 011,4 


1 010,8 


1 010,0 


1 008,9 


1 007,6 


1 006,0 


1 004,3 


260 


1 012.6 


1 012,3 


1 011,7 


1 010,9 


1 009,7 


1 008,4 


1 006,9 


1 005,2 


280 


1 013.6 


1 013.3 


1 012,6 


1 011,7 


1,010,6 


1 009,3 


1 007,7 


1 006,0 


300 


1 014.6 


1 014,2 


1 013,5 


1 012,6 


1 011,5 


1 010,1 


1 008,6 


1 006,8 



^*%,^^^Temperature 

Pressure ^"\^ 
bar ^'V^ 


40 


45 


50 


55 


60 


65 


70 


75 





992,2 


990,2 


988,0 


985,7 


983,2 


980,5 


977,7 


974.8 


20 


993.1 


991,0 


988,9 


986,5 


984,0 


981,4 


978,6 


975,7 


40 


993.9 


991,9 


989,7 


987,4 


984,9 


982,3 


979,5 


976.6 


60 


994,8 1 


992,8 


990,6 


988,2 


985,8 


983.1 


980,4 


977.4 


80 


995,7 


993,6 


991,4 


989.1 


986,6 


984,0 


981,2 


978,3 


100 


996,5 


994,5 


992,3 


990,0 


987,5 


984,8 


982,1 


979,2 


120 


997,4 


995,3 


993,2 


990,S 


988,3 


985,7 


982,9 


980,1 


140 


998,2 


996,2 


994.0 


991,7 


989,2 


986,6 


983,8 


980,9 


160 


999,1 


997,0 


994,8 


992,5 


990,0 


987,4 


984,6 


981,8 


180 


999.9 


997,9 


995,7 


993,3 


990,9 


988,2 


985.5 


982,6 


200 


1 000.8 


998,7 


996,5 


994,2 


991,7 


989,1 


986,3 


983,5 


220 


1 001,6 


999,6 


997,4 


995,0 


992,5 


989,9 


987,2 


984,3 


240 


1 002,4 


1000,4 


998,2 


995,8 


993,4 


990,8 


968.0 


985,2 


260 


1 003.3 


1 001,2 


999,0 


996,7 


994,2 


991,6 


988,9 


986,0 


280 


1 004,1 


1 002.0 


999,8 


997,5 


995,0 


992,4 


989,7 


986.8 


300 


1 004.9 


1 002,9 


1 000.7 


998,3 


995,8 


993.2 


990,5 


987,7 



€9 



IS 13538 : 1993 
180 5198:1987 



Table 16 — Density, q (kg/m^) (continued) 



*V,>,^^Temperature 

Pressure ^*V,^^ 
bar ^X. 


80 


85 


90 


95 


100 


105 


110 


115 





971,7 


968,6 


965.3 


961,8 


958.? 
959.2 


955.6 


951 ,9 ~ 
952,8 


948.0 
949,0 
950.0 
950,9 
951.9 
952.8 
9538 
954.7 
955.6 
956.6 
957,5 
958.4 
959,3 
960,2 
961,1 


20 


972,6 


969,5 


966.2 


962,8 


40 


973,5 


970,4 


967.1 


963.7 
964.6 


960,2 


956.6 


60 


974,4 


971,3 


968,0 


961,1 


957.5 


953,8 


80 


975,3 


972,1 


968.9 


965.5 


962,0 


958,4 


954.7 


100 


976,2 


973,0 


969.8 


966.4 


962,9 


959,4 


955.7 


120 


977,0 


973,9 


970,7 


967.3 


963,8 


960,3 


956.6 
957.5 
958.5 
959,4 
960.3 
961,2 
962,1 
963,0 
963,9 
964.8 


140 


977,9 


974,8 


971,5 


968,2 


964,8 


961,2 
%2.1 


160 


978,8 


975.7 


972,4 


969,1 


965.7 


180 


979,6 


976,5 


973.3 


970.0 


966,5 


963.0 


200 


980,5 


977,4 


974,2 


970.9 


967.4 


963,9 


220 


981,3 


978,2 


975,0 


971.7 


968.3 


964,8 


240 


982,2 


979,1 


975.9 


972,6 


969,2 


965.7 


260 


983.0 


980,0 


976.8 


973,5 


970,1 


966,6 
967^ 


280 


983.9 


980,8 


977,6 


974.3 


971.0 
971,8 


300 


984,7 


981,6 


978,6 


975.2 


968.4 



""V^^^^Temperature 

Pressure ^n,^^ 
bar ^v.^ 


120 


125 


130 


135 


140 


145 


150 


155 





- 


- 


- 


- 


~ 


922^5" 


917.9 
919,0 
920,1 
921,2 
922,3 
923,4 
924,5 
925.6 
926,7 
927,7 
928,8 
929,8 
930,8 
931,9 
932.9 


913.2 
914.3 
915.5 
916.6 
917,7 
918,8 
9199 
921,0 
922,1 
923,2 
924,3 
926,3 
926,4 
927,5 
928,5 


20 


944,0 


940,0 


935.8 


931,5 


927,0 


40 


945,0 


941,0 


936,8 


932.5 


928.1 
929,2 


923.6 

924.7 

925.8 

926.9 

927. 9' ' 

929.0 

930.0 

931,1 

932,1 

933,2 

934.2 

935,2 

936.2 

937.2 


60 


946.0 


943,0 


937.8 


933.6 


80 


947,0 


943,0 


938,8 


934.6 


930,2 
931.3 
932.3 
933.4 
934,4 
935,4 
936.4 
937.5 
938,5 
939,4 
940,4 


100 


948,0 


944,0 


939,8 


935,6 


120 


948,9 


944,9 


940,8 


936,6 


140 


949.9 


945,9 


941,8 


937,7 


160 


950.8 


946,9 


942,8 


938,7 


180 


951,8 


947,9 


943,8 


939,7 


200 


952,7 


948,8 


944,8 


940,7 


220 


953,7 


949,8 


945,8 


941,7 


240 


954,6 


950,7 


9467 ' 


942,6 


260 


955.5 


951,7 


947.7 


943,6 


280 


966.5 


952,6 


948.6 


944,6 


300 


957,4 


953.5 


949.6 


945,5 


941.4 



70 



1513538:1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Table 16 — Density, q {Wglrr?) (continued) 



Pressure ^\,^ 
bar ^>v^ 


160 


165 


170 


175 


180 


185 


190 


195 





- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


~ 


871,0 


20 


908,3 


903,3 


898,3 


893,1 


887.7 


882,3 


876,7 


40 


909,5 


904,6 


889,5 


894,3 


889,1 


883,6 


878,1 


872,4 
873,9 
875,3 


60 


910,7 


905,8 


900,7 


895,6 


890,4 


885,0 


879,5 
880,9 


80 
100 


911,8 


906,9 


902,0 


896,9 


891,7 


886.3 


913,0 


908,1 


903.2 


898,1 


892,9 


887,6 


882,2 


876,7 


120 


914,1 


909,3 


904,4 


899,3 


894,2 


889,0 


883.6 


878,1 


140 


915,3 


910,5 


905,6 


900,6 


895,5 


890,3 


884.9 
886,2 


879,5 
880,8 


160 


916,4 


911,6 


906,8 
907,9 


901,8 


896,7 


891,5 
892,8 


180 


917,5 


912,8 


903,0 


897,9 


887,5 


882,2 


200 


918,6 


913,9 


909,1 


904,2 


899,2 


894.1 


888,8 


883,5 
884,8 


220 


919.7 


915,0 


910,2 


905,4 


900,4 


895,3 


890,1 


240 


920,8 


916,1 


911,4 


906,5 


901,6 


896,5 


891,4 


886,1 


260 


921,9 


917,2 


912,5 


907,7 


902,8 


897,8 


892,6 


887,4 


280 


922,9 


918,3 


913,6 


908,8 


904,0 


899.0 


893,9 


888,7 

890,0 


300 


924,0 


919,4 


914,8 


910,0 


906,1 


900,2 

1 _ 1 


895,1 



^x>,,^^Tem perature 

Pressure ^\^ 
bar ^V^ 


200 


205 


210 


215 


220 


225 


230 


235 





- 


859,1 
860,6 


852,9 


, 


- 


- 


828,4 


821,4 


20 


865.1 


- 


- 


40 


866,6 


854,5 


848,2 


841,8 
843,5 


835,2 


60 


868.1 


862,2 


856,1 


849,9 


837.0 


830,3 


823,4 
825,3 
827,2 
829,1 
831,0 
832,8 
834,6 
836,3 
838 1 


g 8 § 

i 1 1 


869,6 
871,0 
872,5 


863,7 


857,7 
859,3 
860,8 


851,5 


845,2 


838.8 


832,1 
834,0 
835,8 
837,5 
839,3 
841.0 
842,7 
844,4 
846,0 
847,6 
849,2 
850,8 


865.2 
866,7 


853,2 
854.8 


846,9 
848,6 


840,5 1 
842,2 
843,9 
845,6 


140 


873,9 


868,2 
869,6 


862,3 
863,8 


856,3 
857,9 


850,2 
851,8 


160 


875,3 


180 


876.7 


871,1 
872,5 


865 3 


859,4 


853,4 
855,0 


847,3 


200 


878,1 
879.4 


866,8 


860,9 


848,9 


220 


873,9 


868,2 
869,7 


862,4 


856,5 


850.5 
852,1 


240 


880,8 


875,3 


863,9 
865,4 


858,1 


839,8 

841,4 
843,1 
844,7 


260 


882,1 


876,6 


871,1 


859,6 
861,1 


853,7 
855,2 


280 


883,4 


878,0 


872,5 
~ 873,9 


866,8 
868,3 


300 


884.7 


879,3 


862,6 


856,7 



71 



1813538:1993 
180 5198:1987 



Table 16 — Density, q (kg/m-') (concluded) 



^\^ Temperature 

Pressure ^v^ 
bar \^ 


240 


245 


250 


255 


260 


265 


270 


275 





- 


- 


- 




— 


- 


- 


- 


20 


~ 


- 


_ 


- 


- 


762,3 
765,3 
768,2 
770,9 
773,6 
776,3 
778,8 
781.3 
783,8 


40 


814,2 


806.8 


- ' 


- 


- 


~ 


- 


60 


816,3 


809,0 


801,4 


793,6 


785,4 


T/7.Q 


- 


80 


818,3 


811,1 


803,7 


795,9 


788,0 


779,7 


771,2 
773,9 


TOO 
120 


820,3 


813,2 


805,9 


798,3 


790,4 


782,3 


822,3 


815,3 


808,0 


800,5 


792,8 


784,9 


776,6 


140 


824,2 


817,3 


810,1 


802,7 


795,2 
797,4 


787.3 


779.3 
781,8 
784,3 


160 


826,1 


819,2 


812,2 
814,2 


804,9 
807^1 


789,7 


180 
200 


828,0 


821.2 


799,7 


792.1 


829,8 


823,1 


816,2 


809,1 


301,9 
804,0 


794,4 ^ 
796.7 


786,7 


220 


831,6 


825,0 


818,2 


811,2 


789,1 


240 


833,4 


826,8 


820,1 


813,2 


806,1 


798,9 


791,4 


260 


835,1 


828,6 


822.0 


815,2 


808,2 


801,1 


793.7 
795.9 


786.2 
788,5 
790,8 


280 


836,8 


830.4 


823,9 


817,1 


810,3 


803,2 


300 


838,5 


832,2 


825.7 


819,1 


812,3 


805,3 


798,1 



Table 17 — Specific heat capacity per unit mass at constant pressure, c^ lJ/(kgK)] 



^'v^^^Temporature 

Pressure ^v,^,^^ 
bar ^v^^ 





5 


1 

10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 





4 207,5 


4 202,7 


4 196,7 


4 189,7 


4 181,6 


4 182,1 


4 182,0 


4 181,6 
4 176,3 
4 171,2 
4 166,1 
4 161,1 
4 156,1 


20 


4 198,1 


4 194,1 


4 183,0 


4 182,9 
4 176,2 
4 169,6 
4 163.1 


4 175,7 


4 176,4 


4 176,6 
4 171,2 


40 


4 189,0 


4 185,8 


4 181,5 


4 169,9 


4 170,8 


60 


4 180.1 


4 177,6 


4 174,1 


4 164,2 
4 158,5 


4 165,3 
4 159,8 


4 165.9 


80 


4 171.4 


4 169,6 


4 166,9 


4 160.6 
4 155,4 


100 


4 162,9 


4 161,8 


4 159,8 
4 152,8 


4 156,8 


4 153,0 ^ 


4 154,4 


120 


4 154,6 


4 154,2 
4 146,7 
4 139,3 


4 150,5 


4 147,5 


4 149,1 
4 143,9 
4 138,8 


4 150,3 
4 145,3 
4 140.4 


4 151.2 
4 146,4 
4 141,6 
4 136,9 
4 132,3 
4 127,7 
4 123,2 
4 118,8 . 
4 114,4 
4 110,0 


140 


4 146,4 


4 146,0 
4 139.3 


4 144,4 


4 142,1 


160 


4 138,5 


4 138,4 


4 136,8 


180 


4 130,7 


4 132.2 


4 132,7 


4 132,5 


4 131,5 


4 133,7 


4 135,5 


200 


4 123,1 


4 125,1 
4 118,2 
4 111,5 


4 126,3 
4 120,0 
4 113,8 
4 107,7 


4 126,7 


4 126,3 


4 128,7 


4 130,6 


220 


4 115,7 


4 120,9 
4 115,3 
4 109,8 
4 104,4 
4 099,0 


4 121,2 


4 123,8 
4 118,9 


4 125,9 
4 121,2 


240 


4 108,4 
4 101.2 
4 094,2 


4 116,2 
4 111,3 
4 106,4 


260 


4 104,9 


4 114,1 
4 109,4 
4 104,8 


4 116,6 
4 112,0 
4 107,5 


280 


4 098,4 
4 092,0 


4 101,7 
4 095.9 


300 


4 087,4 


4 101,6 



72 



1813538:1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Table 17 — Specific heat capacity per unit mass at constant pressure, c„ [J/(kgK)l [continued] 



"^^.^^Tomperature 

Pressure ^X,^^^ 
bar ^\^ 


40 


45 


50 


55 


60 


65 


70 


75 





4 180.8 


4 179,8 


4 178,8 


4 181,3 


4 183.7 


4 186.2 


4 188,8 


4 191,6 


20 


4 175,8 


4 175,1 


4 174,3 


4 176,8 


4 179,3 


4 181.8 ^ 


4 184,4 


4 187,2 


40 


4 170,9 


4 170,4 


4 169,9 


4 172,4 


4 174,9 


4 177,4 4 180,1 


4 182,9 


60 


4 166,1 


4 165,8 


4 165,5 


4 168,1 


4 170,6 


4 173,1 


4 175,8 


4 178,6 
4 174,4 


80 


4 161,3 


4 161,3 


4 161,2 


4 163,8 


4 166,3 


4 168.9 


4 171,5 


100 
120 
140 


4 156,5 


4 156,8 


4 156,9 


4 159,5 


4 162,1 


4 164,6 


4 167,3 


4 170,2 


4 151,8 


4 152,3 


4 152,7 


4 155,3 


4 157,9 


4 160,5 


4 163,2 


4 166,1 


4 147,2 
4 142,7 


4 147,9 


4 148,5 


4 151,2 


4 153,7 


4 156,3 


4 159,1 


4 162,0 


160 
180 
200 


4 143,6 
4 139,3 


4 144,4 


4 147,1 


4 149,6 


4 152.3 


4 155,0 


4 157,9 . 
4 153,9 


4 138,2 


4 140,4 


4 143,0 


4 145,6 


4 148,2 


4 151,0 


4 133,7 


4 135,0 


4 136,3 


4 139,0 


4 141,6 


4 144,2 


4 147,0 


4 150,0 


220 


4 129,3 


4 130,9 


4 132,4 


4 135,0 


4 137,6 


4 140.3 


4 143,1 


4 146,1 


240 


^ 4 125,0 


4 126,7 


4 128,4 


4 131,1 


4 133,7 


4 136,4 


4 139,2 


4 142,2 


260 


^ 4 120,7 


4 122,6 


4 124,5 


4 127,2 


4 129,8 


4 132,5 


4 135,4 


4 138,4 


280 


4 116,5 
4 112,4 


4 118,6 


4 120,7 


4 123,4 


4 126,0 


4 128,7 


4 131,6 


4 134,6 


300 


4 114,6 


4 116,9 


4 119,6 


4 122,2 


4 124,9 


4 127,8 


4 130,9 



^*«v^^Temperature 

Pressure ^v^ 
bar ^\>,^^ 


80 


85 


90 


95 


100 


105 


110 


115 





4 194,6 


4 198,0 


4 201,8 


4 208,4 


4 215,2 




- 


- 


20 


4 190,2 


4 193,6 


4 197,5 


4 204,0 


4 210,6 


4 217.4 


4 224,6 


4 232,0 


40 
60 


4 185,9 


4 189,4 


4 193,2 


4 199,6 


4 206,1 


4 212,8 


4 219,8 


4 227,1 


4 181,7 


4 185,2 


4 189,1 


4 195,3 


4 201 ,6 


4 208,2 


4 215,0 


4 222,2 


80 


4 177,5 


4 181,0 


4 184,9 
4 180,8 


4 191,0 


4 197,2 


4 203,6 


4 210,3 


4 217,4 


100 

120 


4 173,3 
4 169,2 
4 165,2 


4 176,9 


4 186,8 


4 192,8 


4 199,1 


4 205,7 


4 212,6 


4 172,8 
4 168,7 


4 176,8 J 


4 182,6 


4 188,5 


4 194,7 


4 201,1 


4 207,9 


140 


4 172,8 


4 178,4 


4 184,3 


4 190,3 


4 196,6 


4 203,3 


160 


4 161,2 


4 164,8 


1 4 168,8 


4 174,4 


4 180,1 J 


4 186,0 


4 192,2 


4 198,7 


180 
200 
220 


4 157,2 
4 153,3 
4 149,4 
4 145,5 


4 160,8 


4 164,9 


4 170,3 


4 175,9 


4 181,7 


4 187,8 


4 194,2 


4 156,9 
4 153,0 
4 149,2 


4 161,0 
4 157.2 


4 166,3 
4 162,4 


4 171,8 


4 177.5 


4 183,4 


4 189,7 


4 167,7 


4 173.3 


4 179,1 


4 185,3 


240 


4 153,4 


4 158,5 


4 163,7 


4 169.2 


4 174,9 


4 181,0 


260 

280 

~ 300 


4 141,7 
4 137,9 


4 145,4 
4 141,7 


4 149,6 


4 154,6 


4 159,8 


4 165,1 


^ 170.7 


4 176,7 


4 145,9 


4 150,8 


4 155,8 


4 161,1 


4 166,6 


4 172,4 


4 134,2 


4 138,0 


4 142,2 


4 147,0 


4 151,9 


4 157,1 


4 162,5 


4 168,2 



73 



1813538:1993 
180 5198:1987 



Table 17 — Specific heat capacity per unit mass at constant pressure, Cp [J/(kgK)] [continued) 



^V.Temporature 

Pressure ^\^ 
bar ^V^ 


120 


125 


130 


135 


140 


145 


150 


155 







- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


4 302.5 
4 296,2 
4 289.9 
4 283.8 


4 316,4 
4 309,7 


20 


4 239,9 


4 248,3 


4 257,2 


4 266,7 


4 276,8 


4 289,4 


40 


4 234,8 


4 243,0 


4 251,8 


4 261,1 


4 271,1 


4 283,3 


60 


4 229,8 


4 237,8 


4 246,4 


4 255,6 


4 265.4 


4 277,4 


4 303,2 
4 296,7 
4 290,4 


80 


4 224,8 


4 232,7 


4 241,2 


' 4 250,2 


4 259.9 


4 271,5 


100 


4 219,9 


4 227,7 


4 236,0 


4 244.9 


4 254.4 


4 265,8 


4 277,8 


120 


4 215.1 


4 722,7 


4 230,9 


4 239,6 


4 249,0 


4 260,1 


4 271,8 
4 266.0 


4 284,2 
4 278,1 
4 272,1 
4 266,2 
4 260,4 


140 


4 210.3 


4 217,8 


4 225,8 


4 234,4 


4 243,7 


4 254,6 
4 249,1 


160 


4 205,6 


4 213,0 


4 220,9 


4 229.3 


4 238,5 


4 260,3 


180 


4 201,0 


4 208.2 


4 216,0 


4 224,3 


4 233,3 


1 4 243,7 


4 254,6 


200 


4 196,4 


4 203,5 


4211,1 


4 219,4 


4 228,2 


4 238,3 
4 233,1 


4 249,1 


220 


4 191,9 


4 198,9 


4 206,4 


4 214,5 


4 223,2 


4 243,6 


4 254,7 
4 249,0 
4 243,5 
4 238,1 


240 


4 187,4 


4 194,3 


4 201.7 


4 209,6 


4 218,3 


4 227,9 


4 238,2 
4 232,9 
4 227,7 


260 


4 183,0 


4 189,7 


4 197,0 


4 204,9 


4 213,4 


4 222,9 


280 


4 178,6 


4 185,3 


4 192,5 


4 200,2 


4 208,6 


4 217.8 


300 


4 174,3 


4 180,9 


4 187.9 


4 195,6 


4 203,8 


4 212.9 


4 222,5 


4 232,7 



^^Vv^^Temparature 

Pressure ^\,^ 
bar ^v. 


160 


165 


170 


175 


180 


185 


190 


195 





- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


4 447,6 


4 471,8 


20 


4 330,9 


4 346.2 


4 362,3 


4 379,4 


4 401,4 
4 392,7 


4 424,1 
4 414,7 


40 


4 323,9 


4 338.9 


4 354,7 


4 371,4 


4 437,4 
4 427,4 


4 460,8 
4 450,2 
4 439,8 
"" 4 429,6 
4 419,8 
4 410,2 
4 400,8 
4 391,6 
4 382,7 
4 374,0 
4 365,4 
4 357,1 
4 349,0 
4341,0 


60 


4 317,1 


4 331,7 


4 347,2 


4 363,5 


4 384,1 


4 405,4 


80 


4 310,3 


4 324,7 


4 339,8 
4 332,6 


4 355,8 
4 348,3 


4 375,8 
4 367,7 


4 396,4 


4 417,7 
4 408,3 
4 399,0 ' 


100 


4 303,7 


4 317.8 


4 387,6 
4 379.0 " 


120 


4 297,2 


4311.0 


4 325,5 


4 341,0 
4 333,7 


4 359,7 


140 


4 290,8 


4 304,3 


4 318,6 


4 351,9 


4 370.6 


4 390,0 


160 


4 284.6 


4 297.8 


4 311,8 


4 326,6 


4 344,2 


4 362.4 


4 381,2 
4 372,7 
4 364,3 
4 356,1 
4 348,0 
4 340,2 
4 332.5 
4 325,0 


180 


4 278,4 


4 291,4 


4 305,1 


4 319,7 


4 336,7 


4 354,4 


200 


4 272.3 


4 285,1 


4 298,5 


4 312,9 


4 329,4 


4 346,5 


220 


4 266.4 


4 278,9 


4 292,1 


4 306,2 


4 322,2 


4 338,8 


240 


4 260.6 


4 272,8 


4 285,8 


4 299,6 


4 315,1 


4 331.3 

4 323,9 

. . — _ 

4 316,7 
4 309,6 


260 


4 254,8 


4 266,8 


4 279,5 


4 293,1 


4 308,2 


280 
300 


4 249,1 
4 243,5 


4 260,9 
4 255,1 


4 273,4 
4 267,4 


4 286.8 
4 280,5 


4 301,4 
4 294.8 



74 



iS 13538 : 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Table 17 — Specific heat capacity per unit mass at constant pressure, c. (J/ikgK)] [concluded) 



^\^ Te m pe rat u re 

Pressure ^\^ 
bar ^x^ 


200 


205 


210 


215 


220 


225 


230 


235 





- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


— 


20 


4 496.9 


4 522,8 


4 549,6 


- 


- 


- 


- 


40 


4 485,1 


4 510,2 


4 636,3 


4 563,2 


4 591,1 


4 620,1 


4 664,7 


4 712,3 


60 


4 473,7 


4 498,1 


4 523,3 


4 549,5 


4 576,6 


4 604,7 


4 646,9 


4 692,1 


80 


4 462,6 


4 486,2 


4 510,7 


4 536,1 


4 562,5 


4 589.8 


4 629,8 


4 672,8 


100 


4 45t,8 


4 474,7 


4 498,5 


4 523.2 


4 548,8 


4 575,4 


4 613,4 


4 654,2 


120 


4 441.3 


4 463,6 


4 486.7 


4 510,7 


4 535,6 


4 561,5 


4 597,6 


4 636,5 


140 


4 431,0 


4 452,7 


4 475.1 


4 498.5 


4 522,8 


4 548,0 


4 582.3 


4 619,4 


160 


4 421,0 


4 442.1 


4 463.9 


4 486.7 


4 510,3 


4 534.8 


4 567.5 


4 602,9 


180 


4411,3 


4 431,8 


4 453,0 


4 475,1 


4 498,1 


4 522,1 


4 553,2 


4 587,1 


200 


4 401,8 


4 421.7 


4 442,4 


4 463,9 


4 486,3 


4 509,7 


4 539.4 


4 571.8 


220 


4 392,6 


4411.9 


4 432.1 


4 453,0 


4 474.9 


4 497,6 


4 526,0 


4 557,0 


240 


4 383.5 


4 402.4 


4 422.0 


4 442,4 


4 463.7 


4 485,9 


4 513,0 


4 542.7 


260 


4 374.7 


4 393,0 


4 412.2 


4 432,1 


4 452.9 


4 474,5 


4 500,4 


4 528.9 


280 


4 366.1 


4 383,9 


4 402.6 


4 422,0 


4 442,3 


4 463,4 


4 488,2 


4 515,5 


300 


4 357.7 


4 375,1 


4 393,2 


4 412,2 


4 432,0 


4 452.6 


4 476,3 


4 502.6 



'^^^^Te m parature 

Pressure ^**«». 

bar ^N^^^ 


240 


245 


250 


255 


260 


265 


270 


275 







- 


- 


- 


- 


- 





- 


20 


- 


- 


— 


- 


- 


- 


— 


40 


4 763,0 


4 817,0 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


60 


4 740,3 


4 791.7 


4 846,3 


4 904.3 


4 965,7 


- 


- 


- 


80 


4 718,7 


4 767,8 


4 820,0 


4 875,6 


4 934,5 


4 996,9 


5 062,8 


5 132.4 


100 


4 698,1 


4 745.0 


4 795,0 


4 848,3 


4 905,0 


4 965.1 


5 028,7 


5 096.9 

6 061,4 
5 028.8 


120 


4 678,3 


4 723,2 


4 771,2 


4 822.5 


4 877,0 


4 935.0 


4 996,4 


140 


4 659,4 


4 702,4 


4 748,6 


4 797.9 


4 850,5 


4 906,4 


4 965,8 


160 


4 641,3 


4 682,6 


4 726,9 
4 706,2 


4 774.4 


4 825,2 


4 879,3 


4 936,8 
4 909.2 


4 997.9 
4 968,5 
4 940.5 


180 


4 623,8 


4 663,5 


4 752,0 


4 801,1 


4 853.5 


200 


4 607,0 


4 645,2 


4 686.3 


4 730,6 


4 778,1 


4 828,8 


4 882,9 


220 


4 590.8 


4 627,6 


4 667,3 


4 710,1 


4 756,1 


4 805,3 


4 857,9 


4 913,9 


240 
260 


4 575,2 


4 610,6 


4 649.0 


4 690,4 


4 735,0 


4 782.8 


4 833,9 


4 888,4 


4 560.2 


4 594,3 


4 631,4 


4 671,5 
4 653,3 


4 714,7 
4 695,3 


4 761.2 


4 810,9 
4 788.9 
4 767.8^ 


4 864,1 
4 840,8 
4 818,4 


280 


4 545,6 


4 578,6 


4 614,5 


4 740.5 


300 


4 531,6 


4 563,4 


4 598,1 


4 635,8 


4 676,6 


4 720,6 



75 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



C.2 Accuracy of measurements 

The general principles for estimating the uncertainties in effi- 
ciency measurement by the thermodynamic method are given 
in 11.7. Complementary information on the evaluation and pro- 
pagation of the individual components of the errors is given in 
C.2.1 and C.2.2. 



C.2.1 Estimation of the uncertainty in the 
determination of the energies per unit mass 

C.2. 1.1 Hydraulic energy per unit mass 

Errors arising are: 

a I the relative er'or in the pressure difference measure- 
ment {p2 - p-[): SAp/Ap; 

b) the relative error in the determiriation of the mean value 
of the volume per unit mass: bV^J V„ 

Therefore the relative uncertainty bE^/E^ is given by the equa- 
tion 



8£| 



M ,/(i^^%^SK„\2 



X^pj 



c.2. 1.2 Mechanical energy per unit mass 
C.2.1.2.1 First equation in 11.1.2 
Errors arising are: 

a) the relative error in the pressure difference measure- 
ment (p2i ~ Pnl'- SAp/Ap; 

b) the relative error in the mean isothermal factor; ba/a; 

c) the relative error in the temperature difference: 
bAdlAd; 

6) the relative error in the mean specific heat capacity: 

e) the relative error in the corrections due to secondary 
phenomena: bAE^IE^. 

The absolute uncertainty in E^, bE^, is given by the equation 
(6EJ2 = (A/7-8a)2 + (a-6A/7)2 + (AO-bc^)^ + {c^bAO]^ 

Whence the relative uncertainty, , can be derived 



E, 



1 
u \p 



bay bApY 
^ ^\Ap 



'bc^,Y (bAoy 

^\aoI 




c.2. 1.2.2 Second equation in 11.1.2 
Errors arising are; 

a) the relative uncertainty in the enthalpy difference: 

b) the relative uncertainty in the corrections due to the 
secondary phenomena; 6A£rn''''^m- 

As previously, the uncertainty in the enthalpy difference takes 
into account the combination of the uncertainties in 
temperature measurements (errors in calibration, of measuring 
bridge, in reading), of those in pressure measurements and in 
determination of the enthalpies. 

Let b/i be the absolute total uncertainty in the determination of 
enthalpy, h. The relative uncertainty in the enthalpy difference 
is then 



6 (^21 ■" ^ll' 
^21 - ^n 



2bh 



M^ - '''II 



0pd 



The uncertainties in the velocity and altitude terms have 
generally a very small effect. 

C.2.1.3 Estimation of the uncertainty in corrections due 
to the secondary phenomena 

These phenomena are: 

a) heat exchange betvween surroundings and measure 
ment circuits at inlet and outlet; 

b) instability of energy at inlet; 

c) parasitic exchanges. 

It may be estimated that each correction is biased by an uncer- 
tainty equal to 10 % of its value and each corresponding 
relative uncertainty shall be evaluated by reference to E^, i.e: 

6/, bf2 



These residual errors being independent of each other, they 
shall be combined by the root sum square method. An estima- 
tion of the uncertainty in the mechanical energy per uTiit mass 
due to corrections is thus obtained : 



bAE, 




C.2.2 Relative uncertainty in efficiency 

The relative uncertainty, Stj/>], in the determination of the eHi 
ciency is then 



1 



S£h\2 






76 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Thus 



8^. 



8K 

y. 



1 + 



1 

aAp 






Y 1 /5ff\2 1 






^CpV 



/6A£'n 



1/? 



In the case of the partial expansion operating procedure, where the temperatures are equalized, the above equation reduces to 



n 






^r-er 






12 



77 



IS 13538: 1993 
180 5198:1987 



Annex D 



Other cavitation tests 



D.O Introduction 

The purpose of other cavitation tests is to allow the evaluation 
of the development of the cavitation from other criteria than 
the pump total head drop, i.e. : 

— development of cavitation cavities significantly ex- 
tended; 

— significant changes in sound-pressure level. 

The appearance of the phenomenon or of the detected effect 
generally arises at various (NPSH) values according to the 
criterion selected, as shown schematically in figure 38. 

It should be noted that the (NPSH) associated with each crite- 
rion allows the detection of the early effects of the cavitation 
and the sensitivity of a given impeller design to the cavitation 
under various flow conditions, but that no criterion is at this 
time available allowing connection of the (NPSH) values so 
defined with other effects such as erosion or vibrations. 



During these tests, the speed of rotation shall be kept constant 
within measurement errors. 



D.I Cavitation appearance visual test 

The net positive suction head associated with a defined onset 
of cavitation appearance visually detected, is denoted 
(NPSH),i3. 

In cavitation appearance visual tests, cavitation is induced by 
reducing (NPSH) or other changes progressively until cavities 
appear which have a significant characteristic length (a few 
millimetres), the length of the cavities being measured in the 
general direction of flow. 

Stroboscopic observations may be sufficient in many 
instances. For more accurate observations of cavitation 
appearance, photographic or high speed cinematographic 
techniques may be used. 



H- 



■D 




\ 

\ 




O > 






1 c 
•1 S? c 


\ 






Cavl 
char 
dime 






H i 










[l^KIDH 


/ 








100 


/ 




1 _ — __ _^ 



in 


LJ 


t-»TD > 


fD 


^^l—^^—m^ ^ ^ 


f " ^ 


xnix 


^ 


KIKIK! 


C/1 


Q- 



(NPSH) 



Figure 38 — Detected effect at various (NPSH) values according to criterion selected 



78 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198 : 1987 



Cavitation appearance tests necessitate some components of 
the pump or of the circuit being constructed of transparent 
materials at appropriate areas. For most pump designs, the test 
is usually only effective at flow below best efficiency point, the 
cavitation being difficult to observe on the pressure side of the 
impeller at higher flows. 

For the cavitation appearance tests described, the speed of 
rotation may deviate from the specified speed by ± 20 %. 
Nevertheless, taking into account the qualitative nature of the 
cavitation appearance criterion, a higher deviation may be ad- 
mitted by mutual agreement. Translation of results to the 
specified speed may be made using the relationship 



' <NPSH)-r = <I\IPSH) 



0.2 Cavitation onset determination by 
sound-pressure level measurement 

The net positive suction head associated with a significant 
cliange in the sound-pressure level is denoted (NPSHl^^ [fre- 
quency or frequency bands to be quoted with such (NPSH) 
figures]. When such a test is required, the amount of the 
sound-pressure change shall be specified in the contract. 

In these tests, cavitation varies in intensity by progressively 
varying the (NPSH) whilst maintaining a constant flow rate. 
The sound-pressure level in a given frequency band or at a 
given frequency is measured with each change of INPSH). 

To avoid the results being invalidated by mechanical or 
hydraulic phenomena related to the pump but not to cavitation, 
sound-pressure level tests should preferably be conducted 
above 10 kHz or at least five times the passing frequency that 
an impeller blade makes with a volute topgue, diffuser blades, 
or similar hydraulic passage. 



For arbitrary comparisons of cavitation performance on a 
sound-pressure level basis, octave bands with centre frequen- 
cies of 16 kHz and 31,5 kHz should preferably be used, unless it 
is shown that comparisons on this basis are invalid. In such 
cases, a smaller bandwidth (third octave), higher frequency 
band, or higher discrete frequency analysts may be used. 

Particular care is needed in these tests to ensure that cavitation 
noise from other parts of the test rig does not influence the 
assessments made from the test data. Cavitation may occur in 
areas such as wear rings, between shroud and casing, or at the 
impeller tip. This may produce changes in sound-pressure level 
which appear before, or dominate, the sound pressure level 
associated with the cavitation effect being investigated, which 
is generally located on the impeller blades. 

A hydrophone having a suitable frequency response for the 
tests to be carried out may be used. It should be mounted flush 
with the wall of the inlet pipe, preferably at a distance of one 
inlet diameter away irom the pump suction. 

If no special acoustical method and/or arrangement are used, 
sound pressure level measurement may only be made for ar- 
bitrary comparisons of cavitation performance <see 12.1). The 
use of hydrophones mounted in pipe wall recesses or externally 
mounted sound probes are acceptable. It should be noted that 
these methods may only be valid in measuring changes in 
sound-pressure and not absolute values because there are 
reflections and disturbances associated v^^ith the recess or 
effects of pipe wall stiffness and pipe system characteristics. 

Sound-pressure level measurement shall be made with an ap- 
paratus the sensitivity and accuracy of which are consistent 
with the change in sound -pressure level to be measured. 

The value of the sound-pressure level cannot be translated to a 
speed of rotation other than the speed at which the measure- 
ment has been made, but the value of (NPSHJa^. can be 
translated in the same way as in 0.1. 



19 



IS 13538: 1993 
ISO 5198: 1987 



Annex E 



Friction losses 



The equations given in 8.2.5 for calculating head loss due to 
friction involve a lengthy calculation which would lead in many 
cases to the conclusion that a correction need not be applied. 

Figure 39 may be used as a preliminary check as to whether a 
calculation need.? to be made. It applies to straight steel or 
wrought iron pipes of constant circular cross-section, handling 
cold water. Outlet and inlet pipes are assumed of equal 
diameter, and measuring points two diameters upstream and 
downstream of the inlet and outlet flanges, respectively. If the 
pipes are of different diameters, the diameter of the smaller 
pipe should be used. 

Then if "no correction" is indicated, the calculation need not be 
made. 

If correction is needed, the Moody graph (see figure 40) may be 
used, or the appropriate equations for X solved (see 8.2.5). For 
the pipe roughness k the values given in table 20 may be used. 



Table 20 — Typical values of equivalent uniform 
roughness A for pipes 

(Source: Marks, L.S. Mechanical Engineer's Handbook, 
McGraw-Hill, 1968.) 





Typical values of 




Commercial pipe Inew) 
material 


equivalent uniform roughness 
of the surface 

mm 


K 


Glass, drawn brass, copper 







or lead 




Steel (wrought) 


0,05 




Asphalted cast iron 


0,12 




Galvanized iron 


0.15 




Cast iron 


0.25 




Concrete 


0,3 to 3,0 




Riveted steel 


1,0 to 10,0 





m 



IS 1,3533 ; 1993 
180 5198:1987 






a. 

E 

3 
£1. 




a. 







1 



3 



4 5 6 

Velocity (m/s) 
Figure 39 — Graph showing valocities above whicf* hj.^s ■ orrQci ;..*is are ntquimd 

«1 



0,1 
0,09 

0.08 
0,07 
0,06 

0,05 
0.04 



■o 

(0 

i 0,03 



1 0,025 






I 0,02 



0,015 



0.01 

0,009 

0.008 




CO w 
O -I 

00 » 



00 <o 

■si 



CO 



■^iq 



c 
o 



0,001 
0.000 3 
0.000 6 
0.000 4 

0.000 2 
0,000 1 
0,000 05 



10^ 2 3 456 810^ 2 3 456 810^ 2 3 456 810^ 2 3 4 56 8 10^^2^4 56 8 # 



0.000 01 



Reynolds number. Re = 



UD 



0.000 
^0.000 001 



Figure 40 - Values of universal coefficient for head loss A (Moody graph) 



