**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  11850  (1998) :  Automotive  Vehicles  -  Odometer  Systems  - 
Method  of  Evaluation  [TED  4:  Automotive  Braking  Systems] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


1811850:1998 

HfZ^Uj    HH<h  (  Reaffirmed  2003 ) 

( wcH  ^"^^m ) 

Indian  Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES  —  ODOMETER  SYSTEMS  — 

METHOD  OF  EVALUATION 

(  First  Revision  ) 


ICS  43.040.30 


©BIS  1998 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN   STANDARDS 

MAN AK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  Z AFAR  M ARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

May  1998  Price  Group  2 


Automotive  Vehicles  Testing  and  Performance  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  TED  8 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  ( First  Revision )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Automotive  Vehicles  Testing  and  Performance  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by 
the  Transport  Engineering  Division  Council 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1986  and  the  revision  has  been  undertaken  to  update  its  contents  based 
on  the  experience  gained  over  the  years  in  the  usage  of  it. 

The  odometer  fitted  on  an  automotive  vehicle  is  one  of  the  important  instruments  on  the  dashboard  and  indicates 
not  only  the  distance  travelled  but  also  assists  the  driver  in  assessing  the  fuel  consumption  of  the  vehicle. 
Both  these  parameters  guide  the  vehicle  user  in  the  maintenance  schedules  and  also  in  the  measurement  of  the 
rate  of  fuel  consumption.  Hence  the  accuracy  of  this  instrument  is  of  paramount  importance.  Method  of  fuel 
consumption  rate  is  one  of  the  important  parameter  for  the  judging  the  performance  of  the  vehicle  and  this 
revision  is  an  important  adjunct  to  it.  Earlier  standard  covered  only  four  wheelers  and  this  revision  has  been 
undertaken  to  include  two  and  three  wheelers  also. 

The  committee  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  A. 

In  reporting  the  results  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed 
or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical 
\dlviQs{  revised  )\ 


IS  11850 :  1998 

Indian  Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES  —  ODOMETER  SYSTEMS  — 

METHOD  OF  EVALUATION 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  specifies  the  method  of  evaluation  of 
odometer  system  fitted  on  all  types  of  vehicles. 

2  PREPARATION  OF  THE  VEHICLE 

2.1  The  vehicle  shall  conform  in  all  its  parts, 
components  and  systems  to  the  design  and/or 
production  series  as  applicable. 

2.2  The  vehicle  shall  be  run  in  accordance  with  the 
practice  recommended  by  the  manufacturer 

2.3  The  vehicle  shall  be  loaded  to  the  maximum  total 
weight  specified  by  the  manufacturer  and  the  load 
distribution  amongst  axles  shall  be  as  specified  by  the 
manufacturer. 

2.4  The  vehicle  shall  be  fitted  with  tyres  which  have 
not  covered  more  than  10  percent  of  their  expected 
life.  Tread  depth  measurement  may  be  used  to  assess 
the  tyre  life.  The  tyres  shall  be  inflated  in  cold  condition 
to  the  pressure  as  recommended  by  the  vehicle 
manufacturer  corresponding  to  the  maximum  total 
weight. 

2.5  Prior  to  testing,  it  shall  be  ensured  that  all 
instruments  mounted  on  the  vehicle  shall  not  hamper 
the  visibility  or  freedom  of  the  driver  to  have  proper 
control  of  the  vehicle  at  all  the  times. 

3  EVALUATION  OF  CALIBRATION 

3. 1  The  vehicle  shall  be  driven  on  a  test  track  or  on  a 
roadway  (such  as  national  highway).  The  actual 
distance  covered  shall  not  be  less  than; 

10  km,  if  the  least  count  of  odometer  is  less  than 
1  km,  and 

30  km,  if  the  least  count  of  odometer  is  equal  to 
or  more  than  1km. 


Prior  to  testing  it  shall  be  ensured  that  the  last  digit 
of  the  odometer  shall  just  reach  the  next  digit  and  the 
same  shall  be  noted  as  initial  reference  point. 

3.2  The  actual  distance  travelled  may  be  ascertained 
by  either  of  the  following  methods: 

a)  By  recording  the  actual  distance  travelled  by 
the  vehicle,  by  using  instruments  such  as  fifth 
wheel  or  contactless  distance  measuring  system. 
In  that  case,  the  test  shall  be  conducted  in  such 
a  way  that  at  the  end  of  the  test,  the  last  digit 
of  the  odometer  shall  be  at  the  initial  reference 
point. 

b)  By  driving  the  vehicle  between  two  fixed  marks 
on  the  test  track,  the  distance  between  which 
has  already  been  established.  The  vehicle  shall 
be  continued  to  be  driven  till  the  last  digit  of 
the  odometer  reaches  the  initial  reference  point 
and  this  distance  shall  be  measured  by  a  tape 
and  added  to  the  distance  travelled.  The 
distance  indicated  on  the  odometer  shall  also 
be  recorded. 

3.3  The  test  shall  be  carried  out  twice  in  accordance 
with  3.1  and  3.2  and  each  one  shall  be  considered  as 
one  pass. 

3.4  Odometer  error  shall  be  calculated  as  under: 

Sum  of  indicated 
distance  on  odometer 
for  two  passes  minus 
sum  of  actual 
distances  travelled 
for  two  passes 


Odometer  error,  percent  = 


Sum  of  actual 
distances  travelled 
for  two  passes 


xlOO 


3.5    ihe  odometer  error  shall   not   exceed  ±10 
percent. 


IS  11850  :  1998 

ANNEX  A 

( Foreword  ) 

COMMTITEE  COMPOSITION 

Automotive  Vehicles  Testing  and  Performance  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  TED  8 


28 


Members 

Shri  R.  C.  Halakrishnan 
Shri  Rajat  Nandi 

Shri  S.  G.  Shah  {Alternate) 
JShri  V.  K.  Bhatia 

Shri  Hira  Lal  {Alternate) 
Shri  R  N.  Rangan 

Shri  K.  E,  Takavale  {Alternate) 
Shri  T.  M.  Balaraman 

Shri  V.  M.  Manel  {Alternate) 
Shri   V.  M.  Mundada 

Shri  R.  M.  Kanitkar  {Alternate) 
Shri  R.  S.  Dass 

Shr!  M.  L.  Mehta  {Alternate) 
Shri  S.  R.  Tapade 

Shri  R  C.  Harjatia  {Alternate) 
Shri  R  K.  Saha 

Major  F^alwinder  Singh  {Alternate) 
Shri  R  K.  Shakma 
Shr!  D.  B.  Jain 

Shri  S.  K.  (jaiham  {Alternate) 
Shri  S.  K.  Bharij 

Shri  R.  K.  I^ipathi  {Alternate) 
Shri  K.  C.  Jain 

Shri  R.  K.  (irpTA  {Alternate) 
Shri  R  V.  liHANHARE 
Shri  S.  B.  i\vY\.\ 

Shri  Har.ieet  Singh  {Alternate) 
Shri  U.  K.  Kim 

Shri  M.  (j,  Jhingran  {Alternate) 

Dr   K.   K.  CiANDHI 

Shri  Mukesh  Saxena  {Alternate) 
Shri  I.  V.  Rao 

Shri  B.  S.  Kaustuban  {Alternate) 
Shri  .  K.  Mukherjee 

Shri  Z,  A.  Mujawar  {Alternate) 
Shri  S.  N.  Srinivasan 

Shri  K.  D.  Dighe  {Alternate) 
Shri  V.  Mathur 

Shri  N.  Ranganathan  {Alternate) 


Chairman 

Shri  R.  Ramakrishnan 
I  Cross  Road,  Kasturi  Bai  Nagar,  Adyar, 
Chennai  600020 


Representing 

Ashok  Leyland  Ltd,  Chennai 

Association  of  Indian  Automobile  Manufacturers.  New  Delhi 

Association  of  State  Road  Transport  Undertakings,  New  Delhi 

Automotive  Research  Association  of  India,  Pune 

Bajaj  Auto  Ltd,  Pune 

Bajaj  Tempo  Ltd,  Pune 

Central  Farm  Machine  Training  and  Testing  Institute,  Budni 

Central  Institute  of  Road  Transport,  Pune 

ControllerateofQualityAssuranceVehicles,  Ministry  of  Defence, 
Ahmednagar 

Daewoo  Motors  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Directorate  General  of  Supplies  and  Disposals,  New  Delhi 

Department  of  Industrial  Development,  Mininstry  of  Industry, 
New  Delhi 

Escorts  Ltd,  Faridabad 

Kinetic  Engineering  Ltd,  Pune 
Hero  Honda  Motors  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Hindustan  Motors  Ltd,  Hooghly 

Indian  Institute  of  Petroleum,  Dehra  Dun 

Maruti  Udyog  Ltd,  Gurgaon 

Mahindra  and  Mahindra  Ltd,  Nasik 

Premier  Automobiles  Ltd.  Mumbai 

Royal  Enfield  Motors  Ltd.  Chennai 


(  Continued  on  page  3  ) 


(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 


IS  11850  :  1998 


Members 

Dr  Y.  Satyanarayana 

Shri  M.  L.  Gore  (Alternate) 
Shri  Lakhinder  Singh 

Shri  S.  R.  Agrahari  (Alternate) 
Shri  A.  T.  Pathak 

Shri  A.  V,  Krilaharni  (Alternate) 
Shri  R.  C,  Sethi 

Shri  R.  Rajaram  (Alternate) 
Shri  M.  K.  Mishra 

Shri  R.  G.  Karamore  (Alternate) 
Shri  A.  R.  Gulati, 
Director  (Transport  Engg) 


Representing 
Standing  Committee  (Technical  and  Stores)  CIRT,  Pune 

Swaraj  Mazda  Ltd,  Chandigarh 

Tata  Engineering  and  Loco  Co  Ltd,  Pune 

Vehicle  Research  and  Development  Establishment,  Ahmednagar 

Vehicle  Factory,  Ministry  of  Defence,  Jabalpur 

Director  General,  BIS  (Ex-officio  Member) 


Member-Secretary 

Shri  M.  V.  S.  D.  Prasada  Rao 
Joint  Director  (  Transport  Engg  ),  BIS 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1 986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards' are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  TED  8  (  260  ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  94  02,  323  33  75  (  Common  to 

all  offices  ) 

Regional  Offices:  Telephone 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  f  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110002  '  1  323  38  41 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola  f   337  84  99,  337  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700054  I  337  86  26,  337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  [  60  38  43 

1  60  20  25 

Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113  f  235  02  16,  235  04  42 

1      OT^ICIQ     01^T7    1« 


L 


^J^   IJ   i:^,  z-j-J  Z.J'  !_/ 


Western  :  ManakaUya,  E9  MIDC.  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  f  832  92  95, 832  78  58 

MXJMBAI  400093  I  832  78  91, 832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.   GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR. 
KANPUR.    LUCKNGW.    NAGPUR.     PATNA.     PUNE.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  i'ress,  Khurja,  India 


