**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 14791 (2000) : Prevention and Treatment of Blockage 
Problem in Drip Irrigation System - Code of Practice [FAD 
17: Farm Irrigation and Drainage Systems] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14791 : 2000 

Indian Standard 

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF BLOCKAGE 

PROBLEM IN DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



ICS 65.060.35 



© BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



June 2000 Price Group 6 



Irrigation and Farm Drainage Equipment and System Sectional Committee, FAD 54 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Irrigation and Farm Drainage Equipment and System Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food 
and Agriculture Division Council. 

The drip irrigation system is one of the modem irrigation techniques to economize the use of water in 
agriculture. It has a very high water use efficiency as it applies water directly to the plant root zone. 
Installation of drip irrigation system requires heavy initial investment. If proper care of the system is not 
taken during the operation, severe blockage problem is occurred which results in system failure. A need was 
therefore, felt to develop a standard code of practice for prevention of blockage problem in drip irrigation 
system to ensure trouble free operation and long term performance in the field. 

In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been provided by Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd, 
Jalgaon. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2: 1960. 'Rules for rounding of numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded ofT value, should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14791 : 2000 

Indian Standard 

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF BLOCKAGE 

PROBLEM IN DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

This standard specifies the guidelines for prevention 
and treatment of blockage problems in drip irrigation 
system. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below. 



IS No. 
10799:1999 

12785:1989 

14483 
(Part 1):1997 

14606:1998 
14743:1999 

3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Backwash - A procedure that flushes water 
llu-ough a filter tank in reverse direction to the normal 
operating direction so as to remove captured organic 
and inorganic particulate from the filter media. 

3.2 Blockage/Clogging of Dripline/Emitters or 
System - The drip irrigation line/emitters or system 
is considered to be partially or fully blocked/clogged 
due to mineral, organic matter or scale from pipes 
when the emission rate through the emitters is reduced 



Title 

Design installation and field 
evaluation of micro-irrigation 
system — Code of practice 
{first revision) 

Irrigation equipment — Strainer 
type filter — Specification 

Fertilizer and chemical injection 
system: Part 1 Venturi injector 

Irrigation equipment — Media 
filter — Specification 

Irrigation equipment — 
Hydrocyclone separators — 
Specification 



or there is non-uniformity of water distribuUon or 
there is total stoppage of emission of irrigation water 
through the drip system or one or more of the driplines 
or when a large number of emitters are blocked, 
provided that the rest of the drip irrigation system 
components are in normal operative condition. 

3.3 Loading Rate - The average concentration of 
suspended particulate in the irrigation source water, 
expressed in milligrams (dry mass) per litre of water 
(ppm). 

3.4 Media Filter - A filtrafion device that uses a 
bed of media to remove suspended organic and 
inorganic particles from the irrigation source water. 

3.5 p¥L - The inverse of the logarithm of hydrogen 
ion concentration. The />H equal to 7 represents 
normal water. Less than 7 is acidic and more than 
7 is alkaline. 

3.6 Strainer-iype Filter (Strainer) - An appliance 
containing one or more filtrating elements, used for 
separating suspended solids from the water flowing 
through the appliance and collecting them on the 
face of the filter element. 

3.7 Sodium Absorption Ratio {SAK) - A ratio for 
soil extracts and irrigation water used to express the 
relative activity of sodium ions in exchange reactors 
with soil and calculated as follows: 



SAR = 



Na"^ 



^(ca^-^-HMg-^^)/: 



where 

ionic concentration is expressed in meql. 

BAR of soil can be classified as under: 



Class 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Very high 



SAR Range 
below 10 
10-18 
18-26 
above 26 



I 



IS 14791 : 2000 



3.8 Total Suspended Solids (TSS) - Suspended 
solids in the source water include soil particles 
ranging in size from coarse sand to fine clays, living 
organisms including algae, bacteria, plant debris, 
plant roots, leaves, small fishes and a wide variety of 
miscellaneous water borne matter. 

3.9 Chemical Injector - An appliance used for 
chemical treatment and/or injecting other chemicals 
in the drip irrigation system. 

4 QUALITY OF WATER 

Source of water shall be analyzed carefully for drip 
irrigation systems as the blockage problems are closely 
associated with the quality of water. A representative 
water sample shall be collected for testing. 

4.1 Tests 

The tests should be carried out on the sample to 
determine the following parameters of water quality: 

a) Suspended solids size k) Carbonate 
and quantity 

b) pH m) Chloride 

c) Calcium n) Sulphate 

d) Magnesium p) Nitrate 

e) Sodium q) Boron 

f) Potassium r) Sulphide 

g) Iron s) Presence of oil 

h) Manganese t) E.C. (Electrical 

conductivity, 
millimhos/cm) 

j) Bicarbonates u) Total solids 

4.2 Water Sampling 

If the water source is a well or bore well, the sample 
should be collected after the pump has run for at 
least half an hour. While collecting samples from a 
lake, river, reservoir, etc, the samples should be taken 
near the centre and below the water surface. In case 
of seasonal variations in source water quality, the 
sample should be taken when the water quality is at 
its worst. 

About 1 000 ml water sample should be collected in 
a clean colourless glass bottle having well fitted glass 
stopper. Before collecting sample, the bottle should 
be rinsed and cleaned thoroughly at least three times 
with water sample before the final sample is drawn. 
The samples should be labelled properly and sent 
immediately to a water test laboratory. 

Ceriain tests, such as iron, residual chlorine content 
and pH, should desirably be carried out on test site, 
as their results are subject to change till tlie samples 
are taken to the laboratory. 



4.3 Water Analysis Interpretation 

The water analysis can be interpreted as given in 
Table I. 

4.3.1 Suspended Solids 

Suspended solids in the water supply include soil 
particles ranging in size from coarse sands to fine 
clays, living organism including algae and bacterial 
and a wide variety of water borne matter. Where the 
supply water has more than 200 ppm suspended 
solids, a settling basin is recommended prior to the 
regular filter. 

4.3.2 Electrical Conductivity 

Salinity may be expressed as electrical conductivity 
(EC) in mmho/cm or as total dissolved solids (TDS) 
in ppm, with 1.0 mmho/cm = 640 ppm approximately. 

4.3.3 pR 

The pH of source water used for irrigation is normally 
within a range of 6.5 to 8.5. Water pH. may help or 
hinder the action of chlorine used for control of 
biological growth. pH is indicative of dissolved solids 
present in the water, such as iron/calcium caibonate 
which will precipitate out to cause emitter clogging. 

4.3.4 Calcium (Ca) 

Generally, an irrigation water high in dissolved 
calcium is desirable as it permits water to penetrate 
easily and does not puddle. It is good for light soils 
to improve their physical properties. 

4.3.5 Magnesium (Mg) 

It behaves like calcium in the soil. Usually found in 
measurable amounts. Reported as Ca + Mg in test 
reports. 

4.3.6 Sodium (Na) 

A soil with a large amount of sodium associated with 
clay fraction has poor physical properties for plant 
growth. The soil becomes sticky and impervious. 

4.3.7 Potassium (K) 

It is usually found in only small amounts in natural 
waters. It behaves like sodium in the soil and reported 
as Na + K in test reports. 

4.3.8 Iron (Fe) 

Iron as low as 0. 1 ppm in a soluble ferrous form may 
create emitter clogging problem. Dissolve iron may 
precipitate out of water due to change in temperature 
or pressure, in response to rise in pU or through the 
action of bacteria. The result is a ochre sludge or 
slime mass capable of clogging the entire system. 



Table 1 Interpretation of Water Analysis 

{Clause 4.3) 



IS 14791 : 2000 



SI No. 



Parameters 



(1) 


(2) 


i) 


pH 


ii) 


Electrical Conductivity 




(Salinity) 


iii) 


Total dissolved solids 


iv) 


Hardness 


V) 


Calcium 


vi) 


Magnesium 


vii) 


Carbonate 


viii) 


Bicarbonate 


ix) 


Chloride (Toxic) 


X) 


Sulphates 


xi) 


Sodium 


xii) 


SAR 


xiii) 


Potassium 


xiv) 


Sulphides 


x-v) 


Iron 


xvi) 


Manganese 


xvii) 


Suspended solids 


xviii) 


Permeability 




a) Caused by low salts 




(EC) 




b) Caused by sodium 


xix) 


Toxicity 




a) Sodium 




b) Chloride 




c) Boron 


XX) 


Clogging 




a) Iron 




b) Manganese 




c) Sulphides 




d) Calcium carbonates 





Degree of Presence/Problem 
A 




Unit 


Normal 


Higher 


Extreme 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 




7 


<7 Acidic 


>7A 


mmhos/cm 


<0.8 


0.8-3.0 


>3.0 


ppm 


<500 


500-600 


>600 


ppm 


<200 


200-300 


>300 


ppin 


<60 


60-100 


>100 


ppm 


<25 


25-40 


>40 


ppm 


<200 


200-600 


>600 


ppm 


<200 


200-600 


>600 


ppm 


<140 


140-350 


>350 


ppm 


<20 


20-50 


>50 


ppm 


<100 


100-200 


>200 


- 


<3 


3-9 


>9 


ppm 


<10 


10-20 


>20 


ppm 


<15 


15-25 


>25 


ppm 


<0.1 


0.1-0.4 


>0.4 


ppm 


<0.2 


0.2-0.4 


>0.4 


ppm 


<10 


10-100 


>100 


mmho/cm 


>0.5 


0.5-0.2 


<0.2 


SAR 


<6.0 


6.0-9.0 


>9.0 


ppm 
ppm 
ppm 


<3.0 
<140 
<0.5 


3.0-9.0 

140-350 

0.5-2.0 


>9.0 
>350 
>2.0 


ppm 
ppm 
ppm 
ppm 


<0.1 
<0.2 
<0.1 


0.1-0.4 

0.2-0.4 

0.1-0.2 

No levels established 


>0.4 
>0.4 
>0.4 



4.3.9 Manganese (Mn) 

Like iron, manganese in solution may precipitate out 
as a result of chemical or biological activity. 

4.3.10 Bicarbonate (HCO,) 

Bicarbonate is common in natural waters. Sodium 
and potassium bicarbonates can exist as solid salts. 
Calcium and magnesum bicarbonats exist only in 
solution. As the moisture in the soil is reduced by 
transpiration or by evaporation, insoluble calcium or 
magnesium carbonates are formed. Calcium dominant 
soils can become a sodium dominant (Sodic) soil by 
the use of bicarbonate irrigation water. 



4.3.11 Carbonate (CO,) 

Carbonate is found in some waters. Calcium and 
magnesium carbonates are relatively insoluble. But 
the cations associated with high carbonate waters are 
likely to be sodium with a small amount of potassium. 
Upon drying in the soil, the carbonate ion will remove 
calcium and magnesium from clay by a process 
similar to that of bicaibonates and a alkali (Sodic) 
soil will develop. 

4.3.12 Chloride (CI) 

Chloride is found in all natural waters. It is toxic to 
some plants in high concentration. All common 



IS 14791 : 2000 

chlorides are soluble and contribute to the total salt 
contents (salinity) of soils. 

4.3.13 Sulphate (SO,) 

It is abundant in nature. Sodium, magnesium and 
potassium sulphates are readily soluble. Calcium 
sulphate has a limited solubility. Sulphate has no 
characteristic action on the soil except to contribute 
to the total salt content. 

4.3.14 Nitrate (NO,) 

Not commonly found in large amounts in natural 
waters. Nitrates contribute slightly to the salinity of 
soil. 

In small amount, it acts as a plant nutrient but high 
levels indicate excessive use of fertilizers. 

4.3.15 Boron (B) 

Small amount of Boron is essential for plant growth, 
but higher concentrations are toxic to plants. 



4.3.16 Sulphides 

With concentration of more than 0. 1 ppm of total 
sulphides, sulphur bacteria may grow within the 
irrigation system, forming masses of shme which may 
clog filters and emitters. 

4.3.17 Presence of Oil 

Oil or lubricant contamination will cause almost any 
filter to rapidly plug up. Screens need to be cleaned 
with a solvent and often sand media must be 
completely replaced. The solution to oil problem is 
generally the elimination of oil by skimming it off or 
by drawing water from lower levels well below the 
water surface. 
5 CHEMICAL TREATMENT DEVICES 

Chemicals may be injected into the micro-irrigation 
systems by the use of injector pumps, venturi suction 
devices (venturi injector) or differential pressure tanks 
as illustrated in Fig. 1. 




Fig. 1 Chemical Injection Devices 
4 



IS 14791 : 2000 



5.1 Venturi Injector 

Venturi injector shall comply with the requirement 
of IS 14483 (Part 1). Venturi injectors are useful on 
smaller systems. They generally have a significant 
head loss across them, and this limits their use on 
larger systems. 

5.2 Injector Pumps 

These are positive displacement pumps of either piston 
or diaphragm type, which are powered by an external 
power source such as electric, a portable gasoline 
engine or hydraulically operated using the pressiure 
of water in the irrigation line. Injection rate can be 
regulated precisely and chemicals can be injected at 
constant concentration using the injector pump. 

5.3 Differential Pressure Tanks 

These are simple and reliable devices. They should 
be used where a gross chemical application is to be 
undertaken without regard to the concentration of 
the chemical. The rate of concentration decreases with 
greater outflow of the chemical. 

6 BLOCKAGE PROBLEMS IN DRIP 
IRRIGATION SYSTEM 

6.1 Types of contaminants and other factors leading 
to blockage problems can be classified as under. 

6.1.1 Solid Contaminants 

These include soil particles, living or dead oi^ganic 
materials, algae and bacteria slime, seeds and scale 
from rusty pipes and filters. Any other solid matter 
such as pieces of polyethylene pipe shavings, rags, 
teflon tape and insects present in irrigation water 
which are not adequately filtered out, tend to settle 
as sediments in the pipe lines and cause plugging of 
the orifices or emitters. 

6.1.2 Dissolved Contaminants — Biological or 
Chemical Clogging Problem 

Calcium carbonate, magnesium caibonate, iron oxide, 
manganese dioxide which may grow aggregate or 
precipitate in water as it stands in the lines or 
evaporates from emitters or orifices between 
irrigations. 

6.1.3 The emitters can become clogged as a result of 
roots growing into and blocking the dripline orifices 
or emitters. 

6.1.4 Emitter Suck-back 

The emitter can become clogged as a result of the 
fine soil material being sucked-back into dripline/ 
emitters at the end of an irrigation cycle when the 
system is draining oVer a period of time these particles 
cement together inside the emitter orifice reducing 
discharge rates and in the extreme blocking the 
emitter altogether. 



6.1.5 Physical Blockage of Dripline/Lateral 

Soil over-burden, farm machinery trafiic, rocks, plant 
stalks lodging of sugar canes, and roots will tend to 
pinch the lateral thus blocking or reducing the flow 
of irrigation water through the lateral or dripline. 

6.1.6 Failure of Main Filtration System 

Selection of improper, rounded, poor graded filtration 
media for sand filter or incorrect mesh size of the 
screen filter. 

6.1.7 Poor Maintenance of the System 

Lower frequency and lower efficiency of flushing the 
submain and the laterals. 

6.1.8 Quality of Water See 4. 

7 METHOD OF ASSESSMENT OF 
BLOCKAGE PROBLEM 

7.1 Driplines on Ground Surface 

When driplines are laid on the surface, the degree of 
blockage can be checked by means of visual inspection 
and measuring the amount and uniformity of 
discharge through the emitters or orifices and 
comparing it with the specified discharge. 

7.2 Dripline Buried Under Ground 

When driplines are buried, it is not possible to check 
individual emitters or orifices by visual inspection 
and the flow rates in the driplines should be checked 
by one or more of the following methods: 

a) By inserting a pressure gauge into the tail 
end of the dripline. 

b) By measuring wetted perimeter. 

c) Visual inspection of the field block for uneven 
growth of crop. 

d) Measurement of discharge. 

8 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF 
BLOCKAGE PROBLEM 

8.1 Physical Tk%atment 

Water sources for micro irrigation include municipal 
water, reservoirs, rivers, canals and ground water. 
Solids should be removed to prevent pump wear, 
emitter plugging, plugging of valves and clogging of 
pipe lines. As a thumb rule, in case of emitters, all 
particles greater than one-tenth the minimum flow 
path dimension of the emitter, shall be removed from 
the water to prevent emitter plugging by 'bridging'. 
Therefore, the filter should remove particles down to 
0.03 to 0.18 mm diameter size. For micro sprinklers 
with large and simple orifices, removal of particles 
one-seventh the orifice diameter is generally 
considered sufficient. 



IS 14791 : 2000 



8.1.1 Following types of filtration can be used in 
micro-irrigation for removal of solids from water 

8.1.1.1 Reservoirs (settling basins) 

Reservoirs act as settling basins for sand and silt. 
However, it has got some disadvantages like, 
introduction of organic matter, reduction in irrigable 
land and maintenance problems. They should be used 
for turbulent surface water sources, such as streams 
or ditches. Settling basins can also be used in 
conjunction with aeration to remove iron and other 
dissolved solids. 

8.1.1.2 Pre-screening 

Pre-screening removes large contaminates which 
might cause fouling or excessive back flushing of 
downstream filters. Rotating conveyer belt type 
screens, and self cleaning cylindrical screens should 
be used as pre-cleaners at pump intakes. 

8.1.1.3 Hydrocyclone filters 

Hydrocyclone filters conforming to IS 14743 should 
be used. They remove sand and scale and are very 
efiective if sized properly and the flow rates remain 
relatively constant Centrifiigal sand separators remove 
particles of sizes of 75 microns (200 mesh) or above. 
They require minimum maintenance. However, they 
do not remove organic material and head loss across 
the separators is higher (1.5 to 5 N/cm^). 

8.1.1.4 Media filters 

Media filters conforming to IS 14606 shall be used. 
In media filters high flow rates are passed through 
sand tanks to remove large volumes of organic and 
inorganic contaminates. Sand is sized to provide the 
required degree of filtration. Automatic or manual 
back flushing at preset or periodic intervals removes 
the entrapped suspended impurities which are drained 
into the effluent water. 

8.1. 1.5 Screen filters 

Screen filters conforming to IS 12785 shall be used. 
Tubular screens provide low capacity emergency 
filtration. They should be used as backups to primary 
filtration devices, or in visually clean water situations. 
Some screens have an internal vacuum cleaning 
mechanism that provides frequent and effective 
cleaning, allowing their use in dirtier situations. The 
screen sizes may range from 80 to 200 mesh (175 
microns to 74 microns). The aperture size of the 
screen opening should be between one-seventh and 
one-tenth of the orifice size of the emission devices 
used. 

8.1.1.6 Gravity screen filters 

Gravity screens provide high capacity primary 
filtration. They are typically self cleaning. Water 



cascades on to a very tight fine mesh screen fitted 
between two chambers. Contaminations are washed 
to the edge of the screen and the clean water passes 
through the screen fabric to a lower chamber where 
it is picked up by a booster pump and delivered to 
the drip system. The pressure losses across the gravity 
screen are negligible. These filters should be used in 
systems where pressure losses are required to be 
minimized. 

8.1.1.7 Disc filters 

Disc filter is a hybrid between a media tank and a 
tubular screen. They can be compared with a stack of 
circular discs, each disc has a cross hatch pattern of 
grooves of the appropriate depth to provide the 
required filtration. Water passes between the discs 
through grooves. These filters with an automatic 
backfiush features are also available. 

8.2 Flushing of Irrigation Piping 

Mains, sub-mains and laterals should be flushed 
periodically to remove the settled impurities vnthin 
the piping system. The flushing water velocity shall 
be sufBcient (more than 1.2 m/sec) to remove the 
contaminates settled within the pipes. A variety of 
flush valves and drain valves are available to 
accomplish this in an efficient way. Flushing should 
be carried out regularly at an interval of 7 days to 
10 days. The impurities present in water during 
flushing should be observed carefully and flushing 
should be stopped when the clean water starts 
flowing out. 

8.3 Chemical Treatment 

Chemical treatment is done to control the biological 
growth bacterial precipitation of iron and sulphur, 
chemical precipitation of iron, calcium and to inhibit 
the growth of algae and micro-organisms. 

A general decrease in flow rates may be the first 
symptom of potentially major biological or chemical 
clogging problem within the system. This type of 
problem is vety easy to treat if noticed in early stages 
of clogging. Partially open clogged emitters or orifices 
can be treated more effectively with chemicals than 
the totally blocked emitters or orifices which cannot 
admit chemicals for desired action. 

8.3.1 Bacterial Precipitation of Iron 

There are certain forms of bacteria which can produce 
precipitation of insoluble ferric oxide by oxidizing 
soluble ferrous oxide. This could occur with iron 
concentration as low as 0.1 ppm. The iron precipitate 
forms as a red filaments sludge which can attack to 
PVC and polyethylene tubing and may completely 
block emitters. 

To prevent the bacterial precipitation of iron, 
chlorination should be performed continuously at the 



rate of 1 ppm free available chlorine or intermittently 
at the rate of 10 to 20 ppm for 30 to 60 minutes 
daily. 

In case of well water, superchloiination of well should 
be done by injecting 200 to 500 ppm chlorine based 
on estimated volimie of water quantity in the well to 
reduce the problem. 

8.3.2 Bacterial Precipitation of Sulphur 

Bacteria can produce an organic sulphur slime if the 
water contains more than 0. 1 ppm of total sulphides. 
These bacteria produce white cottony masses of slime 
which may completely block the emitting devices. 

Problems can also be created by iron and sulphur 
interactions and precipitation of iron sulphide on 
stainless steel filter screen if the concentration of 
sulphides is high in water. Insoluble iron sulphides 
are formed by chemical reaction between dissolved 
iron and sulphides. 

Sulphur slime bacteria should be controlled by 
intermittent chlorination at I ppm of free chlorine, 
as measured in the field, for 30 to 60 minutes on 
daily basis. 

8.3.3 Chemical Precipitation of Iron 

Any dissolved iron in water is generally found in the 
ferrous form as ferrous oxide. Once the water is in 
the irrigation system, the conditions are favourable 
for precipitation of iron particularly between irrigation 
cycles. Even at 0. 1 ppm level of iron the precipitation 
may be accelerated by injection of unchelated 
phosphates or calcium salts. 

The problem of chemical precipitation of iron can be 
controlled by removing the iron from the water or by 
retaining the iron in solution. For this purpose 
following techniques are recommended. 

8.3.3.1 Aeration and settling 

This system operates by thoroughly aerating the water 
on entry to settling basin. The device such as sprayer 
allows the incorporation of large amounts of oxygen 
into the water, which oxidizes the ferrous oxide to 
ferric oxide. The ferric oxide precipitates out of the 
water and settles down to the bottom of the basin, 
provided sufficient settling time is allowed. 

Pumping from well with iron bearing water shall 
need double pumping without corresponding higher 
energy costs because the total head remains the same. 

8.3.3.2 Chlorine precipitation 

Free chlorine instantly oxidizes ferrous oxide to ferric 
oxide which then precipitates out of solution. The 
chlorine mixing should be thorough and precipitation 
should be completed prior to filtration of water 
through a sand media filter with automatic backwash 
system. 



IS 14791 ^ 2000 

One ppm of free chlorine is injected for each 
0.7 ppm of iron and some additional chlorine is 
required to kill any iron bacteria and to control the 
growth of bacteria slime. Chlorination precipitation 
is more expensive than aeration process and should 
be considered as a second choice where aeration is 
not feasible. 

NOTE — If manganese is present along wHh iron, the precipitation 
of manganese is slower than that of iron and it may precipitate 
after filter which results in clogging problems in the system. 

8.3.3.3 pR control 

Iron is more soluble at lower />H values. Acid niayl)e 
injected to maintain the iron in solution or may be 
used to periodically dissolve iron sediments which 
have built up over a period of lime. The pR should 
be reduced to 4 or less for a period of 30 to 60 
minutes. This dissolves the iron and flushes it from 
the system. 

8.4 Precipitation of Calcium Salts 

The calcium precipitation is common with most of 
the waters and appears as a white scale for plating 
on the iimer surfaces of the system. This problem 
can be easily corrected By injection of acid at a rate 
such that ihepH. is lowered to less than 4 for between 
30 to 60 minutes This shall be done before total 
blockage of the emitters occurs. 

The acid used for treatment may be connmercial grade 
hydrochloric acid (HCl) 33 to 35 percent, sulphuric 
acid (HjSO^) 70 percent, nitric acid (HNO,) 60 percent 
and phosphoric acid (H^PO^) 85 percent strength. 
Crops like grape and strawberries are sensitive to 
chlorides and hence acids other than HCl should be 
used. 

8.5 Algae Control 

If Ca** + Mg*^ is less than 5 ppm, copper sulphate 
should be injected otherwise chlorine should be 
injected to control various types of algae. The doses 
of copper sulphate vary from 0.07 ppm to a maximum 
of 5 ppm depending upon the type of algae. For 
chlorination, the doses range from 0.3 to 2 ppm. 
However, a standard dose of copper sulphate of 
1.2 ppm is recommended for all types of algae. 
Smaller amounts are often sufficient as prophylactic 
doses to prevent trouble. Use of copper sidphate is 
hazardous for human and animal life, as this water 
should not be consumed by them. It should be carried 
out in presence of skilled and knowledgeable persons. 

8.6 Emitter Clogging by Roots 

Blockages caused by the roots growing into emitters 
and orifices can be prevented by the regular 
application of a root inhibitor such as trifiuralin at a 
rate of 0.1 ml per emitter or orifice. The first 
application should be made of 4 to 6 weeks after 
planting. Subsequent applications should be made at 
an interval of 4 to 6 months. 



IS 14791 : 2000 



Root inhibitors such as trifluorine can be used to 
protect surface emitters against root intrusion. Root 
inhibitors are fused into the emitters during the 
manufacturing process which protects drip system 
for a long time. 

8.7 Emitter Suckback 

The emitter suckback can be reduced by following 
ways: 

a) Ensuring that the field main is at the same 
level or higher than the driplines as this 
enables air to enter the driplines from the air 
relief valve on the riser, 

b) Leaving the first 2 or 3 emitters of a dripline 
above ground so that they can act as air relief 
valves when the system is draining, 

c) Adding of air release valve (double action), 
and 

d) Installation of non-return valve at appropriate 
location. 

8.8 Failure of Main Filtration 

Media filter, screen filter or back-up filters may get 
damaged due to excessive pressure build up and a 
puncture may develop. The sand media or 
contaminates in that case would travel through the 
pipe lines and laterals and block the system. It would 
be necessary to repair or replace the defective filter 
and clean up the system by flushing and cleaning the 
drippers. 

8.8.1 Selection of improper, rounded, poorly graded 
filtration media or incorrect mesh size or too coarse 
a sand will result in poor filtration and lead to 
clogging of irrigation system. The sand used as 
filtration media should be clean, coarse, sharp edged 
and free from excessive fines. A uniformity coefficient 
should be close to 1. 5 which is considered good. The 
higher mesh size of the screen filter allows organic 
and inorganic contaminates to pass and clog the 
system. To solve this problem proper type of filter 
that gives the desired quality of filtered water should 
be selected. The particle size of contaminate that 
passes through the water should not be greater than 
one-seventh to one-tenth that of opening size of the 
emitter or orifice. 

8.9 Poor Maintenance of the System 

Conscientious and regular system maintenance is a 
vital part of the drip irrigation system management. 
The drip irrigation systems tend to fail dramatically 
when not maintained correctiy. 

8.9.1 Filters 

Filters should be checked visually for leaks and the 
clarity of water that has passed through the filters 
should be inspected regularly. Sand level should also 
be checked and maintained. 



8.9.2 Chemical Injector Maintenance 

All injection equipment should be cleaned or flushed 
when not in use, as most of the chemicals that are 
injected into drip systems are corrosive. Injection rate 
should be verified at regular intervals. 

8.9.3 Distribution System 

All pipelines and driplines should be flushed once in 
7 days to 10 days or after repairs are made to avoid 
extraneous material entering the driplines. Discharge 
through the laterals and drippers should be checked 
at least once in three months in the initial stages and 
close watch should be exercised on the uniformity of 
growth of the plantations and signs of leakages or 
breakages of the pipe lines, check pressures in the 
lines. 

9 CHEMICAL TREATMENT 

9.1 Chlorine Treatment 

Chlorination of irrigation water used for drip irrigation 
is required to help prevent the agglomeration of fine 
organic and inorganic particles with bacterial 
byproducts. A chlorination treatment programme is 
regulated by the severity of the plugging problem. 
Weekly or even bi-weekly treatments may have to be 
employed depending on Ihe severity. In order to obtain 
optimum results the cl lorine must be injected at the 
right concentration for the required interval of time. 

9.1.1 In order to have effective chlorination 
following points should be considered when installing 
and operating a chlorination unit: 

a) The duration of chlorine setting inside the 
irrigation system is more important than 
concentiation. 

b) The maximum chlorine concentration injected 
should not exceed 20 ppm. Concentration 
exceeding 20 ppm may precipitate solids that 
could plug drippers. 

c) Chlorine should always be injected before the 
screen filter (strainer filter) so that any 
precipitates can be filtered out of the water. 

d) Chlorine is commercially available in the 
following forms: 

1) Liquid — Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) 

2) Solid granules — Calcium hypochlorite 
Ga(OCl)j 

3) Gas — Gaseous chlorine (Clj ) 

Sodium hypochlorite is a better source of chlorine for 
chlorinate of drip system. Use of calcium hypochlorite 
is not recommended if the irrigation water already 
contains a high concentration of Ca (in excess of 
20 ppm). Gaseous chlorine sources are expensive and 
difficult to obtain and apply and normally not used 
for treatment of irrigation water. 



8 



IS 14791 : 2000 



9.1.2 Calculating the Amount to Inject 

9.1.2.1 Chlorine in liquid form — Sodium 
hypochlorite 

Commercial sodium hypochlorite (common bleach) 
has 12 percent available chlorine but can also be 
made available in 16 percent or 18 percent. Calcium 
hypochlorite is available with 70 percent chlorine 
but it is in granular form and therefore required pre- 
mixing. The formula to calculate the injection rate of 
the chlorine solution is as follows: 



X = 



Qyc, 



w 



lOOOgCjj 



where 

X = Quantity of bleach (kg/h) or liquid in 
1/h for the same concentration,, 

Q = Discharge of system in 1/h, 

q = Output of injection device in 1/h, 

V = Volume of tank in litres, 

C = Desired concentration of chlorine in 

w 

irrigation water, ppm, and 

Cj^ = Concentration of chlorine in the bleach 
in percentage. 

9.1.2.2 Chlorine in gaseous form (100 percent 
available Cy 

The injection rate of chlorine gas shall be determined 
by using following formula: 

where 

q = Injection rate in 1/h, 

Q = System flow rate in 1/s, and 

C = Chlorine concentration in ppm. 

9.1.2.3 Chlorine in solid form — Calcium 
hypochlorite Ca (OCl)j 

It is available commercially as a 'bleaching powder' 
or as granules. Around 65 percent chlorine is available 
from calcium hypochlorite. A stock solution of the 
desired strength may be mixed and used in the same 
manner as sodium hypochlorite solutions. Quantity 
of solid chlorine shall be determined by following 
formula: 



360 C 



where 



q = Injection rate in 1/h, 

Q = System flow rate in 1/s, 

C = Chlorine concentration in ppm, and 

S = Available free chlorine in percent. 



9.1.3 Time of Approach of Chlorine at the Farthest 
Point 

The time that the chlorine solution takes to reach the 
end of the dripline of the field or block to be 
chlorinated shall be established by injecting a coloured 
solution and noting the time it takes to reach the last 
emitter farthest from the injection point, whereas the 
volume of chlorinated water is established by 
calculating the injection rate multiplied by time of 
application. 

9.2 Acid TVeatment 

Adding acid to the irrigation water will lower the pR 
and reduce the amount of chemical precipitates. If a 
sodium hypochlorite is used for chlorination of water 
that has />H value of 8.0 or higher, acid should be 
used simultaneously to keep the pH value in the 
7.0 to 8.0 range. 

The pH level is also important for bacterial control 
as the active component in chlorination is more 
abundant at lower pH values. 

For acid treatment either hydrochloric acid or 
sulphuric acid is used. Commercial grade hydrochloric 
acid (HCL) is available in the market having 
concentration of 36 percent. Commercially grade 
sulphuric acid ( H^SO^) is available with 95 percent 
concentration. All acids are hazardous and should be 
used very carefully imder all possible protection. 
'ALWAYS ADD ACID TO WATER AND NEVER 
ADD WATER TO ACID'. 

The concentration of acid in water shall not be more 
than 2 percent. 

9.2.1 Recommended Procedure for Acid Treatment 

a) Test a flow rate of at least 25 drippers on one 
submain. If the variation in discharge is found 
more than 10 percent of that of designed flow 
rate, then acid treatment is required. 

b) Observe the orifice of dripper carefiilly and 
check the accumulation of salts or precipitates 
at orifice and surface of ground. If it is found 
then acid treatment is required. 

c) Refer the water analysis report and as per the 
recommendation from laboratory use the right 
type and concentration of acid to be injected. 

d) Set the injection device and set the desired 
injection rate on the basis of average dischai;ge 
rate and pressure for first 20 minutes (Desired 
injection rate has to be fixed by water only.). 

e) After setting the injection rate prepare a stock 
solution of acid in the containers of non- 
corrosive material. 



IS 14791 : 2000 

f) Start the injection device and inject the stock 
solution (acidic water) into the system. 

g) After 20 min check the pR value of water of 
the last dripper with the help ofpH paper. 

ii) Repeat the same procedure until you get 4 pH 
at the last dripper. 

j) Then shutdown the system for 24 Jiours. 

k) On next day open the flush valves and lateral 
ends, start the system and allow the 
accumulated acidic water and salts in the 
system to flush out. 

m) Also allow the system to run 30 minutes at 
beginning, so that concentrated acidic water 
in soil gets diluted. 

9.2.2 Quantity of Acid to be Injected 

Quantity of acid to be injected shall be determined by 
the following formula: 

Acid required corresponding 
to the equivalent acid factor 
for 1 000 1 of water (A) in 
ml X Volume of water inside 
the pipe line to be acidified 
(5) in ml 



Total acid required 
(Q in litres 



1 000 000 



where 

A is determined from Table 2, 
B is calculated on the basis of length and 
internal diameter of the complete piping 
system. 

9.2.3 Interval and Duration 

9.2.3.1 Interval of acid treatment depends on the 
concentration of salts in water. 

9.2.3.2 Duration of treatment has to be decided 
practically until pR is reduced to 4 at the last end 
dripper. 

9.2.4 Dosage Period 

Water travels about 1 m every 3 seconds through 
drip system while doing chemigation. To ensure that 
the entire system is treated, divide the maximum 
distance of the piping from the chemigation point 
in m by 20. This gives the minimum dosage time in 
minutes. 

9.2.5 Other Requirements 

a) After the treatment do not inject any type of 
fertilizers into the system. Fertilizer should 
be applied on next day or after completion of 
irrigation. 

b) Chlorine and acid treatment should not be 
performed at the same time. They should be 
gap of at least two weeks of system use. 



Table 2 Acid Requirement for Each 1 000 litre of Water 

{Clause 9.2.2) 



Acid Factor" 


HjSO 


, (95 Percent) 


HCL (36 Percent) 


Phosphoric Add (85 Percent)" 






(ml) 


(ml) 


(ml) 


2 




55 


165 


530 


4 




110 


340 


1060 


6 




165 


500 


1 590 


8 




220 


670 


2 120 


10 




280 


840 


2 650 


15 




415 


1280 


3 975 


20 




555 


1670 


5 300 


25 




700 


2 090 


6 625 


30 




840 


2 510 


7 590 



" Acid factor = milliequivalent (meq) of acid required per litre of water to lower pH to 2 as determined by laboratory titration of water. 

^' Phosphoric acid is a weak acid and quantities required are very high and it may not be economically feasible to use this acid for flushing 
unless it is otherwise used as a fertilizer. 



10 



10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

10.1 Protective devices on chemical injection 
equipment should be provided to prevent 
contamination of the water supply and accidental 
spillage of the chemicals. 

10.2 All acids should be handled with care. Protective 
glass and gloves should be used to protect eyes and 
to prevent skin contact. 

10.3 The resistance of drip irrigation components to 
the chemical used should be taken into consideration. 

10.4 Acid shall be added in water and not water into 
acid for dilution. 

10.5 Acid treatment and chlorine treatment shall not 
be carried out simultaneously. 



IS 14791 : 2000 

10.6 Tank cover of the differential pressure tank 
should not be opened while in operation. 

10.7 Irrigation water should not be used for 
consumption by human beings and animals. 

10.8 Do not inhale acid Aimes or chlorine gas. 

10.9 All chemicals should be handled cautiously and 
should be stored in a secured place for the reasons of 
safety and hazardous nature of the products. 

10.10 The suitability of any cliemical treatment to 
be ascertained and guarded against any adverse effect 
on the standing crop or soil. 

10.11 Use copious water for washing acid bums. 



11 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part, of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. IFAD 54 (881). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 (X)2 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg / 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 1 10 002 \ 323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi r337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700 054 1337 86 26, 337 91 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 / 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



Southern : C. I. T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 J 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) / 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400 093 1 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



