**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11261-2 (1985) : Method for Assessment of Post-harvest 
Grain Losses by Rodents, Part 2: Loss Determination by 
Population Assessment and Estimation Procedures [FAD 16: 
Foodgrains, Starches and Ready to Eat Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i %^s^^^>9i^: 



^^cvvv^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11261 ( Part 2 )- 1985 

Indian Standard < Reaffirmed2005 > 

METHOD FOR 

ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST 

GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS 

PART 2 LOSS DETERMINATION BY POPULATION 
ASSESSMENT AND ESTIMATION PROCEDURES 



UDC 631-155-3 : [ 632-693-2 ] : 631*164*28 




© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr2 October 1985 



IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST 

GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS 

PART 2 LOSS DETERMINATION BY POPULATION 
ASSESSMENT AND ESTIMATION PROCEDURES 



Storage Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee, 

AFDG28 

Chairman Representing 

Dr K. Krishnamurthy Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies (Department of 

Food ) 

Members 

Dr G. K. Girish ( Alternate to 
Dr K. Krishnamurthy ) 
Dr R. A. Agarwal Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
Dr ( Shrimati ) S. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Agricultural Marketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Ministry of 

Adviser to the Government Agriculture and Rural Development, Faridabad 

of India 
Shri A. P. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. Alam Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Dr A. P. Bhatnagar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Chief Engineer Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Dr C. D. Dwivedi Defence Materials & Storage Research & Develop- 

ment Establishment, Kanpur 
Shri V. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Brig V. N. Kapoor QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of 

Defence ), New Delhi 
Brig R. N. Varma ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Pandithurai Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Moorjani ( Alternate) 
Shri M. V. Pavate Planning Commission, Government of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri Ramesh Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Plant Protection Adviser to Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & 
the Government of India Storage, Faridabad 

Shri T. R. Sharma ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11261 ( Part 2) - 1985 

{Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. S. N. Raju National Go-operative Development Corporation, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. L. Gagr ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Vishwambearam Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri K. G. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shbimati Shashi Sareen 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Grain Storage Data Subcommittee, AFDG 28 : 10 

Convener 
Prof A. P. Bhatnagar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Members 

Prof Maltindeb Singh ( Alternate to 
Prof A. P. Bhatnagar ) 
Prof N. G. Bhole Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 

Joint Director ( WS ) Planning Commission, Government of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. V. S. Murthy Triveni Structurals Ltd, Naini ( Allahabad ) 

Shri M. N. Paul ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. P. Ojha Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 

Shri K. Panditkurai Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Moorjane ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. T. R am an at h an Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. V. Gadekar (Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Siiarangapani Central Food Technological Research Institute, 

Mysore 
Dr B. P. N. Singh G. B. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, 

Pantnagar 
Prof G, K. Teckghandani J. N. Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya, Jabalpur 

Shri B. K. Vbrma Indian Grain Storage Research Institute, Hapur 

Shri S. R. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 



IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST 

GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS 

PART 2 LOSS DETERMINATION BY POPULATION 
ASSESSMENT AND ESTIMATION PROCEDURES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Storage 
Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Foodgrain losses due to rodents are very high, sometimes ranging as 
high as 25 to 30 percent. A number of studies and investigations have 
been carried out to assess these damages. Most efforts at rodent damage 
assessment have been focussed on crops under field conditions. How- 
ever, each component namely cropping, handling, transportation, local 
storage and bulk storage is important in assesseing these losses. 

0,3 Although a methodology for assessing post harvest grain losses will 
not in itself reduce these losses, the methodology is essential to post 
harvest operational programmes so that priorities for loss reduction can 
be determined. In addition to serving as a much, needed assessment 
tool, the methodology and other activities proposed can serve as a means 
to persuade all concerned that change is necessary and that effective 
techniques to control losses may be utilized. 

0,4 This standard is being dealt with in the following two parts: 

Part 1 General considerations, direct measurement techniques and 
biological aspects of survey procedures; and 

Part 2 Loss determination by population assessment and estimation 
procedures. 

0.5 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
taken from the following publication: 

Harris ( Kenton L. ) and Lindblad ( Carl J. ). Post Harvest Grain 
Losses Assesment Methods. 



IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) prescribes methods for assessment of losses 
due to rodents primarily for use in grain stores. 

1.1.1 The aim of the methods is to estimate the weight of the grain 
consumed by rodents. The other related losses attributable, for example, 
to contamination, health hazards and damage to sacks must be evaluated 
by other means. 

2- PERSONNEL AND TRAINING 

2.1 The work, including all practical operations such as placement, 
setting and checking of traps should be performed by technology 
graduates, preferably with some experience in the field of rodent 
control, grain storage or small mammal ecology. 

3. SELECTION OF STUDY SITES AND PRELIMINARY SURVEY 
OF INFESTATION 

3.0 A preliminary survey of the study site must always be made as given 
in method A ( see 3.1 ) along with the detailed techniques, as prescribed 
under method B ( see 3.2 ) and method C ( see 3.3 ). 

3.1 Method A — Preliminary Survey 

3.1.0 This survey procedure will lead to valid estimate of the quantity 
of grain lost to rodents only if it is followed up with either the method B 
( see 3.2 ) or method C ( see 3.3 ). 

3.1.1 Equipment 

3.1.1.1 Electric flash light torch 

3.1.1.2 Tracking powder, talcum or finely powdered chalk — A glass jar 
with a perforated lid provides a convenient means of dispensing the 
powder. 

3.1.1.3 Clipboard and record sheets 

3.1.2 Procedure 

3.1,2.1 Two visits will be required. On the first visit record the 
following information on a record form: 

a) Date of survey; 

b) Address of store; 

c) Commodities stored and quantities ( by weight ); 

d) Nominal capacity of the store; 



IS ; 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

e) Expected date of outward shipment; 

f) Estimated annual turnover ( by weight ); 

g) Brief description of the storage structure and conditions of 
Storage; and 

h) A sketch map of the store showing important features and 
location of the stored grain. 

3*1.2*2 During inspection, record the signs of rodent infestation, 
including burrows, excreta, smears, foot prints, damage to the commodity 
or structure, etc, on the sketch map as they are found. Whether or not 
signs of infestation are found, lay tracking patches approximately 
200 X 300 mm at intervals along the walls of the store and beside the 
stacked grain, especially around corners. The tracking patches should 
be laid at the rate of approximately one per 50 tons of grains, except 
that in stores of less than 250 tons, not less than 5 patches should be laid. 

3,1*2*3 The second visit should be made the next day and the 
presence or absence of rodent tracks on each tracking patch recorded. 

3*1.2.4 A simple estimate of the incidence of infestation may be 
calculated when random sample of stores of a single type has been 
surveyed, as follows: 

„ ,. . r , Number of stores infested w inn 

Percent of stores, infested — XT - — . -= -r- X 100 

Number of stores surveyed 

„ , ( % stores infested X % stores not infested ) 

Percent standard error = — =r= r- jr- 1 3- 

Number of stores surveyed 

3*2 Method B — Trapping to Extinction 

3.2.0 This method is suggested for use in stores with population of 
up to 200 rodents and would include heavily infested store holding up to 
500 tonnes of grains. A. complete census of the population is made by 
trapping all the rodents that have access to the grain and the loss is 
estimated by multiplying the number of rodents by their daily food 
requirement. 

3.2.1 Equipment 

3.2.1.1 Snap traps, 200 ( rat sizes; striking bar 70-80 mm long ). 

3.2.1*2 Snap traps, 200 ( mouse size, striking bar 40-50 mm long ). 

3.2.1.3 Spring balance ( 100 X 1 g ). 

3*2.1.4 Spring balance (500 X 5 g ). 

3.2*1*5 Black board chalk for making trap locations. 



IS s 11261 (Parti)- 1985 

3.2.1.6 Bak of a sticky consistency such as peanut butter, crushed 
fruit ( banana, oil palm pericarp or melon ) or sweetened dough. 

3.2.2 Procedure 

3.2.2*1 First make the preliminary survey ( see 3.1 ). The bulk 
of the rodent population should be caught in the first week and complete 
trapping done in a period not exceeding 21 days. 

3.2.2.2 Traps should be distributed at intervals of 1 m or less in all 
places where the presence of rodents is suspected. Place the traps in 
a systematic sequence ( called the 'trap round' ), numbering and entering 
each placement on the record sheet. 

3.2.2.3 Each day check the trap round and record the species and 
body weight of each rodent caught for each trap. 

3.2.3 Grain Loss Assessment 

3.2.3.1 The primary data which should be reported are the numbers 
and the body weight of each species of the rodent trapped. The data 
for each species should be divided into two body-weight classes, that 
is, 50 g or less and more than 50 g. The biomass ( sum of the body 
weights ) of each weight class should then be obtained for each species. 
The estimate of the daily grain loss attributable to each species is 
obtained by multiplying the biomass of the rodents in each weight class 
by a factor representing the daily grain requirement of a rodent in that 
weight class, and then adding together the two products. 

3.2.3.2 It will generally be adequate to base the calculation on an 
assumed grain consumption equivalent to 7 percent of body weight for 
j-adents weighing more than 50 g and 15 percent of body weight for 
rodents weighings 50 g or less. 

3.2.3.3 The estimated daily grain loss attributable to species 'A\ 
for example, would be: 



( 0'07 a"+ 0-15 6) jr 



where 



a = biomass ( g ) of rodents of species 'A' weighing more than 

50 g, and 
b = biomass (g) or rodents of species 'A' weighing 50 g or less. 

3.2*4 The total estimated daily grain loss is then readily determined by 
adding together the estimates for different species, and should be ex- 
pressed both as an absolute amount and as percentages of the amount 
of grain in the store and of nominal capacity of the store. If it can be 
assumed that the rodent population was reasonably stable, than the loss 
over a period of time can easily be calculated. 



IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

3.3 Method G — The Lincoln-Peterson Method jof Population 
Estimation 

3.3.0 This method is based on the capture, mark and release technique. 
The application of this method requires that duration of the study 
should be sufficiently short so that no significant changes occur in the 
population and the chance of capturing a rodent in the second sample 
is independent of whether or not it is marked. The first assumption 
may be satisfied by completing the study in a period not exceeding 
21 days. The second assumption may be satisfied by using live capture 
traps for the first sample and snap traps to collect the second sample, 
since the behavioural responses of rodents to the two types x>f traps are 
relatively independent of one another. 

3.3.1 Equipment 

3.3.1.1 Live-capture traps, 100 ( rat size ). 

3.3.1.2 Live capture traps, 100 ( mouse size ) of sheet metal of 7 mm 
or finer wire mesh funnel-type multiple catch trap with a horizontal 
counter-poised dier operated by the weight of the rodent as it approaches 
the holding compartment, and the single catch trap with a door-closing 
mechanism operated by a treadle. 

3.3.1.3 Restraining device ( simple ) to hold live rodents for marking. 

3.3.1.4 Dissecting scissors, 2 pairs. 

3.3.2 Procedure 

3.3.2.1 After completing preliminary summary ( see 3.1 ), the 
operation is carried out in two steps as follows: 

a) Stage 1 lasts 10 days. In this stage capture, mark and release 
as many rodents as possible. Distribute, bait and set the live- 
capture traps, recording the trap round as in Method B. An 
average density of one-rat size and one mouse-seized trap per 
9 m 2 is suggested. Every morning, each newly caught rodent must 
be marked by clipping off the middle digit of the right hand 
foot. Newly marked rodents should be released at the point of 
capture and their numbers and species recorded beside the 
trap entry on the record sheet. 

b) Stage 2 also lasts 10 days during which the objective is to snap- 
trap as many rodents as possible, using the procedure described 
under Method B. The body weight, species, and presence or 
absence of mark should be recorded for each rodent trapped. 

3.3.3 Population Estimates and Grain Loss Assessment 

3.3.3.1 The primary data which should be reported is as follows: 

a) The numbers of each species marked in stage 1, 



IS : 11261 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

b) The numbers of marked rodents of each species trapped in 
stage 2, 

c) The numbers of unmarked rodents of each species trapped in 
stage 2, and 

d) The species and body weight of each rodent trapped in stages 2. 
3.3.3.2 The population estimate ( P ) for each species is: 



where 

a — number marked in stage 1, 

n = total number caught in stage 2, and 

r = number of marked rodents caught in stage 2. 

3.3.3.3 For estimating daily grain consumption it is necessary to 
determine the weights and relative sizes of the two body-weight classes 
by reference to the sample of rodents trapped in stage 2. Thus, where 
in the absence of data from captive rodents it is assumed that the daily 
grain consumption figures for animals greater than 50 g and for smaller 
rodents are respectively 7 and 15 percent of body weight, the daily grain 
loss attributable to species A will be: 

P [0'07 ab + 0-15 ( 1 — a)c] g 

where 

P = the population estimate for species A, 

a = the proportion of rodents of species A, 

b = the mean body weight ( g ) of rodents of species A weighing 
more than 50 g, and 

c = the mean body weight ( g ) of the rodents of species A 
weighing 50 g or less 

Note — The parameters a, b and c must be calculated from sample trapped in 
stage 2. 



