***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10052-2 (1999) : Radio Disturbance and Immunity Measuring 
Apparatus and Methods, Part 2: Methods of Measurement of 
Disturbances and Immunity [LITD 9: Electromagnetic 
Compatibility] 



C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2 (1996) 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR RADIO DISTURBANCE AND 
IMMUNITY MEASURING APPARATUS AND METHODS 

PART 2 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF DISTURBANCES AND IMMUNITY 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 33.100 



O BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Sepfembef1999 Price Rs.220.SS 



Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee, LTD 22 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) which is identical with CISPR 16-2 (1996) 'Specification for 
radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus and methods — Part 2 : Methods of measurement of 
disturbances and immunity' issued by Special Committee on Radio Interference (CISPR), was adopted by 
the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional 
Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

This standard (Part 2) was originally published in 1982 and was largely based on CISPR 1 6 (1 977) Section 2. 
!S 10052 (Parts 3 to 7) were based on Sections 3 to 7 of CISPR 1 6 (1 977) respectively. 

This revision is now being published to combine IS 1 0052 (Parts 2 to 7) covering methods of measurement 
of radio disturbance and immunity in a single standard as IS 1 0052 (Part 2) and also to align it with the latest 
edition of CISPR 1 6. Consequently. IS 1 0052 (Parts 3 to 7) have been withdrawn. 

Radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus are covered in IS 1 0052 (Part 1 ), 

In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is 
particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words'lnternational Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as 
'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to 
use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below 
along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International Standard 



lEC 50( 161 ) :1990 International 
Electrotechnical \/ocabulary(IEV) 
— Chapter 161: Electromagnetic 
compatibility 

lEC 83 :1975 Plugs and socket- 
outlets for domestic and similar 
general use — Standards 

CISPR 11 (1990) Limits and 
methods of measurement of 
electromagnetic disturbance 
characteristics of industrial, 
scientific and medical ( ISM ) 
radio-frequency equipment ( since 
revised in 1997) 

CISPR 13 (1990) Limits and 
methods of measurement of radio 
interference characteristics of 
sound and television broadcast 
receivers and associated equip- 
ment ( since revised in 1996 ) 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



IS 1885 ( Part 64/Sec 1&2 ) ; 1987 Electro- 
technical vocabulary: Part 64 Electromagnetic 
compatibility, Section 1 General terms, 
Section 2 Specific terms 

IS 1293 :1998 Plugs and socket-outlets for 
household and similar purposes ( third 
revision ) 

IS 6873 ( Part 4 ) : 1999 Limits and methods 
of measurement of radio disturbance charac- 
teristics : Part 4 Industrial, scientific and 
medrcal ( ISM ) radio-frequency equipment 
( first revision ) 



IS 6873 ( Paj;t 3 ) : 1999 Limits and methods 
of measurement of radio disturbance charact- 
teristics : Part 3 Sound and television broad- 
cast receivers and associated equipment 
( first revision ) 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Technically 
Equivalent 



do 



Identical 



do 



( Continued on third cover) 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



CONTENTS 



Page 



Clause 

SECTION 1: GENERAL 

1.1 Scope 3 

1.2 Normative references 3 

1.3 Definitions 3 

SECTION 2: DISTURBANCE MEASUREMENTS 

2.1 Types of disturbance to be measured 6 

2.2 Connection of measuring equipment 6 

2.3 General measurement requirements and conditions 7 

2.4 Measurement of disturbances conducted along leads, 9 kHz to 30 MHz 10 

2.5 Measurements using tfie absorbing clamp, 30 MHz to 1000 MHz 24 

2.6 Measurement of radiated disturbances ^ 25 

SECTION 3: IMMUNITY MEASUREMENTS 

3.1 Immunity test criteria and general measurement procedures 32 

3.2 Method of measurement of immunity for conducted signals 35 

3.3 Method of measurement of immunity to radiated electric field interference 36 

SECTION 4: AUTOMATED MEASUREMENTS 

4.1 Automated measurements (under consideration) 43 

SECTION 5: FACTORS INFLUENCING MEASUREMENT ACCURACY 

5.1 Factors influencing measurement accuracy 43 

Figures 44 

Annexes 

A Guidelines to connection of electrical equipment to the artificial mains network 65 

B Use of spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers 72 

C Historical background to the method of measurement of the Interference power produced by 

electrical household and similar appliances in the VHF range 74 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR RADIO DISTURBANCE AND 
IMMUNITY MEASURING APPARATUS AND METHODS 

PART 2 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF DISTURBANCES AND IMMUNITY 

( First Revision ) 

1.1 Scope 

This part of CISPR 16 specifies the methods of measurement of EMC phenomena in the 
frequency range 9 kHz to 18 GHz. 

1.2 Normative references 

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this part of CISPR 16. At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All normative documents are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this part of CISPR 16 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. Members of lEC and ISO 
maintain registers of currently valid international Standards. 

I EC 83:1 975, Plugs and socket-outlets for domestic and similar general use ~ Standards 

lEC 364-4: Electrical installations of buildings - Part 4: Protection for safety 

CISPR 11: 1990, Limits and methods of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance 
characteristics of industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio-frequency equipment 

CISPR 13: 1990, Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of 
sound and television broadcast receivers and associated equipment 

CISPR 14: 1985, Limits and methods of measurement of radio interference characteristics of 
household electrical appliances, portable tools and similar electrical apparatus 

CISPR 14: 1993, Limits and methods of measurement of radio disturbance characteristics of 
electrical motor-operated and thermal appliances for household and similar purposes, electric 
tools and electric apparatus 

CISPR 16-1: 1993, Specification for radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus and 
methods ~ Part 1: Radio disturbance and immunity measuring apparatus 

ITU-R 468: Measurement of audio-frequency noise voltage level in sound broadcasting 

1.3 Definitions 

For the purpose of this part of CISPR 16, the definitions of lECi 50(161) apply, as well as the 
following: 

1.3.1 associated equipment: 

1) Transducers (e.g. probes, networks and antennas) connected to a measuring receiver or 
test generator. 

2) Transducers (e.g. probes, networks, antennas) which are used in the signal or 
disturbance transfer between an EUT and measuring equipment or a (test-) signal generator. 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



1.3.2 EUT: The equipment (devices, appliances and systems) subjected to EMC (emission 
and immunity) compliance tests. 

1.3.3 product publication; Publication specifying EMC requirements for a product or 
product family, taking into account specific aspects of such a product or product family. 

1.3.4 emission limit (from a disturbing source): The specified maximum emission level of 
a source of electromagnetic disturbance. [lEV 161-03-12] 

1.3.5 immunity limit: The specified minimum immunity level. [lEV 161-03-15] 

1.3.6 ground reference: A connection that constitutes a defined parasitic capacitance to the 
surrounding of an EUT and serves as reference potential. 

NOTE - See also lEV 161-04-36. 

1.3.7 (electromagnetic) emission: The phenomenon by which electromagnetic energy 
emanates from a source. [lEV 161-01-08] 

1.3.8 Immunity (to a disturbance): The ability of a device, equipment or system to perform 
without degradation in the presence of an electromagnetic disturbance. [lEV 161-01-20] 

1.3.9 coaxial cable: A cable containing one or more coaxial lines, typically used for a 
matched connection of associated equipment to the measuring equipment or (test-)signal 
generator providing a specified characteristic impedance and a specified maximum allowable 
cable transfer impedance. 

1.3.10 common mode (asymmetrical disturbance voltage): The RF voltage between the 
artificial midpoint of a two-conductor line and reference ground, or in case of a bundle of lines, 
the effective RF disturbance voltage of the whole bundle (vector sum of the unsymmetrical 
voltages) against the reference ground measured with a clamp (current transformer) at a 
defined terminating impedance. 

NOTE - See also lEV 161-04-09. 

1.3.11 common mode current: The vector sum of the currents flowing through two or more 
conductors at a specified cross-section of a "mathematical" plane intersected by these 
conductors. 

1.3.12 differential mode voltage; symmetrical voltage: The RF disturbance voltage 
between the wires of a two conductor line. [lEV 161-04-08, modified] 

1.3.13 differential mode current: Half the vector difference of the currents flowing in any 
two of a specified set of active conductors at a specified cross-section of a "mathematical" 
plane intersected by these conductors. 

1.3.14 unsymmetrical mode (V-terminai voltage): The voltage between a conductor or 
terminal of a device, equipment or system and a specified ground reference. For the case of a 
two-port network, the two unsymmetrical voltages are given by: 

a) the vector sum of the asymmetrical voltage and half of the symmetrical voltage; and 

b) the vector difference between the asymmetrical voltage and half of the symmetrical 
voltage. 

NOTE - See also lEV 1 61 -04-1 3. 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



1.3.15 measuring receiver: A receiver for the measurement of disturbances with different 
detectors. 

NOTE - The receiver is specified according to CISPR 16-1 . 

1.3.16 test configuration: Gives the specified measurement arrangement of the EUT in 
which an emission or immunity level is measured. 

NOTE - The emission level or immunity level is measured as required by lEV 161-03-11, lEV 161-03-12, 
lEV 161-03-14 and lEV 161-03-15, definitions of emission level and immunity level. 

1.3.17 artificial network (AN): An agreed reference load (simulation) impedance presented 
to the EUT by actual networks (e.g., extended power or communication lines) across which the 
RF disturbance voltage is measured. 

1.3.18 artificial mains network (AMN): A network inserted in the supply mains lead of 
apparatus to be tested which provides, in a given frequency range, a specified toad impedance 
for the measurement of disturbance voltages and which may isolate the apparatus from the 
supply mains in that frequency range. [lEV 161-04-05] 

1.3.19 weighting (quasi-peak detection): The repetition-rate dependent conversion of the 
peak-detected pulse voltages to an indication corresponding to the psychophysical annoyance 
of pulsive disturbances (acoustically or visually) according to the weighting characteristics, or 
alternatively gives the specified manner in which an emission level or an immunity level is 
evaluated. 

NOTES 

1 The weighting characteristics are specified in CISPR 16-1. 

2 The emission level or Immunity level is evaluated as required by lEC 50(161) definitions of level 
(see lEV 161-03-01. lEV 161-03-11 and lEV 161-03-14). 

1.3.20 continuous disturbance: RF disturbance with a duration of more than 200 ms at the 
IF-output of a measuring receiver, which causes a deflection on the meter of a measuring 
receiver in quasi-peak detection mode which does not decrease immediately. [lEV 161-02-11, 
modified] 

NOTE - The measuring receiver is specified in CISPR 16-1. 

1 .3.21 discontinuous disturbance: For counted clicks, disturbance with a duration of less 
than 200 ms at the IF-output of a measuring receiver, which causes a transient deflection on 
the meter of a measuring receiver in quasi-peak detection mode. 

NOTES 

1 For impulsive disturbance, see lEV 161-02-08. 

2 The measuring receiver is specified in CISPR 16-1. 



IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 
C1SPR 16-2(1996) 



Section 2: Disturbance measurements 



2.1 Types of disturbance to be measured 

This subclause describes the classification of different types of disturbance and the detectors 
appropriate for their measurement. 

2.1.1 Types of disturbance 

For physical and psychophysical reasons, dependent on the spectral distribution, measuring 
receiver bandwidth, the duration, rate of occurrence, and degree of annoyance during the 
assessment and measurement of radio disturbance, distinction is made between the following 
types of disturbance: 

a) narrowband continuous disturbance, i.e. disturbance on discrete frequencies as, for 
example, the fundamentals and harmonics generated with the intentional application of RF 
energy with ISM equipment, constituting a frequency spectrum consisting only of individual 
spectral lines whose separation is greater than the bandwidth of the measuring receiver so 
that during the measurement only one line falls into the bandwidth in contrast to b); 

b) broadband continuous disturbance, which normally Is unintentionally produced by the 
repeated impulses of, for example, commutator motors, and which have a repetition 
frequency which is lower than the bandwidth of the measuring receiver so that during the 
measurement more than one spectral line falls into the bandwidth; and 

c) broadband discontinuous disturbance is also generated unintentionally by mechanical or 
electronic switching procedures, for example by thermostats or programme controls with a 
repetition rate lower than 1 Hz (click-rate less than 30/min). 

The frequency spectra of b) and c) are characterized by having a continuous spectrum in the 
case of individual (single) impulses and a discontinuous spectrum in case of repeated 
impulses, both spectra being characterized by having a frequency range which is wider than 
the bandwidth of the measuring receiver specified in CISPR 16-1. 

2.1.2 Detector functions 

Depending on the types of disturbance, measurements may be carried out using a measuring 
receiver with: 

a) an average detector generally used in the measurement of narrowband disturbance and 
signals, and particularly to discriminate between narrowband and broadband disturbance; 

b) a quasi-peak detector provided for the weighted measurement of broadband disturbance 
for the assessment of audio annoyance to a radio listener, but also usable for narrowband 
disturbance; 

c) a peak detector which may be used for either broadband or narrowband disturbance 
measurement. 

Measuring receivers incorporating these detectors are specified in CISPR 16-1. 

2.2 Connection of measuring equipment 

This subclause describes the connection of measuring equipment, measuring receivers and 
associated equipment such as artificial networks, voltage and current probes, absorbing 
clamps and antennas. 



IS 10052 (Parta): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.2.1 Connection of associa ted equipment 

The connecting cable between the measuring receiver and the associated equipment shall be 
shielded and its characteristic impedance shall be matched to the input impedance of the 
measuring receiver. 

The output of the associated equipment shall be terminated with the prescribed impedance. 

2.2.2 Connections to RF reference ground 

The artificial mains network (AMN) shall be connected to the reference ground by a low RF 
impedance, e.g. by direct bonding of the case of the AMN to the reference ground or reference 
wall of a shielded room, or with a low impedance conductor as short and as wide as practical 
(maximum length to width ratio is 3:1). 

Terminal voltage measurements shall be referenced only to tne reference ground. Ground 
loops (common impedance coupling) shall be avoided. This should also be observed for 
measuring apparatus (e.g. measuring receivers and connected associated equipment, such as 
oscilloscopes, analyzers, recorders, etc.) fitted with a protective earth conductor (RE) of 
Protection Class I equipment, tf the PE connection of the measuring apparatus and the PE 
connection of the power mains to the reference ground do not have RF isolation from the 
reference ground, the necessary RF isolation shall be provided by means such as RF chokes 
and isolation transformers, or if applicable, by powering the measuring apparatus from 
batteries, so that the RF connection of the measuring apparatus to the reference ground is 
made via only one route. 

For the treatment of PE connection of the EUT to the reference ground, see clause A. 4. 

Stationary test configurations do not require a connection with the protective earth conductor it 
the reference ground is connected directly and meets the safety requirements for protective 
earth conductors (PE connections). 

2.2.3 Connection between ttie EUT and the artificial mains network 

General guidelines for the selection of grounded and non-grounded connections of the EUT to 
the AMN are discussed in annex A. 

2.3 General measurement requirements and conditions 

Radio disturbance measurements shall be: 

a) reproducible, i.e. independent of the measurement location and environmental 
conditions, especially ambient noise; 

b) free from interactions, i.e. the connection of the EUT to the measuring equipment shall 
neither influence the function of the EUT nor the accuracy of the measurement equipment. 

These requirements may be met by observing the following conditions: 

c) existence of a sufficient signal-to-noise ratio at the desired measurement level, e.g. the 
level of the relevant disturbance limit; 

d) having a defined measuring set-up, termination and operating conditions of the EUT; 

e) having a sufficiently high impedance of the probe at the measuring point, in the case of 
voltage probe measurements; 

f) when using a spectrum analyzer or scanning receiver due considerations shall be given 
to its particular operating and calibration requirements. 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.3.1 Disturbance not produced by the equipment under test 

The measurement signal-to-noise ratio with respect to ambient noise shall meet the following 
requirements. Should the spurious noise level exceed the required level, it shall be recorded in 
the test report. 

2.3.1.1 Compliance testing 

A test site shall permit emissions from the EUT to be distinguished from ambient noise. The 
ambient noise level should preferably be 20 dB, but at least be 6 dB below the desired 
measurement level. For the 6 dB condition, the apparent disturbance level from the EUT is 
increased by up to 3,5 dB. The suitability of the site for required ambient level may be 
determined by measuring the ambient noise level with the test unit in place but not operating. 

In the case of compliance measurement according to a limit, the ambient noise level Is 
permitted to exceed the preferred -6 dB level provided that the level of both ambient noise and 
source emanation combined does not exceed the specified limit. The EUT is then considered 
to meet the limit. Other actions can also be taken; for example, reduce the bandwidth for 
narrowband signals and/or move the antenna closer to the EUT. 

NOTE - If both the ambient fieid strength and field strength of ambient and EUT are measured 
separately, it may be possible to provide an estimate of the EUT field strength to a quantifiable level 
of uncertainty. Reference is made in this respect in annex C of CISPR 11. 

2.3.2 Measurement of continuous disturbance 

2.3.2.1 Narrowband continuous disturbance 

The measuring set shall be kept tuned to the discrete frequency under investigation and 
returned if the frequency fluctuates. 

2.3.2.2 Broadband continuous disturbance 

For the assessment of broadband continuous disturbance the level of which is not steady, the 
maximum reproducible measurement value shall be found. See 2.3.4.1 for further details. 

2.3.2.3 Use of spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers 

Spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers are useful for disturbance measurements, 
particularly in order to reduce measuring time. However, special consideration must be given 
to certain characteristics of these instruments, which include: overload, linearity, selectivity, 
normal response to pulses, frequency scan rate, signal interception, sensitivity, amplitude 
accuracy and peak, average and quasi-peak detection. These characteristics are considered 
in annex B. 

2.3.3 Opera ting conditions of the EUT 

The EUT shall be operated under the following conditions: 

2.3.3.1 Normal load conditions 

The normal load conditions shall be as defined in the product specification relevant to the 
EUT, and for EUTs not so covered, as indicated in the manufacturer's instructions. 

2.3.3.2 The time of operation 

The time of operation shall be, in the case of EUTs with a given rated operating time, in 
accordance with the marking; in all other cases, the time is not restricted. 

8 



IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.3.3.3 Running-in time 

No specific running-in time, prior to testing, is given, but the EUT shall be operated for a 
sufficient period to ensure that the nnodes and conditions of operation are typical of those 
during the life of the equipment. For some EUTs, special test conditions may be prescribed in 
the relevant equipment publications. 



2.3.3.4 Supply 

The ^UT shall be operated from a supply having the rated voltage of the EUT. If the level of 
disturbance varies considerably with the supply voltage, the measurements shall be repeated 
for supply voltages over the range of 0,9 to 1,1 times the rated voltage. EUTs with more than 
one rated voltage shall be tested at the rated voltage which causes maximum disturbance. 



2.3.3.5 Mode of operation 

The EUT shall be operated under practical conditions which cause the maximum disturbance 
at the measurement frequency. 



2.3.4 Interpretation of measuring results 

2.3.4.1 Continuous disturbance 

a) If the level of disturbance is not steady, the reading on the measuring receiver is 
observed for at least 15 s for each measurement; the highest readings shall be recorded, 
with the exception of any isolated clicks, which shall be ignored (see 4.2 of CISPR 14). 

b) If the general level of the disturbance is not steady, but shows a continuous rise or fall 
of more than 2 dB in the 15 s period, then the disturbance voltage levels shall be observed 
for a further period and the levels shall be interpreted according to the conditions of normal 
use of the EUT, as follows: 

1) if the EUT is one which may be switched on and off frequently, or the direction of 
rotation of which can be reversed, then at each frequency of measurement the EUT 
should be switched on or reversed just before each measurement, and switched off just 
after each measurement. The maximum level obtained during the first minute at each 
frequency of measurement shall be recorded; 

2) if the EUT is one which in normal use runs for longer periods, then it should remain 
switched on for the period of the complete test, and at each frequency the level of 
disturbance shall be recorded only after a steady reading (subject to the provision that 
item a) has been obtained). 

c) If the pattern of the disturbance from the EUT changes from a steady to a random 
character part way through a test, then that EUT shall be tested in accordance with item b). 

d) Measurements are taken throughout the complete spectrum and are recorded at least at 
the frequency with maximum reading and as required by the relevant CISPR publication. 

2.3.4.2 Discontinuous disturbance 

Measurement of discontinuous disturbance may be performed at a restricted number of 
frequencies. For further details, see CISPR 14. 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.3.4.3 Measurement of the duration of disturbances 

The EUT is connected to the relevant artificial mains network. If a measuring set is available, it 
is connected to the network and a cathode-ray oscilloscope is connected to the i.f. output of 
the measuring set. If a receiver is not available, the oscilloscope is connected directly to the 
network. The time base of the oscilloscope can be started by the disturbances to be tested; 
the time base is set to a value of 1 ms/div -10 ms/div for EUT with instantaneous switching 
and 10 ms/div - 200 ms/div for other EUT. The duration of the disturbance can either be 
recorded directly by a storage oscilloscope or digital oscilloscope or by photograph or hard 
copy recording of the screen. 

2.4 Measurement of disturbances conducted along leads, 9 kHz to 30 MHz 

2.4.1 Introduction 

When testing for compliance with emission limits for electromagnetic disturbances conducted 
along leads, the following items shall be considered as minimum, both in the standardized 
situation (type tests) and at the place of installation {in situ tests): 

a; iiic lyfjva ur insiuiuam^tfo. ciiicic aits twu r;ic(i)i.'uo ui iiicaouiiiii^ uuiiuuuicu uioiuiuaiiwc«>, 

either as a voltage (prevailing method for CISPR measurements) or as a current. Both 
methods can be used to measui'e the three types of conducted disturbances, i.e: 

- common mode (also called asymmetrical mode) 

- differential mode (also called symmetrical mode) 

- unsymmetrical mode 

NOTE - The unsymmetrical mode voltage is primarily measured at the mains network. The common 
mode voltage (or current) is measured primarily for signal and control lines. 

b) the measuring equipment: the type of measuring equipment is chosen in relation to the 
disturbance properties to be determined (see 2.4.2); 

c) the associated equipment: the type of associated equipment, i.e., artificial networks, 
current probes or voltage probes, is chosen in accordance with the type of disturbance to 
be measured In accordance with 2.4,1 a). Each type of associated equipment presents RF 
loading to the measured signals and tines (see 2.4.3); 

d) RF load conditions of the disturtjance source: the measuring set-up will present certain 
RF load impedances to the disturbance source(s) in the EUT. These impedances are 
standardized in type tests or might depend on the conditions at the place of installation in 
the case of in situ tests (see 2.4.3 and 2.4.4); 

e) the test configuration of EUT: a standardized test configuration shall specify the 
reference ground, the position of the EUT and associated measuring equipment with 
respect to that reference ground, connections to that reference ground and 
interconnections of the EUT with the associated equipment (see 2.4.4 and 2.4.5). 

2.4.2 Measuring equipment (receivers, etc.) 

\rt nanarai a Hjg^jnQtjQn jc Hrau/n hottAfoon contlnuQUS and dlsccntlnuQus dlsturbances. 
Continuous radio-frequency disturbances are predominantly measured In terms of frequency 
domain parameters. Discontinuous disturbances are also measured in terms of frequency 
domain parameters but may need additional time domain measurements. 

The measuring sets and other measuring equipment specified in CISPR 16-1 shall be used. 
For time domain measurements oscilloscopes etc. may be used. 



1C 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CiSPR 16-2(1996) 



2.4.3 Associated measuring equipment 

Associated measuring equipment for conducted disturbance measurement is divided into two 
categories: 

a) voltage measuring sensors, such as artificial networks (AN) and voltage probes; 
NOTE - The artificial network is sometimes referred to as impedance simulation network (ISN). 

b) current measuring sensors, such as current probes. 

2.4.3.1 Artificial networks (AN) 

The common mode, differential and unsymmetrical mode impedances of actual networks, such 
as of power mains and telephones, are location dependent and, in general, time varying. 
Therefore, type testing of disturbance requires standardized impedance simulation networks, 
referred to as artificial networks (AN). The AN provides standardized RF load impedances to 
the EUT. For this purpose, the AN is inserted in series with the terminals of the EUT and the 
actual network or signal simulator. In this way the AN simulates extended networks (long lines) 
with defined impedances. 

2.4.3.1 .1 Types of artificial networks 

The ANs specified in CISPR 16-1 shall be used, unless specific reasons call for another 
construction. In general three types of AN can be distinguished: 

a) the V-type AN: in a defined frequency range the RF impedances between each of the 
EUT terminals to be measured and the reference ground have a defined value, whereas no 
impedance component is connected directly between these terminals. The construction 
defines (indirectly) both the differential and common mode voltage measured. In principle, 
there is no limit for the number of EUT terminals, i.e. for the number of lines to be 
measured by V-type ANs; 

b) the Delta-type AN: in a defined frequency range the RF impedance between a pair of 
EUT terminals to be measured and between these terminals and the reference ground have 
a defined value. This construction defines directly both the differential and the common 
mode RF load impedances. 

Addition of a balance/unbalance transformer makes it possible to measure the symmetric 
and asymmetric disturbance voltage; 

c) the T-type AN: in a defined frequency range the common mode RF impedance between 
a pair of EUT terminals to be measured and a reference ground has a defined value. In 
general, no defined differential load impedance is included in a T-type AN as such. The 
defined differential impedance must then be provided by the external circuit connected to 
the supply (line) terminals of the T-type AN. This type of AN is used to measure common 
mode disturbance voltages only. 

2.4.3. 1 .2 Minimum requirements 

The AN shall meet the following minimum requirements: 

a) in a defined frequency range the AN shall provide defined RF impedances between the 
terminals of the EUT to be measured and between these terminals and the reference 
ground. By meeting this requirement, the disturbance source to be measured is loaded in a 
defined manner if, in addition, the test configuration (see 2.4.4) is defined; 

b) if the AN is intended to separately measure common mode and/or differential mode 
disturbances (see 2.4.3.1.1), the rejection ratio of differential to common mode signals, and 
vice versa, shall be specified in the appropriate frequency range; 

c) in a defined frequency range there shall normally be an isolation between the defined 
RF impedances and the actual network (or a signal simulator) so that the loading of the AN 
by the actual network (or the signal simulator) does not unduly influence the value of any of 
the defined RF impedances; 

11 



IS 10052 (Part 2) -.1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

d) the AN shall provide a defined connection (connector) to which the defined measuring 
equipment can be connected, in order to make a defined test configuration possible. The 
input connector shall be suitable for measuring equipment with 50 £2 input impedance as 
defined in CISPR 16-1; 

e) the AN shall provide a defined connecting point to which the reference ground can be 
connected, in order to make a defined test configuration possible; 

f) the AN shall be calibrated according to a prescribed procedure. 

2.4.3. 1 .3 Additional requirements 

The AN shall have the following additional requirements: 

a) the AN shall contain a decoupling or blocking network to prevent: 

- damage of the components forming the defined RF impedances by the wanted line 
voltages of the network, such as the mains voltage, 

- damage of the components forming the defined RF impedances by peak voltages 
produced by the EUT, such as switching transients, 

- influence of the rated line voltages on the measuring results, for example overload of 
the input stage of the measuring equipment; 

b) the AN shall contain a filter to prevent intentional signals on the actual network or the 
signal simulator influencing the measuring results. 

2.4.3.2 Voltage probes 

For standardized voltage probes, see CISPR 16-1. 

Disturbance voltages on terminals which are not to be measured with an AN can be measured 
with a voltage probe. Examples of such terminals are connecting jacks for antennas, control 
lines, signal lines and load lines. In general the voltage probe is used to measure the common 
mode disturbance voltage. The probe presents a high RF impedance between the terminal to 
be measured and the reference ground. 

2.4.3.2.1 Minimum requirements 

a) In a defined frequency range the voltage probe shall provide a high RF impedance 
between its measuring tip and the reference ground so as not to affect the voltage to be 
measured. 

b) The voltage probe shall have a blocking capacitor of such a value to ensure that line 
voltage cannot damage the measuring receiver. 

c) The voltage probe shall provide a defined 50 Q connection (connector) to which the 
standardized measuring receiver can be connected, in order to make a defined disturbance 
measurement. 

d) The voltage probe shall provide a defined connection point to which the reference 
ground can be connected in a defined manner via a lead of defined maximum length unless 
the reference ground is connected to the EUT in another specified way. 

e) The voltage probe shall be calibrated according to a prescribed procedure, where this 
procedure shall account for parasitic effects near the test point, for example unwanted 
capacitive coupling between the test point and the screening of the probe. The voltage 
division between probe impedance and input impedance of measuring equipment shall be 
independent of frequency or accounted for in the calibration process. 

f) The voltage probe name-plate shall state the maximum line voltage. 

12 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.4.3.3 Current probes 

Current probes or current transformers allow the measurement of all three types of 
disturbance current (see 2.4.1) on mains leads, signal lines, load lines etc. A clip-on 
construction of the probe will facilitate its use. 

The common mode current on leads is measured when the current probe is clipped around 
those leads, regardless of the number of wires. In this situation, the differential mode currents 
on the leads will induce signals with equal magnitude but opposite sign, so that these signals 
cancel to a high degree. The latter effect allows the measurement of a common mode current 
with a small amplitude in the presence of differential mode (operating) currents with large 
amplitude. 

For already defined (and standardized) current probes see CISPR 16-1. 

2.4.3.3.1 Minimum requirements 

a) In a defined frequency range the current probe shall have a defined transfer impedance, 
that is, a defined ratio of the RF voltage induced in the probe and the known RF curi-ent on 
a single wire running through the probe, as measured in a specified way. 

b) In a defined frequency range the insertion loss caused by the current probe, that is of 
the EUT, shall be less than 1 Q. 

c) The current probe shall be constructed in such a way that the influence of electric fields 
on the measuring results can be neglected. 

d) The current probe shall provide a defined connection (connector) to which the defined 
(and standardized) measuring equipment can be connected, in order to make a defined test 
configuration possible. In addition, the input impedance of the measuring equipment to be 
used in connection with the current probe shall be indicated. 

e) The current probe specification shall include the maximum current rating before 
saturation effects will take place. 

f) The current probe shall be calibrated according to a prescribed procedure. 

2.4.4 Equipment test configuration 

2.4.4.1 Disposition of equipment under test and its connection to ttie artificial network 

For measurement of the disturbance voltage the equipment under test (EUT) is connected to 
the power supply mains and any other extended network via one or more artificial network(s) 
(in general, the V-type network Is used for this purpose) (see figure 1), in accordance with the 
following requirements. Other CISPR publications supply additional test details relevant to 
particular EUTs. 

An EUT, whether intended to be grounded or not, and which is to be used on a table is 
configured as follows: 

- either the bottom or the rear of the EUT shall be at a controlled distance of 40 cm from 
a reference groundplane. This groundplane is normally the wall or floor of a shielded room. 
It may also be a grounded metal plane of at least 2 m by 2 m. This is physically 
accomplished as follows: 

. place the EUT on a table of non-conducting material which is at least 80 cm high. 
Place the EUT so that it is 40 cm from the wail of the shielded room, or 

. place the EUT on a table of non-conducting material which is 40 cm high so that the 
bottom of the EUT is 40 cm above the groundplane; 

- all other conductive surfaces of the EUT shall be at least 80 cm from the reference 
groundplane; 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

- the ANs are placed on the floor as shown in figure 1 in such a way that one side of the 
AN housings is 40 cm from the vertical reference ground plane and other metallic parts; 

- the EUT cable connections shall be as shown in figure 1 ; 

- the optional test configuration for table-top EUT with only a power cord attached is 
shown in figure 2. 

Floor-standing EUTs are subject to the same provisions as above with the exception that they 
shall be placed on a floor, the points of contact being consistent with normal use. A ground- 
connected floor of metal shall be used but shall not make metallic contact with the floor 
support(s) of the EUT. The metal floor may be used as the reference ground plane and shall 
extend at least 50 cm beyond the boundaries of the EUT and have minimum dimensions of 2 
m by 2 m. For examples of test configurations, see figures 3 and 4. 

The artificial network Is RF bonded to the reference groundplane by a low radio-frequency 
impedance connection. 

NOTE - The "low" radio-frequency impedance value should preferably be less than 10 £2 at 30 MHz. 
This can, for example, be achieved if the housing of the artificial network is mounted directly to the 
reference ground plane or its connection strap has a length-to-width ratio not more than 3:1 . 

The EUT is located so that the distance between the boundary of it and the closest surface of 
the artificial network is 80 cm. 

The power mains leads to an artificial network and the connecting cable from the network to 
the measuring receiver must be arranged in such a way that their locations do not influence 
the measurement results. EUTs, which are not equipped with fixed connecting leads, are 
connected to the artificial network with aim long lead as specified in the relevant equipment 
documentation. 

If the EUT is to be connected to a reference ground this shall be done by means of a lead 
running parallel to the EUT mains lead and of the same length at a distance of not more than 
10 cm from it, unless a ground conductor is contained in the mains lead itself. If a fixed lead is 
attached to the EUT this shall be 1 m long, or if In excess of 1 m, part of the lead is folded 
back and forth in the shape of a meander, as far as possible so as to form a bundle not 
exceeding 40 cm in length, and arranged in the form of a non-inductive serpentine in such a 
way that the total length of the lead does not exceed 1 m (see also figure 5). However, when 
the bundled lead may Influence the measurement results, a shortening of the length to 1 m is 
recommended. 

2.4.4.2 Procedure for the measurement of unsymmetric disturbance voltages with V-networks 

2.4.4.2.1 Disposition of equipment with ground connection 

For equipment under test which is required to be grounded during its operation, or the 
conductive housing of which can come into contact with ground, the unsymmetric radio 
interference voltage of the individual mains lead is measured with reference to the reference 
metal wall (general mass of the measuring equipment) to which the housing of the equipment 
under test is connected via its protective ground conductor and the ground connection of the 
artificial mains network (see the equivalent circuit in figure 6). 

The parameters determining the interference potential of grounded test units are discussed in 
clause A. 3. 

For EUTs with two or more power and safety conductors or special ground connections the 
measurement result depends much on the termination conditions of the mains terminals and 
the grounding conditions (refer also to 2.4.5 on measurement in systems). 

14 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996} 



As the ground safety conductors in the actual mains power supply installation may have a 
considerable length, and therefore do not guarantee a ground impedance as low and effective 
as in the standard test set-up with only a 1 m long ground wire connection to the reference 
mass, and moreover, since safety conductors need not be used on every product per lEC 364-4, 
disturbance voltage measurements on pluggable Class I appliances shall be carried out 
according to 2.4.4.2.2, also without the safety or ground wire being connected (non-grounded 
measurement). If however for safety reasons it is necessary to maintain the safety function of 
ground wires, this can be achieved by the use of an RF choke or impedance equal to the 
network impedance of a V-network in the safety wire path. 

Exceptions may be made for non-radiating or well screened EUTs which have to be grounded 
according to special requirements or instructions (see A 2.1 and A 4.1). 



2.4.4.2.2 Disposition of equipment without ground connection 

Devices without ground connection comprise electrical devices with protective insulation 
(protection Class II) and devices which can be operated without ground or safety conductor 
(device of protection Class III) and also pluggable protection Class I devices connected via an 
isolating transformer. For these devices, the unsymmetrical disturbance voltage of the 
individual conductors must be measured with respect to the metal reference ground of the 
measurement arrangement as shown in the equivalent circuit of figure 7. 

Since in the long and medium wave bands (0,15 MHz to 2 MHz) the results of measurement 
can be considerably influenced by the low series capacitance C2 between the EUT and the 
reference ground, and since it is determined by the specified distance, the arrangement must 
be exactly followed and other external influence such as body and hand capacitance, for 
example, should be avoided. 



2.4.4.2.3 Disposition of handheld equipment without a ground connection. 

Measurements shall first be made in accordance with 2.4.4.2.2. Additional measurements shall 
then be noade using the artificial hand described in CISPR 16-1. 

The general principle to be followed in the application of the artificial hand is shown in figure 9. 
Terminal M of the RC element shall be connected to any exposed non-rotating rrietat work and 
to metal foil wrapped around all handles, both fixed and detachable, supplied with the EUT. 
Metalwork which is covered with paint or lacquer is considered as exposed metalwork and 
shall be directly connected to the RC element. 

The artificial hand shall consist of metal foil wrapped around the case, or part thereof, as 
specified below. The foil shall be connected to one terminal (terminal M) of an RC element 
(see figure 8) consisting of a capacitor of 220 pF ± 20 % in series with a resistor of 510 Q ± 10 %; 
the other terminal of the RC element shall be connected to the reference earth of the 
measuring system. 

The artificial hand is to be applied the following way: 

a) when the, case of the EUT is entirely of metal, no metal foil is needed, but the terminal M 
of the RC element shall be connected directly to the body of the EUT; 

b) when the case of the EUT is of insulating material, metal foil shall be wrapped around 
the handle B (figure 9), and also around the second handle D, if present. Metal foil 60 mm 
wide shall also be wrapped around the body C at that point where the iron core of the motor 
stator is located or around the gearbox if this gives a higher emission level. All these pieces 
of metal foil, and the ring or bushing A, if present, shall be connected together and to the 
terminal M of the RC element; 

15 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

c) when the case of the EUT is partly metal and partly insulating material, and has 
insulating handles, metal foil shall be wrapped around the handles B and D (figure 9). If the 
case is non-metallic at the location of the motor, a metal foil 60 mm wide shall be wrapped 
around the body C at that point where the iron core of the motor stator is located, or 
alternatively around the gearbox, if this is of insulating material and a higher emission level 
is obtained. The metal part of the body, the point A, the metal foil round the handles B 
and D and the metal foil on the body C shall be connected together and to the terminal M of 
the RC element; 

d) when the EUT has two handles of insulating material A and B and a case of metal C, for 
example an electric saw (figure 10), metal foil shall be wrapped around the handles A and 
B. The metal foil at A and B and the metal body C shall be connected together and to the 
terminal M of the RC element. 

2.4.4.2.4 Disposition of keyboards, electrodes and other equipment sensitive to liuman touch 

In the case of such equipment the artificial hand shall be applied as required by the product 
specifications and in general according to 2.4.4.2.3. 

2.4.4.2.5 Disposition of equipment with external suppression components 

If Interference suppression devices are attached outside the EUT (e.g. in a plug device for 
connection to the mains) or as an element inserted in the connecting cable (power cord 
emission suppression device), or if shielded power cords are used, an additional 1 m long 
unshielded cable must be connected between the emission suppression device and the 
artificial network for measurement of the disturbance voltage. The line between the device and 
the emission suppression device must be placed in the direct proximity of the test object. 

2.4.4.2.6 Disposition of equipment having auxiliary apparatus connected at the end of 
a lead other than the mains lead 

NOTES 

1 Regulating controls incorporating semiconductor devices are excluded from this subclause; the 
provisions of 2.4.4.4.1 shall apply. 

2 When the auxiliary apparatus is not essential to the operation of the EUT and has a separate 
test procedure specified elsewhere, this subclause does not apply. The main EUT is tested as an 
individual EUT. 

3 The ultimate decision whether to measure and apply limits is to be made in the relevant CISPR 
product publication. 

Connecting leads exceeding 1 m in length shall be bundled in accordance with 2.4.4.1. 

Measurements are not required when the connecting lead between EUT and auxiliary 
apparatus is permanently fixed on both ends and is either shorter than 2 m or shielded, 
provided that in the latter case the shielded lead is connected at both ends to the metal 
housing of the EUT and that of the auxiliary apparatus. Leads with refpovable plugs and 
sockets are considered to be extendable to a length of more than 2 m and tneasurements are 
required. 

The equipment under test shall be arranged In accordance with previous parts of 2.4.4.2, with 
the following additional requirements: 

a) the auxiliary apparatus shall be placed at the same height as and at the same distance 
from the grounded conducted surface and if the lead is long enough, it is to be treated in 
accordance with 2.4.4.1. If the auxiliary lead is shorter than 0,8 m, Its length shall be 
maintained, and the auxiliary apparatus shall be placed as far away as possible from the 
main apparatus. When the auxiliary apparatus is a control, the arrangements for Its 
operation must not affect the level of disturbance; 

16 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

b) if an EUT having an auxiliary apparatus is grounded, no artificial hand shall be 
connected. If the EUT itself is made to be held in the hand, the artificial hand shall be 
connected to the EUT and not to any auxiliary apparatus; 

c) if the EUT is not made to be held In the hand, auxiliary apparatus which is not grounded 
and is made to be held in the hand must be connected to the artificial hand, if the auxiliary 
apparatus is not made to be held in the hand either, it shall be placed in relation to a 
grounded conducting surface as described in 2.4.4.1. 

In addition to the measurement on the terminals for the mains connection, measurements are 
conducted on all other terminals for incoming and outgoing leads (e.g. control and load lines) 
using a voltage probe connected to the input of the measuring receiver. 

The auxiliary apparatus, control or load is connected to allow measurements to be made under 
all provided operating conditions and during interactions between the EUT and the auxiliary 
apparatus. 

Measurements are performed both on the power input terminals of the EUT and the power 
input terminals of the auxiliary apparatus. 



2.4.4.3 Measurement of common mode voltages at differential mode signal terminals 

2.4.4.3.1 Measurement using the delta-type network 

The common mode disturbance voltage at the terminals for differential mode signal lines of 
telecommunication, data processing and other equipment is measured with delta-networks in 
accordance with 11.6 of CISPR 16-1, in the frequency range 150 kHz to 30 MHz. The delta- 
networks specified in CISPR 16-1 could be amended in order to allow signal and d.c. current 
paths needed for the proper functioning of the EUT as long as the requirements on differential 
mode and common mode impedances of CISPR 16-1 are complied with. 

When using the delta network for measurements on signal terminals, the differential mode 
rejection must be as great as needed not to give erroneous results when measuring a common 
mode disturbance voltage at the same frequency as the operational differential mode signal. 

When the EUT is to be measured on its power supply terminals using an artificial mains 
network all voltage measurements shall be carried out with both networks connected 
simultaneously. The provisions prescribed in 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.4.2 are to be observed. 

NOTE - The frequency range of the delta-network can be extended to 9 kHz using the same 
network impedance if decoupling of the connected signal line and coupling to the measuring 
receiver are designed accordingly. 

2.4.4.3.2 Measurements using ttie T-type network 

Alternatively a common mode artificial network, e.g. a T-type network according to clause 20 
of CISPR 16-1, can be used for the measurement of common mode disturbance voltages in 
the frequency range 9 kHz to 30 MHz. 

In contrast to the delta-network which provides a differential mode and a common mode 
termination with equal simulation impedances of 150 Q, the T-network provides only a 
common mode termination of 150 Q and almost no loading and high isolation to the differential 
mode operational signal on the communication line. 

At the supply side of the T-type network a signal simulator, load circuits for d.c. or the 
operational signal frequency of the EUT or other circuits needed Tor the operation of the EUT 
can be connected. These circuits shall either themselves provide a differential mode RF 
resistance of 100 Q - 150 Q, as required for the particular EUT, or with a termination to 

17 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



provide this resistance. When no external circuit is specified for the operation of the EUT a 
resistor of 150 Q shall be connected as differential mode RF termination to the T-type network. 
Figure 1 1 shows an example of a T-type network. 



2.4.4.4 Measurements using voltage probes 

2.4.4.4.1 With an artificial mains network 

In order to test devices and systems with several connected or connectable lines, the 
disturbance voltage at the line connections, which cannot be measured with artificial mains 
networks (e.g. for connecting lines between parts of components which are separated from the 
mains) as well as the connecting jacks for antennas, control and load lines, must be measured 
with a voltage probe with a high input impedance (1500 Q or more) to ensure that the lines are 
not loaded by the probe. 

For these cases, however, the primary power input wires must be isolated and RF terminated 
with the AMN. For the remaining lines, also those not to be measured with the probe, the 
corresponding conditions of 2.4.4.1 and the operating conditions laid down for the individual 
devices In the respective product specifications (e.g. CISPR 11 and CISPR 14) must be 
observed in regard to arrangement and length. The voltage probe is connected to the 
measuring receiver via a coaxial cable, the screen of which is connected to the ground 
reference and the case of the voltage probe. No connection shall be made directly from this 
case to live parts of the EUT. 

Figure 12 shows an example for a test set-up for measuring the interference voltage of a semi- 
conductor regulating control. 



2.4.4.4.2 Without an artificial mains network 

During testing of EUTs which are not to be measured with artificial mains networks, the 
disturbance voltage is measured across a defined simulation resistance (e.g. artificial fence 
simulation in 5.4.1 of CISPR 14 or under open-circuit conditions with an exactly defined 
arrangement and line layout taking into consideration the specifications of 2.4.4.1). The 
disturbance voltage is measured with a high-impedance voltage probe. 

This is valid also for e.g. power electronic devices which are fed from their own separate 
power supplies or battery devices to which separately installed lines are connected which are 
not to be loaded. 

In the case of disturbance voltage measurements on separate individual power sources for 
currents of more than 25 A (e.g. battery, generator, converter), an impedance measurement 
must be applied to ascertain that the tolerance of the simulated resistance, in accordance with 
CISPR 16-1 is not exceeded. 

The flexible ground connection for probes with an input impedance Rx of more than 1500 Q 
should not be longer than 1/10 of the wave-length at the maximum measurement frequency 
and shall be connected in the shortest possible way to the metal surface serving as reference 
ground. In order to avoid additional capacitive loading of the test point by the screening of the 
probe, the tip of the probe should not exceed a length of approximately 3 cm. The screened 
connections to the measuring receiver must be arranged in such a way that the capacitance of 
the test object is not altered with respect to the reference ground. 



18 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.4.4.5 Measurements using current probes 

Disturbance current measurements may be useful for several reasons. The first is that m some 
devices It may not be possible to insert an artificial mains network. This is particularly true 
when tests are performed on installed systems, or where the EUT has very high currents. A 
second reason for the use of the current probe is that at the lower end of the frequency range 
the mains impedance becomes very low, so the disturbance source is a current generator. The 
measurement of this current can be made by means of a current transformer without 
interrupting or disconnecting the mains connection. 

Current probes shall conform to the requirements of clause 12 of CISPR 16-1. 

Current probes enable the direct measurement of the D common mode components of the 
disturbance current by enclosing the cable containing all leads. Therefore, common mode 
disturbance currents can be easily separated from differential mode operating currents. 

If measurements are performed with known load and source impedances, the disturbance 
voltage can be calculated. 

If only one conductor is enclosed, the superposition of the differential and common mode 
disturbance current components is measured. If, in this case, any extremely high (above 200 A) 
operating current exists, there is a risk of false data because the magnetic core of the current 
probe may saturate. 

2.4.5 System test configuration for conducted emissions measurements 

2.4.5.1 General approach to system measurements 

The general objective of defining a system test configuration for conducted emission 
measurements has the following key points: 

- avoiding common mode disturbance ground loops; 

- defining a configuration which is easily duplicated; 

- decoupling of lines not being measured from the line being measured; 

- placing of lines to achieve decoupling; 

- duplicating requirements in 2.4.1 to 2.4.4 for the system test to the maximum extent 
possible. 

Whenever possible, the disturbance voltage on a system line shall be measured with an AN. 
For currents up to 50 A, ANs can be used quite easily. The AN shall be installed within 80 cm 
of the system equipment being measured. Each wire of a mutti-wire power mains circuit shall 
be routed through an AN. Each AN shall be terminated with a 50 n resistor at the 
measurement terminal. 

The EUT shall be arranged and connected with cables terminated in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions. 

For some measurements, relevant product publications may state a specific load to be used 
together with load voltage probes, instead of an AN. A voltage probe may also be used for 
conducted measurements when the mains current is above 50 A and an appropriate AN is not 
available. In this latter case test results with an AN will take precedence over the results with a 
voltage probe, however. 

For some measurements, the use of current probes may be specified in the relevant product 
publication. 

19 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.4.5.2 System configuration 

The system shall be carefully configured, installed, arranged and operated in a manner that is 
most representative of the system as typically used (i.e. as specified in the instruction manual) 
or as specified herein. Equipment that typically operates within a system made up of multiple 
interconnected units should be tested as part of such a typical operational system. 

Generally, the system that is tested shall be of the same type that is supplied to the end user. 
If the marketing information is not available or it is not practical to assemble extraordinary 
amounts of equipment to replicate a complete product installation, the test shall be performed 
using the best judgement of the test engineer in consultation with the design engineering staff. 
The results of any such discussion and decision process shall be documented in the test 
report. 

The selection and placement of cables, a.c. line cords, host and peripherals depends on the 
type of EUT and must be representative of expected equipment Installation. Three types are 
distinguished. First, there are systems normally used entirely on one table top. A second type 
of system consists of equipment normally used in a floor-standing configuration. These include 
systems mounted over a specially designed raised floor which facilitates intra-system 
connection under the raised floor. Equipment making up the floor-standing system can be 
interconnected with cabling lying on the floor, under the floor in a raised floor Installation, or 
overhead according to normal Installation. Third, there are systems that are a combination 
of floor-standing and table-top systems. The remainder of this clause provides instructions 
for the testing of each of these systems. In addition, the specific requirements In 2.4.1 to 2.4.4 
shall be observed. 

Equipment in a system, normally being floor-standing, shall be placed on a floor in accordance 
with 2.4.4.1. Equipment designed for both table-top and floor operation shall be tested only In 
the table-top configuration. 

2.4.5.2.1 Operating conditions 

The system shall be operated at the rated (nominal) operating voltage and typical load conditions 
- mechanical or electrical, or both - for which It is designed. Loads may be actual or simulated 
as described in the individual equipment requirements. For some systems, it may be 
necessary to develop a set of explicit requirements specifying the test conditions, operations, 
etc. to be used in testing a specific system. 

If the system includes a visual display unit or monitor, the following operating conditions apply 
unless the product publication specifies otherwise: 

a) set the contrast control to maximum; 

b) set the brightness control to maximum or at raster extinction if raster extinction occurs 
at less than maximum brightness; 

c) for colour monitors, use white letters on a black background to represent all colours; 

d) select the worst case of positive or negative video if both are available; 

e) set character size and number of characters per line so that the maximum number of 
characters per screen is displayed; 

f) for a monitor that has no graphics capabilities, regardless of the viaeo card used, a 
pattern consisting of random text shall be displayed; 

g) for a monitor with graphics capabilities, even though another video card may be needed 
to accomplish a graphic display, a pattern consisting of a line of scrolling Hs should be 
displayed; 

h) if a monitor has no text capabilities, use a typical display. 

20 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1990 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.4.5.2.2 Interfacing equipments, simulators and cables 

Compliance testing is performed with peripheral and cable placement which is judged realistic 
and likely to be found in the final installation. Figures 1. 3, 4 and 5 describe standardized test 
set-ups which will provide a basis for repeatability among testing laboratories and is consistent 
with the requirement for a realistic system and cable orientation. Any deviation from the 
standard test set-ups shall be documented together with its supporting rationale. 

Since a system is required to Interact functionally with other units, the actual interfacing units 
should be used. Simulators may be used to provide representative operating conditions, 
provided the effects of the simulator used in lieu of an actual interfacing unit properly 
represent the electrical, and in some cases the mechanical, characteristics of the interfacing 
units, especially concerning RF signals, impedances and shield terminations. Because of the 
added degree of uncertainty when a simulator is used, such use should be avoided if possible. 
In case of a dispute, measurements made with ah actual interfacing unit shall take 
precedence. If a device is designed to be used only with a specific host computer or 
peripheral, it should be tested with that computer or peripheral. 

Interfacing cables should be typical of normal use as supplied with the normal system and at 
least 2 m long unless the manufacturer's user manual specifies shorter cables. The same type 
of cable (that is, non-shielded, braided shield, foil shield, etc.) specified in the user manual 
should be used throughout the tests. Excessive lengths of cable shall be folded into a 
serpentine-like bundle at the approximate centre of the cable with the bundles 30 cm to 40 cm 
in length. 

If shielded or special cables are used during the tests to achieve compliance, then a statement 
must be included in the test report and in the instruction manual advising of the need to use 
those types of cables. 

Interface ports (conneotors) shall have a cable connected to one of each type of functional 
interface port of the system, and each cable shall be terminated in a device typical of actual 
usage. Where there are multiple interface ports all of the same type, additional connecting 
cables shall be added to the system to determine the effect these cables have on emissions 
from the system. 

Normally, the loading of similar ports is limited to the following: 

a) availability of multiple loads (for large systems); 

b) reasonableness of multiple loads representing a typical installation. 

The rationale for the selection of the configuration and loading of ports shall be included in the 
test report; that is 25 % of possible cables were connected and the emissions did not increase 
by more than 2 dB when one or more cables were added. Additional ports on support units, 
interfacing units or simulators, other than those associated with the system or the minimum 
required system, need not be connected or used during testing. 

2.4.5.2.3 Mains connection 

If the system is an assembly of equipment each having its own power cords, the point of 
connection for the ANs is determined from the following rules: 

a) each power cord which terminates in a mains supply plug of a standard design (lEC 83, 
for example) shall be tested separately; 

b) power cords or terminals which are not\ speci^iec^ by the manufacturer to be connected 
via a host unit shall be tested separately; 

21 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

c) power cords or field wiring terminals which are specified by the manufacturer to be 
connected to a host unit or other power-supplying equipment shall be connected to that 
host unit or other power-supplying equipment, and the terminals or cords of that host unit or 
other power-supplying equipment are connected to the ANs and tested; 

d) where a special mains connection is specified, the necessary connection hardware to 
the AN shall be supplied by the manufacturer for the purpose of the test. 

The ground safety conductor of units separately powered shall be isolated from the equipment 
under test by a 50 (xH AN in the frequency range 0,15 MHz to 30 MHz. The normal AN mains 
input is connected to the reference ground in this use of the AN as a filter. 



2,4.5.3 Measurements of interconnecting lines 

In addition to the measurement on the terminals for the mains connection, measurements may 
need to be performed with a voltage probe on other terminals for incoming and outgoing leads 
(for example control and load lines). If the function of the equipment under test is affected by 
the 1500 O. impedance of the probe, the impedance at 50/60 Hz and at radio frequencies may 
need to be increased (for example 15 kQ in series with 500 pF). In place of a voltage 
measurement, a current measurement with a current probe may also be used, if required (or 
offered as an option) in the product specification. 

During the measurement, the ANs on the mains lead remain in place to provide a defined 
mains isolation and a defined RF termination. The auxiliary apparatus (control, load) is 
connected to allow measurements to be made under all provided operating conditions and 
during interactions between the equipments. Measurements are made on the specified 
terminals of each equipment. 

If the connecting lines between equipments are permanently fixed on both ends and either 
shorter than 2 m or shielded, no measurements are necessary, provided that in the latter case 
the shielded cable is connected at both ends to the reference ground, that is metal housing of 
the equipments. Non-shielded connecting lines with plug(s) or socket(s) are considered to be 
extendable to a length of more than 2 m and therefore must be extended by at least 2 m and 
must be tested. Shielded cables must be at least 2 m long unless the user manual specifies 
shorter cables. 



2.4.5.4 Decoupling of system components 

One of the sources of inaccurate conducted measurements in a system is any ground 
circulating current. This ground current may be interrupted by installing a 50 \iH AN In the 
frequency range 0,15 MHz - 30 MHz in the ground safety conductor to the EUT. 

An additional source of circulating currents can be the shields of interconnecting cables 
between units. Therefore, the ground safety conductor to these units shall also be isolated by 
a 50 ^iH AN. 

The measurement receiver should be referenced to ground only at the measurement point to 
prevent ground loops. (Caution: shock hazard may exist if the measuring set is not supplied 
with an isolation transformer.) 



2.4.6 In situ measurements 

Testing may be performed at the end user's or manufacturer's premises, if the system cannot 
be set up on t^st site. In this case, both the system and its location are considered as the 
system tested. The emission results are unique to the installation site because site 
containment properties affect the measurement. However, where testing of a given system has 

22 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

been accomplished at three or more representative locations, the results may be considered 
representative of all sites with similar systems for purposes of determining compliance with 
emission requirements (if allowed in the procuring or requirement document.) 

The disturbance voltage shall be measured under the existing conduction conditions with non- 
reacllve pick-up devices (high resistance voltage probes). The conduction conditions and 
measurement results are affected by: 

- the existing reference ground or the reference mass used during measurement. Neither 
a conducting ground plane nor an AN shall be installed for user's installation testing unless 
one or both are to be a permanent part of the installation; 

- the RF characteristics and loading conditions for the power mains conduction; 

- the ambient RF environment; and 

- the input impedance of the pick-up device. 



2.4.6.1 Reference ground 

The existing ground at the place of installation should be used as reference ground. This 
should be selected by taking high-frequency (RF) criteria into consideration. Generally, this is 
accomplished by connecting the EUT via wide straps, with a length-to-width ratio not 
exceeding 3, to structural conductive parts of buildings that are connected to earth ground. 
These include metallic water pipes, central heating pipes, lightning wires to earth ground, 
concrete reinforcing steel and steel beams. 

In general, the safety and neutral conductors of the power installation are not suitable as 
reference ground as these may carry extraneous disturbance voltages and tan have undefined 
RF impedances. 

If no suitable reference ground is available in the surroundings of the test object or at the 
place of measurement, sufficiently large conductive structures such as metal foils, metal 
sheets or wire meshes set up in the proximity can be used as reference ground for 
measurement. 

The general requirements of 2.4.4.2.1 and of annex A should be observed. 

2.4.6.2 Measurement with voltage probes 

Testing of conducted disturbance voltage is made with the voltage probe. Special precautions 
must be taken to establish a reference ground for the measurements. 

Any voltage decrease caused by loading of the circuit to be measured can be determined 
qualitatively by varying the voltage probe input impedance. If the input impedance of the voltage 
probe is high compared to the internal impedance of the test point or of the tested network, then 
only slight differences in the measurement of the disturbance voltage occur when the probe input 
impedance is increased. The input impedance of the probe can be doubled by series connection of 
a 1500 n resistor. If the disturbance voltage Is reduced by (the predicted) 5 dB or 6 dB, tfien the 
1500 CI probe can be used to measure the disturbance voltage. 

2.4.6.3 Selection of measuring points 

Radio disturbance voltage measurements at the place of Installation are carried out at the 
boundaries of the user's premises, of Industrial areas, or at points to be specified within the 
Influence area of receiving system. 

23 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.4.6.3.1 Measurements on mains and other supply leads 

In power supply networks it is sufficient to measure the unsynrimetric disturbance voltage with 
the voltage probe at accessible power outlets near the power entrance to the building. 



2.4,6.3.2 Measurements on unshielded and shielded cables 

In the case of non-shielded and shielded signal, control and load leads with non-grounded 
shield leaving the boundaries, the unsymmetric disturbance voltage shall be measured with the 
voltage probe on the individual wires or the screens against reference ground. 

In the case of shielded cables with grounded shield, the common mode disturbance current is 
measured at a distance greater than one-tenth wavelength from the connecting and grounding 
points using a current probe. 



2.5 Measurements using the absorbing clamp, 30 MHz to 1000 MHz 

2.5.1 General 

Absorbing clamps (see figure 13) are suitable for the measurement of the disturbance power 
that can be radiated from a cable for some types of equipment depending on construction and 
size. The precise measuring procedure and its applicability is to be specified in each product 
specification. If the dimensions of the EUT, without connecting leads, approach a quarter of a 
wavelength of the measuring frequency, direct cabinet radiation may occur and the absorbing 
clamp method is not suitable to assess the full radiation capacity of the EUT. In general,, the 
method is most useful for small EUTs and in the frequency range of 30 MHz to 300 MHz. 

The disturbance potential of an EUT with a mains lead being the only external lead may be 
taken as the power it could supply to its main lead acting as a radiating antenna. This power is 
nearly equal to that supplied by the EUT to the absorbing clamp placed around the lead at the 
position where the absorbed power is maximum. 

Equipment having external leads other than a mains lead can radiate disturbance from such 
leads, shielded or unshielded, in the same manner as radiation from the mains lead. 
Absorbing clamp measurements can also be used on these leads for diagnostic purposes. 

Radiation from leads at frequencies above 300 MHz, up to 1000 MHz, may be measured with a 
suitable absorbing clamp. Such measurements are also suitable for diagnostics. However, it 
should be noted that radiation could emanate directly from the equipment as well. 

Historical background of the absorbing clamp is contained in annex C. 



2.5.2 Measurements 

When using the absorbing clamp, the EUT is placed on a non-metallic table at least 80 cm 
high. The lead to be measured is stretched horizontally in a straight line, to permit variation in 
position of the absorbing clamp along the lead to find the maximum indication. The lead shall 
be at least a half-wavelength at the lowest frequency of measurement, plus the length of the 
absorbing clamp and a possible second absorbing clamp: at 30 MHz the lead lengtti is 6 m 
and with the second (filtering) absorbing clamp must be at least 7 m. Leads shorter than 1 m 
are not suitable for absorbing clamp measurements. 



24 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



The absorbing clamp is placed around the lead to be measured as shown in figure 13. The 
position of the absorbing clamp along the lead shall be varied from zero to one half- 
wavelength distance from the EUT at each test frequency. The maximum indication obtained 
on the measurement receiver connected to the absorbing clamp is proportional to the 
disturbance power available. 

When measurements are made on an EUT having more than one lead attached, detachable 
leads shall be removed if operationally possible, at the time when another lead is measured. A 
tead which cannot be removed shall be isolated by means of lossy ferrite rings or another 
absorbing clamp put around the lead immediately adjacent to the EUT. 

The test arrangement for the absorbing clamp is shown in figure 13. No person or metallic 
objects shall be positioned within 80 cm of the measuring set-up. The required movement of 
the absorbing clamp may be performed with pulleys and a rope that is operated by a motor 
that can be operated from a remote location. 

The power corresponding to the measured receiver voltage indication at each test frequency is 
derived from the absorbing clamp calibration procedure described in clause 13 of CISPR 16-1. 

2.6 Measurement of radiated disturbances 

2.6.1 Introduction 

This section sets forth the general procedures for the measurement of the field strength of 
radio disturbance produced by devices and systems. Experience with radiated disturbance 
measurements is less extensive than that of voltage measurements. The radiated disturbance 
measurement procedures are therefore open to revision and extension as knowledge and 
experience are accumulated. In particular, attention shall be given to the effect of leads and 
cables associated with the EUT. 

y 

For some products, it may be required to measure the electric, the magnetic, or both 
components of the radiated disturbance. Sometimes a measurement of a quantity related to 
radiated power is more appropriate. Normally measurements should be made of both the 
horizontal and vertical components of the disturbance with respect to the reference ground 
plane. The results of measurements of either the electric or magnetic components may be 
expressed in peak, quasi-peak, average or r.m.s. values. 

The magnetic component of the disturbance is normally measured at frequencies up to 30 MHz. 
In magnetic field measurements only the horizontal component of the field at the position of 
the receiving antenna is measured when using the distant antenna procedure. If the large loop 
antenna (LLA) system is used, the three orthogonal magnetic dipole moments of the EUT are 
measured. (Note that in the single antenna method, the horizontal component of the field at 
the position of the antenna is determined by the horizontal and vertical dipole moments of the 
EUT, because reflection plays a part.) 

2.6.2 Field-strength measurements 

Field-strength measurements may be made on an open area test site, in an absorber-lined 
shielded enclosure, in a reverberating chamber or using a LLA system. For practical reasons 
other test sites may have to be specified. 

2.6.2.1 Open area test site measurements ^ 

The open area test site shall conform with the relevant specifications in clause 16 of CISPR 
16-1 for its physical and electrical properties and for its validation. 



25 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.6.2.2 General measurement method 

Figure 14 shows the concept of measurements made on an open area test site with the direct 
and ground reflected rays arriving at the receiving antenna. 

The EUT is set up at a specified height above the ground plane and configured to represent 
normal operating conditions. The antenna is positioned at the specified separation distance. 
The EUT is rotated in the horizontal plane and the maximum reading noted. The height of the 
antenna is adjusted so that the direct and reflected rays approach or meet in-phase addition. 
The procedural steps may be interchanged and may need to be repeated to find the maximum 
disturbance. For practical reasons the height variation is restricted and hence perfect in-phase 
addition may not be achieved. 

2.6.2.3 Measurement distance 

An EUT subject to a radiated disturbance limit at a specified distance should be measured at 
that distance unless to do so would be impractical because of equipment size, etc. The 
measurement distance is the length of the projection of the EDTs closest point to the antenna 
and the midpoint of the antenna onto the ground plane. In some test set-ups the distance is 
measured from the antenna to the radiation centre of the EUT. For a measurement distance of 
10 m either method may be used. A distance of 10 m is preferred at most outdoor sites since 
at this distance the expected level of the disturbance being measured is sufficiently above the 
general ambient noise level to permit useful testing. Distances of less than 3 m or greater than 
30 m are not generally used. If a measurement distance other than the specified distance is 
necessary, the results should be extrapolated using the procedures specified in the product 
standards. If no guidance is given, suitable justification for extrapolation shall be provided. In 
general, extrapolation does not follow a simple inverse distance law. 

Where possible, measurement should be made in the far field. The far field region may be 
defined by the following conditions. 

Measurement distance d is selected so that: 

a) d> X/6. At this distance E/H = Zq= 120 re = 377 €1, that is electrical and magnetic field 
strength components are perpendicular to each other, and the measurement error is in the 
order of 3 dB if the EUT is regarded as being a tuned dipole antenna; or 

b) d> X, condition for a plane wave, where the error is in the order of 0,5 dB if the EUT is 
regarded as a tuned dipole antenna; or 

c) d > 2tflX, where D is the largest dimension of either the EUT or the antenna 
determining the minimum aperture for the illumination of the EUT, which applies to cases, 
where D » X. 

2.6.2.4 Antenna height variation 

For electric field-strength measurements the antenna height above the ground plane shall be 
varied within a specified range to obtain the maximum reading which will occur when the direct 
and reflected rays are in phase. As a general rule, for measurement distances up to and 
including 10 m, the antenna height for electric field strength measurements shall be varied 
between 1 m ahd 4 m. At greater distances of up to 30 m, preferably the height shall be varied 
between 2 m and 6 m. It may be necessary to adjust the minimum antenna height above 
ground down to 1 m in order to maximize the reading. These height scans apply for both 
horizontal and vertical polarization, except that for vertical polarization, the minimum height 
shall be increased so that the lowest point of the antenna clears the site ground surface by at 
least 25 cm. For magnetic field strength measurements using the single magnetic loop 
antenna, the height of the receiving antenna may be fixed at a specified elevation (typically 1 
m from ground to the bottom of the loop antenna). The loop antenna and EUT shall be rotated 
in azimuth to maximize the measured disturbance. 

26 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.6.2.5 Product specification details 

In addition to specifying the detailed measurement method and the disturbance parameters to 
be measured, the product standards shall include other relevant details as outlined below. 

2.6.2.5.1 Test environment 

The influence of the test environment shall be considered so as to ensure correct functioning 
of the EUT. Important parameters in the physical environment shall be specified, e.g. 
temperature and humidity. 

The electromagnetic environment needs special consideration to ensure accurate disturbance 
measurements. The ambient radio noise and signal levels measured at the test site with the 
EUT de-energized should be at least 6 dB below the limit. It is recognized that this is not 
always realizable at all frequencies. However, in the event that the measured levels of the 
ambient plus EUT radio noise emissions are not above the limit, the EUT shall be considered 
to be in compliance with the limit. For further guidance on ambient levels and resulting 
measurement error, see 2.3.1.1. 

If the ambient field-strength level at frequencies within the specified measurement ranges 
exceeds the limit(s), the following alternatives may be used: 

a) perform measurements at a closer distance and extrapolate results to the distance at 
which the limit is specified The extrapolation formula shall be as recommended by the 
Product standard or shall be verified by measurements at no less than three different 
distances; 

b) perform measurements in critical frequency bands during hours when broadcast 
stations are off the air and ambients from industrial equipment are lower; 

c) compare the amplitude of the EUT disturbance at the frequency under investigation with 
the amplitude of disturbance on adjacent frequencies in a shielded room or anechoically 
treated shielded room. The amplitude of the EUT disturbance at the frequency under 
investigation can be estimated by measuring the amplitude of the adjacent frequency 
disturbance and making a comparison; 

NOTE - The shielded or anechoic room should not be used for compliance determination at the other EUT 
frequencies unless the anechoic room data is correlatable to the open area test site data. 

d) in orienting the axis of an open field area test site, it is desirable to consider the 
directions of strong ambient signals, so that the orientation of the receiving antenna on the 
site discriminates against such signals as far as possible; 

e) for narrowband disturbances from the EUT occurring near an RF ambient, when both 
are within the standard bandwidth, a narrower instrument bandwidth may be useful. 

2.6.2.5.2 Configuration of equipment under test 

The operating conditions of the EUT shall be specified, e.g., the characteristics of the input 
signals, the modes of operation, the arrangement of components, the lengths and types of 
interconnecting cables, etc. 

The testing of individual and multi-component systems shall satisfy the following two 
conditions: 

a) the system is configured for use in a typical manner. 

b) the system is configured in a manner that will maximize disturbances. 

The term "system" refers to the EUT in combination with the components that are connected to 
the EUT and all required connecting cables. 

27 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



The term "configuration" refers to the orientation of the EUT, the other components of the 
system, the interconnecting cables, and the power mains leads that comprise the system. 
During all measurements, the configuration of the system shall be adjusted so that the above 
two conditions, the condition a) being satisfied first and followed by condition b), are fulfilled, 
within the guidelines described in the following paragraphs. 

The term "typical" is used to describe the arrangement of how the EUT will actually be used. 
Guidelines for setting up a typical configuration are outlined below. 

For equipment designed to be part of a multi-unit system, the EUT shall be installed in a 
typical system and configured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. It shall also 
be operated in a manner that is representative of the typical usage for that EUT. During all 
tests, the EUT and all system components shall be manipulated within the confines of typical 
usage to maximize each disturbance. 

Interface cables shall be connected to each interface port on the EUT. The effect of varying 
the position of each cable shall be investigated to find the configuration that maximizes each 
disturbance as constrained by its typical configuration in actual use. The number of 
manipulations may be limited if a few such cable configurations will lead to maximum 
disturbances over the frequency range investigated. 

Interface cables shall be of the type and length specified by the equipment manufacturer. 

Any excess length of each cable shall be separately bundled in a serpentine fashion at the 
approximate centre of the cable with the bundle 30 cm to 40 cm in length. If it is impractical to 
do so because of cable bulk or stiffness or because the testing is being done at a user 
installation, disposition of the excess cabie length is left to the discretion of the test engineer 
and should be noted in the test report. Different requirements for excess cabling may be 
specified in the product standard. 

Cables shall not be placed underneath, on top of the EUT or on system components unless it 
is appropriate to do so, e.g. a cable is normally routed through overhead cable racks or under 
the ground plane. Cables shall be positioned adjacent to the exterior cabinets of the EUT and 
all system components only if typically used in that manner. The EUT should be investigated in 
different modes of operation. 

For an EUT normally operated on top of a table, radiated emission tests should be performed 
with the EUT on a non-conducting table, the top of which is of suitable size. The table should 
be placed on a remotely controlled rotating platform constructed with non-conducting 
materials. The top of the rotating platform should normally be less than 0,5 m above the 
ground plane and the height of the table and platform together 0,8 m above the ground plane. 
If the rotating platform is at the same elevation as the ground plane, its surface shall be of 
conducting material and the 0,8 m height shall be measured with respect to the top of the 
rotating platform. An EUT normally placed on the floor will be tested on the floor. A flush- 
mounted rotating platform is useful in this situation. 

The EUT shall be grounded in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and conditions 
of intended use. If the EUT is operated without a ground connection, it shall be tested 
ungrounded. When the EUT is furnished with a grounding terminal or internally grounded lead 
which is to be connected in actual installation conditions, the ground lead or connection shall 
be connected to a ground plane (or facility for earth ground), simulating actual installation 
conditions. Any internally grounded lead included in the plug end of the a.c. mains cord of the 
EUT shall be connected to ground through the mains power service. 

2.6.2.6 Measurement instrumentation 

The measurement instrumentation, including antennas, shall conform with the relevant 
requirements in CISPR 16-1. 

28 



IS 10052 { Part 2 ) : 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.6.2.7 Field-strength measurements on other out-door sites 

Out-door test sites similar to an open area test site but without any metal ground plane may 
have to be prescribed for practical reasons for some products, e.g. ISM equipment and motor 
vehicles. The provisions given in 2.6.2.3 to 2.6.2.6 are valid. Equally, the general provisions 
given in clause 16 of CISPR 16-1 are referred to but not the requirements on validation. 

2.6.2.8 Measurements in reverberating chambers 
(Under consideration) 

2.6.2.9 Measurements in absorber-lined shielded enclosures 
(Under consideration) 

2.6.2.1 Measurements in TEM cells 
(Under consideration) 

2.6.3 Substitution method of measurement in the frequency range of 30 MHz to 18 GHz 

The method is intended for measuring radio disturbance radiated from the cabinet, including 
wiring and circuitry inside the cabinet, of an equipment under test. The EUT may be either a 
self-contained unit with no port for any connection or have one or several ports for power and 
other external connections. 

The substitution method is currently being used to measure emissions from microwave ovens 
in the frequency range 1 GHz -18 GHz. 

2.6.3.1 Test site 

The test site shall be a level area. Indoor sites may be used, but may need special 
arrangements, especially in the upper part of the frequency range, in order to meet the 
requirements of stable and non-critical reflections from the surroundings - for example, a 
corner reflector added to the measuring antenna and an absorbing wall behind the EUT. The 
suitability of the site shall be determined as follows (see figure 15). 

Two horizontal half-wavelength dipoles (see also 2.6.3.2) shall be placed parallel to each 
other, at the same height h, being not less than 1 m above the floor and spaced at the 
measurement distance d. Dipole B shall be connected to a signal generator and dipole A to 
the input of the measuring receiver. The signal generator shall be tuned to give maximum 
indication on the measuring receiver and its output adjusted to a convenient level. The site 
shall be considered suitable for the purpose of measurement at the test frequency if the indication 
on the measuring receiver does not vary more than ±1,5 dB when dipole B is moved 100 mm in any 
direction. The test shall be repeated throughout the frequency range at frequency intervals 
small enough to ensure that the site is satisfactory for all measurements intended. 

If an EUT requires that measurements be made also with vertical polarization (see 2.6.3.3), 
the suitability test of the site shall be repeated with the two dipoles positioned for vertical 
polarization. 



29 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.6.3.2 Test antennas 

The test antennas A and B have been described above as half-wave dipoles. For the 
frequency range below 1 GHz, this requirement applies primarily to the transmitting antenna B 
for which the radiated power in the direction of maximum radiation must be relatable to the 
power at the terminals of antenna B. The measuring antenna A should also be a half-wave 
dipole. Its actual sensitivity will be included in the substitution calibration of the test 
configuration. 

In the frequency range of 1 GHz to 18 GHz linearly polarized horn antennas are 
recommended. 

2.6.3.3 BUT configuration 

The EUT shall be placed on a non-conducting table with provision to rotate in the horizontal 
plane. The EUT shall be set up so that the geometric centre of the EUT coincides with the 
point earlier used as centre point for dipole B (figure 15). If the EUT is comprised of more than 
one unit, each unit shall be measured separately. Detachable leads to the EUT should be 
removed if operation is not affected adversely. Required leads shall be provided with 
absorbing ferrite rings and be so positioned that they will not influence the measurements. For 
shielded EUTs, all connectors not used shall be terminated by shielded terminations. 

2.6.3.4 Test procedure 

With the EUT arranged as described in 2.6.3.3, the horizontally polarized measuring dipole A 
shall be placed in the same position as when checking the test site. The dipole shall be normal 
to a vertical plane through its centre and that of the EUT. The EUT is first measured in its 
normal table-standing position and secondly when tilted 90° to stand on a normally vertical 
side. In each position it shall be rotated 360° in the horizontal plane. The highest reading Y 
shall be the characteristic value for the EUT. 

The measuring system is calibrated by replacing the EUT with a half-wave dipole B. The 
centre of this calibrating dipole B shall be placed in the same spot as the geometric centre of 
the previously measured EUT and parallel with the measurement antenna A, and be connected 
to a signal generator. The radiated power from the cabinet of the EUT is defined as the power 
at the terminals of the half-wave dipole B when the signal generator is adjusted to give the 
same reading on the measuring receiver as the maximum reading recorded earlier (Y), at each 
frequency of measurement. 

When measurements are made with both horizontally and vertically polarized measuring 
dipoles, separate calibrations must be made for the two modes. 

2.6.4 Measurements of in situ equipment 
(Under consideration) 

2.6.5 Measurement in a loop antenna system 

The loop antenna system (LAS) considered in this subclause is suitable for indoor measurement of 
the magnetic field strength emitted by a single EUT in the frequency range 9 kHz to 30 MHz. 
The magnetic field strength is measured in terms of the currents induced into the LAS by the 
magnetic disturbance field of the EUT. 

The LAS shall be validated regularly using the method described in clause G.4 of CISPR 16-1, 
annex G. That annex also gives a complete description of the LAS and a relation between the 
measuring results obtained with the LAS and those obtained as described in 2.6.2. 

30 



IS 10052 (Part 2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



2.6.5.1 General measurement method 

Figure 16 shows the general concept of measurements made with the LAS. The EUT is placed 
in the centre of the LAS. The current induced by the magnetic field from the EUT into each of 
the three large loop antennas of the LAS Is measured by connecting the current probe of the 
large loop antenna to a measuring receiver (or equivalent). During the measurements the EUT 
remains in a fixed position. 

The currents in the three large loop antennas, originating from the three mutually orthogonal 
magnetic field components, are measured in sequence. Each current level measured shall 
comply with the emission limit, expressed in dBp.A, as specified in the product standard. 

The emission limit shall apply to a LAS having large loop antennas with the standardized 
diameter of 2 m. 

2.6.5.2 Test environment 

The distance between the outer perimeter of the LAS and nearby objects, such as floor and 
walls, shall be at least 0,5 m. 

The currents induced in the LAS by an RF ambient field shall be judged in accordance with 16.4 
of CISPR 16-1. 

2.6.5.3 Configuration of the equipment under test 

To avoid unwanted capacitive coupling between the EUT and the LAS, the maximum 
dimensions of the EUT shall allow a distance of at least 0,20 m between the EUT and the 
standardized 2 m large loop antennas of the LAS. 

The position of the mains lead shall be optimized for maximum current induction. In general, 
this position will not be critical when the EUT complies with the conducted emission limit. 

In case of a large EUT, the diameter of the loop antennas of the LAS may be increaseo up to 4 m. 
In that case: 

a) the current values measured shall be corrected in accordance with annex J, clause J. 6 
of CISPR 16-1; and 

b) the maximum dimensions of the EUT shall allow a distance between the EUT and the 
large loops of at least 0,1 x D m, where D is the diameter of the non-standardized loop. 



31 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Section 3: Immunity measurements 

3.1 Immunity test criteria and general measurement procedures 

Immunity measurements are based upon a judgement of the point when the effect of 
interference on the EUT (equipment under test) has reached a specified level. 

Immunity measurements are performed in general by the application of a wanted test signal 
and an unwanted signal to the EUT. The fundamental basis of the measurement is set out in 
this clause, together with a listing of conditions which need to be specified in the detailed 
recommendations produced by the CISPR product committees. Clause 3.3 deals with the 
general principals of conduction methods of measurement for immunity, and clause 3.3 with 
radiation methods. 

3.1.1 General measurement method 

Figure 17 sets out the fundamental concept upon which all methods of measurement of 
immunity are based. 

The EUT is set up as specified to represent normal operating conditions. The unwanted signal 
is applied with increasing severity until the prescribed performance degradation is detected or 
the specified immunity level is reached, whichever is lower. 

The unwanted signal may be introduced by direct radiation or by current/voltage injection. In 
most cases both the direct radiation and injection techniques will be needed to fully assess 
the immunity potential of EUTs. The injection method is most useful for frequencies under 
150 MHz, although direct radiated tests above approximately 30 MHz are used. The direct 
radiated tests can be performed using fields launched by antennas and intercepted by the 
EUT. In some cases a "bounded" field is most efficient for EUTs of height less than 1 m. 
Examples of bounded fields occur with TEM cells, stripline antennas and mode-stirred 
enclosures. 

3.1.1.1 Objective assessment of performance degradation 

Objective assessment of EUT immunity is made by monitoring voltages, currents, specific 
signals, audio rectification levels, etc., which can be recorded using analogue or digital 
recording techniques. 

As an example of one such assessment of performance degradation, the immunity of 
television receivers to AM modulated RF interference is presented below. 

First the wanted test signal only is applied to the EUT. This produces a wanted audio signal 
which is measured. The control of the EUT or test set-up is adjusted to set this audio signal at 
the required level. The wanted audio signal is then removed either by switching off the 
modulation or the audio test signal. The unwanted signal is applied in addition and its level is 
adjusted to obtain an unwanted audio signal at the specified level below the wanted audio 
signal level. The level of the unwanted signal is the measure of immunity of the EUT at the test 
frequency concerned. Care should be taken in order not to damage the EUT by too high levels 
of the unwanted signal. 

3.1.1.2 Subjective assessment of performance degradation 

Subjective assessment of EUT immunity is made by visual and/or aural monitoring of 
performance degradation for EUTs with such visual or aural or both presentations. This 
technique differs from that in 3.1.1.1 in that specific electrical or similar signals and levels are 
not directly recorded with an analogue or digital format. Instead, performance degradation is 
not formulated in measurable terms but in human sensory terms, e.g., human audio or visual 
perception of an annoying effect. The unwanted immunity signals can be the same or similar to 
those used for objective immunity assessment measurements. 

32 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 
CIS PR 16-2(1996) 



As an example of one such subjective assessment of performance degradation, the immunity 
of television receivers to an unwanted signal, as perceived by humans as degraded visual and 
aural presentations, is given below. 

In the case of picture interference, the wanted test signal produces a standard picture and the 
unwanted signal produces a degradation of the picture. The degradation may be in a number 
of forms, such as a superposed pattern, sync disturbance, geometrical distortion, loss of 
picture contrast or colour, etc. 

The criterion of what constitutes performance degradation needs to be prescribed, and the 
conditions under which the subjective assessment is to be made must be specified. 

First the wanted signal only is applied to the EUT. The controls of the EUT are set to obtain a 
picture of normal brightness, contrast and colour saturation. The unwanted signal is then 
applied in addition and its level adjusted to obtain degradation of the picture as perceived by a 
human watching the picture. This level is the measure of immunity of the EUT at the test 
frequency concerned. 

3.1.1.3 Measurement to a limit 

The actual measurement of the immunity may not be required, i.e., when it is sufficient to 
know whether the EUT meets a limit or not. The unwanted signal, instead of being adjusted at 
each test frequency, is kept at the level of the limit and its frequency swept through the test 
range. The EUT is considereii to meet the limit if no degradation, whether objective or 
subjective, is observed at any time. This procedure is called a "go/no-go" test. 

3.1.2 Immunity degrada tion criteria 

To establish reasonable immunity criteria will require defining what is meant by performance 
degradation. One such view of the progressiveness of performance degradation may be as 
follows: 

a) no degradation: equipment complies with its design specifications. This type of criterion 
shall be adopted for sensitive health and safety equipment, as well as services with impact 
on large populations of consumers. It might conceivably be used as an immunity criterion 
for some critical processes or equipment operation as well; 

b) noticeable degradation: in this case, the performance has been affected by an EM 
disturbance. Increased noise in video and audio circuits, decreased signal-to-noise ratio in 
control circuits, error rates in digital systems approaching an allowable system maximum, 
or annoying audio or visual disturbances are examples of noticeable degradation. No 
operator intervention should be required to continue use of the electronic 
product/equipment. This degradation is generally used for mass produced products. The 
degradation disappears when the immunity signal is removed; 

c) serious degradation: in this category, products will not be able to provide continuous 
satisfactory operation. To correct this, field engineering or customer service representatives 
will spend considerable time in the field trying to identify and correct the problem. This 
immunity level should be set so that it occurs on very rare occasions. Operator intervention 
is required to restore specific operation of electronic product/equipment such as system 
lockups, resets, indiscriminate writing on floppy disk, and other altering of memory; 

d) failure/total inoperability: this is the most serious category where the product totally fails 
and cannot be reset to regain operability. Eventually, mechanical damage will occur. No 
field repair can be accomplished. This creates a need for complete equipment replacement 
with an urgent redesign to increase its immunity level. Customer service could be 
interrupted for an indefinite time dependent on the capability of the manufacturer to 
produce a satisfactory replacement product. 

It is the task of the product committees to determine the product degradation criteria for the 
above conditions. 

33 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



3.1.3 Product specification details 

In addition to specifying the detailed immunity measurement method and the means of 
determining the degradation of performance acceptable, the product specifications must 
include other relevant details as outlined below. 

3.1 .3.1 Test environment 

The needs of the test environment must be considered. The physical environment needs to be 
specified, e.g., temperature or humidity ranges. Also the EM environment must be specified, in 
particular, the maximum level of ambient signals. 

3.1.3.2 Working conditions of BUT 

The working conditions of the EUT must be specified, e.g., the characteristics of the wanted 
input signal, the modes of operation of the EUT, etc. 

3.1.3.3 EH^ threat 

There are many forms of EM disturbances which may cause the EUT to malfunction. The 
product committee must consider whether the immunity specification should cover all 
eventualities, i.e., immunity from transmitted radio waves, from conduction of signals, from 
spikes/dips/outages/distortions on the mains, from electrostatic discharge, from lightning 
induced surges, etc. 

For each potential threat, the mode of coupling must be evaluated so that the appropriate 
specialized test equipment can be specified together with the covered method of measure- 
ment. It will thus be necessary for the product committees to adapt the general measurement 
principles set out in this clause to their particular product. 

The characteristics of the unwanted signal must be specified, e.g., amplitude, modulation, 
direction, polarization, etc. The frequency range of applicability of each method must be 
defined, e.g., the useful frequency range of the TEM cell is dependent on its width and this in 
turn is dependent upon the size of the EUT. 

The EUT must be examined to determine whether it is particularly susceptible in any mode of 
operation or for a particular frequency of unwanted signal. 

3.1.3.4 Calibration 

The product specification must address calibration needs, either by referring to a basic 
standard or including the calibration procedure within the product or product family 
specification. This should include both the periodic calibration of the test equipment used and 
particularly the means of calibrating said parameters as the amplitude and homogeneity of the 
unwanted signal as it is used in direct radiation or injection methods. 

3.1.3.5 Statistical assessment 

The product specification must state the significance of the CISPR limit. In particular, it should 
address the question of whether the testing should conform to the 80/80 rule of 
Recommendation 46/1, and if so, which of the sampling methods should be used. 

For immunity testing until a performance degradation occurs, compliance with a CISPR limit 
for immunity may be judged using a suitable sample size such that a portion of the sample 
may exceed the permissible limit. For immunity testing performed at the immunity limit to 
determine compliance, e.g. go/no-go testing, without measuring the margin of immunity, 
statistical techniques may not apply. 

34 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2 (1996) 



3.2 Method of measurement of immunity for conducted signals 

The basic method is to inject the unwanted signal into a lead and increase the level until the 
specified level of degradation is observed or the specified imnnunity level is reached, 
whichever is first. The lead may be a signal, a control or mains lead. There are two variants of 
the method. Current injection is used to assess immunity to common mode (asymmetric) 
signals, the voltage injection method to assess immunity from differential mode (symmetric) 
signals. In general current injection is performed as a minimum since that mode is most 
vulnerable to radiated RF environments. 

The general principle of the injection measurement is illustrated in figure 18. The effects of 
interference signals induced into a lead of an equipment in an actual situation are simulated by 
the injection of an unwanted signal through a suitable coupling unit. 

In the case of current injection for unshielded leads, the unwanted current is injected in 
common mode into the conductors. In the case of coaxial or shielded cables the unwanted 
current is injected into the outer conductor or the shield of the cable also in common mode 
(see figure 18). The current flows through the EUT returning to the generator through the 
ground capacitance in parallel with the load impedances of the other terminals provided by 
coupling units. Note that in some cases a portion of the common mode signal is converted into 
differential mode, thus masking the true common-mode response. This may be a combination 
of common mode currents which affect the RF potential differences at opposite ends of the 
lead and cause a degradation of the wanted signal to unwanted signal ratios. 

In the case of voltage injection, the signal is applied between two wires. Note that at 
frequencies approaching 100 MHz or greater, conducted immunity injection by both methods is 
difficult due to the impedances and resonant conditions of the EUT leads and loads. 



3.2.1 Coupling units 

The coupling units contain RF chokes, capacitors, and resistive networks for the injection of 
unwanted signals. The impedance of the unwanted signal voltage source and the load 
impedances are standardized and the coupling units are designed to provide this impedance. 
They also permit the passage of the wanted test signal, other signals, and mains supply. 
Construction details and performance checks of coupling units are contained in CISPR 16-1. 

3.2.2 Measurement set-up 

The arrangement used for conducted immunity measurements must be adequately specified to 
ensure accuracy and repeatability. Particular items to specify include: 

a) height of EUT above a specified ground plane; 

b) disposition of excess signal and power leads; 

c) length of leads connecting coupling unit to signal and power leads; 

d) control of lay-out of all components used, that is EUT, its leads, coupling unit, ground 
plane, interconnect leads, signal source, etc.; 

e) quality of leads, that is, shield connections, transfer impedance, etc. 

More details on such specifications follow for the case of measuring the immunity of TV 
receivers, as an example. 

The TV receiver is placed 100 mm above a metallic ground plane of dimensions 2 m by 1 m. 
The coupling units are inserted into the various leads, respectively. The leads linking the 
coupling units to the EUT shall be as short as possible, in particular the lead to the antenna 
input of the EUT shall be not longer than 300 mm. 

35 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



The mains lead shall be 300 mm long. If longer, it shall be bundled to a length of 300 mm. The 
mains lead shall be fixed in a well-defined lay-out which shall be recorded in the test report. 
The distance between the leads and the ground plane shall be not less than 30 mm. 

The maximum number of coupling units used in a test shall be six. In the case of EUTs with 
more than six terminals, coupling units shall be used for at least one of each type of terminals, 
if present. 

NOTE - Product committees should include such details in the product specification. 

3.2.3 Method of measurement of input immunity 

The unwanted signal is applied to the input terminals of EUTs that normally receive radio- 
frequency signals in that manner. This unwanted signal is mixed with the desired signal. The 
following subclauses highlight such tests as may apply to sound and television receivers, as 
examples. Also, see CISPR 13. 

3.2.3. 1 Measurement of sound receivers 

For these measurements the wanted and the unwanted signal frequencies shall be specified in 
terms of accuracy, e.g., ± 1 kHz. 

The measuring set-up is shown in figure 19. The unwanted signal generator (1) and the 
wanted signal generator (2) are interconnected by means of the coupling network (6). To avoid 
mutual interference between the two generators, the coupling loss can be increased with the 
attenuators (7). The output of the coupling network, the source impedance of which shall be 
specified, shall be matched to the input terminal of the EUT by the network (8). The audio 
output is measured as specified. 

3.2.3.2 Measurement of television receivers 

The measuring set-up is shown in figure 20. The principle of operation is similar to the 
measuring set-up of figure 19 and the remarks in 3.2.3.1 apply. The low-pass filter (10) is 
added to prevent influence of the measuring results by harmonics of the unwanted signal 
generators. 



3.3 Method of measurement of immunity to radiated electric field interference 

The following clauses delineate various methods of measurement of immunity to radiated 
electric field interference. 

3.3.1 Measurements using the TEM mode 

A homogeneous, electromagnetic wave under the free space conditions can be simulated by a 
guided wave of the TEM (transverse electromagnetic) mode travelling between two flat parallel 
conducting surfaces. In this case the electric field component is perpendicular, and the 
magnetic field component parallel, to the conductors. TEM devices may be of the open 
stripline or the closed construction, e.g. TEM or GTEM device. Details of the TEM and stripline 
devices are given in CISPR 16-1. The description of the GTEM device is under consideration.. 

3.3.1.1 Measurement set-up using the open stripline 

The open stripline consists of two parallel plates sufficiently spaced apart to accommodate 
twice the electrical height of an EUT. The metallic structure of the EUT in the vertical plane 
constitutes the electrical height of the EUT. EUTs whose electrical height is greater than half 
the parallel plate separation may load the stripline and introduce a significant effect on the 
applied electric field strength. It should be noted that above the cut-off frequency of the 
stripline, both perpendicular and horizontal electric field strength components are present. 

36 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



For the EUTs that meet the above height restriction and for testing generally under 150 MHz, 
the following arrangement and stripline distances are recommended: 

- the base of the stripline shall be placed on non-metalHc supports at least 0,8 m from the 
floor, and the top conductor plate shall be no closer than 0,8 m from the ceiling; 

- when used in a room, the stripline shall be spaced at least 0,8 m from its open 
longitudinal sides to walls or other objects. When used inside a screened room, RF, 
absorbing material shall be placed in the space between the sides of the stripline and the 
walls of the screened room. Figure 21 shows the basic arrangements; 

- the EUT is placed on a non-metallic support, 100 mm high, in the centre of the stripline 
(see figure 22); 

- connecting leads to the EUT are inserted through holes in the base conductor plate of 
the stripline. The lengths of the leads inside the stripline shall be as short as possible and 
completely surrounded by ferrite rings to attenuate induced currents. The transfer 
impedance of coaxial cables used shall be not higher than 50 mQ /m at 30 MHz; 

- any balanced-to-unbalanced transformer used shall be connected to the EUT with leads 
as short as possible; 

- terminals of the EUT not used during the measurement shall be terminated with 
shielded resistors matching the nominal terminal impedance. 

If an EUT requires another apparatus in order to function properly that additional apparatus 
shall be considered as part of the measuring equipment and precautions shall be taken to 
ensure that the additional apparatus is not exposed to the unwanted signal. These precagtions 
may include additional grounding of coaxial shields, shielding, and inserting of an RF filter on, 
or the application of ferrite rings to, the connecting cables. 

3.3.1.1.1 Measurement circuit for receivers 

Figure 23 shows the circuit used for measuring the immunity of sound and broadcast 
receivers. This is an example of the use of the stripline. The wanted test signal is supplied by 
generator G2 and is connected through a matching network to the input of the EUT. 

The unwanted signal is supplied by generator G1 and is connected through switch S1, wide- 
band amplifier Am, and low-pass filter F to a matching network MN of the stripline. The wide- 
band amplifier Am may be required to provide the necessary field strength. The stripline is 
loaded with a terminating impedance. 

Care shall be taken with respect to the harmonic level of the RF output of the generator G1 
and in particular the output of the wide-band amplifier Am. Harmonics may influence the 
measurement if they coincide with other responses of the EUT. For the case where the EUT is 
a TV receiver, such responses from a harmonic may be at the tuned channel or the i.f. channel 
of the EUT. In some cases provisions shall be made to reduce the harmonic level adequately 
by inserting a suitable low-pass filter F that can handle the input power from the Am. Specific 
checks of the suitability of these filters should be made. 

The audio output power levels shall be measured as specified in the product requirements. 

3.3.1 .2 Measurement set-up using a closed TEM device 
(Under consideration) 

3.3.1.2.1 Measurement circuit 

(Under consideration) 

37 



IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 
CtSPR 16-2(1996) 



3.3.2 Measurement using absorber-lined shielded rooms 

3.3.2.1 Introduction 

Absorber-lined shielded rooms are comprised of a standard six-sided shielded room which has 
some form of RF-absorbent material applied to the four walls and ceiling. Generally, the 
shielded room floor is untreated and acts as the reference ground plane for measurements. 
For field uniformity, the floor of the room may also require the addition of absorber material. 
The absorber material is generally comprised of carbon-impregnated foam. Other material 
includes ferrite tiles or combinations of ferrite tiles and carbon-impregnated foam. Both 
materials dissipate the undesirable energy impinging on its surface in the form of heat. For 
high power immunity levels, due concern for exceeding the heat dissipation rating of the 
absorbing material should be given. Special fire-retardant treatments are available for the 
material. 

3.3.2.2 Size 

The size of absorber-lined shielded rooms depends on several factors: 

a) test area needed for the EUT system; 

b) volume necessary to accommodate the transmitting antenna and its required height(s) 
above the ground plane; 

c) size of the absorber material; 

d) separation between the antenna and EUT; 

e) separation between the EUT and antenna from the closest absorbing material; 

f) the dimensional sizes of the chamber required to give the required accuracy and 
uniformity of immunity field in the test area. 

The size of the absorber-lining material needed is a function of the amount of suppression 
required of the undesired reflections. Such material which is generally pyramidal in shape for 
carbon foam is effective when the height of the material is a significant fraction of a 
wavelength. When this fraction is realized, the absorbing material can attenuate the reflected 
energy by 20 dB or more. The attenuation values increase considerably when the wavelength 
is less than that of the height of the pyramidal material. Conversely, the attenuation is 
degraded to a very low level for carbon-foam absorber material height much less than a 
wavelength. This latter condition Is usually the case for most practical sized absorber material 
(1 m or less in height below 100 MHz). Use of such absorber-lined rooms is thus seriously 
restricted at these frequencies or lower. 

The response of absorber lined chambers under 100 MHz can be improved by a suitably 
chosen layer of ferrite tiles and carbon-foam material. In general, the layering consists of 
ferrites directly mounted on the shielded room walls and ceiling (and perhaps flooring), a layer 
of dielectric material, the carbon-foam material, and in case of floor applications, an inert fill 
between the pyramids and a mechanically strong, load-bearing, non-conductive "walk-on" 
material. The ferrite yields additional reflection reduction below 100 MHz (if properly selected). 
It should be noted that such ferrites are non-linear suppression materials. The impact on the 
absorber room reflective properties as a function of frequency should be characterized before 
using such material, especially above 1 GHz. 

3.3.2.3 Transmitting antenna 

There are many varieties of transmitting antennas that can be used to reproduce the desired 
immunity field inside an absorber-lined shielded room. The most critical parameters for such 
antennas are the ability to dissipate high powers (up to 1 kW) and to have a beamwidth 
sufficiently wide to illuminate the EUT test area. If polarization information is necessary, 
linearly polarized antennas should be used. Typical antennas include high power biconical, log 
periodic arrays and ridged rectangular horns. These antennas should stand well clear of any 
absorber material. At least a 1 m clearance Is suggested. 

38 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



3.3.2.4 Signal generation 

No special signal generator requirements other than adequate suppression of signal generator 
and power amplifier harmonic and spurious outputs are needed when immunity tests are 
performed inside an absorber-lined shielded room. The signal sources should be capable of 
producing both CW and modulated RF carrier levels compatible with the input requirements of 
the power amplifier used to feed the transmit antenna. Since the EUT may respond to several 
frequencies over a large bandwidth, it is important that the combination of the signal generator 
and power amplifier adequately suppress harmonic and spurious outputs. The suppression 
should be 30 dB or more compared to the desired frequency output and to the immunity limit at 
these harmonics. A high-power low-pass filter which tracks the output signal may have to be 
inserted between the amplifier output and the transmitting antenna input. 

3.3.2.5 Calibration of generated electric field 

The purpose of field calibration is to ensure that the uniformity of the field over the test sample 
is sufficient to ensure the validity of the tests results. 

This standard uses. the concept of a "uniform area" which is a hypothetical vertical plane of the 
field in which variations are acceptably small. This uniform area is 1,5 m x 1,5 m, unless the 
EUT and its leads can be fully illuminated within a smaller surface. In the test arrangement, 
the EUT will have its front face coincident with this plane. 

Because it is impossible to establish a uniform field close to an earth reference plane, the 
calibrated area is established at a height no closer than 0,8 m above the earth reference plane 
and where possible the EUT is located at this height. 

In order to establish the severity of the test for EUTs and wires which must be tested close to 
the earth reference plane or which have larger sides than 1 ,5 m x 1 ,5 m, the intensity of the 
field is also recorded at 0,4 m height and for the full width and height of the EUT, and reported 
in the test report. 

The antennas and cables which have been used to establish the calibrated field shall be used 
for the testing. Since the same antennas and cables are used, the cable losses and antenna 
factors of the field generating antennas are not relevant. 

The exact position of the generating antenna shall be recorded. Since even small displacements 
will significantly affect the field, the Identical placement must be used for testing. 

NOTE - The area of the uniform field should be established at 3 V/m by an unmodulated RF signal. Use of an 
unmodulated signal assures proper indication of any field intensity measuring device. 

3.3.2.6 Performance monitors 

Based on the test plan, various sensors should be attached to the EUT to be able to record an 
analogue or digital signal, which will indicate performance degradation. These sensors and the 
leads exteriding outside the absorber-lined shielded room should not affect the performance or 
immunity of the EUT nor become uncalibrated by the applied immunity field or the presence of 
the absorber lining. In some cases, the leads from the EUT to the EUT support equipment 
outside the absorber-lined shielded room can be monitored for performance degradation. The 
degradation monitors in this case do not have to be immune to the radiated RF energy. They 
should, however, be immune to any conducted RF currents on the leads outside the room. If 
visual performance degradation is required, a suitable clear window panel on the shielded room 
wall or closed circuit television system can be used. The panel area shoifi^ be converted with an 
integral shielding material, i.e. wire mesh embedded in glass or conductive transparent material 
applied to the glass surface. The TV camera should be located embedded inside adjacent 
pyramidal tips of the carbon-foam material in a position within the room that does not intercept a 
major reflected EUT signal. Audio degradation can be measured via acoustic couplers or by 
monitoring the recovered audio modulation of the amplitude modulated RF immunity signal carrier. 

39 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



3.3.2.7 Immunity measurement set-up 

3.3.2.7.1 The EUT is set in the centre of the test zone of the absorber-lined shielded room. 
A uniform test field for small products, that is, the EUT linear dimensions are less than a 
wavelength, is obtained when the antenna separation is greater than a wavelength away. 
The field becomes complex for separations closer than a wavelength. For larger products, 
i.e., where the EUT dimensions are greater than a wavelength, the antenna should be 
separated by a distance equal to the largest linear dimension of the EUT in metres squared 
divided by the wavelength of the immunity signal. If measurements are made at closer 
separations, the receive antenna will be in the complex near field zone. This complexity must 
be accounted for in such tests to assure repeatability and the prediction of the far field from 
such near field data. 



3.3.2.7.2 Performance monitors are attached to the EUT as required in the test plan. Field 
strength sensors, if used, should be placed to monitor or provide field levelling only if the field 
that is being recreated was so measured at the actual product location when used by a 
customer. All connections should not be affected by the field or absorber material nor change 
the performance of the EUT. 



3.3.2.7.3 The transmitting antenna should be mounted on an antenna positioner capable of 
varying the polarization, height and location of the antenna with respect to the ground plane 
and EUT. Narrow beamwidth antennas should be kept pointed at the EUT as they are raised 
and lowered. 



3.3.2.7.4 Provisions should be made to monitor and record the various performance 
degradations specified in the test plan. It is strongly suggested where possible that subjective 
visual or aural monitoring by a test operator be replaced with objective analogue or digital 
voltage or current EUT response, this electrical monitoring technique minimizes tester errors 
that result due to the tedious and lengthy test cycle nature of immunity measurements. 



3.3.2.8 Immunity test procedure 

The test procedures for immunity measurements inside absorber-lined shielded rooms are 
generally the same as those inside a regular shielded room. Since the interaction of all the 
reflected signals normally present in an absorber-lined shielded room are much less, 
absorber-lined room measurements are more accurate and repeatable. In both cases, the test 
personnel and test instrumentation (amplifier, signal source, etc.) should be located outside 
the room. 

The general test procedure includes the following: 

a) establish the calibrated disturbance field strength, polarization and modulation (if any is 
required); 

b) configure and operate the EUT as typically used and orient the EUT to maximize its 
immunity response; 

c) vary the transmitted signal limit at each frequency to measure the level at which 
degradation occurs or at the specified immunity level, whichever is lower; 

d) scan the frequency range contained in the test plan to complete the EUT immunity 
profile or to determine go/no-go compliance; 

e) record the performance degradation and the associated field strength levels as a 
function of frequency and the other test parameters. 

40 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



3.3.3 Measurements using an open area test site (OATS) 

3.3.3.1 Introduction 

Radiated immunity field strength levels are by their very nature significantly higher than 
radiated emission levels normally regulated by national governments. Typical test levels for 
much equipment are in excess of 1 V/m. For some EUT systems and large stand-alone 
electronic equipment, the need to illuminate the entire EUT requires high power, an efficient 
and wide beamwidth transmitting antenna, and a large test area. The power and antenna 
requirements are generally independent of the type of test facility used. In some cases the 
large EUT is not completely functional until all its parts are assembled on site at the user's 
premises or at a test site that is quite large. One such test site is the same open area test site 
used for radiated emission measurements. These sites are useful over the full frequency 
range and have particular applicability above 30 MHz subject to the severe restrictions stated 
in 3.3.3.3. 



3.3.3.2 Measurement site requirements 

The open area immunity test site (OAITS) that meets the same requirements for the open area 
test site (OATS) specified in clause 16 of CISPR 16-1 are physically suitable for immunity 
tests. Other sites may be used as long as the electric field strength in the volume occupied by 
the EUT does not vary by more than the specified tolerance. This may require that the 
transmitting antenna be located on an antenna positioner to change the antenna height and in 
some cases, polarization, above the ground plane and antenna location. In changing the 
antenna height, narrow beam-width antennas must be kept pointed towards the EUT. Height 
change would be used to adjust the addition of the direct signal and then reflected from the 
ground screen so that a specified uniform field is found in the EUT volume as frequency 
varies. These requirements need only hold for the frequency range specified in the test plan. 
Absorber material may be required on the ground plane to meet the field uniformity 
requirement. 



3.3.3.3 Interference to radio services 

The potential for causing interference to licensed radio-frequency services in or near the 
OAITS is generally high due to the very magnitude of the immunity signal. Extreme care 
should be taken to ensure that the generation of the test field does not adversely affect such 
RF services, especially in the various safety bands. Fields no higher than needed to measure 
to the specification limit or to record an EUT performance degradation below that limit should 
be generated. If generated, they should be applied for very brief time intervals. 

There may be certain frequency bands where the interference potential is significantly 
reduced. For example, ISM band frequencies are likely to be unaffected by such 
measurements. In some administrations it may be required to secure an experimental radio 
license from the national authority. The license would detail specific frequencies, time of 
operation, and length of operation for the immunity RF field strength transmission. Generally, 
experimental licenses for frequencies used for public radio emergency services, commercial 
broadcast, government channels, standard time and frequency broadcasts, etc. are not 
granted. Use of ISM frequencies and other industrial use frequencies are generally more likely 
to be approved. Note, however, that these approval frequencies may be so spaced apart that 
the true immunity response will not be completely described. 



41 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Under far-fielded conditions the ambient interfacing field Eis given by: 



i1/2 



\pgV u 

£ = 2x7^-^ =14- 
d d 



^.1/2 



where 

U is the input voltage at the tuned radiating antenna with resistance R; 

d is the distance between antenna and the location where a sensitive radio receptor n^ay 
be located; 

G is the gain of the antenna with respect to a half-wave dipole. 

The factor 2, with an accuracy of 1,5 dB, implies the effect of the total reflection at the ground 
plane if the height of the transmit antenna is adjusted for maximum field strength. In the case 
of a vertically polarized transmit antenna, the effective field resulting from the direct and from 
the reflected field may not be a vertically linearly polarized field. 

3.3.3.4 Measurement procedures 

3.3.3.4.1 Gerieral 

Basically, the immunity measurement procedures are the same as those for measurements 
made using any enclosed test site such as a TEM cell or shielded (absorber-lined or not) 
room. In the case of the TEM cell the signal is applied between the centre conductor and the 
outer shell; in the OAITS and other more common shielded enclosures, the immunity signal is 
fed to a transmitting antenna. 

3.3.3.5 Measurement set-up using the open area test site 

3.3.3.5.1 General 

The power required to establish an immunity field strength is not small. Hence the closer the 
EUT is to the antenna, the less power required. Most OAITS measurements are performed 
using EUT/antenna separation distances less than 3 m. For large EUTs, this distance must be 
increased so that the antenna can illuminate the entire EUT. Power amplifier expense and 
availability over the frequency range up to 1000 MHz usually limit large system testing. 
Component or partial EUT testing is substituted in some cases and judgements made as to the 
overall large system EUT immunity. 



42 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Section 4: Automated measurements 

4.1 Automated measurements 

(Under consideration) 

Section 5: Factors influencing measurement accuracy 

5.1 Factors influencing measurement accuracy 

Measurement errors can occur due to the following: 

- mismatch (see 2.2.1); 

- insufficient signal-to-noise ratio; 

- meter and display errors; 

- overload and intermodulation effects of the measuring receiver; 

- calibration accuracy of ancillary equipment; 

- presence of extraneous interference. 

During measurements in the presence of extraneous interference, ranges of higher sensitivity, 
which do not comply with the requirements of CISPR 16-1 of this standard with respect to the 
standing wave ratio and overloading characteristics and which should be marked accordingly, 
shall not be used. If measurements have to be carried out in these ranges, besides checking 
for overloading, the extraneous interference voltage superimposed by the noise of the 
measurement receiver shall be measured when the test object is switched off. 

During measurements at the place of installation, it is recommended to monitor the AF signal 
of the radio interference measurement receiver in order to distinguish between extraneous 
interferences and the signal to be measured. 

5.1.1 Accuracy of measurements 

The error for sinusoidal voltages at the receiver input shall not exceed ± 2 dB. Additional 
errors are introduced by ancillary equipment. (Methods to analyze overall measurement 
uncertainty are under consideration.) 

5.1 .2 Avoidance of extraneous signals and effects 

a) Maximum permitted level of extraneous signals (see 2.3.1). The measurement error due 
to extraneous interference shall be less than 1 dB. This requirement has been fulfilled if 
extraneous interference, measured when the test object is switched off, is 20 dB below the 
radio interference voltage to be measured, or is not measurable. 

b) Filtering and shielding measures, in order to avoid extraneous interference, radio inter- 
ference voltage measurements can be carried out in screened rooms and with additional 
mains decoupling filter (if necessary with an isolating transformer) (see also 2.3.1). If the 
extraneous interference (also noise of the measurement received) cannot be reduced to the 
required signal-to-noise ratio of 20 dB, the extent of the extraneous interference voltages 
shall b^ recorded in the testing report. 

c) Overload and intermodulation check. In the case of radio interference caused by pulses, 
measurement errors may arise due to overload of the measurement device. Overloading is 
made evident by an indication of the measured variable which is lower than the true value. 

Overloading is insignificant if the display drops by less than 1 dB when the input voltage 
attenuator is reduced by a minimum of 10 dB and if the complete i.f. gain is reduced by the 
same amount after the i.f. amplifier. If the reading drops by more than 1 dB, intermodulation 
has occurred or there was an insufficient signal-to-noise ratio. 

This check is not relevant for interference measurement receivers with automatically controlled 
overload protection. 

43 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



EUT 



Non-conductive table 

1,5 m X 1,0 m 




'^^. 



AMN 
No. 1 
EUT 



AMN 
No. 2 

Associated 
equipment 



AMN 
No. 3 
Protective 
earth 
ground 



80 cm to 
ground plane 



40 cm 



Conducting groundplane extends at 
least 0,5 m beyond EUT system footprint 



1 Interconnecting cables that hang closer than 40 cm to the ground plane shall be folded back and forth 
forming a bundle 30 cm to 40 rm long, hanging approximately in the middle between the ground plane and the 
table. 

2 I/O cables that are connected to a peripheral shall be bundled in the centre. The end of the cable may be 
terminated if required using correct terminating impedance. The total length shall not exceed 1 m. 

3 EUT is connected to AMN No 1. Measurement terminals of AMNs must be terminated with 50 f2. AMNs are 
placed directly on horizontal ground plane and 40 cm from vertical ground plane. 

3.1 All associated equipment is connected to AMN No 2. 

3.2 Protective earth ground wires (green/yellow) from associated equipment are connected to AMN No 3. 

4 Cables of hand-operated devices, such as keyboards, mouses, etc. shall be placed as close as possible to 
the host. 

5 Non-EUT components being tested. 

6 Rear of EUT, including peripherals, shall all be aligned and flush with rear of table top. 

7 Rear of table top shall be 40 cm removed from a vertical conducting plane that is bonded to the floor ground 
plane. 

Figure 1 - Test configuration: table-top equipment for conducted disturbance 
measurements on power mains (see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.4.2) 



44 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 




>80 



Metallic wall 2 m x 2 m 

EUT 

Excess power cord (3 cm x 40 cm) (folded back and forth) 

"V" mains network 

Coaxial cable 

Measuring receiver 
B Reference ground connection 
M Measuring receiver input 
P Power to EUT 



Figure 2 - Optional test configuration for an EUT with only a power cord attached 

(see 2.4.4.1) 



45 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



EUT 




Bonded to horizontal groundplane 



1 Excess cables shall be bundled in the centre or shortened to appropriate length. 

2 The EUT and cables shall be insulated (up to 12 mm) from the ground plane. 

3 The EUT is connected to one AMN. The AMN can be placed on top of or immediately 
beneath the ground plane. 

All other equipment is powered from the second AMN. 

Figure 3 - Test configuration: floor-standing equipment (see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.5.2.2) 



46 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Rear of EUT to flush 
with mar of table top 




Bonded to ground plane ' 



40 cm to vertical 
groundplane 



Bonded to groundplane 



y 



1 The interconnecting cables which hang closer than 40 cm to the ground plane shall be folded back and forth 
forming a bundle 30 cm - 40 cm long, hanging approximately in the middle between the ground plane and the 
table. 

2 Excess power cords shall be bundled in the centre or shortened to appropriate length. 

3 The EUT is connected to one AMN. The AMN may alternatively be connected to the vertical reference 
plane. All other equipment is powered from the second AMN. 

4 The EUT and the cables shall be insulated (up to 12 mm) from the ground plane. 

5 The I/O cable to the floor standing unit drapes to the ground plane and the excess is bundled. Cables not 
teaittimq \he ground plane slxb dropped to the height of the connector or 40 cm, whichever is lower. 

Figure 4 - Test configuration: floor-standing and table-top equipment 

(see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.5.2.2) 



47 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



See note 5 



80 cm 




Interface cable(s) 
to interconnected 
units - see note 6 



Equipment 
under test 



1 The length of the EUT power cord in excess of 80 cm shall be folded into a serpentine-like bundle and not 
coiled. 

2 Connection of the AN to the ground plane shall provide a low impedance path at high frequencies. It shall 
be made using a solid flat metal conductor that has a length-to-width ratio of not more than 5 to 1 . 

3 The CISPR measuring the set shall only be grounded to the reference ground plane via the outer conductor 
of the coaxial cable. 

4 Dotted lines represent the test set-up for the three-phase power. 

5 Optional filter hook-up; replace with shorts if not used. 

6 Interconnected units may be attached to a single AN via a power junction strip or box. 

7 A table mounted or handheld EUT must be 40 cm from any grounded conducting surface of at least 2 m 
square and at least 80 cm from any other conductive objects, including devices that are part of the system or 
instrumentation. 

Figure 5 - Schematic of conducted disturbance voltage test configuration 

(see 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.5.2.2) 



48 



M 



-Ih" 



X 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

4, 




"il «N «N P" 



Figure 6a - Schematic for measurement and power circuit 




Figure 6b - Equivilent voltage source and measurement circuit 

1 Equipment under test (EUT) 

2 Power cord 

3 "Vpower rhains networi^ 

4 Decoupling circuit (filter) 

5 Metallic wall 
A Power input 

Bq Reference earth connection 

i-i, /.2 Power cord connection (100 cm) 

Pi , Pg EUT plug to mains network 

Ci Stray capacitance within EUT to metallic parts 

Cg Stray capacitance of EUT to metallic wall (earth) 

Ck Coupling capacitors within mains network 

D, Inductor (choke) for safety ground wire 

K Conductive structural parts of the EUT 

L Inductance of connecting wires 

M Fictitious mid-point of the internal common mode voltages 

Rn Simulation resistances (50 £2 or 150 £2) 

Zg Symmetric Internal resistance of EUT 

Ziu, Zju Common mode resistance of the EUT 

U^^i, Ui^ Internal common mode voltage of the EUT 

^o> ^20 External measurable common mode voltage 

Figure 6 - Equivalent circuit for measurement of common mode disturbance 
voltage for Class I (grounded) EUT (see 2.4.4.2.1) 



49 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 




Figure 7a - Schematic for power and measurement circuit 




Figure 7b - Equivalent RFI source and measurement circuit 
NOTE - Refer to figure 6 for symbols. 

Figure 7 - Equivalent circuit for measurement of common mode disturbance 
voltage for Class II (grounded) EUT (see 2.4.4.2.2) 



50 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



60 mm 



J 



M 

220 pF ± 20% 

510fi±10% 




lsssssssss> 



Metal foil wrapped aro*ind case in front of iron core of motor 
stator or gearbox 



Figure 8 - RC element for artificial Figure 9 - Portable electric drill with artificial 

hand (see 2.4.4.2.3) hand (see 2.4.4.2.3) 



Metal foil wrapped round handle 



Guard {if fined) 




Metat foil \Nrapped rour^d handle 



Insulated handle 



A and B : handles of insulating material 



Figure 10 - Portable electric saw with artificial hand (see 2.4.4.2.3) 



51 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CrSPR 16-2(1996) 



y 



p <^ 



v>b 



4.7»iF = 

200 £2 

1 
2 






1 
2 

200 £2 






4,7 nF =^ 



7?S 




P-A 



:c; 



1 Beginning of winding 

2 End of winding 

A Terminals for telecommunication conductors 

B Terminal for ground (metal wall) 

M Terminal for measuring receiver (50 W) 

P Connection to EUT 

L-\ Differential mode inductance, 5 mH to 40 mH for each winding 

L2 Decoupling inductance (current compensated) 

Figure 11 - Schematic diagram for simulation of telecommunication lines 

(T-1 network or telecom impedance simulation network) (see 2.4.4.3.2) 



52 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Mams terminals 



Amficia! mams V-network 
50a'50nH 



Mains voltage 




Load terminals 



Regulating 

control 



« • 




C> 0,005 nF 
R>1500n 



Coaxial cable 



To remote coinfmnctit 



Measuring receiver 



Switch positions: 

1 For mains measurements 

2 For load measurements 

3 and 4 Successive connections during load measurements 

NOTES 

1 The earth of the measuring receiver shall be connected to the artificial mains V-network. 

2 The length of the coaxial cable from the probe shall not exceed 2 m. 

3 When the switch is in position 2, the output of the artificial mains V-network at terminal 1 shall be terminated 
by an impedance equivalent to that of the CISPR. 

4 Where a two-terminal regulating control Is inserted in one lead only of fhe supply, measurements shall be 
made by connecting the second supply lead as indicated in figure 12a. 



Figure 12 - Measuring example for voltage probes (see 2.4.4.4.1) 



Load terminals 



Mains terminals 




To remote component 



Figure 12a - Measurement arrangement for two-terminal regulating controls 



53 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 




Current 
transformer 



At>80(t)er 
(ferrite rings) 



Absorbing clamp 
moved over power 
cord to obtain max. 
reading on receiver 



Mains 



Additional absortier used to avoid 
interference from mains (a second 
absorbing damp may be used here) 



Specimen interference 
source 




Figure 13 - Test configuration for absorbing clamp 



54 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Receiving antenna 



Direct ray 



EUT 



Supporting 
table 




Measuring 
receiver 



Reflected ray 



v////7///////////////////////// /////////////////////////////^^^ 

Groundplane 



Figure 14 - Concept of electric field strength measurements made on an open area test 
site with the direct and reflective rays arriving at the receiving antenna 

(see 2.6.2.2) 



55 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996} 



Device under test 

"5 


h 


^ Dipoie A 


>< 


^ 


1 


Geometric centre -^ ' 
h 


Measuring apparatus 


' 




//////////y/^/ 


///////////////// 


////^/ 


///////////^ 



a) Measurement 



Substitution dipole B 
I 



///////yf//r///////?/y 



Dipoie A 




b) Calibration 



Figure 15 - Method of measurement - Substitution method (see 2.6.3.1 and 2.6.3.3) 



56 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Diameter: 2 m (3x) 







F = ferrrte absorber 



-— ---^^^[f^'fi^rwn-rnetafric 



// 



--.=:--:t'^ 



Figure 16 - Concept of magnetic field induced current measurements made with 
the loop antenna system (see 2.6.5) 



57 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Wanted signal 
generator 
(if applicable) 





A 




EUT 




Assessment of 
EUT performance 


Direct coupling 
or radiation path 










li 












Monitorina oath 


Unwanted signal 
generator 




(visual or electrical) 







Figure 17 - Fundamental concept of immunity measurement (see 3.1.1) 



58 



Wanted signal 
generator or auxiliary 
equipment 



Coaxial cable, twisted pair or 
multi-lead cable 
(screened or unscreened) 



Coupling unit 



to 




4=C2 



100 




Interference RF 
signal generator 

R int + R1 = 150fl 
I =interfererice current 



Equipment under test 



\ 



Other cables for mains, loud-speakers, 
etc each terminated with a coupling 
unit (150 0) 



Coupling unit 



R1 



.JL. 
_L 



10 cm 



////. 



lOOfl 



50 ti 



C2 sb 



^77777777777777 




EMF 



L = isolating inductance 

CI, C2 = capacitors with low RF 
impedance (if ac.dc 
conditions allow this, 
capacitors should 
be replaced by a 
direct connection) 



Figure 18 - General principle of the current-Injection method (see 3.2) 



o 


0) 


(O 




■0 
30 


s 




(11 


•A 


lO 


O) 




to 


TJ 


l—»l 


t» 


_ik 


;i 




fO 


o> 


"^ 


" 


_4 




(O 




(O 




(O 



IS 10052(Part2):l999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



oi 






o^ 



F^ 



1 



l-r~T 



o- 



e 



I 1 I 



1 Unwanted signal generator G1 

2 Wanted signal generator G2 

3 Load resistor RL 

4 Low-pass filter (see annex B) 

5 Audio-frequency voltmeter (with weighting network 
according to CCIR Recommendation 468) 

6 Coupling network 

7 Attenuators 

8 Matching and/or balancing network 

9 Equipment under test (EUT) 

Figure 19 - Measuring set-up for input immunity measurement of sound 
broadcast receivers (see 3.2.3.1) 



60 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



nC 



-yt 



U^ 



v^ 



oi 



ur" 



t 



Ljr_J ' 



i -r-T 



O* 



10 9 







1 Unwanted signal generators G1 

2 Wanted signal generators G2 

3 Load resistor RL 

4 Low-pass filter 

5 Audio-frequency voltmeter (with weighting network 
according to CCIR Recommendation 468) 

6 Coupling networks 

7 Attenuators 

8 Matching and/or balancing network 

9 Equipment under test (EUT) 
10 Low-pass filter* 

' To prevent influence of the measuring results by harmonics of the 
unwanted signal frequency 

Figure 20 - Measuring set-up for input immunity measurement of television 
broadcast receivers (see 3.2.3.2) 



61 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Screened room walls 




1 to 1 1: absorbing panels with dimensions of approximately 0,8 m x 0,4 m 



Figure 21 - Example of the arrangement of an open stripline TEM device In 
combination with absorbing panels inside a screened room with 
dimensions 3 m x 3,5 m (see 3.3.1.1) 



62 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 




Starujard Input wanted signal 



Mains 



Figure 22 - Mieasuring set-up for the immunity of broadcast receivers to 
ambient fields in the frequency range of 0,15 MHz - 150 MHz 

(see 3.3.1.1) 



63 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 




standard RF signal 
to receiver 



• 

Ga 

1 kHz 












SI 




Am 




F 


tnterttting signal to TEM 
device via MN 


r*i 




^*v''^rw— 













J 1 













Figure 23 - Measuring circuit for the Immunity of sound broadcast receivers to 
ambient fields (see 3.3. 1.1.1) 



64 



IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Guidelines to connection of electrical equipment to 
the artificial mains network 

(see 2.2) 

A.1 Introduction 

This annex is intended to give general guidance in the techniques which can be used to 
assess the disturbance generated by certain electrical equipment in the frequency range 9 kHz 
to 30 MHz. It provides information on methods of connection of such equipment to the artificial 
mains network for the measurement of terminal voltages. A table is provided giving a general 
presentation of various cases encountered in practice enabling, for such cases, a suitable 
technique to be selected. 

The cases described below in A. 2 identify propagation of the EUT disturbance either: 

a) by conduction along the connected mains leads (designated with E-\ and l-\ in the 
equivalent circuit diagrams), or 

b) by radiation and coupled to the connected mains lead (designated with E2 and /2 in the 
equivalent circuit diagrams). 

Whether conducted or radiated disturbance dominates Is partly dependent on the arrangement 
of the EUT with respect to the ground reference (including the type of connection to the 
reference ground) and of the type of connection from the EUT to the artificial mains network 
(shielded or non-shielded cable). 

A.2 Classification of the possible cases 

A .2 . 1 Well-shielded but poorly filtered EUT (figures A . 1 and A.2) 

In this case, the conducted disturbance component represented by the current /1 dominates. 
The disturbance current /1 is fed from the EUT to the artificial mains network Z Consequently, 
the voltage L/^ increases when capacitance C-\ between the EUT shield and the ground 
reference increases (see figure A.1). The voltage U^ is maximized (C/i = Z/i = Ei) when the 
impedance of the current return path is minimized by short-circuiting Ci either directly or 
by using shielded cables to supply the EUT (see figure A.2). (Also, see the discussion in 
clause A.3.) 

A.2.2 Well-filtered but incompletely shielded EUT (figures A.3 and A.4) 

In this case, the disturbance current fed to the mains is reduced practically to zero, and the 
voltage across the artificial mains network may be dominated by undesirable radiation either 
from gaps in an incomplete shield or from a protruding conductor acting as an antenna. Such 
leakage can be represented schematically by an external capacitor C2 connected between an 
internal disturbance source of e.m.f. E2 and ground reference. This capacitance C2 passes a 
current I2. Part of the current I2 which flows through C2 to the ground reference returns via C^ 
and a part of I2 returns via the artificial mains network. If the supply leads are unshielded 
(figure A.3) and the impedance of Ci is large compared with the artificial mains impedance Z 
{ZC^ 0) « 1), then /'2 is nearly equal to I2 and the voltage U2 is nearly equal to l2Z{U2 = Z/2). 

If Ci is increased, Z is shunted and U2 will decrease. At the limit, when Ci is short-circuited 
by supplying the EUT through shielded cables (figure A.4), so that no part of I2 flows through 
Z, then L/2 will be zero. 

65 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



A. 2. 3 Practical general case 

Most usually In practices, neither the shielded nor the filtering are perfect; the two preceding 
effects then occur simultaneously and they are additive. In such conditions, the three following 
cases may be encountered. 

A. 2. 3.1 Supply through shielded conductors (figure A. 5) 

The current /i caused by leakage due to radiation flows in a circuit closed through ground and 
the external surfaces of the screening of the artificial mains network and of the supply 
conductors; it has no effect on Z 

The voltage U^, which may be measured across Z. is solely due to the current /i injected into 
the supply conductors and returning through the internal surfaces of the screening of the 
artificial mains network and these conductors. The voltage U-[ is then maximum: 

ai = Z/i = Ei 

A. 2. 3. 2 Supply through unshielded but filtered conductors (figure A. 6) 

If a highly efficient low-pass fHter is connected to the input of the EUT, with its screening 
directly connected to the screening of the EUT, the current l-\ fed by source E-\ to the mains 
conductors will be stopped by the filter. 

As in the case represented in figure A.6, the current I2 due to the radiation returns through Z 
and the conductors (if ZCi co « 1); the voltage U2 measured across Zis then produced solely 
by the radiation. 

A . 2 . 3 . 3 Supply through ordina ry conductors (figure A . 7) 

Should the filter in figure A.6 be removed, the current /1 from source Ei reappears on the 
conductors (figure A. 7). In comparison to figure A. 5 (with the maximum possible value of /1 for 
the supply of a non-filtered EUT through shielded conductors) the value of /1 in figure A. 7 
(supply of a non-filtered EUT through ordinary i.e. unshielded conductors) is, if ZCi to « 1, 
reduced to a minimum value in the ratio of 1^ (EUT unshielded) / /1 (EUT shielded) = ZC-\ m 
referred to its minimum value (figure A.2). The current /g is the same as in the previous cases, 
but as the conductors are not shielded, it passes also through Zand the mains conductors. 

The voltage U across the artificial mains network results then from the superposition of 
currents /1 and I2. When electromotive forces E^ and E2 are themselves produced by a 
common internal source, these currents are synchronous and the voltage L/ depends not only 
on their values but also on their phases. For certain frequencies, it may occur that currents /1 
and I2 are in opposition and if they are also of approximately the same magnitude, the voltage 
U may become very small even if l-\ and I2 are individually quite large. Moreover, if the 
frequency of the source varies, the phase opposition may not remain constant and voltage U 
may show rapid and considerable variations. 

A.3 Method of grounding 

In the foregoing, the connection to ground of the EUT was assumed to be made through 
connection of shielding of the supply conductors to the ground reference. 

This is the only correct solution in order to obtain a grounding allowing a clear distinction 
between the two kinds of currents l-\ and I2, as indicated above. It may be applied, without 
exception to all frequencies. 

66 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



For frequencies below 1,6 MHz practically the same result may be achieved by grounding 
through a straight lead of small length (1 m maximum), running parallel to the mains lead and 
not more than 10 cm distant from it. 

For frequencies above a few MHz, this simplified solution should only be used with care, 
especially at the higher frequencies. It is then strongly recommended that screened 
conductors be used in all cases. At the higher frequencies, it may be necessary to take into 
account the characteristic impedance of the conductor. 

A.4 Conditions of grounding 

A. 4.1 General 

A.4. 1 . 1 General rules 

It appears from the considerations discussed above that the behaviour of the measuring circuit 
for the voltage across the artificial mains network and, hence, the result of these measure- 
ments, is largely dependent on how the frame of the EUT being tested is connected to ground. 
It is therefore essential to specify these conditions closely. 

Essentially, the principal effect of grounding is to separate the two currents /i and /2 and 
possibly to cause opposing variations of their respective actions on the measuring apparatus 
(which measures voltage U across Z). In the limiting case of a direct connection from the 
body of the EUT to ground, which short-circuits C-\, the values of current /^ and thus of voltage 
L/i = Z/i = E^, are maximum; on the contrary, the current I2 due to radiation passes entirely 
through this short circuit and the corresponding voltage I/2 is reduced to zero. 

From these remarks, the following general rules are drawn. 

A.4. 1 . 1 . 1 Direct grounding should always be used when testing: 

a) a non-radiating EUT (e.g. a motor) as, in such a case, the measurement yields the 
maximum value of the disturbance voltage which may be met In practice; 

b) a poorly filtered radiating EUT when, without troubling to measure the radiation, it is 
wished to measure solely the disturbance voltage due to direct injection into the supply 
conductors: 

1) either for assessing the efficiency of the filter (for Instance, for the time base circuits 
of television receivers); 

2) or for assessing, in the laboratory, the actual disturbance produced by an apparatus 
whose radiation in normal operation will be suppressed by shielding (e.g. a transformer 
for the ignition system of fuel for boilers). 

A . 4 . 1 . 2 Direct grounding 

Direct grounding should not be used when testing item 1) of A.4. 1.1.1 either for a very well- 
filtered EUT which generates considerable radiation (for example, ozonizer, medical apparatus 
with damped oscillations, arc welders, etc.). In all these cases, the voltage across the artificial 
mains network becomes very small with direct grounding, while without such grounding the 
voltage may be quite large or unsteady. The measurement may then be meaningless and it 
may become necessary to make the grounding through a specified impedance in order to 
simulate the actual impedance of the safety ground (protective earth) conductor, e.g. by a 
protective ground choke which additionally provides some RF isolation from the "polluted" and 
therefore "poor" protective earth ground (see lower part of table A.2). 

NOTE - The impedance of such an "electrical long' conductor is in case of an EUT of safety protection Class I 
normally equal to the mains simulation impedance specified as termination for the mains terminals of the EUT 
provided by the artificial mains network (constituted by the network of 50 (xH + 1 Q which, due to themial problems in 
case of high current loads, may be reduced to a network of 50 |iH). 

67 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



A . 4 . 1 . 3 No grounding 

Without any grounding, the voltage across the artificial mains network results fronn the addition 
of both currents /i and l2- A measurement can only be obtained when one of these currents, 
is reduced to zero, either with a very well-screened shielded but poorly filtered EUT (e.g. a motor) 
or with a very well-filtered but radiating EUT (e.g. a television receiver, an ozonizer, etc.). 

NOTE - If in case of an EUT of safety protection Class I for the purpose of analysis of /g, for the reduction of /i 

the impedance according to the note under AAA. 2 is not sufficient, a high impedance RF choke (1,6 mH) may 
be inserted into the ground conductor path. 

The measurement usually yields only the value of the total disturbance, without allowing any 
discrimination, the results being only valid for the conditions used during the test. Such 
conditions should then be very well defined, namely the values of the capacitance to the 
ground plane of the various elements of the EUT (for instance, the capacitance of the 
transmission line from the aerial in the case of a television receiver). Moreover, a single 
measurement for one arbitrary frequency has no significance if, for this frequency, currents /-] 
and I2 are in opposition. As a matter of principle, then, it is necessary to make measurements 
at a number of frequencies. 

A.4.2 Classification of typical testing conditions 

Tables A.1 and A.2 summarize the various testing conditions and the types of EUTs for which 
they are suitable. The tables also give the meaning of the measurement, that is, the physical 
quantity which corresponds to the voltage U measured across the artificial mains network Z 
and also the precautions to be taken when making the measurement. 



68 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Table A.I (see A.4.2) 



Method of connection 



Types of apparatus 



Examples 



Essential characteristics 



Earthing 



Radiation 



Filtering 



Quantity measured 



Details of the 
measurement 



Motors 
Electro- 
domestic 
appliances 



D 



Ordinary cable 






^ 



Ozonizers 

Medical 
apparatus 

Arc-welding 

Television 

receivers 

(time-base) 



Ordinary cable 



fl = Z 



^^7777777777777 



Weak 



Moderate 



Actual interference 
(reduced) solely due 
to injected current C^ 



Very 
good 



Actual interference 
solely due to radiation 
current /g 



Without 



Strong 



Modetate 



Total overall inter- 
ference resulting from 
the superposition of 
the two preceding 
effects (/i and /g) 



The interference 
depends on C^ 



lit is necessary to 
state accurately the 
position of the 
appliance with regard 
to earth or to quote 



the value of C 



These two effects 
(/^ and l^} may be in 
phase opposition at 
certain frequencies 



Measurement 
should be repeated, 
the frequency being 
varied 



With 



Very 
good 



Actual interference 
produced with an 
earth connection of 
usual length 



The position of the 
appliance with regard 
to earth should be 
specified in order that 



Table A.2 (see A.4.2) 



Method of connection 



Types of 
apparatus 



Quantity measured 



Examples 



Details 

of the 

measurement 



Screened cable _ 
m ^ 



Non-radiating 
appliances 
provided with an 
earth terminal 



Maximum actual 
interference as C^ 
is short-circuited 



All motors 
provided with an 
earth terminal 



Radiating 
appliances 
when it is 
desired to 
measure only 
the inter- 
ference 
caused by 
current feed 
to mains 



Check on the efficacy 
of the screening 



Television 

receivers 

Medical 

apparatus 

Ozonizers 

Arc-welding 



Actual interference 
caused by an 
appliance which, in 
normal use, must be 
carefully screened 



Transformer for 
the ignition sys- 
tem of oil burners 
Part of a 
screened 
assembly sep- 
arately tested 



Screened fitter 



ieS^ 



T T 



Ordinary cable 



V/77777777777777777T 



Poorly filtered 
appliances 
when it is 
desired to 
measure only 
the inter- 
ference 
caused by 
radiation 



Check on the efficacy 
of the screening 



Television 
receivers High- 
frequency indus- 
trial apparatus 



Actual interference 
caused by an appliance 
which, in normal use, 
must be provided with 
a good filter 



Fluorescent 
lighting 



The position 
of the 
appliance 
with regard 
to earth 
should be 
specified in 
order that 
ZC^'^ <1 



69 



IS 10052 ( Part 2 ): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



EUT 



t, 



Artificial mains network 



TTZ 






iB Q^n^' 



Screened cable 




Figure A.I (see A.2.1) 



EUT 



O ^.C) 



iQ: 



Screened cable 



Artificial mains network 







Figure A.2 (see A.2.1) 



70 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CiSPR 16-2(1996) 



Filter 
^^^ / Artificial mains network 



EUT 



H. e, 



i 



O Q 



&S 



—J—C —I— I 



C, 



It. 



///y/v/\ 



1^2 f, 



=r=C2 



0)0 . 



Filter 



Artificial mains network 



^ D^Qf 



c, 



4 



//////// ///y 



Figure A.3 (see A.2.2) 



Figure A.4 (see A.2.2) 



EUT 






Artificial mains network 



'T+^ 



1^1 



1' 



Figure A.5 (see A.2.3.1) 



BUT 



Filter 



Artificial mains network 



C)^. ^.C) 



&r^ 



^ Ordinary cable 



T T 







T-r 



Figure A.6 (see A.2.3.2) 



EUT 



1 



o o 






Artificial mains network 




Figure A.7 (see A. 2. 3.3) 



71 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Use of spectrum analyzers and scanning receivers 

(see clause 2.3) 

8.1 Introduction 

When using spectrum analyzers and scanning measuring sets, the following characteristics 
should be taken into account: 

B. 2 Overload 

Most spectrum analyzers have no RF preselection in the frequency range up to 2000 MHz; that 
is. the input signal is directly fed to a broadband mixer. To avoid overload, to prevent damage 
and to operate a spectrum analyzer linearly, the signal amplitude at the mixer should typically 
be less than 150 mV peak. RF attenuation or additional RF preselection may be required to 
reduce the input signal to this level. 

B.3 Linearity test 

Linearity can be measured by measuring the level of the specific signal under investigation 
and repeating this measurement after an X dB attenuator has been inserted at the input of the 
measuring set or, if used, the preamplifier (X > 6 dB). The new reading of the measuring set 
display should differ by X dB not more than ± 0,5 dB from the first reading when the measuring 
system is linear. 

B. 4 Selectivity 

The spectrum analyzer and scanning measuring set must have the bandwidth specified in 
CISPR 16-1 to correctly measure broadband and impulsive signals and narrowband 
disturbance with several spectrum components within the standardized bandwidth. 

B. 5 Normal response to pulses 

The response of a spectrum analyzer and scanning measuring set with quasi-peak detection 
can be verified with the calibration test pulses specified in CISPR 16-1. The large peak voltage 
of the calibration test pulses typically requires an insertion of RF attenuation of 40 dB or more 
to satisfy the linearity requirements. This decreases the sensitivity and makes the 
measurement of low repetition rate and isolated calibration test pulses impossible for bands B, 
C and D. If a preselecting filter is used ahead of the measuring set, then the RF attenuation 
can be decreased. The filter limits the spectrum width of the calibration test pulse as seen by 
the mixer. 

B. 6 Peak detection 

The normal (peak) detection mode of spectrum analyzers provides a display indication which, 
in principal, is never less than the quasi-peak indication. It is convenient to measure emissions 
using peak-detection because it allows faster frequency scans than quasi-peak detection. 
Then those signals which are close to the emission limits need to be remeasured using quasi- 
peak detection to record quasi-peak amplitudes. 

B. 7 Frequency scan rate 

The scan rate of a spectrum analyzer or a scanning measuring set should be adjusted for the 
CISPR frequency band and the detection mode used. The minimum sweep time/frequency or 
the fastest scan rate is listed in the following table: 

72 



IS 10052(Part2):1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Band 


Peak-detection 


Quasi-peak detection 


A 


lOOms/kHz 


20 s/kHz 


B 


100 ms/ MHz 


200 s/ MHz 


C&D 


1 ms/MHz 


20 s/MHz 



For a spectrum analyzer or scanning measuring set used in a fixed tuned non-scanning mode, 
the display sweep time may be adjusted independently of the detection mode and according to 
the needs for observing the behaviour of the emission. If the level of disturbance is not steady, 
the reading on the measuring set must be observed for at least 15 s to determine the 
maximum (see 2.3.4.1). 

B.8 Signal interception 

The spectrum of intermittent emissions may be captured with peak-detection and digital display 
storage if provided. Multiple, fast frequency scans reduce the time to intercept an emission 
compared to a single, slow frequency scan. The starting time of the scans should be varied to avoid 
any synchronism with the emission and thereby hiding it. The total observation time for a given 
frequency range must be longer than the time between the emissions. Depending upon the kind of 
disturbance being measured, the peak detection measurements can replace all or part of the 
measurements needed using quasi-peak detection. Re-tests using a quasi-peak detector should 
then be made at frequencies where emission maxima have been found. 

B.9 Average detection 

Average detection with a spectrum analyzer is obtained by reducing the video bandwidth until 
no further smoothing of the displayed signal is observed. The sweep time must be increased 
with reductions in video bandwidth to maintain amplitude calibration. For such measurements, 
the measuring set shall be used in the linear mode of the detector. After linear detection is 
made, the signal may be processed logarithmically for display, in which case the value is 
corrected even though it is the logarithm of the linearly detected signal. 

A logarithmic amplitude display mode may be used, for example, to distinguish more easily 
between narrowband and broadband signals. The displayed value is the average of the 
logarithmically distorted IF signal envelope. It results in a larger attenuation of broadband 
signals than in the linear detection mode without affecting the display of narrowband signals. 
Video filtering in log-mode is, therefore, especially useful for estimating the narrowband 
component in a spectrum containing both. 

B.10 Sensitivity 

Sensitivity can be increased with low noise RF pre-amplification ahead of the spectrum 
analyzer. The input signal level to the amplifier should be adjustable with an attenuator to test 
the linearity of the overall system for the signal under examination. 

The sensitivity to extremely broadband emissions which require large RF attenuation for system 
linearity is increased with RF pre-selecting filters ahead of the spectrum analyzer. The filters reduce 
the peak amplitude of the broadband emissions and less RF attenuation can be used. Such filters may 
also be necessary to reject or attenuate strong out-of-band signals and the intermodulation products 
they cause. If such filters are used they must be calibrated with broadband signals. 

B.11 Amplitude accuracy 

The amplitude accuracy of a spectrum analyzer or a scanning measuring set may be verified 
by using a signal generator, power meter and precision attenuator. The characteristics of 
these instruments, cable and mismatch losses have to be analyzed to estimate the errors in 
the verification test. 

73 



IS 10052 (Part 2) : 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 



Annex C 

(informative) 



Historical background to the method of measurement of the 

interference power produced by electrical household 

and similar appliances in the VHF range 

(see clause 3.1) 



C.I l-listorical detail 

Although measurement of field strength is, in theory, the most suitable for determining the 
interference capability of all types of appliances at frequencies higher than 30 MHz, the 
methods involved together with the precautions to be taken prove troublesome in application. 
Consequently, engineers have for a long time used the terminal voltage method, while waiting 
for something more satisfactory. Several methods have been envisaged to replace those 
involving field measurements in open air by radiation measurements in the laboratory. Among 
the most interesting are the stop filter method and the ground current method. These are 
substitution methods, in which a slotted coaxial filter having negligible losses is used to adjust 
the radiating length of the supply lead of the source of interference in such a way as to obtain 
maximum radiation. In these methods, the interference capability of an appliance is defined as 
the power which a standard generator must inject into a simple aerial of known characteristics 
in order to obtain the same effect on an aerial connected to the measuring apparatus as that 
produced by the source of interference. Several more convenient methods have been 
developed from those just mentioned. 

The measurement of terminal voltages has been considerably improved by replacing the 
artificial mains V-network by a Y-network, so as to obtain the true common mode voltage 
produced by the source of interference. A similar method using a reactive slotted coaxial filter 
was developed. A method for measuring the power which the source of interference may inject 
into the supply lead has also been proposed. This method is based on the measurement of the 
current at the input of an a^sorbenf coaxial device. 

The advantage of the latter over the terminal voltage method is that it is not necessary to 
disconnect the supply lead. It indicates values of the interference power corresponding closely 
with those obtained by the methods in which the radiation of the supply lead is measured in 
the resonant condition. 

Although, through their ease of operation, the terminal voltage and the absorbing coaxial 
device methods were preferable to the stop filter and the ground current methods, it remained 
to be shown that the results which they gave conformed with those obtained in practice. 

Statistical measurements on the disturbance sources have shown that the interference 
measured by the stop filter method agrees more closely than that measured by the terminal 
voltage method, with the effect of the same sources measured at the input of receivers located 
in the same building. Measurements made by the absorbent device method gave results 
intermediate between the two previous ones. Other methods have been compared. 

C.2 Development of the method 

In the stop filter method, a value directly related to the current at the centre of a resonant half- 
wave aerial is measured. The most important thing is not the radiating system but the power 
that the source of interference is capable of transmitting to the radiating system. The same 
principle applies to the ground current method. If it were possible to measure this power 
without measuring a field, all the disadvantages arising from the influence of surrounding 
objects on the propagation between the radiating elements and the receiving aerial would be 
removed. The attempt to replace the coaxial stop filter by a ferrite tube showed that a large 

74 



IS 10052 (Part2): 1999 
CISPR 16-2(1996) 

part of the energy produced by the source of interference was dissipated in this tube. It was 
then thought that the measurement of the current at the input of the ferrite tube might replace, 
at least in part, the measurement of the field by the stop filter method. This gave rise to the 
devices described in annex K of CISPR 16-1. 

The following question was then studied: how do the different methods of measurement 
compare in the particular case of a shielded source of interference of given available power, 
with a purely resistive internal Impedance when transmitting all its interference energy to the 
suppty lead in the common mode when the size of this source is varied? Experimental 
investigations showed the remarkable fact that the new device gave results which were 
practically independent of the dimensions of the source of interference (3,5 dm^ to 1700 dm^) 
and which were also more consistent than those obtained by other methods. 

In fact, one can reduce the absorbing device measuring system to the following circuit: a 
source of interference of internal impedance Zs supplying a load Zc through a low-loss line of 
characteristic impedance Z^. If the length of the line is varied from zero, the power absorbed 
by the load Zq passes (when Zq is different from ZJ through maxima and minima 
corresponding to resonance and anti-resonance of the system. 

Neglecting the radiation and other losses of the line and discussing the case in which the load 
is located at a distance corresponding to the first maximum, we consider the point in the line at 
which the source and the load appear as pure resistance Rs and Rq. It can thus be shown that 
if P(j is the available power of the source, Pq the power absorbed by the load and 



m = 



_ ' 's 



fle 



then 



Pc 4m 



Pti (m + V^ 
This gives for 

m = 0,1 0,2 0.5 1 2 5 10 20 30 

M = 10lg-^ = -4,8 -2.5 -0.5 -0,5 -2,5 -4,8 -7,4 -9 dB 

It will be seen that the matching of the source to the lead is not very critical and that, if an 
absorbent clamp is used to constitute a load, for example of the order of 200 Q, the results 
obtained will not be very different from those obtained if a load is applied to the output of 
the source of interference in the form of a line brought to resonance by means of a coaxial 
stop filter. 



75 



( Continued from second cover) 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Identical 



do 



international Standard 

CISPR 14 (1993) Limits and 
methods of measurement of radio 
disturbance characteristics of 
electrical motor-operated and 
thermal appliances for household 
and similar purposes, electric 
tools and Electric apparatus 

CISPR 16-1 ( 1993 ) Specification 
for radio disturbance and 
immunity measuring apparatus 
and methods — Part 1 : Radio- 
disturbance and immunity 
measuring apparatus 

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following International Publication and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunc- 
tion with this standard. 

ITU-R 468 : Measurement of audio-frequency noise voltage level in sound broadcasting 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in this Indian 
Standard. 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



IS 6873 ( Part 2 ) : 1999 Limits and methods 
of measurement of radio disturbance 
characteristics : Part 2 Electric motor-operated 
and thermal appliances for household and 
similar purposes, electrical tools and elec- 
tric apparatus ( first revision ) 

IS 10052 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 Specification for 
radio disturbance and immunity measuring 
apparatus and methods : Part 1 Radiodisturb- 
ance and immunity measuring apparatus 
( first revision ) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutoiy institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act. 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of 6lS, This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
heeded; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Iiidian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LTD 22(1835). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 [3233841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 I 337 86 26,337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

I 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19,235 2315 

Western : Manakaiaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) [832 92 95,832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 I 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD GUWAHATI HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Phnted at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



