**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10311  (1982) :  General  requirements  of  powered  platform 
trucks  and  their  acceptance  criteria  [TED  22:  Transport 
Tractors  and  Trailers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  10371  -  1982 

Indian  Standard     (Reaffirmed2001) 

GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS  OF  POWERED 

PLATFORM  TRUCKS  AND  THEIR 

ACCEPTANCE  CRITERIA 


UDC     i -2 1 -81$  258-2  :  620- IS 


©  Copyright   19H3 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MANAK     BHAVAN.     9     BAHADUR     SHAH    ZAFAll    MARG 

NEW    DELHI    IK" 

January  IS83 
Gr  * 


IS  :  10311  -  1982 


Indian  Standard 


GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS  OF  POWERED 

PLATFORM  TRUCKS  AND  THEIR 

ACCEPTANCE  CRITERIA 

Industrial  Trucks  Sectional  Committee,  MGPD  22 

Chairman  Representing 

Shri  K.  C.  Unnithan  Macneill  &  Magor  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Members 

Shri  S.  Roy  Crowd  hury  (  Alternate  to 
Shri  K.  C.  Unnithan  ) 
Shri  H.  S.  Agarwal  Ministry  of  Railways  (  Railway  Board  ),  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  P.  Kohli  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  C.  Anand  Directorate  General  of  Supplies   &   Disposals,  New 

Delhi 

Shri  I.  G.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Ghatjdhry  Escorts  Ltd,  Faridabad 

Shri  L.  R.  Ghaudhary  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  S.  Ekbote  Indian  Airlines,  New  Delhi 

Shri  Yashbir  Kumar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  G.  Govindarajan  Bombay  Port  Trust,  Bombay 

Shri  Q,.  H.  Taufiq  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  D.  John  Madras  Port  Trust,  Madras 

Shri  M.  Chan*drasekaran  (  Alternate  ) 
Brig  T.  C.   Joseph  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Lt-Col  R.  Shivdasani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  Kausik  Voltas  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  D.  V.  Bal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  Konar  Calcutta  Port  Trust,  Calcutta 

Shri  J.  S.  Marwaha  Ministry  of  Railways  (  RDSO  ),  Lucknow 

Shri  K.  L.  NirwaK  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  D.  Modi  Gujarat  Industrial  Trucks  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  A.  G.  Modi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  S.  Nagasundaram  Ministry  of  Defence  (  Air  Wing  ) 

Shri  D.  K.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  N.  Pestonji  Godrej  &  Boyce  Manufacturing  Go  Pvt  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  H.  F.  Ragina  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  A.  Phayade  Standard  Batteries  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  F.  Govadia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  R.  Prasad  Jost's  Engineering  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  E.  J.  Tarapore  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright   1983 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV    of  1957  )    and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said   Act. 


IS  :  10311  -  1982 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  V.  L.'N.  Rao  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Shri  S.  Devrajah  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  C.  Saksena  Directorate  General  of  Factory   Advice   Service   & 

Labour  Institute,  Bombay 
Shri  A.  Ai^agar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  K.  Sengufta  Directorate    General    of    Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  S.  K.  Ghosh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  B.  R.  Singh  Hindustan  Steel  Ltd,  Ranchi 

Shri  S.  Ghittabanjan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  S.  Das,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-qfficio  Member  ) 

Director  (  MCPD  )  (  Secretary  ) 


Forklift  Trucks  Subcommittee,  MCPD  22  :  1 

Convener 
Shbi  V.  Kausik  Voltas  Ltd,  Bombay 

Members 
Shri  D.  V.  Bai-  (  Alternate  to 
Shri  V.  Kausik  ) 
Shbi  S   C  Anand  Directorate  General  of  Supplies  &   Disposals,    New 

Delhi 
Shbi  I.  C.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  J.  S.  Marwaha  Ministry  of  Railways  (  RDSO  ),  Lucknow 

Shri  K.  L.  Nirwan-  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  D,  N.  Pestonji  Godrej  &  Boyce  Manufacturing  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  K.  Mehta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  A.  Phayade  Standards  Batteries  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  F.  Govabia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  R.  Prasad  Jost's  Engineering  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  E.  J.  Tarapore  (  Alternate  ) 
ShriV   L.N.Rao  Chief     Inspectorate    of    Engineering,     Ministry     of 

Defence  (  DGI  ) 
Shri  S.  Devrajan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Sinha  Garden     Reach     Shipbuilders     &     Engineers     Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri  A*  K.  Joardaii  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  C.  Unnithast  Macneill  &  Magor  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  S.  Roy  Chowdhury  (  Alternate  ) 


IS  :  10311  -  1982 


Indian  Standard 


GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS  OF  POWERED 

PLATFORM  TRUCKS  AND  THEIR 

ACCEPTANCE  CRITERIA 


0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  29  September  1982,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the 
Industrial  Trucks  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the 
Marine,  Cargo  Movement  and  Packaging  Division  Council. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  specifies  requirements  relating  to  the  elements  of 
design  of  low  lift  and  high  lift  powered  platform  trucks  and  their 
acceptance  criteria. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  Low  Lift  Platform  Truck  —  A  self  loading  truck  equipped 
with  a  load  platform  intended  primarily  for  transporting  skid  platform. 

2*2  High  Lift  Platform  Truck  —  A  self  loading  truck  equipped  with 
a  load  platform,  intended  primarily  for  transporting  and  tiring  loaded 
skid  platforms. 

2.3  Fixed  Platform  Truck  —  A  truck  equipped  with  a  load  platform 
intended  primarily  for  transporting  loads. 

3.  DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION 
3.1  Rated  Capacity 

3.1.1  For  low  lift  and  high  lift  type  truck  the  rated  capacity  is  the 
maximum  pay  load  uniformly  distributed  on  the  platform  as  far  as 
possible,  expressed  in  kilograms  that  the  truck  can  transport. 


IS  :  10311  -  1982 

3.2  Service  Brake 

3.2.1  The  service  brake  performance  shall  be  in  accordance  with 
IS:  9701-1980*. 

3.3  Steering 

3.3.1  All  steering  controls  for  trucks  except  pedestrian  controlled 
trucks  shall  be  confined  within  the  plan  view  outline  of  the  truck  or 
guarded  against  injury  to  the  operator  during  movement  of  the  controls 
when  passing  obstacles,  walls,  column,  etc. 

3.3.2  Steering  handwheel  shall  be  accomplished  with  steering  knob 
for  safe  and  effective  operation  (  wherever  applicable  )  and  shall  be 
within  the  periphery  of  the  steering  handwheel. 

3.3.3  The  steering  handwheel  and  knob  configuration  shall  be  of  a 
design  that  shall  minimize  the  hazard  from  a  spinning  hand  wheel  due 
to  a  road  reaction  feedback,  or  the  steering  mechanism  shall  be  of  a 
type  that  prevents  road  reaction  from  causing  the  steering  handwheel  to 
spin. 

Note  —  This  clause  is  not  applicable  for  three  wheeler  platform  truck, 

3.4  Travel  Control 

3.4.1  Forward  and  reverse  direction  control(s)  shall  be  clearly  durably 
identified. 

3.4.2  Means  shall  be  provided  so  that  the  travel  circuit  can  be  activated 
only  by  setting  the  speed  and/or  directional  controi(s)  when  the  operator 
assumes  the  operating  position. 

3.4.3  A  manually  operated  switch  (  may  be  key  type  )  to  disconnect 
all  control  circuits  shall  be  provided. 

3.4.4  Service  brakes  may  be  actuated  by  either  an  upward  or  down- 
ward motion. 

3.5  Control  Symbol 

3.5*1  Symbols  when  used  shall  be  in  accordance  with  IS  :  7553-1975f. 

3.6  Platforms 

3.6.1  Lowlift  and  Fixed  Platform  —  Trucks  shall  be  equipped  with 
platform  extending  beyond  the  operator's  position,  strong  enough  to 
withstand  a  compression  load  equal  to  the  weight   of  the   loaded   truck 

♦Brake  performance  of  powered  industrial  trucks, 
fSpecification  for  control  symbols  for  powered  industrial  trucks. 


IS  :  10311  -  1982 

applied   along   the   longitudinal    axis   of  the   truck  with  the  outermost 
projection  of  the  platform  against  a  flat  vertical  surface. 

3.6.2  Highlift  Platform  —  All  platforms  shall  have: 

a)  a  skid  resistance  surface;  and 

b)  provision   to    protect   personnel    in  the  normal  working  position 
from  moving  parts  of  the  truck  that  represent  a  hazard. 

3.7  Guards  for  Wheels 

3.7.1  Guards  or  other  means  shall  be  provided  to  protect  the  operator, 
in  the  normal  operating  position,  from  particles  thrown  by  the  tires  or 
wheels. 

3.8  Warning  Device 

3.8.1  The  truck  shall  be  equipped  with  a  warning  horn,  whistle, 
gong,  or  other  sound  producing  device,  visual  warning  devices,  such 
as  lights  or  blinkers  may  also  be  installed  when  requested  by  the  user. 

4.  MARKING 

4.1  On  every  truck  the  manufacturer  shall  install  a    durable,    corrosion 
resistant  nameplate  legibly  inscribed  with  the  following: 

a)  Capacity  of  the  truck, 

b)  Name  of  the  manufacturer  and  year  of  manufacture, 

c)  Truck   model   and/or   truck    serial   number.     The   truck    serial 
number  shall  also  be  stamped  on  the  frame  of  the  truck, 

d)  Mass  of  the  truck  without  battery, 

e)  Rated  voltage  of  battery,  and 

f )  Mass  of  the  battery  to  be  used. 

5.  ACCEPTANCE  CRITERIA 

5.1  Visual    Examination  —  Check    compliance    of    3.3,    3.4,    3.5.1, 
3.8  and  4. 

5.2  Dimensional   Check  —  The  following  dimensions  shall  be  checked 
as  specified  by  the  manufacturer: 

a)  Overall  height, 

b)  Overall  length, 

c)  Overall  width, 

d)  Maximum  platform  height, 


ISi.l«3tl-1982 

e)  Lowered  platform  height* 

f)  Platform  size, 

g)  Wheel  base, 

h)  Wheel  track,  and 
j)  Tyre  size. 

5.3  Test  for  Performance  —  The  following  tests  shall  be  carried     out 
for  performance  against  values  specified  by  the  manufacturer: 

a)  Capacity  Test 

1)  Each  low  lift  platform  truck  and  high  lift  platform  truck 
shall  be  tested  for  rated  pay  load  for  fifteen  minutes, 

2)  Each  fixed  platform  truck  shall  be  tested  for  rated  pay  load  for 
fifteen  minutes  and  for  10  percent  overload  for  ten  minutes  after 
the  truck  has  run  thirty  minutes  on  rated  pay  load. 

b)  Speed  Test  —  Each  truck  shall  run  with/without  load  at  the  corres- 
ponding speed  specified  by  the  manufacturer  on  level  ground. 

c)  Elevation  Test  —  Values  specified  by  the  manufacturer  for 
elevation  shall  be  checked.  Check  hydraulic  system  by  lifting 
platform  10  times  when  fully  loaded  then  lift  the  platform  with 
the  rated  load  and  keep  it  for  10  minutes.  The  drift  value  shall 
be  as  per  manufacturer's  specification. 

d)  Gradient  Test  —  Each  truck  shall  be  tested  as  per  the  manufacturer's 
specification. 

e)  Brake  Test  —  The  brake  test  to  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  9701-1980*. 

f)  Turning  Radius  Test  —  Ten  percent  of  the  trucks  on  order  with 
minimum  of  one  number  shall  be  tested.  Turning  radius  shall 
not  be  more  than  as  specified  by  the  manufacturer. 

5.4  Test    Certificates  —  The    following    shall   be    accepted   on    test 
certificate: 

a)  Motor  —  Accepted  against  test  certificate  obtainable  from  the 
manufacturer's  specification. 

b)  Battery  —  Manufacturer's  test  certificate  as  per  IS  :  5154-1980f, 

c)  Battery  Charger  —  As  per  manufacturer's  test  certificate^  and 

d)  Engine  —  As  per  manufacturer's  test  certificate. 


♦Brake  performance  of  powered  industrial  trucks. 
•{■Specification  for  lead-acid  traction  batteries  {first  revision  ). 


