**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12568 (1988) : Methods for testing black and white 
photographic enlargers [MED 32: Photographic Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



lS:1Si«B-1>M 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 
TESTING BLACK AND WHITE 
PHOTOGRAPHIC ENLARGERS 



UDC T7l-3ie-5 : 620 J 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. a BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

N£WDBLHI IICKHQ 



IS : 12568 - 1988 



Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 
TESTING BLACK AND WHITE 
PHOTOGRAPHIC ENLARGERS 



0. FOREWORD 



0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 December 
1988, after the draft finalized by the Photo- 
graphic Equipment Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Consumer Products and 
Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 This standard describes the methods for 
testing photographic enlargers for amateur and 
professional use in ordinary photographic 
practice. For special uses such as in photo- 
grammetry and photoengraving, more critical 
tests may be required. 

0.3 This standard is based on ANSI PH 3.31- 



1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard covers the methods for testing 
black and white photographic enlargers for 
amateur and professional use in ordinary 
photographic practice. 

1.2 More critical tests may be required for at 
least some functions of enlargers for photo- 
grammetry, photoengraving and other special 
purposes, which have not been covered in this 
standard. 

1.3 Some characteristics of enlargers such as 
ease of operation, good workmanship and finish, 
and sturdiness cannot be subjected to specific 
testing. However, they are important and 
should not be overlooked. 

2. METHODS OF TEST 

2.1 Test for Uniformity of Illumination 

2.1.1 Before carrying out the test for uni- 
formity falling on the easel, tlie following 
adjustments of the equipment shall be made: 

a) The enlarger shall be set for maximum 
magnification. 

b) An empty negative carrier of tlie 
maximum size fur which the enlar^ijfi is 
made shall be installed. 

c) If a specific lens is not supplied or 
recommended hy \\\v manufacturer, tlie 



1 974 ^Methods for testing photographic 
enlargers' issued by the American National 
Standards Institute. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a 
particular requirement of this standard is 
complied with, the final value, observed or 
calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall 
be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of 
the specified value in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding oi\ numerical values ( revised). 



enlarger shall bo fitted with a lens having 
a focal length a])pioximately the same 
as the diagonal of the negative carrier. 
The lens shall be focussed to give a sharp 
image of the edges of the negative 
carrier. 

d) Any other adjustment recommended by 
the manufacturer such as centering the 
lamp shall also be made. 

c) The enlarger shall be inspected for 

possible interference of the safety-filter 

bracket or other i^arts with the light 
beam. 

f) The lens (Ji<ip]H-af.i;m shall be set at its 
largest opening in the case of the lens 
provided with an adjustable diaphragm. 
If tlu^ results of the lest ibr uniformity of 
illumination are not satisfactory for some 
applications, they rnay generally be 
improved by reducing the opening of the 
diaphragm until there is no vignetting of 
the corner rays by the lens barrel. 



g) 



Th(^ voltage of mains supply used shall be 
adjusted to within 0'5 percent of the 
rated voltage ol' the enlarger. While 
adjusting the mains supply the voltage 
sliall be measured at the sui)ply socket 
to which the recommended power supi)ly 
Cf>rd is connected. 



h) The enlargiriL; lamp used shall [)e accor- 
ding to manufacturer's specification. 



1 



IS : 12568 - 1988 



2.1.2 The illumination shall be measured at 
the brightest point ( usually the centre ) and at 
the darkest point { usually the corners on the 
easel ) using a footcandle meter or other photo- 
meter. 

2.1.2.1 For the purposes of comparison, the 
illumination at the darkest point shall be cal- 
culated as a percentage of the brightest point. 

2.1.2.2 If any local irregularity is apparent, 
and if the measuring area of the photometer 
permits, the gradient of illumination across the 
irregularity shall be measured. 

2.1.2.3 Some common and convenient 
photometers integrate the light over an appreci- 
able area. The illuminometer shall have 
sufficient photographic sensitivity and in 
addition, the diameter of light receiving surface 
is to be less than 1/15 of the diagonal of the 
picture and it shall be of such construction that 
the direction of incident light shall not give 
discrepancies to its indicating values. Measure- 
ment for calculating light output shall be made 
v^ith an incident light photometer without 
cosine correction. 

2.1.3 An alternative test may be used to 
measure the uniformity of illumination. With 
no negative in the carries, a sheet of photo- 
graphic paper shall be exposed so that the 
reflection density is between 0'8 and TO in the 
centre of the print. High-contrast paper will 
give the most critical test. 

2.1.3.1 The print shall be processed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recom- 
mended procedure. 

2.1.3.2 The print may be examined visually 
or measured with a reflection densitometer for 
both the general and local uniformity. If 
relative illumination measurements are desired, 
print density can be converted to relative log 
exposure by relating the density difference to a 
D log E curve obtained from a calibrated 
sensitometer on that paper grade. 

2.2 Light Tightness Test 

2.2.1 The procedure given below shall be 
followed for testing the light tightness of the 
enlarger: 

a) The enlarger shall be placed in a dark 
room with light coloured walls. ( The 
smaller the room, the more critical will 
the test be ). 

b) A negative with average overall density 
of about rO shall be inserted in the 
carrier and an opaque cap shall bo placed 
on the lens. 

c) The time duration for which the enlarger 
lamp must be lighted at normal voltage 



to produce the maximum fogging of 
sheets of sensitized material on the easel 
and adjacent to the easel at the same 
level shall be determined. This test 
should be carried out with the most light- 
sensitive material to be used on the 
enlarger; for example, if separation 
negatives or matrices are to be made, 
panchromatic film should be used for the 
test. The manufacturer's recommen- 
dations for development of the material 
should be followed, carrying the develop- 
ment to the greatest specified amount. 

Darkroom safelight illumination should be 
turned off during this test. The test can be 
performed most conveniently by covering 
portions of the sensitized sheets for various time 
durations. For example, in carrying out a test 
for light-tightness with ordinary enlarging 
paper, the lamp might be on for 16 minutes, 
and parts of the paper would be covered with 
opaque cards to give exposure times of 0, 2, 4, 8 
and 16 minutes. 

When this test is done, it is desirable to have 
an unexposed area of the sensitized material 
adjacent to each of the exposed areas. This can 
be accomplished, for example, by making the 
exposures through holes in an opaque mask 
covering the sensitized sheet. 

2.2.2 The enlarger shall be inspected for light 
leaks while it is in a darkroom. 

2.3 Test for Effectiveness of Safety 
Filter — With the safety filter in its operating 
position, the time required to produced detri- 
mental fogging of the sensitized material on 
the easel shall be determined. The procedure 
outlined in 2.2.1(c) can be adopted for this 
test. The test will be most critical if the enlarger 
is set for minimum magnification and the 
diaphragm is at its largest opening. 

2.4 Test for Resolution 

2.4.1 The vibration of the enlarging head and 
enlarging easel will severely affect resolution. 
The test should be performed at the extremes 
of the magnification range provided by the 
enlarger, with the lens diaphragm at its largest 
opening, and with a test negative of the maxi- 
mum size recommended for the lens under test. 
For some purposes, it may be desirable to per- 
form additional tests at other diaphragm stops. 

Note — It is assumed that a liigh-contrast, resolving- 
power-chart negative shall be used. Tlie photographic 
materials used to record the resolution shovdd be the 
same eraulsion type as the materials used in i>ractice. 
'I'iic use of glossy paper of normal grade is recummendetl. 

2.4.2 For simple comparative purposes, it is 
often adequate to make the sharpest possible 
prims at maximum lens aperture from a nega- 



IS : 12568 - 1988 



tive carrying an image with fine, sharp detail. 

2,4.3 For purposes requiring quantitative or 
numerical ratings, test prints should be made 
from a special test negative carrying resolution 
test patterns at its centre, corners and several 
intermediate points. When suitable, the test 
plate described in 5.1.1 of IS : 5673-1970* should 
be used. 

2.5 Test for Colour Correction of Lens — 

If a lens has lateral colour, it will give images 
of slightly different magnifications for various 
colours of light. This can be checked easily by 
making a print from a negative which has a 
number of lines crossing and perpendicular to 
a diagonal of the negative, with strips of gelatin 
filters laid side by side across these lines on the 
light-source side of the negative. After the print 
has been developed, any discontinuity in the 
lines will provide a measure of the lateral 
coJour, 

2.5.1 If the lens is to be used for some process 
involving specific filters, the check should be 
made with those filters. For a more general 
test, it is usually satisfactory to use commercially 
available filters having dominant transmission 
at wavelengths of 650 nm ( transmission of 
wavelengths shorter than 590 nm should be 
negligible ) and 440 nm ( 370 to 510 nm ). 

2.6 Test for Alignment of Optical Axis, 
Negative and Easel 

2#6,1 If there is a difference in magnification 
between one side of the print and the other» 
parallel lines in the negative are reproduced out- 
of-parallel in the image. This elfect is called 
keystoning. 

2.6.1.1 The only condition which can cause 
keystoning is that the negative is not parallel to 
the easel. The maximum out-of-parallel condi- 
tion occurs for lines which are perpendicular to 
the line of intersection of the plane of the nega- 
tive with the plane of the easel. 

2.6.1.2 Keystoning can be detected by 
projecting an image on the easel from a 
negative having pairs of widely spaced parallel 
lines running in several directions. Each pair 
should be symmetrical with respect to the centie 
of the negative. If the projected lines of any 
pair are not parallel from one side of the image 
to the other, the negative is not parallel to the 
easel. 

2.6.2 The lack of symmetry in tlie image 
resolution may be caused by any one or more 
of the following conditions: 

a) The negative is not parallel to the easel. 
This asymmetiy will lu) accoinpaned by 
keystoning. 

♦Methods of tost for btili pioj(;('to?s. 



b) The mounting surface ( lens board ) is not 
parallel to the negative and easel. If on 
rotating the lens iind lens board together 
about the axis of the lens, the image re- 
solution asymmetry does not rotate and 
there is no keysLoiiing, the mountmg 
surface for the lens hoard is not parallel 
to the negative and easel. If the image 
resolution asymmetry rotates with lens, 
the cause is one or both of the effects 
described in 2.6.2 (c) and 2.6.2 (d) 

c) The lens is defective. 

d) The flange of lens is not parallel to the 
mounting surface for the lens board. 

2.7 Test for Temperature Rise 

2.7.1 If the temperature rise of the negative 
is to be measured, the following conditions of 
measurement are recommended: 

a) The ambient temperature should be about 

2rc. 

b) The negative should have a uniform 
density of 20 ± 01, and the emulsion 
side should be away from the lamp. 

c) To simulate the operating conditions, the 
light source of the enlarger should be 
operated on an intermittent cycle of 10 
seconds on and 10 seconds off. 

d) The lamp should be operated at its rated 

voltage. 

e) The temperature should be measured at 
the negative carrier stage by means of a 
thermocouple. The thermocouple shall 
he prepared by electrowelding to produce 
a beaded junction approximately 4 mm 
in diameter. This bead shall be llattened 
to form a disc of the same thickness as 
the diametc!- of the thermocouple wires, 
then cleaned and inspected under a 
micrc^scopo to ensiue that the wires are 
nor broken or damaged. 

Measur (orient may be made to determine 

the maximum tcmpei atuie or the time tc(]uired 
to reach a specified temperature. 

2.7.2 The temperature rise of the exterior of 
the lamp house can be determined by using an 
insulator to press a tliernjoc(juple against the 
points to he measured and by operating the 
enlarger as described in 2.7.1. 

2.8 Scratching of Negative — Although it is 
difiicult to specify a test which will give a 
quantitative nicasurenicirt oj' the scratching, of 
the negative, il is a simple niattei' to insert, 
manipulate, and remove a fresh negative several 
times and then examine it for scratc.hes. The 
handling should be in accordance witli (he 
manufacturer's instructions. 



