**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11363 (1985) : Tubes, breathing, for anaesthetic apparatus 
and ventilators [MHD 13: Veterinary Hospital Planning and 
Surgical Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 615-471 : 616-089*5 : 615"477'82 



IS : 11363-1985 
ISO 5367-1985 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 




TUBES, BREATHING, FOR ANAESTHETIC 
APPARATUS AND VENTILATORS 

( ISO Title : Breathing Tubes Used with Anaesthetic Apparatus 

and Ventilators) 



S 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 5367-1985 'Breathing tubes used with 
anaesthetic apparatus and ventilators*, issued by the International Organization for Standardiza- 
tion (ISG), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the 
Anaesthetic, Resuscitation and Allied Equipment Sectional Committee, and approved by the 
Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current 
practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 



Adopted 28 February 1985 



© January 1986 ISI 



6r 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR6 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11363-1 985 
ISO 5367-1 985 



Introduction 



3 Definitions 



This International Standard is one of a series dealing with 
anaesthetic equipment and medical breathing machines, and is 
supplementary to ISO 5356. It is primarily concerned with basic 
requirements for breathing tubes, including means of connec- 
tion and conductivity. 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies basic requirements for 
breathing tubes used with anaesthetic apparatus and some 
ventilators, and applies also to those breathing tubes which 
may have other components integrally attached. 

Provision is made for breathing tubes having plain ends (either 
cylindrical or tapered) or ends incorporating conical fittings. 

Breathing tubes for special purposes, such as those used with 
some ventilators, double lumen tubes and paediatric breathing 
systems, are excluded from the scope of this International 
Standard. 



2 References 

ISO 468, Surface roughness — Parameters, their values and 
general rules for specifying surfaces. 

ISO 2878, Rubber, vulcanized — Antistatic and conductive 
products — Determination of electrical resistance. 

ISO 2882, Rubber, vulcanized — Antistatic and conductive 
products for hospital use — Electrical resistance. 

ISO 5356, Breathing attachments for Inhalation anaesthetic 
apparatus, lung ventilators and resuscltators 

— Part 1 : Conical fittings and adaptors. ^ * 

— Part 2 : Screw threaded weight bearing fittings. ^ ' 

lEC Publication 60-1. Safety of medical electrical equip- 
ment — Part 1 : General requirements. 



3.1 breathing tube fanaesthesia breathing system) : 
Large-bore, non-rigid tube, usually corrugated, used tox:onvey 
gases and/or vapours between the anaesthetic machine and/or 
some ventilators and the patient.21 

3.2 patient end : That end of the breathing tube which 
is intended to be connected to the Y-piece or other appropriate 
component near the patient. 

3.3 machine end : That end of the breathing tube which 
is intended to be connected to the anaesthesia machine or 
ventilator. 



3.4 conductive (anti-static] : Pertaining to breathing tubes 
and any integrally attached components with electrical conduc- 
tivity satisfying specified limits under the conditions of test. 

3.5 non-conductive : Pertaining to breathing tubes and any 
integrally attached components with insufficient electrical con- 
ductivity to meet specified limits under the conditions of test. 



3.6 disposable : Intended for single use. 

3.7 compliance : Volume/pressure relationship as deter- 
mined from the gradient of the volume/pressure curve at a 
specified pressure, expressed as millilitres per kilopascai 
( ml /k Pa) for millilitres per centimetre of water (ml/cnnH20n per 
metre length of tube. 



4 Design 

Breathing tubes, whether of corrugated construction or other- 
wise, shall have either plain ends (either cylindrical or tapered) 
or ends incorporating conical fittings. 

A loop for suspending the tube may be provided near one of 
the ends. 



1 ) At present at the stage of draft 

2) Definition taken from ISO 4135, 4 nae5f/?e5/o/o9y'- Vocabulary 



IS : 11363-1985 

ISO 5367-1 985 



5 Dimensions 

5.1 Length 

The length of breathing tubes shall be designated by the 
nominal overall length, expressed in metres, when measured in 
the relaxed condition. 

5.2 Internal diameter 

The internal diameter of the body of the breathing tube shall be 
not less than 18,0 mm. 



6 Materials 



8.3 Disengagement load for connections 

No detectable movement shall be observed when each end of 
the breathing tube is subjected to the following test, gt 

8.3.1 Dip the end in distilled water and engage it with the ap- 
propriate conical fitting complying with the requirements of 
ISO 5356/ 1. Engagement shall be up to or beyond the major 
diameter of the conical fitting, which shall have a surface finish 
not rougher than 0,8|inn (roughness number N 6) determined 
in accordance with ISO 468. 

NOTE ~ Strictly, it would also be necessary to specify the engage- 
ment forces involved in connecting the conical fittings. For the purpose 
of this test, however, such requirements were not considered to be 
readily practicable and it has been assumed that conical fittings would 
be engaged by hand as in normal clinical practice. 



NOTE — Because of the continuing rapid developments of new 
materials, no strict standards relative to materials are provided other 
than the following. 

6.1 Breathing tubes shall be made of suitable materials which 
shall be reasonably resistant to anaesthetic agents. 



8.3.2 Apply a tensile load of 15 N along the linear axis of the 
tube for not less than 1 min. The load shall be applied at least 
250 mm from the end of the connector for conical fittings of 
22 mm size, and at least 200 mm from the end of the connector 
in the case of tubing connected to conical fittings of 15 mm 
size. 



6.2 Unless designated and marked as disposable, the tube 
shall be resistant to ordinary methods of cleaning, disinfection, 
and sterilization, as recommended by the manufacturer or sup- 
plier. It is desirable that non-disposable breathing tubes shall 
withstand accepted methods of steam sterilization. 

NOTE -- Attention is drawn to the absorption of volatile anaesthetic 
agents and other substances by breathing tubes. These agents and 
substances may be subsequently liberated and may pose a hazard. 



8.4 Gas-tightness of connections 

Leakage as demonstrated by the escape of air bubbles shall not 
occur when each end of the breathing ?ube is subjected to the 
following test. 

8.4.1 Dip the end in distilled water and engage it with the ap- 
propriate conical fitting as described in 8.1 and 8.2. 



7 Test conditions 

All testsshall be conducted at 20 + 3 °C after conditioning at 
this temperature for at least 1 h. 



8 Means of connection 

8.1 Plain ends 

Both the machine end and the patient end of breathing tubes 
with plain ends shall make a satisfactory fit with the conical fit- 
ting of nominal 22 mm size in accordance with ISO 535611. 
Plain ends shall additionally comply with the requirements of 
8.3 and 8.4 and their internal diameter shall be not less 
than 19.0 mm. 

8.2 Ends incorporating conical fittings 

The conical fittings shall be designed to give an effective fit 
with the relevant fittings specified in ISO 5356/1 and shall com- 
ply with the test requirements of 8.3 and 8.4. Where disposable 
tubes are supplied in pairs permanently attached to a Y-piece, 
the patient connection port of that Y-piece shall be 
22 mm/15 mm male/female coaxial fittings in accordance with 
ISO 5356/1. 



8.4.2 Apply an internal gas pressure of not less than 10 kPa 
(100cmH2O) above the ambient pressure whilst the connection 
is immersed in water. 



9 Occlusion and flexibility test 

The lumen shall not be appreciably occluded when wound in a 
helix around a 50 mm diameter core with 

a) the minimum tension required to maintain contact with 
the core, and 

b) the loops of tubing being maintained in wall-to-wall 
contact. 



10 Compliance 

10.1 The compliance (see 3.7) of breathing tubes shall be 
determined as follows. 

10.1.1 Block one end of the breathing tube and provide the 
other end with means of injecting a known volume of air. 

10.1.2 Mount the specimen in such a manner so as not to im- 
pede movement, for example by floating it on water. 



IS : 11363-1 985 
ISO 5367-1 985 



10.1.3 Subject the specimen to inflation with a known volume 
of air to a gauge pressure of 10 kPa(100cmH2O}. 



to. 1.4 Record the volume of air required for a stable internal 
pressure {see 10, 1.3). 



10. 1 . 5 Determine the overall length of the test specimen at 
the ambient pressure. 



10. 1. 6 Determine the compliance of the specimen expressed 
as millilitres per kilopascal (or millilitres per centimetre of water) 
per metre length. 



10.2 The manufacturer shall, when required, provide infor- 
mation to the user on the compliance range of the product. 



NOTE ~ The compliance of breathing tubes varies according to 
sterilization processes, usage and storage conditions. Normally the 
compliance of a new tube at a pressure of 10 kPa(100cmH20) should 
not exceed 10 ml/kPa(1ml/cmH20) per metre length of tube. 



11 Electrical conductivity 



11.1 The electrical characteristics of tubes and any integrally 
attached components made of conductive material for use with 
flammable anaesthetic agents shall be specified and tested in 
accordance with ISO 2878 and ISO 2882 respectively, or with 
the requirements of the appropriate national authorities. 



12 Colour 

Breathing tubes made of conductive material shall be coloured 
black, and those made of non-conductive material shall be of 
any colour except black. 



13 Marking 

13.1 Marking of breathing tubes 

Breathing tubes shall be legibly and durably marked as follows : 

a) the name or trademark of the manufacturer; 

b) the date (year and month or week) of manufacture; 

c) breathing tubes made of conductive material shall be 
marked in accordance with lEC Publication 801-1. 

13.2 Marking of packages 

Packages containing disposable breathing tubes shall be 
marked in accordance with 13.1 and shall additionally be clearly 
marked as follows : 

a) the words "STERILE " or "NON-STERILE ", as ap- 
propriate: 

b) words indicating "for single use". 

Both disposable and non-disposable breathing tubes made of 
non-conductive materials and, if provided, integrally attached 
components made of non-conductive materials shall be sup- 
plied in a package clearly marked "NON-CONDUCTIVE". 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi. India 



