**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 15087 (2001) : Planning and Design of Drainage in 
Irrigation Projects - Guidelines [WRD 6: Water Resources 
Planning, Management and Evaluation] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1815087:2001 



f^vjll^H - H|Jkf?|cbl 

Indian Standard 

PLAiSfNING AND DESIGN OF DRAINAGE IN 
IRRIGATION PROJECTS — GUIDELINES 



ICS 93.160 



©BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 2001 Price Group 2 



Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee, WRD 6 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Water 
Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water 
Resources Division Council. 

There is no ISO standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on the practices prevalent in 
the field in India. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, Should be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised y. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 15087 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

PLANNING AND DESIGN OF DRAINAGE IN 
IRRIGATION PROJECTS — GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down the guidelines for planning 
and design of drainage system in irrigation projects 
including the guidelines for dealing with the problem 
of drainage in the command areas of irrigation projects. 

2 SOIL MOISTURE AND PLANT GROWTH 

2.1 The particular moisture content of a soil which 
is best for plant growth is the optimum moisture content. 
It varies for soils of different texture and to some extent 
on different types of crops. The plant roots extract 
water from the thin film surrounding the soil particles. 
The amount of water adhering to the particles in fine 
grained soil is greater than in a coarse grained soil 
on account of greater siu-face area of the fine particles. 
The optimum moisture content corresponds closer to 
the amount which renders the soil most friable and in 
the best condition for cultivation. When moisture 
exceeds this optimum limit, the pore space becomes 
partly filled with moisture, aeration becomes deficient 
and the conditions are less favourable for cultivation 
and plant growth. This results in what is commonly 
known as water-logging. 

2.2 In water-logged soils the air content of the soil 
is low because most pores are filled with water. The 
exchange between the remaining air in the soil and 
air in the atmosphere above gets restricted by these 
conditions. In consequence, plant respiration is 
restricted by oxygen deficiency while at the same time 
carbon dioxide accumulates to toxic levels. This impairs 
root growth and the roots ability to absorb nutrients. 
The water-logging also indirectly affects the plant 
growth by its adverse effects on soil biological life 
and on the structure of the soil. The excess water in 
the soil also adversely affects the soil workability and 
the farm operations are impaired. 

3 ZONES OF ROOT GROWTH 

A zone of soil sufficient for the growth of roots of 
deep rooted crops is essential. Usually a depth of 
about 1 to 1.5 m of unsaturated soil is sufficient for 
expansion and growth of the root system of the crops. 

4 CAPILLARY ACTION 

In fine grained and well compacted soils the capillary 
action is greatest. In fine grained soils water rises to 
the extent of 1 .2 to 1 .5 m by capillary action bringing 
the salts to the surface. On the other hand in coarse 
grained soils even free ground water to a depth of 



about 1 m can be seen causing no rise of moisture at 
the surface and not permitting sufficient growth of 
crops. 

5 FACTORS LEADING TO RISE IN SUB-SOIL 
WATER TABLE 

a) Seepage from water bodies; 

b) Over-irrigation; 

c) Excessive rainfall; 

d) Inadequate natural drainage; 

e) Obstruction to drainage; 

f) Poor subsoil condition; 

g) Adverse geo-hydrologic regime ( say, 
existence of hard pan at shallow depth, 
etc ); and 

h) Leakage and spillage from canals and field 
channels. 

6 SALINITY 

6.1 When ground water table rises, water in the sub 
soil rises to the surface by capillary action. When 
water reaches the surface it evaporates due to the action 
of wind and temperature leaving behind the dissolved 
salts on or near the surface. This phenomenon is known 
as salt-efflorescence and leads to formation of saline 
lands. 

6.2 The real trouble is not due to salt-efflorescence 
because this can be washed out of soil by flooding 
following drainage, but due to the effect of alkalinity 
on heavy soil. Alkalies have dispersing or defloculating 
action on clay causing the soil to lose its tilth and 
become impervious and highly retentive. The 
circulation of air is completely stopped with the result 
nothing is able to grow in the soil. Areas of this type 
are devoid of vegetation. 

6.3 The salinity of a soil is measured by electrical 
conductivity ( EC ) of the soil samples in water 
suspension 1:2. Soils with EC value to I mmhos/ 
cm are termed as non saline, those with values between 
1 to 3 mmhos/cm are termed as slightly saline and soils 
with EC values greater than 3 mmhos/cm are termed 
as saline soils. There are some salt resistant crops 
like rice which can be grown upto EC value of 4 mmhos/ 
cm. 

6.4 The alkaline deposits changes the pH value of 



IS 15087 : 2001 



the soil. ThepH value of 7.0 to 8.5 gives normal yield. 
When the value is between 8.5 to 9.0, the yield 
decreases. When/?H rises above 1 1 .0, the soil is likely 
to become infertile. 

7 DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 

7.1 Necessity of Drainage 

Suitable drainage of agricultural land is a necessity 
for high level agricultural production. Drainage 
maintains the productive capacity of soil by removing 
excess water, improving the soil structure, improving 
the air circulation and reducing salt content and 
erosion. When large areas are brought under irrigation 
atleast a part of the land warrants proper drainage. 
Irrigation and drainage are complimentary practices. 

7.2 Types of Drains 

7.2.1 Ground water drainage is based on the principle 
that controlling the ground water level can provide 
the best unsaturated conditions for the plant growth. 
The ideal situation is to control the water within certain 
limits, which means enabling the water in the saturated 
zone to move from the soil body to some outfall where 
the natural lateral movement of ground water exists. 
This should be permitted by artificial gravitional means. 
Where the ground water is locked in the area it means 
taking the water out against gravity. 

7.2.2 Horizontal and Vertical Drainage 

There are two types of ground water drainage. 
Horizontal through pipes or open ditches and vertical 
by lifting or pumping from wells. The horizontal 
drainage system usually consists of pipes or open 
ditch system. 

In some cases particularly in flatter areas, vertical 
drainage may be a better approach. The water received 
from vertical drainage may be suitably mixed in canal 
water provided it is of suitable quality or may be 
disposed off by surface/sub-surface drainage. 

7.3 Types of Drainage System 

There are two main types of drainage systems. 

a) Surface drains; and 

b) Sub-surface drains. 
7.3. 1 Surface Drains 

7.3. 1 . 1 Surface drainage is the orderly removal of excess 
water from land surface through constructed or 
improved natural channels and supplemented by 
grading of land surfaces. 

7.3.1.2 Seepage drains are provided along the canals 
to intercept seepage water. 

7.3.1.3 A field drain is a graded channel that collects 
excess water from a field or a holding. 



7.3.1.4 A carrier drain is a drain which collects water 
from seepage/field drains and carries it to the main 
drain. 

7.3.1.5 Main drain or outfall drain is normally a drain 
constructed along natural drainage path by remodeling 
the existing drainage path. The carriers drains normally 
outfall in the main drain. Sometimes, seepage/fields 
drains also directly outfall in the main drains. 

7.3.2 Sub-Surface Drains 

Sub-surface drainage is useful for laying drainage 
system quickly and where deeper outfalls are available. 
This also saves the land for cultivation. No culverts/ 
crossing are required in sub-surface drainage system. 

7.4 Design Criteria of Surface Drain 

7.4.1 The designed capacity of the surface drain will 
depend on the following: 

a) Area to be drained, 

b) Pattern of rainfall, 

c) Soil characteristics, 

d) Crops grown, and 

e) Natural ground slope. 

7.4.2 The area to be drained successively increases 
for a field drain, carrier drain and main drain. Surface 
drains are designed for removal of excess rainfall in a 
pre-determined period. Usually the basis is the maximum 
rainfall occurring in 24 hours once in five years. The 
surface run-off depends on the infiltration 
characteristics, natural ground slope and vegetative 
cover of the soil. The run-off coefficient Will vary 
with the different soils. The excess rainfall can not 
be disposed off immediately, a period of 3 days is 
generally allowed for paddy, sugarcane, banana, etc, 
and 1 to 1 .5 days for other food crops and vegetables. 
The surface drains designed for disposal of run-off 
from rainfall are generally adequate for disposal of 
excess irrigation water. 

7.4.3 The indicative designed capacities are as given 
in Table 1 in Litres/Second/Hectare. 

7.5 Design Criteria Sub-surface Drain 

7.5.1 Drainage Coefficient 

Based on the experience in the Deccan Canals the 
expected drainage discharge in the drains is of the 
order of 30 litres per second for a 100 hectare block. 
The designed discharge is usually taken 1 .5 times this 
discharge allowing for excess drainage factor for safety. 
The expected drainage discharge is a function of type 
of soil, the crops grown, topography, method of 
application of irrigation water and may vary from place 
to place. 



IS 15087 : 2001 



Table 1 Indicative Designed Capacities 

(Clause 7 .4.3) 



SI 
No. 


Zone 


Design Rainfall 
in 24 h 

mm 


Soils 


Run-Off 
Coefficient 


Design 
Runoff 

mm 


Availaable 
Time 

days 


Design 
Runoff 

mm/days 


Design 
Capcity 

1/s/ha 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


i) 


Heavy rainfall 


250 


Paddy fields and 
clayey soils 


0.5 


125 


3 


42 


5 


ii) 


Heavy rainfall 


250 


Mummy soils 


0.25 


62 


1.5 


42 


5 


iii) 


Other areas 


100 


Clayey soils 


0.5 


50 


1.5 


33 


4 


iv) 


Other areas 


100 


Murumy soils 


0.25 


25 


1.5 


16 


2 



7.5.2 Gradient of the Drain 

The bed slope of the drain should allow a non-silting 
velocity and the gradient should as far as possible 
be uniform. Depending on the topography and other 
conditions, gradient may vary between 1 : 1 50 to 1 : 1000. 

7.5.3 Spacing of Drains 

The spacing of the drain is given by equation given 
below: 



^=" 



SKhD 



where 

K = 
h - 
D - 



drainage discharge 
( recharge ) ( m/day ), 



or coefficient 



conductivity of the soil 



hydraulic 
(m/day), 

height of water table midway between the 
drains ( m ), 

equivalent depth to impermeable 
substratum ( m ) accounting for radial 
flow and any depth of the impermeable 
layer, and 



L = 



spacing between the drains ( m ). 

Knowing the values ofK, D, h and q, the spacing of 
drains can be computed from above equation. 

8 PILOT DRAINAGE PROJECTS 

Before the drainage system in the affected command 
area is constructed, it is advisable to take up a few 
pilot projects. As per the experience gained, the 
drainage system in full affected command area may 
be constructed. 

9 PREVENTIVE MEASURES 

Drainage problems can best be tackled mainly by 



taking preventive measures to see that the land does 
not get damaged and resort to artificial drainage only 
when it becomes necessary. In the preventive measures 
the most effective method will be application of 
controlled irrigation water so that no excessive water 
accumulates within the root zone. 

10 MAINTENANCE 

Proper maintenance of the drainage system is very 
essential for successful drainage. If drains are not 
properly maintained lands will not be adequately 
drained and will result in damages due to water-logging 
and salinity. The main items ofmaintenance are removal 
of silt, removal of vegetative growth, repairs of side 
slopes and maintenance of road bank and other 
structures. 

11 MONITORING OF IRRIGATED AREAS 

To identify the problem of water-logging well in time, 
it is necessary to monitor the ground water table 
conditions. For this purpose observations of ground 
water table using existing wells in the command area 
as well as by making auger holes where necessary is 
essential. The ground water table should be monitored 
twice in a year that is before and after monsoon. The 
quality of water as well as soil should also be regularly 
tested for EC value to ascertain the salinity problem. 
Where the tendency of ground water is to rise above 
the root zone, preventive measures by controlled 
irrigation as well as effective drainage schemes should 
inunediately be taken. 

While executing the distribution network for irrigation 
project, it would be better to reshape the existing natural 
drains in such a way that the command area is well 
drained and remains free from water-logging. 
Subsequently after the irrigation application and 
monitoring the area if damages are noticed, drainage 
schemes in the form of laterals joining the natural drains 
may be constructed to reclaim the area. 



IS 15087 : 2001 

ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee, WRD 6 



Organization 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 

Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 

Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, 

Hyderabad 

Irrigation Department, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore 
Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nagpur 

Irrigation Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur 
Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 

Ministry of Environment and Forests, New Delhi 

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 

Planning Commission, New Delhi 

Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 

Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhopal 

Water Technology Centre ( lARI ), New Delhi 
University of Roorkee, Roorkee 
BIS Directorate General 



Representative(s) 

Shri R. S. Prasad 

Member ( WP&P ) ( Chairman ) 

Director ( Design ) 

Deputy Secretary ( Planning ) (Alternate ) 

ShriC. V. J. Verma 

Shri P. K. Kumar 

Shri S. D. Dubeya ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( PAO ) 

Director PA ( North ) ( Alternate ) 

DrA. K. Sinha 

Chief Engineer ( Major Irrigation ) 

Superintending Engineer ( World Bank ) 
( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( R&D ) 

Superintending Engineer ( CDO ) 
( Alternate ) 

Director 

Chief Engineer 

Director ( Plant Designs ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. D. Vadnere 

Superintending Engineer & Deputy 
Secretary ( I. M. ) ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer 

Director ( Design Research ) ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( Yamuna Valley ) 

Superintending Engineer ( Irrigation 
Construction Circle ) ( Alternate ) 

Dr S. Maudgal 

Dr ( Shrimati ) Nalini Bhat ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. N. Khazanchi 

Shrimati O. R. Lauta ( Alternate ) 

Joint Adviser ( I&CAD ) 

Deputy Adviser ( I&CAD ) ( Alternate ) 

Engineer-in-Chief 

Joint Chief Engineer ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( BODHI ) 

Director ( Rates & Cost ) ( Alternate ) 

Dr a. K, Singh 

Dr a. Singh ( Alternate ) 

Prof U. C. Chaube 

Dr Nayan Sharma ( Alternate ) 

Shri S.S. Sethi, Director & Head ( WRD ) 

[ Representing Director General ( Ex-officio ) ] 



Member-Secretary 

Shri R. S. Juneja 

Joint Director ( WRD ), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Catalogue' arid 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 6 ( 191 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 1 3 1 , 323 33 75, 323 94 02 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 1 7 

NEW DELHI 110002 L3233841 

Eastern: l/14C.I.T.SchemeVIIM, V.I.P.Road,Kankurgachi f 337 8499,3378561 

KOLKATA 700054 1337 8626,3379120 

Northern: SC0335-336,Sector34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 ^603843 

L 602025 

Southern :C. I. T. Campus, IV CrossRoad,CHENNAI 600 1 13 / 254 12 16,254 1442 

12542519,25413 15 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI400093 I 8327891,8327892 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH.PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



