**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^viiT'jsiS'SfSs-^i^*?*:: 


•^■•■^^^■r 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


IS:  12113'  1987 

( Reaffirmed  2001  ) 


SPECIFICATION  FOR 

FERROUS  SULPHATE  HEPTAHVDRATE, 

AGRICULTURAL  GRADii 


UDG    661  872-^53  2—12  i  63r833 


®  Cspjiirighi  19G8 

RUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    ISHAVAN,     ^     BAHADUR     SHAH      ZATAR     MARG 

NEW  DEUII  UOWM 

Oj  2  Jannaty  1968 


IS  :  12113  -  1987 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 

FERROUS  SULPHATE  HEPTAHYDRATE, 

AGRICULTURAL  GRADE 

Fertilizers  Sectional  Committee,  PCDC  20 

Chairman  Representing 

_Dh  B.  K.  Dhak  Ministry  of  Agriculture    and    Irrigation    (  Fertilizer 

Division  ),  New  Delhi 

Members 
Agbicultubal  Chemist  Andhra  Pradesh  Agricultural  University,  Hyderabad 

Shki  p.  N.  Abxjnachalam  Madras  Fertilizers  Ltd,  Madras 

Shki  T.  R.  SABAPATiiY  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  P.  Bansal  Directorate  of  Agriculture,  Government  ofHaryana, 

Chandigarh 
Shbi  M.  L.  Bhambaki  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shbi  K.  T.  Bhandabi  Hindustan  Fertilizer  Corporation  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Db  R.  K.  S.  Ghauhan  Directorate   of  Agriculture,    Government    of  Uttar 

Pradesh,  Lucknow 
Dbptjty  Dihectoe  {  Agronomy/     Rubber  Board,  Kottayam 
Soils  ) 

Shri  M.  V.  PtrSHPADAS  (  Alternate  ) 
Shei  a.  C  Gakg  Ministry       of       Agriculture       (  Crops     Division  ), 

New  Delhi 
Shri  M.  S.  Gbovee  Directorate     General    of  Technical   Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  R.  C.  Shah  ma  (  Alternate  ) 
Head        of        Agbiodltukal         Agricultural     Chemist      of     the     Government      of 

Ghemistey  and  Soil  Science  Maharashtra,  Bombay 

Shbi  B.  K.  Jain  Fertilizer  Association  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Dii  (  Miss  )  B.  Swaminathan  (  Alternate  ) 
Joint    Dibector    of    Aoricul-     Directorate  of  Agriculture,   Government   of  Andhra 
TUBE  (  QC  )  Pradesh,  Hyderabad 

Deputy  Dibector  of  Agei- 
OULTUBE  (  PA  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Joint  Director  of  Agriculture   Directorate      of     Agriculture,       Government       of 

Tamil  Nadu,  Madras 
Db  Joseph  Xaviee  Fertilizers         &        Chemicals       Travancore      Ltd, 

Udyogamandal 
Shbi  T.  Natabajan  {  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  D.  Koepal  Indian     Farmers     Fertilizer       Co-operative     Lid, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  A.  S.  Parmae  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1988 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the    Indian   Copyright   Act   (  XIV    of  1957    )    and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  anv  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringemeat  of  copyright  under  the  said   Act 


IS  :  12113  -  1987 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members 

Shbi  G.  S.  Mathuk 

Shbi  D.  K.  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 

DjI  R.  S.  MlNHAS 

Shri  C.  G.  Patel 

Shui  M.  V.  Shah  (  Alternate  ) 
Snm  A.  K.  Rao 

Shri  a.  K.  Mbhka  (  Alternate 
Rbpbesentativb 
Rbpekseijta  tivb 
Ssirioii-  Peojeot  Officer 
Db  H.  R.  Takhalate 
Db  p.  R.  Takkar 
Db  K.  M.  Vabma 
Db  J.  S.  P.  Yadav 

Be  I.  P.  Abeol  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  M.  S.  Saxena, 
Director  (  P&C  ) 


Representing 
National  Fertilizers  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

H.P.  Krishi  Vishwavidyalaya,  Palampur 
Gujarat  State  Fertilizer  Co  Ltd,  Vadodara 

Shri  Ram  Food  &  Fertilizer  Industry,  New  Delhi 
) 

Indian  Agricultural  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi 
Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  Research,  New  Delhi 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  (  Department  of  Fertilizer  ) 
Planning  Commission,  New  Delhi 
Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 
Project  &  Development  India  Ltd,  Sindri 
Central  Soil  Salinity  Research  Institute,  Karnal 

Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 


Secretary 

Dr  (  Smt  )  ViJAY  Malik 
Deputy  Director  (  P&C  ),  BIS 


Secondary  and  Micronutrlents  Subcommittee,  PCDC  20  :  5 


Convener 
Dr  J.  C.  Katyal 

Members 

Db  R.  T.  Dangabwala 
Dr  M.  S.  Gangwae 

Dr  R.  S.  Sachan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  A.  K.  Kapue 


Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 


Gujarat  Agricultural  University,  Anand 

G.B.  Pant  University  of  Agriculture  &    Technology, 

Nainital 


Manufacturers 


Micronutrients 
Chandigarh 

Shri  Dineshwar  Dayal  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  K.  M.  Nambiae 
Shri  Y.  R.  Pakkala 
Dr  N.  D.  Patil 

Dr  M.  D.  Patil  (  Alternate  I  ) 

Dr  J.  D.  Patil  (  Alternate  II  ) 
Db  Shri  Kant  S.  Ranadr  Institute  of  Micronutrients  Technology,  Pune 

Shri  U.  W.  T.  Wadbkab  (  ^/ferna/e  ) 
Shbi  Y.  K.  Vabma  Project  &  Development  India  Ltd,  Sindri 


Association, 


Indian  Agricultural  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi 
Rashtriya  Chemicals  and  Fertilizers  Ltd,  Bombay 
Mahatma  Phule  Krishi  Vidyapeeth,  Rahuri 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1  MAY  2012 

TO 

IS  12113  :  1987  SPECIFICATION  FOR 

FERROUS  SULPHATE  HEPTAHYDRATE, 

AGRICULTURAL  GRADE 

[Page  4,  clause  3.2(c)]  —  Substitute  'Quantity  of  the  material  in  the 
container;'  for  'Mass  of  the  material  in  the  container;'. 


(FAD  7) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


IS  :  12113  -  1987 

Tn/iinn    SstnnrlnrH 


JL  W   *r  v^  ff  ^/VM   •*  Jh^   V  W'    V  ^'ft^  V»-*      ^I'V 


SPECIFICATION  FOR 

FERROUS  SULPHATE  HEPTAHYDRATE, 

AGRICULTURAL  GRADE 


0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  14  July  1987,  after  (he  draft  finalized  by  the  Fertilizers  Sec- 
tional Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Petroleum,  Coal  and 
Related  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  Iron-deficiency  is  a  serious  problem  of  several  crop  plants.  It  is 
normally  observed  in  crops  growing  on  alkaline  soils,  More  specifically 
iron-deficiency  is  identified  with  calcareous  soils.  It  also  affects  crop 
plants  when  grown  on  organic  matter  deficient  soils.  Cold  weather  is 
known  to  provoke  iron-deficiency.  Therefore,  need  for  iron  in  agricul- 
ture is  frequently  felt  and  its  application  is  needed  to  overcome  the 
deficiency. 

0.3  Although  IS  :  262-1982*  covers  two  grades  of  ferrous  sulphate, 
namely,  technical  and  analytical,  for  use  in  variety  of  industries,  the 
present  standard  has  been  drawn  up  specifically  to  cater  to  the  needs  of 
fertilizer  industry. 

0.4  It  is  felt  that  this  Indian  standard  for  ferrous  sulphate,  heptahydrate, 
agricultural    grade    will    make    its   use    economical    for     meeting     iron 
deficiency  in  crops.  No  limit  has  been  fixed  for  copper,  zinc  and  manganese 
since  they  are  useful   micronutrients.     A  limit  has  been  fixed  for  lead  as 
it  is  toxic  and  harmful  for  plant  health. 

I* 
0.5  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of 
this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained 
in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value 
in  this  standard. 


♦Specification  for  ferrous  sulphate,  heptahydrate  (  second  revision 
fRules  for  rounding  ofT numerical  values  (  revised  ). 


IS  :  12113  -  1987 

1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  the  requirements,  and  methods  of  sampling 
and  lest  for  ferrous  sulphate,  heptahydrate,  for  use  in  fertilizer  industry. 

2.  REQUIREMENTS 

2.1  Description  —  The  material  shall  be  in  the  form  of  green  or  bluish 
green  crystals. 

2.2  The  material  shall  also  comply  with  the  requirements  given  in 
Table  1,  when  tested  according  to  the  methods  prescribed  in  Appendix 
A.  Reference  to  the  relevant  clauses  of  Appendix  A  is  given  in  col  4  of 
Table  1. 

TABLE  1    REQUIREMENTS  FOR  FERROUS  SULPHATE,  HEPTAHYDRATE 

Sl  Chabactbkistic 

No. 

(1)  (2) 

i)  Ferrous  sulphate,  heptahydrate 
(  FeSOj,  7H,0  ),  as  Fe,  percent 
by  mass,  Min 

ii)  Free  acid  (  as  H,SOt  ),  percent 
by  mass.  Max 

iii)  pH  of  5  percent  (  mjv )  solution 
not  less  than 

iv)  Matter  insoluble  in  water,  percent 
by  mass,  Max 

v)  Lead(asPb),  percent  by  mass, 
Max 

vi)  Ferric  iron  (  as  Fe  ),  percent  by 
mass.  Max 

3.  PACKING  AND  MARKING 

3.1  Packing  —  The  material  shall  be  packed  in  air-tight  containers 
preferably  jute  or  canvas  bags  with  a  polyethylene  liner  so  as  to  protect 
the  material  from  atmospheric  exposure  to  prevent  the  upper  layer  to 
become  lumpy  brownish  colour  or  as  agreed  to  between  the  purchaser 
and  the  supplier, 

3.2  Marking  —  The  container  shall  be  securely  closed  and  legibly 
marked  with  the  following  information: 

a)  Name  and  grade  of  the  material; 

b)  Manufacturers'  name  and  recognized  trade-mark,  if  any; 

4 


REMENT 

Method     ot  Test 
(  Rbf   to   Cl   No. 
iTt  Appendix  A  ) 

(3) 

(4) 

19 

A-3 

1-0 

A-4 

3-5 

A-5 

1-0 

A-6 

0-003 

A-7 

0-5 

A-8 

IS  !  12113  -  1987 

c)  Mass  of  the  material  in  the  container; 

d)  Month  and  year  of  manufacture;  and 

e)  Lot  number   to  enable  the  batch   of  manufacture   to   be  traced 
from  records. 

3.2.1  The  container  may  also  be  marked  with  the  Standard  Mark. 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau 
of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The 
Standard  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance 
that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard 
under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection,  testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised 
and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the  producer.  Standard  marked  products 
are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity  to  that  standard  as  a  further 
safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the  use  of  the  Standard 
Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  porcessors  may  be  obtained  from  the 
Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 

4.  SAMPLING 

4.1  The  procedure  for  taking  representative  samples  from  a  lot,  the 
number  of  tests  and  the  criteria  for  conformity  of  the  material  to  the 
requirements  of  the  specification  shall  be  as  prescribed  in  IS  :  6092 
(  Part  1  )-1985*. 


APPENDIX     A 

(  Clause  2.2  ) 

METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR  FERROUS  SULPHATE, 
HEPTAHYDRATE 

A-1.  QUALITY  OF  REAGENTS 

A-1.1  Unless  specified  otherwise,  pure  chemicals  and  distilled  water 
(  see  IS  :  1070-1977t  )  shall  be  used  in  tests. 

Note  —  'Pure   chemicals'   shall   mean   chemicals   that   do  not    contain  impurities 
which  affect  the  results  of  analysis. 

A-2.  PREPARATION  OF  SAMPLE 

A-2.1  Procedure  —  Powder  200  g  of  the  material  to  pass  through  TOO 
mm  IS  sieve  [  see  IS  :  460  (  Part  1  )-1978j  ].  Keep  the  prepared  sample 
in  a  clean  glass-stoppered  bottle  for  test  purposes. 


♦Methods  of  sampling  and  test  for  fertilizers:  Part  1  Sampling  {first  revision  ). 
fSpecification  for  water  for  general  laboratory  use  (  second  revision  ). 
JSpecification  for  test  sieves:    Part  1  Wire  cloth  test  sieve  (  second  revision  ). 


15:12113-1987 

A-3.  DETERMINATION  OF  IRON  (  as  Fe  ) 

A-3.1  Potassium  Permanganate  Method 

A-3.1.1  Reagents 

A-3.1.1.1  Dilute  sulphuric  acid  —  4  N  approximately. 

A-3.1.1.2  Standard  potassium   permanganate  solution  —  O'l  N  {  J^e  51  of 
IS  :  2316-1968*  ). 

A-3.1.1.3  Oriho^phosphoric  acid. 

A-3.1.2  Procedure  —  Weigh  accurately  about  5  g  of  the  prepared  sample 
(  see  A-2.1  )  and  dissolve  it  in  water.  Add  1  to  2  ml  of  dilute  sulphuric 
acid  and  make  up  the  solution  to  250  ml  in  a  volumetric  flask.  Pipette 
out  exactly  50  ml  of  the  solution  in  a  flask.  Add  10  ml  of  dilute  sulphuric 
acid  and  2  ml  of  ortho-phosphoric  acid  and  titrate  with  standard 
potassium  permanganate  solution. 

A-3.1.3  Calculation 

Iron  sulphate,  heptahydrate  Fe,  percent  _    28  X  F  x  JV 
by  mass  ~  m 

where 

V  =  volume   of  standard    potassium   permanganate    solution 
used, 

jV"  =  normality  of  standard  potassium  permanganate  solution, 
and 

M  =  mass  in  g  of  the  material  taken  for  the  test. 

A-4.  TEST  FOR  FREE  ACID  AS  SULPHURIC  ACID  (  AS  H2SO4  ) 

A-4.1  Reagents 

A-4.1.1  Methyl  Orange  Indicator  —  Dissolve  001  g  of  methyl  orange  in 
100  ml  of  water. 

A-4.1.2  Standard  Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution  —  O'l  N. 

A-4.2  Procedure 

A-4.2.1  Weigh  accurately  about  1  g  of  the  prepared  sample  ( see 
A-2.1  )  and  dissolve  it  in  100  ml  of  water.  Add  4  drops  of  methyl  or?nge 
indicator.  Divide  it  into  two  equal  portions.  Add  TO  ml  of  standard 
sodium  hydroxide  solution  to  one  of  the  portions  keeping  the  other 
portion  for  comparison  of  the  colour. 

•Methods   of  preparation   of  standard  solution  for   colorimetric   and  volumetric 
analysis  ( Jirst  revision  ) . 


IS  :  12113  -  1987 

A-4.2.2  The  limit  prescribed  in  Table  1  shall  be  taken  as  not  having 
been  exceeded,  if  the  purplish  colour  of  the  material  under  test  disappears 
on  the  addition  of  standard  sodium  hydroxide  solution. 

A-5.  DETERMINATION  OF  pH 

A-5.1  Procedure  —  Dissolve  50  g  of  the  prepared  sample  (  see  A-2.1  ) 
in  100  ml  of  freshly  boiled  and  cooled  water  and  determine  the  pH  by 
means  of  a  pH  meter  using  glass  electrodes. 

A-6.  DETERMINATION  OF  MATTER  INSOLUBLE  IN  WATER 

A-6.1  Procedure  —  Dissolve  10  g  of  the  material  in  250  ml  of  water. 
Add  few  drops  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid  to  prevent  hydrolysis.  Filter 
through  a  weighed  sintered  glass  crucible  (  G4  )  and  wash  the  residue 
thoroughly  with  hot  water.  Dry  the  crucible  at  HO  ±  5''C  to  constant 
mass. 

A-6.2  Calculation 

Matter  insoluble  in  water,  percent  . 

by  mass 

where 

A  =  mass  in  g  of  the  residue. 

A-7.  DETERMINATION  OF  LEAD  (  AS  Pb ) 

A-7.0  Outline  of  the  Method  —  Lead  is  determined  colorimetrically 
in  Nessler  cylinders  using  saturated  hydrogen  sulphide  solution, 

A-7.1  Apparatus 

A-7.1.1  Nessler  Cylinders  —  50  ml  capacity. 

A-7.2  Reagents 

A-7.2.1  Concentrated  Hydrochloric  Acid  ■ —  see  IS  :  265-1976*. 

A-7 .2.2  Standard  Lead  Solution  —  Dissolve  1'60  g  of  lead  nitrate  in 
water  and  make  up  the  volume  to  1  000  ml.  Transfer  exactly  10  ml  of 
the  solution  into  a  volumetric  flask  and  dilute  it  again  with  water  to 
1  000  ml  mark.  One  miUOitre  of  this  solution  contains  O'Ol  mg  of  lead 
(  as  Pb  ).     The  dilute  solution  shall  be  freshly  prepared. 

A-7. 2.3  Dilute  Acetic  Acid  —  approximately  1  N. 

A-7. 2. 4  Hydrogen  Sulphide  Solution  —  Saturated. 

A-7.3  Procedure—  Weigh  accurately  TO  g  of  the  prepared  sample 
(  see   A-2.1  )    and    add    15    ml   of  water.     Add   6   ml  of  concentrated 

♦Specification  for  hydrocliloric  acid  (  second  revision  ). 

7 


IS  :  12113  -  1987 

hydrochloric  acid  and  evaporate  to  dryness  on  a  water  bath.  Dissolve 
the  residue  in  water  and  transfer  this  solution  into  a  Nessler  cylinders. 
Dilute  it  with  water  to  30  ml  and  add  1  ml  of  acetic  acid  and  10  ml  of 
hydrogen  sulphide  solution.  In  a  second  Nessler  cylinder,  carry  out  a 
control  test  using  3  ml  of  standard  lead  solution  and  the  same  quantities 
of  other  reagents  in  the  same  total  volume  of  the  mixture. 

A-7.3.1  Dilute  the  contents  of  each  cylinder  to  50  ml  and  shake  well. 
Compare  the  colour  produced.  The  limit  prescribed  in  Table  1  shall  be 
taken  as  not  having  been  exceeded,  if  the  intensity  of  colour  produced 
with  the  material  is  not  greater  than  that  produced  in  the  control  test. 

A-8.  DETERMINATION  OF  IRON  (  AS  Fe  ) 

A-8.0  General  —  Ferric  iron  is  found  by  comparing  the  colour  produc- 
ed with  ammonium  thiocyanate  solution  against  the  colour  of  standard 
iron  solution. 

A-8.1  Reagents 

A-8.1.1  Concentrated  Hydrochloric  Acid  —  ^^^  IS  :  265-1976*. 

A-8.1.2  Dilute  Sulphuric  Acid  —  \  :  I  {vjv). 

A-8.1.3  Ammonium  Thiocyanate  Solution  —  10  percent  (  m\v  ). 

A-8.1. 4  Standard  Iron  Solution  —  Dissolve  0-702  g  of  ammonium  ferii  us 
sulphate  [  FeS04.  (  NH4  )2  SO4.6H2O  ]  in  water  containing  10  ml  of 
dilute  sulphuric  acid  and  dilute  with  water  to  1  000  ml.  Dilute  10  ml  of 
this  solution  to  100  ml.  One  millilitre  of  the  dilute  solution  contain  O'Ol 
mg  of  iron  (  as  Fe  ). 

A-8.2  Apparatus 

A-8.2.1  Kessler  Cylinders  —  50  ml  capacity. 

A-8.3  Pj-ocedure  —  Dissolve  I'D  g  of  the  prepared  sample  (  see  A-2.1  ) 
in  water  containing  2"5  to  3  ml  of  sulphuric  acid.  The  solution  is  made 
up  to  250  ml  and  5  ml  of  the  solution  is  taken  in  the  Nessler  cylinder. 
Add  2  ml  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  5  ml  of  thiocyanate  solution  and  the 
volume  is  made  up  to  50  ml  with  water. 

Carry  out  a  control  test    using  10  ml  of  standard  iron  solution  in  the 
other  cylinder. 

A-8.3.1  The  limit  prescribed  in  Table  1  shall  be  taken  as  not  having 
been  exceeded,  if  the  intensity  of  the  colour  produced  with  the  material 
is  not  greater  than  that  produced  in  the  control  test. 


♦Specification  for  hydrochloric  acid  (  second  revision  ] 


