**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  10630  (1983) :  Methods  for  Determination  of  Methyl 
Parathion  Residues  in  Foods  [FAD  1:  Pesticides  and 
Pesticides  Residue  Analysis] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Siandard 


(  Reaffirmed  2004 ) 


METMODS  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  METHYL  PARATIIION 

RESIDUES  IN  FOODS 


I'D' 


INDIAN     STANDARDS     iNiTJTUTION 

MA?iA«       UHAVATf.     i      >IAH\LIL>H.      S  LI  All     ZAFAR      UaI^O 

nhw  i>r.i.iLi  naocA 

Of  }  Priinbtr 


IS  :  10630  -  1983 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  METHYL  PARATHION 

RESIDUES  IN  FOODS 


Pesticides  Residue  Analysis  Sectional  Committee,     AFDC  56 

Chmirman 

Dr  H.  L.  Bami 

Bungalow  No.  A,  Malkaganj, 
Delhi 

Members  Representing 

Shri  E.  a,  Almeida  Hindustan  Ciba-Geigy  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  F.  Quadbos  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  D.  Amrk  National      Organic     Chemical      Industries     Ltd, 

Bombay 
Dr  J.  S.  Verma  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  C.  GuHA  Central  Food  Laboratory,  Calcutta;    and  Central 

Committee  for  Food  Standards,  New  Delhi 
Shri  P.  K.  Dhingra  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  S.  S.  Gupta  Bayer  India  Ltd,  Thane 

Dr  R.  L.  Kalra  Department  of  Entomology,  Punjab  Agricultural 

University,  Ludhiana 
Dr  R.  p.  Chawla  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  Kalyan  Singh  C.  S.  A.  University  of  Agriculture  and  Technology, 

Kanpur 
Du  K.  Krishnamurthy  Department  of  Food  (  Ministry  of  Agriculture), 

New  Delhi 
Shri  G.  N.  Bhardwaj  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  V.  Lakshminabayana  Directorate  of  Plant  Protection,   Quarantine  and 

Storage,  Faridabad 
Dr  R.  C.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  J.  C,  Majumdar  Pesticides  Association  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Dr  V.  Srinivasan  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  S.  Mithyanatha  Rallis  Agro-Chemical  Research  Station,  Bangalore 

Dr  a.  L.  Mookekjbk  Cyanamid  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


O  Copyright  1983 
INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Cofyyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  10630  -  1983 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Db  S.  K.Mukerjee  Indian  Agricultural  Research  Institute  (IGAR), 

New  Delhi 
Dr  S.  K.  Hand  A  ( Alternate  ) 
Dr  Nagabhush\n  Rao  Regional       Research        Laboratory        ( CSIR ), 

Hyderabad 
Public  Analyst  Public      Analyst,      Government      of     Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Deputy  Public  Analyst  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  T.  D.  Seth  Industrial  Toxicology  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ), 

Lucknow 
Dr  R.  K.  Sethi  Indofil  Chemicals  Ltd,  Thane 

Dr  K.  Sivasankaran  Union  Carbide  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Dr  S.  Y.  Pandey  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  S.  C.  Srivastava  Indian  Veterinary   Research   Institute   (ICAR), 

Izatnagar 
Dr  R,  G.  Naithani  (  Alternate) 
Dr  K.  ViSHESWARAiAH  Central   Food   Technological  Research    Institute 

(  CSIR),  Mysore 
DrJ.  R.  Rangaswamy  {Alternate) 
Dr  B.  L.  Wattal  National    Institute    of    Communicable     Diseases, 

Delhi 
Shri  G.  C.  Joshi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Pubnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 

Secretary 

Shri  M.  L,  Kumar 

Senior  Deputy  Director  (  Agri  &  Food ),  ISI 


IS  :  10630  -  1983 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  METHYL  PARATHION 

RESIDUES  IN  FOODS 

0.    FOREWORD 

0,1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  30  August  1983,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Pesticides 
Residue  Analysis  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the 
Agricultural  and  Food  Products  DLvision  Council. 

0.2  Methyl  parathion  formulations  are  extensively  used  in  agriculture  for 
the  control  of  many  insect  pests.  Frequent  and  increased  use  of  methyl 
parathion  formulations  often  results  in  harmful  effects  due  to  toxic  nature 
of  their  residues.  Careful  assessment  of  residues  is,  therefore,  an  important 
step  in  safeguarding  human  health  and  in  the  establishment  of  sound 
regulatory  policy. 

0.3  In  the  preparation  of  this  standard,  due  consideration  has  been  given 
to  the  limits  of  methyl  parathion  residues  which  have  been  laid  down 
under  the  provisions  of  Prevention  of  Food  Adulteration  Rules  and  the 
specified  test  methods  are  sensitive  to  the  prescribed  levels  of  residues. 

0«4  This  standard  will  enable  the  health  authorities  and  others  engaged 
in  the  field  to  follow  uniform  test  procedure  for  the  estimation  of  methyl 
parathion  residues  in  various  foods. 

0,5  In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with 
this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded 
off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  spectrophotometric  and  gas  chromatographic 
methods  for  determination  of  methyl  parathion  [  0,0-dimethyl  0-(  4- 
nitrophenyl )  phosphorothioate  ]  and  its  oxygen  analogue  residues  in 
foods. 


*Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised) 

3 


IS  :  10630  -  1983 

1.1.1  Spectrophotometric  method  may  be  adopted  as  a  limit  test  for 
routine  purposes  whereas  gas  chromatography  method  shall  be  the 
reference  method  with  a  minimum  detection  limit  of  0'05  i^glg 
(  0'05  ppm  )  of  raethyl  parathion  residues. 

1.1.2  Though  no  set  procedure  for  thin  layer  chromatography  (  TLG  ) 
is  being  prescribed,  any  standardized  TLG  procedure  may  be  followed  if 
necessary  for  clean  up,  identification  and  confirmation  of  methyl 
parathion  residues. 

2.  SAMPLING 

2.1  The  representative  samples  for  the  purpose  of  estimating  methyl 
parathion  residues  in  various  agricultural  and  food  products  shall  be  in 
accordance  with  the  sampling  procedures  as  prescribed  in  the  relevant 
Indian  Standards,  whenever  available. 

3.  SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC  METHOD 

3.1  The  residues  of  methyl  parathion  are  extracted  with  benzene  or 
isopropanol  and  the  cleaned  up  solution  is  clarified.  The  nitro  group  of 
parathion  is  then  reduced  with  zinc  dust  and  hydrochloric  acid  solution 
to  amino  group.  The  resulting  water  soluble  compound  is  diazotized  and 
coupled  with  N-(  1-naphthyl)  ethylene  diamine  to  produce  a  magenta 
colour,  the  intensity  of  the  colour  is  measured  with  a  spectrophotometer  at 
555  to  560  nm. 

3.2  Reagents 

3.2.1  Benzene  — -  Analytical  reagent  grade  and  glass  redistilled. 

3.2.2  Adsorbent  Mixture  —  Ten  part  of  anhydrous  powdered  sodium 
sulphate,  5  parts  of  Atta  clay,  5  parts  filter  eel,  and  2  parts  of  activated 
carbon. 

3.2.3  Parathion  Standard  Solution  —  Prepare  a  standard  solution  for 
methyl  parathion  in  such  a  manner  that  1  ml  of  the  final  solution  contains 
20  Mg  of  parathion. 

3.2.4  Standard  Hydrochloric  Acid  Solution  —  0*5  N. 

3.2.5  Sodium  Nitrite  Solution  — -  Aqueous,  0*25  percent  (  m/y  ). 

3*2S  Ammonium  Sulphamate  Solution  —  Aqueous,  2'5  percent  {rnlv). 
Dissolve  1*25  g  in  water  and  dilute  to  50  ml.     Prepare  weekly. 

3.2.7  jV-^(  1-Naphthyl)  EthylenediamineDi-Hydrochloride Solution —  Aqueous, 
1  percent  ( mjv ).  Prepare  fresh  solution  daily  and  store  in  a  dark 
coloured  bottle. 


IS  :  10630  -  1983 

3.2.8  ^inc  Dust  —  analytical  reagent  grade. 

3.2.9  Isopropyl  Alcohol  —  analytical  reagent  grade  and  glass-redistilled. 

3.3  Preparation   of  Sample  Glean-up  and  Extraction  of  Methyl 
Parathion  Residues 

3.3.1  Firm  and  Relatively  Tough  Skinned  Fruits^  Such  as  Apples  and  Pears  — 
Weigh  2  to  3  kg  of  fruit  into  a  clean  dry  jar  of  15  litres  so  mounted  that 
it  can  be  turned  with  end-over-end  tumbling  action  by  hand-crank  or 
motor.  Add  500  ml  of  benzene  {see  Notes  i  and  2)  and  stopper  with 
tight-fitting  corkj  wooden  bung,  or  plastic  screw-cap  faced  with  gasket  of 
sheet-cork  or  other  suitable  solvent-resistant  material.  Turn  the  jar  for  5 
minutes  at  75  to  100  rev/min  {see  Note  3  ).  Open  the  jar  and  drain  off 
benzene  as  completely  as  possible  into  a  1  -litre  erlenmeyer  flask  ( see 
Note  4 ). 

Note  1  —  In  all  cases;  treat  the  benzene  extract  by  shaking  for  five  minutes  with 
the  adsorbent  mixture,  in  proportion  of  approximately  10  g  to  100  ml  extract. 
Finally,  filter  through  rapid,  folded  paper. 

Note  2  —  As  benzene  vapours  are  toxic,  take  precautions  at  all  times  against 
inhaling  them. 

Note  3  —  Since  apples  treated  for  longer  periods  become  swollen  and  soft,  limit 
the  time  of  stripping;  on  other  firmer  products  time  factor  is  not  so  important. 

Note  4  —  It  is  assumed  that  concentration  of  parathion  in  benzene  poured  off 
from  apples  is  the  same  as  that  in  the  solvent  retained  by  the  apples  after  wetting. 

3.3.1.1  Aliquots  of  this  benzene  extract  obtained  in  3,3.1  may  be  used 
directly  for  parathion  residue  determination  if  they  do  not  contain  more 
than  100  mg  of  foreign  organic  matter. 

3.3.1*2  In  order  to  remove  partially  any  colouring  matter  and  plant 
waxes,  add,  to  each  100  ml  of  the  benzene  solution,  10  g  of  adsorbent 
mixture  (  see  3.2.2  ).  Stopper  flask,  shake  vigorously  for  five  minutes,  and 
filter  on  folded  paper.  Do  not  allow  appreciable  evaporation  of  the 
filtrate  before  determining  parathion  in  aliquot. 

3.3.2  Soft  Fruits,  Such  as  Plums^  Tomatoes,  Berries^  etc  —  Use  1  to  2  kg 
sample  with  300  to  500  ml  of  the  redistilled  benzene,  and  strip  by  shaking 
gently  by  hand  for  five  minutes  in  a  jar  of  suitable  size. 

3.3.3  Fresh y  Leafy  Vegetables ^  Such  as  Cabbage^  Lettuce  and  Greens  —  Blend 
100  g  of  the  sample  into  100  ml  of  isopropyl  alcohol  for  two  minutes  in 
high  speed  blender.  Add  200  nil  of  benzene  and  blend  again  for  two 
minutes,  pour  the  mixture  into  a  centrifuge  bottle  and  centrifuge  for 
5  minutes.  Transfer  supernatants  to  a  1 -litre  separator.  Wash  blender 
with  50  ml  portions  of  benzene  and  transfer  to  centrifuge  bottles.  Break 
up  solids  with  stirring  rod,  stopper  and  shake  for  2  minutes.     Centrifuge 


IS  :  1(»30  -  1983 

as  before  and  add  solvent  layer  to  separator.  Wash  and  extract  with  equal 
volume  of  distilled  water  to  remove  isopropyl  alcohol.  Dry  benzene  layer 
with  30  g  of  anhydrous  sodium  sulphate  and  dilute  to  suitable  volume 
with  benzene  and  finally  make  the  volume  to  200  ml  with  benzene. 

3.3.4  Other  Products  —  Grind  dried  products,  in  a  suitable  mill  and 
extract  with  benzene  in  a  large  Soxhlet-type  extractor  for  a  period  of  one 
to  two  hours.  Satisfactory  extraction  may  be  achieved  in  many  cases  by 
letting  ground  material  steep  overnight  in  stoppered  jars  with  measured 
volume  of  redistilled  benzene.  Follow  the  same  procedure  as  detailed 
in  3.3.3. 

3.4  Preparation   of   Standard    Curve  for  0-200  Mg  Range  —  Add 

2"0,  4*0,  6*0,  8*0  and  lO'O  ml  parathion  standard  solution  ( see  3.2.3 )  to  a 
series  of  250-ml  conical  flasks.  Make  up  the  volume  to  25  ml  with 
ben^ne  in  all  cases  and  provide  a  blank  of  25  ml  benzene.  Add  20  ml 
of  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  (  see  3.2.4 )  and  200  mg  of  finely  powdered  zinc 
dust  and  connect  to  a  condenser  by  all-glass  adapter  fitted  with 
thermometer.  Place  on  a  hot-plate  at  medium  heat  and  rapidly  distil  off 
the  benzene.  When  the  vapour  temperature  is  about  70°G,  ebullition 
stops,  benzene  is  eliminated  and  vapour  temperature  falls.  Do  not  let 
aqueous  solution  boil  at  this  point.  Disconnect  the  flask^  add  10  ml  of 
alcohol  and  reconnect  to  reflux  condenser.  Reflux  for  5  minutes  and  cool 
the  flask  in  ice  water.    Treat  the  other  flasks  likewise  in  succession. 

3.4.1  Add  about  100  mg  of  filter  eel  to  each  flask  and  filter  into  50-ml 
volumetric  flask  through  whatman  No.  44  or  equivalent  filter  paper.  Use 
long  thin  stirring  rods  during  transfer  of  solutions  and  washings  to  filter. 
Take  care  not  to  exceed  the  volume  by  45  ml  in  each  of  the  flasks. 
Volume  of  wash  water  that  may  be  used  is  limited  to  about  15  ml, 

3.4.2  Add  1  ml  of  sodium  nitrite  solution  to  each  flask,  mix  and  let 
stand  for  10  minutes.  Add  I  ml  of  ammonium  sulphamate  solution  to 
each  flask,  mix,  and  let  stand  for  10  minutes.  Then  add  2*0  ml  of 
N-(  1-napthyl )  ethylene  diamine  dihydrochloride  solution,  dilute  to  50  ml 
volume  and  let  stand  for  10  minutes.  Take  the  absorbance  of  the  solution 
at  555  nm  in  spectrophotometer  (  see  Note  ).  Colours  should  be  stable  for 
at  least  one  hour. 

Note —  With  1-cm  cell  absorbance  for  100  [xg  of  parathion  is  about  0*33.     If 
available,  5-cna  cell  may  be  preferred. 

3.4.3  Read  the  absorbance  in  succession  using  blank  standard  as 
reference  and  plot  optical  density  against  concentration  in  (ig  of  parathion 
to  obtain  standard  curve. 


IS:  10630-1983 

3.5  Determination  —  The  total  benzene  extract  containing  methyl 
parathion  residues  obtained  as  under  3.3  from  the  material  under 
investigation  is  shaken  with  chilled  dilute  sodium  bicarbonate  solution  in 
a  separating  funnel.  The  solvent  extract  is  separated  and  an  aliquot  of 
this  clarified  solution  is  placed  in  a  250-ml  conical  flask,  the  volume  of 
aliquot  taken  depending  upon  the  expected  residue  content.  If  the  aliquot 
is  less  than  25  ml,  dilute  to  25  ml  with  redistilled  benzene,  add  20  ml  of 
0*5  N  hydrochloric  acid  and  200  mg  of  zinc  dust  and  proceed  as  for  the 
standard  solution  of  parathion  for  the  preparation  of  standard-curve. 

3.6  Reporting  of  Parathion  Residues  —  Develop  colour,  read 
absorbance  against  blank  standard  and  determine  content  of  parathion  in 
the  aliquot  taken  from  the  standard  curve  and  report  of  parathion 
residues  in  the  material  in  terms  of  Pg/g  (  ppm  ). 

4.  GAS  CHROMATOGRAPHIC  METHOD 

4.1  The  residues  of  methyl  parathion  are  extracted  with  acetone.  ^  The 
extracted  methyl  parathion  is  measured  by  gas  chromatograph  equipped 
with  flame  photometric  detector.  The  content  of  methyl  parathion  /Ag/g 
( ppm  )  is  determined  by  comparing  the  response  with  the  response  for  a 
known  standard  of  similar  concentration. 

4.2  Reagents 

4.2.1  Acetone  —  analytical  grade  and  glass  redistilled. 

4.2.2  Precipitating  Solution  —  Prepared  by  dissolving  2  g  of  ammonium 
chloride  and  25  g  of  orthophosphoric  acid  in  1  000  ml  water. 

4.2.3  Hyflo  Super-Cel 

4.2.4  Chloroform  —  analytical  grade,  glass  redistilled, 

4.2.5  Sodium  Sulfate  —  anhydrous. 

4.2.6  Benzene  —  analytical  grade,  glass  redistilled. 

4.2.7  Silica  Gel  Neutral  Column  —  chromatography  grade. 

4.3  Preparation  of  Sample,  Clean-up  and  Extraction  of  Methyl 
Parathion  Residues 

4.3.1  Initial  Extraction  —  Orw^h  100  g  of  sample  at  high  speed  in  a 
blender  for  2-3  minutes.  To  this  add  150  ml  acetone  and  macerate 
further  for  2-3  minutes.  Filter  the  mixture  and  transfer  the  residue  back 
to  the  blender  for  re-extraction  with  further  100  ml  of  acetone.  Filter 
and  rinse  the  blender  with  further  lOO  ml  of  acetone  and  wash  the  residue 


IS  :  10630  -  1983 

with  the  acetone  rinsings.  Transfer  the  filtrate  to  a  500-ml  round-bottom 
flask  and  distil  off  the  solvent  on  a  rotary  vacuum  evaporator  below 
45^C. 

4«3.2  Clean-up  Plant  Co-Extracts  by  Precipitation  —  Dissolve  the  residue  in 
45  ml  of  acetone  and  to  it  add  50  ml  of  precipitating  solution.  Cool  in 
deep  freezer  for  45  minutes.  Add  5  g  of  filter  aid  and  filter  under 
vacuum.  Rinse  the  flask  and  wash  the  residue  2  X  30  ml  with  45  :  50^ 
acetone  :  precipitating  solution.  Transfer  the  filtrate  and  washings 
to  250-ml  separating  funnel  and  extract  it  with  chloroform  3  x  50  mL 
Pass  the  organic  solvent  phase  through  anhydrous  sodium  sulfate  and 
collect  it  in  a  SCO-mi  round  bottom  flask.  Distil  off  the  solvent  on  a 
rotary  vacuum  evaporator  below  45**C. 

4.3.3  Clean-up  of  Extract  by  Column  Chromatography  —  Prepare  a 
chromatography  column  using  10  g  of  activated  neutral  silica  gel  and 
glass  column  of  500  mm  height  and  18  mm  internal  diameter,  using 
90  :  10  benzene  acetone  mixture.  Dissolve  the  residue  in  the  benzene 
acetone  solvent  mixture  and  transfer  it  to  the  column.  Elute  the  column 
with  30  ml  of  solvent  mixture  at  the  rate  of  5-6  ml/min  and 
collect  the  eluent  in  50-ml  round-bottom  flask.  Evaporate  the  eluent  on 
a  rotary  evaporator  below  45*0  to  dryness,  Re-dissolve  the  residue  in  2  ml 
acetone  added  by  a  volumetric  pipette.  Swirl  well  to  get  a  uniform 
solution.  Also  prepare  a  standard  solution  of  methyl  parathion  in  acetone 
containing  0*05  Mg/ml. 


4*4  Apparatus 

4,4.1  Gas  Chromatograph  —  A  gas  chromatograph  equipped  with  flame 
photometer  detector  is  operated  under  the  following  suggested  parameters. 
These  parameters  may  be  varied  according  to  the  available  facilities 
provided  standardization  is  done: 


Column 
Packing 

Carrier  gas 


Glass,  90  cm  long,  6'25  mm  diameter 

10  percent  QV-l  on  Gas  Ghrom    Q^ 
(80-100  mesh) 

Nitrogen 


Carrier  gas  flowrate 

60  ml/min 

Combustion  gases 

Hydrogen 

200  ml/min 

Oxygen 

30     ml/min 

Air 

100  ml/min 

Column  temperature 

210''G 

Injection  port  temperature 

250*C 

IS  :  10630  -  1983 

Detector  Flame  photometric 

Detector  temperature  250**C 

Retention  time  for  methyl       2  min  45  s. 
parathion 

4.5  Procedure — Inject  suitable  aliquot  (3  Ml)  into  the  column  using  a 
microlitre  syringe.  Identify  the  peak  by  its  retention  time  and  measure 
the  peak  area. 

4.6  Calculations 

Methyl  parathion  .^g/g{  ppm)  =    j'^  x  f'  X  M  ^  ^    ""-^ 

where 

Ai  =  peak  area  of  sample; 

A2  ~  peak  area  of  standard; 

Vj^  =  volume  of  sample  injected,  in  Ml; 

Fg  =  volume  of  standard  injected,  in  Ml; 

F3  =»  total  volume  of  sample  solution,  in  ml; 

C  ==  concentration  of  standard  solution,  in  ppm; 

M  =  mass  of  sample  taken  for  analysis,  in  g;  and 

/    =  recovery  factor  ==   ^ 

•^  Percent  mean  recovery 

Percent  mean  recovery  is  determined  by  taking  untreated  control 
sample  to  which  known  amount  of  methyl  parathion  are  added  and 
analysed  as  described  above. 


ii^bilis   sxAnoakus 

ON 

PESTICIDES  RESIDUE  ANALYSIS 

IS: 

5863  (Partl)-1970     Method   for  determination  of  malathion  residues:  Part  I  Cereals- 

and  oilseeds 
5864-1983     Methods  for  determination   of  DDT   residues  in  food   commodities  (  first 

revision) 
5952-1970     Method  for  determination  of  parathion  residues  in  foodgrains  and  vegetables 
6169-1983     Methods  for  determination  of  BHC  ( HCH  )  residues  in  food  commodities 

(first  revision) 
10168-1982     Methods  for  determination  of  fenitrothion  residues  in  foods 
10169-1982     Methods  for  determination  of  carbaryl  residues  in  fruits  and  vegetables 


