**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13611 (1993) : Protocol for Providing the 

Connectionless-mode Network Service in Data Communications 
for Information Processing Systems [LITD 13: Information 
and Communication Technologies] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vf ijii^s^yiis^ i s:>&^ nT¥seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



(S 13611 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

PROTOCOL FOR PROVIDING THE 

CONNECTIONLESS-MODE NETWORK SERVICE 

IN DATA COMMUNICATIONS FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 



UDC 68r327-801 



©BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1993 Price Group 14 



Gomputer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee, LTD 36 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8473 : 1988 'Information processing systems — 
Data communications — Protocol for providing the connectionless-mode network service', 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau 
of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computer Systems and Interconnection 
Sectional Committee ( LTD 36 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

ISO 7498 Information processing systems— IS 12373 : 1987 Basic reference model of 

Open systems interconnection — Basic open systems interconnection for informa- 

reference model tion processing systems ( Identical ) 

ISO 7498/Add. 1 Addendum 1 : Connec- Amendment No. 2 to IS 12373 : 1987 

tionless-mode transmission ( Identical ) 

ISO 8348 Information processing systems — Doc Ltd 36 ( 1558 ) Network service 

Data communications — Network service definition in data communications for 

definition information processing systems ( Under 

preparation ) ( Identical ) 

ISO 8348/Add. 1 Addendum 1 : Connec- do 

tionless-mode transmission 

ISO 8348/Add. 2 Addendum 2 : Network do 

layer addressing 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following ISO Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in 
conjunction with this standard: 

ISO/I EC 8208 Information processing systems — Data communications "X'25 Packet 

level protocol for data terminal equipment 

ISO/TR 8509 : 1987 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnections — 
Service conventions 

ISO 8648 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnections — 

Internal organization of the Network layer 

ISO 9074 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnection — 

ESTELLE ( Formal Description Technique based on an Extended State 

Transition Model ) 
ISO 8802 Information processing systems — Data communications — Local Area 

Networks 
ISO 8886 Information processing systems — Data communications — Data link 

service definition for open systems interconnection 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting 
it in this standard. 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



Indian Standard 

PROTOCOL FOR PROVIDING THE 

CONNECTIONLESS-MODE NETWORK SERVICE 

IN DATA COMMUNICATIONS FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 



Introduction 

iS0 8473 is one of a set of international Standards pro- 
duced to facilitate the interconnection of open systems. 
The set of standards covers the services and protocois 
required to achieve such interconnection. 

This International Standard is positioned with re- 
spect to other related standards by the layers defined 
in ISO 7498. In particular, it is a protocol of the 
Network Layer. This International Standard may be 
used between Network entities in End systems or in 
Network Layer relay systems (or both). It provides 
the connectionless-mode Network Service as defined in 
IS0 8348/Add.l. 

The interrelationship of these standards is illustrated 
in figure 1. 



Protocol 
specification 



OSI Network Service 



Reference to aims 



Reference to assumptions 
— Underlying service 



Figureil - Interrelationship of stuudards 



1 Scope and field of application 

This IiiWnattonai Standard specifies a protocol which 
i» u»ed to provide the connectionless-mode Network- 
Service as described in IS08348/Add.l. The protocol 
relies upon the provision of an underlying connection- 
lest-mode service by reiU subnetworks and/or data links. 



The underlying connectionless-mode service assumed by 
the protocol may be obtained either directly, from a con- 
nectionless-mode real subnetwork^ or indirectly, through 
the operation of an appropriate Subnetwork Dependent 
Convergence function (SMDCF) or protocol (SNDCP) 
over a connection-mode real subnetwork, as described 
in ISO %^AB. This International Standard specifies 
the way in which this underlying connectionless-mode 
subnetwork service is obtained from real subnetworks 
that conform to ISO 8802-2 or ISO 8208. The under- 
lying connection!ess=mode subnetv/ork service may be 
obtained from real subnetworks that do not conform to 
either ISO 8802-2 or ISO 8208, but the v.ay in which this 
is done is not specified by this International Standard. 

NOTE — The SNDCF defined for the operation 
of this protocol in configurations that include a 
subnetwork using the X.25 PLP can be generalized 
in a straightforward way to cover the operation 
of ISO 8473 in configurations that include subnet- 
works that use connection-oriented protocols other 
than the X.25 PLP. 

This International Standard specifies 

a) procedures for the connectionless transmission of 
data and control information from one Network en- 
tity to a peer Network entity; 

b) the encoding of the protocol data units (PDUs) used 
for the transmission of data and control informa- 
tion, comprising a variable-length protocol header 
format; 

c) procedures for the correct interpretation of protocol 
control information; and 

d) the functional requirements for implementations 
claiming conformance to this Interrfational Stan- 
dard. 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



The procedures are defined in terms of 

a) the interactions among peer Network entities 
through the exchange of protocol data units; 

b) the interactions between a Network entity and a 
Network Service user through the exchange of Net- 
work Service primitives; and 

c) the interactions between a network-entity and an 
underlying service provider through the exchange 
of service primitives. 



2 References 

ISO 7498, Information processing s'ystem.s — Open 
systems interconnection — Basic reference model. 

ISO 7498/ Add. 1, Information processing systems — 
Open systems interconnection — Basic reference model. 
Addendum 1: Connectionless-mode transmission. 

ISO 8208, Inform.ation processing systems — Data 
communications — X.25 Packet Level Protocol for Data 
Terminal Equipment. 



ISO 8348, Information processing systems - 
communications — Network service definition. 



Data 



ISO 8348/Add.l, Information processing systems — 
Data com^munications — Network service definiiion — 
Addendum 1: Connectionless- mode transmission. 

ISO 8348/Add.2, Information processing systems — 
Data communications — Network service definiiion — 
Addendum 2: Network layer addressing. 

ISO/TR8509, Information processing systems — 
Open Systems Interconnection — Service conventions. 

ISO 8648, Information processing sysiem^s ' — Open 
System^s Interconnection — Internal organization of the 
Network layer. 



ISO 8802, Information processing systems 
communications - Local Area Networks. 



Data 



ISO 8886, Information processing systems — Data 
communication - Data link service definiiion for Open 
Systems Interconnection^ . 

ISO 9074, Information processing systems - ~ Open 
systems interconnection — ESTELLE (Formal Descrip- 
tioT} Technique based on an Extended State Transition 
Model). '^ 



^At present, at the stage of draft; publication anticipated in 
due course. 



IS 13611 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



3 Definitions 



Section one: General 

3.5 Local Area Network definitions 



3.1 Reference Model definitions 

This Intern*'itional Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO 7498: 

a) end-system 

h) network-entity 

(•) Network layer 

d) Network protocol 

e) Network protocol data unit 

f) Network relay 

g) Network-service 

h) Network-service-access-point 

i) Network-service-access- point-address 

j) routeing 

k) service 

1) service data unit 

m) service primitive 

3.2 Service conventions definitions 

This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO/TR8509: 

a) service provider 

b) service user 

3.3 Network Layer architecture defini- 
tions 

This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO 8648: 

a) intermediate system 

b) relay system 

c) subnetwork 

d) subnetwork independent convergence protocol 

e) subnetwork independent convergence function 

f) subnetwork access protocol 



3.4 Network Layer addressing defini- 
tions 

This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO 8348/Add.2: 

a) Network addressing domain 

b) Network protocol address information 

c) subnetwork point of attachment 



This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO 8802: 

a) local area network 
h) logical link control 
c) media access control 

3.6 X.25 definitions 

This International Standard makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO 8208: 

a) data circuit-terminating equipment 

b) data terminal equipment 

c) logical channel 

d) permanent virtual circuit 

e) virtual circuit 

3.7 Additional definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the fol- 
lowing definitions apply: 

3.7.1 derived PDU: A protoc<^I data unit whose 
fields are identical to those of an initial PDU, except 
that it carries only a segment of the user data from an 
N-UNITDATA request. 

3.7.2 initial PDUi A protocol data unit carrying 
the whole of the user data from an N-UNITDATA re- 
quest. 

3.7.3 local matter: A decision made by a system 
concerning its behaviour in the Network Layer that is 
not prescribed or constrained by this International Stan- 
dard. 

3.7.4 network-entity title; An identifier for a 
network-entity which has the same abstract syntax as 
an NSAP address, and which can be used to unambigu- 
onsly identify a network-entity in an end or intermediate 
system. 

3.7.5 reassembly: The act of regenerating an ini- 
tial PDU from two or more derived PDUs. 

3.7.6 segment: A distinct unit of data consisting of 
part or all of the user data provided in the N-UNITDATA 
request and delivered in the N-UNITDATA indication. 



IS 13611 : 1993 
180 8473:1988 



3.7.7 segmentation: The act of generating two or 
more derived PDUs from an initial or derived PDU. The 
derived PDUs together carry the entire user data of the 
initial or derived PDU from which they were generated. 



4 Abbreviations 
4.1 Data Units 

IMSDU Network service data unit 

PDU protocol data unit 

SDU service data unit 

5NSDU subnetwork service data unit 



NPA! Network protocol address information 

N5AP Network service access point 

PVC permanent virtual circuit 

SN subnetwork 

SNDCF subnetwork dependent convergence func- 

tion 

5NDCP subnetwork dependent convergence proto- 

col 

SNICP subnetwork independent convergence pro- 

tocol 

SNAcP subnetwork access protocol 

SNPA subnetwork point of attachment 

SNCR subnetwork connection reference 

Ul unnumbered information 



4.2 Protocol Data Units 

DT PDU data protocol data unit 

ER PDU error report protocol data unit 



4.3 Protocol Data Unit Fields 



5 Overview of the protocol 



cs 


checksum 


DA 


destination address 


DAL 


destination address length 


DUID 


data unit rdentifier 


E/R 


error report flag 


LI 


length indicator 


LT 


lifetime 


MS 


more segments flag 


IMLPID 


network layer protocol identifier 


5A 


source address 


SAL 


source address length 


SL 


segment length 


SO 


segment offset 


SP 


segmentation permitted flag 


TL 


total length 


IP 


type 


V/P 


version/protocol identifier Extension 


4.4 


Parameters 


DA 


destination address 


QoS 


quality of service 


SA 


source address 



4.5 Miscellaneous 



CLNP 



DCE 

DTE 

LLC 

MAC 

NS 



connectionless-mode network protocol (i.e. 

the protocol defined in this International 

Standard) 

data circuit-terminating equipment 

data terminal equipment 

logical link control 

media access control 

network-service 



5.1 Internal organization 
work Layer 



of the Net- 



The architectural organization of the Network Layer 
is described in a separate International Standard, 
ISO 8648. ISO 8648 identifies and categorizes the way 
in which functions can be performed within the Net- 
work Layer by Network Layer protocols, thus providing 
a uniform framework for describing how protocols oper- 
ating either individually or cooperatively in the Network 
Layer can be used to provide the OSI Network-Service. 
This protocol is designed to be used in the context of 
the internetworking protocol approach to the provision 
of the connectionless-mode Network-Service defined in 
ISO 8648. 

This protocol is intended for use in the Subnet- 
work Independent Convergence protocol (SNICP) role. 
A protocol which fulfills the SNICP role operates to 
construct the OSI Network-Service over a defined set 
of underlying services, performing functions which are 
necessary to support the uniform appearance of the 
OSI connectionless-mode Network-Service over a ho- 
mogeneous or heterogeneous set of interconnected sub- 
networks. This protocol is defined to accommodate 
variability where Subnetwork Dependent Convergence 
protocols and/or Subnetwork Access protocols do not 
provide all of the functions necessary to support the 
connectionless-mode Network-Service over all or part of 
the path from one NSAP to another. 

As described in ISO 8648, a protocol at the Network 
Layer may fulfill different roles in different configura- 
tions. Although this protocol is designed particularly 
to be suitable for a SNICP role in the context of the 
internetworking protocol approach to the provision of 
the connectionless-mode Network-Service, it may also 
be used to fulfill other roles and may therefore be used 
in the context of other approaches to subnetwork inter- 
connection. 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



The operation of this protocol is specified with re- 
spect to an underlying service which is made available 
through the operation of other Network Layer protocols 
or through provision of the Data Link Service. The un- 
derlying service assumed by this protocol is described in 
5-5. 

5.2 Subsets of the protocol 

Two subsets of the full protocol are defined which ex- 
ploit the known subnetwork characteristics of particular 
configurations and are therefore not subnetwork inde- 
pendent. 

The Inactive Network Layer protocol subset is a null- 
function subset which can be used when it is known that 
the source and destination end-systems are connected 
by a single subnetwork, and when none of the functions 
performed by the full protocol is required to provide the 
connectionless-mode Network-Service between any pair 
of end-systems. 

The N 071' segmenting protocol subset permits sim- 
plification of the header when it is known that the 
source and destination end-systems are connected by 
subnetworks whose individual service data unit sizes are 
greater than or equal to a know^n bound which is large 
enough so that segmentation is not required. This sub- 
set is selected by setting the Segmentation Permitted 
flag to zero (see 6.7). 

5.3 Addresses and titles 

The following subclauses describe the addresses and ti- 
tles used by this protocol. 

5.3.1 Addresses 

The Source Address and Destination Address parame- 
ters referred to in 7.3 of this International Standard are 
OSI Network Service Access Point (NSAP) Addresses. 
The syntax and semantics of an OSI Network-Service- 
Access-Point- Address are described ISO 8348/Add.2. 

The encoding used by this protocol to convey NSAP 
Addresses is the preferred binary encoding specified 
in ISO 8348/Add.2. The NSAP address, encoded as a 
string of binary octets according to ISO 8348/Add.2, is 
conveyed in its entirety in the address fields described 
in 7.3, 

5.3.2 Network-entity titles 

A network-entity title is an identifier for a network- 
entity in an end-system or intermediate system. 
Network-entity titles awe allocated from the same name 
space as NSAP addresses, and the determination of 
whether a name is an NSAP address or a network-entity 



title depends on the context in which the name is inter- 
preted. The values of the Source Rouieing and Recording 
of Route parameters defined in 7.5.4 and 7.5.5 respec- 
tively are network-entity titles. The values of the Source 
Address and Destination Address parameters in the Er- 
ror Report PDU defined in 7.9 are also network-entity 
titles. 

The encoding used by this protocol to convey 
network-entity titles is the preferred binary encoding 
specified in ISO 8348/Add.2. The network-entity title, 
encoded as a string of binary octets according to ISO 
8348/Add.2, is conveyed in its entirety in the fields de- 
scribed in 7.5.4, 7.5.5 and 7.9. L2. 



5.4 Service provided by the protocol 

This protocol provides the connectionless-mode Net- 
work Service described in ISO 8348/Add.l. The 
Network-Service primitive provided is summarized in ta- 
ble 1. 

NOTE — ISO 8348/Add.l states that the max- 
imum size of a connectionless- mode Network- 
service-data-unit (IMSDU) is 64512 octets. 



5.5 Underlying service assumed by the 
protocol 

It is intended that ISO 8473 be capable of operating over 
connectionless-mode services derived from a wide vari- 
ety of real subnetworks and data links. Therefore, in 
order to simplify the specification of the protocol, its 
operation is defined (in clause 6) with respect to an ab- 
stract "underlying service" rather than any particular 
real subnetwork service. This underlying service consists 
of a single SN-UNITDATA primitive which conveys the 
source and destination subnetwork point of attachment 
addresses, a subnetwork Quality of Service parameter, 
and a minimum number of octets of user data. 

The SN-UNITDATA primitive is used to describe the 
abstract interface which exists between the protocol ma- 
chine and an underlying real subnetwork or a Subnet- 
work Dependent Convergence function which operates 
over a real subnetwork or real data link to provide the 
required underlying service. 

The primitive provided is summarized in table 2, 

Provision of the underlying service is described in 
clause 8. 



5.6 Service assumed from the local cii- 
vironrtient 

A timer service shall be provided to allow the protocol 
entitv to schedule events. 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



Table 1 - Connectionless-mode Network- Service primitive 



Primitive 


Parameters 


N-UNITDATA .Request 


NS-Source- Address, 


-Indication 


NS-Destination- Address, 




NS-Quality-of-Service, 




NS-Userdata 



Table 2 - Underlying Service primitive 



Primitive 


Parameters 


SN-UNITDATA .Request 

■ Indication 

1 


SN-Source- Address, 
SN- Destination- Address, 
SN-Quality-of- Service, 
SN-Userdata 



There are three primitives associated with the S- 
TIMER service: 

a) the S-TIMER Request; 

b) the S-TIMER Response; and 

c) the S-TIMER. Cancel. 

The primitives provided are summarized in table 3. 



Table 3 - Timer primitive 



Primitive 


Parameters 


S-TIMER .Request 
.Response 


S-Time, 
S-Name, 
S-Subscript 

S-Name, 
S-Subscript 



The S-TIMER Request primitive indicates to the local 
environment that it should initiate a timer of the speci- 
fied name and subscript and maintain it for the duration 
specified by the time parameter. 

The S-TIMER Response primitive is initiated by the 
local environment to indicate that the amount of time 



requested by the corresponding S-TIMER Request prim- 
itive has elapsed. 

The S-TIMER Cancel primitive is an indication to the 
local environment thai the specified timer(s) should be 
canceled. If the S-Subscript parameter is not specified, 
then all timers with the specified name are canceled; 
otherwise, the timer ojf the given name and subscript 
is cancelled. If no timers correspond to the parameters 
specified, the local environment takes no action. 

The parameters of the S- TIMER service primi-tives are 
specified in ta^^le 3. 

The S-Time parameter indicates the time duration 
of the specified timer. An identifiying label is associ- 
ated with a timer by means of the S-Name parameter. 
The S-Subscript parameter specifies a value to distin- 
guish timers with the same name. The name and sub- 
script takei. together constitute a unique reference to 
the timer. 

Timers used in association with a specific protocol 
function are defined under that protocol function. 

NOTE — This International Standard does not 
define specific values for the timers. Any deriva- 
tions described in this Standard are not manda- 
tory. Timer values should be chosen so that the 
requested Quality of Service can be provided, given 
the known characteristics of the underlying service. 



6 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



Section two: Specification of the protocol 



6 Protocol functions 

This clause describes the functions performed as part of 
the protocol. 

Not all of the functions must be performed by every 
implementation. Subclause 6.19 specifies which func- 
tions may be omitted, and the correct behaviour when 
requested functions are not implemented. 

6.1 PDU Composition function 

This function is responsible for the construction of a 
protocol data unit according to the rules governing the 
encoding of PDUs given in clause 7. Protocol Control 
Information required for delivering the data unit to its 
destination is determined from current state and local 
information and from the parameters associated with 
the N-UNITDATA Request. 

Network Protocol Address Information (NPAI) for the 
Source Address and Destination Address fields of the 
PDU header is derived from the NS-Source-Address and 
NS- Destination- Address parameters. The N 5- Destina- 
tion-Address and IMS-Quahty-of-Service parameters, to- 
gether with current state and local information, are used 
to determine which optional functions are to be selected. 
User data passed from the Network-Service User (NS- 
Userdata) form the Data Part of the protocol data unit. 

During the composition of the protocol data unit, a 
Data Unit Identifier is assigned to distinguish this re- 
quest to transmit NS-Userdata to a particular destina- 
tion NS User from other such requests. The originator 
of the PDU shall choose the Data Unit Identifier so that 
it remains unique (for this Source and Destination ad- 
dress pair) for the maximum lifetime of the Initial PDU 
in the network; this rule applies for any PDUs derived 
from the Initial PDU as a result of the application of 
the SegmentAtion function (see 6.7). Derived PDUs are 
considered to correspond to the same Initial PDU, and 
hence the same N-UNITDATA. Request, if they have the 
same Source Address, Destination Address, and Data 
Unit Identifier. 

The Data Unit Identifier is also available for ancillary 
functions such as error reporting (see 6.10). 

The total length of the PDU in octets is determined 
by the originator *and placed in the Total Length field 
of the PDU header. This field is not changed in any 
Derived PDU for the lifetime of the protocol data unit. 

When the non-segmenting protocol subset is em- 
ployed, neither the Total Length field nor the Data Unit 
Identifier field is present. The rules governing the PDU 
composition function are modiHed in this case as follows. 
During the composition of the protocol data unit, the 



total length of the PDU in octets is determined by the 
originator and placed in the Segment Length field of the 
PDU header. This field is not changed for the lifetime 
of the PDU. No Data Unit Identification is provided. 

6.2 PDU Decomposition function 

This function is responsible for removing the Protocol 
CJontrol Information from the protocol data unit. Dur- 
ing this process, information pertinent to the generation 
of the N-UNITDATA. Indication is determined as follows. 
The NS-5ource-Address and NS-Destination-Address pa- 
rameters of the N-UNITDATA. Indication are recovered 
from the NPAI in the Source Address and Destination 
Address fields of the PDU header. The Data Part of 
the received PDU is retained until all segments of the 
original service data unit have been received; collec- 
tively, these form the NS-Userdata parameter of the N- 
UNtTDATA. Indication. Information relating to the Qual- 
ity of Service provided during the transmission of the 
PDU is determined from the Quality of Service and other 
information contained in the Options Part of the PDU 
header. This information constitutes the NS-Quality-of- 
Service parameter of the N-UNITDATA. Indication. 

6.3 Header Format Analysis function 

This function determines whether the full protocol de- 
scribed in this Standard is employed, or one of the de- 
fined proper subsets thereof. If the protocol data unit 
has a Network Layer Protocol Identifier indicating that 
this is a standard version of the protocol, this func- 
tion determines whether a received PDU has reached its 
destination, using the Destination Address in the PDU 
header. If the Destination Address provided in the PDU 
identifies an NSAP served by this network-entity, then 
the PDU has reached its destination; if not, it shall be 
forwarded. 

If the protocol data unit has a Network Layer Proto- 
col Identifier indicating that the Inactive Network Layer 
protocol subset is in use, then no further analysis of 
the PDU header is required. The network-entity in this 
case determines that either the Subnetwork Point of At- 
tachment address encoded as network protocol address 
information in the supporting subnetwork protocol cor- 
responds directly to an NSAP address serviced by this 
network-entity or that an error has occurr. ^. 

6A PDU Lifetime Control function 

This function is used to enforce the maximum PDU life- 
time. It is closely associated with the Header Fbrmat 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



Analysis function. This function determines whether a 
PDU received may be forwarded or whether its assigned 
lifetime has expired, in which case it shall be discarded. 

The operation of the PDU Lifetime Control function 
depends upon the Lifetime f\t\d in the PDU header. This 
field contains, at any time, the remaining lifetime of 
the PDU (represented in units of 500 ms). The life- 
time of the Initial PDU is determined by the originating 
network-entity and placed in the Lifetime field of the 
PDU. When the Segmentation function is applied to a 
PDU, the value of the Lifetime field of the Initial PDU 
is copied into all of the Derived PDUs. 

The Lifetime of the PDU is decremented by ev- 
ery network-entity ^yhich processes the PDU. When a 
network-entity processes a. PDU, it decrements the PDU 
Lifetime by at least one. The value of the PDU Lifetime 
field shall be decremented bv more than one if the sum 
of 

a) the transit delay in the underlying service from 
which the PDU was received; and 

b) the delay within the system processing the PDU. 

exceeds or is estimated to exceed 500 ms. In this case, 
the Lifetime field should be decremented by one for each 
additional 500 "ms of delay. The determination of delay 
need not be precise, but where a precise value cannot 
be ascertained, the value used shall be an overestimate, 
not an underestimate. 

If the Lifetime field reaches a value of zero before the 
PDU is delivered to the destination, the PDU shall be 
discarded. The Error Reporting function shall be in- 
voked as described in 6.10. This may result in the gen- 
eration of an Error Report PDU. 

It is a local matter whether or not the destination 
network-entity performs the Lifetime Control function. 

6.5 Route PDU function 

This function determines the network-entity to which a 
protocol data unit should be forwarded and the under- 
lying service that must be used to reach that network- 
entity, using the Destination Address and the Total 
Length fields of the PDU. Where segmentation' is re- 
quired, the Route PDU function further determines over 
which underlying service Derived PDUs/segments shall 
be sent in order to reach that network-entity. The re- 
sults of the Route PDU function are passed to the For- 
ward PDU function (along with the PDU itself) for fur- 
ther processing. 

Selection of the underlying service that shall be used 
to reach the "next" system in the route is initially influ- 
enced by the NS-Quality-of-Scrvice parameter of the N- 
UNITDATA. Request, which specifics the QoS requested 



by the sending NS User. Whether this QoS is to be pro- 
vided directly by the CLNP, through the selection of the 
N-Quaiity-of-Service parameter and other optional pa- 
rameters, or through the QoS facilities offered by each 
of the underlying services is determined prior to invoca- 
tion of the Forward PDU function. Route selection by 
intermediate systems may subsequently be influenced 
by the values of the N-Quality-of-Service parameter (if 
present), and other optional parameters (if present). 

6.6 Forward PDU function 

This function issues an SN-UNITDATA, Request primi- 
tive (see 5.5), supplying the subnetwork or SMDCF iden- 
tified by the Route PDU function with the protocol data 
unit as user data to be transmitted, the address informa- 
tion required by that subnetwork or SNDCF to identify 
the "next" system within the subnetwork-specific ad- 
dressing domain (this may be an intermediate system 
or the destination end-system), and Quality of Service 
constraints (if any) to be considered in the processing 
of the user data. 

When the PDU to be forwarded is longer than the 
maximum service data unit size provided by the under- 
Iving service, the Segmentation function is applied (see 
6.7). 

6.7 Segmentation function 

Segmentation is performed when the size of the protocol 
data unit is greater than the maximum service data unit 
size supported by the underlying service to be used to 
transmit the PDU. 

Segmentation consists of composing two or more new 
PDUs (Derived PDUs) from the received PDU. The re- 
ceived PDU may be the Initial PDU, or it may be a 
Derived PDU. All of the header information from the 
PDU to be segmented, with the exception of the seg- 
ment length and checksum fields oi the fixed part, and 
the segment offset of the segmentation part, is dupli- 
cated in each Derived PDU, including all of the address 
part, the data unit identifierand total length of the seg- 
mentation part, and the options part (if present). 

NOTE — The rules for forwarding and segmenta- 
tion guarantee that the header length is the same 
for all segments (Derived PDUs) of the Initial PDU, 
and is the same as the header length of the Initial 
PDU. The size of a PDU header will not change 
due to the operation of any protocol function. 

The user data encapsulated within the received PDU 
are divided such that the Derived PDUs satisfy the size 
requirements of the SN-Uscrdata parameter field of the 
SN-UNITDATA. Request primitive used to access the un- 
derlying service. Each derived PDU, except for the last, 



ic 13511 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



shall contain a number of octets that is a non-zero mul- 
tiple of 8. Thus, the value of the segment offset field in 
any PDU is either zero or a non-sero multiple of 8. Seg- 
mentation shall not result in the generation of a Derived 
PDU containing less than eight octets of user data. 






0««>JlIt\^ 



Initial PDU by means of 

a) the Source Address field; 

b^ the Destination Address field: and 

c) the Data Unit Identifier field. 

The following fields of the PDU header are used in 
conjunction with the Segmentation function: 

a) Segment Offset — identities the octet at which the 
segment begins with respect to the start of the Ini- 
tial PDU; 

b) Segment Length ^~ specifies the number of octets in 
the Derived PDU^ including both header and data; 

c) More Segm^ents Flag — is set to one if this Derived 
PDU does not contain the final octet of the Initial 
PDU as its final octet of user data; and 

d) Total Length — specifies the entire length of the 
Initial PDU, including both header and data. 

Derived PDUs may be further segmented without con- 
straining the routing of the individual Derived PDUs. 

The Segm^entation Permitted^sig is set to one to indi- 
cate that segmentation is permitted. If the Initial PDU 
is not to be segmented at any point during its lifetime in 
the network, the flag is set to zero by the source network- 
entity. The setting of the Segmentation Permitted flag 
may not be changed by any other network-entity for the 
lifetime of the Initial PDU and any Derived PDUs. 

6.8 Reassembly function 

The Reassembly function reconstructs the Initial PDU 
from the Derived PDUs generated by the operation of 
the Segmentation function on the Initial PDU (and, re- 
cursively, on subsequent Derived PDUs). 

A bound on the time during which segments (Derived 
PDUs) of an Initial PDU will be held at a reassembly 
point before being discarded is provided, so that re- 
assembly resources may be released when it is no longer 
expected that any outstanding segments of the Initial 
PDU will arrive at the reassembly point. Upon recep- 
tion of a Derived PDU, a reassembly timer is initiated 
with a value which indicates the am.ount of time which 
shall elapse before any outstanding segments of the Ini- 
tial PDU shall be assumed to be lost. When this timer 
expires, all segments (Derived PDUs) of the Initial PDU 
held at the reassembly point are discarded, the resources 
allocated for those segments are freed and, if selected, 
an Error Report is generated (see 6,10). 



While the exact relationship between reassembly life- 
time and PDU lifetime is a local matter, the Reassem- 
bly function shall preserve the intent of the PDU life- 
time. Consequently, the reassembly function shall dis- 
card PDUs whose lifetime would otherwise have expired 
had they not been under the control of the reassembly 
function; that is, the reassembly lifetime for a given PDU 
shall be less than the PDU lifetime in all derived PDUs 
being held at the reassembly point. 

NOTES 

i) Methods of bounding reassembly lifetime arc 
discussed in Annex B. 

2) The Segmentation and Reassembly functions 
are intended to be used in such a way that 
the fewest possible segments are generated 
at each segmentation point and 'reassembly 
takes place at the final destination of a PDU. 
However, other schemes whi<h 

a) interact with the routcing algorithm to 
favour pa^ths on which fewer segments 
are venerated; 

b) generate more segments than absolutely 
required in order to avoid additional seg- 
mentation at some subsequent point; or 

c) allow partial or full reassembly at som.e 
intermediate point along the route 

are not precluded. The information neces- 
sary to enable the use of one of these al- 
ternative strategies m.ay be m.ade available 
through the operation of a Network Layer 
Management function or by other means. 

3) The originator of the Initial PDU determines 
the value of the Segmentatioh Permitted flag 
in the Initial PDU and all Derived PDUs (if 
any). Partial or full reassembly in an inter- 
mediate system [Note 2 (c) above] may not 
change this value in the Initial PDU or any 
PDU derived from it, and may not therefore 
add or remove the segmentation part of the 
header. 



6,9 Discard PDU function 

This function performs all of the actions necessary to 
free the resources reserved by ttie network-entity when 
any of the following situations is encountered (It should 
be noted that the list is not exhaustive): 

a) A violation of protocol procedure has occurred, 

b) A PDU is received whose checksum is inconsistent 
with its contents. 

c) A PDU is received, but due to local congestion, it 
cannot be processed, 

d) A PDU is received whose header cannot be ana- 
lyzed. 



IS 13611 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



e) A PDU is received which cannot be segmented and 
cannot be forwarded because its length exceeds 
the maximum service data unit size supported by 
any underlying service available for transmission of 
the PDU to the next network-entity on the chosen 
route. 

f) A PDU is received whose destination address is un- 
reachable or unknown. 

g) Incorrect or invalid source routeing was specified. 
This may include a syntax error in the source 
routeing field, an unknown or unreachable network- 
entity title in the source routeing field, or a path 
which is not acceptable for other reasons. 

h) A PDU is received whose PDU lifetime has expired 
or whose lifetime expires during reassembly. 

i) A PDU is received which contains an unsupported 
option. 



6,10 Error Reporting function 

6.10.1 Overview 

This function attempts to return an Error Report PDU 
to the source network-entity when a protocol data unit 
is discarded in accordance with 6.9^. 

The Error Report PDU identifies the discarded PDU, 
specifies the type of error detected, and identifies the 
location in the header of the discarded PDU at which 
the error was detected. At least the entire header of the 
Discarded PDU and, at the discretion of the originator 
of the Error Report PDU, none, all, or part of the Data 
Part is placed in the Data Part of the Error Report PDU. 

The originator of a Data PDU controls the generation 
of Error Report PDUs. An Error Report flag in the orig- 
inal PDU is set by the source network-entity to indicate 
that an Error Report PDU is to be returned if the Initial 
PDU or any PDUs derived from it are discarded; if the 
flag is not set, Error Reports are not generated. 

NOTES 

1) The suppression of Error Report PDUs is 
controlled by the originating network-entity 
and not by the NS User. Care should be ex- 
ercised by the originator with regard to sup- 
pressing ER PDUs so that error reporting is 
not suppressed for every PDU generated. 

2) Non-receipt of an Error Report PDU does not 
imply correct delivery of a PDU issued by a 
source network-entity. 



0.10.2 Requirements 

An Error Report PDU shall not be generated to report 
the discard of an Error Report PDU, 



An Error Report PDU shall not be generated to report 
the discard of a Data PDU unless that PDU has the Error 
Report flag set to allow Error Reports. 

If a Data PDU is discarded, and the Error Report flag 
has been set to allow Error Reports, an Error Report 
PDU shall be generated if the reason for discard is one 
of the reasons for discard enumerated in 6.9, subject to 
the conditions described in 6.10.4. 

NOTE — If a Data PDU with the E/R flag set 
to allow Error Reports is discarded for any other 
reason, an ER PDU may be generated (as an im- 
plementation option). 

6.10.3 Processing of Error Reports 

An Error Report PDU is composed from information 
contained in the header of the discarded Data PDU to 
which the Error Report refers. The contents of the 
Source Address field of the discarded Data PDU are 
used as the Destination Address of the Error Report 
PDU. This value, which in the context of the Data PDU 
was used as an NSAP Address, is used in the context 
of the Error Report PDU as the network-entity title of 
the network-entity that originated the Data PDU. The 
network-entity title of the originator of the Error Re- 
port PDU is conveyed in the Source Address field of the 
header of the Error Report PDU, The value of the Life- 
time field is determined in accordance with 6.4. Op- 
tional parameters are selected in accordance with 6.10.4. 

Segmentation of Error Report PDUs is not permit- 
ted; hence, no Segmentation Part is present. The total 
length of the ER PDU in octets is placed in the Segment 
Length field of the ER PDU header. This field is not 
changed during the lifetime of the ER PDU. If the orig- 
inator of the ER PDU determines that the size of the 
ER PDU excefds the maximum service data unit size of 
the underlying service, the ER PDU shall be truncated 
to the maximum service data unit size (see 8.3) and for- 
warded with no other change. Error Report PDUs are 
routed and forwarded by intermediate system network- 
entities in the same way as Data PDUi. 

NOTE — The requirement that the underlying 
service assumed by the CLNP shall be capable of 
supporting a service data unit size of 512 octets 
stated in 8.3 guarantees that at least the entire 
header of the discarded Data PDU can be conveyed 
in the Data Part of any ER PDU. 

When an ER PDU is decomposed upon reaching its 
destination, information that may be used to interpret 
and act upon the Error Report is obtained as follow*. 
The network-entity title recovered from the NPAI in the 
Source Address field of the ER PDU header is used to 
identify the network-entity which generated the Error 
Report. The reason for generating the Error Report 



10 



IS 13611 :199a 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



is extracted from the Options Part of the PDU header. 
The entire header of the discarded Data PDU (and part 
or all of the original user data) is extracted from the 
Data Part of the ER PDU to assist in ascertaining the 
nature of the error. 



6.10.4 Relationship of Data PDU Options to 
Error JReports 

The generation of an Error Report is affected by options 
that are present in the corresponding Data PDU. The 
presence of options in the original Data PDU that are 
not supported by the system which has discarded that 
PDU may cause the suppression of an Error Report even 
if the original Data PDU indicated that an Error Report 
should be generated in the event of a discard. 

The processing of an Error Report is also affected by 
options which are present in the corresponding Data 
PDU. In particular, 'options selected for the original 
Data PDU affect which options are included in the cor- 
responding Error Report PDU. The selection of options 
for an Error Report PDU is governed by the following 
requirements: 

a) If the Priority Option or the QoS Maintenance Op- 
tion is selected in the original Data PDU, and the 
system generating the Error Report PDU supports 
the option, then the Error Report PDU shall specify 
the same option, using the value that was specified 
in the original Data PDU. 

b) If the Security Option is selected in the Data PDU, 
and the system generating the Error Report sup- 
ports this option, then the Error Report PDU shall 
specify the option using the value that was specified 
in the original Data PDU. 

If the system docs not support the Security Option, 
an Error Report shall not be generated for a Data 
PDU that selected the Security Option. 

c) If the Complete Source Route Option is selected in 
the original Data PDU, and the system generating 
the Error Report PDU supports this option, then 
the Error Report shall specify the Complete Source 
Route option. The Source Route parameter value is 
obtained by extracting from the original Data PDU 
that portion of the complete source route that has 
already been traversed; and reversing the order of 
network-entity titles which comprise the list. 

If the system does not support the Complete Source 
Route Option, an Error Report shall not be gen- 
erated for a Data PDU that selects the Complete 
Source Route option. 

d) The Padding, Partial Source Routeing, and Record 
Route Options, if supported, may be specified in 
the Error Report PDU. 

NOTE — The values of the optional pa- 
rameters in (d) above may be derived as a 



local matter, or they may be based upon 
the corresponding values in the original Data 
PDU. 



6.11 PDU Header Error Detection 

The PDU Header Error Detection function protects 
against failure of intermediate or end-system network- 
entities due to the processing of erroneous information 
in the PDU header. The function is realized by a check- 
sum computed on the entire PDU header. The checksum 
is verified at each point at which the PDU header is pro- 
cessed. If the checksum calculation fails, the PDU shall 
be discarded. If PDU header fields are modified (for ex- 
ample, due to operation of the lifetime function), then 
the checksum is modified so that the checksum remains 
valid. 

The use of the Header Error Detection function is op- 
tional and is selected by the originating network-entity- 
If the function is not used, the checksum field of the 
PDU header is set to zero. 

If the function is selected by the originating network-, 
entity, the value of the checksum field causes the follow- 
ing formulce to be satisfied: 



y^Oj (mod 255) =: 



^(I - i + l)oi (mod 255) = 

where L is the number of octets in the PDU header, 
and ai is the value of the octet at position i. The first 
octet in the PDU header is considered to occupy position 

When the function is in use, neither octet of the check- 
sum field may be set to zero. 



NOTES 

1) To ensure that inadvertent i;rtodification of a 
header while a PDU is bcrng process<rd by an 
intermediate system (for example, due to a 
memory fault) may still be detected by the 
PDU Header Error function, an intermediatr 
system network-entity shall not recompute 
the checksum for the entire header, even if 
fields are modified. 

2) Annex C contains descriptions of algorithms 
which may be used to calculate the correct 
value of the checksum field when the PDU 
is crea,tcd, and to update the value of the 
checksum field when the header is modified. 



11 



IS 13611 : 1993 
180 8473:1988 



6.12 Padding function 

The padding function is provided to allow space to be 
reserved in the PDU header which is not used to sup- 
port any other function. Octet alignment shall be main- 
tained. 

NOTE — An example of the use of this function 
is to cause the Data Part of a PDU to begin on a 
convenient boundary for the originating network- 
entity, such as a computer word boundary. 



6.13 Security 

The provision of protection services (e.g. data origin 
atithentication, data confidentiality, and data integrity 
of a single connectionless-mode NSDU) is performed by 
the Security function. 

The Security functpion is related to the Protection from 
Unauthorized Access Quality of Service parameter de- 
scribed in ISO 8348/Add.l. The function is realised 
through selection of the security parameter in the op- 
tions part of the PDU header. 

This International Staadard does not specify the way 
in which protection services are to be provided; it pro- 
vides only for the encoding of security information in the 
PDU header. To facilitate interoperation between end- 
systems and Network relay systems by avoiding different 
interpretations of the same encoding, a means to distin- 
guish user-defined security encodings from standardized 
security encodings is described in 7.5.3. 

NOTE — As an implementation considera- 
tion, data origin authentication may be provided 
through the use of a ciyptographically generated 
or enciphered checksum (unique from the PDU 
Header Error Detection mechanism); data confi- 
dentiality and data integrity may be provided via 
route control mechanisms. 



6,14 Source Routeing function 

The Source Routeing function allows the originator to 
specify the path a generated PDU shall take. Source 
routeing may be selected only by the originator of a 
PDU. Source Routeing is accomplished using a list of 
network-entity titles held in a parameter within the op- 
tions part of the PDU header. The length of this param- 
eter is determined by the originating network-entity, and 
does not change during the lifetime of a PDU. 

The Source Route parameter includes information 
used by the originating end-system when determining 
the initial route of the PDU. Only the titles of inter- 
mediate system network-entities are included in the list; 
the network-entity title of the destination of 'the PDU is 
not included in the list. 



Associated with the list of network-entity titles is an 
indicator which identifies the next entry in the list to be 
used; this indicator is advanced by the receiver of the 
PDU when the next title in the list matches its own. The 
indicator is updated as the PDU is forwarded so as to 
identify the appropriate entry at each stage of relaying. 

Two forms of the Source Routeing function are pro- 
vided. The first form, referred to as Complete Source 
Routeing, requires that the specified path shall be 
taken; that is, only those systems identiRed in the list 
may be visited by the PDU while en route to the des- 
tination and each system shall be visited in the order 
specified. If the specified path cannot be taken, the 
PDU shall be discarded. Clause 6.10 describes the cir- 
cumstances in which an attempt shall be made to inform 
the PDU's originator of the discard using the Error Re- 
porting function. 

The second form is referred to as Partial Source 
Routeing. As with complete source routeing, each sys- 
tem identified in the list shall be visited in the order 
specified while en route to the destination. However, 
with this form of source routeing the PDU may take any 
path necessary to arrive at the next intermediate sys- 
tem in the list, which may include visiting intermediate 
systems that are not identified in the list. The PDU will 
not be discarded (for source routeing related reasons) 
unless one of the systems specified cannot be reached 
bv any available route. 



6*15 Record Route function 

The Record Route function records the path(s) taken by 
a PDU as it traverses a series of intermediate systems. 
A recorded route consists of a list of network-entity ti- 
tles held in a parameter within the options part of the 
PDU header. The length of this parameter is determined 
by the originating network-entity, and does not change 
during the lifetime of the PDU. 

The list is constructed as the PDU is forwarded along 
a path towards its destination. Only the titles of in- 
termediate system network-entities are included in the 
recorded route. The network-entity title of the origina- 
tor of the PDU is not recorded in the list. 

When an intermediate system network-entity pro- 
cesses a PDU containing the Record Route parameter, 
the system adds its own network-entity title at the end 
of the list of recorded network-entity titles. An indicator 
is maintained to identify the next available octet to be 
used for recording of route. This indicator is updated 
as entries are added to the list as follows. The length of 
the entry to be added to the list is added to the value of 
the next available octet indicator, and this sum is com- 
pared with the length of the Recotd Route parameter. 
If the addition of the entry to the list would exceed the 
size of the parameter, the next available octet indicator 



12 



1313611:1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



is set to indicate that route recording has been termi- 
nated. The network-entity title is not added to the list. 
The PDU may still be forwarded to its final destination, 
without further addition of network-entity titles. 

If the addition of the entry would not exceed the 
size of the Record Route parameter, the next available 
octet indicator is updated with the new value, and the 
network-entity title is added to the end of the list. 

Two forms of the Record Route function are pro- 
vided. The first form is referred to as Complete Route 
Recording. It requires that the list of network-entity 
titles be a complete and accurate record of all intermedi- 
ate systems visited by a PDU (including Derived PDUs), 
except when a shortage of space in the record route op- 
tion field causes termination of recording of route, as de- 
scribed above. When Complete Route Recording is se- 
lected, PDU reassembly at intermediate systems is per- 
formed only when the Derived PDUs that ate reassem- 
bled all took the same route; otherwise, the PDU is dis- 
carded, and if selected, an Error Report is generated 
(see 6.10). 

The second form is referred to as Partial Route 
Recording. It also requires a record of intermediate 
systems visited by a PDU. When Partial Route Record- 
ing is selected, PDU reassembly at intermediate systems 
is always permitted. Wh^n reassembly is performed at 
an intermediate system, the route recorded in any of the 
Derived PDUs may be placed in the PDU resulting from 
the reassemblv. 



6.17 Priority function 

The Priority function allows a PDU with a numerically 
higher priority value to be processed preferentially with 
respect to other PDUs with numerically lower priority 
values. The function is realized through selection of a 
parameter in the options part of the PDU header. 

The lowest priority value is zero. The Priority func- 
tion provides a means whereby the resources of end and 
intermediate system network-entities, such as outgoing 
transmission queues and buffers, can be used preferen- 
tially to process higher-priority PDUs ahead of lower- 
priority PDUs. The specific action taken by an individ- 
ual network-entity to support the Priority function is a 
local matter. 



6.18 Congestion Notification function 

'To allow NS Users to take appropriate action when con- 
gestion is experienced within the NS provider, inter- 
mediate systems may inform the destination network- 
entity of congestion through the use of a flag in the QoS 
Maintenance parameter in the options part of the PDU 
header. The value of this flag is initially set to zero (0) 
by the originator of the PDU and may be set to one (1) 
by any intermediate system which processes the PDU to 
indicate that it is experiencing congestion. The criteria 
for determining when this action is to be taken are a 
local matter. 



NOTE — The Record Route function is intended 
to be used in the diagnosis of subnetwork problems 
and/or to provide a return path that could be used 
as a source route in a subsequent PDU. 



6.16 Quality of Service 
function 



Maintenance 



The Quality of Service Maintenance function provides 
information to network-entities in intermediate systems 
which may be used to make routeing decisions where 
such decisions affect the overall QoS provided to NS 
users. This information is conveyed to intermediate sys- 
tem network-entities in a parameter in the options part 
of the PDU header. 

In those instances where the QoS requested cannot be 
maintained t intermediate system network-entities shall 
attempt to deliver the PDU at a QoS different from the 
QoS requested. Intermediate system network-entities do 
not necessarily provide a notification of failure to meet 
the requested Quality of Service. 



NOTE — Congestion typically corresponds to 
unavailability of buffer space to maintain output 
queues. An appropriate policy for indicating con- 
gestion may be based upon the depth of the output 
queue selected for a PDU (according to its destina- 
tion address or other routeing information). When 
the depth of a particular output queue exceeds a 
certain proportion of the depth of that queue, an 
intermediate system will start to discard PDUs. 
The intermediate system will set the Congestion 
Experienced flag in the next PDU to be forwarded 
and may continue to do so until the condition is 
alleviated. 



6,19 Classification of functions 

Implementations are not required to support all of the 
functions described in 6.1 through 6.18. Functions are 
divided into three categories: 

Type 1: These functions shall be supported. 

Type 2: These functions may or may not be supported. 
If an implementation does not support a Type 2 
function and the function is selected in a PDU, then 
that PDU shall be discarded and an Error Report 



13 



IS 13611 : 
130 8473 



1993 
1988 



PDU shall be generated and forwarded to the origi- 
nating network-entity, providing that the Error Re- 
port flag is set and the conditions of 6.10.4 are sat- 
isfied. 
Type 3: These functions may or may not be supported. 
If an implementation does not support a Type 3 
function and the function is selected in a PDU, then 
the function is not performed and the PDU is pro- 
cessed exactly as though the function had not been 
selected. The protocol data unit shall not be dis- 
carded for this reason. 

Table 4 shows how the functions arc divided into these 

three categories. 



7 Structure and Encoding of 
PDUs 

7.1 Structure 

All Protocol Data Units shall contain an integral num- 
ber of octets. The octets in a PDU are numbered start- 
ing from one (1) and increasing in the order in which 
they are submitted to the underlying service. The bits 
in an octet are numbered from one (1) to eight (8), where 
bit one (1) is the low-order (least significant) bit. 

When consecutive octets are used to represent a bi- 
nary number, the lower-numbered octet has the most 
significant value. 

Any implementation supporting this protocol is re- 
quired to state in its specification the way in which 
octets are transferred, using the terms "most significant 
bit" and "least significant bit". The PDUs of this pro- 
tocol are defined using the terms "most significant bit" 
and "least significant bit". 

NOTE — When the encoding of a PDUis repre- 
sented using a diagram in this Clause, the following 
representation is used: 

a) octets are shown with the lowest numbered 
octet to the left, higher-numbered octets be- 
ing further to the right; 

b) within an octet, bits are shown with bit eight 
(8) to the left and bit one (1) to the right. 

PDUs shall contain, in the following order: 

a) the fixed part; 

b) the address part; 

c) the segmentation part, if present; 

d) the Options part, if present; and 
c) the Data part, if.prcsent. 

The structure is illustrated in figure 2. 



Part 



Fixed Part 



Address Part 



Segmentation Part 



Options Part 



Data 



Described in 
Clause 7.2 

Clause 7.3 

Clause 7.4 

Clause 7.5 

Clause 7.6 



Figure 2 - PDU Structure 
7-2 Fixed Part 

7.2.1 General 

The fixed part has the format illustrated in figure 3. 



Octet 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6,7 
8,9 



Network Layer Protocol Identifier 



~ Length Indicator 

Version/ Protocol Id Extension 
Lifetime 



SP[MS|E/R| Type" 

Segment Length 

Checksum 



Figure 3 - PDU Header - Fixed Part 



7.2.2 Network Layer Protocol Identifier 

The value of this field is set to binary 1000 0001 to 
identify this Network Layer protocol as ISO 8473. The 
value, of this field is set to binary 0000 0000 to identify 
the Inactive Network Layer protocol subset. 



7.2.3 Length Indicator 

The length is indicated by a binary number, with a max- 
imum value of 254 (nil 1110). The length indicated is 
the length in octets of the header, as described in 7.1. 
The value 255 (1111 1111) is reserved for possible future 
extensions. 

NOTE — The rulfes for forwarding and segmenta- 
tion guarantee that the header length is the same 
for all segments (Derived PDUs) of the Initial PDU, 
and is the same as the header length of the Initial 
PDU. The size of a PDU header will not change 
due to the operation of any protocol function. 



14 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473: 1988 



Table 4 - Categorization of Protocol functions 





Pull 


Non 


Inactive 


Function 


Protocol 


Segmenting 
Subset 


Subset 


PDU Composition 




1 


1 


PDU Decomposition 




1 


1 


Header Format Analysis 




1 


1 


PDU Lifetime Control 




1 


N/A 


Route PDU 




1 


N/A 


Forward PDU 




1 


N/A 


Segment PDU 




N/A 


N/A 


Reassemble PDU 




N/A 


N/A 


Discard PDU 




1 


N/A 


Error Reporting 




1 


N/A 


Header Error Detection 




1 


N/A 


Security 


2 


2 


N/A 


Complete Source Routeing 


2 


2 


N/A 


Complete Route Recording 


2 


2 


N/A 


Partial Source Routeing 


3 


3 


N/A 


Partial Route Recording 


3 


3 


N/A 


Priority 


3 


3 


N/A 


QoS Maintenance 


3 


3 


N/A 


Congestion Notification 


3 


3 


N/A 


Padding 


3 


3 


N/A 



NOTES 

1) While the Error Reporting and Header Error Detection func- 
tions shall be provided, they are invoked only when selected by 
the originating network-entity. 

2) The rationale for the inclusion of type 3 functions is that in 
the case of some functions it is more important to forward the 
PDUs between intermediate systems or deliver them to an end- 
system than it is to support the functions. Type 3 functions 
should be used in those cases where they are of an advisory 
nature; they cannot cause a PDU to be discarded when they 
are not supported. 



15 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



7.2.4 Version/Protocol Identifier Extension 

The value of this field is binary 0000 0001, which iden- 
tifies the standard Version 1 of ISO 8473. 



7.2.5 PDU Lifetime 

The PDU Lifetime field is encoded as a binary number 
representing the remaining lifetime of the PDU, in units 
of 500 milliseconds. 



7.2.6 Flags 

7.2.6.1 Segmentation Permitted 

The Segmentation Permitted flag indicates whether seg- 
mentation is permitted. Its value is determined by the 
originator of the PDU and cannot be changed by any 
other network-entity for the lifetime of the Initial PDU 
and any Derived PDUs. 

A value of one (1) indicates that segmentation is per- 
mitted. A value of tero (0) indicates that segmentation 
is not permitted. When the value of zero is selected, 
the segmentation part of the PDU header is not present, 
and the value of the Segment Length field gives the total 
length of the PDU (see 7.2.8 and 7.4.3). 



7.2.6.2 More Segments 

The More Segments flag indicated whether or not the 
data part of this PDU contains (as its last octet) the 
last octet of the User Data in the NSDU. When the 
More Segments flag is set to one (1), segmentation has 
occurred and the last octet of the NSDU is not contained 
in this PDU. The More Segments flag cannot be set to 
one (1) if the Segmentation Permitted flag is not seA to 
one (1). 

When the More Segments flag is set to zero (0), the 
last octet of the Data Part of the PDU is the last octet 
of the NSDU. 



7.2.6.3 Error Report 

When the Error Report flag is set to one, the rules in 
6.10 arc used to determine whether to generate an Error 
Report PDU if it is necessary to discard this Data PDU. 

When the Error Report flag is set to zero, discard of 
the Data PDU will not cause the generation of an Error 
Report PDU. 

7.2.7 Type Code 

The Type Code field identifies the type of the protocol 
data unit. Allowed values are given in table 5. 



Table 5 - PDU Type Codes 
PDU Type Type Code 





Bits 5 4 3 2 1 


DTPDU 


1110 


ER PDU 


1 



7.2.8 PDU Segment Length 

The Segment Length field specifies the entire length,, 
in octets, of the PDU, including both header and data 
(if present). When the full protocol is employed and a 
PDU is not segmented, the value of this field is identical 
to the value of the Total Length field located in the 
Segmentation Part of the header. 

When the non-segmenting protocol subset is em- 
ployed, no segmentation part is present in the header. 
In this case, the Segment Length field specifies the en- 
tire length of the Initial PDU, including both header and 
data (if present). 

The Segment Length field is not changed for the life- 
time of the PDU. 



7.2.9 PDU Checksum 

The checksum is computed on the entire PDU header. 
For the Data PDU, this includes the segmentation and 
options parts (if present). For the Error Report PDU, 
this includes the reason for discard field as well. 

A checksum value of zero is reserved to indicate that 
the checksum is to be ignored. The operation of the 
PDU Header Error Detection function (see 6.11) ensures 
that the value zero does not represent a valid checksum. 
A non-zero value indicates that the checksum shall be 
processed. 



7.3 Address Part 

7.3.1 General 

The Address part immediately follows the fixed part of 
the PDU header. The address part is illustrated in figure 

7.3.1.1 Destination and Source Addresses 

The Destination and Source addresses used by this pro- 
tocol arc Network-Service Access Point addresses as de- 
fined in ISO 8348/Add.2. 

The Destination and Source Addresses are of variable 
length. The Destination and Source Address fields are 
encoded as Network Protocol Address Information using 



16 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



Destination Address Length Indicatoi 



Destination Address 



Source Address Length Indicator 



Source Address 



Octet 
10 
11 



m- 1 

m 
m+ 1 

n- 1 



Figure 4 - PDU Header - Address Part 



Data Unit Identifier 
Segment Offset 



Total Length 



Octet 
n, n 4- 1 

n + 2, n -I- 3 
n -I- 4,n-l- 5 



Figure 6 - PDU Header - Segmentation Part 



may be correctly reassembled. The Data Unit Identifier 
size is two octets. 



the Preferred Binary Encoding defined in 8.3.1 of ISO 
8348/Add.2. 

The Destination Address Length Indicator field spec; 
ifies the length of the Destination Address in octets. 
The Destination Address field follows the Destination 
Address Length Indicator field. 

The Source Address Length Indicator field specifies 
the length of the Source Address in octets. The Source 
Address Length Indicator field follows the Destination 
Address field. The Source Address field follows the 
Source Address Length Indicator field. 

Each address parameter is encoded as illustrated in 
figure 5: 



Octet 


Address parameter Length Indicator 


n 


(e.g., 'm') 


Octets 




n+ 1 


Address Parameter Value 


to 




n-^ m 





Figure 5 - Address Parameters 



7.4.2 Segment Offset 

For each Derived PDU, the Segment Offset field spec- 
ifies the relative position of the segment contained in 
the Data Part of the Derived PDU with respect to the 
start of the Data Part of the Initial PDU. The offset 
is measured in units of octets. The offset of the first 
segment (and hence, the Initial PDU) is zero; an unseg- 
mented (Initial) PDU has a segment offset value of zero 
(0). The value of this field shall be a multiple of eight 
(8). 



7.4.3 PDU Total Length 

The Total Length field specifies the entire length of the 
Initial PDU in octets, including both the header and 
data. This field is not changed for the lifetime of the 
Initial PDU (and hence, its Derived PDUs). 



7.5 Options Part 

7.5.1 General 

The options part of the PDU header is illustrated in 
figure 7. 



7 A Segmentation Part 

If the Segmentation Permitted Flag in the Fixed Part of 
the PDU Header (see 7.2.6.1) is set to one, the segmen- 
tation part of the header, illustrated in figure 6, shall be 
present. 

If the Segmentation Permitted flag is set to zero, the 
segmentation part is not present (the non*segmenting 
protocol subset is in use). 

7.4*1 Data Unit Identifier 

Th^Data Unit Identifier identifies an Initial PDU (and 
hence, its Derived PDUs) so that a segmented data unit 



Octet 

"I n-h6 



Options 



Figure 7 - PDU Header - Options Part 



If the options part is present, it may contain one or 
more parameters. The number of parameters that may 
be contained in the options part is constrained by the 
length of the options part, which is determined by the 
following formula: 



17 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



Options part length — PDU Header Length 
~~ (length of fixed part + length of address part 
+ length of segmentation part) 

and by the length of the individual optional parameters. 

Parameters defined in the options part may appear 
in any order. Duplication of options is not permitted. 
Receipt of a Protocol Data Unit with a duplicated op- 
tion should be treated as a protocol error. The rules 
governing the treatment of protocol errors are described 
in 6.10, Error Reporting function. 

The encoding of parameters contained within the op- 
tions part of the PDU header is illustrated in figure 8: 



Parameter Code: 1100 1100 
Parameter Length: variable 
Parameter Value: anv value is allowed 



7.5.3 Security 

This parameter allows a unique and unambiguous se- 
curity level to be assigned to a protocol data unit (see 
6.13). 

Parameter Code: 1100 0101 
Parameter Length: variable 

Parameter Value: The high order two bits of the first 
octet specify the Security Format Code, where: 



Octets 



n 


Parameter Code 


u+ 1 


Parameter Length (e.g. m) 


n + 2 

to 

n -h m+ 1 


Parameter Value 



Figure 8 - Encoding of Option Parameters 



The Parameter Code field is encoded in binary and 
provides for a maximum of 255 different parameters. 
No parameter code uses bits 8 and 7 with the value 00, 
so the actual maximum number of parameters is lower. 
A parameter code of 255 (binary 1111 1111) is reserved 
for possible future extensions. 

The parameter length field indicates the length, in 
octets, of the Parameter Value Held. The length is indi- 
cated by a positive binary number, ttz, with a theoretical 
maximum value of 254. The practical maximum value 
of m is lower. For example, in the case of a single pa- 
rameter contained within the options part, two octets 
are required for the parameter code and the parameter 
length indicators. Thus, the value of m is limited to: 

m — 25*2 - ( length of fixed part -h length 
of address part + length of segmentation part) 

Accordingly, for each successive parameter the maxi- 
mum value of m decreases. 

The parameter- value field contains the value of the 
parameter identified in the parameter code field. 

The following parameters are permitted in the opti 

part. 



tions 



7.5.2 Padding 

The padding parameter is used to lengthen the PDU 
header to a convenient size (see 6.12). 



Securitv 


Type of Security Field: 


Format Code 




00 


Reserved 


01 


Source Address Specific 


10 


Destination Address Specific 


11 


Globally Unique 



The rest of the first octet is reserved and shall be 
zero. The remainder of the Parameter Value field 
specifies the security level as described in the fol- 
lowing subclauses. 



7.5.3.1 Source Address Specific 

The Security Format Code value of binary "OT' indi- 
cates that the remaining octets of the parameter value 
field specify a security level which is unique and unam- 
biguous in the context of the security classification sys- 
tem employed by the authority responsible for assigning 
the source NSAP Address. 



7.5.3.2 Destination Address Specific 

The Security Format Code value of binary "10" indi- 
cates that the remaining octets of the parameter value 
field specify a security level which is unique and unam- 
biguous in the context of the security classification svs- 
tem employed by the authority responsible for assigning 
the destination NSAP Address. 



7.5.3.3 Globally Unique Security 

The Security Format Code value of binary "IT' indi- 
cates that the remaining octets of the parameter value 
field specify a globally unique and unambiguous securitv 
level. This security classification system is not specified 
in this Standard. 



18 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



7, 5,4 Source Routeing 

The source routeing parameter specifies, either com- 
pletely or partially, the route to be taken from Source 
Network Address to Destination Network Address (see 
6-14). 

Parameter Code: 1100 1000 

Parameter Length: variable 

Parameter Value; 2 octets of control information fol- 
lowed by a concatenation of network-entity title en- 
tries ordered from source to destination. 



The third octet begins the network-entity title list. 
The list consists of variable length network-entity title 
entries. The first octet of^ach entry gives the length of 
the network-entity title comprising the remainder of the 
entry. Network-entity title entries are always added to 
the end of the list. 

NOTE ~ The length of the Record Route pa- 
rameter is determined by the originator of the PDU 
and is not changed during the lifetime of the PDU; 
hence, the operation of the Record Route function 
does not affect the length of the header. 



The first octet of the parameter value is the type code, 
and has the following significance: 

0000 0000 partial source routeing 
0000 0001 complete source routeing 

<all other values reserved> 

The second octet indicates the octet offset of the next 
network-entity title entry to be processed in the list. It 
is relative to the start of the parameter, such that a 
value of three (3) indicates that the next network-entity 
title entry begins immediately Tifter this control octet. 
Successive octets are indicated by correspondingly larger 
values of this indicator. 

The third octet begins the network-entity title list. 
The list consists of variable length network-entity title 
entries. The first octet of each entry gives the length of 
the network-entity title which comprises the remainder 
of the entry. 

7,5.5 Recording of Route 

The recording of route parameter identifies the interme- 
diate systems traversed by the PDU (see 6.15). 

Parameter Code: 1100 1011 

Parameter Length: variable 

Parameter Value; 2 octets of control information fol- 
lowed by a concatenation of network-entity title en- 
tries ordered from source to destination. 

The first octet of the parameter value is the type code, 
and has the following significance: 

0000 0000 Partial Recording of Route 

in progress 
0000 0001 Complete Recording of Route 
in progress 

<all other values reserved> 
The second octet identifies the first octet not currently 
used for a recorded network-entity title, and therefore 
also the end of the list. It is encoded relative to the 
start of the parameter value, such that a value of three 
(3) indicates that no network-entity titles have yet been 
recorded. A value of all ones is used to indicate that 
route recording has been terminated. 



7.5.6 Quality of Service Maintenance 

The Quality of Service Maintenance parameter conveys 
information about the quality of service requested by 
the originating Network-Service user. 

Network-entities in intermediate systems may (but 
are not required to) make use of this information as an 
aid in selecting a route when more than one route sat- 
isfying other routeing criteria is available and the avail- 
able routes are known to differ with respect to Quality 
of Service (see 6.16). 

Parameter Code: 1100 0011 
Parameter Length: variable 

Parameter Value: The high order two bits of the first 
octet specify the QoS Format Code, where: 



QoS Format 

Code 


Type of QoS 
Field 


00 
01 
10 
11 


Reserved 

Source Address Specific 
Destination Address Specific 
Globally Unique 



The rest of the first octet is reserved for use by the 
Globally Unique QoS Format, as described in 7.5.6.3. If 
any other QoS format code is selected, bits 6-1 of the 
first octet shall be zero. The remainder of the Parameter 
Value field specifies the QoS as described in the following 
Clauses. 

7.5.6.1 Source Address Specific 

The QoS Format Code value of binary "01" indicates 
that the remaining octets of the parameter value field 
specify a QoS which is unique and unambiguous in the 
context of the QoS Maintenance system employed by 
the authority responsible for assigning the source NSAP 
Address. 

7.5.6.2 Destination Address Specific 

The QoS Format Code value of binary "10" indicates 
that the remaining octets of the parameter value field 



19 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



specify a QoS which is unique and unambiguous in the 
context of the QoS Maintenance system employed by 
the authority responsible for assigning the destination 
NSAP Address. 



7.5.6.3 Globally Unique QoS 

The QoS Format Code value of binary "11" indicates 
that the remainder of the parameter value field specifies 
a globally unique QoS Maintenance field. When the 
globally unique QoS Maintenance function is employed, 
the parameter value field shall have a total length of one 
octet, which is assigned the following values: 



Bits 


Usage 


8 and 7 


QoS Format Code of binary "11" 


6 


Reserved 


5 


sequencing vs. transit delay 


4 


congestion experienced 


3 


transit delay vs. cost 


2 


residual error probability vs. 




transit delay 


1 


residual error probability vs. cost 



Bit 5 is set to one to indicate that, where possible, 
routeing decisions should favour sending all PDUs to the 
specified destination NSAP address over a single path 
(in order to maintain sequence) over minimizing transit 
delay. A value of zero (0) indicates that, where possible, 
routeing decisions should favour low transit delay over 
sequence preservation. 

Bit 4 is set to zero by the network-entity which origi- 
nates the protocol data unit. It is set to one by an inter- 
mediate system to indicate that this PDU has visited a 
congested intermediate system, anct appropriate action 
should be taken by the destination network-entity. Once 
the congestion experienced bit is set by an intermediate 
system, it may not be reset by any intermediate system 
traversed by the PDU further along the path towards 
the destination. 

Bit 3 is set to one to indicate that, where possible, 
routeing decisions should favour low transit delay over 
low^ cost, A value of indicates that routeing decisions 
should favour low cost over low transit delay. 

Bit 2 set to one to indicate that, where possible, route- 
ing ^decisions should favour low residual error probabil- 
ity over low transit delay. A value of zero indicates that 
routeing decisions should favour low transit delay over 
low residual error probability. 

Bit 1 is set to one to indicate that, where possible, 
routeing decisions should favour low residual error prob- 
ability over low cost. A value of indicates that routeing 
decisions should favour low cost over low residual error 
probability. 



7.5.7 Priority 

The value of the Priority parameter indicates the rel- 
ative priority of the protocol data unit. Intermediate 
systems that support this option shall make use of this 
information in routeing and in ordering PDUs for trans- 
mission see 6.17). 

Parameter Code: 1100 1101 
Parameter Length: 1 octet 
Parameter Value: 

0000 0000 — Normal (Default) 

through 

0000 1110 — Highest 

<all other values reserved> 



The values 0000 0001 through 0000 1110 are to be 
used for higher priority protocol data units. If an inter- 
mediate system does not support this option, all PDUs 
shall be treated as if the field had the value 0000 0000. 



7.6 Data Part 

The Data Part of the PDU consists of an ordered multi- 
ple of octets, which is identical to the same ordered mul- 
tiple of octets specified for the NS-Uscrdata parameter 
of the N-UNITDATA Request and Indication primitives. 
The Data Part is illustrated in figure 9: 



Octet 



Data 



1 P+1 



Figure 9 - PDU Header - Data Part 

7.7 Data (DT) PDU 
7,7.1 Structure 

The DT PDU has the format illustrated in figure 10. 



.7.1.1 Fixed Part 




1) 


Network Layer Protocol Identifier 


See 7.2.2 


2) 
3) 
4) 


Length Indicator 
Version/Protocol Id Extension 
Lifetime 


See 7.2.3 
See 7.2.4 
See 7.2.5 


5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 


SP, MS, E/R 
Type Code 
Segment Length 
Checksum 


See 7.2.6 
See 7.2.7 
See 7.2.8 
See 7.2.9 



20 



1813611:1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



7.7.1.2 Addresses 

See 7.3. 

7.7.1.3 Segmentation 

See 7.4. 

7.7.1.4 Options 

See 7.5. 





Octet 


Network Layer Protocol Identifier 


1 


Length Indicator 


2 


Version/ Protocol Id Extension 


3 


Lifetime 


4 


SP 1 MS 1 E/R 1 Type 


5 


Segment Length 


6,7 


Checksum 


8,9 


Destination Address Length Indicator 


10 


Destination Address : 


11 
m- 1 


Source Address Length Indicator 


m 


Source Address : 


m+ 1 
n-1 


Data Unit Identifier 


n,n+ 1 


Segment Oflfset 


n + 2,rH-3 


Total Length 


?i + 4,n-f 5 


Options 


P 


Data 


p+1 
z 



7.7.1.5 Data 

See 7.6. 



Figure 10 - DT PDU 




7.8 Inactive Network Layer Protocol 



Octet 

1 
2 



2 -n 



Figure 11 - Inactive Network Layer Protocol 



7.8.1 Network Layer Protocol Identifier 

The value of the Network Layer Protocol Identifier field 
is binary sero (0000 0000). 



7.8.2 Data Part 

The Data Part may contain any number of octets up 
to one less than the maximum number that can be 
placed in the SN-Userdata parameter of the underlying 
SN-UNITDATA primitive. Therefore, the Inactive Net- 
work Layer protocol can be used only when the length of 
the NS-Userdata parameter in the N-UNITDATA primi- 
tive is constrained to be less than or equal to the value 
of the length of the SN-Userdata parameter minus one 
(see 7,6). 



7.9 Error Report PDU (ER) 

7.0.1 Structure 

The format of the Error Report PDU is illustrated in 
figure 12. 



21 



tS 13611: 1093 
180 8473:1988 



7.9.1.1 Fixed Part 

The fixed part of the Error Report Protocol Data Unit is 
composed in the same way as a new (Initial) Data PDU. 
Table 6 provides references to previous clauses describ- 
ing the encoding of the fields comprising the fixed part. 



Table 6 - Error Report PDU: Fixed Part Fields 





Octet 


Network Layer Protocol Identifier 


1 


Length Indicator 


2 


Version /Protocol Id Extension 


3 


Lifetime 


4 


SP- MS= Reserved Type 


5 


Segment Length 


6,7 


Checksum 


8,9 


Destination Address Length Indicator 


10 


: Destination Address : 


11 
m- 1 


Source Address Length Indicator 


m 


: Source Address : 


m-f 1 
n- 1 


Options 


n 

p-i 


Reason for Discard 


p 

q-l 


Error Report Data Part 


9 

z 



Figure 12 - Error Report PDU 



Field 


See Clause 


Network Layer Protocol Identifier 


7.2.2 


Length Indicator 


7,2.3 


Version/Protocol Id Extension 


7.2.4 


Lifetime 


7.2.5 


SP, MS, E/R (Always set to zero) 


6.10 


Type Code 


7.2.7 


Segment Length 


7.2.8 


Checksum 


7.2.9 



7.9.1.2 Addresses 

The Destination Address specifies the network-entity ti- 
tle of the originator of the discarded PDU. The Source 
Address specifies the title of the intermediate-system or 
end-system network-entity initiating the Error Report 
PDU (see 7.3). 

7.9.1.3 Options 

See 7,5. 

7.9.1.4 Reason for Discard 

This parameter is valid only for the Error Report PDU. 

Parameter Code: 1100 0001 

Parameter Length; two octets 

Parameter Value: type of error encoded m binary 

The parameter values are listed in table 7. 

The first octet of the parameter value contains an er- 
ror type code. If the error in the discarded Data PDU 
can be localized to a particular field, the number of the 
first octet of that field is stored in the second octet of 
the reason for discard parameter field.. If the error can- 
not be localized to a particular field, or if the error is 
a checksum error, then the value z^ro is stored in the 
second octet of the reason for discard parameter field. 



7.9.1.5 Error Report Data Part 

This field contains the entire header of the discarded 
Data PDU, and may contain none, some, or all of the 
Data Part of the discarded PDU. 



22 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



Table 7 - Reason for Discard Parameter Values 



Parameter 


Class of 


Meaning 


Value 


Error 




0000 


0000 




Reason not specified 




0001 




Protocol Procedure Error 




0010 




Incorrect Checksum 




0011 


General 


PDU Discarded due to Congestion 




0100 




Header Syntax Error (cannot be parsed) 




0101 




Segmentation needed but not permitted 




Olio 




Incomplete PDU Received 




0111 




Duplicate Option 


1000 


0000 


Address 


Destination Address Unreachable 




0001 




Destination Address Unknown 


1001 


0000 




Unspecified Source Routeing Error 




0001 


Source 


Syntax Error in Source Routeing Field 




0010 


Routeing 


Unknown Address in Source Routeing Field 




0011 




Path not Acceptable 


1010 


0000 


Lifetime 


Lifetime Expired while Data Unit in Transit 




0001 




Lifetime Expired during Reassembly 


1011 


0000 




Unsupported Option not Specified 




0001 


PDU 


Unsupported Protocol Version 




0010 


Discarded 


Unsupported Security Option 




0011 




Unsupported Source Routeing Option 




0100 




Unsupported Recording of Route Option 


1100 


0000 


Reassembly 


Reassembly Interference 



8 Provision of the Underlying 
Service 



Subnetwork Dependent Convergence functions may be 
performed to provide an underlying connectionless- 
mode service w^hen a real subnetwork does not inher- 
ently provide the underlying connectionless-mode ser- 
vice assumed by the protocol. If a subnetwoilc inher- 
ently provides a connection-mode service^ a Subnet- 
work Dependent Convergence function provides a map- 
ping into the required underlying connectionless-mode 
service. Subnetwork Dependent Convergence functions 
may also be required in those cases where functions as- 
sumed from the underlying service are not performed. 
In some cases, this may require the operation of an 
explicit protocol (i.e., a protocol involving explicit ex- 
changes of protocol control information between peer 
network-entities) in the Subnetwork Dependent Conver- 
gence protocol (SNDCP) role. However, there may also 
be cases where the functionality required to fulfill the 
SNDCP role consists simply of a set of rules for ma- 
nipulating the underlying service (without the exchange 
of Protocol Control Information between peer network- 
entities). 



8.1 Subnetwork Points of Attachment 

The source and destination address parameters in the 
SN-UNITDATA primitive specify the points of attach- 
ment to a public or private subnetwork(s). Subnetwork 
Point of Attachment addresses (SNPAs) are defined by 
each individual subnetwork authority. The syntax and 
semantics of SNPAs are not defined in this International 
Standard. 



8.2 Subnetwork Quality of Service 

Associated with each connectionless-mode transmission, 
certain measures of Quality of Service are requested 
when the SN-UNITDATA primitive action is initiated. 
These requested measures (or parameter values and op- 
tions) are based on a priori knowledge of the service 
available from the subnetwork. Knowledge of the na- 
ture and type of service available is typically obtained 
prior to an invocation of the underlying connectionless- 
mode service. 

The Quality of Service parameters identified for the 
underlying connectionless-mode service may in some cir- 
cumstances be directly derivable from or mappable onto 
those identified in the connectionless-mode Network- 
Service. The following parameters as defined in ISO 
8348/Add.l may be employed: 



23 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



a) Transit delay; 

b) protection against unauthorized access; 

c) cost determinants; and 

d) residual error probability. 

NOTE — For those real subnetworks which do 
not inherently provide Quality of Service as a pa- 
rameter, it is a local matter as to how the seman- 
tics of the service requested might be preserved. 
In particular^ there may be instances in which the 
Quality of Service requested cannot be maintained. 
In such circumstances, an attempt shall be made 
to deliver the protocol data unit at whatever Qual- 
ity of Service is available. 

In general, either the SWDCF or the subnetwork itself 
may perform functions associated with specific QoS re- 
quests. These functions may be optionally selected by 
the CLNP. The relevant subnetwork QoS parameters a:rc 
classified as follows: 

a) those QoS parameters for which the SNDCF or the 
subnetwork itself performs functions expressly de- 
signed to provide information for the Route PDU 
function of the CLIiP; 

b) those QoS parameters for which the SNDCF or the 
subnetwork itself performs functions expressly de- 
signed to provide the desired QoS; and 

c) those QoS parameters for which the SNDCF or the 
subnetwork itself may be called upon to perform 
either of the functions (a) or (b) above. 

The determination of values for these QoS parameters 
is provided in the following sub-clauses. 

8.2,1 Transit delay 

Transit delay is the elapsed time between an 
SN~UN1TDATA Request and the corresponding SN- 
UNITDATA Indication. Elapsed time values ar< cal- 
culated on SNSDUs that are successfully transmitted. 
Successful transniission of an SNSDU is defined to oc- 
cur when an SNSDU transmitted by the sending SNDCF 
is delivered to the intended destination SNDCF. Transit 
delay is based on an SNSDU size of 512 octets, and is 
specified in units of 500 ms. 

Transit delay is determined by the SNDCF prior to 
the processing of any user data by the subnetwork. The 
mechanism whereby transit delay information is passed 
to the Route PDU function of the CLNP is a local matter. 
Transit delay may be either measured or estimated. The 
SNDCFs described herein do not provide any means for 
measuring or estimatirig Transit delay beyond any such 
means provided by the underlying subnetwork. 

NOTES 



1) If Transit delay is to be measured, an 
SNDCP designed to bound the transit time 
of SNSDUs that cross the subnetwork should 
be used prior to the processing of any data 
requests to determine the actual delay. 
Transit delay within a given subnetwork may 
vary. Where Transit delay is measuTed, it 
may be necessary to periodically repeat the 
measurement process in order to maintain ac- 
curate measures in any routeing information 
maintained by the network-entity. 

2) If no better measures are available, Tran- 
sit delay may be estimated by sending an 
SNSDU (via some uniquely identified proto- 
col data unit which prompts a response) and 
by measuring the elapsed time between the 
SN-UNITDATA requests and the correspond- 
ing SN-UNITDATA indications. This results 
in an overestimate of delay such that the 
CLNP may be expected to operate correctly. 
If Transit delay is estimated, it is preferred 
that estimates be high rather than low in or- 
der that uncertainties in transit delay do not 
prevent the CLNP from discarding protocol 
data units whose intended lifetime has ex- 
pired. 

3) Subnetworks which make use of ISO 8208 
have the capability to dynamically deter- 
mine whether the Transit delay available at 
connection establishment will satisfy the re- 
quested Transit delay. The SNDCF may use 
the Transit delay Selection/Indication and 
the End-to-End Transit delay Negotiation 
Facilities of the X.25 PLP to provide this 
dynamic capability. Transit delay negotia- 
tion by the SNDCF or the SNAcP machine is 
transparent to the CLNP machine. 

4) In t|ie case of subnetworks which make use 
of ISO 8208, the Transit delay value provided 
to the CLNP shall take into consideration any 
processing or queueing delay incurred as a re- 
sult of an attempt by the SNDCF to establish 
a virtual circuit. 



8.2.2 Protection from Unauthorized Access 

No recommendation is made relating to how to provide 
protection against passive monitoring, modification, re- 
play, addition, or deletion of 5N-Uscrdata. 

8.2.3 Residual Error Probability 

Residual Error Probability is estimated as the ratio of 
lost, duplicated, or incorrectly delivered SNSDUs to to- 
tal SNSDUs transmitted by the SNDCF during a mea- 
surement period. The mechanism whereby Residual Er- 
ror Probability is passed to the Route PDU function of 
the CLNP is a local matter. 



24 



IS 13611 :19Q3 
180 8473: 1988 



Residual Error Probability is known by the SNOCF 
prior to the processing of any user data by the subnet- 
work either as a result of the SNDCF having maintained 
a history of measures of Residual Error Probability or 
as a result of information obtained from the provider of 
the underlying service. 

NOTE — For subnetworks which provide a 
connection-mode service, Residual Error Probabil- 
itv is determined on an individual connection ba- 



a particular PDU are known to be large enough that 
segmentation is not required, then the Non-segmenting 
protocol subset may be used. 

Data received from a subnetwork with protocol iden- 
tification for ISO 8473 (first octet = 1000 0001) shall be 
processed according to ISO 8473. 

NOTE — Data with other protocol identifica- 
tion should be ignored, since it may have been sent 
by an implementation supporting additional pro- 
tocols intended for use with ISO 8473. 



8.2.4 Cost Determinants 

The attempt to satisfy the constraints imposed by the 
NS User via the Cost Determinants Quality of Service 
parameter is performed by the Route PDU function in- 
voked by the CLNP. Where pertinent, information relat- 
ing to tarifF(8) atsessed on a per packet or per connection 
basis is passed to the Route PDU function of the CLNP. 
The mechanism by which this is accom|)lished is a local 
matter. 

NOTE — The Route PDU function invoked by 
the CLNP is likely to be required to perform the 
following cost assessments. If: 

a) there is to be no incrememtal cost incurred 
in the processing of the SNSDU submitted, 
and ther^ is a tariff assessed on a per packet 

basis; 

b) there is to be no additional cost incurred, and 
no connection is currently available to the 
specified destination, and a tariff is assessed 
on a per connection basis by the subnetwork 
(e.g. for virtual circuit setup, holding time of 
the virtual circuity etc.); or 

c) if a maximum acceptable cost has been spec- 
ified for the processing of the NSDU and that 
cost is likely to be exceeded, 

then the Route PDU function shall return a result 
indicating that the CLNP should attempt to deliver 
the NSDU via sorne alternate route. If an alternate 
route cannot be found, a local function may be 
invoked to notify the NS User of the inability of 
the NS Provider to deliver this NSDU (and possibly 
subsequent NSDUs) under the stated constraint. 

8.3 Subnetwork User Data 

The SN-Userdata is an ordered multiple of octets, and is 
transferred transparently between the specified subnet- 
work points of attachment. 

The underlying service assumed by the CLNP is re- 
quired to suppoii a service data unit size of at least 512 
octets. 

If the minimiim service data unit sizes supported by 
all of the subnetworks involved in the transmission of 



8.4 Subnetwork Dependent Conver- 
gence functions 

8,4.1 General model 

The general model for providing the underlying ser- 
vice assumed by the protocol in conjunction with a real 
subnetwork tha.t uses a connectionless subnetwork ac- 
cess protocol is as follows. The generation of an SN- 
UNITDATA Request by the CLNP results in the gen- 
eration of a corresponding subnetwork-specific UNIT- 
DATA request by the Subnetwork Dependent Conver- 
gence function. The receipt of a subnetwork-specific 
UNITDATA indication associated with delivery of a 
connectionless data unit to its destination causes the 
SNDCF to generate an SN-UN1TDATA Indication to the 
CLNP. 

The general model for providing the underlying ser- 
vice assumed by the CLNP in conjunction with a real 
subnetwork that uses a connection-mode subnetwork 
access protocol is as follows. The generation of an 
SN-UNITDATA Request by the CLNP causes a con- 
nection (logical channel, logical link, or the equiva- 
lent) to be made available for the transmission of SN- 
Userdata. If a connection cannot be made available, 
the SN-UNITDATA Request is discarded. The receipt 
of subnetwork-specific PDUs containing SN-Userdata 
causes the SNDCF to generate an SN-UNITDATA Indi- 
cation to the CLNP. 

Where a real subnetwork is designed to use either 
a connectionless-mode or a connection-mode siihnet- 
work access protocol, the provision of the underlving 
service assumed by the CLNP is achieved bv using the 
connectionless-mode alternative. 

8.4.2 Subnetwork Dependent Convergence 
functions used with ISO 8802-2 Subnet- 
works 

ISO 8802-2 describes two classes of Logical Link 
Control (LLC). Class 1 provides an unacknowledg^'d 
connectionless-mode service onlv. Class 2 provides both 
connectionless-mode and connertion-mode services. Ff^^r 
stations which conform to either of these two classes of 



25 



IS 13611 : 1993 
ISO 8473: 1988 



service, the Unacknowledged connectionless-mode Ser- 
vice is used to provide the underlying service assumed 
by ISO 847a. 

The Una.cknowledged connectionless-mode Service de- 
scribed in iSO 8802-2 is precisely that required by the 
CLNP. This service, with the exception of QoS, is sum- 
marized in table 8. 

Subnetwork Dependent Convergence functions per- 
form a mapping of the Unacknowledged connectionless- 
mode Service provided by a LLC Class 1 or Class 2 
subnetwork onto the underlying service assumed by the 
CLNP. The mapping is as follows. The generation of an 
SN-UNITDATA Request by the CLNP results in a DL- 
UNITDATA Request (as described in ISO 8802-2) being 
generated by the Subnetwork Dependent Convergence 
function. A corresponding DL-UNITDATA Indication 
prompts the SIMDCF to generate an SN-UNITDATA Indi- 
cation to the CLNP. No explicit Subnetwork Dependent 
Convergence protocol control information is exchanged 
between network-entities to provide this mapping of ser- 
vice. 

The addresses used in the SI\I-UNITDATA request and 
indication primitives are the seven-octet LAN station 
addresses described in ISO 8802, consisting of the six- 
octet Medium Access Control (MAC) address plus the 
one-octet LLC Service Access Point address. 



ate the X.121 DTE addresses used by the X.25 subnet- 
work. 

If the X.25 subnetwork does not provide calling DTE 
information, a null SN-Source- Address parameter is sup- 
plied in the SN-UNiTDATA Indication. The SNDCF shall 
include its own DTE address in the "calling DTE" field of 
the X.25 Call Request packet, in the case that the sub- 
network does not include this parameter but permits its 
inclusion by DTEs. 

NOTE — iSome subnetworks which use the X.25 
PLP employ addressing schemes other than X.121. 
The use of addressing schemes other than X.121 
(e.g. CCITT Recommendations E.163 and E.164) 

is not precluded. 

The SN-Userdata parameter carries user data up to 
a maximum size specified by the subnetwork authority. 
The underlying service assumed by ISO 8473 requires 
that a subnetwork be capable of sxipporting a minimum 
service data unit size of 512 octets. 

NOTE — The M-bit may be used In cases where 
an X.25 subnetwork cannot directly support a min- 
imum packet size of 512 octets as well as in situa- 
tions where a service data unit size greater than 
the minimum is required; e.g. where the non- 
segmenting protocol subset is used. 



NOTE — In order to provide the underlying ser- 
vice assumed by ISO 8473, a the underlying ser- 
vice shall be able to support a minimum service 
data unit size of 512 octets. While no SDU size 
Testriclion is imposed by ISO 8802-2, the minimal 
requirement for a MAC is that it be capable of con- 
veying Unnnmbertd Inform a lion (Ul) PDUs con- 
taining 128 octets in the information field. The 
additional constraint is therefore imposed on the 
SNDCF in such circumstances that it be able to 
convey at least 512 octets of user data in Ul PDUs. 



SA^Z Subnetwork Dependent Conver- 

gence functions used with ISO 8208 Sub- 
networks 

The connection-mode service offered by subnetworks 
which use the X.25 Packet Level Protocol defined in 
ISO 8208 is manipulated by the Subnetwork Depen- 
dent Convergence function so that a virtual circuit is 
made available for the transmission of SN-Userdata fol- 
lowing the generation of an SN-UNITDATA Request by 
the CLNP. In general (see 8.4.3.4), no explicit Subnet- 
work I>epcndent Convergence protocol control informa- 
tion i? «3cchanged between peer network-entities during 
the dat\ phase of operation in order to provide this map- 
ping of service. 

The SN*De$tination-Address and SN-Source-Address 
pnrameters in the SN-UNITDATA request and indication 



8.4.3,1 Call Setup Considerations 

The mechanism and timing for opening a virtual circuit 
prior to the transmission of SN-Userdata are a local mat- 
ter. The opening of a virtual circuit may be initiated 
by: 

a) the arrival of an SNSDU to be transmitted over an 
X.25 subnetwork at the time when no suitable vir- 
tual circuit is available; 

b) the local queue of requests waiting for an existing 
virtual circuit reaching a threshold size at which an 
additional virtual circuit shall be made available (if 
possible) to maintain the requested QoS; or 

c) the explicit intervention of system management. 

When it has been determined that a (new) virtual 
circuit must be made available, the calling SNDCF per- 
forms all f\\nctioT\s associated with establishing a vir- 
tual circuit. The called SNDCF performs those opera- 
tions associated with accepting a call, but generates no 
SN-UNITDATA indication until the call setup is com- 
pleted, at which 'time X.25 Data packet(s) may be ex- 
changed. In general, the receipt of X,25 Data packets 
containing SN-Userdata causes the SNDCF to generate 
an SN-UNITDATA indication to the CLNP. X.25 Reset 
packets, if received, have no effect on the operation of 
the SNDCF. The necessary procedures for the correct 
operation of the X.25 PLP are followed. 



26 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



Table 8 - ISO 8802-2 LLC Service primitives 



Primitive 


Parameters 


DL-UNITDATA .Request 


DL-Source- Address, 


.Indication 


DL-Destination- Address, 




DL-Priority, 




DL-Data 



8.4.3.2 Call Clearing Considerations 

The mechanisms for determining when a virtual cir- 
cuit is to be cleared following the transmission of SN- 
Userdata by the SNDCF are local matters. Examples of 
circumstances which would cause the SNDCF to clear a 
virtual circuit are: 

a) the expiration of a timeout period following the 
transmission of one or more PDUs (see clause 
8.4.3.4); 

b) the need to use a specific interface to open an alter- 
nate virtucvl circuit from the local Network-entity 
to a different remote Network-entity; 

c) the explicit intervention of system management; or 

d) a provider-initiated clear of a virtual circuit 

When it has been determined that a virtual circuit 
shall be cleared, the SNDCF performs all functions as- 
sociated with clearing a call. All packets other than 
a Clear Confirm or Clear Indication are ignored. The 
same actions apply to receipt of a Clear Indication. In 
these circumstances, the SNDCF will retain user data 
submitted via SN-UNITDATA requests while attempting 
to establish a new circuit; however, the SNDCF shall dis- 
card the user data if the transit delay indicated to the 
CL NP is likely to be exceeded. 

NOTE — It is not a requirement that virtual 
circuits be dynamically opened or closed for the 
correct operation of the SNDCF herein described. 
The use of permanent virtual circuits (PVCs) or 
the maintenance of virtual circuits in a open stat^ 
from system initialization is not precluded. 

8.4.3.3 Protocol Discrimination 

The first octet of the call user data field of the Call Re- 
quest packet shall be set to the value that indicates that 
the virtual circuit is to be used to provide the underly- 
ing service assumed by ISO 8473. The value is defined 
in 7.2.2. 

8.4.3.4 Timeout Periods 

Timeout periods may be used to determine when a vir- 
tual circuit should be cleared (for example, when a vir- 
tual circuit has been idle for a long period of time) or 



when additional virtual circuits should be opened (for 
example, when there is an excessively long queue of data 
units waiting for the initi<il logical channel). 

Implementations may choose to clear a virtual circuit 
after it has been idle for some period of time. If a timer 
is selected for this purpose, it is used in the following 
manner. When a virtual circuit is made available for 
the transmission of SNSDUs, a timer is initiated with 
a value representing the maximum period of time this 
virtual circuit may remain idle. Each time a data unit 
is transmitted by the underlying service, the timer is 
reset to this initial value. If no data units are queued 
for processing and this timer expires, the virtual circuit 
is cleared. 

The selection ol timeout values is a local matter. 

NOTES 

1) Additional virtual circuits may be opened 
when there is an excessively long quetie of 
data units waiting for the initial logical chan- 
nel. The timeout periods for determining 
when such additional virtual circuits are to 
be cleared may be shorter than the timeout 
period for the initial virtual circuit. (The 
timeout period may also be a fixed period of 
time.) Implementations may choose to close 
all additional virtual circuits if the queue of 
data units to be transmitted reaches some 
threshold (possibly zero), 

2) Timeout periods are selected on the basis of 
economic and implementation-specific crite- 
ria. If there is no duration charge imposed 
by a given subnetwork authority for leaving 
a virtual circuit open, and if there is a charge 
for opening virtual circuits, tlven the timeout 
period may be selected so thgt the virtual cir- 
cuit remains open for a long period of time. 
Timeout periods may alxb vary according to 
the time of day, traffic load (averaged over 
the recent past)j or other factors. 



8.4.3.5 Resolution of Virtual Circuit Collisions 

Two SNDCFs may simultaneously attempt to establish 
virtual circuits to each other. It is desirable to be able to 
detect this and eliminate one virtual circuit while retain- 
ing the other, so as to avoid unnecessary call charges. 



27 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



If the subnetwork supplies the DTE address of the 
calling DTE, it is possible to detect such a collision. A 
collision occurs when an incoming call is received from a 
DTE, while confirmation is still awauted for a previously 
initiated call to the same DTE. 

If the calling DTE address is not supplied by the net- 
work, collisions are not detected. 

A convention is established for determining which vir- 
tual circuit is to be preserved when a collision does oc- 
cur. The convention is based on a comparison of the 
called and calling X.25 DTE addresses. The virtual cir- 
cuit initiated by the SNDCF having the higher DTE ad- 
dress is the one which is retained. 

Upon receipt of an X.25 Call Request packet while 
confirmation of a previously issued Call Request packet 
to the same DTE address is outstanding, an SNDCf shall 
perform the call collision resolution procedure d<^scribed 

in the following steps: 



a) the DTE address of the local SNDCF shall be com- 
pared with that of the remote SNDCF. If the ad- 
dresses are of different length, the shorter is padded 
to the length of the longer by the addition of zero 
digits at the most significant (left) end of the ad- 
dress. 

b) the comparison shall be performed, starting from 
the least significant (right) digit and progressing to 
the most (left). 

c) as soon as a digit having the same position in each 
address has a different value, the comparison is 
stopped. 

d) the address having the digit with the lower value 
(where is the lowest, and 9 is the highest) is re- 
garded as being the lower address. 

e) if the local SNDCF has the lower address, the 
SNDCF shall clear the virtual circuit which is initi- 
ated and accept the virtual circuit initiated by the 
remote SNDCF. 

f) if the local SNDCF has the higher address, the 
SNDCF shall clear the virtual circuit initiated by 
the remote SNDCF and continue to await accep- 
tance of the virtual circuit which it initiated. 



If a request to establish a new virtual circuit is re- 
ceived once a virtual circuit is fully^fstablished, the new 
virtual circuit shall be accepted and that previously ex- 
isting shall be cleared. 



^.4.3.6 Use of Multiple Virtual Circuits 

In some circumstances, it may be desirable to use sev- 
eral X.25 virtual circuits between two network-entities, 
for example, to increase throughput or resilience. In 
this case, each virtual circuit is separately visible to the 
CLNP and provides a distinct service. Each is supported 
by a distinct pair of independent SNDCFs. Nevertheless, 
it is necessary to distinguish between these independent 
virtual circuits in order to avoid incorrect detection of 
collisions. 

Where multiple virttial circuits are required, they are 
distinguished during connection establishment by the 
conveyance of a two-octet subnetwork connection ref- 
erence (SNCR) in the user data field of the X.25 Call 
Request packet. If no user data are present in the X.25 
Call Indication packet' (other than the protocol discrim- 
inator encoded in octet 1), the receiving SNDCF shall 
proceed as though the SNCR had been explicitly con- 
veyed with the value zero. When it is necessary to ex- 
plicitly convey a subnetwork connection reference, the 
user data field of the X.25 Call Request Packet shall be 
set as illustrated in table 9. 

Octets 1 through 3 arc set to the values indicated. 
Octets 4 and 5 convey the reference for the subnetwork 
connection. Octet 4 conveys the low order octet of the 
SNCR; octet 5 conveys the high order octet. 

The collision resolutipn procedure described in 8.4.3.5 
shall be followed only when the two virtual circuits con- 
vey (explicitly or implicitly) the same SNCR. 

The values of the SNCR may be chosen arbitrarily by 
the communicating SNDCFs. Where a known number 
of virtual circuits is required but there is no prior agree- 
ment on the SNDCP values to be used, the values from 
zero up to one less than the number of virtual circuits 
required shall be used. 

NOTE — The procedures described above have 
been specified in order to satisfy the following cri- 
teria: 

a) unwanted duplicate virtual circuits should be 
rapidly detected and cleared; 

b) it must be possible to have multiple virtual 
circuits between a pair of network-entities 
where required, for example, for reasons of 
throughput or redundancy; and 

c) for the common case in which only a single 
virtual circuit is required, minimal protocol 
control information (perferably none) should 
be required. 



NOTE — This procedure is required in order lo 
ensure rapid recovery from provider- initated clear 
of the virtual circuit in cases where both SNDCFs 
do not receive notification of this action at exactly 
the same time. 



8.4.3.7 Priority 

As part of its operation to manage virtual circuits, the 
SNDCF may perform a priority function with respect to 
SN-UNITDATA requests that specify priority as a QoS 



28 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



Table 9 - Subnetwork Connection Reference Encoding 



Protocol 


Length 


SNCR 


SNCR 


Discrimination 


Indication 


Version 


Value 


Octet 1 


Octet 2 


Octet 3 


Octets 4 and 5 


0000 0000 








or 


0000 0100 


0000 0010 


{sec below} 


1000 0001 








(sec 7.2.2) 









parameter. Specifically, the SNDCF may open a new 
virtual circuit to handle the higher-priority traffic, or 
close an existing virtual circuit in order to free a logical 
channel or local system resources to enable it to pro- 
cess higher-priority traflfic for which no resources would 
otherwise be available. 

8.4.3.8 ISO 8208 Protocol Elements 

The following protocol elements of ISO 8208 arc neces- 
sary for the provision of the underlying service assumed 
by ISO 8473: 

a) virtual call service; 

b) data transfer (without delivery confirmation bit and 
interrupt transfer procedures); 

c) flow control procedures; 

d) flow^ control and reset packets; 

e) call setup and .clearing packets; 

f) DTE & DCE data packets; 

g) restart procedures; 
h) restart packets; 

i) DCE timeouts; 

j) DTE tiiiie limits; and 

k) coding of X.25 network generated packets. 

The following protocol elements are desirable but not 
necessary: 

1) flow control parameter negotiation; 
m) transit delay selection and indication; and 
n) throughput class negotiation. 



All other services and facilities are optional. 

NOTE — The mandatory protocol elements do 
not preclude the operation of the SNDCF over a 
subnetwork which uses the 1980 version of X.25. 



9 Conformance 

For conformance to this International Standard, the 
ability to originate, manipulate, and receive PDUs in 
accordance with the full protocol (as opposed to the 
Non- segmenting or Inactive Network Layer Pro- 
tocol subsets) is required. 

Additionally, conformance to this International Stan- 
dard requires provision of the protocol functions de- 
scribed in clause 6. Provision of the optional functions 
described in 6.19 and enumerated in table 10 shall meet 
the requirements described therein. Exceptions to this 
requirement are described in 9.1 below. 

Additionally, conformance to this Internationa! Stan- 
dard requires adherence to the structure and encoding 
of PDUs of clause 7. 

If and only if the above requirements are met is there 
conformance to this International Standard. 

9.1 Provision of functions for confor- 
mance 

Table 10 below categorizes the functions in clause 6 with 
respect to the type of system providing the function. 



29 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



Table 10 - Provision of functions for Conformance 



Function 


System Type 


Send 


Forward 


Receive 


PDU Composition 

PDU Decomposition 

Header Format Analysis 

PDU Lifetime Control 

Route PDU 

Forward PDU 

Segment PDU 

Reassemble PDU 

Discard PDU 

Error Reporting 

Header Error Detection 

Security 

Complete Source Ronteing 

Complete Route Recording 

Partial Source Ronteing 

Partial Route Recording 

Priority 

QoS Maintenance 

Congestion Notification 

Padding 


M 
M 

M 
M 

M 
M 


(Note 1) 

M 
M 

M 
M 

(Note 2) 

I 

M 

M 

M 
(Note 4) 
(Note 4) 
(Note 4) 
(Note 5) 
(Note 5) 
(Note 5) 
(Note 5) 
(Note 5) 
(Note 3) 


(Notel) 
M 

M 
I 

(Note 1) 

M 
M 

M 
M 

(Note 4) 

(Note 3) 


Key: 

M: Mandatory function; this function shall be implemented 
I: Implementation option, as described in the text 
-: Not applicable 



NOTES 

1) The support of the PDU Composition and Forward PDU functions is 
necessary for the generation of Error Report PDUs. 

2) The Segment PDU function is in general mandatory for an intermediate 
system. However, a system which is to be connected only to subnetworks 
all offering the same maximum SDU size (such as identical Local Area 
Networks) will not need to perform this function and therefore does not 
need to implement it. 

If this function is not implemented, this shall be stated as part of the 
specification of the implementation. 

3) The correct treatment of the padding function requires no processing. A 
conforming implementation shall support the function, to the extent of 
ignoring this parameter wherever it may appear. 

4) This function may or may not be supported. If an implementation does 
not support this function, and the function is selected in a PDU, then 
the PDU shall be discarded, and an ER PDU shall be generated and 
forwarded to the originating network-entity if the Error Report flag is 
set and the conditions of 6.10.4 are satisfied, 

5) This function may or may not be supported. If an implementation does 
not support this function, and the function is selected in a PDU, then the 
function is not performed and the PDU is processed exactly as though 
the function had not been selected. The PDU shall not be discarded for 
this reason. 



30 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



Annex A 
Formal Description 

(This annex is not an integral part of the standard.) 



A.l Introduction 



The operation of the ISO 8473 protocol (CLNP) is mod- 
eled as a finite state automaton governed by a state vari- 
able with three values. The behaviour of the automa- 
ton is defined with respect to individual independent 
Protocol Data Units. A transition of the automaton is 
prompted by the occurrence of an atomic event at one 
of three interfaces: 

a) an interface to the Transport Layer, defined by the 
service primitives of ISO 8348/Add.l; 

b) an interface to the underlying service assumed by 
the protocol, defined by the SN-UNITDATA primi- 
tive of 5.5 of this International Standard; 

c) an interface to an implementation-dependent timer 
function, defined by the TIMER primitives de- 
scribed in 5.6 of this International Standard. 



Reassembling The automaton is in the Reassem- 
bling state for the period in which it is assembling 
PDU segments into a complete PDU. 

Closed The final state of the automaton is the Closed 
state. When the automaton enters the Closed 
state it ceases to exist. 

A. 3 Atomic Events 

An atomic event is the transfer of a unit of information 
across an interface. The description of an atomic event 
specifies a primitive (such as the N-UNITDATA. Request 
described in ISO 8348/Add.l) and the service bound- 
ary at which it is invoked (such as the Network Service 
boundary). The direction of information flow across the 
boundary is implied by the definition of each of the prim- 
itives. 



In addition, a transition of the automaton may be 
prompted by the occurrence of a condition of the au- 
tomaton. 

Atomic events are defined in clause A. 3. The occur- 
rence of an atomic event is not in itself sufficient to cause 
a transition to take place; other "enabling" conditions 
may also ha\'e to be met before a particular transition 
can take place. Enabling conditions are boolean expres- 
sions that depend on the values of parameters associated 
with the corresponding atomic event (that is, the pa- 
rameters of some primitive) and on the values of locally 
maintained variables. 

More than one enabling condition — and therefore, 
more than one possible transition — may be associated 
with a single atomic event. In every such case, the en- 
abling conditions are mutually exclusive, so that for any 
given combination of atomic event and parameter val- 
ues, only one state transition can take place. 

Associated with each transition is an action or "out- 
put". Actions consist. of changes to the values of local 
variables and the sequential performance of zero or more 
functions. The operation of the finite state automaton is 
completely specified in clause A. 4 by defining the action 
associated with every possible transition. 

A,2 Values of the State Variable 

The protocol state variable has three values: 

Initial The automaton is created in the Initial state. 
No transition may carry the automaton into the 
Initial state. 



A. 3.1 N.UNITDATA-request and indication 

The N.UNITDATA_request and N.UNITDATAJndica- 
tion atomic events occur at the Network Service bound- 
ary. The primitives which describe these atomic events 
are defined by ISO 8348/Add.I: 

N.UNITDATA.request(NS-Source- Address, 

NS- Destination- Address, 

NS-Quality-of-Service, 

NS-Userdata) 

N.UNITDATAJndication(NS-Source- Address, 

NS-Destination- Address, 

NS-Quality-of-Service, 

NS-Userdata) 



The parameters of the N.UNITDATA.request and 
N.UNITD ATA Judication are collectively referred to as 
Network Service Data Units. 

A. 3. 2 SN.UNITDATA,request and indication 

The SN.UNITDATA-request and SN.UNITDATAindi 
cation atomic events occur at the abstract interface as 
sumed to exist between the CLNP machine and a sup 
porting' underlying service. The primitives Avhich de 
scribe these atomic events are defined in 5.5: 

SN.UNITDATA.request(SN-Source- Address, 

SN-Dcstin^tion- Address, 
SN-Quality-of-Scrvice, 



31 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



SN-UserdataX 

SN.UNITDATAJndication(SN-Source- Address, 

SN-Dcstination- Address, 

SN-Quality-of-Scrvicc, 

SN-Userdata) 



The parameters of the SN.UNITDATA.Request and 
SN.UNITDATAJndication arc collectively referred to as 
Subnetwork Service Data Units. 

The value of the SN-Userdata parameter may repre- 
sent an Initial or a Derived PDU. 



A*3.3 S.TIMER Atomic Events 

The S.TIMER atomic events occur at the interface be- 
tween the Protocol described herein and its local envi- 
ronment. They are defined in 5.6: 

S.TIMER-request(Time, Name, Subscript) 
S.TIMER-cancel(Name, Subscript) 
S.TIMER-rcsponse(Name, Subscript) 



A.4 Operation of the Finite State Au- 
tomaton 

This Annex formally specifics an abstract machine 
which provides a single instance of the connectionless- 
mode Network Service by use of the CLNP. It should 
be emphasized that this formal specification docs not 
in any way constrain the internal operation or design 
of any actual implementation. For example, it is not 
required that the program segments contained in the 
state transitions will actually appear as part of an ac- 
tual implementation. This formal specification is useful 
in that it attempts to eliminate any degree of ambiguity 
or vagueness which may occur in the specification of a 
protocol standard. 

This formal specification describes the behaviour of a 
single finite state machine which provides the protocol 
behaviour corresponding to a single independent service 
request. It is expected that any actual implementation 



will be able to handle behaviour corresponding to many 
simultaneous finite state machines. 

For the purpose of this specification, it is assumed 
that reassembly is performed by the destination end- 
system. 

When the CLNP machine receives an N-UNITDATA 
Request from the Transport Layer, the parameters as- 
sociated with that request are used to construct a pro- 
tocol data unit as described in clause 6. The NS-Source- 
Address and NS-Destination-Addrcss parameters of the 
N-UNITDATA Request are used to derive the N PA I to be 
conveyed as the source and destination NSAP address 
parameters for the PDU. The NS-Userdata parameter 
specifies the user data to be transmitted. The remain- 
ing fields of the PDU header are derived from local and 
state information and the NS-Quality-of-Service param- 
eter. 

The NS-Q^ality-of-Servicc parameter specifies the QoS 
requested by the sending NS User. Whether this QoS is 
to be provided directly by the CLNP itself or through 
the QoS facilities offered by each underlying service 
to be traversed is determined prior to the initial SN- 
UNITDATA Request by the Route PDU Function of the 
CLNP machine. Which (if any) optional parameters are 
to be used to assist in the processing of this PDU as well 
as whether segmentation of the PDU is required is also 
determined at this time. 

Once the appropriate subnetwork has been selected, 
an SN-UNITDATA Request is issued by the Forward 
PDU function of the CLNP machine. When the desti- 
nation 5NDCF (identified by the SNPA contained in the 
SN-Dcstination-Addrcss parameter of the SN-UNITDATA 
Request) receives the SNSDU, it notifies the CLNP ma- 
chine it serves of the delivery of the SNSDU via a corre- 
sponding SN-UNITDATA Indication. 

The PDU header is analyzed, and if the NSAP address 
encoded in the destination address field of the PDU cor- 
responds to one (if any) of the NSAP addresses sup- 
ported by the CLNP machine, the PDU is decomposed, 
and an N-UNITDATA Indication is issued to the NS User 
attached to this NSAP, If it is determined that the PDU 
has not reached its destination, the Route and Forward 
PDU functions are preformed. This process continues 
until the destination is reached or the PDU lifetime ex- 
pires, in which case the PDU is discarded. 



32 



1513611:1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



A.4.1 Type and Constant Definitions 

const 

ZERO = 0; 

max-uset-data = 64512; 
TERMINATED =: 255; 

type 

timer-data.type = . , .; 

network_layer_pTotocolJd-type = (lSO-8473_protocol_id); 

versionJd-type — (versionl);' 

pdu.tp.type - (DT, ER); 

NSAP_addt-type = ,..; 

NPALaddr-type :=...; 
SN-addr_typ€ = . . . ; 

rr.titles-type — . . . ; 

quality_of_service_type — . . . ; 

SN.QOS.type » ...; 

data-type — . . . ; 

biifFer_type — . . . ; 



options-type — 
subnct_id_type : 



nsdu-type = record 

da : NSAP-addr_type; 

sa : NSAP-addr.type; 

qos : quality _of-scrvice_typc; 

data : data-type; 

end; 

routcrcsult-type — record 
siibnct.id : subnetJd-type; 
sn.da : SN-addr_typc; 
sn.sa : SN.addr.type; 
segment-size: integer; 
end; 

error-type = (NO-ERROR, 

TOO.MUCH-USER-DATA, 

PROTOCOL-PROCEDURE-ERROR, 

INCORRECT-CHECKSUM, 

CONGESTION, 

HEADER.SYNTAX-ERROR, 

SEG.NEEDED-AND-NOT-PERMITTED, 

INCOMPLETE.PDU, 

DUPLICATE.OPTION, 

DESTINATION-UNREACHABLE, 

DESTINATION-UNKNOWN, 

UNSPECIFIED SRC-ROUTEING-ERROR, 

SYNTAX-ERROR-IN-SRC-iout«ing.FIELD, 

UNKNOWN,ADDRESSJN.SRC.ROUTEING, 



(^ NSAP addresses, as passed across the Network Ser- 
vice boundary * ) 
(• addresses carried in PDUs *) 
(^ addresses in the underlying service used by this 
protocol * ) 
(* holds the address list in a recording of route pa- 
rameter ' ) 
(* QOS parameter passed across the Network Service 
boundary ) 
(* the QOS parameter, if any, passed to the under- 
lying service used by this protocol * ) 
(* User data. This is equivalent conceptually to a 
variable length binary string ' ) 
{* memory resources used in sending and receiving 
of user data. This provides capabilities required for 
segmentation and reassembly * ) 
( • stores the options part of the PDU header * ) 
{* local identifier for a particular underlying service 
used by this protocol. In general there may be mul- 
tiple underlying subnetwork (or data link) services*) 



33 



IS 13611 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



SRC.ROUTEING.PATH.NOT-ACCEPTABLE, 

LIFETIME.EXPIREDJN_TRANSIT, 

LIFETIME-EXPIREDJN.REASSEMBLY, 

UNSPECIFIED.UNSUPPORTED.OPTION, 

UNSUPPORTED_PROTOCOL.VERSION, 

UNSUPPORTED.SECURrTY.OPTION, 

UNSUPPORTED_SRC_ROUTEING„OPTION, 

UNSUPPORTED.RECORD.ROUTE_OPTiON, 

REASSEMBLYJNTERFERENCE); 

rr.details.type ~ record 
rr.len : Integer; 
rr_typecode : rr_typecode_type; 
rr_offset : integer; 
rr.titles : rr.titles.type; 
end; 

rr_typecode,type = (PARTIAL.RECORDING, COMPLETE^RECORDWMG); 
pdu-type — record 

nlp_id : networkJayer.protocoLid.type; 

hli : integer; 

vpJd : version_id_type; 

lifetime : integer; 

sp : boolean; 

nis : boolean; 

er.flag : boolean; 

pdu_tp : pdu-tp_type; 

segJen : integer; 

checksum : integer; 

da-len : integer; 

da : NPAI_addr_type; 

saJen : integer; 

sa : NPALaddr-type; 

du_id : optional integer; (* present only if sp^^TRuE 

so : optional integer; (* present only if sp=TRUE 

totJen : optional integer; (' present only if sp=TRIjE 

options : options-type; 

data : data_type; 

end; 



A.4.2 Channel Definitions 

channel Network.access.point (User, Provider); 
by User: 

UNrTDATA-request(NS_Destination_address : NSAP.addr.type; 

NS-Source-address : NSAP.addr.type; 

NS-Quality-of-Service : quaiity_of_service_type; 

NS.Userdata : data.type); 

by Provider: 

UNITDATAJndication(NS-Destination_address : NSAP.addr.type; 
NS_Source_address : NSAP.addr.type; 
NS-Quality-of-Scrvicc : quality-of-service.type; 
NS.Userdata : data.type); 



channel Subnetwork.access-poiRi (User, Provider); 



34 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



by User: 

UNITDATA.request(SN_Destination-address : SN-addr.type; 
SN_Source_address : SN_addr-type; 
SN.Quality.oLScrvice : SN-QOS_type; 
SN-Userdata : pdu-type); 

by Provider: 

UNITDATAJndication(SN-Destination_address : SN_addr_type; 
SN_Source_address : SN.addr.type; 
SN_Quality.of.Service : SN.QOS.type; 
SN_Userdata : pdu.type); 



channel System_access_point (User, Provider); 
by User: 

TIMER_request(Time : integer; 

Timer_id : timer_name_type; 

Subscript : integer); 

TlIVIER-cancel(TimerJd : timer_name-type); 
Subscript : integer); 

by Provider: 

TIMER_response(Timer_id : timer_name_type; 
Subscript : integer); 



A.4.3 Formal Machine Definition 

module Connectionless.Network-ProtocoLMachine 

(N: Network_access_point (Provider) common queue ; 
SN: array[subnetJd_type] of 

Subnetwork-access-point (User) common queue ; 
S : System-access-Point (User) individual queue ); 



body IP for CONNECTIONLESS_NETWORK.PROTOCOL.MACHINE; 

var 

nsdu : nsdu.type; 
PDU : pdu.type; 
rcv-buf : buffer-type; 

state : (INITIAL, REASSEMBLING, CLOSED); 



function getJifetime(da : NSAP-addr_type; 

qos : quality_of.service-type): lifetime.type; 

primitive; 

(• Tiiis function returns the lifetime value to be used for a PDU, based upon the destination address and requested quality of 
service. ) 



function get.seg.perniitted(da : NSAP-addr.type; 

qos : quality -of-service_type; 
dl : integer): boolean; 

primitive; 

(' This function returns the boolean value to be used in the segmentation permitted field of a PDU. This value may depend 
upon the destination address, requested quality of service, and the length of the user data. * ) 

35 



IS 13611: 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



function size(data : data.type) : integer; 
primitive; 

( * This function if turns the length, in octets, of the specified data. 



function size_buf (buf : buffer.type) : integer; 
primitive; 

( * This function returns the length, in octets, of the data contained in the specified buffer. * ) 



function get.er.flag (nsdu : nsdu_type) : boolean; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns a boolean value to be used as the error report flog in a PDU which transmits the specified NSDU. If 
the PDU must be discarded at some future time, an error report can be returned only if this value is set to TRUE. *) 



function get. NPALlen (addr : NSAP_addr-type) : integer; 
primitive; 

(' This function returns the length of the Network -Protocol Address Information corresponding to a specified NSAP address.*) 



function get.NPAI (addr : NSAP-addr_type) : NPALaddr.type; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the address as encoded in the protocol header, or Network Protocol Address Information, corresponding 
to the specified NSAP address. *) 



function get_options(da : NSAP_addr_type; 

qos:quality.of^ervice_type): options.type; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the options field for a PDU, based on the specified destination address and quality of service. ') 



function get-header_len(da_len : integer; 

saJen : integer; 

sp : boolean; 

options : options-typc): integer; 
primitive; 

( * This function returns the header length, in octets. The header length depends upon the lengths of the source and destination 
addresses, whether the segmentation part is of the header is present and the length of the options part. *) 



function get.data_unit_id (da : NPALaddr_type ) : integer; 
primitive; 

( ' This function returns a data unit identifier which is unique for the specified destination address. ' ) 



function make.buflFer (data : data.type) : buffer-type; 
primitive; 

(' This function places the specified data in a newly created buffer. The way in which buffers arc managed is a local matter. 
The newly created buffer is returned as the function value. * ) 



function check.paraineters(hli : integer; 

sp : boolean; 



36 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



da : NPALaddr.type; 
options : options.type; 
datalen : integer): error.type; 
primitive; 

(* This function determines whether the parameters associated with the routeing and forwarding of the PDU are valid. If so, a 
result of NO^RROR i« returned and the Route function is called to determine the route and the segment size; otherwise, this 
function returns an error. ') 



function get.checksum (pdu : pdu-type) : integer; 
primitive; 

( * This function returns the 16- bit integer value to be placed in the checksum field of the PDU. If the checksum facility is not 
selected, this function returns the value zero. ^) 



function route(hli : integer; 
sp : boolean; 

da : J^FALaddr-type; 
options : ctptions.typc; 
datalen : integer): routc.rcsult-type; 
primitive; 

(* This function determines the route to be followed by a PDU segment as well as the segment size. Determination of route 
and segment size may be mutually dependent, and is made on the basis of the header length, the segmentation permitted flag, 
the destination address, certain parameters (such as source routeing) contained in the options part of the PDU header, and the 
length of data. "Route" returns a data structure specifying the subnetwork on which the segment should be transmitted, the 
source and destination SNPAs to be used on the subnetwork, and the segment size. "Route" may only be called if the function 
check-para meters has already determined that the parameters passed are valid. *) 



function extract (biif:bufFer_type; octcts:integcr): data.type; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the specified amount of data from the specified buffer. The number of octets returned is constrained 
by the requirement that no segment of less than eight octets may be generated by a sending network-entity. The number of 
octets returned is 1) the amount specified, 2) the amount of data which remains in the buffer; or 3) an integral number of octets 
greater than eight but not exceeding (1) or (2) above. The data returned are removed from the buffer, and the actual number 
of octets extracted from the buffer is returned in the parameter octets. * ) 



function get-sn-qos(subnct-id : subnctlid-type; 

options : options-type): SN.QOS-type; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the QoS provided by the specified subnetwork. This information is used to determine the values (if 
any) for the QoS Maintenance, Security, and Priority parameters in the options part of the PDU. ' ) 



function getJocaLNPALaddrJen : integer; 
primitive; 

(* Tliis function returns the length of the local address as used in the protocol header. *) 



function gctJocaLNPALaddr : NPALaddress.typc; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the local address as used in the protocol header. ') 



function get.NSAP.addr(addr : NPAI.addi.type; 



37 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



icn : integer): NSAP.addr.type; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the NSAP address corresponding to the Network Protocol Address Information of the specified length. 

') 



function NPALaddi.Iocal (addr : NPALaddr.type) : boolean; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the boolean value TRUE only if the specified Network Protocol Address Information specifies a local 
address. ♦ ) 



function NSAP.addrJocal (addr : NSAP.addr-type) : boolean; 
primitive; 

(' This function returns the boolean value TRUE only if the specified NSAP address specifies a local address. 



function get.qos (options: options-type): quality «of-service_type 

primitive; 

(* This function determines, to the extent possible, the quality of service that was obtained for b particular PDU, based upon 

the quality of service and other information contained in the options part of the PDU header. *) 



function data.unit-complete (buf : bufFcr.type) : boolean; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns a boolean value specifying whether all Derived PDUs of the PDU held in the specified buffer have been 
received. * ) 



function estimated.elapsed.time : integer; 
primitive; 

{ * This function returns an estimate of the time elapsed, in 500 ms increments, since the PDU was transmitted by the previous 
peer network-entity. The estimate includes both time spent in transit and any time spent in buffers within the local system. 
The estimate need not be precise, but overestimates are preferable to underestimates, as underestimating the time elapsed may 
defeat the intent of the lifetime function. * ) 



procedure empty.bufFer (buf : bufFci-type); 
primitive; 

(' This procedure empties the specified buffer. 



procedure allocate-reasscmbly_resources(pdu-tot Jen : integer; 

options : option.type); 
primitive; 

(* This procedure allocates resources required for reassembly of a PDU of the specified total length. Whether this procedure 
is called once (upon reception of the first Derived PDU or the Initial PDU), or each time a Derived PDU is received is a local 
matter. If a PDU must be discarded to allocate resources and the PDU to be discarded has the ER flag set, then an error report 
is generated. The decision to discard a PDU and the choice of PDU to discard may take into account the values of the priority 
parameter in the PDU options field. *) 



procedure frce-reasscmbly-resources; 
primitive; 

(* This procedure releases the resources that had been previously allocated by allocate^eaMembly .resources. *) 



38 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



procedure merge.seg(buf : buffer.typc; 

so : integer; 

data : data-type); 
primitive; 

(* This procedure merges the specified data into the specified buffer based on the specified segment offset of the data. "* ) 



function send-er-on-congestion (pdu : pdu.typc) : boolean; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the boolean value TRUE if an error report should be sent when the indicated data unit is discarded 
due to congestion. If the value TRUE is returned, then the crJiag field of the discarded data unit must still be checked before 
an error report can be sent, ' ) 



function get.er .lifetime (da ; NPALaddr-type) : integer; 
primitive; 

( * This function returns the lifetime value to be used for an ER PDU, based upon the destination address and specified quality 
of service. * ) 



function get.er-dataJ!eld(error : error-type; 

pdii : pdu-typc): data_type; 
primitive; 

(* This function returns the data field for an Error Report PDU. The data field of an error report must include the header of 
the discarded PDU, and may optionally contain additional user data. ") 



function get_er_options(error : error.type; 

da : NPAI_addr_type; 

options:options-type): options-type; 
primitive; 

( * This function returns the options field of an error report, based on the reason for discarding the PDU; the destination address; 
and the options field of the discarded PDU. The relationship of Data PDU options to ER PDUs is described in 6.10.4. The 
options field always contains the reason for discard parameter, obtained from the value of the parameter error. If an option 
selected in the original PDU cannot be provided by the system processing the Error Report, an error is returned in the parameter 
error; no ER PDU is generated, otherwise, the value NO_ERROR is returned in t^ie parameter error, and ER PDU processing 
continues. Selection of options other than those selected in the PDU which cause the generation of an ER PDU a local matter. 



function gct-.rr-details (options:options.type; 

error : error.type): rr.details.type; 
primitive; 

( * This function searches through the options for a Recording of Route parameter. If none is found, the rrJen field of the result 
is set to zero. Otherwise, rrJen is set to the parameter length and the remainder of the result field is set to contents of the 
parameter value field. ' ) 



procedure post-error.rcport (er_pdu : pdu.type); 
primitive; 

(* This procedure posts the specified error report (ER) type PDU to the local entity that handles error reports. 



procedure insert-address (rdetails : rr-details.type; 

fieldlen : integer); 
primitive; 



39 



1813611:1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



(* This procedure works on the recording of route parameter given in rdetails. It first moves all the network-entity titles *up' in 
the list, leaving a space at the beginning the length of which is equal to the value of fieldlen. It then inserts into this space a 
new network-entity title field, consisting of one octet containing the length of the local network-entity title followed by the title 
itself. ') 



procedure sct.rr.details (options : options_type; 

rdetails : rr_dctails_type); 
primitive; 

C* This procedure updates the value of the recording of route parameter in the options field. 



procedure record-route (options : options-typc); 

var 

rdetails : rr-details»typc; 
title.ficldlcn : integer; 

begin 

rdetails :=: get.rr-dctails (options); 

if rdetails.rrJen > and rdctails.rr.oflfsct <> TERMINATED then 
begin 

titlc-ficldlen := 1 + (gctJocaLNPALaddrJcn); 
if ((rdctails.rr_offsct-|-addr-fieldlcn) - rdetails. rrJcn) > 1 

then rdetails. rr-offsct := TERMINATED; . 
else 

begin 

rdetails. rr.offsct := rdctails.rr-ofFsct+title-ficldlen; 
insert.address (rdetails, titlc-fieldlcn); 
end; 
set-rr-details(options, rdetails); 
end; 
end; 



procedure send_error_rcport(crror : error-type; 

pdu : pdu-typc); 

var er_pdu : pdu-typc; 

begin 

if (pdii.er.flag) then 

begin 

er-pdu.nlpJd := ISO_8473-protocoLid; 

er-pdu.vp_id := versionl; 

cr-pdu. lifetime := get.er.lifetinie(pdu.sa); 

er-pdu.sp := FALSE; 

cr-pdu.ms := FALSE; 

er-pdu.er-flag := FALSE; 

er-pdu.pdu.tp := ER; 

er-pdu.daJen :- pdu.sa-len; 

er.pdu.da := pdu.sa; 

er.pdu.sa-lcn :— getJocal-NPALaddrJcn; 

ei-pdu.sa := get-locaLNPALaddr; 

er.pdu.options := gct-er-opiion8(crror, 

er.pdiuda, 
pdu.options); 

if (error =: NO-ERROR) then 
begin 



40 



1813611:1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



er.pdu.hli :— get.headerJert (er.pdu.daJcn, 

cr.pdu.saJcn, 
er.pdu.sp, 
er-pdu.options); 
er.pdu.data := get_er_data_fi€ld(crror, pdu); 
if (NPAI_addrJocal(er.pdu.da)) then 

post_error-report(er.pdu) 
else s€nd_pdu(er_pdu); 
end; 
end; 
end; 



procedure send,pdu (pdu : pdu.type); 

var 

rte.result : route_result_type; 
error.code : error-type; 
send_buf : buffer_type; 
octets_to-extract : integer; 
niore.seg : boolean; 
sn.qos : SN_QOS_type; 

begin 

send-bul := make-bufFer(pdu.data); 
more-seg := pdii.ms; 
repeat 
begin 

error.code :~ check_parameters(pdu.hli, 

pdii.sp, 
pdu. da, 
pdu. options, 
size(pdu.data)); 
if (error-code - NO.ERROR) then 
begin 

rte.result := route(pdu.hli, 
pdu.sp, 
pdu. da, 
pdu. options, 
size(pdu.data)); 
octets.to.extract := rte_result. segment-size - pdu.hli; 
pdu. data := extract(send_buf, octets.to-extract); 
pdu.seg-len :~ pdu.hli + size(pdu.data); 
if (size-buf(send-buf) = ZERO) then 

pdu.ms := more-seg; 
else 

pdu.ms := TRUE; 
pdu.checksum := get-chccksum(pdu); 
sn-qos := get.sn.qos(rte.rcsult.8ubnet.id, pdu. options); 

OUTPUT SN[rtc-rc8ult.9ubnet-id].UNITDATAjrcqttcst 
(rte.result.sn.da, 
rte.result.sn.sa, 
sn.qos, 
pdu); 

if (pdu.sp) then pdu.so := pdu. so -f octcts-to-extract; 
end 
else 



41 



IS 13611 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



if (error.code = CONGESTION) then 
if (send-er.on_congestion(pdii)) then 

send.error.report(CONGESTION, pdu); 
else 

send.error_report (error.code, pdu); 
end; 

until (si2e.buf(data-buf) - ZERO) or (error_code <> NO-ERROR); 
end; 



initialize 

begin 

to INITIAL; 

end; 



(~* Begin transitions ') 

trans (• transition #1 ') 

from INITIAL to CLOSED 

when N.UNITDATA-request 

provided riot NSAP_addr_local(NS_Destination_Address) 

begin 

nsdu.da ::=: NS_Destination_Address; 
nsdu.sa :— NS.Source.Address; 
nsdu.qos := NS-Quality_of_Service; 
nsdii.data :~ NS-Userdata; 
pdu.nlpJd :— ISO_8473.protocoLid; 
pdu.vpJd := version!; 

pdu, lifetime := get_lifetime(nsdu.da, nsdu.qos); 
pdu.sp := get.seg_pcrmitted(nsdu.da, 

nsdu.qos, 
size(nsdu.data)); 
pdu.ms :- FALSE; 
pdu.er.flag :— get_er_flag(nsdu); 
pdu.pdu.tp :- DT; 
pdu.da.len :— get_NPALlen(nsdu.da); 
pdu. da := get-NPAI(nsdu.da); 
pdu.saJen :— get_NPAI_len(nsdu,sa); 
pdu.sa := get_NPAI(nsdu.sa); 
pdu. options := get_options(nsdu.da, nsdu.qos); 
pdu, data := nsdu.data; 
pdu.hli :=: get-header_len(pdu.daJen, 

pdu.saJen, 
pdu.sp, 
pdu. options); 
if (pdu.sp) then 

begin 

pdu.duJd :— get-data-unitJd(pdu.da); 

pdu.so :- ZERO; 

pdu.totJen := pdu.hli + size(pdu.data); 

end; 
if ($ize(pdu.data) > max-uscr-data) then 

5end_error-rcport(TOO_MUCH_USER-DATA, pdu) 
else 

send.pdu(pdu); 



42 



IS 13611 :19i» 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



(^ transition #2 
from INITIAL 
to CLOSED 

when N.UNITDATAjrequest 
provided NS A P.addrJocal(NS_Destination_ Address) 

begin 

nsdu.da := NS_Destination_Address; 

nsdu.sa := NS_Soxirce_Address; 

nsdu.qos :— NS_QiiaIity_oLService; 

nsdu.data := NS.Userdata; 

OUTPUT N.UNITDATAJndication (nsdu.da, 

nsdu.sa, 

nsdu.qos, 

nsdu.data); 
end; 



("* transition #3 
from INITIAL to CLOSED 
when SN[subnet-id],UNITDATAJndication 
provided (NPALaddr_local(SN.Userdata.da) and 
SN-Userdata.so - ZERO and 
not SN.Userdata.ms) 
begin 

pdu *— SN-Userdata; 
if (pdu.pdu_tp - DT) then 

OUTPUT N.UNITDATAJndication(get_NSAP_addr(pdu.da, pdu.da.Ien), 

get.NSAP-addr(pdu,sa, pdu.sa.len), 
get_qos(pdu. options), 
pdu. data); 
else 

post_error-report(pdu); 
end; 



from INITIAL to REASSEMBLING 
when SN[subnet-id].UNITDATAJndication 
provided NPAI_addr-local(SN_Userdata.da) and 
((SN.Userdata.so > ZERO) or (SN.Userdata.ms)) 

begin 

pdu := SN-Userdata; 

allocate_rcassembly_resources(pdu.tot_len, pdu. options); 
empty _bufFer(rcv_buf); 
merge-seg(rcv,buf, 

pdu. so, 

pdu. data); 
OUTPUT S.TIMERjcquest (pdu.lifctime, 

lifetime-timer, 
ZERO); 
end; 



43 



(* transition #4 *) 



1813611:1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



from INITIAL to CLOSED 

when SN[subnctJd],UNITDATAJndication 

provided not NPALaddiJo.cal(SN.Useidata.da) 

begin 

pdu :— SN-Userdata; 

if (pdu. lifetime > estimated.elapsed.time) then 

begin 

pdu. lifetime := pdu. lifetime - estimated.elapsed-time; 

record-routc(pdu. options); 

send-pdu(pdu); 

end 
else 

send.error.report(LIFETIME_EXPIRED-IN.TRANSIT, pdu); 
end; 



(* transition #5 



') 



transition #6 



') 



from REASSEMBLING to REASSEMBLING 
when SN[8ubnct.id],UNITDATAJndication 
provided (SN.Useidata.du.id = pdu.duJd and 
SN-Userdata.daJen = pdu.daJen and 
SN-Userdata.da — pdu. da and 
SN.Userdata.sa-len = pdu.saJen and 
SN-Userdata.sa — pdu.sa ) 

begin 

merge-seg (rcv.buf, 

SN.Userdata.so, 

SN-Userdata. data); 
end; 



(* transition #7 
from REASSEMBLING to CLOSED 
provided data.unit.complete (rcv.buf) no delay 

begin 

if pdu.pdu.tp = DT then 

OUTPUT N.UNITDATAJndication(get.NSAP-addr(pdu-da, pdu.daJen), 

get-NSAP-addr(pdu.sa, pdu.saJen), 
get-qos(pdu . options ) , 
extract (rcv.buf, size-buf(rcv_buf))); 

else 

post-error-report(pdu); 

OUTPUT S,TIMER-.cancel(lifetime_timer, ZERO); 

f rce.rcassembl v-resources ; 

end; 



{* transition #8 



') 



from REASSEMBLING to CLOSED 
when S.TIMER.response 

begin 

8end-error.report(LIFETIME-EXPIRED.IN.REASSEMBLY, pdu); 
end; 



44 



A. 5 State Transition Diagram 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 





















r 

INITIAL 


REASSEMBLING 
























CLOSED 





















45 



IS 13611 : 
ISO 8473 



1993 
1988 



Annex B 
Supporting Technical Material 

(This annex is not an integral jrart of the standard.) 



B.l Data Unit Lifetime 

There are two primary purposes for providing a PDU 
lifetime capability in the protocol defined by ISO 8473. 
One purpose is to ensure against unlimited- looping of 
protocol data units; while the routeing algorithm should 
ensure that it will be very rare for data to loop, the PDU 
lifetime field provides additional assurance that loops 
will be limited in extent. 

The other purpose of the lifetime capability is to pro- 
vide a means by which the origiiiating network-entity 
can limit the maximum NSDU lifetime. ISO Transport 
Protocol Class 4 (ISO 8073) assumes that there is a 
particular maximum NSDU lifetime in order to protect 
against certain error states in the transport connection 
establishment and termination phases; viz.^ if a TPDU 
does not arrive within maximum NSDU lifetime, then 
there is no chance that it will ever arrive. It is nec- 
essary to make this assumption, even if the Network 
Layer does not guarantee any particular upper bound 
on NSDU lifetime; however, it is simpler for Transport 
Protocol Class 4 to deal with lost TPDUs than to deal 
with late TPDUs and for this reason, it is preferable to 
discard late TPDUs than to deliver them. It should be 
noted that NSDU lifetime is not directly associated wUh 
the retransmission of lost TPDUs; rather, it is most use- 
ful for distinguishing old (duplicate) TPDUs from new 
TPDUs. 

Maximum NSDU lifetime must be provided to a trans- 
port protocol entity in units of time in order to be useful 
in determining Transport timer values (a transport en- 
tity cannot count "hops"). 

In the absence of any guaranteed upper bound, it is 
common to estimate a value for maximum NSDU life- 
time. This value is often based upon observation of 
past performance, and may vary with source and des- 
tination. There are two possible ways to deal with the 
requirement for a limit on the maximum NSDU lifetime: 
1) provide a mechanism in the Transport Layer to rec- 
ognize and discard old TPDUs; or 2) specify lifetime in 
units of time. The second method requires intermediate 
systems to decrement the lifetime field by a value which 
is an upper bound on the time elapsed since the PDU 
visited the previous intermediate system. The Trans- 
port Layer relies on the Network Layer discard NSDUs 
(and hence TPDUs) whose lifetime has expired. 

A major disadvantage to employing solution 1 is that 
transport entities (instances) are created when required 
and released when their purpose is fulfilled; hence, they 
are by nature temporary. In order to determine whether 
a particular TPDU is old, functions which recognize and 
discard old TPDUs must be designed (and must always 



be present) in addition to those performed by each trans- 
port entity instance. Such functions are extremely com- 
plex and impose a non-irivial overhead in Transport 
Layer operation. 

Conversely, the state machine associated with the pro- 
vision of a connectionless-mode service does not require 
knowledge of previous connection state information to 
operate correctly. As no additional mechanisms beyond 
those necessary to correctly bound NPDU lifetime are re- 
quired to ensure that old NSDUs (and hence old TPDUs) 
are delivered to the Transport Layer, it is preferable to 
have the Network Layer discard NPDUs whose lifetime 
has expired, and have the Transport Layer deal with lost 
TPDUs (solution 2). 

B.1.1 Determining a vartue for NPDU lifetime 

It is not necessary for each intermediate system to sub- 
tract a precise measure of the time that elapsed since 
an NPDU (containing theTPDU or a segment thereof) 
visited the previous intermediate system. Where a pre- 
cise measure is not available, it is sufficient to subtract 
an overestimate of the actual time taken. In most cases, 
an intermediate-system may simply subtract a constant 
value which depends upon the typical near-maximum 
delays that are encountered in a specific underlying ser- 
vice. A more accurate measure may be required for 
those subnetworks which have both a relatively large 
maximum delay, and a relatively large variation in de- 
lay. 

As an example, assume that a particular local area 
network has short average delays, with overall delays 
generally in the 1 to 5ms range and with occasional de- 
lays up to 20ms. In this case, altKough the relative 
range in delays might be large (a factor of twenty), it 
would still not be necessary to measure the actual de- 
lay for NPDUs. A constant value of 20ms (or more) can 
be subtracted for all NPDUs. Similarly, if a single hop 
satellite link had delays ranging from 0,5s to 0,6s then 
the higher value could always be used. 

If a third subnetwork had normal delays ranging from 
0,1 to Is, but occasionally delivered a n NPDU after a 
delay of 15s, then an intermediate system attached to 
this subnetwork might be find it necessary to determine 
how long it has actually taken the NPDU to be deliv- 
ered. Even in this last example, it is more useful to 
have the intermediate systems determine when the de- 
lays are extreme and discard very old NPDUs, and allow 
the Transport protocol to detect the lost TPDU. 

In addition to the time delay within each subnetwork, 
it is important to consider the time delay within inter- 



46 



IS 13611 :1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



mediate systems. It should be relatively simple for those 
gateways which expect to hold on to some data units for 
significant periods of time to decrement the lifetime ap- 
propriately, 

B.2 Reassembly Lifetime control 

In order to ensure a bound on the lifetime of NSDUs, and 
to effectively manage reassembly buffers in the Network 
Layer, the Reassembly function described in clause 6 
must control the lifetime of segments representing par- 
tially assembled PDUs. This clause discusses methods 
of bounding reassembly lifetime and suggests some im- 
plementation guidelines for the reassembly function. 

When segments of a PDU arrive at a destination 
netwotk-cntity, they arc buffered until an entire PDU 
is received, assembled, and passed to the PDU Decom- 
position function. The protocol does not guarantee t)ie 
delivery of PDUs; hence, it is possible for some segments 
of a PDU to be lost or delayed such that the entire PDU 
cannot be assembled in a reasonable length of time. 
In the case of loss of a PDU "segment", for example, 
this could be forever. There are a number of possible 
schemes to prevent this: 

a) Per-PDU reassembly timers, 

b) Extension of the PDU Lifetime control function, 
and 

c) Coupling of the Transport Retransmission timers. 

Each of these methods is discussed in the following 
clauses. 

B.2.1 Method (a) 

This method assigns a "reassembly lifetime" to each 
PDU received and identified by its Data Unit Identifier. 
This is a local, real time which is assigned by the re- 
assembly function and decremented while some, but not 
all segments of the PDU are being buffered by the desti- 
nation network-entity. If the timer expires, all segments 
of the PDU are discarded, thus freeing the reassembly 
buffers and preventing a "very old" PDU from being con- 
fused with a newer one bearing the same Data Unit Iden- 
tifier. For this scheme to function properly, the timers 
must be assigned in such a fashion as to prevent the 
phenomenon of Reassembly Interference (discussed be- 
low). In particular, the following guidelines should be 
followed: 

a) The Reassembly Lifetime must be much less than 
the maximum PDU lifetime af the network (to pre- 
vent the confusion of old and new data units). 

b) The lifetime should be less than the Transport 
protocol's retransmission timers minus the average 
transit time of the network. If this is not done, 



extra buffers arc tied up holding data which has al^ 
ready been retransmitted by the Transport Proto- 
col. (Note that an assumption has been made that 
such timers are integral to the Transport Protocol, 
which in some sense, dictates that retransmission 
functions must exist in the Transport Protocol em- 
ployed). 

B.2.2 Method (b) 

This method is feasible if the PDU lifetime control func- 
tion operates based on real or virtual time rather than 
hop count. In this scheme, the lifetime field of each PDU 
segment of a Data Unit continues to be decremented 
by the reassembly function of the destination network- 
entity as if the PDU were still in transit (in a sense, it 
still is). When the lifetime of any segment of a partially 
reassembled PDU expires, all segments of that PDU are 
discarded. This scheme is attractive since the delivery 
behavior of the ISO 8473 Protocol would be identical 
for segmented and unsegmented PDUs. 



B.2.3 Method (c) 

This m.ethod couples the reassembly lifetim.e directly to 
the Transport Protocol's retransmission timers, and re- 
quires that Transport Layer management make known 
to Network Layer Management (and hence, the Re- 
assembly function) the values of its retransmission 
timers for each source from which it expects to be re- 
ceiving traffic. When a PDU segment is received from a 
source, the retransmission time minus the anticipated 
transit time becomes the reassembly lifetime of that 
PDU. If this timer expires before the entire PDU has 
been reassembled, all segments of the PDU are dis- 
carded. This scheme is attractive since it has a low 
probability of holding PDU segments that have already 
been retransmitted by the source Transport-entity; it 
has, however, the disadvantage of depending on reliable 
operation of the Transport Protocol to work effectively. 
If the retransmission tirriers are not set correctly, it is 
possible that all PDUs would be discarded too soon, and 
the Transport Protocol would make no progress. 



B.3 The Power of the Header Error De- 
tection function 

B.3.1 General 

The form of the checksum used for PDU header error 
detection is such that it is easily calculated in software 
or firmware using only two additions pcr^octet of header, 
yet it has an error detection pov.er approaching (but not 
quite equaling) that of techniques which involve calcu- 
lations that are much more time- or space-consuming 



47 



iS 13^11 : 1993 
ISO 8473 : 1988 



(such as cyclic polynomial checks). This clause discusses 
tlie power of this error detection 'function. 

The checksum consists of two octets, either of which 
can assume any value except zero. That is, 255 distinct 
values for each octet are possible. The calculation of the 
two octets is such that the value of cither is independent 
of the value of the other, so the checksum has a total 
of 255 X 255 — 65025 values. If one considers all ways 
in which the PDU header might be corrupted as equally 
likely, then there is only one chance in 65025 that the 
checksum will have the correct value for any particular 
corruption. This corresponds to 0,0015% of all possible 
errors. 

The remainder of this clause considers particular 
classes of errors that are likely to be encountered. The 
hope is that the error detection function will be found 
to be more powerful, or at least no less powerful, against 
these classes as compared to errors in general. 



B.3.2 Bit Alteration Errors 

First considered are classes of errors in which bits are 
altered, but no bits are inserted nor deleted. 

A burst error of length 6 is a corruption of the header 
in which all of the altered bits (no more than b in num- 
ber) are within a single span of consecutively transmit- 
ted bits that is b bits long. Checksums are usually ex- 
pected to do well against burst errors of a length not 
exceeding the number of bits in the header error de- 
tection parameter (16 for the PDU header). The PDU 
header error detection parameter in fact fails to detect 
only 0,000019% of all such errors, each distinct burst 
error of length 16 or less being considered to be equally 
likely. In particular, it cannot detect an 8-bit burst in 
which an octet of zero is altered to an octet of 255 (all 
bits = 1) or vice versa. Similarly, it fails to detect the 
swapping of two adjacent octets only if one is zero and 
the other is 255. 

The PDU header error detection, as should be ex- 
pected, detects all errors involving only a single altered 
bit. 

Undetected errors involving only two altered bits 
should occur only if the two bits arc widely separated 
(and even then only rarely). The PDU header error de- 
tection detects all double bit errors for which the spac- 
ing between the two altered bits is less than 2040 bits := 
255 octets. Since this separation exceeds the maximum 
header length, all double bit errors are detected. 

The power to detect double bit errors is an advantage 
of the checksum algorithm used for the protocol, versus a 
simple modulo 65536 summation of the header split into 
16 bit fields. This simple summation would not catch 
all such double bit errors. In fact, double bit errors with 
a spacing as little as 16 bits apart could go undetected. 



This annex does not consider the case where the 
checksum itself is erroneously set to be all zero; this 
case is discussed in B.3.4. 



B.3.3 Bit Insertion/Deletion Errors 

Although errors involving the insertion or deletion of 
bits are in general neither more nor less likely to go 
undetected than are all other kinds of general errors, 
at least one class of such errors is of special concern. 
If octets, all equal to either zero or 255, are inserted 
at a point such that the simple sum Cu in the running 
calculation (described in B.3.4) happens to equal zero^ 
then the error will go undetected. This is of concern 
primarily because there are two points in the calculation 
for which this value for the sum is not a rare occurrence, 
but is expected; namely, at the beginning and the end. 
That is, if the header is preceded or followed by inserted 
octets all equal to zero or 255 then no error is detected. 
Both cases are examined separately. 

Insertion of erroneous octets at the beginning of the 
header completely misaligns the header fields, causing 
them to be misinterpreted. In particular, the first in- 
serted octet is interpreted as the network layer, proto- 
col identifier, probably eliminating any knowledge that 
the data unit is related to the ISO 8473 Protocol, and 
thereby eliminating any attempt to perform the check- 
sum calculation or invoking a different form of checksum 
calculation. 

Insertion of erroneous octets at the end of the header, 
in the absence of other errors, is impossible because the 
length field unequivocally defines where the header ends. 
Insertion or deletion of octets at the end of the header 
requires an alteration in the value of the octet defining 
the header length. Such an alteration implies that the 
value of the calculated sum at the end of the header 
would not be expected to have the dangerous value of 
zero and consequently that the error is just as likely to 
be detected as is any error in general. 

Insertion of an erroneous octet in the middle of the 
header is primarily of concern if the inserted octet has ei- 
ther the value zero or 255, and if the variable Cn happens 
to have the value zero at this point. In most cases, this 
error will completely destroy the parsing of the header, 
which will cause the data unit to be discarded. In ad- 
dition, in the absence of any other error, the last octet 
of the header will be thought to be data. This in turn 
will cause the deader to end in the wrong place. In the 
case where the header otherwise can parse correctly, the 
last field will be found to be missing. Even in the case 
where the last field is the padding option, and therefore 
not necessary, the length field for the' padding function 
will be inconsistent with the header length field, and 
therefore the error can be detected. 



48 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



B.3.4 Checksum Non-calculation Errors 

Use of the header error detection function is optional. 
The choice of not using it is indicated by a checksum 
parameter value of zero. This creates the possibility that 
the two octets of the checksum parameter (neither of 
which is generated as being zero) could both be altered 
to zero. This would in effect be an error not detected by 
the checksum, since the check would not be made. One 
of three possibilities exists: 

a) A burst error of length sixteen (16) which sets the 
entire checksum to zero. Such an error could not be 
detected; however, it requires a particular position- 
ing of the burst within the header, (A calculation 
of its effect on overall dctcctability of burst errors 
depends upon the length of the header). 

b) All single bit errors arc detected. Since both octets 
of the checksum field must be non-zcio when the 
checksum is being used, no single bit error can set 
the checksum to zero. 

c) Where each of the two octets of the checksum pa- 
rameter has a value that is a power of two, such 
that only one bit in each equals one (1), then a ze- 



roing of the checksum parameter could result in an 
undetected double bit error. Furthermore, the two 
altered bits have a separation of less than sixteen 
(16), and could be consecutive. This is clearly a 
decline from the cTomplcte dctcctability previously 
described. 



Where a particular administration is highly concerned 
about the possibility of accidental zeroing of the check- 
sum among data units within its network addressing do- 
main, then the administration may impose the restric- 
tion that all data units whose source or destination lie 
within its network addressing domain must make use 
of Ihe header error detection function. Any data units 
which do not could be discarded, nor would they be 
allowed outside the network addressing domain. This 
protects against errors that occur within the network 
addressing domain, and would protect all data units 
whose source or destination lies within the network ad- 
dressing domain, even where the data path between all 
such pairs crosses other network addressing domains (er-* 
rors outside the protected network addressing domain 
notwithstanding). 



49 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



AftfleX C 

Algorithms for PDU Header Error Detection function 

(This annex is not an integral part of the standard.) 



C.l Symbols used in algorithms 

C,\, Ci are variables used in the algorithm; 

i is the number (i,e. position) of an octet within the 

header (the position of the first octet is i = 1); 
Oi is the value of octet i of the PDU header; 
n is the number (i.e position) of the first octet of the 

checksum parameter (n — 8); 
L is the length of the PDU header in octets; 
A' is the value of octet one of the checksum parameter; 
Y is the value of octet two of the checksum parameter. 



C,2 Arithmetic conventions 

Addition is performed in one of the two following modes: 

a) modulo 255 arithmetic; 

b) eight-bit one's complement arithmetic in which, if 
any of the variables has the value minus zero (i.e. 
255) it shall be regarded as though it had the value 
plus zero (i.e. 0). 

C.3 Algorithm for Generating Check- 
sum Parameters 

Construct the complete PDU header with the value of 
the checksum parameter field set to zero; 

A: C ^ Ci ^ 

B: Process each octet of the PDU header sequentially 
from I := 1 to X by 

C, ^ Co + Oi 

Ci ^ — Ci + Cn 
C: Calculate: 

A' ^ (I - 8)Cn - Ci (mod 255) 

Y ^{L- 7)(-C„) + Ci (mod 255) 

D: If A* = 0, then A' ^255; 
E: If r = 0, then Y ^ 255; 

F: place the values of A" and 1' in octets 8 and 9 re- 
spectively. 

C.4 Algorithm for Checking Checksum 
Parameters 

A: If octets 8 and 9 of the PDU header both contain 
(ail bits off), then the checksum calculation has 
succeeded; else if either but not both of these octets 



contains the value zero then the checksum is incor- 
rect; otherwise initialize 



B: Process each octet of the PDU header sequentially 
from I — 1 to X by 

Cn ^ Cn + Oi 

Ci < — Ci + On 

C: If, when all the octets have been processed, d = 
Ci ~ (mod 255) then the checksum calculation 
has succeeded; otherwise the checksum calculation 
has failed. 



C.5 Algorithm to adjust the Checksum 
Parameter when an octet is altered 

This algorithm adjusts the checksum when an 
octet(such as the lifetime field) is altered. Suppose the 
value in octet k is changed by Z = newvalue - oldvalue. 

If A and 1' denote the checksum values held in octets 
nand n+l, respectively, then adjust A and V as follows: 

If A' = and Y = then do nothing, else if 
A' = or 1' = then the checksum is incorrect, 
else: 

A ^ (jfe - rt - \)Z + A (mod 255) 

Y ♦_ (n - k)Z -f Y (mod 255) 



If A 

255. 



0, then A <- 255; if Y ~ 0, then 1' 



For this protocol, n = 8. If the octet being altered is the 
lifetime field, k — A. For the case where the lifetime is 
decreased by one unit {z — -1), the assignment state- 
ments for the new values of A and 1' in the immediately 
preceeding algorithm simplify to: 

A *- A + 5 (mod 255) 

Y — y - 4 (mod 255) 

NOTE — To derive this result, assume that when 
octet k has the value Z added to it then A' and 1' 
have values Zx aJid Zy added to them. For the 
checksum parameters to satisfy the conditions of 
6.11 both before and after the values are added, 
the following is required: 

Z + Zx + Zy = (mod 255) 



50 



IS 13611 :1993 
180 8473:1988 



and 

{L-k + \)Z~\'{L~'n-hl)Z,.-\-(L^n)Zy ^0 (mod 255) 
Solving these equations simultaneously yields 
Z,: ={k-n--l)Z 

and 

Zy = (n - k)Z 



51 Printed at Dec Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureaa of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attenting to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSrmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard maybe sent BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc :No. LTD 36 ( 1550) 

Aendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Afifected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 



NEW DELHI 11002 



f331 01 31 
1331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 js? 86 26, 37 86 62 

r53 38 43, 53 16 40 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 < ^2 23 84 

^ u ^ T -T^ ^ ,. r235 02 16, 23504 42 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 { ^^^ ,^ ,' ^.. ^- ,- 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 51 

BOMBAY 400093 |632 78 91 , 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHVVAR. COIMBATORE 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Hrmrea at PrimwcH Printers, Aligarh, India 



