**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11462 (1985) : Mould and core sand dryers rotary type 
[MTD 26: Industrical Fuel Fired Furnaces] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11462 -19(5 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

MOULD AND CORE SAND DRYERS, 

ROTARY TYPE 



V D C 62 1 -7 43/' 744 : 63 J ■ 742 '52 : 660 -17*57/ -5 8 




® Copyright I.9IJ6 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI 1IO0OZ 



Or 4 



July |98fc 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

MOULD AND CORE SAND DRYERS, 

ROTARY TYPE 

Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee > SMDC 32 

Chairman Representing 

Shri P. R. Srinivasast National Productivity Council, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri R. K. Agbawal Eastern Equipment & Engineers, Rourkela 

Shbi G. D. Apte Walchandnagar IndustriesLtd, Walchandnagar 

Shri B. G. Phadke ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. BAfcASTTBRAMANiAN Thermal Equipments, Madras 

Dr P. H. Bbangale Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants ( India) 

Ltd, Ranchi 
Shri K. N. Chakravorty Bhartia Electric Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Gangopadhyay The Wesman Engineering CoPvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri U. Nandy ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Goswami Guest Keen Williams Ltd, Howrah 

Shri G. K. Gtjreja Association of Indian Engineering Industry, 

Bombay 
Shri B. N. Kalyani Bharat Forge Co Ltd, Pune 

Dr A. K. Kheb ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Kampar Fuel Furnaces Manufacturers, Vadodara 

Shri R. A. Pradhan ( Alternate) 
Shri J. B. Kamdar The National Agricultural & Diesel Industries, 

Madras 
Shri H. T. Makhuani H. T. Makhijani & Associates, Bombay 

Shri S. V. Chavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Manbal Engineering Projects ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi D. K. Agarwal ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. S. Garg ( Alternate II ) 
Shri R. C. Nandy M. N.Dastur & Co (P) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. De ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Narasimhan Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras 

Shri M. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. A. Patel Indian Furnace Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. H. Khandelwal ( Alternate I ) 

Shri M. Ptjrandhar (Alternate II) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri G. Ramdass Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri I. G. Khanna ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. H. Rane Sahyadri Udyog, Pune 

Shri S. N. Phansalkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Rao Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr S. M. Aeron ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. D. Roy Larsen & Toubro Limited, New Delhi 

Shri Sanjay Dutt ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. G. Sengupta Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Xtd, 

Jamshedpur 
Shri M. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Senior Chemist & Metallurgist, Ministry of Railways 
Wheel & Axle Plant, 
Bangalore 
Chemist & Metallurgist 
(SF) CLW, Chittaranjan 
( Alternate I ) 
Deputy Director (Met-I), 
RDSO, Lucknow ( Alternate II ) 
Shri P. L. Shrivastava Wellman Incandescent India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. Ghose ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. L. Soneji Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. P. Talreja ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. P. Sood ENCON Thermal Engineers, Faridabad 

Shri G. D. Ailawadi ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. F. Surti Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri G. V. Deo {Alternate ) 
Shri K. Raghavendran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretaries 
Shri S. M. Bhatia 
Joint Director (Metals), ISI 

Shri B. K. Mukhopadhyay 
Assistant Director ( Metals ), ISI 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JULY 2011 

TO 

IS 11462 : 1985 SPECIFICATION FOR MOULD AND 

CORE SAND DRYERS, ROTARY TYPE 

[Page 4, clause 1.1(c)] — Delete. 

(Page 5, clause 3.8) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

The drive system shall comprise a friction drive through rollers and tier. Rollers are made of EN-9 steel 
and Tier is made of mild steel. One or two of the supporting roller is/are made live driven through motor 
and gear box and rotates the shell by friction through supporting ring tier. The speed depends on size of 
rotary dryer.' 

(Page 6, clause 3.9) — Delete. 

(Page 7, clause 6.1, line 5) — Delete the words 'and not less than 500 C. 

(Page 7, clause 6.4) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

The atomizing air pressure shall depend on the burner design type and fuel to be used.' 

[Page 7, clause 7.1(i)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 

Fuel oil like heavy furnace oil, 9 500 kcal/kg to 0.78 to 0.96 (for liquid 
light diesel oil, high speed 10 500 kcal/kg with respect to water =1). 

diesel and LSHS fuel Specific gravity with 

respect to water also varies 

for different fuel oil. 

[Page 8, clause 7.1(iii)] — Delete and renumber the other columns. 
[Page 8, clause 7.1(iv)]: 

a) Delete the words '(Baroda gas)' from the first column. 

b) Substitute the following for existing in the second column: 
'8 000-9 000kcal/Nm 3 '. 

c) Delete the words '(with respect to air =1)' from the third column. 



Amend No. 1 to IS 11462 : 1985 

(Page 9, clause 8.1.3, Heading) — Substitute 'Safety of Fuel Combustion' for 'Control of Fuel 
Combustion'. 

[Page 10, clause 8.1.3(e)] — Add the following at the end: 

f) Gas Train Equipment — Gas Train Equipment as safety device shall consist 
of the following: 

— Manual shut-off valve 

— Gas filter 

— Gas governor 

— Safety shut-off valve 

— Low gas pressure switch 

— High gas pressure switch 

— Pressure gauge with 2-way cock 

(Page 10, clause 8.1.4) — Add the following as new clause 8.1.4 and renumber the existing clause 
8.1.4 as 8.1.4.1: 

'8.1.4 Temperature Control System — The dryer can be supplied with or without automatic temperature 
controlling system, which if required will consist of following: 

• Thermocouple to be located in the oven 

• Temperature Controller 

• Combustion Air Control Valve with Actuator 

• Fuel/Air Ratio Regulator 

(Page 11, clause 9.2) — Add the following at the end: 

Tn case of certain types fuel air burners, atomizing air pressure may be higher, say 1 300 to 1 500 mmWG 
and 5 to 6 bar in case of atomization with compressed air.' 



(MTD 26) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

MOULD AND CORE SAND DRYERS, 

ROTARY TYPE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 24 September 1985, after the draft finalized by the 
Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Sand dryers used in Indian industry are of many types. This 
standard is limited to the rotary sand driers operating at approximately 
atmospheric pressure and maximum temperature of 500° C, for drying 
washed and graded silica sand. 

0.3 The silica sand shall contain: 

a) a minimum of 98 percent silica, 

b) not more than 10 percent moisture at the time of its feed to the 
dryer, and 

c) not more than 0*4 percent clay. 

0.4 The wet sand shall flow uniformly through a heat resisting alloy 
chute into the dryer at the rated input per hour in kg and parallel or 
counter current to the flow of hot gases and also in direct contact with 
them. 

0.5 All the physical tests for foundry sands shall be conducted according 
to the methods laid down in IS : 1918-1966*. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960-jv The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



•Methods of physical tests for foundry sands. 
■(■Rules for rounding off numerical valuei (revised). 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

1. SCOPE 

LI This standard applies to newly manufactured sand dryers of rotary 
type, for foundries, using any of the following fuels: 

a) Fuel oil, 

b) Liquefied petroleum gases (LPG), 

c) LPG-air mixture, 

d) Natural gas, and 

e) Coke oven or producer gas. 

2. LOCATION 

2.1 Ovens shall be located and erected so that the building structural 
members shall not be adversely affected by the maximum anticipated 
temperatures. 

2.2 Ovens shall be well separated from valuable stock, important power 
equipment, machinery and sprinkler risers, thereby securing a minimum 
interruption to production and protection in case of accidents to the 
ovens. 

2.3 Ovens shall be safely located and protected from exposure to dip 
tanks, spray booths, storage and mixing room, flammable liquids or 
exposure from or to the diffusion of flammable air-vapour mixtures. 

2.4 Ovens shall be readily accessible with adequate space above them to 
permit installation of automatic sprinklers, proper use of house streams, 
the proper functioning of explosion vents, inspection and maintenance. 

2.5 Combustible roofs and floors of ovens shall be ventilated to keep 
temperature below 71 °C or they shall be well insulated. 

2.6 The external temperature of the floor near the ovens shall not exceed 
121°C when supporting floor is of concrete, steel channels or tiles. 
Adequate insulation therefore should be further provided, equivalent to 
the insulating value used for the oven walls and roof, bearing in mind 
the need of protection against mechanical damage or abrasion. 

2.7 When oven ducts or stacks pass through combustible walls, floors or 
roofs, adequate insulation and clearances shall be provided so that the 
combustible materials do not achieve the temperatures exceeding 71°C. 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

S .MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION AND OTHER 
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS 

3*1 The construction of all parts whether specifically covered by this 
standard or not shall be in accordance with reasonable concepts of 
safety and durability. The equipment and its construction shall provide 
at least a performance level equivalent to that covered in this standard. 

3.2 The brief exposure of the rotating dryer shell to high temperature 
gases, in the first section immediately after the chute shall determine the 
shell thickness, the pitch, height of the flights, which transport the wet 
sand through this section. 

3.3 The front end of the dryer which is connected to the chute from the 
static hot gas mixing duct shall be satisfactorily sealed against in-rush of 
unnecessary cold air, which is detrimental to the thermal efficiency 
of the dryer. If at all this clearance is used to supply fresh excess air, 
the corresponding reduction shall be done in the excess air quantity 
supplied at the burner end. 

3-4 The front end and the rear end of the dryer shall be located in 
reference to the dryer length in such a way as to allow the expansion of 
the dryer lengthwise, on both the ends, as uniformly as possible, depending 
on the ambient temperatuie and the inlet and outlet operating 
temperature. 

3.5 Given equality of surface area and surface condition, the continuous 
heat exchange between the hot gas and the wet sand in a rotary dryer 
depends on the log mean temperature difference and the heat transfer 
area, which in turn depends on the efficiency of the quadrant distribution 
( baffles ), that is, sub-division of the cross-section area of rotary drum. 
This arrangement shall be rugged, simple, dismantable and shall Jiave a 
construction to compensate for the thermal stresses, in situ besides high 
efficiency for heat transfer area. 

3.6 The mountings of the dryers shall be of a good design, precision, 
workmanship, ensuring maximum dependability under heavy rotating 
load, thermal expansion both radial and axial. 

3.7 The bearings of the antifriction type and the guide roller supports shall 
be adjustable on the mounting, which in turn shall be grouted firmly, in 
R.G.G. plinth. Rim rollers and guide rollers shall be of high grade cast 
steel with roller surfaces hardened. 

3.8 The drive system shall comprise a spur toothed gear and pinion of 
high strength cast steel, with accurately cast teeth made of chilled cast 
iron. The speed is 4-6 rev/min approximately. 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

3.9 The pinon shall be driven by a shaft, flexible coupling, helical gear 
box and slip ring induction motor, with a minimum of 200 percent full 
load torque, and with a complete safety guard. 

3.10 Knockers shall be used only if required to prevent the sticking of 
wet sand on the wall of the dryer, near the chute. 

4. DUCT 

4.1 All exposed hot fan casings, cyclones and hot ducts within 2 metres 
of the building floor shall be protected to prevent injury to personnel. 

4.2 Exhaust ducts shall not discharge near the doors nor the windows 
or the other air intakes, in a manner that shall permit re-entry of the 
exhaust into the building. 

4.3 Exhaust ducts containing fines of sand shall not be allowed to 
discharge over the roof. Instead these should discharge into an efficient 
dry cyclone system or with filter fabric or wet cyclones. 

4*4 The surface temperature of all ducts, their bracings, brackets and 
hangers should not exceed 71° C and these should be adequately 
protected with mineral wool insulation. 

4.5 Ducts shall be constructed entirely of sheet steel or other non- 
combustible material of adequate strength and rigidity, to meet the 
service conditions. The ducts of sheet steel shall be constructed of hot 
rolled sheet of thickness not less than 1*6 mm. 

4.6 Ducts shall have adequate facilities for access so as to permit proper 
inspection and maintenance. 

5. CHUTES 

5.1 The chute, through which the wet sand shall flow at the rated 
capacity, shall be subjected to hot gas temperatures not exceeding 700° G. 
Thus it shall be designed with reasonable concepts of durability, 
substantiality and safety. For temperatures up to 400°C, 10 mm thick 
mild steel plates shall be used for the construction of the chute. For 
temperatures above 400° C, suitable grade and thickness of alloy steel 
plates, as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser, shall 
be used. 

6. DRYER — HEATER SYSTEM 

6.1 It shall be a heating system, in which the burners burn the fuel, 
with not more than 10 percent excess air, and produce the products of 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

complete combustion. These shall be then mixed with fresh air 
effectively in a mixing duct, to produce hot gases at a temperature 
not more than 700° G and not less than 500° C, for the parallel and 
counter current flow rotary dryers. 

6.2 The quenching and tempering of the above products of combustion 
from their flame temperature, to the desired temperature of the hot 
gases, in the mixing duct shall be efficient and thorough and shall be 
such that there shall not be a direct flame impingement on the inlet 
chute of the dryer. 

6.3 The combustion chamber shall be designed for safety, the rated 
intensity of heat in kcal/h.m 3 , the flame lengths and the number of 
flames ( burners ). 

6.4 The atomising air pressure may be 1 000 mm of water (gauge) or 
0*7-2' 1 kgf/cm 2 but shall depend on the burner size and desired turn- 
down. 

6.5 Excess air-fuel burners, which may produce hot gases up to 500°C 
may be an alternative to the above burner. 

6.6 An explosive vent shall be provided on the top of the combustion 
chamber or mixer duct in such a way that the operators shall not be 
exposed to any danger or injury. The venting ratio of 1 : 9 for example, 
one square metre for every 9 m 3 of the combustion chamber inclusive of 
the mixer unit, shall be provided. 

6.7 A cyclone fan of adequate capacity with respect to temperature, 
pressure drop and air delivery shall be installed on the discharge side of 
the rotary dryer, in such a way that the hot dried sand shall fall through 
a discharge chute vertically downwards, while the hot gases at about 
125 to 170°C are sucked up by the unit through a set of cyclones. 

7. CHARACTERISTICS OF FUELS 

7.1 In conducting the performance tests, fuels having characteristics as 
shown below shall be used: 



Fuel 






Heating Value* 


SpGr at 15°C 


i) Fuel oil 






10 000 kcal/kg 


0*546 ( for liquid with 
respect to water = 1 ) 


ii) Liquefied 
petroleum 


gas 


(LPG) 


1 1 800 kcal/m s 


1*830 ( for gas with 
respect to air = 1 ) 



♦The heating value refers to lS^C, 760 mm mercury pressure and dry gas. 

7 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

Fuel 
iii) LPG-air mixture 

iv) Natural gas 
( Baroda gas ) 

v) Coke oven gas 
vi) Producer gas 



Heating Value* 
12 670kcal/m 3 

1 1 900 kcal/m 3 

4 200 kcal/m 8 

i 300 kcal/m 3 



SpGrat 15°C 

1*42 ( with respect to 

air = 1) 

0'778 ( with respect to 
air -= 1 ) 

0*45 ( with respect to 
air =* 1 ) 

0*90 ( with respect to 
air = 1 ) 



8. FUEL SAFETY CONTROL {see Fig. 1 ) 



8.1 Fuel safety control covers appliances, such as safety shut-off valve, 
flame detection unit, time-delay relays ( TDR), pressure switches — high 
and low, supervisory cocks, solenoid valves, etc. These devices shall be 
used to provide: 

a) sufficient pre-ventilation, 

b) sufficient ventilation during operation, 

c) control of fuel combustion, and 

d) over temperature protection. 



AMPLIFIER FOR SIGNALS 
y^^RQU THE DETECTOR 



PILOTFLAME AND 
MAIN FLAME ULTRA- 
VIOLET RAY DETEC- 
TOR 



SAFETY SHUT- OFF 
VALVE 




FUEL 



pt- 

1 h *— ignition transformer 

Fig. 1 Fuel Safety Control 



♦The heating value refers to 15°C, 760 mm mercury pressure and dry gas. 

8 



IS i 11462 - 1985 

8.1*1 Pre~ventilation or Purging 

a) Timed pre- ventilation is essential for all ovens in which the fuel 
may accumulate during a shut down period or after an 
accidental flame failure; 

b) For oven volumes less than 10 m 3 , the operation of purging may 
be omitted if the doors are to be opened for turning on the heat 
again; 

c) In all other ovens of volume more than 10 m 3 all doors, manholes 
and explosion vents shall be opened in such a way that the total 
vent area is 1 m 2 , for every 4*5 m 3 of the oven; 

d) An approved time delay relay shall be arranged in the safety 
control circuit and set so as to require the operation of exhaust 
and re-circulating fans for a sufficient time to provide 4 ( four ) 
oven volume changes of FRESH AIR, before the fuel is turned 
on or the conveyor is operated. An audible and visible alarm 

shall operate during the purge; 

e) Combustion blower shall be interlocked so that it may not be 
started, until the purge is completed; and 

f ) Automatic recycling after accidental flame failure is not 
allowed. 

8.1.2 Ventilation 

a) Exhaust duct pockets shall be located in the area of greatest 
concentration of fumes and pockets of static gases; 

b) All exhausts shall be equipped by mechanical ventilators using 
power driven fans. Each oven shall be equipped with its own 
individual exhaust fan and not a common system, serving other 
ovens or equipment; and 

c) A clear space of at least 1 to 2 metres shall be made available 
on the rear side of the burner as a safety operational 
requirement. 

8.1.3 Control of Fuel Combustion — To control the fuel combustion the 
following protective devices may be provided; 

a) S afety shut-off valve — The primary safety shut-off valve used in 
the main fuel supply line shall be of manually opening, 
automatically closing type. This valve shall be properly 
interlocked to shut down upon any abnormal operating 
conditions or failure of safety control circuit. A leak test 
facility shall be provided downstream of fuel supply shut-off 
valve. 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

b) Flame detection device — It detects the presence or absence of 
flame and shall automatically shut-off the fuel supply in the 
event of flame outage. The flame detection equipment shall 
have safe start check and 2 to 4 seconds flame failure response 
time. The flame detector shall be interlocked to shut down 
individual burners, separate zones, or the entire oven at the 
option of the manufacturer. 

c) Pressure switch — A pressure activated device is arranged to effect 
a safety shutdown of the burner or burners from starting in the 
event of a malfunction with respect to the pressure of the fuel or 
combustion air. Both automatic and manual reset type pressure 
switches are acceptable. They shall be interlocked with a safety 
shut-off valve to stop the fuel flow when abnormal fuel pressure 
or combustion air pressure occur. The abnormal pressure may 
be higher or lower than specified for safe and correct operation 
of burner zones or entire oven. 

d) Safety blow device — It is a device provided near the outlet of 
each gas mixing machine, where the nominal size of piping is 
larger than 65 mm to protect the machine in the event of air 
explosion through an automatic fire check, covering a flame 
arrester, a blow out disk, provision of automatic shutting of the 
supply of air gas mixture. 

e) Ignition system — Ovens, when operating below 760° G shall have 
burner ignition by spark ignited interrupted pilots, torch or by 
direct spark ignited self piloted burners. The burners shall 
produce stable flame during the trial-for-ignition period. When 
pilots, or main burners are spark-ignited, the spark shall be shut- 
off at the end of the trial-for-ignition period. 

8.1.4 Excess Temperature Controller — It shall be provided and suitably 
interlocked with the safety control circuit so that all the main burners 
controlled by the circuit shall be shut-off in the event of excess 
temperatures. It shall not automatically re-open the fuel valve. This 
control shall be in addition to any normal temperature control devices 
used. 

8.2 To ensure further the closure of all individual main burners, cocks, 
before the main burner shut-off valve may be opened, the fuel safety 
control system shall also guarantee the following interlock operations: 

a) combustion air pressure is normal, 

b) atomizing medium pressure is normal, 

c) normal gas pressure in the pilot is normal, 

10 



IS 1 11462 - 1985 

d) ventilation fan is operating, 

e) pre-ventilation purge is completed, and 

f) the combustion safeguard of the pilot opens its safety solenoid/ 
shut-off valve. 

8.3 Typical arrangement for fuel safety control for gas fired and oil fired 
heating systems is shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, respectively. 

9. FUEL OIL AND FUEL GAS BURNERS 

9.1 The main burner system shall operate on high-low flame. For oil 
burners one of the following alternatives shall be adopted: 

a) Self Proportioning Low-air Pressure Oil Burner with Single Lever Air 
Oil Control — The control lever may be operated manually 
or by a reversible modualating servo-motor or a pneumatic 
cylinder. The single lever operation shall permit automatic 
proportioning of air-oil ratio, based on the feed back received 
from the temperature control instrument. 

b) Low Air-pressure Oil Burner — It may have external ratio 
regulator for proportioning air-oil ratio. The regulator may be 
used for individual burners, or zones or entire oven and cross- 
connected to combustion air line downstream of air control valve. 
The change in pressure across the valve is the pressure impulse 
on the diaphragm of the regulator. The oil flow is thereby 
regulated automatically in proportion with air flow. The oil 
pressure before the ratio regulator shall be 1*5-2*0 kgf/cm 2 . The 
air control valve may be operated manually or by servo motor by 
the feed back received from the temperature control instrument. 
These burners shall have separate inlet ports for atomizing and 
combustion air. 

9.2 The combustion and atomizing air pressure shall be specified by the 
burner manufacturer but the atomizing air pressure shall be not less than 
620 mm WG for light distillate oils and 970 mm WG for heavy oil. 
Excess air burners with high flame stability are desirable for low 
temperature ovens. These burners shall also be capable of firing on 
ratio. 

9.3 Gas burners shall be essentially nozzle mix type. Air-gas regulator 
shall be used for proportioning gas with regard to air by cross connecting 
the regulator to the main air line down stream of the air control valve. 
Burners shall have high degree of stability under excess air conditions. 

11 



IS : 11462 - 1985 

10. CYCLONE FAN/CYCLONE SYSTEM 

10.1 The dryer design shall be such that the velocity of hot gases across 
the dryer is in the range of 7 500-10 000 metres/hour, at 170°C, Max. The 
fan specification shall then depend on the dryer shell diameter, the 
temperature of the gases at the inlet and the outlet and the pressure drop 
across the baffles, through the axis of the dryer. 

10.2 The cyclone fan shall be connected to a set of efficient cyclones for 
fine dust collection. 



9 9 9 P, .♦ 9 

kizzzzzrezzzzzd 



© © 




@© © ® 



1. Temperature control 12. 

2. Push button near pilot cock 

3. Pilot 13. 

4. Inspirator 

5. Handle 14. 

6. ^ 6 O. D. copper tubing 15. 

7. Filter 16. 

8. Bleedorifice (1/32 size) 17. 

9. Checking pressure switch 18. 

10. Zero governor for several inspirator 19. 

11. Low gas-pressure switch 20. 



Supervising (FM) cock for 

leakage test of safety shut-off valve 

Main safety shut-off valve, manual 

reset 

Light 

Pilot solenoid valve 

Low air-pressure switch 

Main furnace blast gate for air 

Combustion air blower 

Pilot gas-pressure switch 

Zero governor 



Fig. 2 Safety Control for Gas Fixed Heating System 

12 




GO) 



© 



o-Xo-Q 



i r 









ftSM 1 



PS-2 



fi 



^-U^ 



OIL CONNECTION 
AT 7 kg/ cm 2 



5> © 




§a©* 



1. 

2. 
3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 



Combustion air blower at 0*14 kgf/cm 1 

Oil burner 

Safety shut-off valve 

Air-oil ratio regulator ( ratiotrol ) 

Butterfly valve for air 

Oil filter 

Proportioned and metered oil supply line 

Oil shut-off valve — pneumatic 

Diaphragm relief valve 

Oil heater and its electrics 

Oil pump 

Oil pressure gauge 

Fig. 3 Safety Control for 



13. Normally open pressure switch for air 

14. Normally open pressure switch for oil 

15. Supply of secondary air 

16. Flexible air pipe for secondary air 

17. Glpbe valve for oil 

18. Globe valve for oil 

19. Globe valve for oil 

20. Needle or sensitrol valve 

21. Return oil pipe line 

22. Flexible air pipe for primary air 

23. Oil heater expansion chamber 

Oil Fired Heating System 



ss 



3 



to 
en 



