**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12699 (1989) : Selection, installation, operation and 
maintenance of centrifugal jetl pump - Code of practice 
[MED 20: Pumps; 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



■^r.^ 
■' .i^> 



1812m :1IM 

Indian Standard 

SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF JET CENTRIFUGAL 
PUMP COMBINATION — CODE OF PRACTICE 



UDC 621-671 : 621'694 : 006*76 



® BIS 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

JVovem^rl989 PrlceGnwpS 



Pumps Sectional Committee, HMD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 12 June 1989. after the 
draft finalized by the Pumps Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

This standard has been prepared on the basis of information received from industry. The technical 
requirements are covered in IS 12225 : 1987 Uet centrifugal pump combination*. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 1997 

TO 

IS 12699 : 1989 SELECTION, INSTALLATION, 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF JET 

CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First cover page and page 1, tiile ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing title: 

^SELECTION, INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE OF CENTRIFUGAL JET PUMP — 

CODE OF PRACTICE' 

Also substitute 'Ontrifiigal jet pump' for 'jet centrifugal pump combination' 
wherever appear in this standard. 

( Page 1, clause 3.0 ) — Substitute the following for the existing matter 

*3.0 The selection criteria are listed below: 

a) Water well size and capacity^ 

b) Maximum depth from which water is lifted, 

c) Performance requirements, namely, quantity, jet setting depth and 
discharge head (delivery head of centrifiigal pump), 

d) Type of prime mover, 

e) Type of installations, and 

f) Quality of water.' 

( Page 1, clause 3.12) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'3.12 Bore Well 

In bore wells, the sizes of pipe lines depend on the diameter of the bore. For the 
same bore well, if more quantity of water is to be pumped, in order to 
accommodate bigger flow area for the pressure pipe and delivery pipe ( suction 
pipe of centrifugal pump ) of the jet punq> (assemUy) packer/duplex type of jet 
pumps (assemblies) are preferred to twin type jet pumps (assemblies). In all 
bore wells for ease of erection, maximum jet unit outer dimension shall be 

Price Grovp 1 1 



Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 

always 6 mm (minimum) less than the clear boit well size. The maximum 
quantity of water that can be pumped by using these jet pumps ( assemblies ) 
with optimum percentage loss of friction in both pressure and delivery pipes 
( suction pipe of centrifugal pump ) of the jet pumps ( assemblies ) shall be as 
given in Tables 1 and 2/ 

( Page 1, Table 1, column headings ) — Substitute 'Jd INimp ( Assembly ) 
Maximviii Dtmeiuioii' for 'Jet Pump Maiimtaii DfaMBskNi*, 'Niiftry Pipe ( Svctkm 
Pipe of Centrifugal Pump ) DUmeter' for 'Disdiar|e Pipe' and 'Pressure Pipe Diameter' 
for 'Pressure Pipe'. 

( Page 1, Table 2, column headings ) — Substitute 'Imier Pipe ( Suction Pipe of 
CentriAigal Pump) Diameter' /O'* 'Dlsckaiie Pipe Diameter*. 

( Page 2, clause 3.2, sixth line ) — Substitute 'IS 210 : 1993' for 'IS 210 : 
1978'. 

( Page 2, clause 3JJ ) — Substitute 'Quantity' for 'Quality' wherever 
appears in the clause. 

( Page 2, clauses 4 and 5 ) — Designate clauses '4' and '5' as '3.4' and 
'3 J' and renumber the subsequent clauses. 

[ Page 2, clause 4 (b) ] — Substitute the following for the existing matter 

'b) Electric Motor, shall be according to IS 996 : 1979 for single phase and 
IS 7538 : 1975 for three phase.' 

( Page 2, clause 6.1, last sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing sentence: 

'Farther the pipe tapping to the jet pump (assembly) shall be provided in the 
centrifugal pump casing itself.' 

( Age 2, clause 6.1 ) — Insert the following note at the end: 

*NOTE — Typical field instaUatioiis for twin type oeatrifugal jet pump, packer type 
centrifugal jet pump, and duplex type centrifugal jet pump ate given in Fig. 1, Fig. 2 and 
Fig. 3 respectively/ 

( Page 2, clause 6.1A, first and third lines ) — Insert the words 'pump 
(assembly)' after the word 'jet'. 



Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 
( Page 2, clause 6.Z ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
'62 Installation of Twin Type CentriAigal Jet Pump ( see Fig. 1 ) 




PRIMtNC UNIT 

PRtSSURC CONTROL VAlVt 
PRCSSURC CAUCr 
MONO PUMP 
SUP COUPUMC 
CLAMP 

JCT ASSEMBLY 
rOOT VALVt 

DCLIVARV PtPt LIMC or JtT UNIT / 
SUCTION PIPC or CCNTRirUGAL PUMP 
10 PRCSSURC PIPC 



FIG. 1 TYPICAL FIELD Installation for Twin Type Jet 

CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION 



Attend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 

( Page 2, clause 6 J.1, second sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing sentence: 

'Air shall be blown through the jet assembly to ensure that no dirt or foreign 
particles are trapped inside.' 

( Page 2, clause 622 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

%22 Pipe Assembly 

Clean all pipes from foreign paitkles before tightening with jet pump 
(assembly). Tighten the delivery (suction of centrifogal pump) and pressure 
pipes, applying suitable pipe compound to the proper threads with the jet pump 
(assembly). While tightening the delivery pipe ( suction of centrifugal pump ) 
care shall be taken to see that it does not on any account strike the protruding 
poition of the venturi tube. Do not overtighten the pipe in the jet body and while 
tightening the pressure pipe do not move away the two pipes too much as both 
the above actions may lead to breakage of the jet assembly. After tightening 
each length pour water and see that there is no leakage in the joints. A chain 
block of minimum two tonne capacity with tripod consisting of 6-metre k)ng 
50-mm dia pipes, can be used for deep well erection. The delivery (suction of 
centrifugal pump) and pressure pipes shall be clamped with proper size clamp 
securely, and while one clamp is for lowering (or lifting), the nuts of the other 
clamp be loosened and positioned in the proper place and secured to fit the chain 
bk>ck hook for the subsequent operation. Tighten each end of pipe length by a 
binding wire to avoid damage to the jet assembly due to pipe chattering during 
subsequent pipe tightening. When the pipes have been fitted up to full length, tit 
two elbows with the delivery ( suction of centrifugal pump ) and pressure pipes 
with the proper centre distance between the pipes and fit them to the delivery 
(suction of centrifugal pump) and piessuie pipe lines in the conunon flange of 
the centrifugal pumpset. The slip coupling in the pressure pipe line ( see Fig. 1 ) 
facilitates easy erection. Then insert the slip coupling in the pressure line such 
that the cut is in the centre of the coupling. Then tighten pump common flange 
without any leakage with a rubber washer to the pump body. In vertical 
mounting Gt dfaectly the delivery pipe ( suctioit of centrifugil pipe ) to the 
common flange and assemble the slip coupling in the pressure pipe line 
vertically. For horizontal mounting the slip coupling can be conveniently Gtted 
in the horizonUl portion of the presaure pipe line.' 



r Amend No. 1 to IS IU99 : 1989 

( Page 3, clause €.23) — SubstiUite the following for the existing: 

*i.23 Assembly of Discharge Pipe ( Delivery of Centrifugal Pump ) to the 
Monopump 

F\X the discharge ( delivery of centrifugal pump ) flange to the pump body using 
the rubber washer. To the discharge flange (delivery of centrifiigai pump) using 
a nipple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of the T-coupling, tighten the priming 
unit. To the other side, tighten the pressure regulating valve. Connect the 
discharge line (delivery of centrifugal pump) to the overhead tank on the other 
side of the pressure regulator valve. The arrow mark on the valve body shall 
point toward the direction of the flow of water in the discharge line ( delivery of 
centrifugal pump ). Tighten the delivery ( suction of centrifugal pump ) and 
pressure pipe lines in the horizontal portion by a twin clamp before starting. 
Give a proper support to the pipe lines so that they do not give any pressure on 
the pump body. Screw down the pressure guage to the threaded opening 
provided in the pump casing/pressure regulator valve body.* 

( Page 3, clause €3) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

%3 InstaUation of Packer Type Cetntriftigal Jet Pump ( see Fig. 2) 

The main components of packer type jet centrifugal pump combination are: 

a) Centrifugal monoblock pump/coupled pump/belt driven pump; 

b) Jet assembly components: 

1) Packer type jet assembly with foot-valve, packer and strainer 
assembly, 

2) Packer housing contained in a sealing pipe with stopper coupling, 

3) Packer head/well adopter, 

4) Flanges to connect pump and packer head, and 

5) Qamps for outer pipe, irmer pipe and well. 

c) Discbarge (delivery of centrifugal pumps) assembly components: 

1) Pressure regulating valve, 

2) Priming unit, 

3) Pressure gauge, 

5 



Amend No. 1 to IS IU99 : 1989 

4) Air releasing cock, and 

5) Discbarge flange (delivery of centrifiigal pump). 




t ffttlMMG OHir 

2 fRCSSURC CONTROL VALVC 

5 PRCSSURC CAUCC 

4 MONO PUtiW 

5 SUP COUPLING 
t PACKER HCAO 

7 CUMP 

8 iCT PUMP VtHlUm 
• NOZZCL 

to FOOT VALVC 

II OClfVCRY PIPC LINK Of JCT UNIT / 

SUCTION PIPE or CCNTRIFUCAL PUUP 

I J MCSSURC PiPt 



FIG. 2 TYPICAL FIELD INSTAUATION FOR PACKER TYPE JET 
CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION 



r Amend No. 1 to IS 12«99 : 1989 

( Page 3, clause 6.3.2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

*6.3.2 Assembly of Inner Pipe to the Jet Assembly and Locating it Within the 
Outer Pipe 

All the jet assemblies fitted with foot-valve, packer assembly and a strainer are 
to be tested for proper operation before leaving the works. The complete 
assembly of jet, foot-valve, packer assembly and strainer are to be supplied as a 
single unit. They contain two bucket washers at the bottom fitted to the packer 
assembly. Screw down the packer jet assembly to the first length of inner pipe 
by using proper pipe compound so that there shall not be any leakage. During 
the operation, care shall be taken to see that the pipe is clean. During tightening 
operation, the bucket washer shall not be allowed to touch any surface which 
will lead to their damage. Lower the inner pipe with jet assembly into the outer 
pipe so that the rubber packer do not strike the walls of the outer pipe during 
lowering operation. A good suggestion is to use snuill lengths after cleaning 
them thoroughly. Care shall be taken to see that the joints are leakproof. During 
the tightening operation of successive lengths of inner pipe, the bottom portion 
of the pipe lowered inside the casing pipe shall not be allowed to turn. As soon 
as the bottom portion of the jet assembly has touched the stopper coupling, see 
that the inner pipe protnides above the outer pipe flange by 0.2 m. At the top, 
inner pipe shall not be threaded. Do not allow the inner pipe or jet assembly to 
strike the stopper couplings suddenly. This may lead to damage of the complete 
unit itself. Use chain block with tripod to lower the inner pipe.* 

( Page 4, clause 633, line 2) — Delete the word '( delivery )'. 

( Page 4, clause 633 ) — Insert the folk>wing Note at the end: 

*NOTE — The inner pipe becomes che suction line of die centrifugal pump anoular space 
between the inner and outer pipes functions as pressure pipe line.' 

( Page 4, clause 63A ) — Substitute the foltowing for the existing matter 

'63 A Assembly of Discharge ( Delivery of Centrifijtgal Pump ) Pipeline to the 
Monopump 

See 6.23 {otdtUiih.' 

( Page 4, clause 6A) — Substitute the folk)wing for the existing heading: 

*6A Installation of Duplex Type Jet Pump ( s^ Fig. 3 )' 



Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 19S9 



^^^ 





1 PRIKHMO UNIT 

2 FUCSSURC CONTROL VALVC 

3 PftCSSURC GAUGC 

4 MONO PUMf 

9 SUP COUfUNO 

« ^^QUCIEX HCAO / WCa ADOPTCR 

• NOIZU 

10 rOOT VMVC 

1 1 snuwci 



Flo. 3 TrPICAL FIELD INSTALIATIOH FOR DUPLEX Type JET 

Obntrifuoal Pump Combinat[on 



L 



Amend No. 1 to IS 12699 : 1989 



I Page 4, clause 6Al(a) | — Substitute the following for the txhWng 
matter. 

Vi) Assembly of outer pipe and inner pipe to the duplex jet assembly/ 

[ Page 4, clause 6.4.1(c) | — Substitute the following for the existing 
matter 

'c) Assembly of discbarge line ( delivery of centrifugal pump ).* 

(Page4, clause 6 A2, para 1, line 4) — Substitute 'inner' /or 'delivery*. 

( Page 5, clause 6.4.3, heading ) — Substitute 'Inner' for 'Delivery', 

( Page 5, clause 6.43, line 2 ) — Delete *( delivery )'. 

( Page 5, clause 6.43 ) — Insert the following Note at the end: 

'NOTE — The inner pipe becomes the suction line of the centrifugal pump and the 
annular space betueen the inner and outer pipes functions as pressure pipe line.* 

( Page S, clause 6.4.4 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

*6.4.4 Assembly of Delivery Pipeline to the Monopump 

seeiJl3 for details.' 

( Page 6, clause %A, first line) — Substitute 'maintenance requirements '/i^r 
'installations*. 

( Page 6, Annex A ) — Substitute *IS 210 : 1993 Grey iron castings {fourth 
revision y for 'IS 210 : 1978 Grey iron castings {third revision )\ 

{ Page 6, Annex A ) — Insert the following after IS 996 : 1979: 

'IS 7S38 : 1975 Three phase squirrel cage induction motor for 

centrifugal pumps for agricultural application' 



(HMD 20) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 OCTOBER 2007 

TO 

IS 12699 : 1989 SELECTION, INSTALLATION, 

OI*ERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF JET 

CENTRIFUGAL PUMP COMBINATION — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

[First cover page) — Substitute the following for the existing Hindi title: 

aftr ^jwwi - ^rtcJ 4JI|di' 



(ME 20) 



Repngnphy Unit, BIS, New Delhi. India 



:m,fifitf>^tfft 



Indian SKm4(ffd>} 



AasfD■MAINIlNA^FCE OF JET CENTRIFUGAL-. 
PUMF COMBlNATrON — CODE OF PRACTICE. 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This staiidatd layi down general guidclltos 
fb^ selM^tidii, iiiiHdilkiti^, operation and maime- 
Otocifoftwhi^' duple* and paclcer type jet ceptrt- 

2'Rt3SfiIt£NC£S 

Ijl The Indian Standardg; listed in Annex A are 
ndcessary adjuncts to this standard. 

3 SELECTION CtttTEWA 

3.0 The selection criteria are listed below: 

a) Water wtlli^ze, capacity/and depth; 

b) Ptfformaace requirements,, namely^ q^^tity» 
y^ setting 4epth and discharge head; 

c) Type of prime mover; 
d)^Type^ of itfatallations; and 
e) Quality of water. 

3.1 Water Well Size, Capacity tod Deptt 

3.1.1 Open Well 

la ofien wells; thete is i no restriction on^ selection 
of pipe< site for vnm jet oentrilii^l pump cooibina^ 
tioft. 

3^1 J BatfB^Well 

to bore^wella^ the>^ size^ of pipe^ lines depe»ds?ot 
t^diaineter of ttae b(»^ Pot tte same bore weU^ 
if more quantity of Water is to be pum^edv in 
order to acooiuiiiodaike bigger flow areai for tke 
pressure pipe and delivery pipe of the jet pump, 
packer/duplex type of jet pumjjft are preferrecEto 
twin typejef pumps. In all bore wells for ease 
dfettdtti^mA^ttttaj^t puxttp outer diincinsfoil 
sfr^l be always utintmum 6^ mm less tHan^ the 
deafbdtVWeirsiib; llle majciittum qtiantity of 
vWteHfiitr can be iftiimped by using these jet 
fmrtftw witfc Optiitaum pcftfeentag.e loss of frictripfn 
M combined' pipe Ifti* of pressure and delivery qf 
^toip^sHali^beas givett itttkbles 1 and i: 



Table 1 DtmenstoiiaaiidMaxbninnOv^piittfor 
TwUi^Type ^e$.ftWJ8 1 

{Chuse>3.\Jl) 
Dimenston 



miia ■ 

\m\ 

110 

las 

159^ 

200 
200 
200 
250 



mm 

76 

92 
102» 
114 
126 ' 
135- 
164 
172 
185 
230. 



mn^, 


m«i, 


25 i 


20 


32 


25 


40 


32 


40i 


40 


50 


40 


50 


50 


65 


50 


65 


65 


80 


65 


IW. 


80 



l/m>. 

12 

20 

35 

50 

65 

80 
120 
180 
225 
32ft 



NOTE — The discharges indjcftted are for jan opti- 
mum combined pipe rrtctton of abdut lO^percc^; 
Bjr aUowinie /higher fcictional losses, more output 
ca«<b^>ol]^uied. 



Table 2 Dimensions and Maximam Oatj^iit for 
Packer/Doplfx^ %|M^ /ell^^ 

{CbmseKM.2 ) 



-«4^ 



Clear 0ore 
Diameter 



80 
lOQ, 
100, 

ny 

125 
150 
150 
200 



Oater Pipe 

Socket 

Dlaaieter; 



mm 

70 

89 

96 ( TjG )♦. 
102 
102 

122 ( TC )♦ 
127 

147 ( TC )• 
159 



Discharge 
PipeDia- 


•SSf' 


dieter 


Dtome* 




t«f, 


mm 


mn>. 


25 


30- 


40 


6S 


r 50 


8«t 


50 


«o 



50 

65 

65* 

80 

80 



100 
1|00 
125 
t25 



Recom- 
mtAded 
Oatpvt 

l/m 

15 

35 

75 

75 

75 
170 
170 
250 
2ffO 






rrr 



m L ' ^'j?"iu 



3.2 Qmlltsr ef Water 

the quality of w^ter j^i^lTb^^tjeiten intp considera- 
tion for selection qf j^t pijmp and centrifugal 
pump components coRSteifC^iplit When, pimped 



IS 12699 : 1989 



water is neutral, the jet pump shall be made of 
cast iron ( Minimum Grade FG 200 of IS 
210 : 1978 ). When the water is acidic, jet pump 
and impeller of centrifugal pump shall be bronze 
as per Grade LTB2 of IS 318 : 19^1. 

33 Performance Requirements 

3.3.1 Quality 

The quality of water required shall be decided by 
two factors: 

a) Actual consumer requirement, and 

b) Availability of yield of well or bore well. 

The maximum quantity that may be tapped shall 
be 80 percent of the tested yield of the well. 

3 J.2 Jet Setting Depth 

To take care of frictional losses, the jet setting 
depth shall be taken 1*2 times the optimum spr* 
ing depth of the bore well and jet pump shall be 
placed 3 to S m above the bottom of the bore well 
for silt not to enter the jet pump and it shall be 
placed 2 m below the maximum drawn down level 
or to have adequate submergence as specified by 
manufacturer. 

333 Discharge Head 

The discharge head of the jet centrifugal pump 
combination shall be almost near the minimum 
operating head of the system which generally is 
taken as operating head of the centrifugal pump 
minus 6 m. This shall allow the system to operate 
at the optimum efficiency. 

4 TYPE OF PRIME MOVER 

Jet centrifugal pUmp combination shall be 
selected according to the availability of the 
power source. 

a) Diesel Engine, shall be according to IS 
11170: 1985. 

b) Electric Motor, shall be according to IS 
996 : 1979. 

NOTE — If jet centrifugal pump combination is to 
be driven by both, belt driven type centrifugal pump 
shall be prefer! cd. If the pump is to be driven by 
only electric source, monobloc or direct coupled 
pump shall be preferred. 

5 TYPES OF INSTALLATIONS 

a) Vertical 

Whenever the centrifugal pump is to be 
placed in a separate room away from well, 
horizontal installation is preferred and 
whenever space availability is lin^ited and 
where pump has to be placed above the 
well, vertical mounting of the centrifugal 
pump shall be preferred. 



h) fforiiontal 

When centrifugal pump is mounted hori- 
zontally, the length of the horizontal pipe 
line shall not be more than TS to 2 m. In 
case the lengths are to be increased, one 
size higher diameter of pipe shall be used 
to keep tt\e frictional losses minimum. 

6 INSTALLATION 

6.1 Installation of Centrifugal Pomp 

All requirement laid down in IS 9694 ( Part 2 ) : 
1980 shall apply to the centrifugal pump. ( For 
simplicity, the centrifugal pump of the system has 
been taken as a motorized monobloc horizontal 
type centrifugal pump ). The entire installation is 
given for pumps with flange ends; for screwed 
ends, the procedure is the same except that the 
pipes are screwed in and jointed with union joints 
slip coupling. Further, the pipe tapping to the jet 
pump shall be provided in the centrifugal pump 
casing itself in the example considered. 

6.1.1 Plumbing the Well 

Before erecting the jet inside the borewell, lower 
a guide of outer diameter 6 mm bigger than the 
outer pipe coupling/jet diameter with a minimum 
length of 2 m into the borewell. It shall be noted 
that it goes into the borewell freely. At every 3 m 
interval, a knot shall be tied in the inserting rope 
to find out the water depth. A yield test conducted 
in the bore with test pump will also help to 
assess the maximum length of pipe to be lowered. 

6.2 Installation of Twin Type Jet Centrifugal 
Pomp Combination 

6.2.1 Inspection 

All components before erection, shall be inspec- 
ted for possible damage in transit. No dirt or 
foreign particles entrapped inside shall be seen 
by blowing air through jet assembly combination. 
Pour water inside the jet assembly up to pressure 
pipe housing level and find out whether there 
is any leakage in the jet body or the foot valve. 
If there is any leakage in the foot-valve where it 
is threaded with the jet assembly, tighten them 
with suitable pipe compound and thread packing. 
Over tightening will result in breakage. 

6.2.2 Pipe Assembly 

Clean all pipes from foreign particles before tight* 
ening with jet pump. Tighten the delivery and 
pressure pipe» applying suitable pipe compound 
to the proper threads with the ejector body. 
While tightening the delivery pipe/ care shall be 
taken to see that it does not on any account strike 
the protruding portion of the venturi tube. Do 
not over-tighten the pipe in the jet body and 



IS 12699 : 1989 



whMe tightening the pressure pipe^ do not move 
away the two pipes too much as both the above 
will lead to breakage of jet assembly. After tigh- 
tening each length, pour water and see that there 
is no leakage in the joints. A chain block of mini- 
mum two tonne capacity with tripoid eadi of 6 m 
length of SO mm pipe can be used for deepwell 
erection. Each pipe shall be used clamped with 
proper size clamp securely, and while one clamp 
is used for lifting or lowering, the other nuts be 
loosened and positioned in the proper place 
and secured to fit the chain block for the subse- 
quent operation. Tighten each end of pipe length 
by a binding wire to avoid damage to the jet 
assembly due to pipe chattering during subsequent 
pipe tightening. When the pipes have been fitted 
up to full length, fit two elbows with the delivery 
and pressure pipes with the proper centre distance 
between the pipes and fit them to the delivery and 
pressure fHpe lines in the flanges. The slip coup- 
ling in the pressure pipe line facilitates easy erec- 
tion. Make a central cut in the horizontal length 
of the pressure pipe line, then insert the slip coupl- 
ing in the pressure line such that the cut is in 
the centre of the slip coupling. Then tighten the 
slip coupling nuts to seal the pressure line from 
leakage. Tighten pump common flange without 
any leakage with a rubber washer to the pump 
body. In vertical mounting, fit directly the deli- 
very pipe to the common flanges and assemble 
the slip coupling to the pressure pipe vertically. 

6.2.3 Assembly of Discharge Pipe to the 
Monopwnp 

Fit the discharge flange to the pump body using 
the rubber washer and wire gauge to avoid entry 
of foreign particles. To the discharge flange using 
a nipple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of the 
T-coupling, tighten the priming unit. To the other 
side, tighten the pressure regulating valve. Con- 
nect the discharge line to the overhead tank on the 
other side of the pressure regulator valve. The 
arrow mark on the valve body shall point towards 
the direction of the flow of water in the discharge 
line. Tighten the delivery and pressure pipe lines 
in the horizontal portion by a twin clamp before 
starting. Give a proper support to the ejector pipe- 
line so that they do not give any pressure on the 
pump body. 

6.3 iDstallation of Packer Type Jet Centrifagai 
Pump Combination 

The main components of packer type jet centri- 
fugal pump combination are centrifugal mono- 
bloc pump/coupled pump/belt driven pump. 

Jet Assembly Components 
► * . '^ 

a) Packer type jet assembly with foot-valve, 
packer and strainer assembly; 



b) Packer housing contained in a sealing pipe 
with stopper coupling; 

c) Packer head/well adopter; 

d) Flanges to connect pump and packer head; 

e) Clamps for outer and inner pipe, well; and 

f ) Delivery assembly components: 

1) Pressure regulating valve, 

2) Priming unit, 

3) Pressure gauge, 

4) Air releasing cock, and 

5) Delivery flanges. 

6.3.1 Outer Pipe Assembly 

The packer housing which forms the bottom most 
part of the outer pipe is always supplied with a 
screwed in stopper coupling. Clean the packer 
housing and see that the stopper coupling con- 
tains within it, a shock absorbing disc pasted to it. 
Then screw down the packer housing to the first 
length of outer pipe through a coupling firmly 
applying suitable pipe compounds. During the 
tightening operation, care must be taken to see 
that either the packer housing or the outer pipe 
does not collapse due to the excessive or improper 
tightening pressure. Lower first length inside 
the bore gently without striking the walls of the 
bore. Connect through couplings up to the requir- 
ed length, successive bits of outer pipe to the 
first length. On the top of the last bit of the outer 
pipe, tighten the outer pipe flange and place 
above the bore well or open well, using a clamp 
on a bed, which may be bore casing pipe in 
borewells, or a platform of rails in open wells. 
For lowering the outer pipe within the bore well, 
a chain block mounted on a tripoid post must be 
used. Each length of outer pipe must be checked 
for correct bore sizes and for bends, by passing 
through it a guide of the specified outer pipe 
bore size. Any burrs or welding lines inside the 
outer pipe protruding above the specified bore 
size diall be removed and then only the pipe shall 
be used for erection. 

6.3.2 Assembly of Inner { Delivery ) Pipe to the 
Jet Assembly and Locating it Within the Outer 
Pipe 

All the jet assemblies fitted with foot-valve, 

f>acker assembly and a strainer are to be tested 
or proper operation before leaving the works. 
The complete assembly of jet, foot-valve, packer 
assembly and strainer are to be supplied as a 
single unit. They contain two bucket washers 
at the bottom fitted to the packer assembly. 
Screw down the packer jet assembly to the first 
length of delivery pipe by using proper pipe com- 
pound so that there shall not be any leakage. 
During the operation, care shall be taken to see 



is^i; 



2^:198^' 



that the pipe is clean. 



■'K^, ''^:Hu.,on ""I :■;;,, 



^ ^A •■JiU. .'..Ml I 

,,|>uaM.,tigWe _ 

tion, the bucket washer s^iafl pot bejiuowea to 



touch any surface wliibh win lead fo thb!r dAiibiige. 
Liomc^ thftiidivery piB^ wiife. jet,ajRS^Wy uitQ.the 
outer pipe sp that the rubber packer dp t^ot Strike 
the walls of the outfer pipe during lo^efihg'opbra- 
tion. A good suggestion ^ is to use.sidtdl lefigths 
after cleaning them thproughlv. C^ shall be 
taken to see that the joints are leiakpfobr. ' During 
the tightening operation of $uc6esiive bits of 
delivery pipe, the bottom x{H>rtion of the pipe 
lowered inside th^ casing pipe^jsb^ noj; t^^allowed 
to turn. As soqn as the bpttbm pojtion of the 
jet assembly has touched the stPf>per couplings 
see that the delivery pipe protrudes above the 
outer pipe flange by 0*2 im. At th^ top» deliVdiy 
pipe 8h|l]. npt.be threaded- Do npt allow th 
deijfv '' ' ' '' * '''^ 




^. .^jcompleteunij^ieif.., w^^^ , 
tnpoidto lowir the drfivery pfpe^ 




fd'tf^e 



Tlie concentric flow areas between outer and inher 
(dejivery) pipes are ntade twin flow areas by 
filtiog a ^packer head above the outei^ pipe flange. 
Place its gasket above the outer pipe fUmge and 
tboa moUnt the p^ker hi^d above it» passing it 
above the inner pipe outside diameter. In thii 
cojidition» the inner pipe shall be protruding^aboVe 
the packer headtop^ level by at le^t 40 to SO mm. 
Cut> the inoer ipipe \ using hacksaw to the top 
sut^Eace level of. packer .bead. Clean out all the 
burrs around the iniier pipe and insert the sealing 
ring rubber gland aboVe the outside diameter of 
the inner pipe which will sit in its seating in the 
packer head. Place its gasket above the packer 
head^now it ist ready for contiepting^ with the 
moQOpump. Two sets of flanges one for the 
packer head and other for monppump shall be 
supplied. Conni^t these flange usitag two elbowi 
and reqflired length of ptpe^. A sjip^ cpupliog 
may be used for the ease cf erection in the pressure 
line. Using the gasket, tighten this assembly to 
the packer head and monopump. 



6i3 A Assembly 
Monopump 



of Discharge Pipeline to the 



Fit the discharge flangie to the p^mp body usihlg 
therubtier washer and wire gauge to avoid entry 
of foreign particles. . Tp tne dTschargje flah|e usitig 
mpple» tighten a T-coupling. To the top of the 
T-cpupling, tighten the priming ..utilt. To th^ 
outer side, tighten the pi^Uitt x^gulntihg valve 
so that the arrow pn it points tow^rdb the, flow df 
water in discharge pipeline. Connect (he fli^iarg^ 
line to the overhiead tknk» ort the othelf iidc pf thte 
pressure regulator valve. In hprizotftai sets, tiihtefla 
the suction ahd pressiiit pipislihes ih thfe Hori^hty 



P«i«?a!i)y';tiifi^'da^^ 

the pump casmg/pressure reguIatW valve tk>dy. 

It shall be bdrh im mind ' that in du|dex jet^pump, 
both outer and delivery pipe are screwed to Jel 
assemUr togettittr and then lowered in the wall. 
The foot*valve of the AwpYfhi jet pump majf be 
either external to the duplex assembly or internal 
within duplex assteibly. The main c6niponents 
of a duplex type jet centrif\igal pump obmUnation 
are: 

a)l Ceritjil^^f ySnoptiiiiii/coiJ^ 
puiiit); 

b) Thfej« purilp a^feifi%<iPWt)bfie«^ 

1) t>iipljex type jet puinp ji$si?mbly with 
fopt-valve, striaincr and' duplex unit; 

2) OUtefptpl! flang^ 

4) Flanges to connect pump and duplex; 
and 

5) Otot'cr and inner pli)8 clam jfeV 

c) Delivery assembly components: 

1) Pressure regulating valve, 

2) Prlniing unit, 

3) Pressure gauge, 

4) Air releasing cock, and 

5) Delivery flanges. 

6AI\ 'rtel installation of duplex typj^j^t asierhbly 
wiih pii)cs and niono^unip is doneiii three'pba^s. 

a) Assembly pf outer pipe ahd delivery pipe 
( inner i^pt ) to the duplex jet assembly, 

by'A?sej6blfy pf oiiter and inner pip0 tb th^ 
niPnopump tlirpugh duple?^ l^atd/^^ll 
adopter through flahges, and 

c) Assembly of discharge line. 

6.4.2 Assembly of Outer Pipe and Delivery Ptph 
to the Duplex Jet Assembly 

For ease of erection, the length df (Kdi^du^'bitk 
of pipes are generally kept less thai? .three metres 
smce both pipes are assembled toge'tbei%^J^eep the 
length pf the, dejiyerjr pipy.ait.^ast ^m longer 
than oiiter pipe for easy tightening of the inner 
and outer pipe separately. 

Check the difpjex jet assembly for any damage in 
transit and bfpW & ffif&ueh MM mk^so 
that no foreign ^^^& mi d^^ m venturi 



IS 12699 : 1989 



or nozzle. If the footvalve forms an internal p^t 
of the jet assembly, fit a small column of inner 
pipe and pour water to check water tightness of 
seating of the footvalve. 

If the footvalve is external, it should be only fitted 
after the assembly of first length of inner and 
outer pipe to jet assembly before lowering. 
Tighten the jet assembly with first bit of inner 
pipe with proper sealing compound. Above the 
duplex nut seating, place the gasket and place the 
first bit of the outer pipe and tighten both through 
outer pipe coupling using proper sealing com- 
pound. 

Using one clamp on the outer pipe and one on 
the inner pipe, lower the pipes within the bore- 
Pour water within these pipes and check for any 
leakage. If both the inner and the outer pipes 
are lowered to the required length, fix a clamp on 
the outer pipe and house it on the well casing. 
Tighten the outer pipe flange using proper sealing 
compound to the outer pipe. It shall be seen 
that in this position, the inner pipe shall be pro- 
truding above the outer pipe flange by a length of 
at least duplex head height plus 50 mm. 

6.4.3 Assembly of Outer and Delivery Pipe to 
Monopump Through Duplex Head and Flanges 

The concentric flow areas between outer and inner 
( delivery ) pipes are made twin flow areas by 
fitting a duplex head otherwise known as well 
adopter above the outer pipe flange. Place its 
gasket above the outer pipe flange and then mount 
the duplex head above it passing it above the inner 
pipe. In this condition, the inner pipe will be 
protruding above the duplex head top level by at 
least 40 to 50 mm. Cut the inner pipe using 
hacksaw to the top surface level of the duplex 
head. Clean out all the burrs around the inner 
pipe and insert the sealing ring rubber gland above 
the outside diameter of the inner pipe which will 
sit in its seating in this duplex head. Place its 
gasket above the duplex head. Now it is ready for 
connecting it with the monopump. Two sets of 
flanges, one for the duplex head and the other for 
the monopump shall be supplied. Connect these 
flanges using two elbows and the required length 
of pipes. A slip coupling shall be used for ease 
of erection in the pressure line. Using the gasket, 
tighten this assembly to the duplex head and to 
the monopump. 

6.4.4 Assembly of Discharge Pipeline to the 
Monopump 

Fit the discharge flange to the pump body using 
the rubber washer and wire gauge to avoid entry 
of foreign particles. To the delivery flange, using 
ampple, tighten a T-coupling. To the top of 
the T-coupling, tighten the priming unit. To the 
other side, tighten the pressure regulating valve. 



Connect the delivery line to the overhead tank on 
the other side of the pressure regulating gate valve. 
Tighten the suction and pressure pipelines in the 
horizontal portion by a twin clamp before starting. 
Give proper support to the ejector pipeline so 
that they do not give any pressure on the pump 
body. Screw down the pressure gauge to its 
thread in the pump casing. 

6.4.4.1 Electrical connections 

Use proper capacity switch and starter with over- 
load and under voltage protections. While giving 
connection, take care to avoid loose contacts. 
Do not use oversize fuse. Before starting, see 
that the motor runs in the correct direction as 
indicated by the arrow mark on the casing. In 
single phase jet pumps, test with a voltmeter to 
ensure that the line voltage does not go below 1 80 
volts while starting the pump, 

7 OPERATION 

7.1 All the instructions laid down for centrifugal 
pump in IS 9694 ( Part 3 ) : 1980 shall apply to 
the operation of jet centrifugal pump combination. 
Further, the following recommendations shall be 
followed. 

7.1.1 After starting the pump, the pressure regu- 
lating valve/throttle valve shall be adjusted to a 
pressure which is 20 percent higher than the 
minimum operating pressure specified on the 
name plate. Pump shall be allowed to run at 
least for 3 to 4 hours and fall in operating 
pressure shall be recorded. Pressure regulating 
valve shall now be readjusted to the 
minimum operating pressure. Failure of the 
pump to operate at minimum operating pressure 
shall mean that the yield of well is lesser than the 
capacity of the pump. In such cases, readjust the 
pressure to a higher value so that the continuous 
flow of water is established. The failure of jet 
centrifugal pump combination to deliver water 
after starting may be due to the following 
additional factors: 

a) Clogging of foreign particles in jet nozzle 
or venturi. 

b) Foot valve strainer clogging due to mud in 
the well — It is recommended that footvalve 
shall be at least 2 m above the bottom most 
point of well in bore wells and at least 
0*3 m above the bottom in open wells. 

c) Inner changing pressure and delivery pipe. 

d) Leaky joints of duplex nut. 

e) Leaky joints of coupling in pressure and 
delivery pipes. 

f ) Damage of packer washers during erection 
in packer type jet pump. 



6.1 All the installations laid down for centrifugal 
pump in IS ^94 ( Part 4 ) : 1980 shall Apply for 
the maintenance of jet centrifugal pump .^omhi- 
nation. 



9 SHIPMENT 

9d IS 9694 (Part2);1980 
jcen(riff^gal;pump part. 



shall apply to iSbc 



#i2 l«0MhBiiP4AiiiMibly 

a) All tho important cMSponanta, such w» 
venturi, nozzle, footvalve» eic» slurtl -he 
clearly protected and covered from "foreign 
partielefr entry. 

b) The venturi and fo6tvaIve vtem pofti^ 
shall be thoroQ^lhly protected frottv damage 
due to accidental thto^ng of the packing. 

c) Pressure gaiige supplied with the pomp 
shall be thoroigftly protected from damages 
to the dial and the glass cover from shoek. 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 2.1) 

LIST OF r»EBii»W;P INDIAN STANDARDS 



]8 210:I97« Orey iron castings {third 

ftvtikm) 

IS 318 : 1981 Leaded tin bronze ingots 

and castings ( S0€ond 

IS99j6:1979 Single phaae sosall and 

univers^ electric motors 
( sacamf revision } 

lS9694(Paft2);|$»0 Code of practice for Ac 
Selection, installation, 
operation and mainte- 
nance of horizontal centri- 
fjUgal pumps for agricul- 
ture applications: Part 2 
Installation 

189694(PaFt3):1980Codc of practice for the 
selection^ installationt 
operation and mainte- 



IS No. nth 

nanee 6f hdrizomal centri- 
fugal pumps for agricul* 
ture aipplications : Part 3 
Operation 

IS 9694 ( Part 4 ) : 1980 Code of practice for the 
selection, installation, 
operation and mainte- 
nance of horizontal centri- 
ftigal pumps for agricul- 
ture applications: Part 4 
Maintenance 



1811170:1985 



IS 12225 ; 1987 



Performance reiquirement 
constant speed compits- 
sion ignition ( diesi^l ) 
engines fbr agritultutta 
purposes 

Technical requireitieilt fbr 
jet centrifugal pus^com^ 
bination 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without ^e prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Slaplarda 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, ii any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 



Doc : No. HMD 20 ( 4740 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Pablication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi II 0002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zalar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern ; 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktoia 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHQ?AL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
QUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. 
TRIVANDRUM. 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Telephone 

(33101 31 
|331 13 75 

36 24 99 

|2 1S43 
{3 16 41 

r41 24 42 

X412S19 

1^41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 



Printed st Printwell Printers, Dilh], India 



