**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^s*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 

( ?W ^^mi ) 

Indian Standard 

EARTH-MOVING MACHINERY — 
DEFINITIONS OF DIMENSIONS AND CODES 

PART 3 EQUIPMENT AND ATTACHMENTS 

( Second Revision ) 

ICS 53.100 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 2006 „ . ^ 

Price Group 7 



Material Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, ME 07 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 3) (Second Revision) which is identical with ISO 6746-2 : 2003 'Earth-moving 
machinery — Definitions of dimensions and codes — Part 2 : Equipment and attachments' issued by 
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on the recommendation of the Material Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee and 
approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1985. In the first revision ISO 6746-2 : 1987 was adopted. Present 
revision has been taken up to harmonize it with the latest version of ISO Standard. 

The text of the ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard 
without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. 
Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

tn this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their places are listed 
below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International Standard 



ISO 6165 : 1987 Earth-moving 
machinery — Basic types — 
Vocabulary 

ISO 6746-1 : 2003 Earth-moving 
machinery — Definitions of 
dimensions and codes — Part 1 : 
Base machine 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS 12138 : 1993 Earth-moving machinery 
— Basic types — Vocabulary {first revision) 

IS 11114 (Part 2) : 2006 Earth-moving 
machinery — Definitions of dimensions and 
codesiPart 2 Base machine (second 
revision) 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Identical 



do 



For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis.shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)' . The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 11114 (Parti): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Indian Standard 

EARTH-MOVING MACHINERY — 
DEFINITIONS OF DIMENSIONS AND CODES 

PART 3 EQUIPMENT AND ATTACHMENTS 

( Second Revision ) 



1 Scope 

This part of ISO 6746 specifies a reference system 
for defining, and a coding system for identifying, 
equipment and attachment dimensions for earth- 
moving machinery in terminology standards and 
commercial specifications. 

It is applicable to the equipment and attachments of 
basic types of earth-moving machinery as defined in 
ISO 6165. 



1 Doraaine d'application 

La presents partie de I'lSO 6746 specifie un sys- 
tems de reference pour definir les dimensions des 
equipements et des accessoires des engins de ter- 
rassement, dans les normes terminologiques et 
dans les specifications commerciales, et un sys- 
teme de codage pour identifier ces dimensions. 

Elte est applicable aux equipements et accessoires 
des principaux types d'engins de terrassement tels 
qu'ils sont definis dans I'lSO 6165. 



2 Normafive references 

The following referenced documents are indispens- 
able for the application of this document. For dated 
references, only the edition cited applies. For un- 
dated references, the latest edition of the refer- 
enced document (including any amendments) 
applies. 

ISO 6165, Earth-moving machinery — Basic 
types — Vocabulary 



2 References normatlves 

Les documents de reference suivants sont indis- 
pensables pour rapplication du present document. 
Pour les references datees, seule I'edition citee 
s'applique. Pour les references non datees, la der- 
niere edition du document de reference s'applique 
(y compris les eventuels amendements). 

ISO 6165, Engins de terrassement — Principaux 
types — Vocabulaire 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



3 Terms and definitions 



3 Termes et definitions 



For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given in ISO 6165 and the following ap- 
ply. 

3.1 

three-dimensional reference system 

system used to determine dimensions of earth- 
moving machines 

See Figure 1 . 

3.1.1 

zero Y plane 

vertical plane which passes through the longitudinal 
centreline of the machine 

3.1.2 
X plane 

any vertical plane perpendicular to the Y plane 

3.1.3 
Z plane 

any horizontal plane perpendicular to the X and Y 
planes 

3.1.4 

positive coordinate 

positive direction, forward from the zero X plane, 
right from the zero Y plane, and above the zero Z 
plane 

NOTE 1 The intersection of the X, V, Z axes (zero 
planes) is normally located at a well-defined base point: 
i.e. SIP for a seat as defined in ISO 5353; crankshaft 
centreline for an engine; sprocket or rear axle centreline 
for a tractor-dozer; ground line for machine measure- 
ments. 

NOTE 2 If only components (e.g. engine, seat) are 
shown, the location and positive direction of the axis from 
the intersection of the X, Y, Z axes (zero planes) assume 
the normally expected orientation of the component to a 
machine, i.e. number one cylinder of engine to the front of 
the machine, seat facing to the front. 

NOTE 3 If the machine or its equipment or attachment 
or all these are illustrated, a machine driving from right to 
left is shown. 



Pour les besoins du present document, les termes 
et definitions donnes dans I'SO 6165 ainsi que les 
suivants s'appliquent. 

3.1 

syst^me de rdfdrence a trois dimensions 

systfeme utilis6 pour determiner les dimensions des 
engins de terrassement 

Voir Figure 1 . 

3.1.1 

plan Y zero 

plan vertical qui passe par I'axe longitudinal de I'en- 
gin 

3.1.2 
plan X 

tout plan vertical perpendiculaire au plan Y 

3.1.3 
plan Z 

tout plan horizontal perpendiculaire aux plans X 
etY 

3.1.4 

coordonnee positive 

coordonnee situee dans la direction positive: en 
avant du plan X zero, a droite du plan Y zero et au- 
dessus du plan Z zero 

NOTE 1 L'intersection des axes X, Y, Z (plans z6ro) 
est habituellement situ6e en un point de base bien d6fini, 
a savoir, SIP pour un siege tel que defini dans I'lSO 5353, 
axe du vilebrequin pour un moteur, axe du barbotin ou de 
I'essieu arriere pour un tracteur, iigne de rM6rence au sol 
pour des mesurages sur engins. 

NOTE 2 Si Ton a repr6sente uniquement des compo- 
sants (par exemple un moteur, un si6ge), I'emplacement 
et la direction positive de I'axe par rapport d l'intersection 
des axes X, Y, Z (plans z6ro) ont I'orientation normale- 
ment prevue du composant par rapport a un engin, c'est- 
a-dire premier cylindre du moteur par rapport ^ I'avant de 
I'engin, siege face a I'avant. 

NOTE 3 Si un engin ou son 6quipement ou ses ac- 
cessoires ou I'ensemble de ceux-ci sont illustr6s, ils sont 
representes comme se depla^ant de droite i gauche. 



IS11114(Part3):2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



X Plane 



Y plane 




Figure 1 — Three-dimensional reference system 



Plan X 



Y zero 




Figure 1 — Systeme de reference a trois dimensions 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



3.2 

ground reference plane 

GRP 

plane on which the machine is placed for measure- 
ments: in the case of the base machine, a hard, 
level surface; in the case of equipment and attach- 
ments, either a hard, level surface or compacted 
earth 

NOTE The surface used depends on the intended 

use of the machine and its equipment and attachments. 
This needs to be defined when developing specific ISO 
terminology standards or commercial specifications. 

3.3 

base machine 

machine with a cab or canopy and operator- 
protective structures if required, without equipment 
or attachments but possessing the necessary 
mountings for such equipment and attachments 



3.2 

plan de reference au sol 

PRS 

plan sur lequel I'engin est place pour les mesures: 
dans le cas des engins de base, surface plane 
dure; dans le cas des equipements et accessoires, 
soit une surface plane dure ou terre compactee 

NOTE La surface employee depend de Tutilisatidn 

normale de I'engin et de ses equipements et accessoires. 
II est necessaire de la d6finir dans les normes ISO termi- 
nologiques sp^cifiques et dans ies specifications com- 
merciales. 

3.3 

engin de base 

engin, si necessaire avec cabine ou canopy et les 
structures de protection de I'operateur, sans equi- 
pements ni accessoires mais pourvu des dispositifs 
necessaires a un montage de ces equipements et 
accessoires 



3.4 
equipment 

set of components mounted onto the base machine 
which allows an attachment to perform the primary 
design function of the machine 

3.5 
attachment 

assembly of components that can be mounted onto 
the base machine or equipment for specific use 

3.6 
component 

part or an assembly of parts of a base machine, 
equipment or an attachment 



3.4 
equipement 

ensemble d'elements montes sur I'fengin de base, 
qui remplit la fonction primaire de I'engin 



3.5 
accessoire 

assemblage d'elements, qui peut etre monte sur un 
engin de base pour une utilisation specifique 

3.6 
element 

partie d'un assemblage ou partie d'un engin de 
base, d'un equipement ou d'un accessoire 



4 General 



4 Generalites 



Examples of dimensions and codes for equipment 
and attachments, taken from other International 
Standards, are given in Annexes A to E. These 
examples illustrate the use of the three-dimensional 
reference system (see Figure 1) and the coding 
system specified in Clause 5 to define such dimen- 
sions and assign them codes. 

The same general principles should be used when 
defining, and assigning identifying codes to, other 
earth-moving machinery equipment or attachment 
dimensions in specific terminology standards or 
commercial specifications. 

The three-dimensional reference system shall be 
used to determine the dimensions. 



Des exemples de dimensions et de codes pour les 
equipements et accessoires, issus d'autres NormeS 
internationales sont donnes^dans les Annexes A 
a E. Ces exemples lllustrent I'utilisation du systeme 
de reference a trots dimensions (voir Figure 1) et du 
systeme de codage specifie dans I'ArticleS pour 
definir de telles dimensions et leur assigner des co- 
des. 

II convient que les memes principes generaux 
soient appliques lors de la definition et de Tas- 
signation de codes d'identification pour d'autres 
dimensions d'equipements et d'accessoires 
d'engins de base equipant les engips de terrasse- 
ment faisant I'objet de normes terminologiques ou 
de specifications commerciales. 



tS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



The definitions of dimensions and the specification 
of codes for base machine are given in ISO 6746-1 . 



Le syst^me de reference d trois dimensions doit 
§tre utilis6 pour determiner ces dimensions. 

Les definitions des dimensions M des codes pour 
les engins de base sont donn^es dans 
riSO 6746-1. 



5 Coding system 

Each dimension is assigned a code composed of 
capital letters and a reference number. 

Two capital letters shall be used to indicate the type 
of equipment or attachment dimension, according to 
the following: 

HH = height (see Annex A); 

WW = width (see Annex B); 

LL = length (see Annex C); 

RR = radius or reach (see Annex D); 

AA = angle (see Annex E). 

More than one reference number may be added to 
the appropriate capital letters, depending on the 
needs of the specific earth-moving equipment or at- 
tachment for which a standard or commercial speci- 
fication is being developed. 



5 Systeme de codification 

Un code compose de deux lettres majuscules et 
d'un num^ro de reference est assign^ d chaque di- 
mension. 

Deux lettres majuscules doivent Stre utilis6es pour 
indiquer le type de dimension de I'^quipement ou 
de I'accessoire, comme suit: 

HH = hauteur (voir Annexe A); 

WW - largeur (voir Annexe B); 

LL = longueur (voir Annexe C); 

RR = rayon et port§e (voir Annexe D); 

AA = dimension angulaire (voir Annexe E). 

Piusieurs numeros de reference peuvent §tre ajou- 
tes aux lettres majuscules appropriSes, suivant les 
besoins de I'^quipement ou de I'accessoire de 
I'engin de terrassement pour iequel une norme ter- 
minologique ou une specification commerciale est 
en preparation. 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Heights 



Annexe A 

(normative) 

Hauteurs 



This annex gives examples of equipment and at- 
tachment heights and codes showing cases of prac- 
tical implementation of the coding system. 



La pr§sente annexe donne des exemples de hau- 
teurs de;s 6quipements et accessoires et sp6cifie 
leurs codes, montrant I'application du syst6me de 
codage pour quelques cas particuliers. 



Code 



HHXK 



Term and definition 
Terme et d^rinition 



blade height 

distance on Z coordinate between GRP 
and the top of the blade (excluding 
name plate and spill guard) with the 
blade on the ground in mid-pitch posi- 
tion (where applicable) with no blade tilt 
or angle 



hauteur de la iame 

distance sur la coordonn6e Z entre le 
PRS et le dessus de la lame (sauf pla- 
teau et rehausse), la lame 6tgnt au sol 
en position d'attaque moyenne (si pos- 
sible) et n'etant ni bascul^e ni inclin6e 



Illustration 




IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Code 



HHxx 



HHxx 



Term and definition 
Terme et definition 



lift heiglit 

distance on Z coordinate between GRP 
and the lowest point of the cutting edge 
in mid-pitch position (where applicable) 
with no blade titt or angle for blades, or 
the lowest point for the ripper with the 
tooth in lifted position 



hauteur de levage 

distance sur la coordonnee Z entre le 
PRS et le point le plus bas du bord de 
coupe en position d'attaque moyenne 
(si possible), la lame n'6tant ni bas- 
culee ni inclinee pour les lames, ou le 
point le plus bas pour la d§fonceuse, la 
dent etant Iev6e 



Illustration 



maximum height to hinge pin, fully 
raised 

distance on Z coordinate between GRP 
and the centreline of the hinge pin with 
the fully raised bucket 



hauteur maximale de levage 
du godet 

distance sur la coordonnee Z entre le 
PRS et I'axe du tourillon pivotant du 
godet, ce dernier etant en position de 
levage maximale 




PRS 





Iff 




X 

X 








W' 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Code 



////xx 



Term and definition 
Terme et definition 



maximum height of cutting edge or 
teeth 

distance on Z coordinate between GRP 
and cutting edge or teeth at the highest 
point that can be reached 



hauteur maximale du bord coupant 
ou des dents 

distance sur la coordonnee Z antra le 
PRS et le bord coupant au point la plus 
haut pouvant §tre attaint 



Illustration 




IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Widths 



Annexe B 

(informative) 

Largeurs 



This annex gives examples of equipment and at- 
tachment widths and their codes, showing cases of 
practical implementation of the coding system. 



La pr^sente annexe donne des exemples de lar- 
geurs des §quipements et accessoires et specific 
leurs codes, montrant ('application du systems de 
codage pour quelques cas particuliers. 



Code 



Term and definition 
Terme et definition 



Illustration 



WW XX 



maximum width 

distance on Y coordinate between two Y 
piaqes passing through the farthest points of 
the equipment 



largeur maximale 

distance sur la coordonnee Y entre deux 
plans Y passant par les points les plus 6loi- 
gnes des equipements 



ik 
^ 



if^ 



^ 



b^^j 



U 



X 



4_-^ 



r 



t 



WW XX 




WW XX 



C-frame width 

distance on Y coordinate between two Y 
planes passing through the farthest points of 
the G-frame 



largeur du chassis en forme de C 

distance sur la coordonnee Y entre deux 
plans Y passant par les points les plus eloi- 
gnes du chassis en forme de C 




IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Code 



WWxx 



WW XX 



Term and defini'don 
Terme et definition 



width of open grab 

distance in Z plane between tiie furthest 
points of the cutting edges or teeth of the 
open grab 

largeur du grappin ouvert 

distance, dans un plan Z, entre les points les 
plus eloignes des bords de coupe du grappin 
ouvert 



log grapple width 

distance on Y coordinate between two Y 
planes passing through the outermost points 
of the grapple 



largeur du grappin ^ buches 

distance sur la coordonnee Y entre deux 
plans Y passant par les points les plus ex- 
terieurs du grappin 




Illustration 





Jl 



k 



l^Wxx 



10 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Annex C 

(informative) 

Lengths 



Annexe C 

(informathve) 

Longueurs 



This annex gives examples of equipment and at- 
tachment lengths and their codes, showing cases of 
practical implementation of the coding system. 



La pr6sente annexe donne des exemples de lon- 
gueurs des 6quipements et accessolres et sp6cifie 
leurs codes, montrant I'application du systdme de 
codage pour quelques cas particuliers. 



Code 



LL XX 



LL XX 



Term and definition 
Terme et definition 



maximum length 

distance on X coordinate between two X 
planes passing through the farthest points at 
the front and rear of the machine with equip- 
ment/attachment fitted 



longueur maximale 

distance sur la coordonnee X entre deux 
plans X passant par les points les plus eloi- 
gnes a I'avant et d I'arriere de I'engin avec son 
equipement/ses accessoires 



overall length in shipping position 

distance on X coordinate between two X 
planes passing through the farthest points of 
the front and rear of the machine with equip- 
ment/attachment fitted in shipping position 



longueur hors tout en condition 
de transport 

distance sur la coordonnee X entre deux 
plans X passant par les points les plus eloi- 
gnes a I'avant et a I'arriere de I'engin avec son 
equipement/ses accessoires en condition de 
manoeuvre 



Illustration 





11 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Annex D 

(informative) 

Radial and reach dimensions 



Annexe D 

(informative) 

Rayons et portees 



This annex gives examples of equipment and at- 
tachment radial and reach dimensions and their 
codes, showing cases of practical implementation of 
the coding system. 



La pr^sente annexe donne des exemples de rayons 
et de port6es des 6quipements et accessoires et 
specifie leurs codes, montrant {'application du sys- 
teme de codage pour quelques cas particuliers. 



Code 



RRxx 



RRxx 



Term and definition 
Terme et definition 



reacli at maximum height 

distance on X coordinate (Y plane) between 
the axis of rotation and the cutting edges or 
teeth at its maximum height 



portee maximale 

distance sur la coordonnee X (plan Y), entre 
I'axe de rotation et le point le plus eloigne du 
bord coupant lorsque I'equipement est etendu 
pour atteindre la portee maximale 



outside machine clearance radius 

distance on X coordinate {Z plane) between 
the turning centre and the furthest point of the 
machine including equipment/attachment in 
carry position, when executing its smallest 
practicable turn 



rayon minimal de braquage 

distance sur la coordonnee X (plan Z). entre le 
centre de rotation et le point le plus eloigne se 
trouvant sur le cote du godet quand I'engin, 
avec son equipement/ses accessoires en po- 
sition de deplacement, execute sa rotation 
avec un rayon de braquage le plus faibte pos- 
sible 



Illustration 



RRxx 





12 



iS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Annex E 

(informative) 

Angular dimensions 



Annexe E 

(InTormative) 

Dimensions angulaires 



This annex gives examples of equipment and at- 
tachment angles and their codes, showing cases of 
practical implementation of the coding system. 



La pr6sente annexe donne des examples de di- 
mensions angulaires des 6quipements et acces- 
soires et sp6cifie leurs codes, montrant I'application 
du syst^me de codage pour quelques cas par- 
ticuliers. 



Code 



AA XX 



AA XX 



Term and definition 
Terme et definition 



blade angle 



maximum angle in Z plane de- 
scribed by the blade during its ex- 
treme clockwise or ahticlocltwise 
movement measured from the 
straight position 



angle de biais de la lame 

angle maximal dans le plan Z d6crit 
par la lame pendant son mouvement 
extreme vers la gauche ou vers 
la droite, par rapport a la position 
moyenne de la lame 



maximum swinging angle 

maximum angle in Z plane of an 
equipment/attachment during its 
extreme left-to-right movement 
measured from the centre position 



angle d'orientation maximal 

angle maximal dans le plan Z d§crit 
par I'equipement/les accessoires 
pendant leur mouvement extreme 
vers la gauche ou vers la droite, par 
rapport a la position axiale 



Illustration 





13 



IS 11114 (Part 3): 2006 
ISO 6746-2 : 2003 



Bibliography Bibliographie 



[1} ISO 6353, Earth-moving machinery, and [1] \S0 5353, Engins de terrassement, et trac- 
tractors and machinery for agriculture and teurs at materiels agricoles et forestiers — 

forestry — Seat index point Point repere du siege 



14 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are Issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ME 07 (0842). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11 0002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 website : www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r 2323 761 7 

NEW DELHI1 10002 12323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.R Road, Kankurgachi r2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 12337 8626,2337 9120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 r 260 3843 

1260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 r2254 1216, 2254 1442 

122542519,2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) /2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 i 2832 7891 , 2832 7892 

Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



