***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



i ^v l JlA:^:^|fc^^^/fflJ4^^^:^^ 3^^Is:^a ^I ^r ^^ >^»^^ 



IS 12182 (1987) : Guidelines for determination of effects 
sedimentation in planning and performance of reservoirs 
[WRD 10: Reservoirs and Lakes] 



of 



^■^^^^ 



C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 



^ 



ik 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 12182- 1987 

^ ^ ( Reaffirmed 200? ) ^ - fl 

Indian Standard "' ' ^ .^ 

GUIDELINES FOR 
DFTERMiNATlON OF EFFECTS OF 

SEDIMENTATION IN PLANNING AND 

PERFORMANCE OF RESERVOIRS 



ODC 627 f^l T 6:27 8 034 7 



® Cepyfi^hi 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAi^. 9 BAHAUUR SO AH ZAFAR MaRO 

^*Ew DELHI mmi 

Gr 5 FihniQfy 1966 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

DETERMINATION OF EFFECTS OF 

SEDIMENTATION IN PLANNING AND 

PERFORMANCE OF RESERVOIRS 



Reservoirs Sectional Committee, BDG 48 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi N. K. Sarma Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Members 
Shui B. K. BaNerjee Damodar Valley Corporation, Dhanbad 

Chief EnginBEB Irrigation and Power Department, Government of 

Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
SuPEEiNTENDiNG ESGiKEEK ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
DiRECTOB, Tunnel & Spill- 
way ( Alternate ) 
DiRECTOB Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Sara K. N. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Director Public Works Department, Government of Madhya 

Pradesh, Bhopal 

StJPEBlNTENDING ENGINEER 

( Designs ) ( Alternate ) 
DtRECTOR. Irrigation and Waterways Department, Government 

of West Bengal, Calcutta 
Director { Chief Enginei:'! ) Public Works Department, Government of 

Karnataka, Bangalore 
Chief Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( Hydrdeogy-Soctji ) Central Water Commission, !New Delhi 
Deputy Director ( Hydro- 
LoaY-SoTJTti ) { Alternate ) 
Director (Reservoir Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Sedimentation ) 
Deputy D [rector { Reser- 
voir Sedimentation 
Directorate ) ( Alternate ) 
Joint Commissioner ( Soil Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ( Department 
Conservation ) of Agnculture ).. New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act- 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

{ Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri Suresh Chander Gupta Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shri Surinder Kumab Gupta { Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Mehndiratta In personal capacity ( N-13, Tata Apartments, 

Govindpuri Extn, Kalkaji, Xew Delhi ) 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

DiKECTOB ( G ) ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 

Executive Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Supeeintenhing Engineer Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
Executive Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. D. Thatte Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, 

Gandhinagar 
Shri M. K. Pueohit ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. N. Tripathy Irrigation & Power Department, Government of 

Orissa, Bhubaneshwar 
Shri D. S. Upadhyay India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Shri K. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. N. Yoganakasimhan Water Resources Development Training Centre, 

Roorkee 
Dr V. C. Chaupe ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, BIS { Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri Hemant Kumar 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

DETERMINATION OF EFFECTS OF 

SEDIMENTATION IN PLANNING AND 

PERFORMANCE OF RESERVOIRS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on 29 September 1987, after the draft finalized by the 
Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 The storage reservoirs built across rivers or streams lose their 
capacity on account of deposition of sediment. This deposition of sedi- 
ment which takes place progressively in time reduces the active capacity 
of the reservoir which in turn affects the regulating capability of the 
reservoir to provide the outputs of water through passage of time. 
Accumulation of sediment at or near the dam may interfere with the 
future functioning of water intakes and hence affects decisions regarding 
location and height of various outlets. It may also result in greater 
inflow of sediment into the canals/water conveyance systems provided 
at the reservoir. Problems of rise in flood levels in the head reaches 
and unsightly deposition of sediment from recreation point of view may 
also crop up in course of time. 

0.2.1 Water resources systems operate over a long period of time and 
are subiect to ever increasinc demand for water for various nurT^oses. 
Besides, long term changes in terms of technology and production 
functions are also encountered. Man-made changes taking place in the 
river basin and consequent changes in hydrologic regime controlling the 
water inputs over long term periods are also encountered and have to 
be provided for ( All these factors are to be considered and taken into 
account while assessing performance of any reservoir project ). In this 
context, sedimentation of reservoirs is to be viewed as an additional 
factor which has to be considered and its effects studied and evaluated 
on the reservoir performance. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
the practices prevailing in the field in this country. T.his. has been met 
by deriving assistance from Chapter II and. Ill of CBI & P Technical 
Report number 19. 

3 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

1. SCOPE 

l.l This standard lays down guidelines for determining the various 
effects of sedimentation on the performance of reservoir projects in order 
to make suitable allowances in the design of such projects at the time of 
initial planning. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 44 
( Part 6 )-1983* and the following shall apply. 

2.1 Dead Storage — Storage of reservoir not susceptible to release by 
means of the in-built sluices/outlets. 

2.2 Economic Life — If at any point of time, the benefits likely to 
accrue in further operation of the reservoir compare unfavourably 
under the relevant economic criteria with the future costs involved in 
operating and maintaining the system, but excluding any element to 
cover the past costs incurred, the reservoir shall be said to have reached 
the end of the economic life. 

2.3 Feasible Service Time — For a specified purpose, the period or 
notional period for which the reservoir provided or is/was expected to 
provide a part of planned benefit in respect of storage in the reservoir 
being impaired by sedimentation. Customarily, it is estimated as the 
time after which the new zero elevation of the reservoir would equal the 
sill of the outlet relevant for the purpose. 

2.4 Full Service Time — For a specified purpose, the period or 
notional period for which the reservoir provided or is/was expected to 
provide, a part of the full planned benefit inspire of sedimentation. 

2.5 New Zero Elevation — The level up to which all the available 
capacity of the reservoir was or is expected to be lost due to progressive 
sedirnentation of the reservoir up to the specified time. 

Note — New zero elevation is a time related concept and as sedimentation 
progresses, the new zero elevation may rise. Thus specified time should be any 
length of time such as full service time, feasible service time, etc. 

3, PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH SEDIMENTATION OF 
RESERVOIR 

3.1 Following are the main effects of sedimentation on the reservoir: 

a) The reduction of the active storage capacity which may reduce 
the capability of the reservoir to deliver the benefits which could 
have been delivered by the reservoir but for sedimentation. The 

•Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part 6 Reservoirs {first revision ). 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

progressive reduction of the active storage capacity may reflect 
on the outputs from the reservoir in following ways: 

1) It may reduce the dump or secondary output. However, 
where demands have not grown as expected, this effect may not 
be felt. In years of exceptional good run or secondary off, there 
may be no reduction of dump output'^. 

2) It may reduce availability of lirm -water in marginal years by 
increase in both the number and quantum of failures. How- 
ever, in very bad years where no spills would have occurred 
even otherwise, the number and quantum of failures may 
remain unaffected by reduction in active storage capacity. 
Some reduction of benefits from the existing reservoir projects 
as a result of sedimentation of active storage capacities is 
inevitable. However, efforts may be made to make the best 
use of remaining storage capacity as described, in 5. 

b) Sedimentation at or near the d am face may tend to block the outlet 
causing difficulties in operation of the gates. Sedimentation up to 
intake of the outlet may induce more sediment to be carried 
through the conservation outlets, thus causing problems of 
sedimentation of canals, machinery parts, etc Elevation to 
which sediment will accumulate at the dam in a given period 
of time affects the design elevation of outlets for water with- 
drawals, namely, the sill level of canal's taking off from 
reservoir and power penstock sills. Location of these outlets is, 
however, also dependent on other considerations like command 
areas to be covered and minimum head required for functioning 
of turbines. In cases where outlet elevations are controlled by 
above considerations, the effect of sediment accumulation may 
pose no problem. Sedimentation may cause operational 
difficulties by tending to jam the intake gates of the outlet when 
new zero elevation reaches above the gate sill. The problem is 
more serious for gates which are not frequently operated, and 
for situations where early floods occur when reservoir is low 
deposit sediment near the intake. However, in frequently 
operated gates, a local deep approach channel may develop and 
allow withdrawal of water. However, in such cases, difficulties 
caused by passage of sediment in irrigation canals, power 
houses, etc, may become serious. 

c) Sediment accumulation at the dam face may increase the loading 
on the masonry/concrete dam structure beyond what has been 
provided for, 

d) Sedimentation in upper portion of the reservoir may change the 
back water profile from what it would have been put for 
sedimentation. The increase in flood levels upstream of the 

5 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

reservoir may cause additional submergence, formation of 
marshy lands, etc. 

e) The river regime at the entry to the reservoir may get affected 
due to sediment deposits. Delta formation and braided river 
pattern may result and this may be unsightly. Tree growth in 
the delta lends increase evapotranspiration. 

f ) The operation constraints for a reservoir may necessitate certain 
minimum reservoir level and filling generally starts at around 
same level or range of levels. Over a period of years, large 
deposits of sediment may be built up in the reservoir. The 
depth of sediment upstream and downstream of this location is 
small, resulting in a sort of hump in the reservoir bed. This 
hump acts as a natural barrier to the flow of sediment closer to 
the dam. The deleterious effect of this hump formation is the 
early reduction of live storage capacity, 

g) The process of sedimentation in reservoirs may also increase the 
turbidity of water resulting in the environment problems like 
deterioration of water quality and reduction of visibility in the 
reservoir water for fish survival. 

4. STUDY OF EFFECTS OF RESERVOIR SEDIMENTATION 

4.1 The study normally comprises of the following: 

a) Performance assessment with varying rate of sedimentation, and 

b) Likely effects of sedimentation at dam face. 

In special cases where effects of sedimentation on backwater levels 
are likely to be significant, backwater studies would be useful. Similarly, 
special studies to bring out delta formation regime changes may be of 
interest. 

4.2 Performance Assessment ( Simulation ) Studies with 
Varying Rate of Sedimentation 

4.2.1 The following steps are involved for simulation studies: 

a) Selection of annual sediment yields into the reservoir or the 
average annual sediment yield, and of trap efficiency expected; 

b) Distribution of sediment within the reservoir to obtain a sediment 
elevation and capacity curve at any appropriate time; 

c) Simulation studies with varying rate of sedimentation; and 

d) Assessment of effect of seclimentation. 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

4.2.2 Sediment Yield Assessment 

4.2.2.1 Estimation of sediment yield from the catchment area above 
the reservoir is usually made using river sediment observation data or 
more commonly from the experience of sedimentation cf existing 
reservoirs with similar characteristics. On adopting the first procedure, 
it is usually necessary ( though often not complied within practice ) to 
evolve proper sediment water discharge rating curve and combine it with 
flow duration ( or stage duration curve ) based on uniformly spaced 
daily or shorter time units in case of smaller river basins. Where observ- 
ed stage/flow data is available for only shorter periods, these have to 
be suitably extended with the help of longer data on rainfall to eliminate, 
as far as possible, the sampling errors due to shortness of records. The 
sediment discharge rating curves may also be prepared from hydraulic 
considerations using sediment load formulae, that is, modified Einstein's 
procedure but this has not yet become popular. It is also necessary to 
account for the bed load which may not have been measured. While 
bed load measurement is preferable; when it is not possible, it is often 
estimated as a percentage generally ranging from 5 to 20 percent of the 
suspended load. However, practical means of measuring bed load of 
sediment needs to be undertaken particularly in cases where high bed 
loads are anticipated. To assess the volume of sediment that would 
deposit in the reservoir, it is further necessary to make estimates of 
average trap efficiency for the reservoir in question and the likely unit 
weight of sediment deposits, time averaged over the period selected. 
The trap efficiency would depend mainly on the capacity inflow ratio 
but would also vary with location of controlling outlets and reservoir 
operating procedures. Computation of reservoir trap efficiency may be 
made using the trap efficiency curves such as those developed by Brune 
and by Churchill. An illustration of these computations and curves is 
given in Appendix A. 

4.2.2.2 The density of deposited sediment would vary with the 
composition of the deposits, the location of the deposit within the 
reservoir, the flocculation characteristics of clay and water, and the age 
of the deposit. For coarse material ( 0062 5 mm and above ), variation 
of density with location and age may be unimportant. For silt and clay, 
this may be significant. Normally, a time and space average density 
of these fractions, applicable for the period under study is required for 
finding the overall volume of deposits. For this purpose, the trapped 
sediment for the period under study would have to be classified in 
fractions by corrections in inflow estimates of the fractions by trap 
efficiency. Most of the sediment removed from the reservoir should be 
from the silt and clay fraction. In some special cases, local estimates 
of densities at a point in the reservoir may be required instead of 
average density over the reservoir. 



IS : 12182 • 1987 

4.2.2.3 The reservoir surveys give valuable additional information 
regarding the rate of sediment accumulation. Thi^ information may 
be of guidance in deciding the annual sediment inflow "§nd deposition 
for the problem of catchment. However, as given in 4.2.2.4, informa- 
tion obtained through capacity re-survey of reservoirs would have little 
use unless it is accurate enough. While transferring the rates observed 
in adjacent reservoir( s ), considerations for differences in the sediment 
production or trapping characteristics of the cases involved have to be 
kept in view. 

4.2.2.4 Estimates of annual sediment yield/sedimentation rate 
assessed from past data are further required to be suitably interpreted 
and where necessary, the unit rates which would apply to the future 
period are computed by analysing data for trends or by making subjec- 
tive adjustments for the likely future changes. Where the contributing 
drainage area is likely to be reduced by upstream future storages, only 
such of the projects as are under construction or which have the same 
priority of being taken up and completed as the project in question are 
considered for assessing the total sediment yield. Sediment observation 
data ( see IS : 4890-1968* ) is necessary if the yield is being assessed 
from hydrometric data. If observational methods are inadequate, the 
possibility of large errors should be considered. For drawing conclusions 
from reservoir re-surveys, it is important that reduction of at least 10 
percent or more has been observed in the capacities of the two successive 
surveys; if this is not done, inaccuracies in the successive surveys will 
distort the estimation of the capacity reduction between the surveys. If 
the loss of capacity is small, useful conclusions may not be forthcoming, 
and in such cases, river sediment measurements with its large observa- 
tional errors may still provide a better estimate. It is essential to make 
a proper assessment of sediment yield for reservoir under study taking 
relevant factors into account. Any adhoc adoption of a sediment yield 
rate, from experience not fully analysed, may lead to large errors. The 
range recommended in 3.2,3 of IS : 6518-1972t may at best be used for 
rough reconnaissance level studies [ see IS : 5477 ( Part 2 )-1969"{* ]. 

4.2.3 Distribuhon of Sediment Volume — ■ Once an assessment of expected 
volume of total sediment deposition for the required time period has 
been made, the revised elevation area capacity curves of the reservoir 
are prepared by using empirical area reduction methods. 

4.2.4 Simulation Studies with Varying Rate of Sediment — The following 
are the two ways in which the effect of sedimentation may be considered 
in the simulation: 

a) The first method considers the progressive reduction of capacity 
every year or for blocks of a few years, and as the simulation 



* Methods for meafurement of suspended sediment in open channels. 

■fCode of practice for control of sediment in reservoirs. 

JMethods for fixing the capacities of reservoirs: Part 2 Dead storage. 

8 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

progresses, uses the newly updated curve. This method would 
be more appropriate in bringing out the progressive effects on 
the reservoir; however, it requires that the simulation be carried 
out for a long period up to which the benefits of the project are 
required to be monitored through the simulation. 

b) The second method lumps the progressive effect of sedimentation 
up to an appropriate time horizon up to which no reduction in 
firm target benefits is contemplated ( full service time ) and 
considers situation as at the end of that period throughout the 
simulation. Thus, though the performance as given by this 
method is the one that considers the effect of sedimentation up to 
that period ( full service time ), the progressive reduction of the 
dump or secondary benefits within that period should not be 
brought out in this method. The main advantages of this 
method are: 

1) It is relatively simple, and 

2) It does not require that the period of simulation should 
correspond to the full service time. 

4.2.5 Assessment of Effect of Sedimentation on Outputs — The comparison 
of the sedimentation studies would bring out the effect of sedimentation, 
as a vector of the differential performance, as time progresses if method 
given in 4.2.4(a) is followed. If the method given in 4.2.4(b) is 
followed, it would bring out the change in the range and distribution of 
the performances over the time period considered. If the studies are for 
planning purposes, changes in the project features, and necessary 
progressive adjustment in targetted outputs beyond the full service time 
would become apparent and the studies may be repeated after modifying 
the planning decisions. 

5. PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT FOR STORAGE RESERVOIR 

5*1 General — The performance of reservoir project under varying 
hydrologjc inputs to meet varying demands is required to be assessed. 
Although analytical probability based methods are available to some 
extent, simulation of the reservoir system is the standard method. The 
method is also known as the working tables, sequential routing, perfor- 
mance assessment studies, etc. In this method, the water balance of the 
reservoirs and of other specific locations of water use and constraints in 
the systems are considered. AH inflows to and outflows from the 
reservoirs are worked out to decide the changed storage during the 
period. In simulation studies, the inflows to be used may be either 
historical inflow series, adjusted for future upstream water use changes 
or a synthetically generated series so adjusted. Whichever approach is 



15:12182-1987 

used, it shall be used uniformly for assessment of alternate scenarios in 
regard to sedimentation [ see IS : 5477 ( Part 3 )-l969* ]. 

NoTK ■ — A synthetic generation of hydrologic series is a technique which involves 
mathematical modelling of the statistical properties of historical series and the 
activation of the model to generate alternate equally likely sequences. 

5.1.1 A set of practicable and pre-determined operation policies is 
essential, to such studies; so is the idea of a firm demand which the 
reservoir shall meet, as long as possible, within the policy and physical 
limitations. For this purpose, firm irrigation and power and other 
demands which the reservoir should meet are to be pre-determined. 
Demands over and above firm demands are considered as secondary or 
dump demands, meeting of which, although beneficial is not obligatory. 

5.1.2 The acceptability of performance as seen in the simulation is 
decided by checking if the firm demands have been met with the 
desired reliability: that is, whether these meet the acceptability criteria. 
In case, these are not met or the performance is better than required, 
it is customary to change the assumptions and conduct simulation study 
again in the planning phase of the project. In general for irrigation 
and hydro power projects, it is customary to adopt the following accept- 
ability criteria: 

a) Any year or water year in which the firm demands are not met 
fully in each time period separately is labelled as a failure year. 

b) The ratio of failure years to the total years of simulation is 
determined. For irrigation and hydro-power, the ratio shall 
not exceed 0"25 and 1 respectively. The evaluation of per- 
formance may also be made through economic analysis consider- 
ing the series of benefits from year to year during the period of 
simulation. 

5.2 Time Units and Period of Simulation 

5.2.1 In general, for within the year projects, a monthly simulation is 
sufficient for assessing conservational benefits. Shorter period simulation 
is required for assessing benefits of flood control and secondary power. 
Units longer than one month may be used for carry over projects. The 
period of simulation has to be long enough to contain different hydro- 
logic situations which are experienced ( see also 5.1 ). 

5.3 Inflows and Demands — The water inflows in the desired time 
units may be based on the historical data as observed, historical as 
estimated from liydrologic observations of related phenomenon, or 
synthetic hydrologic data. The last method has the advantage that it 
does not make any assumption about the actual flows repeating 



* Methods for fixing the capacities of reservoirs: Part 3 Live storage. 

10 



IS : 12182-1987 

themselves. In all cases, observed trends in hydrologic data may be 
projected in the future operational period. Similarly, the effect of the man- 
made future upstream development may be incorporated, either in the 
form of time dependent changes, or in the form of scenario studies, 
with a pseudo stationary approach with different levels of development. 
Pattern of firm demand is decided on the basis of assessment of future 
energy requirement. Seasonal requirements may or may not be built 
in the demands. The growth of demands after construction may also 
be considered. 

6. STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR PLANNING 

6.1 Procedures for New Storages — A rough assessment of 
seriousness of the problem is necessary to classify the reservoir sediment- 
ation problem as insignificant, significant or serious. Assessment of 
reservoir sedimentation problem, in a particular case, may be made by 
comparing the expected average annual volume of sediment deposition 
with the gross capacity of the reservoir. If ratio is more than 0*5 per- 
cent per year, the problem is usually said to be serious and special care 
is required in estimating the sediment yields from the catchment. If it 
is less than O'l percent per year, the problem of siltation may be insigni- 
ficant and changes in reservoir capacity can be neglected for studies of 
reservoir performance. For cases falling between these two limits, the 
sedimentation problem is considered significant and requires further 
studies. 

6.1.1 The following studies are required if the problem is insignificant: 

a) No simulation studies with sediment condition is necessary. 

b) The feasible service time for the project may be decided. 
Sediment distribution studies to ensure that the new zero-eleva- 
tion does not exceed the dead storage level may be made. 

6.1.2 The following studies are required if the problem is significant 
but not serious: 

a) Both the full service time and feasible service time for the 
reservoir may be decided. 

b) Simulation studies for conditions expected at the end of full 
service time may be made by procedure explained in 4.2.4(a) 
to ensure that firm outputs with required dependability are 
obtained. The studies used also assess non-dependable secondary 
outputs, if relevant, available at the end of this period. Studies 
without sedimentation, with the same firm outputs should bring 
out the additional potential secondary outputs which may be 
available in the beginning, and this information may be used, if 
required, in the economic analysis, using a linear decrease of 
these additional benefits over the full service time. 

u 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

c) No simulation studies beyond full service time are essential. 

d) Studies as described in 6.1.1 for feasible service time are essential. 

6.1.3 The following studies are required if sedimentation problem is 
serious: 

_a) All studies as described in 6.1.2 would be required. 

b) The secondary benefits available in the initial years should be 
more in such cases. If these are being utilised, for a proper 
assessment of the charge of these, a simulation at half of full 
service time should be required. 

c) In these cases, the drop of benefits after the full service time may 
be sharper. To bring out these effects, a simulation of the 
project at the end of the feasible service time is required to be 
done. 

d) Considering (a), (b), and (c) together, it may be worthwhile to 
resort to the more realistic method, given in 4.2.4(a) in simulation 
for cases where the problem is serious. For this purpose, it 
should be sufficient to consider sediment trapped in every 10- 
year block, and to use the expected sedimemal elevation area 
capacity curve at the end of each 10-years block, for simulation 
of that block. 

7. PROCEDURE FOR EXISTING PROJECTS 

a) Assess the present elevation area curve either by reservoir 
re-surveys or by projecting from the earlier survey data, using 
the estimates of sediment yield and its distribmion. 

b) Decide the target firm level of the outputs. To start with, this 
may be based on the earlier planning or on existing situation. 

c) Simulate the reservoir by the method described in 4.2.4(a). It 
should suffice if 10-yearly block is considered and expected 
sedimented elevation area capacity curve at the end of each 10- 
years block is considered for simulation of that block. 

d) Screen the performance to see if the frequency of failures, after 
proper smoothening tends to cross from an acceptable frequency 
to an unacceptable frequency ( see 3.1 ). If this is happening, 
estimate the time of switchover from an acceptable frequency of 
failures to an unacceptable frequency. This represents the end 
of the full service time, thus giving an estimate of the residual 
full service time. If the total full service time ( la j>sed period 
plus remaining period ) is more or less equal to the prescribed 
full service time in the criteria, this would show that the actual 
sedimentatipn has no effect on the project. 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

e) For period beyond the full service time, it should be necessary 
to determine the policy changes in operation which may include 
measures discussed in 7.1 and 7.2. 

7.1 In hydro-electric projects, the slow reduction in the total energy 
generation as a result of partial loss of active capacity may be adjusted 
in the system by reducing the load factor without losing the peaking 
benefits. It is also important to note here that even if the reservoirs for 
such projects were to be silted up completely, the head available in the 
reservoir would give a permanent benefit. 

7.2 In the case of irrigation projects, the reduction in availability of 
water may be adjusted to some extent by changing the crop pattern and/ 
or the dependability criteria. 

7.3 The simulation shall have to be repeated with these changes. If it 
is necessary to bring out the overall effect of sedimentation, or the effect 
of sedimentation due to change in the estimate of sediment load from 
the earlier planning, it should be necessary to recompute steps given in 
7 (a) to (e) for either the no sedimentation case or for the earlier 
assumption of sediment rate. The time series of the differences in per- 
formance should bring out the differential effect. 

7.4 If at any time, the new zero elevation is crossing the sill levels of 
an outlet of a primary purpose, this should signify the end of the 
feasible service period unless with new engineering measures ( see 7.2 ) 
or due to natural development of an approach channel this may be 
extended. 

8. LIFE OF RESERVOIR AND DESIGN CRITERIA 

8.1 General — The reservoir exists for a long time and the period of 
its operation should normally check large technological and socio- 
economic changes. The planning assumptions about the exact socio- 
economic output are, therefore, likely to be changed during operation, 
and similarly, the exact implication of socio-economic differences in the 
output due to sedimentation are difficult to assess. The ever increasing 
demands due to both increase of population and increases in per capita 
needs are of a larger magnitude than the reductions in outputs, if any, 
of existing reservoirs. Thus effects of sedimentation, obsolensence, 
structural deterioration, etc, of reservoirs may require adjustments in 
future developmental plans and not simply replacement projects to bring 
back the lost potential. On a regional or national scale, it is the suffici- 
ency of the total economic outputs, and not outputs of a particular 
project which is relevant. However, from local considerations, the 
reduction of outputs of reservoir like irrigation and flood control may 
cause a much greater degree of distress to the population which has got 
used to better socio-economic conditions because of the reservoir. 

13 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

8.2 Life of Reservoir — Life strictly is a term which may be used for 
system having two functional states 'ON' and 'OFF'. Systems showing 
gradual degradation of performance and not showing any sudden non- 
functional stage have no specific life period. Reservoirs fall in the later 
category. 

8.2.1 The term 'life of reservoir' as loosely used denotes the period 
during which whole or a specified fraction of its total or active capacity 
is lost. In calculating this life, the progressive changes in trap efficiency 
towards the end of the period were commonly not considered. In some 
of the projects, it was assumed that all sedimentation would occur only 
in the dead storage pocket and the number of years in which the pocket 
should be filled under this assumption was also sometimes termed as the 
life of reservoir. This concept was in fact used to decide the minimum 
size of the pocket. Under this concept, no effect of sedimentation should 
be felt in the live storage of the reservoir. It has subsequently been 
established that the silt occupies the space in the live storage of reservoir 
as well as the dead storage, 

8.2.2 It shall not be possible to express the life of the reservoir as a 
specific period. The concerned life related terms such as economic life, 
feasible service time and full service time are defined in 2.2 to 2.4. 

8.2.3 If the operation of the reservoir becomes impossible due to any 
structural defects, foundation defects, accidental damages, etc, this 
situation should also signify the end of the feasible service time. Before 
the expiry of this feasible service time, it may be possible to make large 
changes in the reservoir { for example, new higher level outlets, structural 
strengthening, etc ) or other measures, if it is economically feasible to do 
so. If these studies are done, the feasible service time may be extended. 

8.2.3.1 Economic life — By definition, the economic life cannot be 
more than the feasible service time. In general, for reservoir projects 
with gravity irrigation, operation and maintenance costs are so small 
compared to benefits even from much reduced capacity that economic 
life should be determined by the feasible sedimentation problem; no 
check should be required. 

9. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR NEW PROJECTS 

9.1 General Design Criteria — The design criteria given in 9.1.1 

to 9.1.3 are recommended. 

9.1.1 Irrigation Projects — Full service time shall not be less than 50 
years after the start of operation. Feasible service time shall not be less 
than 100 years after the start of operation. For reservoirs with serious 
sedimentation problem where extension of feasible service time to over- 
come social distress is perhaps feasible, the period may be suitably 

14 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

reduced, provided detailed studies as detailed therein are done, and 
also provided that rigorous economic analysis up to the feasible service 
time and with changing stream of benefits is m^de. 

9.1.2 Far hydro-power projects expected to supply power to a 
community, in isolation the feasible and full service time shall be the 
same as for the irrigation projects. 

9.1.3 For hydro-power projects supplying power to a grid, full service 
time shall not be less than 25 years. Feasible service time shall not be 
less than 70 years. For reservoirs with serious sedimentation problem 
where extension of feasible service time to overcome social distress is 
perhaps feasible, the periods may be suitably reduced, provided detailed 
studies as detailed therein are done, and also provided that rigorous 
economic analysis up to the feasible service time and with changing 
stream of benefits is made. 

to. CONSIDERATION OF EFFECTS OF SOIL GONSERVATIOff 
PROGRAMME 

10.1 Soil conservation may lead to reduction of sediment. This 
programme, apart from benefiting downstream reservoir, covjd have 
large beneficial effects on production of the protected area. However, 
because of the different areas benefitted, socio-economic implication, etc, 
these programmes normally are not included in the economic analysis of 
the reservoir project. Therefore, any change in trend of sediment yield, 
attributable to such programmes, may not be considered in assessment 
of performance of the reservoir. If economic feasibility of the soil 
conservation programme is to be established, any properly established 
reduction of yield, and its effect on the reservoir benefits may be consi- 
dered in that analysis. 

10.2 Normally at the project planning stage, the sediment load calcula- 
tions used in the sedimentation studies are as per the land use existing 
then. If adverse human actions come into operation in the catchment, 
it may result into a higher sediment load than the one assumed in the 
project planning. This should be reflected in the project. 



15 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

APPENDIX A 

{ Clause ^.2.2A ) 
TYPICAL EXAMPLE TO CALCULATE TRAP EFFICIENCY 

A-1. GENERAL 

A-1.1 Trap efficiency of a reservoir, over a period is the ratio of the 
total deposited sediment to the total sediment inflow. Gunnar Brune 
analysed data from 44 reservoirs with catchment areas varying from 
small to very large and presented a median curve together with lower 
and upper envelope curves which is shown in Fig. 1. Using data from 
Tennisse Valley Authority, M.A. Ghurchi! developed a relationship 
between the percentage of incoming sediment and the sedimentation 
index of the reservoir and presented a curve which is shown in Fig. 2. 

ENVELOPE CURVE FOR NORMAL 

PONDED RESERVOIRS 

^ MEDIAN CURVE FOR NORMAL 
\ PONDED RESERVOIRS 




O o 

CD /-^ 



Lrt 


»— 


Csl 


LO 


r- 


OJ 


O 


o 


O 


CD 


o 


<-) 


O 


C3 


fc 


.—. 







CAPACITY INFLOW RAT 1.0 (YEARS) 



A-L2 Description of Terms in Brune's Curve 

a) Capacity — Reservoir capacity at FRL 

b) Injiow — Average annual inflow in volumetric units. 

16 



^ c 
(rt 5 

< 

ace , 










































■^^ 










































^"^--^ 




















=! 






















^ 














OJUJ 

OLj in 
2q: 10 

ix 

O 13 

Zo 5 






















"^ 




^ 


































^=^ 


\ 


N 






."t 1 






























N 






°^7 
































\ 




1 
































N 


\ 


K 


)4 2 


c 


' u 


)5 2 


C 


SEDIMENTATION II^DEX 


5 108 2 
SEC^/m 


S 


109 2 


5 



CO 



h) 



00 



to 

»4 



IS : 12182 - 1987 

A-1.3 Description of Terms in Churchill's Curve 

a) Capacity — Reservoir capacity at the mean operating pool 

elevation for the period considered. 

b) Inflow — Average inflow rate during the study period. 

c) Period of -— Capacity divided by inflow rate. 

Retention 

d) Length — Reservoir length at mean operation pool level. 

e) Velocity — Mean velocity obtained by dividing the. inflow by 

average cross-sectional area. The average cross- 
sectional area is computed by dividing capacity by 

length. 

f) Sedimenta Periods of retention divided by the velocity. 

tion Index 

A-2. EXAMPLE 
A-2.1 Reservoir Data 

a) Full reservoir level 

( FRL ) = 400 m 

b) Mean operating pool elevation = 399 m 

c) Capacity at FRL, Cx - 55-1 x 106 m^ 

d) Capacity at mean operating pool elevation, C^ = 51'5 X 10^ m^ 

e) Average inflow, /, over the study period of 10 years, in volume- 
tric units 

- 1 38006 X 10« m3/year 

f) Length of reservoir, L, at the mean operating level 

= 19 312-13 m 

A-2.2 Brune*s Method 

Capacity inflow ratio 
55-1 

Trap efficiency corresponding to above ratio Cjl as read from 
median curve of Fig. 1 for normally ponded reservoir 

~ 75 pei-cent 

A-2.3 GhurchiPs Method 

Average inflow ratio = 1 380'06 m^/year 

43-76 m3/sec 

18 



IS : 12182 - 1M7 



. , Cs 51-5 X lO^m^ 

Retention period _ = 43.75 ni3/^^ 

= 1- 1.76 9 X 106 sec 

Co, 

A ( Average cross-sectional area ) =^ -~^ 

51-5 X 10«m3 „^^..„_:2 



^-^^ = 2 666-7 m' 
1 y::ii'^- 

T 
Velocity 



1 9312-13 m 
/ 

~A 



^ f2f,.f^"^ == 0016 41 m/sec 
2 ODD 7 m'' 

. , period of retention 
Sedimentation index - ^^^f^dty 

1-1769 X 106 sec 



0016 41 m/sec 
= 7-1718 X 107sec2/m 



Percentage of incoming sediment passing through as read from 
Fig. 2 corresponding to above sedimentation index = 15 percent. 

Trap efficiency = 100 — 15 = 85 percent. 



19 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Baae Unit* 

QjUANTITY 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity 

Plane angle 
Solid angle 

Derived Units 

Quantity 

Force 
Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Unit 



Symbol 



metre 


m 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


g 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candela 


cd 


mole 


mol 


Unit 


Symbol 


radian 


rad 


steradian 


sr 


Unit 


Symboi* 


newton 


N 


joule 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesla 


T 


hertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


volt 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

1 N = 1 kg.m/s* 
1 J = 1 N.m 

I W = 1 J/s 

I Wb = 1 V.s 

1 T = 1 Wb/m' 

1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-'> 
I S = 1 A/V 
I V = 1 W/A 
1 Pa = 1 N/m* 



