**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13161-2 (1992) : Shipbuilding - Noise levels on board 
ships, Part 2 Measurement [TED 17: Shipbuilding] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13161 (Part 2 ): 1992 

. ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

SHIPBUILDING - NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD 

SHIPS 

PART 2 CODE OF MEASUREMENT 



UDC 629- 12 : 534-61 : 006-76 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

January 1992 Price Group 2 



Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TED 17 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division 
Council ( TEDC ). 

This Indian Standard is a part of the series of standards on noise levels onboard ships. 
The other parts are: 

Part 1 Glossary of terms 

Part 3 Maximum noise levels — Code of practice 

Part 4 Noise exposure limits 

Part 5 Requirement for protection 

Part 6 Guidelines for controlling noise exposure 

The purpose of this standard is to specify noise levels and to device means to reduce exposure 
to noise in order to: 

a; Provide for safe working conditions by giving consideration to the need for speech 
communication and for hearing audible alarms, and to an environment where clear- 
headed decisions can be made in control stations, navigation and radio spaces and 
manned machinery spaces; 

b) Protect the seafarer from excessive noise levels which may give rise to a noise-inducted 
hearing loss; and 

c) Provide the seafarer with an acceptable degree of comfort in rest, recreation and other 
spaces and also to provide conditions for recuperation from the effects of exposure to 
high noise levels. 

This standard is intended as a guide and it may not be possible to implement all or any of the 
measures recommended on all ships. Therefore, it also does not cover detailed technical 
information needed for putting constructional noise control measure into effect, or for deciding 
measures appropriate in particular circumstances. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from Publication No. 814 82-05E 
"Noise levels onboard ships", issued by International Maritime Organization ( IMO ). 



IS 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 



SHIPBUILDING - NOISE LEVELS ONBOARD 

SHIPS 



PART 2 CODE OF MEASUREMENT 



1 SCOPE 

This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies operating 
conditions, measurement procedure and 
positions for noise levels in various spaces on- 
board ships. 

2 REFERENCE 

The IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1992 'Shipbuilding — 
Noise levels onboard ships : Part 3 Maximum 
noise levels — Code of practice', is necessary 
adjunct to this standard. 

3 OPERATING CONDITIONS 
3.1 At Sea 

3.1.1 Measurements shall be taken with the 
ship in loaded or ballast conditions. 

3.1.2 The main propulsion machinery shall be 
run at normal design service shaft speed. 
Controllable pitch and Voith-Schneider 
propellers, if any, should be in the normal 
seagoing position. 

3.1.3 All auxiliary machinery, navigation 
instruments, radio and radar sets, etc, normally 
or likely to be, in use at any one time should 
operate throughout the measurement period. 

3.1.4 Measurements in spaces containing 
emergency diesel engine-driven generators, 
fire pumps or other emergency equipment that 
would normally be run only in emergency, or 
for test purposes, shall be taken with the 
equipment operating. Adjoining spaces need 
not be measured with such equipment 
operating, however, unless it is likely that the 
equipment will be operated for periods other 
than those mentioned above. 

3.1.5 Mechanical ventilation and air-condition- 
ing equipment shall be in normal operation, 
taking into account that the capacity shall be 
in accordance with the design conditions. 

3.1.6 Doors and windows shall 
closed but they shall be open 
this is the normal condition, for instance in 
the navigating bridge where the door on the 
lee side is normally open. 



in general be 
in spaces where 



3.1.7 Spaces shall be furnished with all 
necessary equipment. Measurements without 
soft furnishing may be made but no allowances 
shall be made for their absence. 

3.1.8 Ships fitted with bow thrusters, stabilizers, 
etc, may be subjected to high noise levels 
when in operation. Measurements shall be 
taken at positions around such machinery 
when in operation and in adjacent accommo- 
dation spaces and duty stations. 

3.2 In Port 

3.2.1 Measurements as specified in 3.2.2, 3.2.3 
and 3.2.4 shall be taken with the ship in port 
condition. 

3.2.2 Measurements shall be taken with the 
ship's cargo handling equipment in operation, 
in those areas and accommodation spaces 
affected by its operation. Noise originating 
from sources external to the ship shall be 
discounted as indicated in 3.3.3. 

3.2.3 Where the ship is a vehicle carrier and 
noise during loading and discharging originates 
from vehicles, the noise level in the cargo 
spaces and the duration of the exposure shall 
be measured. 

3.2.4 It will be necessary to take measurements 
in machinery spaces with the auxiliary 
machinery operating in the port condition if 
the provisions in respect of ear protection are 
to be met in lieu of the noise level in machinery 
spaces ( continuously manned ) during main- 
tenance, overhaul or similar port conditions. 

3.3 Environmental Conditions 

3.3.1 The depth of water under the ship's keel 
and the presence of large reflecting surfaces in 
the ship's vicinity may affect the readings 
obtained, and shall, therefore, be noted in the 
noise survey report. 

3.3.2 The meteorological conditions such as 
wind and rain, as well as sea state, shall be 
such that they do not influence the measure- 
ments. Wind force 4 and sea state 3 ( equivalent 
to wind speed of 11 to 16 knots ) shall not be 



1 



IS 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



exceeded. If this cannot be achieved, the 
actual conditions shall be reported. 

3.3,3 Care shall be taken to see that noise from 
extraneous sound sources, such as people, 
construction and repair work, does not 
influence the noise level onboard the ship at 
the positions of measurement. If necessary, 
readings may be corrected for steady state 
background noise according to the energy 
summation principle. 

3.4 Safe Measurement Conditions 

With the meter set to 'fast response' spot 
checks should be made at positions of high 
noise level to ensure the safety of a person 
taking measurements. 

4 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES 

4.1 During noise level measurement, only 
seafarers necessary for the operation of the 
ship and persons taking the measurement shall 
be present in the space concerned. 

4.2 Sound pressure level readings shall be 
taken in decibels using an A-weighting filter 
[ dB ( A ) ]. 

4.3 The meter shall be set to 'slow' response 
and the readings made only to the nearest 
decibel. A measuring time of at least 5 seconds 
shall be allowed. If a meter fluctuates in level 
within a range of no more than 5 dB ( A ) 
maximum to minimum, an estimate of the 
level shall be made by averaging the excursions 
of the needle by eye. 

4.4 If the range fluctuations are in excess of 5 
dB ( A ), or the sound is cyclic, irregular or 
intermittent in operation an integrating meter 
shall be used set to A-weighting. Integration 
shall be made over a period of at least 30 
seconds. 

4.5 Exposure Measurement 

In addition to the steady state and fluctuating 
noise level measurements, the noise exposure 
of seafarers may be measured as allowed by 
3.2 of IS 13161 ( Part 3 ) : 1992, if necessary. 

4.6 Calibration 

The sound level meter shall be calibrated 
before and after measurements are taken. 

5 MEASUREMENT POSITIONS 

5.1 Points of Measurement 

If not otherwise stated, measurements, shall be 
performed with the microphone at a height of 
between 1-2 m and 1-6 m from the deck. The 
distance between two measurement points shall 



be at least 2 m, and in large spaces not 
containing machinery, measurements shall be 
taken at intervals not greater than 7 m 
throughout the space including positions of 
maximum noise level. In large cargo holds, not 
more than three measurements need be taken. 
In no case shall measurements be taken closer 
than 0-5 m from the boundaries of space. The 
microphone positions shall be as specified 
in 5.2 to 5.8. 

5.2 Accommodation Spaces 

One measurement shall be made in the middle 
of the space. The microphone shall be moved 
slowly horizontally and/or vertically over a 
distance of 1 m and the mean reading recorded. 
Additional measurements shall be performed 
at other points if appreciable differences, that 
is greater than dB (A), in the level of 
sound in side the room occur, especially near 
the head positions of a sitting or lying person. 

5,1 Machinery Spaces 

5.3.1 Measurements shall be made at the 
principal working and control stations of the 
seafarers in the machinery spaces and in the 
adjacent control rooms, if any special attention 
being paid to telephone locations and to 
positions where voice communication and 
audible signals are important. 

5.3.2 Readings shall not normally be taken 
closer than 1 m from operating machinery, or 
from decks, bulkheads or other large surfaces, 
or from air inlets. Where this is not possible, 
measurement shall be taken at a position 
midway between the machinery and adjacent 
reflecting surface. 

5.3.3 Measurements from machinery which 
constitutes a sound source shall be taken at 
1 m from the machinery. Measurement shall be 
made at a height of 1-2 m to 1-6 m above the 
deck, platform or walkway as follows: 

a) At a distance of 1 m from, and at 
intervals not greater than 3 m around, 
all sources such as: 

1) Main turbines or engines at each 
level 

2) Main gearing 

3) Turbo-blowers 

4) Purifiers 

5) Electrical alternators and generators 

6) BoiLer firing platform 

7) Forced and/or induced draught fans 

8) Compressors 

9) Cargo pumps ( including their driving 
motors or turbines ) 



IS 13161 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 



( In order to avoid an unnecessarily 
large and impractical number of 
measurements and recordings in the case 
of large engines and of machinery spaces 
where the measured sound pressure 
level in dB ( A ) at the intervals above 
does not vary significantly, it will not be 
necessary to record each position of 
maximum sound pressure level shall, 
however,be made and recorded, subject 
to at least four measurements being 
recorded at each level ). 

b) At local control stations, for example, 
the main manoeuvring or emergency 
manoeuvring stand on the main engine 
and the machinery control rooms; 

c) At all other locations not specified in (a) 
and (b) which would normally be visited 
during routine inspecition, adjustment 
and maintenance; 

d) At points on all normally used access 
routes, unless covered by positions 
already specified above, at intervals not 
greater than 10 m; and 

e) In rooms within the machinery space, 
for example, workshops. 

( In order to restrict the number of 
measurements and recordings, the 
number of recordings can be reduced as 
in (a), subject to a total of at least four 
measurements, including those specified 
in this paragraph, being recorded at each 
machinery space level up to upper deck. 

5.4 Duty Stations 

The noise level shall be measured at all points 
where the work is carried out. Additional 
measurements shall be performed in spaces 
containing duty stations if variations in noise 
level are thought to occur in the vicinity of 
the duty stations. 



5.5 Normally Unoccupied Spaces 

5.5.1 In addition to the spaces referred to 
in 5.2 to 5.4, measurements shall be made in all 
locations with unusually high noise levels where 
seafarers may be exposed, even for relatively 
short periods, and at intermittently used 
machinery locations, for example, cargo 
discharge pumps. 

5.5.2 In order to restrict the number of 
measurements and recordings, noise levels need 
not be measured for normally unoccupied 
spaces, holds, deck areas and other spaces 
which are remote from sources of noise and 
where a preliminary survey shows that the noise 
levels are well below the limit specified in 
IS 13161 (Part 3) : 1992. 

5.6 Open Deck 

Meaurements shall be taken in any areas 
provided for the purpose of recreation and 
additionally where a preliminary survey 
indicates that the maximum exposure limit 
without protection may be exceeded. 

5.7 Intake and Exhaust Openings 

When measuring noise levels at the intake and 
exhaust of engines and near ventilation, air- 
conditioning and cooler systems, the 
microphone shall where possible, be placed 
outside the gas stream at a distance of 1 m 
from the edge of the intake or exhaust opening 
and at a 30° angle away from the direction of 
the gas stream and as far as possible from 
reflecting surfaces. 

5.8 Navigating Bridge Wings 

Measurements shall be taken on both navigat- 
ing bridge wings but shall only be taken when 
the navigating bridge wing to be measured is 
on the lee side of the ship. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. TED 17 ( 890 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters i 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones; 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg mi 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 |331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern ; SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 

FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



