**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14140 (1994): Shipbuilding - Ships' Main Engine Fuel Oil 
Piping System - Code of Practice [TED 17: Shipbuilding] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14140:1994 
mT^ ITR^ ^ Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

q^f^nrfT — TfrT ^ ^^ ^^ tm #^ qrffq"^ 

Indian Standard 

SHIPBUILDING — SHIPS' MAIN ENGINE FUEL 
OIL PIPING SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE 



UDC 62912 : 621-436 : 66275 : 62r643-4 : 00676 



e BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1994 Prict Gronp 6 



Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TE 17 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division 
Council. 

This standard has been prepared to give recommendations and requirements for fuel oil piping 
system of ships* main engine with the object of uniformity and proper working of the system. 

In preparing this standard due consideration has been given to factors involved and current 
practices regarding the use of ferrous materials. 

Attention shall be given to the design, fabrication and installation of systems to ensure streamlined 
flow. In particular, abrupt changes in the direction of flow, mismatched pipe bores, tube bore 
protrusions and other restrictions to flow shall be avoided. 

At each stage of construction it is the responsibility of the user of this Indian Standard to ensure 
compliance with the requirements of the statutory authorities and/or classification society as. 
applicable. 

The Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex A. 



IS 14140 : 1994 



Indian Standard 



SHIPBUILDING — SHIPS' MAIN ENGINE FUEL 
OIL PIPING SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies requirements for the 
materials, design, installation, inspection and 
testing of fuel oil piping system of ships' main 
engine including all fittings which form part of 
such system, 

1.2 For the purpose of this standard, the fuel oil 
piping system includes all pipes and fittings from 
the oil tanks to pump suction and the oil return 
pipes from engines to the tanks and engine inlet 
but excludes ail heat exchangers. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

812 : 1957 Glossary of terms relating to 

welding and cutting of metals 

2712 : 1979 Compressed asbestos fibre joint- 

ings ( second revision ) 

3233 : 1965 Glossary of terms for safety and 

relief valves and their parts 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Design Pressure 

The maximum pressure to which the system may 
be subjected when in service and is the value 
used in design calculations. This pressure may 
result from a combination of circumstances 
unlikely to occur under normal working condi- 
tions. But it shall not be less than the highest 
set pressure of the safety valve or relief valve, if 
provided. 

3.2 Test Pressure 

The pressure to which the system and its compo- 
nents are subjected under test conditions, 

3.3 Piping System 

All pipes, pumps, valves and fittings and piping 
from the oil tanks to the pump suction and the 
oil return pipes from engines to the tanks exclu- 
ding all heat exchangers. 



3.4 FJow Conditions 

The expected conditions of oil flow in individual 
parts or sections of the piping system. To meet 
varying design requirements, three conditions as 
given below are recognized: 

a) Continuous Flow — Where the oil in a 
system or part of a system is flowing 
continuously under the ship's normal 
operating conditions. 

b) No Flow — Air vents and a branch connec- 
tion to a main pipe which has its other 
end permanently closed. The oil in that 
branch is regarded as having no-flow 
condition, 

c) Intermittent Flow — All system or part of 
the system not covered by (a) and (b). 

3.5 Parchaser 

The ship owner or ship operator according to 
the circumstances of the particular ship, 

3.6 Manufacturer 

The ship builder or authorised sub-contractor. 

4 SINGLE AND DUAL PRESSURE SYSTEMS 

4.1 The engine builders recommend a dual 
pressure system for high viscosity fuel of 
500 cSt/50''C and above. Fuels having such visco- 
sities require to be heated to a temperature as 
high as ISC'C. There is possibility of fuel oil 
vapourising at this temperature at the suction 
of the main engine fuel pumps causing vapour 
lock failure to inject fuel. For this reason the 
fuel oil is fed to the main engine pumps in two 
stages by means of low pressure ( primary ) and 
high pressure ( secondary ) booster pumps. A 
typical fuel oil diagram for slow speed engines 
depicting the arrangement is given in Fig. 1. 

4.2 In all other cases, a single pressure system 
consisting of one set of pumps to deliver the 
fuel to the main engine fuel pumps is used. 

5 BLENDING 

3.1 General 

Diesel engine fuels include a variety of petroleum 
products ranging from gas oil to heavy fuel oil. 
Gas oil is produced from crude oil by distillation 
and processing, whereas fuel oil is mainly the 
residue left after distillation of the crude oil. 



to AIR VENT MANIFOLD 



FROM DIESEL OIL SEPARAtOR 



FROM HEAVY OIL SEPARATOR 



FROM TRANSFER PUMP 




01 MAIN ENGINE 

02 HEAVY OIL SETTUNG TANK, 
HEATABLE AND INSULATED 

03 HEAVY OIL DAILY TANK, 
HEATABLE AND INSUUTED 

04 DIESEL OIL DAILY TANK 

05 THREE-WAY VALVE, MANUAL 
OR REMOTE OPERATED 

06 SUCTION FILTER.HEATABLE 

07 LOW PRESSURE FEED PUMP 

08 BUFFER UNIT.HtATABLE 
AND INSULATED 

09 HIGH PRESSURE BOOSTER 
PUMP 

10 STEAM FUEL END-HEATER 

11 FUEL OIL FILTER.HEATABLE 

12 FUEL INJECTION PUMP 
ON MAIN ENGINE 

13 VENTING UNIT.HEATABLE 
AND INSULATED 

14 CONDENSATION WATER TRAP 

15 PRESSURE REGUUTING VALVE 

16 LEAKAGE FROM FUEL PUMP 

17 LEAKAGE FROM FUEL 

P\P£ CASING 

18 CONTROL AIR PIPE 

19 DAMPING VESSEL 

20 SCREWED LIFT VALVE 

21 SCREWED DOWN 
NON RETURN VALVE 

UH-LEVEL AURM HIGH 
LAL-LEVEL ALARM LOW 

-41- INSULATED AND HEATED 
^PIPE 

~m- INSUUTED PIPE 



GO 



Fig. 1 Fuel Oil System 



IS 14140 : 1994 



5.2 Heavy fuel is usually a blend of residua! oil 
with lighter components to achieve a desired 
viscosity. 

5.3 If blending of fuels on board ships is inten- 
ded, where direct burning of heavy fuel is not 
desirable for some medium speed engines, care 
shall be taken to make sure that the components 
selected are compatible. Incompatibility of fuel 
can cause operating problems such as heavy 
sludging in the separators, filter plugging and 
deposit formation in engine. High viscosity 
fuel oil is sometimes further blended on board 
with diesel oil to produce an intermediate visco- 
sity fuel suitable for auxiliary diesel and medium 
speed engine?. The blending equipment, heater, 
ratio of blending, etc, shall be in accordance with 
the recommendations of the engine builder. 

5.4 Suitable measures shall be taken on starting 
up and stopping of the engine as well as prolon- 
ged idling on heavy fuel oil as per engine manu- 
facturer's operating instructions. 

6 PUMPS 

6.1 Type and Selection of Pumps 

Fuel oil shall be generally supplied to engine by 
positive displacement rotary pumps. Selection 
of the pump shall be based on the inherent 
advantages of one type over the other. 

6.1.1 The pumps shall have in-built safety valve 
or relief valve which shall be a part of the 
system. 

6.1.2 Usually two pumps shall be installed, one 
as stand by, and driven by separate electric 
motors. The motor rating shall be determined 
by considering the oil viscosity when starting 
from cold. 

6.2 Capacity of Pumps 

6.2.1 Pumps shall be able to deliver the pre- 
heated heavy fuel oil or diesel oil to the fuel 
injection pumps under pressure at a larger flow 
than required. This prevents malfunction due 
to the formation of a vacuum and the accumula- 
tion of gas vapour in the fuel injection pumps. 
The capacity and delivery pressure shall be as 
agreed to between the purchaser and manu- 
facturer in line with the engine builder's rccom- 
tnendation. 

6.2.2 The pump capacity may have to be 
increased if an automatic back-flushing filter 
using the filtered fuel oil for back-flushing is 
installed. 

6.3 Mounting of Pumps 

'6.3.1 Pumps shall be mounted in such a way 



that they are readily accessible for maintenance 
and so arranged that any one pump may be 
opened up for overhauling/repair while other 
pump is in operation. 

6.3.2 The mounting surface provided for the 
pump and motor shall be rigid and able to 
prevent coupling mis-alignment due to work 
load and temperature variations. 

6.3.3 The temperature of the heavy fuel oil at 
feed pump inlet usually exceeds 100**C: 
Therefore, to avoid pumping trouble due to 
the formation of vapour in the suction pipe it is 
recommended that the booster pump be 
installed to have flooded suction. Also the 
resistance to flow in suction line shall b^ kept 
as small as possible. 

6,4 Control of Pumps 

The independently driven pumps are to be 
capable of being stopped from a position outside 
the space which shall be always accessible in 
the event of fire occurring in the compartment 
in which they are situated as well as from 
the compartment itself. 

7 SETTLING/SERVICE TANKS 

7.1 General 

The relative positioning of tanks to each other 
with regard to tank levels must be followed. 
Preferably the shipside shall not be used as a 
boundary for any such tanks. Similarly, such 
tanks shall not have a common boundary with 
any ballast tanks or accommodation deck. The 
tanks equipment shall comply with the rules of 
the Classification Societies. The tanks have the 
following common features; 

a) Provision shall be made for drainage of 
sludge, solid particles and water from the 
bottom of the tanks. The drain valve or 
cock shall be self closing type, 

b) Drain is to be provided at the lowest 
point in the tank. It is essential to design 
the bottom of the tanks to slope 
downwards to facilitate collection of 
sediment and water. 

c) To avoid the ingress of these deposits into 
the injection system, the outlet pipe shall 
be positioned so that the fuel shall be 
drawn off at a level well above the tank 
bottom. 

d) Heating coil shall be provided for all fuel 
oil tanks. For diesel oil provision of 
heating is not necessary. Heating of oil 
in the settling and service tanks shall be 
limited to 10°C below the flash point and 
shall be controlled by a thermostat. 
Temperature of heating medium shall not 
exceed 220"C. 



IS 14140 : 1994 



c) Where a combined vent-cum-overflow 
. pipe is provided on top of each tank, the 
size of the same shall to be 1*25 times the 
size of the filling pipe from pump. If sepa- 
rate overflow and vent pipes are provided 
then the size of the overflow pipe shall 
be r25 times the size of the filling pipe 
from pump and the vent pipe shall be of 
minimum size. 

f ) Level indicator is to be fitted on each 
tank as per rules. 

g) Deflector shall be fitted near to the filling 
points to avoid splashing of oil during 
filling of the tank* 

h) In general, there shall be two manholes 
namely, one on the tank wall the lowest 
point of which shall be about 300 mm 
from the bottom and another on the top 
surface of tank; in the case of tanks of 
less than 5 m^ capacity only one manhole 
may be provided on top or at a convenient 
place. 



j ) A thermometer pocket, 

k) All fuel oil outlet valves shall be of quick 
closing type with provision for remote 
and manual operation for oil fuel tanks 
which are situated above the double 
bottom tanks, the inlet and outlet pipes, 
which are connected to the tank at a 
point lower than the overflow pipe or 
below the top of the tanks without an 
overflow pipe, shall be fitted with shut- 
off valves located on the tank itself. These 
valves shall be accessible and capable of 
being closed from positions outside these 
spaces in the event of fire occurring in 
these spaces. 

Where non-return valves are provided in 
the inlet pipes which are connected below 
overflow lines, quick closing valves with 
remote control are not required. 

Outlet connections of tanks having 

smaller capacities of 500 litres and less 

need not be provided with quick closing/ 
remote control valves. 

m) All heated tanks with heating provisions 
shall be suitably insulated. 

n) A drip tray shall be arranged in way of 
all fittings on the tank valves from where 
oil is likely to drip. This drip tray shall 
be connected to one of the leak-off tanks 
to collect the oil. 

7«2 Settling Tank 

7.2.1 H,0. Settling Tank 



b) provide a suitable constant fuel oil outlet 
temperature which helps to maintain the 
separation temperature in the centrifuges 
within the required margin. 

c) settle out any gross water contamination 
which may occur, as well as sediment. 
The settling tank may be duplicated 
where practicable since the gravitational 
settling shall be a lengthy process. 

The capacity of the tank shall be decided in 
consultation with the engine manufacturer of 
main and auxiliary engines and purchaser. 

7.2.2 D. O. Settling Tank 

The contaminated diesel oil shall be stored in 
this tank. This settles out any gross water 
contamination as well as sediments. 

The tank capacity depends upon the 
consumption of the main and auxiliary engines, 
the mode of operation of ship, etc, and shall be 
determined from case to case. 

NOTE — For the fuel oil and diesel oil settling 
tanks described in 7.2.1 and 7,2.2 the bottom 
drains shall lead to an open funnel or hopper 
using a self closing spring loaded drain valve 
so that the contents of discharge may be visually 
examined. The final discharge of these drains 
shall be led to the leak' off tank. 

7.3 Daily Tank 

7.3.1 H,0. Daily Tank 

Fuel oil from the settling tank shall be pumped 
to the daily tank through a pre-heater and 
heavy oil separators. The overflow line from 
daily tank shall be connected to settling tank 
in order to allow a continuous separation of 
heavy fuel oil, independent of the actual engine 
fuel consumption. A non-return valve without 
manual control preferably flap type shall be 
provided in the overflow line to prevent 
accidental discharge of dirty fuel oil into the 
daily tank. 



This contains dirty heavy oil. 
of this tank shall be to: 

a) act as a buflFer tank. 



The main purpose 



7.3.2 D.O, Daily Tank 

The clean diesel oil from oil separators shall be 
stored in this tank. 

7.4 Mixing Tank ( Buffer Tank ) 

7.4,1 The purpose of this tank is to equalize the 
fuel temperature between the hot surplus oil 
returning from the engine and fuel oil pumpg 
and the oil flowing in from the daily tank. 
Furthermore, it provides a smooth transition of 
fuel viscosity and temperature when switching 
from Diesel Oil to Heavy Oil and vice versa. 

1A.2 Provision shall be made for cleaning the 
bottom part of the tank. The capacity of the 
tank shall be determined in consultation with 
the engine builder. 



IS 14140 : 1994 



7.4.3 Level alarm, heating provisions, drain and 
vent connections shall hz provided for the tank. 

8 HEATERS 

.8.1 Heating coils shall be provided in the heavy 
oil tanks for heating the oil to designed 
temperature conditions in order to maintain 
proper viscosity and flow conditions in the 
system, 

8.2 Pre-heaters shall be provided with the 
heavy oil and diesel oil separators. The 
separation temperature shall be controlled 
within db 2*'C and a correctly sized steam valve 
and pre-heater shall help to maintain constant 
separation temperature. 

8.3 To keep the heavy oil temperature steady, 
steam tracing lines shall be provided along 
with the fuel oil line. 

8.4 Relief valves are to be fitted on the oil side 
of the heaters and are to be adjusted to operate 
at a pressure of 0*35 N/mm* above that of the 
supply pump relief valves. The discharge from 
these valves is to be led to safe positions. 

9 FILTRATION 

9.1 Filters may retain solid particles to a certain 
size. In fuel oil system very fine screen filters 
shall be subjected to frequent clogging and arc 
practically impossible to clean properly. 
Therefore, filters having not too small a mesh 
size need be considered. 

9.1.1 Suction Filter 

The beatable suction filter shall be of the 
simplex type with a mesh size of about 0*5 to 
ro mm. The filter shall be fitted before the 
booster pump. The filter throughput shall be 
more than 20% of the maximum pump capacity. 

9.1.2 Duplex Filter ( Discharge Filter ) 

The beatable duplex filter protects the fuel 
injection system from damage caused by solid 
particles. It shall be located as near as possible 
to the fuel injection pumps. The maximum 
mesh size shall be 0'05 mm. 

10 OIL SEPARATORS 

10.1 Filters may retain solid particles down to a 
certain size. Water and the particles smaller 
than the mesh size of the filter shall be separated 
out to a large extent by centrifugal separators. 

10.2 The fuel oil from settling tank shall be 
pumped to the daily tank through a pre-heater 
and fuel oil separator(s). 

It is desirable to have at least two fuel oil 
separators. These shall be installed in the 
system in such a way that normally each may 



work for a single stage operation, but in case 
of a particularly difficult fuel oil, it shall be 
possible to work both the separators in series as 
a purifier and clarifier respectively. 

The clarifier will not only improve the 
separation results, but it will also act as a safety 
device in case the purifier is not well adjusted. 
The effective separator throughput must be in 
accordance with the maximum consumption of 
the engine plant plus a safety margin of about 

10 to 15 percent. The separators shall be in 
continuous operation from port to port, 

10.3 To maintain a constant flow through the 
separators, integral or separate positive dis- 
placement type pumps operating at constant 
capacity shall be installed. 

11 CONTROL VALVE 

A three-way control valve shall be fitted before 
the mixing tank which controls the changeover 
from diesel oil to heavy oil and vice versa. It 
shall be of manually or electrically or pneumati- 
cally operated type. 

12 VISCOSITY CONTROL UNIT 

This shall be used to maintain the heavy fuel 
oil viscosity at the inlet of injection pumps 
within the prescribed viscosity range. It shall 
be advisable to locate the viscometer up-stream 
of the filter. 

13 DESIGN OF PIPE LINE SYSTEM 
13.1 General 

13.1.1 In designing a fuel oil system certain 
configurations and some types of fittings which 
give an appreciable pressure loss shall be 
avoided, if possible. 

13.1.2 Pipes used in the system shall comply 
with required pressure ranges and shall conform 
to relevant Indian Standards. The type and 
material of the flexible pipes, bellows and 
expansion pieces shall be of approved type. 

13.1.3 In order to keep pressure losses low, the 
pipe run shall be as short and direct as possible, 
tight right-angle bends and T-pieces shall be 
kept to a minimum. 

13.1.4 The diameter of each pipe run shall be 
determined from considerations of the oil flow 
quantities and a permissible 'maximum veloci- 
ty — pipe diameter' specification. The length of 
the pipe shall be such that removal/maintenance 
is easy. 

13.1.5 All pipe lines through which heated oil 
is flowing shall be insulated along with steam 
tracing line. 

13.1.6 The flexible pipes are to be used only 
up to the bore size of 50 mm. For bigger sizes 



IS 14140 : 1994 



expansion pieces/bellows may be used. Securing 
arrangements of flexible pipes^ expansion pipes 
and bellows shall be of approved standards. 

13.2 Recommended Velocities 

The oil velocities for pipe shall not exceed the 
specified values given in Table 1 for guidance 
only. 

13.3 Development of the Design 

Following steps are involved. 

13.3.1 Review basic design data. 

13.3.2 List pump sizes recommended by suppliers 
for a typical duty. List standard modules for 
pump and fuel heater components of the main 
system. 

13.3.3 Study purchaser's specification and note 
special requirements for pipe materials, valves, 
joints, fabrication and erection. 

13.3.4 Study statutory and Classification Society 
requirements for the systems. 

13.3.5 All pipes shall be hydraulically tested to 
requisite pressure by the supplier and test 
reports shall be obtained. 

13.3.6 Establish if any special requirements are 
disclosed by the above procedures and if they 
conflict with standards normally followed by 
sub-contractors or builders. Initiate procedures 
to resolve points of difference and obtain 
outstanding information. 



13.3.7 Preparation of Flow Diagrams ( see Fig, P 
and Fig. 2 ) 

13.3.7.1 Sketch single line flow diagram* 
indicating pumps, machinery units and ancillary 
units specified. The pumps, heat exchangers,, 
etc, shall be capable of functioning when ship is 
trimmed and/or listed within specified limits. 

13.3.7.2 Add legend and a list of symbols and 
abbreviations which shall be used to identify 
pipeline fittings. Symbols used shall conform to 
relevant Indian Standards. 

13.3.7.3 Add specified fittings to diagram^ 
paying due regard to features mentioned else- 
where in this standard which shall keep flow 
resistance minimum for the pipe bore size 
adopted and allow preferential flow, for 
example, through-by-pass where required. 

13.3.7.4 Calculate flow quantities required in 
systems and matching pump capacities. 

13.3.7.5 Establish maximum velocities accep- 
table in system and calculate matching pipe size 
and indicate it in the diagram. 

13.3.7.6 Make first order estimate of probable 
straight pipe lengths and static heads, list fiitings 
and calculate probable flow resistance. This 
calculation shall be kept under review as the 
design is progressed. If the system resistance 
is higher than acceptable, the pipe bores shall 
be reconsidered and the calculation adjusted 
until the results are satisfactory. 



Table 1 Recommended Values of Velocity and Flow Rate 

{Clause 13.2) 

Diesel Oil 



Nom Pipe dia, mm 


32 


40 


50 


65 


80 


100 


125 150 


Suction pipe velocity, m/s 


0-7-09 


0-8-10 


0-9-M 


10-1'2 


M-1-3 


1-2-1-4 


1-3-1-5 1-3-1-5 


Suction pipe flow ratc> ni»/h 


2'0.2-6 


3-6-4*5 


6-3-7*7 


12-0-14*5 


20'C-24-0 


34-0-40-0 


57-0-660 830-95-0 


Delivery pipe velocity, m/s 


0'9-M 


10-1-2 


11-1*3 


1-2-1*4 


1-3-1-5 


r4-i-6 


1-5-1-7 1*5-1-7 


Delivery pipe flow rate. mVh 


2-6-3-2 


4-5-5-4 


7-7-9*1 


14-5-17-0 


240-27-0 


40-0-45-0 


66-0-75-0 95*0-108 


Heavy Oil 


Nom pipe dia, mm 


32 


40 


50 


65 


80 


100 


125 150 


Suction pipe velocity, m/s 


0'3-0*5 


0*3-0-5 


0-3-0-5 


0*4-06 


0-5-0-6 


0-5.0-7 


0-6-0'8 0-6-0-8 


Suction pipe flow rate m^/h 


0-9-1-5 


1-4.2 3 


21-3'5 


4'8-7-2 


7-2-10-9 


14-0-200 


26-0-35-0 380-51'0 


Delivery pipe velocity, m/s 


0*4-0'6 


0-5-0'7 


0-6-0-8 


0-7-0-9 


0-8-10 


0-9-1-1 


1-0-1-2 l'0-l-2 


Delivery pipe flow rate, m»/h 


1 -2-1*7 


2-3.3-2 


4-2-5-6 


8-4-10-8 


14-5-180 


25*0.310 


44-0-53*0 64*0-760 



IS 14140 : 1994 



I 



QUICK CLOSING VALVE 



CX3 SCREWED LIFT VALVE 

^^ SCREWED DOWN 
^ NON RETURN VALVE 






O FROM DIESEL 

■7^^*^ OIL SEPARATOR 



% \ %% 




FROM TRANSFER 
PUMP 



SIGHT GLASS 



TO OVERFLOW 
TANK 



SUCTION FILTERS 



FUEL OIL 
BOOSTER PUMPS 



TO OVERFLOW TANK 

Fio. 2 SCHEMATIC Arrangement of Fuel Oil System ( Diesel Oil only ) 



13.3.7.7 Results obtained shall be checked with 
an economic analysis of the cost of pumping the 
quantity required with various flow resistance 
pumps and pipe sizes to ensure they are 
compatible. 

13.3.8 Preparation of Isometric Sketches 

13.3.8.1 Flow paths may be readily visualised 
and piping layout generally decided by means of 
such sketches which may be supplementary and/ 
or alternative to flow diagrams and piping 
arrangement drawings. 

13.3.8.2 Such isometric sketches shall show the 
general arrangement of equipment and piping, 
with limited details, to determine optimum 
layout and nozzle orientation on equipment. 
Instrumentation requirements for pipe connec- 
tions may also be determined. 

13.3.9 Ordering of Equipment 

13,3,9.1 Lists of special fittings required — for 
example, special valves, control valves, spectacle 
pieces — shall be prepared from the available 
sketches. Preliminary requisitions for such 
fittings and for pumps, piping, etc, shall be 
issued. Such requisitions shall be kept under 
review as the systems are developed. 



13.3.10 Piping Layout 

13.3.10.1 If model techniques are not employed' 
nor alternative, permanent records of the layout 
found acceptable, it will be necessary to prepare 
pipe arrangement drawings. Such drawings 
shall; 

a) Determine scale and show orientation, 

b) Show the essential minimum detail of 
associated equipment and ship structure 
to determine system component locations 
and clearances. Such outlines shall 
contrast with piping; 

c) Provide clearances for all equipment for 
easy access and maintenance. 

d) Provide accessibility to all system 
components which may require manipula- 
tion, inspection and maintenance. 

e) Provide easily portable sections, short 
bends or make up pieces to facilitate 
removal of equipment and fittings, 

f ) Show piping by single line except where 
double line is essential to demonstrate 
clearances. 



IS 14140 : 1994 



g) Arrange pipe runs on fore and aft line or 
athwartships except where large size or 
other criteria justify the minimum length 
between two points being used. As far as 
possible the pipes shall be laid along the 
bulkhead, deckhead, shipside and under 
the floor plates so that space in the 
compartment may be utilised to the best 
possible extent. 

h) Give preference to large bore pipe runs 
to give direct runs where possible and 
minimize fabrication costs. Such pipes 
shall be routed to take advantage of ship 
structure for supports and pipe supports 
to be shown on drawing. 

j) Keep the number of joints to a minimum 
practicable number. 

k) Lay pipes in such a way that they shall 
not touch the tank top. It is advisable to 
give sufficient clearance between the 
pipes and the tank top to avoid pipes 
submerging in bilge water and also for 
inspection of the tank top and also 
opening flanges. 

m) Show the essential minimum details of 
scatings of equipment, ladder ways, etc, 
to enable to design the fully co-ordinated 
pipe layout. 

n) Specify that lifting eyes to be provided 
for enabling motors or pumps, etc, to be 
removed, 

p) Show the bends to pipes when running in 
itraight length to compensate for expan- 
sion and contraction of the pipes. 

q) Show suitable openings to be provided on 
floor plates wherever valves are fitted 
below floor level. 

r) Provide accessibility for the location 
where a closing length is to be made from 
dimensions lifted at site. 

s) Avoid pockets and vertical loops where 
possible, but provide additional drains and 
vents where such configurations are 
unavoidable* 

t) Provide and indicate location of instru- 
mentation system connection. 

u) Show enlarged detail section to indicate 
orientation and flow direction through 
special control valves or other fittings 
which are of unusual construction. 

v) Show component unit numbers of all 
pipes and fittings. 

w) Indicate non-standard joints, materials, 
fittings, testing procedures, purchaser's 
special requirements, etc, with drawings. 

x) Include essential dimensions for locating 
pipe centre lines in the ship where these 
may be required to produce pipe 
fabrication sketches or pipe support 
dimensions. 



y) Clearly indicate terminal points of lines 
where continuation will be arranged by 
other piping designers and detail 
connecting flanges. 

z) Piping in general shall be kept away from 
electric switch boards and other electric 
equipments. Flanges shall be arranged 
as far away from electric cables as 
practicable. If unavoidable, suitable 
protection shall be provided. Fuel oil 
piping shall not be laid above or near a 
diesel engine exhaust pipe so as to avoid 
possibility of any leaky fuel oil coming in 
contact with heated surfaces. 

13.3.11 Checking of System 

On completion of the drawings the system 
resistance losses shall be re-calculated, the pipe 
and fitting schedules reviewed and requisitions 
for equipment confirmed. 

13.4 Pressure Loss Through Proprietary Items 

The pressure loss through proprietary items 
may be obtained from the manufacturer's 
specification. The extra losses to be determined 
are those occurring in the pipes, valves, bends 
and other fittings. 

14 PIPE WORE FLEXIBILITY SUPPORT 
AND INSTALLATION 

14.1 Flexibility of Piping System 

14.1.1 Piping systems shall be designed with 
adequate flexibility so that expansion of the 
piping machinery vibration and working of the 
ship shall not result in over-stressing of the 
system or leakage at joints. 

14.L2 Flexibility shall normally be provided by 
the use of plain piping bent to nominal specified 
radius and offset in the piping. 

14.1.3 Where space limitations prevail or where 
piping is to be attached to resiliently mounted 
machinery, use may be made of flexible pipes or 
bellows or expansion pieces. They shall be 
installed in unstressed condition. 

14.1.4 Pipes through which heated fuel oil 
passes shall be properly insulated along with 
steam tracing line in order to maintain the 
temperature steady. 

14.1.5 Pressure of fluid in a piping system may 
result in distortion particularly in way of bends 
and flexible units if adequate anchorage is not 
provided. Attention is drawn to the necessity 
of making such provision as stated in 14.3,3. 

14.2 Flexible Piping Units or Assemblies 
14.2.1 The design and construction of these 



8 



IS 14140 : 1994 



components shall be suitable for the pressure, 
vacuum and temperature under all conditions 
likely to occur in service, including ambient 
temperature and shall also be capable of 
absorbing the movements imposed by attached 
machinery and pipe work. 

14.2.2 The material of these components 
including any fittings if separately attached, 
shall be suitable for containing fuel oil and be 
compatible with the material of the piping 
system to which they are attached. 

14.2.3 Resistance to damage by fire or other 
means shall be considered and where deemed 
necessary a protective arragement shall be given 
around the flexible components. 

14.2.4 Flexible pipes shall be limited to small 
lengths only. 

14.3 Piping Supports 

14.3.1 Pipelines shall be routed to enable the 
surrounding structure to provide logical points 
of support, anchorage, guidance or restraint. 
Supporting of the largest of critical piping 
systems shall take prime consideration over 
others and the location of supports and anchors 
shall be shown on arrangement drawings. 

14.3.2 The design of supports shall be capable 
of adequately supporting the piping system 
without undue distortion. In addition to 
pipeline gravitational loads, the supports shall 
provide for concentrated loads imposed by 
valves and risers, for axial loadings due to 
expansion and the pressure of fluid, and for 
inertia effect due to ship movements. Hangers 
for supports shall be provided close to concen- 
trated weights; as horizontal changes in line 
direction, and on or adjacent to pipe. 

14.3.3 Pipework adjoining flexible units shall 
be supported as closely as possible to the 
flexible unit. The supports shall be designed 
to prevent the pressure loads transmitted by 
the flexible unit distorting the attached pipe 
work and equipment. 

14.3.4 The intervals of supports for pipes shall 
be decided according to the bore and configura- 
tion of pipe work. 

14.3.5 All pipe work shall be examined during 
the sea trial to determine whether additional 
hangers are necessary due to unforeseen 
vibrations. 

14.4 Piping Installation 

14.4.1 Pipe Jointing 

General jointing material shall conform to 
Grade B/O of IS 2712 : 1979. Other materials 
may be adopted by agreement between the 
purchaser and manufacturer. 



Jointing material shall be pre-cut and so 
dimensioned that it will not project into the 
bore of the pipe. It is recommended that the 
gaskets be full face and located on the bolts^ 
except where raised face flanges are in use. 

14.4.2 Pipe Erection 

14.4.2.1 Flange face shall be closely mated and 
bolt holes in alignment before making up the 
joints. The pipes shall not be strained into- 
position in order to make them fit. Pipes which 
do not fit satisfactorily shall be retured to the 
workshop for correction and re-stress relieving. 
where necessary. 

14.4.2.2 Mating pipes, valves and fittings shall 
be installed with their bores concentric and in 
line and care taken to ensure that any jointing 
fitted does not protrude into the bore. 

14.4.2.3 Care shall be taken with alignment of 
piping when making screwed, brazed or welded 
joints. 

14.4.2.4 The installation of bellow pieces or 
flexible units shall be carefully carried out to 
ensure that they are not pre-stressed. 

14.4.2.5 The closing length of piping shall be 
manufactured to a sufficient degree of accuracy 
so that it may be fitted in place without undue 
manual efl'ort. 

14.4.2.6 The pipes or any of the fittings in the 
system when mounted shall not touch another 
pipe or fitting or any structural member of the 
ship. If this is entirely unavoidable, then 
clamps shall be provided at such points of 
contact to ensure rigidity of the assembly and 
to avoid abrasive wear of the material due to 
vibration and rubbing. 

14.4.2.7 Insulation for pipes, where necessary,, 
shall be provided, only after completing the 
erection of the line and shall be done such that 
each length of pipe may be dismantled without 
cutting the insulation. 

15 INSPECTION AND TESTING 

15.1 Component Inspections and Tests Before 
Installation 

15.1.1 Cleaning of Pipes 

Pipes shall be internally cleaned and made 
free from scales. If conditions like corrosive 
atmosphere exist, pipes shall be suitably 
protected on the exterior. Where fabricated 
pipe work is to be used, pipes shall be shot 
blasted or pickled in random lengths before 
fabrication. 

15.1.2 Shop Inspection 

15.1.2,1 All components shall be checked to 



IS 14140 : 1994 



ensure that they are correct and in accordance 
-with drawings, especially details of terminals 
and materials. 

15.1.2.2 All components shall be visually 
examined for faults and irregularities. 

15.1.2.3 Welded and brazed joints shall be 
examined to ensure that fillets are regular 
and continuous in form. Wherever practi- 
cable, it shall be established that there is 
no lack of root penetration or evidence of non- 
fusion or burn through excessive penetration of 
the pipe in way of the joint. 

15.1.3 Shop Test 

Each completed pipe and fitting shall be 
hydraulically tested to V5 times the maximum 
pressure to which the system may be subjected 
under service conditions. 

15.1.3.1 Hydraulic tests and capacity tests for 
pumps: 

a) All pumps intended for essential services 
shall be" tested hydraulically and for 
capacity at manufacturer's works; 

b) Pump housing and cylinders shall be 
tested to \5 times the working pressure; 
and 

<;) Pump capacities shall be checked with 
the pump running at rated speed with 
rated pressure head. Capacity test may 
be dispensed with when previous 
satisfactory tests have been carried out on 
similar pumps. 

15.1.3.2 The completed pipes and fittings 
shall be tested with fresh mains water 
with filling, air evacuation and test gauge 
connections provided. The specified test 
pressure shall be maintained for not less 
than two minutes after the filling valve 
is closed to demonstrate the integrity of all 
connections. After testing, all such components 
shall be drained and pickled or cleaned again. 
All terminals shall be blanked before the 
component is dispatched to ship. Heating coils 
in tanks and fuel oil piping are to be tested to 
hydraulic pressure after installation to the 
specified test pressure. 

15.2 System Inspections and Tests After 
Installation 

15.2.1 System Inspection After Installation 

Before any testing is carried out the system shall 

be inspected to check that: 

a) Pipes arc painted as per the colour code 
where required. The colour of the 
paint on the pipes shall be as specified in 
relevant Indian Standards; 



b) The installation is in accordance with the 
pipe arrangement drawings; 

c) The location and fitting of supports and 
hangers are adequate; 

d) The joints arc accessible for maintenance; 

e) The fitiings are installed correctly for the 
required direction of flow, especially 
valves and filters: 

f ) The valves are accessible for operation 
and maintenance; 

g) Loads are not imposed on pump castings 
and other fixed components due to 
distortion rf pipes or lack of support of 
adjoining fittings; 

h) All valves and necessary remote controls 
may operate through 'their full limits of 
open-shut-open; 

j ) All bellow pieces and flexible pipes are 
installed correctly within the operating 
limits specified; 

k) Pumps are fitted with required suction 
and discharge pressure gauges; and 

m) Valves are correctly labelled. 
16 INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL 

16.1 DiflFerent instruments such as thermo- 
meters, pressure gauges, level indicators, 
thermostats, pressure switches, flow switches, etc, 
shall be used for indicating the system 
conditions and also for controlling the condi- 
tions within the required limits. 

16.2 Methods of Warning of System Failure 

Lights and audible alarms shall be installed on 
the system to indicate the failure of the fuel-oil 
system. 

16.2.1 Initiation of Warning 

Flow switches, level switches, pressure switches, 
etc, shall be used to initiate the warning of the 
system failure. 

16.2.2 The use of audible alarms is recom- 
mended to indicate the following: 

a) Heavy fuel oil settlings/service tanks — 
low level 

b) Diesel oil settling/service tanks — low 
level 

c) Diesel oil settling tank — high level 

d) Heavy oil settling/service tanks — high 
temperature 

e) Mixing tank — high temperature 



10 



IS 14140 : 1994 



f ) Fuel oil — low pressure 

g) Fuel oil filter — high diflFerential pressure 
h) Fuel oil purifiers — seal failure 

3) Fuel oil viscosity — maximum/minimum 
17 FLUSHING OF FUEL OIL PIPE LINES 

17.1 Flushing Medium 

Flushing shall be carried out by using diescl fuel 
oil. 

17.2 Flushing Method 

Flushing shall be carried out according to the 
following process: 

a) Before starting flushing it is to be 
confirmed that all tanks are sufficiently 
cleaned to be ready for flushing. 

b) The main engine fuel oil inlet shall be 
connected to the return pipe by a 
temporary pipe and diesel oil shall be 
circulated by the booster pump at room 
temperature. A 60 mesh filter shall be 
installed on the booster pump suction side 
to check the conditions of filtration. 

18 COMMISSIONING 

18.1 To ensure the proper commissioning of 
system the following operations shall be carried 
out; 

a) Cleaning of pipes, 

b) Checking the main items of equipment 
and control devices, 



c) Flushing as required, 

d) Filling of system, 

e) Setting of operating conditions, 

f ) Running tests to prove the system, 
g) Checking for leaks, and 

h) All filter elements shall be finally cleaned' 
where required before final handing over 
to the purchaser. 

19 SEA TRIAL 

19.1 System Tests 

a) The system shall be circulated with oil at 
the maximum pressure attainable by the 
pumps under normal service conditions. 

b) All air vents shall be operated to ensure 
that air is released from high points. 

c) The system shall be examined for leaks 
from joints and glands. 

d) Note shall be made of undue noise and 
vibration and additional supports fitted 
where necessary. 

e) The temperature and pressure controls in 
fuel oil system are very important for the 
proper functioning of the engines. Control 
valves shall be arranged as per the engine 
manufacturers recommendation. 

f) Complete system shall perform satis- 
factorily in all specified conditions of list 
and trim of the vessel. 



Chairman 
Capt K. K. Lohana 

Members 
Shri B, C. Bakshi 

Cdr D. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S- N. Bassi 

Shri S. K. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Cmde R. K. Bhatia 

Cmde N. p. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Bhatia 

Shri K. K. Tiwari ( Alternate ) 
Shri Subir Chakravarty 

Shri S. Chakravarty ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Chopra 

Shri D. G. Saranodhar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Jaywant Y Chowgulb 

ShRI a. R. I. Havaldar ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Chief Surveyor 
Head of Design Department 

Head of Standard Cell ( Alternate) 
Shri p. R. Govil 

Shri M. K. Aoarwal ( Alternate ) 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TE 17 

Representing 
Institution of Naval Architects, Bombay 



Directorate of Quality Assurance ( Warship Project ), Ministry of* 

Defence New Delhi 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, Calcutta 

Directorate General of Naval Designs, New Delhi 

DGTD. New Delhi 

Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Small Shipowners Association, Goa 

DG Shipping, Bombay 
Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay 

Ministry of Surface Transport ( SBR ), New Delhi 

( Continued on Page 12 > 

11 



IS 14140 : 1994 

( Continued from page 1 1 ) 

Members 
R. Adm Y. N. Inamdar 
Shri Joseph Isaac 

Shri U. S. Bhowmick ( Alternate ) 
I-T Cdr S. S. Jaswal 

Shri K. R. R. Chodhary ( Alternate ) 
Shri Madan Lal Kochar 

Shri P. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 

CaPT H. K. D. PATEt 

5hri K. Prem Kumar 

Shri A. K. Sen 

Shri G. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sbn 
Shri A. Sengupta 

Shri R. Bhave ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Singha 

Shri S. K. Halder ( Alternate ) 
Capt K. S. Sood 
^HRiS. Srinivasan 

Shri K» P. Rao ( Alternate) 
:Shri N. S. Vijayaraghvan, 
Director ( Transport Engineering ) 



Representing 
The Institute of Marine Engineers ( India ), Bombay 
Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 

Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay 

The Indian National Shipowners Association. Bombay 

Goa Shipyard Ltd, Goa 

The Shipping Corporation of India, Bombay 

Chowgule Steamships Ltd, Bombay 
Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Flakt India Ltd, Calcutta 

Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 
Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Director General. BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Member Secretary 

Shri N. S. Judge 
Director ( Transport Engineering ), BIS 



Marine Piping Subcommittee, TE 17 : 1 



Convener 
Shri R. Sen 

Members 
^HRi J. R. Aggarwal 

Shri Sanjay Aggarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. T. Christo 

Shri M. G. Vijayan ( Alternate ) 
Engineer and Ship Surveyor 
Shri Sunil Ghodoaonkar 

Shri R. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri M- C Kesavrao 

Shri R. N. Sahu ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Koli 

Shri V. P. Jirafe ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Majhi 
Capt Mohan Raman 

Lt N, Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri D* K. Sihgal 

Shri B. B. Sikka ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Sengupta 

Shri S. V. Ramchandani ( Alternate 

Shri J. D. Grover ( Alternate II ) 
IShri Sudesh Kumar 

Shri Gur Sarup ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. P. Sunderesan 



I) 



Chowgule Steamships Ltd, Bombay 

Govardhan Das P. A ( Calcutta ), Calcutta 

Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 

Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 
Goa Shipyard Ltd, Goa 

Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay 

Garden Reach Shipbuilders &. Engineers Ltd, Calcutta 
Indian Navy. New Delhi 

Loader Engineering Works, Jalandhar 

Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 
Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshcdpur 



12 



Barean of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory iastitution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization^ marking and quality 
•certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. : TED 17 ( 929 ) 

Amendments Issned Since PaUication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones ; 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T, Scheme VII M, V-LP- Road, Maniktola f 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1 37 S6 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 J 53 38 43, 53 16 40 

53 23 84 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 



{ 

23 

235 15 19, 235 23 15 



Western } Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 430093 1 632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches; AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Paragon Enterprises. Delhi, India 



