**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13838 (1993) : Mechanical testing of metals - 
Determination of poisson's rates [MTD 3: Mechanical Testing 
of Metals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13838 : 1993 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

MECHANICAL TESTING OF METALS — 
DETERMINATION OF POISSON'S RATIO 



UDC 669 : 620" 17 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1993 Price Group 2 



Mechanical Testing of Metals Sectional Committee, MTD 3 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Mechanical Testing of Metals Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Metallurgical 
Engineering Division Council. 

When uniaxial force is applied to a solid, it deforms in the direction of the applied force, but also 
expands or contracts laterally depending on whether the force is tensile or compressive. If the solid 
is homogeneous and isotropic, and the material remains elastic under the action of the applied 
force, the lateral strain bears a constant relationship to the axial strain. This constant, called 
Poisson's ratio; after a French scientist that developed the concept, is a definite material property 
just like Young's modulus and Shear modulus. 

Poisson's ratio is used for design of structures where all dimensional changes resulting from 
application of force need to be taken into account, and in the application of the generaHzed theory 
of elasticity to structural analysis. 

The accuracy of the determination of Poisson's ratio is usually limited by the accuracy of the 
transverse strain measurements because the percentage errors in these measurement are usually 
greater than in the axial strain measurements. Since a ratio rather than an absolute quantity is 
measured, it is only necessary to know accurately the relative value of the calibfatien factors of the 
extensometers- Also, in general, the values of the applied loads need not be accurately known. 
It is frequently expedient to make the determination of Poisson's ratio concurrently with 
determinations of Young's modulus and the proportional limit. 

In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ASTM Standard E 132-86 
'Standard Test Method for Poisson's Ratio at Room Temperature, issued by the American Society 
for Testing and Materials, USA. 

In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed 
or calculated, is rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding 
off numerical values {revised)\ 



IS 13838 : 1993 



Indian Standard 



MECHANICAL TESTING OF METALS — 
DETERMINATION OF POISSON'S RATIO 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method for 
determination of Poisson's ratio of metallic 
materials from tension tests at room temperature, 

1.2 This method is limited to specimens of 
metallic materials of rectangular cross-section 
and stresses at which creep is negligible compared 
to the strain produced immediately upon loading. 



2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are 
adjuncts to this standard. 



necessary 



IS No. 



Title 



1828 Metallic material — Verification 

(Part 1 ) : 1991 of static uniaxial testing 
machines: Part 1 Tensile testing 
machines ( second revision ) 

2854 : 1990 Determination of Young's 
modulus, tangent modulus and 
chord modulus ( first revision ) 

12872 : 1990 Metallic materials — Verification 
of extensometers used in uniaxial 
testing 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the 
following definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Linear Strain 

The change per unit length of a linear dimension 
due to force applied. 

3.1,1 Axial Strain 

The linear strain parallel to the longitudial axis of 
the specimen. 

3.L2 Transverse Strain 

The linear strain in transverse ( perpendicular ) 
to the axis of the specimen. 

3.2 Poisson's Ratio (a) 

The absolute value of the ratio of transverse 
strain to the corresponding axial strain in a body 
subjected to uniaxial stress, usually wiihin the 
elastic range, that is, below the proportional 
limit. 



3.3 Proportional Limit 

The stress at which the strain just ceases to be 
proportional to the applied stress. 

3.4 Shear Modulus ( G ) 

Shear modulus is the ratio of shear stress to 
corresponding strain. 

3.5 Young's Modulus ( E) 

Young's modulus is the ratio of tensile or com- 
pressive stress to corresponding strain. 

4 APPARATUS 

4.1 Load 

Load shall be applied either by calibrated dead 
weights or in a testing machine that has been 
calibrated in accordance with IS 1828 ( Part 1 ) : 
1991. 

4.2 Extensometers 

Unless specified otherwise in product standard, 
Class A extensometers as per IS 12872 : 1990, 
shall be used. 

NOTE — If exceptions are provided in the product 
standard for using extensometers of types not covered 
in IS 12872:1991, it may be necessary to apply 
corrections, for example, the correction for the 
transverse sensitivity of bonded resistance gauges. 

4,2.1 It is recommended that at least two pairs of 
extensometers be used; one pair measuring axial 
strain and the other for transverse strain; with the 
extensometers of each pair parallel to each other 
and on opposite sides of the specimen. Additional 
extensometers may be used to check on ahgnment 
or to obtain better average strains in the case of 
unavoidable variations in thickness. The extenso- 
meters should be placed on the specimen with a 
free distance of at least one specimen width bet- 
ween and cxtensometer and the nearest fillet, and 
at least two specimen widths between any cxtenso- 
meter and the nearest grip. 

NOTE — Three possible arrangements of extenso- 
meters, among the many that have been used, are 
shown in Fig. 1 . Arrangement ( a ), which requires only 
two pairs of extensometers, can be used if the condi- 
tions are very nearly ideal with respect to axiality of 
load and constancy of cross-section within the length 
in which the extensometers are placed. An additional 
pair of extensometers is used in arrangement { b ) to 
provide some compensation for the effect of a uniform 
variation in thickness in the axial direction. The 
other arrangement of three pairs of extensometers, 
arrangement ( c ), provides a check on alignment. 



1 



IS 13838 : 1993 



(a) 



(b) 



NOTE — Each symbol indicates the location of a pair 
of extensometers on opposite sides of the specimen. 

Fig. 1 Three Possible A.rrangements of 
Extensometers 

5 TEST SPECIMENS 

5.1 Selection and Preparation of Specimens 

In the selection and preparation of test specimens, 
special care shall be taken to assure obtaining 
representative specimens that are straight and 
uniform in thickness* 

5.2 Dimensions 

In general, it is recommended that the length of 
the portion of the specimen that is of constant 
width be at least five times the width, and that 
the length of the specimen between grips be at 
least seven times the width. The width itself 
should be at least equal to the thickness. If 
fillets are used near the ends of the specimen, 
these fillets should have a radius not less than the 
minimum width of the specimen. The width 
shall be constant throughout the entire length 
over which the extensometers are placed and for 
an additional distance ( at least equal to the 
width ) at each end, unless specified otherwise in 
the product standard. 

6 PROCEDURE 

6.1 Measurement of Specimens 

Measure width and thickness throughout the 
length in which the extensometers are to be 
placed. Make the measurements of width with 
calipers having a least count of 0'025 mm. 
Measurements of thickness may be made with a 
micrometer having a least count of 0*0025 mm. 

NOTE — For thin sheet, a survey of thickness 
variation by more sensitive devices, such as a 
pneumatic or electric gauge, may be needed to 
determine thicknesses with the required accuracy. 

6.2 Alignment 

Use care to ensure axial alignment of the speci- 
men. The alignment may be checked with the 
arrangement of extensometers of Fig. 1 ( c ; by 



verifying that the differences in strain, indicated 
by the axial extensometers, are small compared 
to the average axial strain. In general, alignment 
may be improved by increasing the free length of 
the specimen between grips. 

6.3 Make simultaneous measurements of load 
and strain and record the data. 

6.4 Speed of Testing 

The speed of testing shall be low enough to make 
negligible the thermal effects of adiabatic ex- 
pansion or contraction, and high enough to make 
creep negligible. In loading with dead weights, 
avoid temporary overloading due to inertia of 
the weights. 

6.5 Applied Load 

The applied loads shall correspond to stresses that 
are within the linear portion of the stress-strain 
curve, that is, less than the proportional limit. 
The precision of the value of Poisson's ratio 
obtained will depend on the number of data pair 
of longitudinal and transverse strain taken 
(see Fig. 2 ). 



LONGITUDINAL 
STRAIN £t 




TRANSVERSE STRAIN tt 



applied load, p 
Fig. 2 Plot of Average Strain Versus Load 

6,6 Strain Readings 

Read all extensom.eters at the same load. 



6.7 Temperature 

Record the temperature, 
peratures during the test. 



Avoid changes in tem- 



7 EVALUATION OF DATA 

7.1 The average longitudinal strain ( h ) indicated 
by the longitudinal extensometers and the average 
transverse strain ( et ) indicated by the transverse 
extensometers, are plotted against the applied 
load ( P ), as shovv'n in Fig. 2. A straight line 
is drawn through each set of points, and the 
slopes, d^ijdP and d^tjclP, of these lines are deter- 
mined. Poisson's ratio is then calculated as 
follows: 

a - ( d€ildP )/( deijdP ) 



IS 13838 : 1993 



7.2 The errors which may be introduced by 
drawing a straight line through the points can be 
reduced by applying the method of least squares. 
The values of Poisson's ratio thus obtained 
should coincide with that obtained for a single 
large load increment for stresses below the 
proportional limit. 

NOTE — For the method of least squares, random 
variations in the data are considered as variations in 
strain. In determining the stress range ( load range) 
for which data should be used in the calculations. It 
is helpful to examine the data using ihe strain devia- 
tion method described in IS 2854 : 1990. Due to 
possible small offsets at zero load and small variations 
in establishing the load path in the specimen during 
the first small increment of load are typically not 
included in the calculations, and the line is not 
constrained to pass through zero. 

7.3 Above the proportional limit, the ratio of 
transverse strain to axial strain will depend on 



the average stress and on the stress range for 
which it is measured and, hence, should not be 
regarded as Poisson's ratio. If this ratio is 
reported, nevertheless, as a value of *Poisson's 
ratio' for stresses beyond the proportional limit, 
the range of stress should be stated. 

7.4 Poisson's ratio will have more than one value 
if the material is not isotropic. Deviations from 
isotropy should be suspected if the Poisson's 
ratio ( o ) determined as per this standard, differs 
significantly from that determined by substituting 
the values of Young's modulus (£") and shear 
modulus ( G ) in the following equation: 

G - ( EIG2 ) - 1 



where E and G shall 
precision than the 
measurement of a. 



be measured with greater 
precision desired in the 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provmons of iht Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act. 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a Hcence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no 
changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of 
Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this 
Indian Standard may be sent to BIS givinjg the following reference: 

Doc:No» MTD3 (3744) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 



Central : Manak^'Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



-f331 01 31 

|331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola J37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 |37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 j53 38 43, 53 16 40 

153 23 84 



{i 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 r235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) J632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 1632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi. India 



