**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14280 (1995) : Mechanical vibration - Balancing - Shaft 
and fitment key convention [MED 28: Mechanical Vibration 
and Shock] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1814280:1995 
ISO 8821 :1989 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



Indian Standard 

MECHANICAL VIBRATION — BALANCING 

— SHAFT AND FITMENT KEY 

CONVENTION 



UDC 534.141 : 621-253 : 621.755 



©BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1995 

Price Group 6 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with ISO 8821 : 1989 'Mechanical vibration — Balancing— Shaft 
and fitment key convention', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and 
Shock Sectional Committee (LM 04) and approval of the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention 
is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard! appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as Indian Standard*. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is 
to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 



In the adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exists. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below 
along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International 
Standard 

ISO/R 773 : 1969 



ISO/R 775 : 1969 



ISO 1925 : 1990 



Indian 
Standard 

IS 2048 : 1983 Parallel keys and keyways {second 
revision) 

IS 3688 : 1990 Power transmission — Shaft — 
Dimensions for cylindrical and 1/10 conical 
shaft ends {second revision) 



IS 13274 : 1992 Mechanical vibration - 
ing — Vocabulary 



-Balanc- 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Technically 
equivalent 

Identical 



Identical 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8921 : 1988 



Indian Standard 



MECHANICAL VIBRATION — BALANCING 

— SHAFT AND FITMENT KEY 

CONVENTION 



1 Scope 



1.1 This International Standard specifies a single convention 
for balancing the individual components (shafts or rotors, and 
fitments) of a keyed assembly. It is intended to provide com- 
patibility of all balanced components so that when they are 
assembled they will meet the overall balance and/or vibration 
tolerance levels for that assembly. 



1.2 This International Standard requires that half keys be 
used when balancing the individual components of a keyed 
assembly to avoid the balancing errors created if full keys or no 
keys were used. 



1.3 This International Standard applies to rotors balanced In 
balancing machines, in their own housings, or in situ. This key 
convention should also be applied when measuring residual 
unbalance and vibration severity of rotors utilizing keyways but 
to which the fitments have not yet been assembled. 



1.4 Although the figures in this International Standard show 
keys of constant rectangular or square cross-section, mounted 
parallel to the shaft axis, this International Standard applies 
also to keys mounted on tapered shaft surfaces, to woodruff, 
gib, dowel and other special keys. The principle of the half-key 
convention as outlined in the definition and elsewhere is then 
applied as is appropriate to the particular shape and location of 
the special key. 



1.5 This International Standard includes instructions for the 
implementation (see annex A) and for the transition period that 
will occur as the half-key convention is adopted (see annex B). 



2 Normative reference 

The following standard contains provisions which, through 
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International 
Standard. At the time of publication, the edition i/idicated was 
valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition 
of the standard listed below. Members of lEC and ISO maintain 
registers of currently valid International Standards. 

ISO 1925 : 1981, Balancing - Vocabulary. 



3 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the definitions 
given in ISO 1925, together with the following, apply. 

3.1 fitment: Component without its own shaft which has to 
be mounted on a shaft or mandrel before its unbalance can be 
determined. 

Examples include couplings, pulleys, pump impellers, blower 
fans and grinding wheels. 

NOTE — A fitment becomes a rotor when it is placed on a shaft with 
journals (see also the definition of "rotor" in ISO 1925). This could not 
only be a balancing mandrel but also the shaft extension of an ar- 
mature, which by itself already is a rotor. To avoid confusion between 
fitment and rotor, this International Standard hereafter uses only the 
terms fitment and shaft, whereby the latter may be any kind of shaft, 
for example a balancing mandrel, an armature shaft, turbine shaft, 
pump shaft, etc. 

3.2 key; full key: Locking device used to prevent rotation 
between a fitment and its mating component, usually a shaft, 

NOTES 

1 Since the full key is used in the final assembly, it is often also called 
the final assembly key. 

2 Figure 1 shows various types of key and keyway configurations. 

3.3 half key: Key used in balancing, having the unbalance 
value of that portion of the final (full) key which will occupy 
either the shaft keyway or the fitment keyway in the final 
assembly. 

NOTES 

1 The unbalance value of the half key for a given shaft may differ 
from that needed for the mating fitment (of equal keyway length) due 
to differences in distance from the shaft centreline, depth of keyways, 
and clearances. 

2 The required unbalance value for a half key may be calculated by 
assuming that the full key is separated into two half keys along the con- 
toured parting line between shaft and fitment, taking half the height 
clearances of key and keyway in each of the key halves into con- 
sider ation (see figure 2). 



4 Haif-key convention 
4.1 Description 

The half-key convention requires that a half key be used in the 
shaft keyway while balancing the shaft without its fitment. A 



IS 14280:1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Type 



Configuration 
of keyway 



Name of 
keyway 




A 







[ 


















r 


) 











Round/ 
round end 



Configuration 
of keyi» 



C 



J 



Name 
of key 



Square/ 
square end 



Round/ 
round end 



^\ 1 




^^^#^ 


/ 











Round/ 
square end 




Sled runner 



1) Full key 

cross-sections 



/ = length of keyway 



j I Rectangular 

I j Square 



C 



C 



Round/ 
square end 



Square/ 
square end 



3 



Round/ 
round end 



Square/ 
square end 




Depth of 
keyway 



Figure 1 - Major types of shaft keyways and keys {see also ISO/R 773 and ISO/R 775) 

2 



IS 14280 : 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



complementary haif-key is used while balancing the fitment on 
a balancing mandrel, provided it has no keyways. If the mandrel 
has keyways, see the alternative methods specified in A. 2. 2. 
The axial location of the centre of gravity of the half key should 
be the same as that of the full key in the final assembly (see 
figure C.2). 

The use of the haif-key convention wiii provide a uniform 
method for balancing shafts and fitments joined together by 
keys. It will eliminate balancing errors and therefore excessive 
residual unbalance (and/or machine vibration) caused by the 
use of different key conventions, and avoid the creation of in- 
ternal bending moments in assemblies (as would be caused by 
the use of full keys during balancing). 



4.2 Marking 

4.2.1 After balancing, the end of the shaft adjacent to the 
keyway shall be permanently marked with the letter H to in- 
dicate that balancing was performed using the half-key conven- 
tion. Permanent marking using metal stamps or vibratory 
engravers is recommended, but a permanent or indelible ink 
may be used. 

If the shaft face is too small for marking, the bottom of the 
keyway may be used. 

4.2.2 After balancing, the face of the fitment adjacent to the 
keyway shall be permanently marked with the letter H to 
indicate that balancing was performed using the half-key con- 
vention. This letter should be readily visible when the fitment is 
joined to the shaft. Permanent marking using metal stamps or 
vibratory engravers is recommended, but a permanent or indeli- 
ble ink may be used. 



a) components balanced using the fuli-key convention 
shall be marked with the letter F adjacent to the keyway: 

b) components balanced using the no-key convention 
shall be marked with the letter N adjacent to the keyway. 

4.2.4 The marking of the shaft and the fitment with the letter 
H may be omitted if confusion as to which key convention was 
used is unlikely. 



Half key for fitment 




Half key for shaft 
Figure 2 — Contoured haif-key set 



5 Implementation 

All manufacturers of original parts and processed components 
shall comply with the half-key convention of balancing and 
mark each newly manufactured rotor and fitment with the letter 
H. 



4.2.3 When balancing a replacement shaft or fitment the 
known mating part of which has not been balanced using a half 
key, it is permissible to balance the particular component with 
the corresponding key convention. In this special case, both 
components snail be permanently marked with an identification 
letter corresponding to the key convention used, as follows: 



Change-over of equipment in service to the half-key convention 
with proper identification of the shaft and fitment during the 
first repair balancing operation is encouraged; in any case, the 
marking shall be added. 

Annex B gives a transition strategy. 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Annex A 

(informative) 



Recommendations for the implementation of the half-key convention 



A.I Implementation date 

To avoid undue confusion between manufacturers and users as 
to the key convention used, it is recoainnended that im- 
plementation of the half-key convention be accomplished by 
1 January 1990. 



A. 2. 6 The half key should be held in place on the shaft by 
means that introduce negligible unbalance, for example 
fibreglass tape, but will prevent the half key from accidentally 
separating from the keyway. 



A. 2 Half-key requirements 



A. 2.1 A half-key is required for the shaft keyway. 



A.2.2 For a fitment with a single keyway, one of the fol- 
lowing requirements is to be met: 

a) when the mandrel has no keyway: use one half key; 

b) when the mandrel has two identical keyways 180° op- 
posite each other : use one full key and one half key of equal 
length; 

c) when the mandrel has a single keyway : use one half key 
(for balancing the mandrel) and one full key (for balancing 
the mandrel/fitment assembly). 

NOTES 

1 Mandrel construction using requirennent a) or b) are preferred 
because they are inherently balanced. 

2 The balancing mandrel should have the same diametral tolerances 
as the shaft it is intended to simulate. The mandrel should also have 
correction planes on it to allow for unbalance correction, index balanc- 
ing, and biasing. 



A. 3 Exceptions 

A. 3.1 If a shaft or fitment is provided with two equal 
keyways 180° opposite each other and two keys are used in the 
final assembly, it is permissible to balance without keys. This 
fulfils the requirement of the half-key convention. If the two 
keyways are not equal or are positioned other than 180° op- 
posite each other, two half keys are required for balancing the 
shaft and two more for the fitment. 



A. 3. 2 If the vibration tolerance levels of certain assemblies 
are generous enough to be not exceeded by the change in key 
convention, or if a manufacturer has a limited number of users 
who require no shaft repair by or replacement from alternative 
sources, it may be acceptable to retain a key convention other 
than the half-key convention; however, all shafts should be 
marked accordingly. 

A. 3. 3 A half key is not used in certain couplings because 
they are balanced by the manufacturer without a keyway being 
machined into the bore. The user of the coupling generally 
enlarges the bore and machines the keyway to his requirements 
without rebalancing. This method basically complies with the 
half-key convention, provided the final key has approximately 
the same length as the keyway. 



A, 2. 3 Special keys such as woodruff, gib or tapered keys 
require individual consideration. 



A. 2. 4 If a full key is shipped with the shaft, its length is 
obvious and therefore permits determination of the proper half 
key for the fitment (see also clause C.4). If no key is shipped 
with the shaft, the length of the half-key used originally for 
balancing the shaft is assumed to be the same as the length of 
the shaft keyway (see also figure 1, dimension /). 



A. 2. 5 Half keys used for balancing should always be made of 
material having the same specific weight as the final key. 
Unless specifically stated otherwise, it is to be assumed that 
final keys are made of steel. Therefore, half keys should also be 
made of steel. 



A. 4 Past key convention practice 

After implementation of the half-key convention, there will be 
in existence for many years shafts and fitments which were 
manufactured prior to the issue of this International Standard. 
When such an older (unmarked) shaft or fitment needs to be 
rebalanced without its mating component being also available 
for rebalancing, it will be necessary to know to what key con- 
vention the other (unavailable) component was balanced. The 
on-hand component must then be rebalanced to the same con- 
vention (and marked), otherwise the rebalancing work wilt 
most probably produce unsatisfactory results. 

To help determine the key convention to which the other (un- 
available) component probably was balanced, table A. 1 lists the 
key conventions u^ed in the ISO Participating and Observer 
Countries in the past. 



IS 14280 : 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Tahio A 1 



lA/nrlHuuiHo nact iiQanA nf Icnv conventions 



Country (Organization) 


Shaft key method used 


Australia (SAA) 


Not available (N/A) 


Austria (ON) 


N/A 


Belgium (IBM) 


N/A 


Canada (SCO 


Half key 


China (CSBS) 


N/A 


Czechoslovakia (CSN) 


Full key 


Denmark (DS) 


N/A 


Egypt (EOS) 


N/A 


France (AFNOR) 


Full key 


Germany (DIN) 


Full key since approximately 




1965 


Hungary (MSZH) 


N/A 


Italy (UNI) 


N/A 


Japan (JISC) 


Half key 


Mexico (DQN) 


N/A 


Netherlands (NNI) 


N/A 


. Romania (IRS) 


N/A 


South Africa (SABS) 


N/A 


Sweden (SIS) 


Full key on most electrical 




motors since 197S-01-01. 




Other rotating machinery 




indeterminate. 


Switzerland (SNv) 


N/A 


United Kingdom (BSD 


Half key prior to 1978-01-01, 




then full key. 


USA (ANSI) 


Half key 


NOTES 




1 Where no starting date is shov\ 


/n, it is assumed that no conven- 


tion other than that listed was used previously. 


2 Due to European harmonizatio 


n efforts, it can be assumed that 


many European countries have used the full-key convention since | 


1878 01 01. 





IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Transition to half-key convention 



B.I Manufacturers of shafts and/or fitments coupled 
together by keys should alert all known holders of inventory of 
their parts and assemblies of the date on which compliance is 
to become effective, and suggest the transition strategy to be 
used until the present inventory is exhausted. Recommended 
transition procedures are given below. 



B.1.1 All shafts and fitments held in stock at a manufacturer, 
distributor or user which have been balanced in accordance 
with the half-key convention, are to be marked with the letter H 
in accordance with 4.2 prior to shipment and/or use. If not so 
balanced, they are now to be rebalanced to the half-key con- 
vention and marked. 



8.1. 2 Where rebalancing to the half-key convention is not 
appropriate, a!! shafts and fitments in stock are to be marked 
with the applicable convention in accordance with 4.2. 

B.2 In the transition period, before the manufacturer has 
changed over to the half-key convention, the manufacturer 
may send users new parts or assemblies that are not balanced 
with the halfkey convention. He is to mark these parts with the 
appropriate identification letter. The user has the option of 
rebalancing them to the half-key convention but, if he does so, 
he is then to change the key convention marking. 

B.3 A change-over of shafts and fitments in service during 
the first rebalancing operation is to include the proper marking 
in accordance with 4.2. 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Annex C 

(informative) 

Practical considerations for making half keys 



C.I Contoured half keys 

When the half keys for the shaft and fitment, as shown in 
figure 2, are put together, they have the same overall dimen- 
sions and mass as the full key that will be used in the final 
shaft/fitment assembly. However, such contoured half keys 
are rather expensive to manufacture and quite impractical for 
balancing one-of-a-kind or small lots of shafts or fitments. 



C.2 Not-contoured half keys for shafts 

Shop practice, therefore, often uses half keys of less than ideal 
dimensions, such as keys of (approximately) half-height or half- 
length (see figures C.I to C.3). The half-length keys are 
preferable because they are easier to make and provide a closer 
unbalance value of the idealized contoured half key than the 
half-height key. In fact, for keys having a square cross-section, 
a half-length key cut to 48 % of the full mass of the final key 
will generally have an unbalance value within 2 % of the ideal 
half key. 

If the depth of the keyways differs between shaft and fitment 
(as for keys with rectangular cross-section described in 
ISO/R 773 and ISO/R 775), the above rule no longer holds 
true. Instead, the mass of the half-length key for the shaft 
should be 45 % of the (final) full key for keys up to 8 mm wide, 
and 54 % for wider keys. The unbalance values of these half 
keys will then generally be within 2 % of the ideal value. 

The percentages stated above may not be accurate enough to 
be applicable to half keys used for flexible rotor balancing. 



C.3 IMot-contoured half keys for fitments 

For low volume production, the not-contoured half-height key 
is prevalent. To compensate for the missing contoured portion 
facing the shaft, the length of the key should exceed the length 



of the final (square cross-section) key by 4 %. This is not 
required for keys complying with ISO/R 773 and ISO/R 775, 
since there the fitment keyway has sufficient clearance above 
the key to permit insertion of a half-height key having the same 
length as the fitment keyway and producing the proper un- 
balance value. 




Figure 0.2 — Half-length key (for shaft only), its centre 

of gravity located in the same transverse plane as that of 

the full key in the final assembly 

For high volume production, a half-length key as shown in 
figure C.3 may be more efficient. The key can be bolted into 



Fitment 




Half-length key 



Figure C.3 - Half-length key used for balancing fitment 




Half key for fitment 



Missing material 
due to cut 



Half key for shaft 
Figure C.I — Half-height key set 

7 




IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



one of the opposing keyways of a balanced mandrel to main- 
tain its axial position. The fitment must be centred over the key 
during balancing. 



C.4 Half-key length 

Key lengths are not universally standardized for given shaft 
diameters. Often shaft and fitment are furnished by different 
manufacturers, neither knowing the length of the other's 
keyway. In such cases, the rule is that each manufacturer uses 
a half key properly dimensioned on the assumption that the 
final assembly key will occupy the full length of the keyway (see 
also A.2.4). 

Occasionally, an assembler of shaft and fitment will be con- 
fronted with a longer keyway in the shaft than in the fitment. 
To avoid having to rebalance either the shaft with a half key 
based on the shorter fitment keyway, or the fitment with a half 
key based on the longer shaft key, one of the following two 
alternative solutions may be used. 

a) Stepped key, machined to have tvvo sections of dif- 
ferent height to accommodate different keyway lengths in 
shaft and fitment (see figure C.4). 

b) Average-length key, consisting of a full-height key cut 
to the average length of the shaft and fitment keyways (see 
figures C.5 and C.6). 




Ik == length of keyway 
If = length of fitment 
/^ - average length of key 



u 



Figure C.5 — Average-length {final) key for short 
fitment in ideal position 



Stepped key 



Fitment 




Shaft 



Figure C.4 — Stepped (final) key for short fitment 

The ideal axial installation position for the average-length key is 
in the centre of the rectangular portion of the shaft keyway 
with the fitment centred on the key (see figure C.5). 

Mounting of the fitment in the Ideal position, however, is 
seldom possible. Instead, the fitment Is usually installed flush 
with the shaft end, as shown in figure C.6. 

The installation shown in figure C.6 introduces ^A'0 balancing 
errors: namely, a couple unbalance because the portion of the 
key marked "filled" should be in the position marked "not 
filled", and a quasi-static unbalance because the portion of the 
key marked "filled" Is located at a greater distance from the 
shaft centreline than the portion marked "not filled " where it 
should be located. To assess the significance of these errors, 
they must be transposed Into the shaft correction Planes I and 
II, as shown in figure C.8. In most cases the errors will be 
negligible. 



Not filled 




Fitment 



Figure C.6 — Average-length (final) key for short fitment 
mounted flush with shaft end, producing balancing error 

If the fitment keyway is longer than the shaft keyway, the fit- 
ment must be balanced with a half-key based on the shorter 
shaft keyway. Alternatively, a stepped key can be made, the 
upper half of which fills the full length of the fitment keyway, 
the lower half filling the shorter length of the shaft keyway. 

C.5 Balancing errors due to half keys 

Half keys may cause balancing errors (and therefore excessive 
residual unbalance) because of keyway design clearances, 
machining tolerances, and deviations from the ideal shape or 
position. Figure C.7 illustrates some of these errors by showing 
a cross-section through a shaft and fitment assembly with key 
and keyway in stationary and then in operational position. 
Clearances permit the key to tilt slightly. These and other bal- 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Stationary 





This part of keyway not 
to be filled by half key 
if not filled by final key 



Operational 




Shaft rotation 

Figure C.7 — Stationary and operational key positions 

ancing errors nnust be taken into account when setting 
Individual balance tolerances for the shaft and the fitment. 

It nnust be noted that a quasi-static balancing error occurring 
near the end of a shaft will usually be increased in its effect 
when translated into the near shaft correction plane. The shaft 
example in figure C.8 illustrates this point. For Plane I (the near 
correction plane) the error increases by the ratio xly, and for 
Plane II (the far correction plane) it changes by the ratio z/y. 

Couple unbalance errors occurring in two closely spaced 
planes, for example those in figure C.6, usually translate into 
smaller unbalance values in the shaft correction planes by the 
ratio of the distances between couple unbalance error planes 
and shaft correction planes. 



I 



n 



^ 



y 



]a 



Figure C.8 — Translation of key-caused quasi-static 
balancing error into shaft (rotor) correction planes 



C,6 Shape of keyway end (see figures C. 9 and C. 10) 

Keyways are generally machined into shafts with an end mill 
cutter (type A and B in figure 1 1 or with a key slot cutter (type C 



Figure C.9 — Shaft keyway** machined with end 
mill cutter 



This part of keyway is 
never filled by half key 
nor by final key 




Figure CIO — Shaft keyway^' machined with a key 
slot cutter 

in figure 1). If the rounded portion of the shaft keyway is not 
filled by the final key (it never is in type C keyways), its 
unbalance value need not be considered when calculating the 
size of the half key. Instead, the small void constitutes an un- 
balance in the shaft and is corrected, together with the other 
shaft unbalances, in the shaft correction planes. The internal 
moment thereby introduced into the shaft is of no concern on 
rigid rotors, but may not be acceptable on flexible rotors. 

Fitment keyways are generally machined with a broach or shaper 
and therefore are rectangular in shape, with both ends open. 

If the fitment was balanced with a half key that filled the entire 
length of the keyway, and is then mounted on a shaft having a 
key of the same length but with one or two round ends, a small 
balancing error results. Each round end leaves void two small 
corner spaces in the fitment keyway. In most cases this error is 
small enough to be absorbed by the assembly balance 
tolerance- If not, the error must be corrected by rebalancing the 
fitment with an appropriately dimensioned half key. 



C,7 Use of setscrews 

To prevent axial movement of a fitment mounted on a shaft, 
one or more setscrews are frequently used. These are located in 
the hub of the fitment directly over the keyway. 

When balancing the fitment on a mandrel, it is important that 
thesetscrew(s) betightenefl down on the key(s). This will press 
the mandrel against the fitment bore opposite to the 
setscrew(s), the same as will be the case in the final assembly 
of fitment to shaft. 

If the fitment has two setscrews offset by 90°, it is important to 
tighten the setscrews in the same sequence each time. By 
following these procedures balancing errors are minimJzed. 



1) For identification of shaft keyway types, see figure 1. 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Annex D 

(informative) 

Shaft and fitment key conventions 



D.1 Description of methods 

There are currently three methods or "key conventions" used 
for balancing shafts and their fitments : 

— full-key convention (see D.1.1); 

— half-key convention (see D.1.2); 

— no-key convention (see D.I. 3). 



D.1.1 The full-key convention requires that a full key {usually 
the final key) be used in the shaft keyway during balancing. No 
key is used to balance the fitment on a balancing mandrel that 
has no keyway. If the mandrel has a keyway, it has to be 
balanced by itself using a full key. That same key is to remain in 
the mandrel during balancing of the fitment. The location of the 
full key in the shaft should be in the same axial position that will 
be used when shaft and fitment are assembled. 



D.1.2 The half -key convention requires that a half key be 
used in the shaft keyway during balancing. A complementary 
half key is used to balance the fitment on a balancing mandrel 
that has no keyway. The location of the half key should be in 
the same axial position that will be used when the shaft and fit- 
ment are assembled. 



D.I. 3 The no-key convention does not use any type of key 
during balancing of the shaft or its fitment, even though both 
have keyways. 



D.2 Advantages and disadvantages of 
current conventions 

Each of the three balancing conventions has certain advantages 
and disadvantages associated with it. The most important 
attributes and drawbacks of each convention are outlined in 
D.2.1 toD.2.3. 



D.2.1 Full-key convention 

D.2.1. 1 Advantages 

The advantages of the full-key convention are that 

a) balancing errors from incorrect key mass are avoided by 
using the final key in the shaft and no key in the fitment; 

b) no special half keys need to be manufactured; 



c) the keyway in the fitment may be of different length 
than the shaft key, without affecting the balance of the 
assembly or requiring a stepped key; 

d) the shaft balance '(without the fitment) may be checked 
in the test laboratory or at the job site with the final key; 

e) the individual shaft (with full key) and the fitment 
(without key) both leave the manufacturer's plant in a 
balanced state. 

D.2.1. 2 Disadvantages 

The disadvantages of the full-key convention are that 

a) an additional unbalance in the shaft and in the fitment is 
produced which results in a correction cost not incurred 
with the half-key convention. Initial unbalance may exceed 
allowable or correctable amounts and thus cause shaft re- 
jection ; 

b) an internal bending moment is produced in the shaft. 
The projecting part of the key creates an unbalance which 
has to be compensated by correction masses in at least two 
planes on the shaft (since it usually cannot be corrected in 
the plane of the key). The internal bending moment may af- 
fect the balance quality of flexible rotors. The internal bend- 
ing moment will not affect the balance quality of rigid 
rotors. The internal bending moment remains in the shaft 
when the fitment is attached (see figure D.I). 

c) it creates confusion in world markets because individual 
manufacturers or countries using this method nevertheless 
use a half-key method on larger shafts without a consistent 
or well defined cross-over point. This results in incompatible 
components if they are supplied by two manufacturers 
using different key conventions; 

d) there is a greater danger of the full key separating from 
the shaft keyway during balancing since a full key has twice 
the mass of a half key; 

e) it does not allow coupling manufacturers to follow the 
common practice of balancing their couplings before the 
keyways are machined. 

D.2.2 Half-key convention 

D.2.2.1 Advantages 

The advantages of the half-key convention are that 

a) no unbalance is created in either the shaft or its fitment 
and therefore no unnecessary unbalance corrections are 
required; 



10 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 



Bending moments 



Full key 




Correction mass 2 



• Correction mass 1 
Figure D.I — Internal moments created when a full key Is corrected by two correction masses on the rotor body 



b) no internal bending moments are produced in the shaft 
or fitment; 

c) it allows fitments to be balanced before the keyway is 
machined; this practice is commonly used by coupling 
manufacturers. 



D.2.2.2 Disadvantages 

The disadvantages of the half-key convention are that 

a) a special key is required for balancing. Balancing errors 
may be introduced if the half key does not have the proper 
unbalance value. Special keys, such as woodruff, round 
and gibhead keys, may be difficult to manufacture; 

b) a special key may cause extra expense, particularly in 
job balancing; 

c) a special key is required when assessing the residual un- 
balance or vibration severity of a shaft without a fitment in 
the test laboratory or at the job site; 

d) if the length of the key used in the final assembly differs 
from the length of the key used in balancing, an unbalance 
is produced in the assembly which might cause rejection of 
the assembly. 



D.2.3 No-key convention 
D.2.3.1 Advantages 

The no-key convention is convenient, since no keys are 
required either in the shaft or in the fitment. 

D.2.3.2 Disadvantages 

The disadvantages of the no-key conventions are that 

a) the absence of the key produces an unbalance which 
must be corrected in both the shaft and the fitment during 
individual balancing; 

b) unbalance correction usually cannot be made in the 
plane of the shaft key; instead, it has to be made in two 
shaft (rotor) body planes (see also figure D.I). This creates 
an internal bending moment in the shaft (or rotor) which, in 
case of a flexible rotor, may affect its balance quality. The 
internal bending moment will not affect the balance quality 
of rigid rotors. The internal bending moment remains in the 
shaft after the fitment has been attached; 

c) the addition of the key during assembly of the fitment 
to the shaft produces an unbalance; 

d) it has limited applicability. The method can only be 
used if permissible residual unbalance for the shaft 
assembly is larger than the balancing error produced by the 
missing key. The alternative solution of field balancing after 
assembly is costly, Inconvenient, and sometimes not poss- 
ible due to inaccessibility of the correction planes. 



11 



IS 14280: 1995 
ISO 8821 : 1989 

Annex E 

(informative) 

Bibliography 

ISO/R 773 : 1969, Rectangular or square parallel keys and their corresponding keyways. 
ISO/R 775 : 1969, Cylindrical and 1 / 10 conical shaft ends, 

ISO 1940-1 : 1986, Mechanical vibration - Balance quality requirements of rigid rotors - Part 1: Determination of permissible 
residual unbalance. 

ISO 2953 : 1985, Balancing machines — Description and evaluation. 

ISO 5343 : 1983, Criteria for evaluating flexible rotor balance. 

ISO 5406 : 1980, The mechanical balancing of flexible rotors. 



12 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review oflndian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LM 04 ( 0147 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



1/14 C l.T Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Eastern 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakglaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



Telephone 



{ 



3310131 
33113 75 



{ 



37 84 99, 37 85 61 
37 86 26,37 8662 



{ 



60 38 43 
6020 25 



f 235 0216,235 0442 
\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 6329295,6327858 
\ 632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



