**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



^^^Eii^^^^^tt^i iil%k^K>S :^^S^T<^^ 



IS 11910 (1986) 
Additives] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Spearmint Oil, Food Grade [FAD 



Food 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



JS: 11910" 19Se 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPEARMINT OIL, FOOD GRADE 



UDC 664 039 : 6e!J'&g7-653 



(§) C&pjfTight 19B7 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANPARDS 

MANAK BilAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAII ZAFAtt MARG 

film DEUil 11O0O2 

Gr 2 ^^^J' 1^^ 



IS : 11910 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPEARMINT OIL, FOOD GRADE 

Food Additives' Sectional Committee, AFDC 19 

Chairman Representing 

Dr T. S. Santhanakbishnan* Bush Boake Allen ( India ) Ltd, Madras 

Members 

Shri B. Hanum \ntha Ratt ( Alternate to 
Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan ) 
DrJ. C. An and All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 

Dr S. Jindal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Arya Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati) T. S. Vasundhaka ( Alternate ) 
Shbimati Anita Chatjdhary Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development, New Delhi 
Shri R. J. Verm a ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Desai Atul Products Limited, Atul 

Dr J. M. Turel ( Alternate ) 
Brig S. K. Dew an Technical Standardization Committee, Army 

Purchase Organization, New Delhi 
Shri K. S. KrishKamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dhingra Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Drugs Controller ( India ) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 

Deputy Drugs Controlleb 
( India ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. N, Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Iyer Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Dr V, S. Mohan ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare ) , New Delhi 
Shrimati Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr E. K. Jayanarayanan Mohan Meakin Limited, Ghaziabad 

Shri D. K. Rastogi ( Alternate ) 
Joint Commissioner ( Dairy Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Agriculture 
Development ) and Rural Development ), New Delhi 

Deputy Commissioner ( Dairy 
Development ) ( Alternate ) 



♦Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan acted as chairman at the meeting in which this docu- 
ment was finalized. 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by anv means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11910 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shei S. Kasthuri King Institute, Madras 

Public Aijalyst ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. C. Kathbani Asian Chemical Works, Bombay; and All India 

Saccharin Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 
Dr S. S. Pandit ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Khanna ' Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Shri V. K. Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Db M. J. MuLKiY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. R. Shirhatti ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. G. Naik K0RADE Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Db B. K. Nandi Foods and Nutrition Board, Department of Food 

( Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies ), New Delhi 
Shri M. M. Kwatara ( Alternate) 
Db C. S. Narayanan Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Trivandrum 

Db C. Arumughan ( Alternate ) 
Db K. M. Nabayanan National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Dr M. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shbi a. S. Rajadhayksha Corn Products Company ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Palekar ( Alternate ) 
Db R. Rajagopala Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Dr R. Seshadri ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Ramamurthy Indian Confectionery Manufacturers' Association^ 

New Delhi 
Representative The Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association 

of India, New Delhi 
Dr a. K. Roy Council for Indian Food Trade and Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. W. Shende Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shri K. P. Rane ( Alternate ) 
Db I. S. Shenolikab National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 

Dr Ramesh Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. A. Siddiqi Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & Fats, 

Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Db T. V. Subbaiah Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr R. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. B. Bedekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Tiwari Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 

Bhavnagar 
Db R. M. Oza ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. M. Tiwabi Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr C. p. S. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. B. Tubakhia Idachem Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi B. J. Navloob ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. C. ViN Vin Flavours, Vadodara 

Shbi T. Pubnanandam, Director General, BIS ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shbimati Shashi Sareen 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), BIS 

( Continued on page 8 ) 



IS : 11910 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SPEARMINT OIL, FOOD GRADE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 November 1986, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Additives Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 With the increased production of processed foods, manufacturers 
have started adding a large number of substances, generally in small 
quantities, to improve the appearance, flavour, texture or storage 
properties of the processed foods. As certain impurities in these subs- 
tances could be harmful, it is necessary to have a strict quality control 
of these food additives. A series of standards is, therefore, being 
prepared by this Institution to cover purity and identification of these 
substances. These standards would help in checking purity which 
requires to be checked at the stage of manufacture for it is extremely 
difficult ( and in many cases impossible ) to detect the impurity once 
these substances have been added to the processed foods. Besides 
these standards are intended to guide the indigenous manufacturers in 
making their product conform to specifications that are accepted by 
scientists, health authorities and international bodies. 

0.3 Spearmint oil is the volatile oil obtained by steam distillation from 
the fresh overground parts of the flowering plant Mentha spicata Linn 
( Common Spearmint ), or of Mentha cardiaca Gerard ex Baker ( Scotch 
Spearmint ) ( Fam Labiatae ). 
0.3.1 Spearmint oil is used as a flavouring agent in foods. 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard considerable asssistance has been 
derived from Food Chemical Codex, Pub. National Academy of Sciences 
and National Research Council, Washington D C, USA. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accord- 
ance with IS ; 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rtvistd ). 

3 



IS : 11910 * 1986 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and methods of sampling 
and test for spearmint oil, food grade. 

2. REftUIREMtNTS 

2A Description — Spearmint oil shall be in the form of a colourless, 
yellow or greenish-yellow liquid, having the characteristic odour and 
taste of spearmint. 

2.2 Angular Rotation — The angular rotation at 25^G in neat oil in 
a 100-mm tube shall be between —48" to —59'', 

2.3 Reaction to Litmus — A recently prepared solution of the sample 
in 80 percent alcohol shall be neutral or only slightly acid to moistened 
litmus paper, 

2.4 Refractive Index — The refractive index at 20°C shall be between 
1-484 and 1-491. 

2.5 Solubility in Alcohol — One miJlilitre of oil shall be soluble in 
one miililitre of 80 percent alcohol. On further dilution the solution 
may become turbid. 

2.6 Specific Gravity — The Specific gravity at 25725°C shall be 
between 0*917 and 0*934. 

2.7 The material shall also conform to the requirement given in 
Table 1. 

TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR SPEARMINT OIL, FOOD GRADE 

Si. Characteristic Requiremekt Method of Test, 

No. Ref to 

, ^- ^ 

Appendix of Clause of 
this Stan- IS : 1699- 
dard 1974* 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Ketones, percent by volume, Min 

ii) Heavy metals ( as pb ), mg/kg, Max 

iii) Lead ( Pb ), mg/kg, Max 

iv) Arsenic ( as As ), mg/kg, Max 

♦Methods of sampling and test for food colours {first revision ), 



55 


A 


^- 


40, 


B 





10 


— 


9 


3 


— 


10 



lis : 11910 - 198e 

3. PACKING, STORAGE AND MARKING 

3*1 Packing — The material shall be packed to the brim in air-tight 
containers. The containers shall be such as to preclude air contami- 
nation of the contents with metal or other impurities. 

3.2 Storage — The material shall be stored in a cool place protected 
from light. 

3.3 Marking — Each container shall be marked legibly to give the 
following information: 

a) Name of the material including the words, -food grade'; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

c) Minimum net mass of contents; 

d) Batch or code number; and 

e) Date of manufacture. 

3.3.1 The container may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance 
that they have been produced to comply Vkrith the requirements of that standard 
under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised 
and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products 
are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 The representative samples of the materia] shall be drawn and 
conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification 
shall be determined according to the procedure prescribed in 3 of 
18:1699-1974*. 

5. TESTS 

5.1 Tests shall be carried out by the methods specified in coi 4 and 5 
of Table 1. 

5.2 Qiiality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1977t ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — *Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



♦Method of sampling and test for food colours {first revision ). 
tSpecification for water for general laboratory use (second revision )* 



IS : 11910 - 1986 

A PPENDIX A 

[ Table 1, Item (i) ] 

DETERMINATION OF KETONES 

A-1. REAGENTS 

A-1.1 Sodium Sulphite Solution — A 30 percent aqueous solution^ 
freshly prepared. 

A- 1.2 Phenolphthalein Test Solution — Dissolve 1 gram of 
phenolphthalein in 100 ml of alcohol. 

A-1.3 Acetic Acid Solution — 50 percent {vlv). 

A-2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Pipette a 10-ml sample into a 100-ml cassia flask fitted with a 
stopper. Add 50 ml solution of sodium sulphite. Add 2 drop? of 
phenolphthalein test solution and neutralize with a 50 percent ( vjv ) 
acetic acid solution. Heat the mixture in a boiling water bath, and 
shake the flask repeatedly, neutralizing the mixture from time to time 
by the addition of a few drops of the 50 percent acetic acid solution, 
stoppering the flask to prevent loss of volatile material. When no 
coloration appears on addition of a few more drops of phenolphthalein 
test solution and heating for 15 minutes, cool to room temperature. 
When the liquids have separated completely, add sufficient sodium 
sulphite solution to raise the lower level of the oily layer within the 
graduated portion of the neck of the flask. 

A-3. CALCULATION 

Ketones, percent by volume «» 100 — ( F x 10 ) 

where 

V *= the number of ml of separated oil in the graduated neck 
of the flask. 

APPENDIX B 

[ Table 1, Item (ii) ] 

DETERMINATION OF HEAVY METALS 

B«l, REAGENTS 

B*L1 Ammonia Solution — Dilute 400 ml of ammonium hydroxide 
( 28 percent ) to 1 000 mi with water. 

|kL2 Hydrochloric Acid — 10 percent. 

6 



IS : 11910 - 1986 

B-1.3 Lead Nitrate Stock Solution — Dissolve 159'8 mg of lead 
nitrate in 100 ml water containing 1 ml of nitric acid. Dilute with 
water to 1 000 mi and mix. Prepare and store the solution in lead-free 
glass containers. 

B-1.4 Standard Lead Solution — Dissolve 10 ml of lead nitrate stock 
solution, accurately measured, with water to 100 ml. Each ml of the 
solution so prepared contains the equivalent of 10 ^g of lead ion (Pb). 
Prepare solution on the day of use. 

B-1.5 Nitric Acid — 10 percent ( vjv ). 

B-1.6 Sulphuric Acid — 94*5 to 95*5 percent ( vjv ). 

B-1.7 Acetic Acid — 6 percent ( m/y ). 

B-1.8 Hydrogen Sulphide — A saturated solution of hydrogen 
sulphide made by passing H2S in cold water. 

B-2. PROCEDURE 

B-2.1 Solution A — Take 2_ml of the standard lead solution in a 
50-ml Nessler tube and add 23 ml of water. Adjust the pH to between 
3*0 and 4*0 by addition of acetic acid or ammonia solution. Dilute 
with water to 40 ml and mix, 

B-2.2 Solution B — Place 500 mg of the sample, accurately weighed 
in a suitable crucible, add sufficient nitric acid to wet the sample, and 
carefully ignite at a low temperature until thoroughly charred, covering 
the crucible loosly with a suitable lid during the ignition. After the 
substance is thoroughly carbonized, add 2 ml of nitric acid and 5 drops 
of sulphuric acid and cautiously heat until white fumes are evolved. 
Then ignite, preferably in a muffle furnace, at 500 to 600°C until the 
carbon is all burnt off. GooK add 4 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, 
cover and digest on a steam bath for 10 to 15 minutes. Uncover and 
slowly evaporate on a steam-bath to dryness. Moisten the residue with 
one drop of hydrochloric acid. Add 10 ml of hot water and digest 
for 2 minutes. Add, dropwise, amonia solution until the solution is just 
alkaline to litmus paper. Dilute with water to 25 ml and adjust the 
pH to betvvxen 3*0 and 4*0 ( pH indicator paper ) by the addition of 
diluted acetic acid. Filter, if necessary. Wash the crucible and the 
filter with 10 ml of water. Transfer to a 50-mI Nessler tube. Dilute 
the combined filtrate and washings with water to 40 mi and mix. 

B-2.3 To each tube add 10 ml of freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide. 
Mix and allow to stand for 45 minutes and view down over a Vv^hite 
surface. The colour of solution B shall not be darker than that of 
Solution A. 



IS : 11910 * 1986 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Food Colours and Flavours Subcommittee, AFDC 19 : 1 

Convener Representing 

Shri K. V. Nagabaja Central Food Laboratory. Central Food Tech- 

nological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

Members 

Dr J. C. Anand All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 

Dr S. Jindal ( Alternate ) 
Shki S. D. Bhakowaj Ajanta Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shbi Kapil Dev ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vam Dev Bhardwaj Arun Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shri Ashok Doora ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dhingra Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Shri M. K. Jain National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Shri J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Shrimati Debi Mckherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Kasthuri King Institute, Madras 

Dr S. K. Khanna Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Shri S. M, Mehta Atul Products Limited, Atul 

Shri M. V. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K, Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Dr M. J. MuLKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. R. Shirhatti ( Alternate ) 
Dr a, G. Naik Kurade Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Shrt B. a. Rake Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. W. Shende ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. Hanumantha Rau Bush Boake Allen ( India ) Limited, Madras 

Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Dr L. V- L, Sastby Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Shri Navikchandra R. Shah Devarsons Private Limited, Ahmadabad 

Dr V. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. C, Vasudbvan Corn Products Co ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Palekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Vin Vin Flavours, Vadodara 



, 8 



