**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11909 (1986) : Sweet Orange Oil, Cold Pressed, Food Grade 
"FAD 8: Food Additives] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



13:11959- 19S5 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SWEET ORANGE OIL, COLD PRESSED, 

FOOD GRADE 



UDC C64'09D ; eC!>&26 444 



© Cipyright 1937 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STAKDARUS 

MANAK BllAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR WARO 

NKSV DELHI UOOOa 

Gr 3 *^V 1^*81 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SWEET ORANGE OIL, COLD PRESSED, 

FOOD GRADE 

Food Additives Sectional Committee, AFDC 19 

Chairman Representing 

Dr T. S. SaNthanakbishnan* Bush Boake Allen ( India ) I^td, Madras 

Members 

Shri B. Hanumaktha Rau ( Alternate to 
Db T. S. Samhanakrishnan ) 
Dr J, C. An AND All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 

Db S. Jindal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Arya Defence Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Dr ( Shrimati ) T. S. Vasundhara ( Alternate ) 
Shrtmati Anita Chattdhary Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development, New Delhi 
Shri R. J. VerMa ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Desai Atul Products Limited, Atul 

Dr J. M. TUREL ( Alternate ) 
Brig S. K. Dewan Technical Standardization Committee, Army 

Purchase Organization, New Delhi 
Shri K. S. KrishKamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dhingra Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Drugs Controller ( India ) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 

Depttty Drugs Controllbb 
{ India ) ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. G. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi S. N. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Iyer Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. S. Mohan ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services. Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 
Shrimati Deri Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Db E. K. Jayanarayanan Mohan Meakin Limited, Ghaziabad 

Shri D. K. Rastogi ( Alternate ) 
Joint Commissioner ( Dairy Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Agriculture 
Development ) and Rural Development ), New Delhi 

Deputy Commissioner ( Dairy 
Development ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

♦Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan acted as chairman at the meeting in which this docu- 
ment was finalized. 



© C0pjmght 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of J 957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11909 • 1986 

{ Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. Kasthuri King Institute, Madras 

PtTBLic Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Shki J. C. Kathrani Asian Chemical Works, Bombay; ani All India 

Saccharin Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 
Dr S. S, Pakdit ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. KhaNna , Industrial Toxicology Research CentrCj Lucknow 

Shri V. K. Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Dr M. J. MuLKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. R. Shirhatti ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. G, Naik KtJRADE Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Dr B. K. Nandi Foods and Nutrition Board, Department of Food 

( Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies ), New Delhi 
Shri M. M, Kwatara ( Alternate ) 
Dr C. S. Narayanan Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Trivandrum 

Dr C, Arumughan ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. M. Narayanan National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Dr M. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Rajadhayksha Corn Products Company ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Palekar ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. Rajagopala Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Dr R. Seshadri ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Ramamtjrthy Indian Confectionery Manufacturers' Association^ 

New Delhi 
Representative The Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association 

of India, New Delhi 
Dr a. K. Roy Council for Indian Food Trade and Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. W. Shende Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shri K. P. Rane ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. S. Shenolikar National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 

Dr Ramesh Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. A. SiDDiQi Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & Fats, 

Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Dr T. V. Stjbbaiah Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr R. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. B. Bedekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Tiwari Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 

Bhavnagar 
Dr R. M. Oza ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. M. Tiwari Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr C. P. S. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. B. Turakhia Idachem Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. J. Navloor ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Vin Vin Flavours, Vadodara 

Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shrimati Shashi Sareen 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), BIS 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SWEET ORANGE OIL, COLD PRESSED, 

EOOD GRADE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 November 1986, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Additives Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 With the increased production of processed foods, manufacturers 
have started adding a large number of substances, generally in small 
quantities, to improve the appearance, flavour, texture or storage pro- 
perties of the processed foods. As certain impurities in these substances 
could be harmful, it is necessary to have a strict quality control of these 
food additives. A series of standards is, therefore, being prepared 
to cover purity and identification of these substances. These standards 
would help in checking purity which requires to be checked 
at the stage of manufacture for it is extremely difficult ( and in 
many cases impossible ) to detect the impurity once these substances 
have been added to the processed foods. Besides, these standards are 
intended to guide the indigenous manufacturers in making their product 
conform to specifications that are accepted by scientists, health authorities 
and international bodies. 

0.3 Sweet orange oil, cold pressed, is the volatile oil obtained by 
expression from the fresh peel of the ripe fruit of Citrus Sinensis 
L. Osbeck ( Fam Rutaceae ). It is an intensely yellow, orange or 
deep orange liquid, having the characteristic odour and taste of the 
outer part of fresh, sweet orange peel. 

0.3.1 Sweet orange oil, cold pressed, is widely used as a flavouring 
agent in foods, 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from Food Chemical Codex, Pub. National Academy of Sciences 
and National Research Council, Washington DC, USA. 

0.5 A separate Indian Standard for oil of Mandarin Orange ( Citrus 
reticulata ), cold pressed ( IS ; 6617-1972 ) used in soap, confectionery, 
perfumery and beverage industry has already been published. 

3 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accord- 
ance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in 
this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

U This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of 
sampling and test for sweet orange oil, cold pressed, food grade. 

2. REQJUIREMENTS 

2.1 Description — Sweet orange oil, cold pressed is an intensely 
yellow, orange or deep orange liquid, having the characteristic odour 
and taste of the outer part of fresh, sweet orange peel, 

2.2 Solubility — Sweet orange oil, cold pressed shall be miscible with 
anhydrous alcohol and with carbon disulphide. It shall be soluble in 
glacial acetic acid. 

2.3 Angular Rotation — The angular rotation at 25°C in neat oil in a 

100-mm tube shall be between -f 94° and +99°. 

2.4 Refractive Index — The refractive index at 20^0 shall be between 
1-472 and 1*474. 

2.5 Specific Gravity — The specific gravity at 25725*'C shall be 
between 0842 and 0-846, 

2.6 The material shall also conform to the requirements given in Table 1. 

3. PACKING, STORAGE AND MARKING 

3.1 Packing — The material shall be filled in food lacquered M.S. 
drums or other suitable containers with as little air space as possible. 
The containers shall be such as to preclude air contamination of the 
containers with metal or other impurities. 

3.2 Storage — The material shall be stored in a cool and dry place so 
as to avoid excessive exposure to heat. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

4 



IS : 11909 - 1986 



TABLE i REQUIREMENTS FOR SWEET GRANGE OIL, COLD PRESSED, 

FOOD GRADE 




( Clause 2.6 ) 






Sl Characteristic 
No. 


Requirement 


Method of Test, Rbf to 


Appendix of 
This Standard 


Clause of IS : 
1699-1974* 


(1) (2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) Aldehydes ( as CioHjoO ) per- 
cent by mass 


1-2 to 2-5 


A 


— 


ii) Foreign oils 


To pass test 


B 


— 


iii) Washed citrus oils 


To pass test 


G 


— 


iv) Lead ( as Pb ) , mg/kg. Max 


10 


— 


9 


v) Arsenic ( as As ), mg/kg, Max 


3 


— 


10 


vi) Heavy metals ( as Pb ), mg/kg, 
Max 


40 


D 


—" 


*Methods of sampling and test for food colours {first revision ). 


^ 



3.3 Marking — Each container shall be marked legibly to give the 
following information: 

a) Name of the material including the words, 'food grade'; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

c) Minimum net mass of contents; 

d) Batch or code number; and 

e) Date of manufacture. 

3»3.1 The container may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance 
that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard 
under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised 
and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products 
are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 The representative samples of the material shall be drawn and 
conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification shall 
be determined according to the procedure prescribed in 3 of IS : 1699- 
1974*. 



♦Methods of sampling and test for food colours (first revision ). 

5 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

5. TESTS 

5.1 Tests shall be carried out by the methods specified in col 4 and 5 of 
Table 1. 

5.2 Quality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1977* ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — *Pure Chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



APPENDIX A 

[ Table \, Item (i) ] 

DETERMINATION OF ALDEHYDES 

A-1. REAGENTS 

A-1.1 Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride Solution — Dissolve 50 grams 
of hydroxylamine hydrochloride ( preferably recrystallized before using ) 
in 90 ml of water and dilute to 1 000 ml with aldehyde-free alcohol. 
Adjust the solution to a j&H of about 3*4 with 0'5 N alcoholic potassium 
hydroxide. 

A-1.2 Bromophenol Blue Test Solution — Dissolve 100 mg of 
bromophenol blue in 100 ml of dilute alcohol (1 in 2 ) and filter if 
necessary. For pB. determinations, dissolve 100 mg in 3'2 ml of 0*05 N 
sodium hydroxide, and dilute with carbon dioxide-free water to 200 ml. 

A-2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Weigh accurately 10 ml of sample and transfer into a 125-ml 
Erlenmeyer flask. Add 30'0 ml of the hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
solution and mix thoroughly. Allow the mixture to stand at room 
temperature for 10 minutes with occasional shaking. Titrate the libe- 
rated hydrochloride acid with 0*5 N alcoholic potassium hydroxide to a 
greenish-yellow endpoint using bromophenol blue test solution as indi- 
cator or to a pB. of 3*4 using a suitable j&H meter. Perform a blank 
determination simultaneously with the sample determination. 



•Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ), 

6 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

A-3. CALCULATIONS 

.,.1.^ u F - Fi ( 78-14 X 100 ) 
Aldehydes, percent by mass = -j^ 

where 

V = mi of 05 N aicohoiic potassium hydroxide consumed in 

titration of the sample; 
F, = ml of 0*5 N alcoholic potassium hydroxide consumed in 

titration of the blank; and 
M = mass of the sample in mg. 



APPENDIX B 

[ Table 1 , Item (ii) ] 
TEST FOR FOREIGN OILS 

B-1. PROCEDURE 

B-1.1 Transfer 50 ml of the sweet orange oil to a Ladenburg flask 
having 4 bulbs of approximate diameters 6 cm, 3*5 cm, 3*0 cm and 
2'3 cm respectively in ascending order. The distance from the bottom 
of the flask to the side arm is 20 cm. Distil the oil at the rate of 1 drop 
per second until the distillate measures 5 ml. The angular rotation of 
the distillate shall not differ from that of the original oil by more than 
2 degrees and the refractive index of the distillate shall not be less than 
O'GOO 5 and not more than O'OOl 8 lower than that of the original oil 
at 20°C. 



APPENDIX C 

[ Table 1. Item (iii) ] 
TEST FOR WASHED CITRUS OILS 

C-1. PROCEDURE 

C-1.1 Evaporate 3 ml of the sweet orange oil in a tared glass 
crystallizing dish on a stearn bath for 5 hours. Continue heating at 
105°C for 2 hours. Cool in a desiccator and weigh. Not less than 43 mg 
of residue remains. 

C-1.2 A 1-ml sample does not form a clear solution with 2 ml of 
89'0 percent alcohol. 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

APPENDIX D 

[ Table 1, Item (vi) ] 
DETERMINATION OF HEAVY METALS 

D-1. REAGENTS 

D-1.1 Ammonia Solution — Dilute 400 ml of ammonium hydroxide 
( 28 percent ) to 1 000 ml with water. 

D-1,2 Hydrochloric Acid — 10 percent. 

D-1. 3 Lead Nitrate Stock Solution — Dissolve 159'8 mg of lead 
nitrate in 100 ml of water containing 1 ml of nitric acid. Dilute with 
water to 1 000 ml and mix. Prepare and store the solution in lead free 
glass containers. 

D-1.4 Standard Lead Solution — Dilute 10 ml of lead nitrate stock 
solution, accurately measured, with water to 100 ml. Each ml of the 
solution so prepared contains the equivalent of 10 jttg of lead ion ( Pb ). 
Prepare the solution on the day of use. 

D-1.5 Nitric Acid — 10 percent ( vjv ). 

D-1,6 Sulphuric Acid — 94*5 to 95-5 percent ( vfv ). 

D-1.7 Acetic Acid — 6 percent ( mjv ). 

D-1.8 Hydrogen Sulphide — A saturated solution of hydrogen sulphide 
made by passing H2S in cold water. 

D-2. PROCEDURE 

D-2.1 Solution A — Take 2 ml of the standard lead solution in a 
50-ml Nessler tube and add 23 ml of water. Adjust the /»H to between 
3*0 and 4'0 by addition of acetic acid or ammonia solution. Dilute 
with water to 40 ml and mix. 

D-2.2 Solution B — Place 500 mg of the sample, accurately weighed 
in a suitable crucible. Add sufficient nitric acid to wet the sample, and 
carefully ionite at a low temperature until thoroughly charred, cover- 
ing the crucible loosely with a suitable lid during ignition. After the 
substance is thoroughly carbonized, add 2 ml of nitric acid and .5 drops 
of sulphuric acid and cautiously heat until white fumes are evolved. 
Then ignite, preferably in a muffle furnace, at 500 to 600°C until the 
carbon is all burnt off. CodI, add 4 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, 
cover and digest on a steam bath for 10 to 15 minutes. Uncover and 
slowly evaporate on a steam-bath to dryness. Moisten the residue with 
one drop of hydrochloric acid, add 10 ml of hot water and digest for 
2 minutes. Add, dropwise, ammonia solution until the solution is just 

8 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

alkaline to litmus paper. Dilate with water to 25 ml and adjust 
the pH. to between 3*0 and 4 ( />H indicator paper ) by the addition 
of dilute acetic acid. Filter if necessary. Wash the crucible and the 
filter with 10 ml of water. Transfer to a 50-ml Nessler tube. Dilute 
the combined filtrate and washing with water to 40 ml and mix. 

D-2.3 To each tube add 10 ml of freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide. 
Mix and allow to stand 'for 45 minutes and view down over a white 
surface. The colour of solution B shall not be darker than that of 
solution A. 



IS : 11909 - 1986 

( Continued fnm page 2 ) 

Food Colours and Flavours Subcommittee, AFDC 19 : 1 

Convener Representing 

Shri K. V. Naqakaja Central Food Laboratory, Central Food Tech- 

nological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

Members 
Dr J. C. Anand All India Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi 

Db S. JiKDAL ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. D. Bharbwaj Ajanta Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shri Kapil Dev ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Vam Dev Bhardwaj Arun Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shbi Ashok Dogba ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dhingba Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Shri M. K. Jain National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Shbi J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Shrimati Debi Mukhebjeb ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Kasthxtbi King Institute, Madras 

Dr S. K. Khanna Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Shri S. M. Mehta Atul Products Limited, Atul 

Shri M. V, Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. K. Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Dr M. J. MuiiKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Da V. R. Shirhatti ( Alternate ) 
Db a, G. Naik Kurade Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association^ 

New Delhi 
Shbi B. A. RaKb Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. W, Shende ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Hanumantha Ratt Bush Boake Allen ( India ) Limited, Madras 

Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Dr L. V. L. Sastby Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(GSIR), Mysore 
Shri Navinchakdba R. Shah Devarsons Private Limited, Ahmadabad 

Dr V. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, B. Sulb Naarden ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. C. Vasttdevan Corn Products Oo ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Palbkar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. C. Vin Vin Fiavours, Vadodara 



10 



