**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11301 (1985) : Methods for determination of phosalone 
residues in food commodities [FAD 1: Pesticides and 
Pesticides Residue Analysis] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS ; 11301 • 1935 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF PHOSALONE RESIDUES 

IN FOOD COMMODITIES 



UDG 6rt4 : r.43 : 6112-9S'D2ft PHOSALONE 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 KAHAUUR SHAii ZAfAft MARO 

NEW 0n-Hl IKWJ 



IS 1 11301 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF PHOSALONE RESIDUES 

IN FOOD COMMODITIES 

Pesticides Residue Analysis Sectional Committee, A FDC 56 

Chairman 

DrH. L. Bami 

Bangalow No. A, Malkaganj 

Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shri E. a. Almeida Hindustan Ciba-Geigy Ltd, Bombay 

Shri F. Quadi\os{ Alternate) 
SRRI S. K. Anand Public Analyst, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Deputy Public Ax alyst ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. D. AwASTHi Indian Institute of Horticultural Research 

(ICAR), Bangalore 
Sum K. D. Amrb National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 
DrJ . C. Verma (Alternate ) 
Da K. G.GunA Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta; and Central 

Committee for Food Standards. New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Dhingba (Alternate) 
Dr R. C.Gupta Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & 

Storage (Ministry of Agriculture & Rural 
Development ), Faridabad 
Dh ( Shrimati ) G. MuKHERjEB (A Iternate) 
D R S. S. Gttptii Bayer I ndia Ltd, Thane 

Dr P. V. Raixar (Alternate ) 
DrR. L. Kalra Department of Entomology, Punjab Agricultural 

University, Ludhiana 
Dr R. p. Chawla {Alternate} 
D R Kalyan Sixqh C, S. A. University of Agriculture & Technology, 

Kanpui 
Dr K. Krishnamurthy Department of Food ( Ministry of Agriculture & 

Rural Development ), New Delhi 
Srri G. N. Bhardwaj (Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



15:11301- 1985 

( Continuedfrom page 1 ) 

Members 
DrS. Madhusoodanan 

DrJ . C. Majtjmdar 

Dr V. Srinivasan {Alternate ) 
Db- M. S. Mitkyanatha 
Dr A. L. MooKERJBE 

DltS. K. MUKERJEBl 

DrS. K. Handa (Alternate) 
DrNagabhushan Rao 

Shri R. Rajoopal 

Shri G. C. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. S. Sastky 

DrT. K. Verma (Alternate) 
DrT. D. Seth 

Dr R. K. Sethi 

Da K. Sivasakkaban 

DrS. Y. Pandey (Alternate) 
Dr K. Visheswabiah 



Representing 

Fredrick Institute of Plant Protection & 

Toxicology, Padappai 
Pesticides Association of India, New Delhi 

Rallis A^ro-Chemical Research Station, Ban^lore 
Gyanaimd India Ltd, Bombay 
Indian Agricultural Research lnstitute( ICAR ), 
New Delhi 

Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), 

Hyderabad 
National Institute of Communicable Diseases, 

Delhi 

Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR), 
Izatnagar 

Industrial Toxicology Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Luck now 
Indofil Chemicals Ltd, Thane 
Union Carbide India Ltd, New Delhi 



Central Food Technological Research Institute 
( C S I R ) , Mysore 
DfiJ . R. Ranoaswamy (Aftemare ) 
Shbi T. Purnajjandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri& Food) 

Secretary 
Shri Lajinder Singh 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



IS : 11301 - 1985 



Indian Standard 



METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF PHOSALONE RESIDUES 

IN FOOD COMMODITIES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 24 June 1985, after the draft finalized by the Pesticides 
Residues Analysis Sectional Connnnittee had been approved by the 
Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Phosalone fornnulations are used in agriculture for the control of 
nnany insect pests. Frequent and increased use of these fornnulations 
often result in harnnful effects due to toxic nature of residues. Careful 
nnonitoring of residues, is therefore, an innportant step in safeguarding 
hunnan health and in fornnulation of regulatory policy. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard due consideration has been 
given to the linnits likely to be laid down under the provisions of 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules and the specified test nnethods 
are sensitive to the levels indicated in 1.1.1. 

0.4 This standard will enable the health authorities and other engaged 
in the field to follow a unifornn test procedure for the estinnation of 
phosalone residues in various foods. 

0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis nnade in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1 960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes gas chronnatographic ( GLC ) nnethods using 
alkali flanne-ionization detector ( AFID ), and electron capture detector 
( ECD ) for the deternnination of phosalone [ 0, O-diethyl-S- 
( 6-chlorobenzoxazolone-3-yl )-nnethyl phosphorodithioate ] residues in 
food connnnodities. 



*Rules for rounding oiT numerical va]u'.\s ( revi^sed). 



15:11301- 1985 

1.1.1 The minimum limit of determination of phosalone residues using 
alkali flame-ionization detector is 0*lf^g/g while it is 0'05**g/g with 
electron capture detector. 

2. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

2.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled water 
( see IS :1070-I977* ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note-- 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the result of analysis, 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Representative samples of the material for estimating phosalone 
residues shall be drawn in accordance with IS : 11380 (Part 1 )-I985t. 

4. EXTRACTION 

4.1 Reagents 

4.1.1 Solvents — Acetone, acetonitrile, petroleum ether, n-hexane and 
dichloromethane. All glass distilled. 

4.1.2 Sodium Chloride 

4.1.3 Sodium Sulphate — Anhydrous. 

4.1.4 Glass Wool — Rinse with acetone and methanol several times and 
dry before use. 

4.1.5 Adsorbent for Column Chromatography — Florisil ( 60 to 100 mesh ). 

4.2 Apparatus 

4.2.1 High Speed Blender — Waring or equivalent with glass jar, teflon 
washers and seals. 

4.2.2 Centrifuge — Capable of 3 000 r/min and having proper capacity 
centrifuge bottles. 

4.2.3 Kuderna-D anish Concentrator -Having 500-ml flask and 10 
tol5-ml receiving tube with Snyder column. 

4.2.4 Rotary Vacuum Evaporator 



*Specifi cation for water for general laboratory use ( second revision). 
•j-Methods of sampling for the determination of pesticide residues: Part I 
Agricultural and food commodities. 



15:11301- 1985 
4.2.5 Separating Funnel -- one-litre capacity. 

^.2.6 Chromatographic J ube — 2'2 cm outer diameter and 40 cnn long 
with stop-cock. 

4.3 Non-fatty Foods ( Less Than 2 Percent Fat Content ) 

4.3.1 Vegetables and Fruits ( Containing More Than 75 Percent Moisture ) — 
Transfer 50 g of the sannple to a waring blender with 100 nnl acetone 
and blend for 2 nninutes at high speed. Filter extract through pre-washed 
glass wool plug held on a conical funnel into a beaker. Re-extract the 
residual sannple nnaterial with two 50 nnl portions of acetone by blending 
for 2 nninutes each and filter through the sanne glass wool plug. 
Concentrate the connbined extract to about 100 nnl in a rotary vacuunn 
evaporator. Transfer it to a 1-litre separating funnel, containing 100 nnl 
petroleunn ether and 100 nnl of dichloronnethane. Shake for 1 nninute, 
allow the layers to separate. Transfer the lower aqueous layer into 
another l-litre separating funnel. Dry the retained upper organic layer 
of the first separating funnel by passing through 4 cnn thick anhydrous 
sodiunn sulphate supported on glass wool in a funnel and collect in a 
Kuderna-Danish concentrator or rotary vacuunn evaporator flask. To 
the separating funnel containing the aqueous phase, add 5 g sodiunn 
chloride and shake for half-a-nninute to dissolve the salt. Add 100 nnl 
dichloronnethane, shake for one nninute and allow the phases to separate. 
Collect the lower organic phase into the Kuderna-Danish concentrator 
after passing it through the sanne anhydrous sodiunn sulphate plug. 
Repeat partitioning wit h one nnore portion of 100 nnl of dichloronnethane. 
Rinse the sodiunn sulphate plug with 50 nnl of dichloronnethane into the 
concentrator. Discard the aqueous fraction. Evaporate the connbined 
partitioned organic extract in a Kuderna-Danish concentrator/ rotary 
vacuunn evaporator to suitable volunne. Ensure connplete rennoval of 
dichloronnethane by repeated evaporation with the addition of 20 nnl 
acetone. Concentrate to about 2 nnl. 

4.3.2 Cereals and Pulses ( Containing Less Than 20 Percent Moisture ) — 
Weigh 200 g of the sannple into the blender jar and add 150 nnl 
of 35 percent water in acetone ( 350 nnl distilled water diluted to 1 litre 
with acetone ). Blend at high speed for 2 nninutes and filter under 
pressure through pre-washed Whatman filter paper No. 1 placed on a 
Buchner funnel. Re-extract the residual nnaterial with two 50 nnl 
portions of 35 percent water-acetone by blending for 2 nninutes and filter 
under pressure quickly. Concentrate the connbined filtrate to about 100 nnl 
in a rotary vacuunn evaporator/ Kuderna-Danish concentrator and 
transfer to a 1-litre separating funnel containing 100 nnl of 
dichloronnethane and 100 nnl of petroleunn ether. Partition and 
concentrate to volunne as in 4.3.1. 



IS : 11301 - 1985 

4.3.3 Water and Beverages — Partition twice 500 ml portion of l-litre 
sannple having 7 g sodiunn chloride dissolved in it with 100 nnl of 
dichloronnethane in a separating funnel. Collect the lower 
dichloronnethane layer through a plug of anhydrous sodiunn sulphate and 
concentrate as described in 4.3.1. 

4.4 Fatty Foods ( Containing JNIore Than 2 Percent Fat ) 

4.4.1 Fats and Oils — Connpletely dissolve 5 g sample in about 150 nnl 
of n-hexane and transfer to a separating funnel. Partition thrice 
with 100, 50, 50 nnl of acetonitrile. Each tinne collecting the lower 
acetonitrile layer into the second separating funnel, containing 600 nnl 
of 2 percent sodiunn chloride solution in distilled water. To this, 
add 100 nnl of petroleunn ether and shake thoroughly for 1 nninute and 
allow layers to separate. Drain the lower aqueous phase into another 
separating funnel and repeat partitioning twice nnore. Connbine the 
upper petroleunn ether layer by passing over a plug of anhydrous sodiunn 
sulphate and concentrate in a rotary vacuunn evaporator/ Kuderna-Danish 
concentrator to about 5 nnl. 

4.4.2 Oilseeds and Nuts-Transfer 50*0 g of crushed sannple with 10 g 
anhydrous sodiunn sulphate into a blender jar. Add 150 nnl of acetone 
and blend at high speed for 3 nninutes. Filter under pressure through 
a pre-washed Whatman No. 1 filter paper placed over a Buchner funnel. 
Re-extract the residual nnaterial twice nnore with 75 nnl portion of 
acetone. Evaporate the connbined f literate to ainnost oily layer in a 
Kuderna-Danish-Concentrator/ rotary vacuunn evaporator. Dissolve oily 
residue in 100 nnl of n-hexane and partition with acetonitrile as in 4.4.1. 

4.4.3 Meat and Fish — Transfer 50*0 g of the nninced sannple with 20 g 
of anhydrous sodium sulphate in a blender jar. Add 150 ml of 
n-hexane-ketone ( 2 ilvjv) and blend for 3 minutes at high speed. 
Filter under pressure through prewashed Whatman filter paper No. 1 
placed on a Buchner funnel. Re-extract the residual nnaterial twice 
with 100 nnl portion of n-hexane-acetone and follow concentration and 
partitioning as given in 4.4.1. 

4.4.4 Milk and Millc Products -Transfer 100 g nnilk in the blender jar. 
Add 10 g of anhydrous sodiunn sulphate and 100 nnl of acetone and blend 
for 2 nninutes. Filter under pressure through prewashed Whatman filter 
paper No. 1 placed on a Buchner funnel. Re-extract the residual nnaterial 
with 100 nnl of acetone. Follow steps as in 4.4.1 after concentration to 
oily layer. 

Note 1 — As the extracti on and partitioning procedures are based on fat, 
moisture, and sugar content of the food material, reiFer food composition tables for 
these values given in The Mention ya\ue of Indian Foods and Planning of Satisfactory Vkis 
by W.R. Aykrod, ICMR, New Delhi or equivalent. 



I S : 11301 " 1985 

N OTE 2 -Where sample extracts pose difficulty in filteration or thick emulsions 
are formed during partitioning, centrifugation of the material at about 3 000 r/min 
for about 10 minutes can be resorted to. 

4.5 Clean Up 

4,5.1 The partitioned extracts obtained in 4.3.1 to 4.3.3 are suitable 
for direct estinnation by alkali flanne ionization detector up to O'lMg/g 
level. However, for extracts fronn 4.4.1 to 4.4.4 and estinnations below 
0*lfig/g level of the residues and/ or estinnation by electron capture 
detector, further clean up by colunnn chronnatography is necessary. 

4*5.2 Prepare the chronnatographic colunnn by packing with 1 cnn 
layer of glass wool at the bottonn followed by 10 cnn layer of florisil 
and 1 cnn layer of anhydrous sodiunn sulphate. Prewash this colunnn 
with 100 nnl of benzene and discard eluate. Dissolve residues in the 
concentrator tub^ flask in two 5 nnl portions of benzene and transfer to 
the colunnn bed. Open the stopcock and allow the colunnn to run till 
the transferred nnaterial soaks into the absorbent. Close the stopcock 
and fill the colunnn with 200 nnl of elutant, benzene-ethyl acetate 
solution (95 ; 5 u/v). Collect in a round bottonned flask. Concentrate 
eluate in a rotary vacuunn evaporator on water bath at tennperature 
of 45°C. Transfer quantitatively to a graduated test tube with acetone 
and nnake to suitable volunne for analysis. 

4.5.3 Calibrate the Aorisil colunnn by eluting standard solution 
of ( 1 Jig/ ml) phosalone with the elutant. 

5. GAS CHROMATOGRAPHIC DETERMINATION 

5.1 Principle — Phosalone residues obtained after sannple extraction and 
partitioning are nneasured by gas chronnatograph equipped with alkali 
flanne ionization detector (A FID) Quantitation by gas chronnatograph 
equipped with electron capture detector (ECD) require further 
clean-up by colunnn chronnatography. The annount of residues is 
deternnined by connparing the response with the response for a known 
standard of sinnilar concentration. 

5.2 Apparatus 

5.2.1 Gas Chronnatograph — A gas chronnatograph equipped with 
thernnoionic detector operated under the following suggested paranneters. 
These paranneters nnay be varied as per available facilities provided 
standardization is done: 

Colunnn Glass, 1 nneter long and 3 nnnn i.d. 

packed with 3 percent DC-200 on 
80 to 100 nnesh Gas chrom Q. 



IS: 11301 -1985 



Injection port 


temperature 


220°C 






Column oven 


temperature 


230°C 






Detector temperature 


240" G 






Carrier gas 




Nitrogen 

Hydrogen 

Air 




70 ml/ min 

40 ml/min 

400 ml/min 


Attenuation 




IxlO-^ to 


23 


X 10-^ A 


Recorder chart flow 


2*5 cm/ min 







5.2.2 Gas Chromatograph - IK gas chromatograph equipped with 
electron capture detector operated under the following suggested 
parameters. These parameters my be varied as per available facilities 
provided standardization is done. 



Column 



Glass, 1 meter long and 4*2 mm 
o.d. packed with 3 percent 
OV 17 on GO to 80 mesh gas 
chrom Q. 



Nitrogen flow rate 80 ml/min 

250°C 

240°C 

250°C 



Carrier gas 

Injection port temperature 
Column oven temperature 
Detector temperature 

5.3 Reagent 

5.3.1 Reference Standard of Phosalone ( High Purity ) 

5.3.2 Prepare working standard solution of phosalone in acetone 
of I'Optg/ml by appropriate dilution of a more concentrated stock 
solution. 

5.4 Procedure 

5,4,1 Alkali Flanne Ionization Detector ( AFID) — Inject a range of 
duplicate volumes ( 2 to 5 Ml ) of the working standard solution into the 
column. Measure peak response as peak height/ area. Calculate mass of 
pure phosalone from the volume of standard solutions injected. Now 
inject known volume ( 2 to 5 jmI ) of the sample extracts made to specific 
volume after partitioning/ clean up. Measure the peak response of the 
sample at the specific retention time of the standard phosalone. 



8 



IS : 11301 .• 1985 

5.4.2 Electron Capture Detector ( ECD )— Inject a volume of ( 2to8fil) 
of the working standard solution into the column. Measure peak 
response as heightyarea and calculate mass of phosalone from the 
volume injected. After standardization, inject known volume ( 2 to 8 ^l) 
of the sample, extract after clean up and made to specific volume. 
Measure peak response of the sample at specific retention time of the 
phosalone standard. 

5.5 Calculations 

Phosalone residues, Mg/g ( ppm ) =* '^ xVfx I t'^ ^ ^ 
where 

Ai == peak hei ght/ area of the sampi e; 

V2 = volume, in mI, of standard phosalone injected; 

V^ = total volume, in ml, of standard solution; 

C = concentration, in /xg/g, of the standard solution; 

f = recovery factor = percent m^n recovery 
A2 =^ peak height/ area of the phosalone standard; 
Vi ^ volume in ^*1 of sample injected; and 
M = mass in g, of sample taken for analysis 

Note 1 -Percent mean recovery is determined by raicing untreated control 
sample to one in which known amount of phosalone are added and analysed as 
described above. Recoveries should be 80 percent or above. 

Note 2 — The Calculation can also be based on data obtained by the use of 
integrator, wherein the comparison of the area of the standard is made with that of 
sample. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SIUNITS) 



Base Unit* 








QpA-KTlTY 


UNIT 


SyMBOIi 




Length 


metre 


m 




Man 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Tliermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of lubitance 


mole 


mo! 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradiao 


sr 




Derived Units 








QPANXIXY 


Unit 


SYMBOL 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N - 1 kg.mfs* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


IJ - I N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


I W - IJ/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb- 1 V,s 


Flux density 


teria 


T 


I T « 1 Wb/m* 


Frequency 


beitz 


Ha 


1 Hz-i 1 c/»(s-^) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


Is -l A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V - I W/ A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m» 



