**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 12448-8 (1992) : Basic testing procedures and measuring 
methods for electromechanical components for electronic 
equipment. Part 8: Connector Tests (Mechanical) and 
Mechanical Tests on Contacts and Terminations [LITD 3: 
Electromechanical components and Mechnical Structures for 
Electronic Equipment] 



aj^feVi iim^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nvF^f 



:<>5&i| \ I iT'5K;^5?S^>^i»1 



K^^i^i^Vii^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



\S 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

%^^EJT^^ ^q-^^T ^ ftr^ f^^^ ^tT^^ ^^z^ ^ 

/a2^/Vza2 Standard 

BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND 

MEASURING METHODS FOR 

ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS 

FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 

PART 8 CONNECTOR TESTS ( MECHANICAL ) AND MECHANICAL TESTS ON 

CONTACTS AND TERMINATIONS 

UDC 621-380 38+621-31 : 620-17 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OFINDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1992 Price Group 4 



Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee, LT 07 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 8 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

The object of this standard ( Part 8 ) is to lay down uniform methods of tests for connection ( Mecha- 
nical ) and mechanical tests on contacts and terminations of Electromechanical Components. 

This standard ( Part 8 ) is based, without any technical change, on lEC Pub 512-B ( 1977 ) 'Electromecha- 
nical components for electronic equipment, Basic testing procedures and measuring methods : Part 8 
Connector tests ( Mechanical ) and Mechanical tests on contacts and terminations' and lEC Pub 512-8B 
( 1980), Second supplement to publication 512-8 ( 1977), issued by International Electrotechnical 
Commission -( lEC ). 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for 
rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ 



IS 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 



BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND 

MEASURING METHODS FOR 

ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS 

FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 

PART 8 CONNECTOR TESTS ( MECHANICAL ) AND MECHANICAL TESTS ON 

CONTACTS AND TERMINATIONS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part 8) covers test methods 
for connector test ( mechanical ) and mechani- 
cal test on contacts and terminations. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standards listed below are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 



9000 

( Part 19/Sec 1 ) 

1986 



12448 

(Part2/Sec 1 ) 
1988 



Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic 
and electrical items : Part 19 
Test U : Robustness of ter- 
minations and integral moun- 
ting devices, Section 1 Test 
Ual : Tensile (first revision ). 

Basic testing procedures and 
measuring methods for elec- 
tromechanical component s 
for electronic equipment : 
Part 2 General examination, 
electrical continuity and 
contact resistance tests insu- 
lation tests and voltage 
stress tests, Section 1 General 
requirements 



3 TEST 15a : CONTACT RETENTION IN 
INSERT 

3.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to assess the ability of the contact 
retaining system to withstand the axial mechani- 
cal stresses likely to be encountered during 
normal usage. 

3.1 Preparation of the Specimen 

The specimen shall consist of a component with 
all contacts installed according to the detail 
specification* Loosen or remove any accessories 
which are not essential for the contact retaining 
system. 



3.2 Test Method 

Select 20 percent of the contacts ( but not less 
than six contacts ) at random for the test. At 
least one contact shall be near the periphery 
and one near the centre of the component. For 
components having six contacts or less, all con- 
tacts shall be used for the test. 

Specified axial force shall be applied to the 
contact in both directions consecutively. This 
force shall be reached by gradual increase at a 
rate not to exceed 10 N s until the specified 
value is reached. This maximum value shall be 
maintained during 10 s. 

After the contact is seated on the retention 
member, the contact movement shall be measu- 
red. The allowable axial displacement of the 
contacts in relation to the insert, while the 
force is applied and after the force is removed,, 
shall be stated in the detail specification. 

3. 3 Final Measurements 

The specimen shall be visuallv examined in 
accordance with IS J 2448 ( Part*2/Sec 1 ) : 1988. 

3.4 Requirements 

The amount of axial displacement of the con- 
tacts in relation to the insert, while the force is 
applied and after the force is removed, shall not 
exceed the amount specified and there shall be 
no damage to or loosening of parts such as- 
would impair the operation of the component. 

3.5 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Preparation of the specimen; 

b) Mounting of the specimen; 

c) Force to be applied and its application 
point; 

d) Allowable displacement; and 

e) Any deviation from the standard test 
method. 



1 



IS 12448 (Part 8): 1992 



4 TEST 15b : INSERT RETENTION IN 
HOUSING ( AXIAL ) 

4.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to assess the ability of the insert retain- 
ing system to withstand the axial mechanical 
stresses likely to be encountered during normal 
usage. 

4.1 Preparation of the Specimen 

The specimen shall be prepared and mounted in 
accordance with the detail specification. Cable 
fittings and accessories shall not be fitted, 

4.2 Test Method 

An axial force or test pressure as specified shall 
be applied to the insert in both directions 
consecutively. The force or pressure shall be 
increased steadily at a rate of approximately 50 
N/s or 5 kPa/s, respectively up to the specified 
value and held at that value for 1 min. 

WARNING — Where air pressure is used, 
there is a danger of contacts and/or inserts 
being ejected at high velocity. 

4.3 Final Measurements 

The specimen shall be subjected to visual exami- 
nation in accordance with IS 12448 ) Part 2/ 
Sec 1 ):1988. 

4.4 Requirements 

There shall be no damage to or displacement of 
the insert from its original position in the hous- 
ing such as would impair the operation of the 
component. 

4.5 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, tTie following details shall be specified : 

a) Preparation of the specimen; 

b) Mounting of the specimen; 

c) Force or pressure to be applied, method 
and pomt(s) of application; and 

d) Any deviation from the standard test 
method. 

5 TEST 15c : INSERT RETENTION IN 
HOUSING ( TORSIONAL ) 

5.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to assess the ability of the insert 
retaining system to withstand the torsional 
stresses likely to be encountered during normal 
usage. 

5.1 Preparation of the Specimen 

The specimen shall be prepared and mounted in 
accordance with the detail specification. Cable 
fittings and accessories shall not be mounted on 
the component. 



5.2 Test Method 

With the housing of the component securely 
clamped, a specified torque shall be appUed to 
the insert by a suitable test fixture. The torque 
shall be increased steadily at a rate of approxi- 
mately 0-5 Nm/s up to the specified value and 
held for 1 min. 

5.3 Final Measurements 

There shall be no movement of the insert in 
relation to the liousing as to cause permanent 
displacement of the insert that would impair 
the operation of the component. 

5.4 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Preparation of the specimen; 

b) Mounting of the specimen; 

c) Detail of the test fixture; 

d) Torque to be applied and applicable 
direction; 

e) Requirements for final measurements; 
and 

f) Any deviation from the standard test 
method. 

6 TEST 15d : CONTACT INSERTION, 
RELEASE AND EXTRACTION FORCE 

6.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to determine the forces required to 
insert contacts into and extract contacts from 
their normal position in a component. 

6.1 Preparation of the Specimen 

The specimen shall consist of a component and 
associated contacts. All contacts shall be wired 
with cable/wire as specified in the detail speci- 
fication. All contacts shall be installed, except 
those to be used for the test. 
Cable fittings and accessories shall not be moun- 
ted on the component. Where applicable, reten- 
tion devices shall be indexed to the release 
position. 

The component shall be mounted securely in a 
suitable clamping device and in a position suit- 
ble for performing the measurements. 

6.2 Test Equipment 

The test equipment shall consist of: 

a) appropriate insertion and extraction 
tools; 

b) a suitable device for holding the compo- 
nents; and 

c) a suitable device for measuring the 
forces. 



IS 12448 { Part *): 1992 



6.3 Test Method 

Select 20 percent of the contacts ( but not less 
than six contacts) at random for the test. For 
components having six contacts or less, all con- 
tacts shall be used for the test. At least one 
contact shall be near the periphery and one near 
the centre of the component. 

6.3.1 Insertion Force 

The insertion tool, with the contact, shall be 
inserted in the approved manner, maintaining 
axial alignment and applying sufficient force to 
insert the contact into its normal position. This 
insertion force shall not exceed the value stated 
in the detail specification. 

Ascertain that the contacts are correctly inser- 
ted and locked. 

6.3.2 Release and Extraction Force 

The release and extraction forces shall be mea- 
sured by suitable means. 

The extraction too shall be engaged in the nor- 
mal manner for the purpose of releasing the 
contact, while maintaining axial alignment. The 
releasing shall not exceed that stated in the 
detail specification. 

While maintaining axial alignment, apply suffi- 
cient force to the wire and/or tool to extract/ 
eject the contact from the component. The 
extraction force shall not exceed the value sta- 
ted in the detail specification, 

6.4 Final Measurements 

The specimen shall be subjected to visual exami- 
nation in accordance with IS 12448 (Part 2/ 
Sec 1 ) : 1988. 

6.5 Requirements 

There shall be no damage that would impair 
normal operation. 

6.6 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Preparation, mounting and wiring of the 
specimen; 

b) Appropriate insertion and extraction 
tools; 

c) Maximum insertion, release and extrac- 
tion forces; and 

d) Any deviation from the standard test 
conditions. 

7 TEST 15e : GROUNDING CONTACT 
RING HOLDING FORCE 

Under consideration. 



8 TEST 15f : COUPLED STRENGTH TEST 
( FOR PUSH-PULL CONNECTORS ) 

Under consideration. 

9 TEST 15g : INSERTION ALIGNMENT 
( EDGE-SOCKET CONNECTORS ) 

Under consideration. 

10 TEST 16a : PROBE DAMAGE 

10.0 General 

The object of this test is to verify that the elas- 
tic system ensuring the contact will not be sub- 
ject to deterioration in case of insertion of a 
test probe. 

10.1 Test Conditions 

The female contact shall be embedded in the 
appropriate connector insert and locked to pre- 
vent its rotation in the insert during the test. 

10.2 Requirements for the Test Pin 

The test pin shall conform to the following 
requirements: 

a) The diameter shall be equal to the maxi- 
mum diameter of the actual pin of the 
connector increased by 0-13 mm ( 0-005 
in ) for actual pin diameters greater than 
0-89 mm ( 0-035 in ) and T^y 0'076 mm 
( 0*003 in ) for actual pin diameters less 
than0-&9mm ( 0-035 in ); 

b) The pin shall have a spherical end; and 

c) It shall be made of hardened steel and 
shall have a polished surface. 

10.3 Test Method 

A test pin, of dimensions specified in 10.2, is 
inserted into the female contact to a depth of 
3/4 A ( see Fig. 1 ). The axis of the female 
contact is kept horizontal during the test. The 
test pin is held by a test device enabling a cons- 
tant bending moment to be applied to the female 
contact. With this device free and unsupported 
the connector is rotated slowly through 360"" 
about its longitudinal axis in such a way that 
the force is applied uniformly over the entire 
internal surface of the female contact with the 
extremity of the test pin. 

This operation is repeated with the test pin 
inserted to a depth 1/2 A and then to a depth 
1/4 A (^ee Fig, 1 ). 

10.4 Test Requirements 

After this test, the female contact shall fulfil the 
gauge retention force requirements specified in 
Test 16e ( see 14 ). 



IS 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992 



INSERT INSUU7ING MATERIAL 



TEST 
PIN 




SOCKET 
CONTACT 



NOTES 

1 A =^ Depth from front end of female contact insert face to bottom of female contact bore excluding curvature 
at the bottom of the bore. 

2 Spacers of suitable length and profile may be fitted over the test pin to achieve the specified depth. 

Fig. 1 Cross Section of Test Pin Insertion 



10.5 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Dimension A : Minimum depth of female 
contact bore, measured from the hard 
face of the insert; 

b) Shape and dimension of the test pin; 

c) Value of the moment to be appHed; and 

d) Any deviation from the standard test 
method, 

11 TEST 16b : RESTRICTED ENTRY 

11.0 General 

The object of this test is to verify that an over- 
size pin cannot be inserted into the female 
contact. 

11.1 Test Method 

A test gauge of specified dimensions shall be 
applied. 



11.2 Test Requirements 

The test gauge shall not enter the contact. 

11.3 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Details of the test gauge; 

b) Force to be applied; and 

c) Any deviation from the standard test 
method. 

12 TEST 16c : CONTACT STRENGTH 

Under consideration. 

13 TESTl6d : TENSILE STRENGTH 
( CRIMPED TERMINATION ) 

Under consideration. 



IS 12448 ( Part 8 ): 1992 



14 TEST 16e : GAUGE RETENTION FORCE 
( RESILIENT CONTACTS ) 

14.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to measure the holding capability of 
resilient contacts by means of gauges. 

14.1 General Requirements 

The size and weight of the gauges to be used 
shall be specified by the detail specification. 

14.2 Test Methods 

14.2.1 Method A, Using Individual-Contact Gauges 

a) Female contacts 

Each contact to be tested shall have a 
maximum size gauge engaged and separated 
three times, after which the appropriate 
minimum size retention-force gauge shall be 
applied. 

b) Male contacts 

Each contact to be tested shall have a mini- 
mum size gauge engaged and separated three 
times, after which the appropriate maximum 
size retention-force gauge shall be applied, 

14.2.2 Method 5, Using Multiple-Contact Gauges 

a) The component sizing gauge shall be 
engaged and separated three times. 

b) The individual-contact retention-force 
gauge shall then be applied to each of the 
test contacts. 

14.3 Test Requirements 

The contacts tested shall support the weight of 
the contact retention-force gauge in a vertically 
downward direction. 

14.4 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified; 

a) method of mounting and preparation of 
the specimen and whether the contacts 
are to be wired, etc; 

b) the number of sizings, if other than three; 

c) the number of contacts to be tested; 

d) details of the gauges and test jigs to be 
used; and 

e) any deviation from the standard test 
method. 

15 TEST 16f : ROBUSTNESS OF 
TERMINATION 

15.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to assess the ability of the terminations 



to withstand the mechanical stresses likely to be 
applied during normal assembly operations. 

15.1 Test Method 

The terminations shall be tested in accordance 
with Test U of IS 9000 (Part 19/Sec 1 to 5 ) : 
1986. 

15.2 Final Measurements 

Visual examination [ Test la of IS 12448 ( Part 
2/Sec 1 ): 1988] 

15«3 Requirements 

There shall be no damage which would impair 
normal operation. 

15.4 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Applicable tests; 

b) Method of preparation and mounting of 
the specimen; 

c) Test conditions, such as values of the 
forces, number of bends, etc; and 

d) Any deviation from the standard test 
method. 

16 TEST 16g : MEASUREMENT OF 
CONTACT DEFORMATION AFTER 
CRIMPING 

16«0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to assess the ability of contacts to with- 
stand the crimping operation without deforma- 
tion beyond specified limits. 

16.1 Preparation of the Specimen 

The sample shall consist of twenty ( 20 ) speci- 
mens ( contact-wire assemblies ) for each speci- 
fied barrel size. Ten ( 10 ) specimens shall be 
fitted with the largest wires and ten ( 10 ) with 
the smallest wires specified. The lead length 
shall be not less than 100 mm ( 4 in ). 

Care shall be taken to use the specified crimping 
tool. The following details shall be recorded for 
each specimen; 

— tool part nimiber, 

— setting or die part number, 

— positioner locator part number ( if used ). 

16.2 Test Method 

The contact shall be held in a collet in the 
shaded area siown in Fig. 1, that the contact 
can be rotated around the longitudinal axis to 
permit measurements at the specified points. 



IS 12448 (Part 8): 1992 



DIAL INDICATOR PROBE PLACED 
HERE FOR MEASURMENT OF TIR 




MALE CONTACT 
DIAMETER 



HOLDING AREA 



X ~ 2 X Male contact diameter, and 

y = Approximately half the distance between the end of the crimp barrel and the near edge of the crimp* 



indentation. 



Fig. 2 Contact Holding Area for Deformation Measurement 



DIAL INDICATOR 
0-025 MM. 
(O'OOI IN) 




CONDUCTOR 



CONTACT 
SUPER PRECISION COLLET 



Fig. 3 Typical Test Arrangement for Deformation Measurement 



A suitable test arrangement is shown in Fig. 2. 
The precision of the collet shall be such that 
the run-out of a steel gauge pin of approximately 
1-6 mm ( 0-063 in) diameter measured 13 mm 
( 0*512 in ) from the face of the collet shall 
not exceed 0*013 mm ( 0-000 5 in ). 

Indicator readings shall be taken at the points 
specified in Fig. 1, before and after crimping. 
The total indicated reading ( TIR ) is the total 
excursion of the indicator when the contact is 
rotated through SGO''. Half of this measure is the 
deformation. 



16.3 Requirements 

The total indicated reading ( TIR ) shall 
within the specified limits. 



be 



16.4 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifi- 
cation, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Wire type and size and crimping tool to 
be used, 

b) Maximum value of total indicated 
readings of deformation, and 

c) Any deviation from the standard test 
method. 

17 TEST 16h : INSULATION GRIP EFFEC- 
TIVENESS ( CRIMPED CONNECTIONS ) 

17.0 General 

The object of this test is to detail a standard 
method to assess the ability of an insulation 



:gi ip to hold the insulation of a cabie/wire under 
specified conditions. 

17.1 Preparation of the Specimen 

The specimen shall consist of a crimp contact 
or a terminal end and the specified cable/wire 
and shall be prepared in accordance with the 
detail specification. 

The unstripped cable/wire of a length not less 
than 100 mm. shall be fitted to the insulation 
grip. The crimp contact/terminal end ^hall then 
be crimped in the normal manner but the cable 
wire shall be held by the insulation grip only. 

17.2 Test Method 

17.2.1 Winding Test 

A mandrel having a diameter equal to that 
specified for the fiexibihty test of the relevant 
wire shall be used. 

The crimp contact/terminal shall be held tan- 
gential to the mandrel. 

The wire shall be wound around the mandrel for 
at least one turn and shall be in contact with 
the mandrel where it enters the insulation grip. 
Sufficient tension, as specified in the detail spe- 
cification, should be apphed to the wire to keep 
it in contact with the mandrel. A test made by 
first winding the wire in one direction, as shown 
in Fig. 4a and then in the opposite direction, 
as shown in Fig. 4b shall be considered to be 
one cycle. The total number of cycles shall be 
as specified by the detail specification. 

17.3 Final Measurements 

17.3.1 The specimen shall be visually examined 
using magnification, unless otherwise specified 
by the detail specification. 

17.3.2 When specified by the detail specifica- 
tion, the conductor shall be withdrawn from the 



IS 12448 ( Part 8 ) : 1992 

cable/wire so that any damage to the conductor 
can be observed. This may be done by stripping 
the insulation from the far end of the cable/ 
wire and applying a tensile load between the 
bared conductor and the crimped terminal. 

17.4 Requirements 

The specimen shall withstand the specified 
number of cycles of the winding test. The insu- 
lation shall not be damaged in a m.anner that 
could impair its function and should remain in 
position in the insulation grip. 

When the conductor damage examination is 
carried out, the conductor of the cable/wire 
shall not show any damage in the zone of ttie 
insulation grip. 

17.5 Details to be Specified 

When this test is required by the detail specifica- 
tion, the following details shall be specified: 

a) Preparation of the specimen; 

b) Cable/wire, type, size to be used; 

c) Type of die setting of crimping tool; 

d) Tension to be applied; 

e) Number of cycles of the v/inding test to 
be performed; 

f) Visual examination by magnification, if 
required; 

g) Conductor damage examination, if requi- 
red; and 

h) Any deviation from the standard test 
method, 

18 TEST 16i : CONTACT PRESSURE 

Under consideration. 

19 TEST ioj : MINIMUM NORMAL FORCE 

Under consideration. 




4a 



4b 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards AcU 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, tosting and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use oft he Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc: No LT 07 ( 1094) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Dare of Issue Text Afifected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manan Bhavan, 9 Bhadur Shah Zafar Marg .^^l 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 {33I 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 87 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 632 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE, BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 



Printed at New India Printing Prew. Khuija. India 



