**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12368 (1988) : Guidelines for Design and Construction of 
Hot Air Generators [MTD 26: Industrical Fuel Fired 
Furnaces] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 669*183-212-3 IS : 12368 * 1988 



Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF 
HOT AIR GENERATORS 



(Reaffirmed 2000) 



1. Scope — Covers general guidelines for design and construction of direct fired forced draft hot air 
generators. 

2. Design Parameters — The following basic performance parameters need to be specified for 
designing the hot air generator: 

a) Heat release in kcal/h; 

b) Temperature of hot air at the outlet of the generator in K ,( °C ); 

c) Quantity of hot air in m^h at K (*'C ); 

d) Pressure of hot air at the outlet of the generator in mm WG; 

e) Ambient temperature in K { *'C ); 

f) Estimated fuel consumption in kg/h or m^s; 

g) Fuel to be Used — Furnace oil/LDO/Gas; and 

h) Electric Supply Characteristics — 440 V, 3-phase, 4 wire, 50 cycles, a.c. supply for electric oil 
preheaters and motors; or 

220 V/110 V single phase, a.c. supply for control equipment. 

3. General Construction — The hot air generator shall consist of three segments, that Is, combus- 
tion chamber, conical venturi mixing chamber and outlet chamber. The circular combustion chamber 
will have the burner wall at one end. The burner shall be fitted on to the burner wall at one end 
of the combustion chamber which will fire directly into the chamber. The combustion chamber shall be 
made of two concentric shells wherein the inner shell lined with refractory material, will work as com- 
bustion chamber and the dilution air will be forced through the annular gap available between the two 
concentric shells. Dilution air is forced into the air heater with the help of a forced draught centrifugal 
fan which will mix with the products of combustion in the conical venturi mixing chamber, also 
lined with insulation material. Hot air at desired temperature and quantity will emanate from the 
outlet chamber which is also normally lined with insulation material. The outlet chamber will be 
provided with an access door for inspection and maintenance. The air heater should be horizontal type 
and should be complete with an outlet flange with suitable bolt holes for connecting it to the plant 
equipment with the help of connecting duct. 

4. Constructional Details 

4.1 For constructional features for steel casing and lining with refractory/insulation material, the 
following guidelines are suggested: 

a) Dimensionally the combustion chamber should meet the following requirement: 

1) Length — Hot less than the maximum flame length at the highest firing rate of the 
burner, and 

2) Nominal Diameter — Not less than 2 times the maximum possible flame diameter; 

b) Minimum thickness of mild steel shell plated for the combustion chamber (both inner and 
outer shells), conical venturi mixing chamber and the outlet chamber should be 5 mm; 

c> Minimum thickness of mild steel shell plate for the burner wall should be 8 mm; 

d) Minimum thickness of connecting mild steel flanges between segments/sections should be 
10 mm; 

e) Inside of combustion chamber shell should be lined with dense quality refractory bricks having 
total minimum lining thickness of 230 mm. End burner wall should be lined ♦with 230 mm 
dense quality brick backed with 115 mm thick layer of light weight insulation brick; and 



Adopted 18 April 1988 



September 1988. BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2011 

TO 

IS 12368 : 1988 GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF HOT 

AIR GENERATORS 

[Page 1, clause 2(f)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
'Estimated fuel consumption in kg/hour for fuel oil or NmVhour for fuel gas'. 

[Page 1, clause 4.1(e), line 1] — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'Depending on the temperature inside of combustion chamber, the shell should be lined with dense quality 
refractory bricks having'. 

(Page 2, clause 5.3, last sentence) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
'Blower will be arranged with directA^-belt drive through a suitable motor. Following details shall be'. 

{Page 3, clause 6, Title) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
'Accessories'. 

[Page 3, clause 6.4(b)] — Substitute the word 'PID' /6>r 'pi'. 

{Page 3, clause 6.5) — Add the following new clauses: 
'6.5.1 Auto ignition equipment (for gaseous fuel) — It consists of: 

a) Spark ignitor, 

b) HT Cable, 

c) Transformer, and 

d) Gas solenoid valve'. 

6.5.2 Fuel oil - It consists of: 

a) Pilot gas burner 

b) Regulated LPG supply (through plant LPG supply or LPG cylinder 
banks, 

c) Gas solenoid valve, 

d) Oil solenoid valve, 

e) Spark ignitor; 

f) HG cable. 



Amend No. 1 to IS 12368 : 1988 

g) Ignition transformer, 

h) Adustable valve for Gas flow, 

i) Adjustable valve for Pilot air; and 

j) Pilot air & gas pipelines. 

[Page 3, clause 6.7(c)] — Add the following at the end: 
'd) Gas pressure switch or contact type gas pressure gauge with isolation valve. 

(Page 4, clause 6.9, Title) — Add the following words at the end: 
'for Fuel Oil Tank' . 

(Page 4, clause 6.10) — Add the following new clause: 
'6.11 Gas Train Equipment — It consist of the following: 

a) Manual shut-off valve 

b) Gas governor 

c) Safety shut-off valve 

d) Low gas pressure switch 

e) High gas pressure switch 

f) Pressure gauge with 2-way cock. 

[Page 4, clauses 7.1(a) and 7.1(b)] — Substitute '+ 10°C' for '+ 5°C' and '+ 5 percent' for '+ 2 
percent' . 

(Page 4, Explanatory Note, second and third para) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'Hot air generators are also used for central heating systems based on oil/gas/solid fuel firing. 

Hot air generators are oil/gas/solid fuel burning appliances fitted with combustion air blowers, dilution air 
blowers and fuel firing equipment such as burners and accessories. In case of oil firing system, it also 
includes oil pumping and heating units and atomizing air blowers.' 



(MTD 26) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS : 12368 -1988 

f) For mixing and outlet chambers the following lining pattern is suggested: 

1 ) Up to 200°C hot gas temperature the inside face of steel shell may not be lined with 
insulation material. The outer surface of the steel shell should, however, be lagged with 
50 mm thick mineral wool blanket; 

2) Above 200°C but less than 500X hot gas temperatures, the inner face of steel shell should 
be lined with minimum 115 mm thick insulation bricks; and 

3) For 500°C and above, the lining thickness should be minimum 230 mm of insulation 
bricks. 

5. Essential Equipment 

5.0 The following equipments are required besides the mild steel shell and lining materials. 

5.1 Combustion Equipment — It shall conisist of an oil/gas burner having the size and capacity com- 
patible for use with furnace. It shall be complete with accessories, such as cast iron front plate, 
flexible oil pipe, ratiotrol butterfly valves for combustion/atomizing air. 

5.2 Combustion Air Blower — It shall be centrifugal steel plate blower complete with casing and 
impeller fabricated from mild steel sheets suitably reinforced, wherever necessary. The blower will 
be arranged for direct/V-belt drive through a suitable motor. Following details shall be indicated on 
the blower: 

a) Blower model, 

b) Capacity ( m^/h ), 

c) Pressure mm at H2O ( gauge ), 

d) Motor rating ( kW ), and 

e) Type of drive. 

5.3 Atomizing Air Blower — This type of blower is required only in case of liquid fuel and air atomizing 
type burner using low/medium pressure air. If fitted, it shall be a centrifugal steel plate blower, complete 
with casing and impeller, fabricated from mild steel sheets suitably reinforced, wherever necessary. 
The blower will be arranged for direct belt drive through a suitable motor. Following details shall be 
indicated on the blower: 

a) Blower model, 

b) Capacity ( m^/h ), 

c) Pressure mm H2O ( gauge ), 

d) Motor rating ( kW), and 

e) Type of drive. 

SA Dilution Air Blower — It shall be a centrifugal steel plate blower complete with casing and 
impeller, fabricated from mild steel sheets and suitably reinforced, wherever necessary. The blower 
will be arranged for direct/V-belt drive through a suitable motor. Following details shall be indicated 
on the blower: 

a) Blower model, 

b) Capacity ( m^h ), 

c) Pressure mm of H2O ( gauge ), 

d) Motor rating ( kW), and 

e) Type of drive, 

5.5 Composite Pumping and Heating Unit — \X\s required on\yior heavy grade oil as fuel. It shall 
consist of the following: 

a) Rotary gear oil pumps complete with relief valve and motor but without starter, 

b) Electric oil preheater complete with thermostat, 

c) Suction side filter, 

d) Delivery side filter, 

e) Pressure regulating valve, 

f) Pressure gauge with cock, and 

g) Inter-connecting pipework between pump and preheaters, etc. 



18:12368-1988 

5.5.1 The pumping and heating unit shall be mounted on a fabricated frame work with drip tray. 
Switchgears for control of motors as well as heaters may not necessarily form a part of hot air 
generator supply. 

5.5.2 The pumping and heating unit can be either of simplex or duplex type. In duplex type, two 
sets of pumps, heaters and filters have to be provided, and one set remains as standby. 

5.5.3 In case light distillate oil is used as fuel, requiring no preheating for effective atomization, the 
compositing heating and pumping unit may be substituted with a composite pumping unit only 
( heater elements excluded ). 

6. Optional Accessories 

6.1 Air Ducting — It may be fitted between the combustion air blower/atomizing air blower and the 
burner; and from the dilution air fan to the hot air generator. 

6.2 0/7 P/pevvo/-/: — It is required from composite pumping and heating unit/pumping unit to the 
burner, 

6.3 Automatic Temperature Control Equipment — It consists of: 

a) Thermocouple with compensating cable, 

b) Controller ( on/off or PI ), 

c) Control motor with linkage, 

d) Air flow control valve, and 

e) Fuel flow regulating valve. 

6.4 Over-ride Temperature Control Equipment — It consists of: 

a) Thermocouple, 

b) Controller ( on/off or PI ), and 

c) Solenoid valve with by pass assembly. 

6.5 Gas/Electric Ignition Equipment — It consists of: 

a) Gas/electric ignitor, 

b) HT cable, 

c) Transformer, and 

d) 6 mm solenoid valve ( gas ). 

6.6 Flame Failure Equipment — It consists of: 

a) Photo electric cell ( UV type), 

b) Amplifier, and 

c) Solenoid valve. 

6.7 Safety Device — It consists of: 

a) Oil pressure switch or contact type oil pressure gauge with isolation valve, 

b) Low oil temperature air pressure switch ( temperaturestat ) , and 

c) Low combustion air pressure switch or contact type air pressure gauge. 

6.8 Instrument Panel— WshaW be V\tted with re\ays and alarm system for the above safety devices 
and shall house controllers of automatic temperature control and over-ride temperature control. The 
panel may also be provided with multipoint alarm annuciator for audiovisual alarm in case of fault 
condition. * 



IS: 12368 -1988 

6.9 Outflow Heater with Thermostat and Thermometer 

6.10 0/7 Semce Tan/: — Complete with oil level indicator, oil inlet, outlet overflow and drains, vent 
and manhole. 

7. Performance Guarantee 

7.1 The following characteristics may be declared and guaranteed by the manufacturer towards 
performance of the hot air generator within the specified tolerances: 

a) Hot Air 

Temperature tolerance : ± B'^C 
Volume tolerance : ± 2 percent 

b) Specific Fuel 

Consumption tolerance : d: 5 percent 

(at rated capacity throughout considering a tolerance limit of ± 4 percent in the heating 

value of fuel). 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Hot air generators are used with industrial furnaces for supply of hot air to heat the furnace to 
enable it to burn the fuel efficiently. 

Hot air generators are also used with oil burning/gas burning installations for central heating 
systems. 

Hot air generators are primarily oil burning appliances fitted with air blowers, atomizing air 
blowers ( in case of liquid fuels ), dilution air blower, and pumping and heating unit. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



