**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



fe &v i jfi^^ii^^^ff/iJA^VN:^^ig^ i sb^^i r t^^> p; »^^^u i Ka a»g^^ 



IS 12036 (1995) : Agricultural tractors 
Power tests for power take off [FAD 11; 
Tractors and Power Tillers] 



- Test procedures 
Agricultural 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12036:1995 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

( T^^T 'J^TTV^iT ) 

Indian Standard 

AGRICUL TURAL TRACTORS -TES T 
PROCEDURES-POWERTESTSFOR 
POWERTAKE-OFF 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 65'060'10 



©BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1995 Price Group 3 



Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, FAD 32 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finalized by the Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

Power take-off ( PTO ) is one of the power outlets in Agricultural Tractors Testing of power at the 
PTO in one of the important characteristics in tractor testing. A need was therefore felt to 
prepare a detailed standard to provide uniform guidelines for conducting the tests. This standard 
was first published in 1987. This revision has been taken up to align the procedure with revised, 
ISO standard. This revision incorporates among other the following: 

a) General layout of the standard; 

b) Permissible tolerance for the measurement limits; 

c) Running in and preliminary adjustments; 

d) Specification of the fuel to be used for testing; 

e) Method for measurement of fuel consumption; 

f) Statement of power rating; and 

g) Belt pulley performance test ( optional )• 

Though high temperature test has not been covered in ISO, keeping in view the prevalent situation 
in the country high ambient test has been retained in this revision. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 789-1* 
1990. 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis, made in accordance with this standard, if the final' 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance witl> 
IS 2 : I960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 



IS 12036 : 1995 



Indian Standard 



AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS-TEST 

PROCEDURES — POWERTESTSFOR 

POWER TAKE-OFF 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard specifies test procedures for 
determining the power available at the power 
take-off ( PTO ), and at the belt or pulley shaft, 
on agricultural tractors of the wheeled, track- 
laying or semi track-laying type. 

The statement of the power rating of the PTO is 
specified in 6.3. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contains provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encoura- 
ged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent edition of the standards indicated 
below: 

IS No. Title 

4931 : 1995 Agricultural tractors — Rear 
mounted — power take-off type 
1, 2 and 3 ( third ra/ision ) 

5994 : 1987 Test code for agricultural trac- 
tor ( second re/ision ) 

'12226:1995 Agricultural tractorrs — Test 
procedure — Power test for 
drawbar (^r^f ra/ision ) 

3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 5994 : 1987 shall apply. 

4 MEASUREMENT UNITS AND 
PERMISSIBLE TOLERANCES 

Measurement units and permissible tolerances as 
given in 4 of IS 5994 : 1987 shall apply. 

5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Specification 

The tractor tested shall conform to the specifica- 
tion in the test report ( see Annex A ) and shall 
be used in accordance with the manufacturer's 
Tecommendations for normal 'operation. 



5.2 Running-in and Preliminary Adjustments 

The tractor shall be run-in prior to the test. For 
spark ignition engines fitted with a means for 
the operator to vary the ratio of the fuel/air 
mixture, the tests shall be carried out with the 
settings recommended for normal operation. 
The adjustment of the carburettor or the injec- 
tion pump shall conform to the manufacturer's 
specifications. Run-in shall be done with the 
governor set at full throttle and with the engine 
operating at rated speed. Run-in shall be done 
as per manufacturer's recommendations. 

5.3 Fuels and Lubricants 

Fuels and lubricants for the tests shall conform 
to 5.3 of IS 12226; 1995. 

5.4 Ancillary Eqaipment 

For all tests, accessories such as the hydraulic 
lift pump or air compressor may only be discon- 
nected if it is practicable for the operator to do 
so as normal practice in work, in accordance 
with the operator's manual and without using 
tools. If not, they shall remain connected and 
operate at minimum load. 

If the tactor is equipped with devices that create 
variable parasitic power losses such as a variable 
speed cooling fan, intermittent hydraulic or 
electrical demands, etc, the device shall not be 
disconnected or altered for test purposes. If it is 
practical for the operator to disconnect the 
device as outlined by the operator's manual, it 
may be disconnected for test purposes, in which 
case this shall be recorded in the test report. 

Power variations during tests caused by these 
devices exceeding ±5 percent shall be recorded 
in the test report in terms of percent variation 
from the mean. 

5.5 Operating Conditions 

Make no corrections to the measured values of 
torque or power for atmospheric condit ons or 
other factors. Atmospheric pressure shall not be 
less than 96 '6 kPa. If this is not possible because 
of altitude, a modified carburettor or fuel pump 
setting may have to be'sed, details of which 
shall be included in the report. The surrounding 
temperature shall be 27±7°C. 



IS 12036 : 1995 



Stable operating conditions siiall have been 
attained at each load setting before beginning 
test measurements. 

5.6 Fuel Consumption 

Arrange the fuel measurement apparatus so that 
the fuel pressure at the carburettor or the fuel 
injection pump is equivalent to that which exists 
when the tractor fuel tank is half full. The fuel 
temperature shall be comparable to that which 
occurs during full load operation for 2 h of the 
tractor when fuel is taken from the tractor fuel 
tank. 

When consumption is measured by volume, 
calculate the mass of fuel per unit of work using 
the density corresponding to the appropriate 
fuel temperature. This value shall then be used 
to calculate the volumetric data using the fuel 
density at 15°C. 

Alternatively, when the consumption is measured 
by mass, calculate volumetric data using the fuel 
density (specific gravity) value at 15°C. 

6 TEST PROCEDURE 

6.1' Power Take-off Test 

Tests shall be carried out at one or more PTO's 
as specified by the manufacturer on all tractors 
having a PTO as specified in IS 4931 : 1995. The 
tests shall include one on a power take-off 
capable of transmitting the full power of the 
engine if such a PTO is available. 

6.1.1 General 

The various tests shall normally be carried out 
continuously. 

The angle of the connection of the shaft connec- 
ting the PTO to the dynamometer shall not 
exceed 2". 

If an exhaust gas discharge device for the test 
area is used, it shall not change the engine 
performance. 

6.1.2 Power 

6.1.2.1 Maximum power absolute 

Operate the tractor at the engine speed where 
maximum power occurs for a period of 2 h 
subsequent to a warming-up period to reach 
stabilized running conditions. Measure the 
power, torque and fuel consumption. 

The maximum power quoted in the test report 
shall be the average of at least six readings made 
at regular intervals during the 2 h period. If the 
power varies by more than ±2 percent from the 
average, repeat the test. If the variation con- 
tinues, report the deviation. 



For a tractor not fitted with a PTO capable of 
transmitting the full power of the engine, operate 
it for 2 h at a power specified by the manufac- 
turer. If possible, a 20 percent increase in power 
shall be applied every 5 min for a period of 1 
min. If the engine can not develop the 20 per- 
cent increase in nower, carry out the intermittent 
test at full engine power. Omit the test described 
in 6.1.3 and 6.1.4. 

6.1.2.2 Maximum power at rated engine speed 
(optional ) 

If maximum power does not occur at rated 

engine speed, an optional additional 1 h test 

should be carried out using the procedure stated, 
in 6.1.2.1. 

6.1.3 Varying Speed at Full Load 

Measure the power, torque and fuel consumption 
as a function of speed at full power at approxi- 
mately 10 percent speed increments. The 
minimum speeds at which measurements are 
made shall be at the speed of maximum torque 
and, if possible, 15 percent below that speed. 

6.1.4 Varying Load Tests 

Measure the power, speed and fuel consumption 
at the values listed below of torque with the 
governor control set for maximum power, firstly, 
at the rated engine speed and secondly, at the 
standard speed appropriate to the design of the 
PTO that is either 540 mirr^ or 1 000 min"^ 
( see IS 4931 : 1995 ): 

a) The torque corresponding to maximum 
power available at rated engine speed and 
at standard PTO speed; 

b) 85 percent of the torque obtained in (a); 

c) 75 percent of the torque obtained in (b); 

d) 50 percent of the torque obtained in (b); 

e) 25 percent of the torque obtained in (b); 
and 

f) Unloaded [ with the dynamometer discon- 
nected if the residual torque is greater than 
5 percent of the torque defined in (b) ]. 

6.1.5 Presentation of Results 

The data in 6.1.1 to 6.1.4 shall be reported in 
tabular form for each test condition. If also 
presented in graphical form ( which is optional ), 
the following, covering the full range of engine 
speeds tested, shall be included: 

~ Power as a function of speed; 

— Torque as a function of speed; 

— Fuel consumption ( mass) and specific 
fuel consumption ( mass) as a function, 
of speed; and 



IS 12036 : 1995 



— Specific fuel consumption ( mass ) as a 
function of power. 

Report the no-load maximum engine speed. 

6.1.6 Additional Measurements 

In addition to the performance measurements 
specified above, report the following: 

— Ambient air temperature at a representative 
point: thi% is taken to be approximately 
2 m in front or to the side of the tractor, 
depending upon the location of the suction 
or blower device on the tractor, and 
approximately V5 m above the ground. 
For a tractor fitted with a pusher fan, the 
point is approximately 2 m behind the 
tractor and approximately V5 m above 
the ground; 

— Air temperature at the engine air intake; 

— Atmospheric pressure; 

— Relative air humidity; 

— Maximum coolant temperature ( in the 
case of an aircooled engine, measure the 
temperature of the cylinder block at repre- 
sentative points ); 

— The fuel temperature at the inlet to the 
carburettor or injection pump; and 

— Engine oil temperature. 

6.1.7 Test at High Ambient Temperature 

The test given under 6.1.3, 6.1.2.1 and 6.1.2.2 
shall be conducted under high ambient tempera- 
ture of 43 ± 2°C. The power, torque and fuel 
consumption shall be reported. The lubricating 
oil consumption on mass basis; during maximum 
power test ( see 6.1.2.1 ) at high ambient shall 
be measured and reported. The observations 
given under 6.1.6 shall also be reported. 

6.2 Belt or Pulley Shaft Tests ( Optional ) 

At the manufacturer's request, the power availa- 
ble at the belt or pulley shaft of tractors, if 
fitted, may be measured. 



Connect the tractor pulley to that of the dyna- 
mometer by a flexible belt having appropriate 
power and torque transmission characteristics. 
Belt sl'D, when calculated from the following 
formula; shall not exceed 2 percent and thk 
tension necessary to prevent this shall be as 
small as possible. 

Belt slip shall be determined by the following 
formula: 

100 ( »o - wi ) 
«o 

where 

«o is the number of revolutions per minute 
of the driven pulley without slip; and 

ni is the number of revolutions per minute 
of the driven pulley under load. 

All the provisions for tests at the main PTO 
with the exception of those at standard PTO 
speed and for tractors unable to transmit the 
full engine power at the PTO shall apply to the 
belt or pulley shaft. 

If the rated engine speed does not correspond to 
a standard belt speed, measure the performance 
of the engine at the speed corresponding to the 
standard belt speed of 15'75 m/s ± 0'25 m/s. 

6.3 Statement of Power Rating 

The power rating of the tractor shall be stated 
as the maximum power measured at a PTO 
capable of transmitting the full power of the 
engine. If the tractor is not fitted with a 
PTO capable of transmitting the full power of 
the engine, the power measured at other PTO 
points may be used, but shall be clearly identified 
in the test report. 

NOTE — If there are no PTO points capable of 
transmitting the full power of the engine, the power 
rating of the tractor is stated as the power measured- 
at the drawbar ( see IS 12226 : 1995 ). 



IS 12036 : 1995 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.1 ) 

SPECIMEN TEST REPORT FOR POWER TAKE-OFF 



A-l LOCATIONS 



Tractor manufacturer's name and address: 
Place of running in: 
Duration of running in: 



.mm 



A-2 SPECIFICATION OF TRACTOR 
Tractor 

Model: 

Engine 

Make: 

Type: - 

Rated speed: 

Cylinders 

Number: 

Stroke: mm 

Fuel and Injection System 

Capacity of fuel tank: 

Make, type and model of injection pump: 

Manufacturer's production setting : 

Make, type and model of injectors: 

Make, type and model of magneto, coil and distributor: 

Make, type and model of carburettor: 

Ignition or injection timing ( manual or automatic ): ■■■■ 

Air Cleaner 

Make and model: 

PrecleanerC if jitted) 

Make and model: 

Cooling Sys tern 

Type constant/intermittent (^ delete ) 

If intermittent, mode during test: ••• 



SI. No.: 

Model: 
SI No.: 



Bore : mm 

Capacity 1 



.1/h 



Type: 



Type: 



Power Take-of 

Location 

Type of drive: 

Height above ground mm 

Speed at: min~^ 

( Repeat for each power take-off if more than one ) 

Belt Pulley 

Location: 

Type of drive: 

Linear speed of pulley: m/s 

Height above ground: mm 

A-3 FUEL AND LIJ BRICANT SPECIFICATIONS 

Fuel 

Trade-name: , 

Octane number or cetane index: 

Type: 

Engine Oil 

Trade-name: 

Viscosity class; 

Transmission Oil 

Trade-name: 

Viscosity class: 

A-4 DATA TESTS 

Date and location of test: 



I S 12036 : 1995 

Dimensions: mm 

Number of splines: 

Corresponding engine 
speed: mia 

Dimensions: mm 

( diameter and width ) 

Corresponding engine 
speed: min-i' 

Location from tractor 
centreline: mm 

LABORATORY TESTS 

Octane ( RONi^ No: 

Density at 15°C: 

Type: ' 

Type: 



i> RON: Research Octane Number. 



tS 12036 : 1995 

Type of dynamometer: 



Speed inin~i 
Engine PTO 



Power 

kW 



Maximum power absolute ( 6.1.2.1 ) 



Fuel Consumption 

1/h kg/h kg/kWh kWb/1 



Rated engine speed with varying load [ 6.1.2.2, and 6.1.4(a) ] ( Optional ) 

a) 
b) 

c) 
d) 

e) 

f) 



Varying speed at full load (6.1.3 ) 



Standard speed with varying loads ( 6.1.4 ) 



a) 
b) 

c) 

d) 
c) 

f) 



..mi n"^ 



Nm: 



No-load maximum engine speed: 

Equivalent crankshaft torque: 

Maximum equivalent crank shaft torque 

Mean atmospheric conditions: 

Temperature at air intake: "C 

Relative humidity: % 

Maximum temperature of coolant: °C 

Engine oil temperature: °C 



Nm: at... mirT^ engine speed 

Ambient temperature °C 

Pressure., kPa 



NOTE — The Table in A-4 may also be used with appropriate modifications to report the results of belt and 
belt pulley tests. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to 

promotete harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indiali Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 32 ( 0190 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Pablication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 3310131,331 13 75,371 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern ; C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephones 



( 





■ 331 66 17 
. 335 38 41 


37 84 99, 
37 86 26 


37 85 61 
, 37 86 62 




.( 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 



235 02 16, 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 

832 92 95, 832 78 58 
832 78 91, 832 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LWCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Delhi India 



