**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11267 (1985) : Method of test for length distribution 
(wet classification of fibre length) of chrysotile asbestos 
fibre using Turner and Newall classifier [CED 53: Cement 
Matrix Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: T 1267- 1985 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Sfamhrd 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

LENGTH DISTRIBUTION ( WET 

CLASSIFICATION OF FIBRE LENGTH ) OF 

CHRYSOTJLE ASBESTOS FIBRE USING 

TURNER AND NEW ALL CLASSIFIER 



UDC 677'5 11 : 531*71714 




® Copyright \9B5 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BiiAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SIIAH ZAFjVR HARG 

MKW DELHI lim^i 



Gt3 



J^^iimbcr 1995 



IS : 11267 • 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

LENGTH DISTRIBUTION ( WET 

CLASSIFICATION OF FIBRE LENGTH ) OF 

CHRYSOTILE ASBESTOS FIBRE USING 

TURNER AND NEWALL CLASSIFIER 

Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDC 2 

Chairman Representing 

Vr H, C, Visvbsvabaya Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Members 

Additional Dikectob Research, Designs & Standards Organization 

Stand ABDS ( B & S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Director Standards 
( B & S ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. p. Banebjee: Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shbi Harish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Chief Engineer ( BD ) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 

Shri J. C. Basur ( Alternate ) 
CHncr Engineer ( Designs ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Executive Engineer ( D ) III ( Alternate ) 
Chiep Engineer ( Research- Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Government 
cum-Dibectob ) of Punjab, Amritsar 

Research Officer 

( Concrete Technology ) ( Alternate ) 
Dlbectob a. p. Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 

Joint Directob ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New 

Delhi 
Chief Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( C & MDD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( G & MDD-I ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Ghanbkar Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shbi A. V. GoKAK Cement Controller (Ministry of Industry), New 

Delhi 
Shri S. S. Miglani ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Gupta Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products Limited, 

Ballabgarh 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1 957 ) and 
reproduction ib whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi p. J. Jagus Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Br a. K. Chattekjke ( Alternate ) 
Shki N. G. Joshi Indian Hume Pipes Co Limited, Bombay 

Shbi R. L. Kapoor Ministry of Shipping and Transport ( Roads Wing ) 

Shbi N. SiVAGURTT ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Laha Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri B, T. Unwalla ( Alternate ) 
Dr a, K. MuLiiiCK Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Shri K. K. Nambiab In personal capacity ( ^Ramanalaya^ lly First Cresent 

Park Road, Gandhinagar, Adyar, Madras ) 
Shri S. N. Pal M. N. Dastur and Company Private Limited, 

Calcutta 
Shri Biman Dasgupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. PASRicfiA Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Shri Y. R. Phull Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central 

Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi 
Shri M. R. Chatter jee Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

( Aliernaie ) 
Dr Mohan Rai Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Dr S. S. Rehsi ( Alternate ) 
Dr M, Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Madras 
Dr a. G. Madhava Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. Ramaka Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Limited, New Delhi 

Dr K. C. NaraKG ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Ramachandran India Cements Limited, Madras 

Shri G, Ramdas Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Dr a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. Chalapathi Rao Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate) 
Shri T. N. Sctbba Rao Gammon India Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. A. Reddi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Arjun Rijhsinghani Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri G. S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. SatyanarayaNa Engineer-in-Chiers Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri V. R. Kotnis ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Shri K. R. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
SiTPER INTENDING ENGINEER Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

( Designs ) Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer ( SMD 
Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. Swaroop Orissa Cement Limited, New Delhi 

Shri H. Bhattacharyya ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. C. Bandyopadhyay 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

( Continued on page 10 ) 

2 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

LENGTH DISTRIBUTION ( WET 

CLASSIFICATION OF FIBRE LENGTH ) OF 

CHRYSOTILE ASBESTOS FIBRE USING 

TURNER AND NEWALL CLASSIFIER 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 12 April 1985, after the draft finalized by the Cement and 
Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 A series of standards on testing procedures of asbestos fibre is being 
formulated so as to provide standard methods for obtaining physical and 
chemical properties of asbestos fibre which is used for manufacturing 
various asbestos cement products like asbestos cement sheets, asbestos 
cement pipes, etc. These testing procedures will be useful for both mine 
owners and the manufacturers of asbestos cement products. 

0.3 The test for length distribution of chrysotile asbestos fibre by wet 
classification can be performed by either Bauer-McNett classifier or 
Turner and Newall ( T & N ) classifier. This standard covers the 
method of test by Turner and Newall classifier and the method of test 
by Bauer-McNett classifier is covered in IS : 9691-1980*. 

0.4 This test provides a simple method for obtaining information on the 
fibre length distribution of milled chrysotile asbestos fibre. This test 
method also requires the use of a relatively low cost apparatus, small test 
specimens and a short test period. This is suitable for quality verification 
and manufacturing control. 

0.5 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. This has been met by basing the standard on 
* Chrysotile Asbestos Test Manual' 1974 ( revised 1978 ) of Asbestos 
Textile Institute and Quebec Asbestos Mining Association. 



♦Method of test for length distribution ( wet classification of fibre length ) of 
chrysotile asbestos fibre using Bauer-McNett classifier, 

3 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

0*6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated^ 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the method of test for the determination of 
fibre length distribution and fines content of milled chrysotile asbestos 
fibre by wet classification using Turner and Newall ( T & N ) classifier. 

1*2 For the purpose of estimating fibre length distribution, this test 
method is limited to samples free from excessive quantities of non-fibrous 
particles or contaminants, 

1.3 For comparison between different fibre grades, only those specimens 
which have approximately the same degree of fiberiaation will give 
completely meaningful results. 

lA This standard is not applicable to ultrafine grades of asbestos powder 
which contains little or no fibres retained on 75 ^^m IS Sieve. This 
standard is restricted to fibre grades 4A to 7D inclusive. 

Note — The fibre grade classification is based on Quebec Standard ( Q* S ) 
designation of chrysotile asbestos grades. 

2. APPARATUS 

2.1 Turner and Newall Classifier — This apparatus ( Fig. 1 ) consists 
of four 127 mm diameter rotating plastic circular vessels, the bottom of 
which are fitted with 98 mm diameter screens, arranged vertically and 
concentrically in order of diminishing screen sizes. It is also fitted with 
stirrers in order to prevent screen blinding, and with spouts for conduct- 
ing the drainage from each vessel to the following vessel. The lowest 
vessel discharges into a 75 jxm IS Sieve 203'2 mm in diameter, in the 
base of the apparatus, 

2.1.1 Sieve discs fitted with screen cloth having IS Sieve designation 
2'36 mm, 1*18 mm, 600 /zm, 300 ^m and 75 fjum are required. 



*RuIes for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

4 



IS : 11267 - 1985 



VPRT. flTHHfCR S|r 




Fig. 1 Turner and Newall Classifier 
2.2 Accessories — The following accessories shall be provided: 

a) one 63 /im IS Sieve disc for drying 75 ^m fractions; 

b) fraction collector or optional suction arrangement, such as 
Buchner funnel; 

c) drying oven ( convection type, or mechanical draught ) or infra- 
red drying unit; and 

d) balance ( sensitivity 0001 g ). 

5 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

2.3 Water Supply Provisions — A suitable pressure regulator and 
filter, if necessary, shall be provided to ensure a constant flow of clean 
water to the classifier. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sampling shall be done in accordance with IS : 4844-1968*. 

4. PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLE 

4.1 From the sampling done in accordance with 3.1, two specimens 
having mass approximately 15 g shall be drawn. Afterwards, reduce 
each specimen by coning and quatering to 2 ib 0005 g. 

5. PREPARATION OF APPARATUS 

5*1 Measurement of Stirrer Stroke — Stirrer stroke may be measured 
by attaching a pencil to the side of the stirrer and measuring the chordal 
length of the arc swept on a piece of card held horizontally under it. 
Care shall be taken to mount the pencil in such a position that its point 
describes an arc having the same radius as that swept by the tip of the 
stirrer. 

5.2 Adjustment of Stirrer Stroke 

5.2.1 Stirrer stroke shall be 60*0 to 64*0 mm. If it is outside this range, 
it may be adjusted as described in 5.2.2. 

5.2«2 Loosen the hexagonal nut of the driven crank mounted on the 
vertical stirrer shaft. Rotate the eccentric crank pin so that the pin 
moves inwards if the stroke was too small, or outwards if the stroke was 
too large. Tighten the locking nut and recheck the stroke. Repeat the 
procedure until the correct stroke is obtained. 

5.2.3 The arc swept by each of the four stirrers shall stop S mm from 
the inner edge of the lower bevelled part of the plastic vessel. 

5*3 Stirrer Clearance 

5.3.1 The clearance between the tip of each stirrer and the screen over 
which it is mounted shall be 1*5 to 2*4 mm. If the clearance falls outside 
these limits^ it may be adjusted as described in 5*3*2 and 5.3»3. 

5.3.2 For the upper two stirrers, adjust the clearance by means of the 
small screw which is located on the stirrer support fork upon which the 
horizontal part of the stirrer arm rests. 



*Method of sampling and preparation of asbestos fibre for laboratory test purposes. 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

5.3.3 For the two lower stirrers, the adjustment shall be made by 
iosening the socket screw which secures the stirrer fork to the stirrer 
drive shafts and adjusting the height of the stirrer fork as necessary. 
Lowering the stirrer fork raises the stirrer tip and vice versa. The 
adjustment is made easier if feeler gauges are inserted between the 
underside of the stirrer fork and the upper surface of the cam follower. 
The horizontal angular position of the stirrer fork shall be maintained 
during these adjustments, to ensure that the stirrer tip does not strike 
the side of the plastic vessel at the extremity of its stroke. Limits imposed 
in 5.2.3 shall be maintained. 

5,4 Open the water control valve, start the drive motor, adjusting the 
flow of water through the classifier to 80 ml/s or the 64 graduation on 
the flowmeter tube when reading the top of the float, and ensure that 
there are no leaks caused by inadequate clamping of the sieve discs. 
Any such leak shall be rectified by unclamping the plastic vessel, 
readjusting the sieve disc and reclamping the plastic vessel. It is to be 
ensured that the side of the water jet impinges on the top of the screen 
about 3 mim from the inner edge of the lower bevelled part of the plastic 
vessel. The water spout shall be adjusted, if necessary, for this purpose. 

Note — The operating water level in the top three vessels shall be checked daily 
before use. The level shall be to the top surface of the clamping lugs within 
± 3*2 mni. In case the water level is high or low in any vessel, adjust the copper 
outlet tube of that vassel to obtain the desired level. Generally^ very slight 
adjustments are necessary. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Disperse one test specimen in 400 ml of water in a 500-ml beaker 
and allow it to soak for four minutes. Then, stir intermittently by hand 
for a further period of one minute. Stir gently and diametrically across 
the beaker to disperse the asbestos without excessive fiberizing action. 

6.2 While the test specimen is soaking, thoroughly wet all the discs of 
the sieve series and fit to the classifier. Take a clean 75 micron, 203*2 mm 
diameter test sieve and thoroughly wet its screen cloth and place it in 
the recess in the top of the classifier base, and centre the small plastic 
disc supplied with the apparatus atop the screen surface beneath the 
fourth vessel outlet. 

Note — Tare mass of each sieve disc shall be verified daily before use. 

6.3 Slowly pour the water dispersion containing the test specimen from 
the beaker into the first ( top ) vessel, ensuring that overflowing does 
not occur. This operation shall be completed within 20 to 25 seconds. 
Start the timing period at this point. Any residue from the beaker shall 
be washed out with a small volume of clean water into the first vessel. 

Note — A plastic wash bottle is suitable for this purpose. 

7 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

6,4 During the test, manually rotate the 75 ^m sieve slightly at 30 seconds 
intervals, recentering the plastic disc on each occasion, for improved 
operation and to prevent blinding- If the water level in either of the 
two lowest rotating sieve units rises continuously, as may happen with 
short or talcy grades, lower the stirrer on the appropriate sieve by 
pressing down the control knob on the left-hand side of the classifier 
body. Clear immediately any fibre which lodges in the orifices of any 
of the sieving units, by means of a wire hook. A clue to this malfunction 
is given if the water level in any of the units rises unduly. 

6«5 At the end of 300 seconds test period, stop the flow of water and 
when each unit has drained, wash down any fibre remaining on the 
walls of the vessel, using a plastic wash-bottle and directing the water 
jet in a direction opposite to the motion of the vessel. Afterwards, stop 
the motor. 

6.6 Unclamp the plastic vessels and remove each sieve disc in turn from 
its sieving unit, after ensuring that any fibre remaining in the conical 
depression in the sieve holder above has been washed down. 

6.7 Carefully wash the fibre retained on the 203'2 mm diameter 75 yxm 
sieve on to a 63 ^m sieve held in the fraction collector ( or Buchner 
funnel ) and apply a vacuum to enhance the filtration. A venturi type 
water-jet suction pump may be used for this purpose. The suction tube 
shall be connected to the outlet of the fraction collector. 

6.8 Dry the*fibre fractions retained on their respective sieve discs to 
constant mass at 105 to 110°C in a drying oven. 

6.9 When all the fractions are dried, cool the sieve discs along with the 
contents for a minimum period of 15 minutes in a partly closed container 
and weigh immediately. 

7, REPORTING OF RESULTS 

7.1 Obtain the net mass of the different fibre fraction by subtracting 
the tare mass of each sieve disc, previously determined, from the gross 
mass of the corresponding fibre fraction and sieve disc. The quantity 
passing 75 /Am in the original specimen is calculated by subtracting the 
cumulative mass of the fractions retained on the sieve discs from the 
original mass of the specimen. Report the percentage of fibre retained 
on each sieve disc and the percentage passing through the last screen. 
Fully identify the origin and the grade designation of the sample. 

Note — For a typical calculation, Appendix A may be referred to. 

7.2 If the corresponding individual percentage obtained for each sieve 
fraction of the duplicate specimens differ by more than three units of 
percentage, make a third test, i^verage the results of two acceptable 
tests and report average stating the series of sieves used. 

8 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

8. PRECAUTIONS 

8.1 To obtain desired accuracy, the general precautions given in 8.2 
to 8.6 should be observed. 

8.2 It is important that all the retained material be washed from the 
walls of the vessels into the corresponding sieve discs and after removal 
of a sieve disc, any material in the cone beneath it be washed into the 
vessel below. 

8.3 For better accuracy and reproducibility, a water temperature of 
27 ± 2''C is recommended. 

8.4 New sieve discs should be run-in by making at least ten dummy tests 
before they are put into regular use. 

8.5 Stirrer clearance of \'5 to 2*4 mm and stirrer stroke of 60 to 64 mm 
shall be maintained. 

8.6 Sieve discs should be checked regularly for holes, slack and other 
damage. 



A P PENDIX A 

{ Nottwdcr Clmst 7.1 ) 

CALCULATIONS 

A-L TEST RESULTS 

Sample: Group 4 ( Q,.S. classification ) 

Mass of sample: 2 g 

Results: 

IS Sieve size 2*36 mm 1'18 mm 600 ^m 300 ^m 75 /xm 

Mass retained, g 0080 0'460 0*500 O'lBO 0270 

A.2. CALCULATION 

Mass effraction passing 75 /Ltm sieve. 

= 2-0 — ( 0080 + 0-460 -f 0*500 + 0*180 + 0*270 ) - 0*510 g 

I S Sieve designation of Sieve discs 

2*36 mm 1*18 mm 600 ^m 300 ^m 75 ^m 
Percentage retained 4*0 23*0 25-0 9'0 13'5 

Percentage passing 75 ftm — — — — 25*5 



IS : 11267 - 19S5 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Asbestos Cement Products Subcommittee, BDC 2 : 3 

Convener 

Db S. K. Chopra 
S-436 Greater Kailash, New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. K. BanbbJee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi S. N. Basit Directorate General of Supply and Disposals, New- 

Delhi 
Shbi T. N. Oboveja ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. S. Chayamitbthy Engineer-in-Chief Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Shbi K. R, Bhambani ( Alternate ) 
DiEBCTOB Stakdabds ( B & S )-I Research, Designs and Standards Organization 

( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 
Assistant DrBECXOB Stakdabds 
( B& S)-II ( Alternate) 
Shbi K. D. Dhabiyal Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shbi S. Ganapathy Southern Asbestos Cements Ltd, Madras 

Genebal Manageb ( Cemient ) Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar 

Shbi D. N. Sikgh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. S, Goenka Sarbamangala Manufacturing Co, Calcutta 

Shbi I. P. Goenka ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K, Ghosh Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi M. L. Dabbal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Sbinivasan N. Iyee Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. G. Upadhyaya ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. S. Kalani Saurabh Construction Co, Indore 

Dr (Shbimati ) S. Laxmi Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Shbi Harshad R. Oza Flow Asbestos Products, Ahmadabad 

Shbi V, Pattabhi Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products Ltd^ 

Hyderabad 
Shbi A. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. ChaIjAPj^thi Rao Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Db a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shbi J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. T, P. SiifHA Small Scale Industries, New Delhi 

Shbi V. N. Somani Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. R, Bhandari ( Alternate I ) 
Shbi J. J. Shah ( Alternate II ) 
Superintending Subveyor of Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works ( CZ ) 
Surveyor of Works ( CZ ) ( Alternate) 
Shri S. A. Swamy Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 



( Continued on page 11) 

10 



IS : 11267 - 1985 

( Continued from pag$ 10 ) 

Panel for Indigenous Varieties of Asbestos, BDG 2 : 3/Pl 

Members Representing 

Shei G. M. Banbrjba Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

CoNTROLiiER Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 

Shri R, K, Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director Central Fuel Research Institute ( GSIR ), Jealgora 

Shri K. D. Dhahiyal Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
General Manager ( Cement ) Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar 

Shri D. N. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Ghosh Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 

Shri M. L. Dabral ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. p. Ghosh Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Shri M. V. Ranga Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri Srinivasan N, Iyer Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. G. Upadhyaya ( Alternate ) 
Seth PtTSALAii Mansinghka Pusalal Mansinghka Pvt Ltd, Bhilwara 

Dr a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, V. S. R. Sastri Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Ltd, 

New Delhi 

Shri Palvinder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Somani Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Shri S. R. Bhandari ( Alternate I ) 

Shri J. J, Shah ( Alternate II ) 
Dr I. D. Varma Hyderabad Asbestos Cement Products Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Shri N. Venkataramah Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay 



11 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
BaseUnHa 



QUAHTITy 


Unit 


Symbox 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Qtctantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








QpAKTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 


Dbjfinition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s» 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


2 W - 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


I T - I Wb/m* 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-i> 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


3 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V ^ \ W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


! Pa =. 1 N/m^ 



