**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14884 (2000) : Mechanical Vibration and Shock - Vibration 
of Buildings - Guidelines for the Measurement of Vibrations 
and Evaluation of Their Effects on Buildings [MED 28: 
Mechanical Vibration and Shock] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vf ijii^s^yiis^ i s:>&^ nT¥seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



REAFFIRMED 






IS 14884:2000 
180 4866:1990 



/nd/an Standard 

MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK — 

VIBRATION OF BUILDINGS — GUIDELINES 

FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF VIBRATIONS 

AND EVALUATION OF THEIR EFFECTS 

ON BUILDINGS 

ICS 17.160 



©BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 2000 Price Group 10 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, ME 28 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 4866 : 1990 'Mechanical vibration and shock — 
Vibration of buildings — Guidelines for the measurement of vibrations and evaluation of their effects 
on buildings' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional 
Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in 
Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read 
as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is 
to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. 

Amendment 1 to the above International Standard has been printed at the end. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed 
below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of 

Equivalence 

ISO 2041 : 1 990 IS 1 1 71 7 : 2000 Vocabulary on vibration Identical 

and shock {first revision) 

ISO 2631 -2 : 1 989 IS 1 3276 (Part 2) : 1 992 Evaluation of do 

human exposure to whole body vibrations : 
Part 2 Continuous and shock induced 
vibrations in buildings (1-80 Hz) 

ISO 5348 : 1 987 IS 1 4883 : 2000 Mechanical vibration and do 

shock : Mechanical mounting of accelerometers 

The concemed technical committee has reviewed the provisbns of the following Intematbnal Standards 
referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction 
with this standard: 

International Title 

Standard 

ISO 4356: 1977 Bases for the design of structures - Deformations of buildings at the 

serviceability limit states 
lEC 68-2-27 : 1 987 Environmental testing - Part 2 : Tests - Test Ea and Guidance : Shock 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified v^lue 
in this standard. 



AliMnd No. 2 to IS 14884 : 2000 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 AUGUST 2007 
TO 
IS 14884 : 2000/ISO 4866 : 1990 MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK ~ 
VIBRATION OF BUILDINGS — QUIDEUNES FOR THE MEASUREMENTS OF 
VIBRATIONS AND EVALUATION OF THEIR EFFECTS ON BUILDINGS 

[Page 17, Annex D (see also Amendment NoA)\ — Insert the following Annex as 
Annex E and renumber the existing Annex E as Annex F: 



Pric«GrcNip4 



Amend No. 2 to IS 1 4884 : 2000 



Annex E 

(informative) 



Vibrational interaction between the foundation of a structure and the soil 



E.I General 

When vibration measurennents cannot be made on the foundation of a structure or inside a building, ISO 4866 
allows that measurements be made on the ground surface outside. It may also be necessary to predict the 
response of a building not yet constructed. In both cases there is a need to understand the dynamic interaction 
between a building and the ground. 

In the first case, the most suitable position outside the building for measurement and the relationship between the 
signal at that position and that on the building foundation need to be established. 

In the second case, the response of the foundation of the building may be expected to follow closely the motion of 
the ground in contact with the foundation unless interaction is significant. This annex seeks to indicate the nature 
of such an interaction and suggests procedures which allow it to be taken into account. 

Figure E.I illustrates the notation which will be used in this annex in terms of the peak amplitude, u, of a travelling 
wave passing across a foundation (u can be the displacement, velocity or acceleration amplitude of the sinusoidal 
wave). Free-field amplitude is denoted by uq, amplitude in the base of the foundation by up, amplitude at an 
arbitrary position in the structure by Us\. and on the soil surface near an existing building by w^. Far from the 
structure, ufs^ = uq. Soil-structure interaction analysis is concerned generally with the relationship between free-field 
motion and structure motion, that is usx/^o and, in particular, uf/uo = tq. The important ratio wpA^N = r^ is given by 
the more sophisticated procedures which also address the problem of soil response involving the variation of 
vibration amplitude with depth. 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



AMENDMENT 1 



Page 17 

Add the following annex as annex D and change the present annex D to annex E. 

Page 18 

Add references 124] to 1381 to annex E. 



19 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



Annex D 

(informative) 

Predicting natural frequencies and damping of buildings 



Introduction 

ISO 4866:1990 specifies methods of measuring 
building response including fundamental natural 
frequencies. When direct measurements cannot be 
nr^ade or are limited in usefulness by high damping, 
sub-component resonances or other practical prob- 
lems, it becomes necessary to estimate natural fre- 
quency and damping values. 

This annex offers guidance on the ways in which the 
fundamental natural frequency and associated damp- 
ing value may be assessed. It draws attention to the 
uncertainties involved which should be taken into 
account wherever an estimation of fundamental 
natural frequencies of a building is used in measuring 
or evaluation procedures. 



D.I Predicting natural frequanctes of tall 
buildings using empirical methods 

There are many empirical formulae for predicting the 
frequency / or period T, of the fundamental 
translation mode; of these the simplest is/« 10/A/ Hz 
(i.e. r = 0.1N s), where N is the number of storeys. 
Various other formulae are given in the codes of 
different countries and these can be grouped into 
three categories: 



where 

H is the height, in metres; 

T is the period, in seconds; 

ky ranges from 0,14 sm-^ to 0,03 sm*^ 
(references [24) to (271). 



D.1 



T^k2H4D . . D.2 

where 

D is the width parallel to the force, in metres; 

k2 ranges from 0,087 sm-^^ to 0, 1 09 sm"^ 
(references 1251 and (281). 

T^k^H yfo func(//.D,/) ... D.3 

(see, for example, reference (291). 
NOTE 1 k^ has the units sm"'; k2 has the units sm~^. 

A later study (301. considering a sample of 1 63 rec- 
tangular-plan buildings, recommended / « 46/// Hzm 
(i.e. T = 0,022// sm'M for the fundamental translation 
mode, /= 58/// Hz m for the orthogonal fundamental 
translation mode and / ■ 72/// Hzm for xhe fun- 
damental torsional nrKxJe (sample size of 63 buildings). 

NOTE 2 These formulae for /ore empirical. They may also 
be considered as numerical value equations yielding values 
of / in hertz when values of H in metres are inserted, for 
instance /« 46///. 

Figure D.I shows the resulting fit of the cur^e 
/ « 46/// Hzm to the data and it can be appreciated 
that large errors are likely to be encountered. It can be 
seen toat errors of ± 50 % are not uncommion, and 
this is typical ot the accuracy which can be expected 
using empirical formulae. Based on measured data, it 
appears that the mode shapes of the fundamental 
modes of tall buildings can be reasonably approxi- 
mated by straight lines. 



20 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866: 1900 



D.2 Predicting natural frequencies of tall 
buildings using computer-based methods 

It has long been realised that comparatively large 
errors are likely to occur using the sinnple empirical 
formulae, but it has also been generally accepted that 
a satisfactory estimate of frequency can be obtained 
using one of the standard computer-based methods. 
However, buildings are complicated structures and it 
is not a simple task to create an accurate 
mathematical model; consequently it must be 
accepted that these models v^ill only provide 
approximate predictions. In a study (301 examining 
published evidence, the correlation between 
computed frequencies and measured frequencies 
was actually considerably worse than the correlation 
between the frequencies predicted using / = 46/// 
Hz m and the measured values. This discrepancy can 
be attributed to inadequacies in modelling the real 



properties of buildings. Predictions of fundamental 
frequencies should therefore be treated with caution. 

Special methods have been developed for analysis of 
core buildings 131), shear buildings [321 and sway 
frame and frame buildings 1331, but with any method it 
is important to check whether the method has been 
calibrated using a range of reliable experimental data 
and to understand what errors are likely to be 
encountered. If the method has not been proven, then 
accuracies greater than those obtained for empirical 
predictors should not be assumed. Only the 
ifundamental frequencies have been discussed, but 
the predicted frequencies of higher frequency modes 
will suffer from similar or (more probably) greater 
errors. This means that, except for special cases 
where the mathematical model has been tuned to 
experimental results, predictions involving many 
calculated modes must be regarded as unreliable. 



^ - 



100 



f • kh/HWz-m 



50 



2S - 



12.5- 







— \ — 
0.25 



— I — 
0.5 



8 

Frtqutncy, Hz 



Figure D.I — Plot of height versus fundamental frequency for 163 rectangular-plan buildings 

using logarithmic scales 



21 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



D.3 Predicting damping valuM of tall 
buildings 

The damping (or rate of energy dissipation) in any one 
mode limits the motion in that nr>ode, and 
consequentty to estimate the building response to a 
given load it is necessary to estimate or measure the 
amount of damping. No proven nr>ethods of predicting 
damping exist and the measured data show that 
damping values between 0,5 % and 2,1 % critical can 
occur (see figure D.2). Higher values may also be 
encountered in buildings where soil/structure inter- 



action is significant. Simple steel frames are likely to 
have much lower damping. Methods of predicting 
damping have been developed (see refs. [34) and [351) 
but, again, the expected accuracy is not quoted. 

Figure D.2 shows a plot of damping versus building 
height for a selected sample of buildings 136). It can 
be seen that large differences in damping can be 
obtained for orthogonal translation modes of the 
same building. Damping Is partly a function of the 
construction procedures and workmanship involved 
and cannot be predicted accurately. Consequently, 
large errors in estimation must be anticipated. 



fi 


L Lowt»f frtqutncy mode 








1 


O OrthogooQl modt 
















? 

% 

CD 


A O 








200- 


to 








100- 


A 

O 




t 





Damping ratio, % crif Icol 



Figure D.2 — Building halght versus damping ratio for tha fundamantal translation modas of 10 buildings 
where soil/structura interaction was negligible (from decay measurement) 



22 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



D.4 Natural frequencias and damping 
values in low-risa buildings 

The characteristics of 96 low-rise buildings are 
presented in references (371 and [381. The buildings 
were located in the USA and are described as 1, 1 Vi 
and 2 storey buildings with basements, partial 
basements or crawl spaces. The data show that the 
average measured frequency decreases with building 
height. 



Figure D.3 shows a histogram relating the number of 
buildings to their measured frequencies. It is 
important to note the range of frequencies which is 
encountered and thus the error involved in using an 
empirical prediction. There is no obvious tendency for 
the frequencies to vary with the age or location of the 
houses, and there is no correlation of the frequencies 
with plan dimensions. 



Figure D.4 shows a histogram relating the number of 
buildings to their damping ratios. This indicates 
generally higher damping ratios than for taller 
buildings and shows the range of damping values 
which may be encountered. No obvious relationship 
between damping and building geometry exists. 



D.5 Non-linear behaviour 

The previous clauses discuss the riatural frequency 
and the damping of each mode and this might give 
the impression that these quantities are invariant. 
However, they do vary with amplitude of motion and 
for earthquake analyses this might be important 
(albeit difficult to quantify). In general, wind loading 
induces small amplitude motion (in comparison with 
large earthquakes) and the changes in natural 
frequency and damping over the range of amplitudes 
normally encountered is small. In one building which 
was subjected to forces equivalent to a range of 
winds from light to hurricane force, changes of 3 % in 
frequency and 30 % in damping were recorded (36). It 
can be appreciated that these changes are perhaps 
not significant and can be ignored for design 
purposes. 

D.6 Rnal comnnent 

The general conclusion which can be reached from 
this annex is that theoretical predictions are likely to 
involve considerable inaccuracies. Consequently, 
theoretical analyses should consider these possible 
inaccuracies by carrying out parametric variation and, 
for important structures, the design calculations 
should be verified using experimental measurements 
when the structure is complete. 



c 

5 16 
o 

z 

12-1 



\h 



10 



1S 



Fundomtntol frtqijency. Hz 

Figure D.3 — Fr^quencitt msasurtd In 96 low-rls# buildings 



23 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



16- 



12- 



8- 



d 



.■UJJU I .. 

10 15 

Damping ratio, % criticol 



Rgur« D.4 — Damping ratios measured In 96 low-rise buildings 



24 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 :1M0 



Bibliography 



[241 Kawecki. J. Empirical formulae used for 
calculating the natural periods of vibrations of 
buildings. Czasopismo Techntczne, Z 7-B (129), 
1969. 

1251 Steffens, R.J. Structural vibration and damage. 
Building Research Establishment Report, UK, 
1974. 

126] Barkadze, E.I. Problems of determining the 
results of instrumental measurements of natural 
periods of buildings. Soobs AN Groz, 39 (6K 
1962. 

(271 Naka, T. Structural design of tall buildings in 
Japan. ASCE-IABSE Joint Committee Report: 
Planning and design of tall buildings, Proc. 3rd 
Regional Conference, Tokyo, Sept. 1971. 

(281 Anderson, A.W. et al. Lateral forces of earth- 
quake and wind. Ptoc. ASCE, 11 (Separate) 
No. 66, 1951. 

1 2 91 Recommendations Association Frangaise du 
G^nie Parasismlque - 90. Presse des Ponts et 
Chauss^es. Pans. 

[301 Ellis, B.R. An assessment of the accuracy of 
predicting the fundamental natural frequencies of 
buildings and the implications concerning the 
dynamic analysis of structures. Proc. Inst. Civ. 
Eng, 69. Sept. 1980. 



[311 ESDI) 81036, Undamped natural frequencies of 
core buildings. ESDU, London, Nov. 1981. 

1321 ESDU 79005, Undamped natural vibration of 
shear buildings. ESDU, London, May 1979. 

(331 ESDU 82019. Undamped natural vibrations of 
sv\/ay frame buildings and frame structures. 
ESDU. London, Aug. 1982. 

[341 ESDU 83009, Damping of structures — Part 1: 
Tall buildings. ESDU, London, May 1983. 

[351 Jeary, A.P. Damping in tall buildings — A 
mechanism and a predictor. Earthquake 
Engineering and Structural Design, 14, 1986. 

[361 Ellis, B.R. Dynamic soil-structure interaction in 
tall buildings. Ph.D. Thesis. University of London, 
1984. 

[371 Medearis. K. The development of rational 
damage criteria for low-rise structure subjected 
to blasting vibrations. Report to National Crushed 
Stone Association. Washirygton DC. Aug. 1976. 

[381 SiSKiNO, D.E. et al. Structural response and 
damage produced by ground vibration from 
surface mine blasting. US Dept. of Interior, 
Bureau of Mines, Rl 8507, 1980. 



25 



Bureso of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comVncnis. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amcndmcnl*; or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ME 28 (0237). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 CI.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : CLT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHaZIABAD, GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r 337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



r2350216,235 04 42 
123515 19,235 2315 

r 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
183278 91,832 7892 



Priat«l*tSkMMPlialiii(Pnii,D«lliibdi* 



Amwtd No. 2 to IS 14884 : 2000 



Direction of wave propagation 




Source 




Distance 



Symbols: 

u Is the displacement, velocity or acceleration amplitude of the sinusoidal wave; 

Mo IS the free-field amplitude; 

Uf^ IS the amplitude on the soil surface near an existing building; 

i4f is the amplitude m the base of the foundation; 

Ufx is the amplitude at an arbitrary position in the structure 

ro = up/uQ 



Figure E.I — Notations, illustrated at a horizontally propagating wave 



Ammd No. 2 to 18 14884 : 2000 



E.2 Theoretical considerations 

Soil-structure interaction influences the dynamic response of all structures to sonrie degree. Only a rtgid bmlding 
bonded to rigid ground would respond in the sanne way as the ground. In reality, the ground does not have an 
infinite rigidity and may provide a mechanism for the radiation and dissipation of energy. Hence it can be thought of 
as acting as a spring and dashpot system or a series of such systems just below the foundation. 

The degree to which soil-structure interaction is a significant aspect of structural response depends on the dynamic 
parameters of the structure and of the ground, in particular on the natural frequencies of the structure and the 
shear stiffr>ess of the ground. When considering relatively stiff low-rise buildings (low rise * 6 m to 7 m high), the 
problem nr>ay be examined as the vertical response of a rigid mass on a spring and a dashpot adjusted to match the 
analytical solution with the ground as semi-infinite isotropic and homogeneous elastic halfspace. Such simple 
concepts suggest that the maximum amplification to be expected in the vertical direction is not likely to exceed 2. 
Rocking and sliding mgdes can also be explored in a similar manner and suggest 'that somewhat higher 
magnifications can be theoretically achieved in most cases. However, vertical amplification is surely limited 
because energy captured by the structure from the passing wave is reradiated into the ground thus damping the 
amplitude response. 

Full consideration of soil-structure interaction should take account of the layering of the soil, the variation of shear 
stiffness with depth, the effects of building load on soil stiffness, the effect of shear strains on soil stiffness, the 
geometry of the foundation, and foundation embedment, as well as the frequency content of the excitation. 

Dynamic soil-structure interaction is one of the central problems in earthquake engineering, and over the last two 
decades methods of analysis have been highly developed, mainly for the nuclear industry, giving rise to a vast 
literature (see references (391 to (451). Refined analysis has also been used for wind and man-made loading and 
some simplified rules have been derived (see references (46] and (47)). 

These advanced analytical methods can be grouped into two classes: 

a) the direct method, whereby the soil and structure are treated together; the ground may be represented by 
finite elements, lumped parameters or both (hybrid models); 

b) the substructure method, whereby the response of the ground and structure are calculated as separate 
systems with a separation between ground and structure to which springs and dashpots or stiffness functions 
are applied. 

Another approach is the response spectrum, widely used in earthquake engineering and other shock loading 
(see reference (48)). It can be adapted to take some account of soil-structure interaction by reducing the natural 
frequency assessed for a structure on soils of low stiffnes§. The effects of soil response can be allowed for. 
in part, by using design response spectra which vary according to the shear modulus depth profile of the soil. 

Generally, the closer the frequency of the excitation is to the natural frequency of a building or building element the 
greater will be the response. Earthquakes, with low frequencies of 0,5 Hz to 8 Hz, will tend to excite the lower 
natural frequencies of buildings; man-made excitation is generally at higher frequencies and tends to excite the 
structural elements of a building. Furthermore, the range of vertical frequencies of building elements (6 Hz to 
40 Hz) lies in the range of man-made excitation, leading to the relatively large bending responses which have been 
observed in ceilings (see reference (491). 

E.3 Relationship between vibration at the ground surface and at the foundation 

There are difficulties associated with measurements on the ground near the building, for example: 

— the measuring point is usually remote from the positions of interest within the structure; 

— there are more uncertainties in coupling the transducer to the ground than in fixing it to a building part; 

— the soil near a building is often disturbed; 

— vibration amplitudes near a building may change with distance from the building as a proportion of the 
wavelength. 



Aimnd Na 2 to IS 14884 : 2000 

The direct methods for analysis of soil-structure interaction are expensive and need detailed knowledge oi sod 
properties, however, they can give some guidance on the following factors influencing tm. 

a) The amplitude of vibration may be affected by reflection at the front of the foundation (with respect to the 
travelling wave) and decreased at the rear side by dissipation and front side reflection. Theses effects depend 
on the foundation size, depth and excitation wavelength. 

b) Where the propagation behaves like a surface Rayfeigh wave (which is usual for distant sources), the 
amplitudes decrease with depth (see, for example, figure E.2), so deeper foundations pick up less motion. 

c) Strong earthquake motions are usually modelled as vertically propagating horizontally polanzed shear waves 
with amplitudes increasing as the waves pass upwards from high rigidity. So again, deeper foundations may 
pick up smaller vibration. 

Such complexities preclude a definitive set of rules relating r^ and ro to the category of structure and character of 
excitation, but both measurements (see reference (501) and theoretical studies indicate that in most situations of 
man-made excitations the value of r^ is likely to be unity or less. This has been supported by results of a 
questionnaire^^ which has indicated that for vertical motion without regard to frequency, r^ was in the range 0,3 to 
0,6. The maximum magnification recorded was in the horizontal response and amounted to a 13 % increase. 
Histograms of the replies to the questionnaire are given in figures E.3 and E.4. 

This general reduction of vertical vibration on the foundation as compared with that on the soil surface near a 
building may not hold in cases where there is a marked rocking response to continuous vibration. 

As for preferred positions of measurement near a building, it is suggested that these positions should be less than 
2 m or 1/10 of the dominant wavelength away from the building. 



1 ) The questjonnaire contained various ground conditions as vvell as various types of vibration excitation. 



Amend No. 2 to IS 14684 : 2000 




^ is the Rayleigh wavelength. 

Rgura E.2 — Variation of vibrational amplitude u^ with depth z of a Rayleigh wave 



10 - 



AmMxJ No. 2 to IS 14884 : 2000 



? 9 



8 - 



§ ^ 



5 - 



4 - 



3 - 



— I — 
1.2 



0.2 



0,4 



0,6 



0,8 



Figure E.3 — Frequency distribution of tm (vertical direction of vibration) 



e 6 



£ 5 



3 - 



2 - 



1 - 



0.2 



0.4 



0.6 



0,8 



1.2 



Figure E.4 — Frequency distribution of r^ (horizontal direction of vibration) 



Amend No. 2 to IS 14884 : 2000 

Page 18 

Add references (39) to (50) to annex F. 

(39) Newnmrk, M. and Rosenbluth. E. Fundamentals of earthquake engmeenng. Prentice Hall, 1973. 

|40) HiCHARD, F.E.. Hall. J.R. and WOODS. R.D. V/bratfons of soils and foundations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1970. 

(41) Wolf, J. P. Dynamic soil structure interaction. Prentice Hall, 1985. 

(42) Clough, R.W. and Penzien, J. Dynamics of structures. McGraw Hill Corp., New York, 1975. 

(43) Warburton, G.B., Richardson, I.D. and Webster, J.J. Forced vibrations of two masses on an elastic 
halfspace. Transactions ASf\/IE. March 1971. 

(44) HolzlOhner, U. Dynamically loaded buildings on the soil. Proc. X ICSMFE. Vol. 3, Stockholm, 1981. 

(45) ROESSET, J.M. and Gonzales, J.J. Dynamic interaction between adjacent structures. Proc. DMSR. Karlsruhe 
1977, Vol. 1, Balkema, Rotterdam, 1978. 

(46) Ellis, B.R. Dynamic soil structure interaction m tall buildings. Ph.D. Thesis, University of London, 1984. 

(47) Auersch, L. Durch Bodenerschutterungen angeregte Gebaudeschwingungen — Ergebnisse von 
Modellrechnungen. BAty^ Research Report 108, Wirtschaftsverlag NW. Bremerhaven, 1984. 

(48) Foster, G.A. Structural response and human response to blasting vibration effects — is there a connection? 
Vibra-tech report. 1985. 

(491 Auersch. L,, Hebener. H. and Rucker, W. Erschutterungen infolge Schienenverkehr: Theoretische und 
mefttechnische Untersuchungen zur Emission, zur Ausbreitung durch den Boden und zur Ubertragung im 
Gebaude. STUVA Report No. 19 (senes Verminderung des Verkehrslarms in Stadten und Gemeinden, 
Teilprogramm Schienennahverkehr), 1986. 

[50] SiSKiND. D.E. and Stagg. M.S. Blast vibration measurements near and on structure foundations. Report of 
Investigations R 1 8969, US Bureau of Mines, 1985. 



(MED 28) 



Repro0faptTyUnltBtS.NtwD«M,ln(fia 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



Indian Standard 

MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK — 

VIBRATION OF BUILDINGS — GUIDELINES 

FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF VIBRATIONS 

AND EVALUATION OF THEIR EFFECTS 

ON BUILDINGS 



1 Scope 



This International Standard establishes the basic 
principles for carrying out vibration measurement 
and processing data, with regard to evaluating vi- 
bration elTects on buildings. It does not cover the 
source of excitation except insofar as the source 
dictates dynamic range, frequency or other param- 
eters. The evaluation of the effects of building vi- 
bration is primarily directed at structural response, 
and includes appropriate analytical methods where 
the frequency, duration and amplitude can be de- 
fined This International Standard only deals with the 
measurement of structural vibration and excludes 
the measurement of airborne sound pressure and 
other pressure fluctuations although response to 
such excitations is taken into consideration 

A building, for the purposes of this International 
Standard, is defmed as any above-ground structure, 
which man frequently inhabits This excludes from 
consideration certain items of plant, for example 
columns, stacks, headframe, containments, even 
though they may receive intermittent visits from op- 
erating staff. 

The structural response of buildings depends upon 
the excitation; to this end this International Standard 
examines the methods of measurements as affected 
by the source, i.e frequency, duration, and ampli- 
tudes as induced by any source, such as earth- 
quakes, explosions, wind effects, sonic booms, 
internal machinery, traffic, construction activities 
and others. 

NOTE 1 There are differences between earthquakes and 
man-made vibrations which affect recording conditions. 
Earthquake-fault-rupture sources are large in size and 
much deeper than most man-made sources. They can 
cause damage at great distances, have much greater en- 
ergy flux and duration and a different pattern of wave 
propagation. Consequently, for the same parameter value 
(for example peak particle velocity), the effects on 
buildings are different. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this International Standard. At the time of publi- 
cation, the editions indicated were valid. All stan- 
dards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this International Standard 
are encouraged to investigate the possibility of ap- 
plying the most recent editions of the standards in- 
dicated below. Members of lEC and ISO maintain 
registers of currently valid International Standards 

ISO 2041 1975, Vibration and shock - Vocabulary 

180 2631-2:1989, Evaluation of human exposure to 
whole-body vibration — Part 2 Continuous and 
shock-induced vibrations in buildings (1 to 80 Hz). 

ISO 4356 1977. Bases for the design of structures — 
Deformations of buildings at the serviceability limit 
states 

ISO 5348; 1987, Mechanical vibration and shock — 
f^echanical mounting of accelerometers. 



lEC 68-2-271987, Environmental testing 
Tests — Test Ea and Guidance: Shock. 



Part 2 



3 Source-related factors to be considered 

3.1 Characteristics of vibration responses In 
buildings 

The types of vibration can be classified as 

a) deterministic, 

b) random. 

and further subdivided as given In 8 2 



IS 14864:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



For each type of vibration, a minimum amount of In- 
formation Is needed so that adequate definition of 
the type of vibration can be drawn up (see 
ISO 2041) (1) 



3.2 Duration 

The duration of the dynamic exciting force Is an Im- 
portant parameter. For the purposes of this Interna- 
tional Standard, the response can be regarded as 
continuous or transient, and the type of response 
will be dictated by the relationship between the time 
constants associated with the structural response 
and the forcing function 

The time constant of a resonance response for res- 
onance, r. in seconds, t^, Is given by 

1 



2^ i./r 



where 



represents the influence of the damping 
and depends on the kind of excitation (lin- 
ear or non-linear); 



/r is the resonance frequency 

Two cases can thus be defmed (without regard to 
whether or not the excitation Is deterministic or 
random) 

~ Continuous 

If the forcing function Impinges on the structure 
continuously for more than St^ then the vibration 
is regarded as continuous 

— Transient 

If the forcing function exists for a time which is 
less than St^, then the response is regarded as 
transient 

Since forcing functions which occur naturally are of- 
ten not well behaved it may be that responses do 
not fall easily Into a single category. For example 
blasting even with several Intervals would be con- 
sidered transient 



3.3 Frequency and range of vibration Intensity 

The frequency range of vibrations of interest de- 
pends upon the distribution of spectral content over 
the frequency range of the excitation and upon the 
mechanical response of the building. This pinpoints 
the spectral content as a most Important property 
of vibration Input For simplicity's sake, this Interna- 
tional Standard deals with frequencies ranging from 
0.1 Hz to 500 Hz; it covers the response of buildings 
of a wide variety and building elements to excitation 



from natural (wind and earthquake) and to man- 
made (construction, blasting, traffic) causes. Internal 
machinery may require higher frequencies to be re- 
corded. 

Most building damage from man-made sources oc- 
curs In the frequency range from 1 Hz to 150 Hz. 
Natural sources, such as earthquakes, usually con- 
tain energy at lower frequencies In the range from 
0,1 Hz to 30 Hz at damaging intensities. Wind 
excitation tends to have significant energy in the 
frequency range from 0,1 Hz to 2 Hz. 

Vibration levels of interest range from a few to se- 
veral hundred millimetres per second depending on 
frequency. 



4 Building-related factors to be 
considered 

The reaction of buildings and building components 
to dynamic excitation depends upon response char- 
acteristics (for example natural frequencies, mode 
shapes and modal damping) as well as the spectral 
content of the excitation. Cumulative effects should 
be considered, especially at high response level and 
long exposure times where fatigue damage is a 
possibility. 



4.1 Type and condition of buildings 

In order to describe properly and categorize the 
visible effects of vibration and the results of instru- 
mental measurements, a classification of buildings 
as defmed in clause 1 is needed For the purposes 
of this International Standard, a classification of 
buildings Is set out in annex A. 



4.2 Natural frequencies and damping 

The fundamental natural frequencies of a building 
or of parts of the building influence its response and 
need to be known to allow the several methods of 
evaluating vibration to be applied. This may be 
achieved by spectral analysis of low-level response 
to ambient excitation or by the use of exciters, f^l 

Where a full response analysis Is not undertaken 
and an assessment of potential vibration severity Is 
needed, empirical expressions relating the height 
of a building to the fundamental period can be used. 

(3). (4). [5] 

Experimental studlest^l have indicated the range of 
fundamental shear frequency of low-rise buildings 
3 m to 12 m high to be from 4 Hz to 15 Hz. Damping 
behaviour Is generally amplitude-dependent. The 
natural frequency and damping behaviour of sta- 
tionary structures will be dealt with in a future ad- 
dendum to this International Standard. 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



4.3 Building base dimensions 

Ground-borne vibrations may have wavelengths of 
a few metres to several hundreds of metres. The 
response excitation from shorter wavelengths is 
complex and the foundations may act as a filter. 
Smaller domestic buildings would generally have 
base dimensions smaller than the characteristic 
wavelengths of all but the highest-frequency sources 
(for example precision blasting in rock) 



4.4 Influence of soil 

It is now common in earthquake engineering studies 
to take Into account the influence of the soil, i^] 

An evaluation of such interaction effects Is some- 
times justified for man-made vibrations; such an 
evaluation demands that the shear wave velocity or 
dynamic rigidity modulus in an appropriate volume 
of ground material be determined. Empirical, nu- 
merical and analytical procedures may be obtained 
from several sources l'^) 

Foundations on poor soils and fill may suffer from 
settlement or loss of bearing capacity due to ground 
vibration. The risk of such effects is a function of the 
particle size of the soil, its uniformity, compaction^\ 
degree of saturation, internal stress stale, as well 
as the peak multiaxial acceleration and duration of 
the ground vibration Loose, coheslonless. saturated 
sands are especially vulnerable and in extreme cir- 
cumstances may undergo liquefaction. This phe- 
nomenon needs to be taken into consideration in 
evaluating vibrations and explaining their effects 
e^J.f^] (See also annex A ) 



5 Quantity to be measured 

The characterization of both the nature of vibration 
input and the response may be effected by a variety 
of displacement, velocity or acceleration trans- 
ducers. These can furnish a record as a function of 
time. It is the usual practice to sense a kinematic 
quantity, such as velocity or acceleration From 
knowledge of the appropriate transfer function of the 
sensing system, each quantity can be derived from 
another by Integration or differentiation. Integration 
at lower frequencies calls for care and confidence 
In amplitude-phase response of the transducer and 
instrument chain (see clause 6). As long as the re- 
quirement on data collection, treatment and pres- 
entation (see clause 6) can be met, the sensor may 
respond to any chosen quantity. Experience sug- 
gests that there are preferred measuring quantities 
for different situations (see table 1). 



6 Measuring Instrumentation 



6.1 General requirements 

Vibration is measured with a view to using the data 
in some evaluatory or diagnostic procedure or to 
monitoring a vibration with some established target 
level in mind. For evaluation, the minimum per- 
formance shall be sufficient to meet the require- 
ments laid down In clause 3 and clause 7 with 
regard to the evaluatory procedures described in 
clause 9. 

It is not expected that a single instrumentation sys- 
tem would meet ail the requirements of frequency 
and dynamic range for the wide range of structures 
and inputs for which this International Standard Is 
applicable. 

The measuring system includes the following 
instrumentation: 

— transducers (see 6.2); 

— signal-conditioning equipment, 

— d^ta recording system. 

The frequency response characteristics (amplitude 
and phase) need to be specified for the complete 
measuring system when connected together in the 
manner to be used. 

The degree to which measured motion needs to ap- 
proach true motion will depend upon the character 
of the investigation and the evaluation method used 

The minimum requirement for 9 2 2 and 9.2.3 is that 
the vibration shall be characterized by a continuous 
measurement of the peak particle velocity values. 

The minimum requirement for 9 2.4 is that the time 
history of the vibration shall be recorded over suffi- 
cient duration and with sufficient accuracy to estab- 
lish its spectral characteristics. Analog or digital 
methods are available subject to the stipulations 
laid down in this clause 



6.2 Choice of transducers 

The choice of transducers is important for the cor- 
rect evaluation of vibratory motion. In general, 
transducers may be divided into two groups prod- 
ucing a linear output either above or below the na- 
tural resonance of the sensing mechanism. The 
so-called "velocity pick-up" or "geophone" widely 
used in structural vibration measurement Is typical 
of an electromagnetic sensor operating at a fre- 
quency above its natural resonance, whereas a 
plezo-electric accelerometer usually operates below 



1) Soil compaction may be n>onllored by pwecifte levelMog 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866: 1990 



Table 1 - 


- Typical range of structural response for various sources 




Vibration forcing function 


Frequency 
range 

Hz 


Amplitude 
range 

nm 


Particle 

velocity 

range 

mm/s 


Particle 

acceleration 

range 

m/82 


Time 
charac- 
teristic 


Measuring 
quantities 


Traffic 

road, rail, ground-borne 


1 to 80 


1 to 200 


0,2 to 50 


0.02 to 1 


C/T 


pvth 


Biatting vlbratJon 
ground-borne 


1 to 300 


100 to 2 500 


0.2 to 500 


0.02 to 50 


T 


pvth 


Pile driving 

ground-borne 


1 to 100 


10 to 50 


0,2 to 50 


0,02 to 2 


T 


pvth 


Machinery outside 

ground-borne 


1 to 300 


10 to 1000 


0,2 to 50 


0,02 to 1 


C/T 


pvth/ath 


Acoustic 

traffic, machinery outside 


10 to 250 


1 to 1 100 


0.2 to 30 


0,02 to 1 


C 


pvth/ath 


Air over pressure 


1 to 40 








T 


pvth 


Machinery Inside 


1 to 1 000 


1 to 100 


0,2 to 30 


0.02 to 1 


C/T 


pvth/ath 


Human activities 

a) impact 

b) direct 


0.1 to 100 
0,1 to 12 


100 to 500 
100 to 5000 


0.2 to 20 
0,2 to 5 


0,02 to 5 
0,02 to 0,2 


T 


pvth/ath 


Earthquakes 


0.1 to 30 


10 to 105 


0,2 to 400 


0,02 to 20 


T 


pvth/ath 


Wind 


0.1 to 10 


10 to 105 







T 


ath 


Acoustic Inside 


5 to 500 






Key 

C - continuousKgj^piij.^^ categories, see 3 1 and 3 2) 
1 ■" transient j 

pvth - particle velocity time history 
ath - acceleration time history 

NOTES 

t The ranges quoted are extremes but indicate the values which may be experienced and which may have to be 
measured (see also note 3). Extreme ranges of amplitude of displacement and frequency have not been used to derive 
particle velocity and acceleration. 

2 The frequency range quoted refers to the response of buildings and building elements to the particular type of 
excitation. It is indicative only 

3 Vibration values within the ranges given may cause concern. There are no standards which cover all varieties of 
building, condition and duration of exposure, but many national codes associate the threshold of visible effects with peak 
particle velocities at the foundation of a building of more than a few millimetres per second. A significant probability 
of some damage is linked to peak particle velocities of several hundred millimetres per second Vibration levels below 
the threshold of human perception (see ISO 2631-2) may be of concern in delicate and industrial processes. 



the resonance. There are electromagnetic sensors 
which operate below their natural frequency, such 
as are widely used strong-motion seismographs. 

In practice, care should be exercised in using the 
phase Information from the "velocity pick-up " type 
of transducer at the lower frequencies If both am- 



plitude and phase response are critical, linear per- 
formance of the whole measuring chain should be 
ensured. A low-frequency cut-off ten times the low- 
est required measured frequency is often recom- 
mended as a good compromise and, in general, the 
measured signal should he 5 dB above the back- 
ground noise. 



IS 14884 : 2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



Velocity pick-ups generate a relatively high signal 
thus simplifying the Instrument chain. If particle ve- 
locity Is needed, the plezo-electric accelerometer 
output needs Integrating, and with transients the re- 
sponse of the whole chain should be verified 



measurement of maximum responses in the whole 
structure together with observations on elements 
such as floors, walls and windows. 



6.3 SignaMo-noise ratio 

The signal-to-nolse ratio should generally be not 
less than 5 dB, If the signal-to-noise ratio Is between 
10 dB and 5 dB, the measured value should be cor- 
rected (i e. diminished) and the correction method 
reported. Background noise is defmed as the sum 
of all the signals not due to the phenomenon under 
investigation. 



7 Position and fixing of transducers 



7.1 Positions 

7.1.1 General 

The proper characterization of the vibration of a 
building requires a number of positions of meas- 
urement which depend upon the size and complexity 
of the building 

Where the purpose is to monitor with regard to im- 
posed vibration, the preferred position is at the 
foundation, a typical location being at a point low on 
the main load-bearing external wall at ground floor 
level when measurements on the foundations 
proper are not possible 

Measurements of vibration response generated by 
traffic, pile-driving and blasting, especially at a great 
distance, show that the vibration may be amplified 
within the building and in proportion to the height 
of the building. It may, therefore, be necessary to 
carry out simultaneous measurements at several 
points within the building. Simultaneous measure- 
ments on the foundation and the ground outside will 
serve to establish a transfer function 

Where a building is higher than 4 floors (^ 12 m), 
subsequent measuring points should be added ev- 
ery 4 floors and at the highest floor of the building. 

Where a building is more than 10 m long, measuring 
positions should be installed at horizontal intervals 
of approximately 10 m 

Additional measuring points may have to be made 
in response to requests by occupants and as a con- 
sequence of initial observations. 

For Investigations of the analytical type, positioning 
will depend upon the modes of deformation to be 
considered. Most practical cases are economically 
limited to identification of fundamental modes and 



7.1.2 Measurement In a building 

Transducer placement in a building depends on the 
vibration response of concern. As described in 
7 11, assessment of the vibration being input to a 
building from ground-borne sources is best done by 
measurements on or near the foundation Determi- 
nation of structural racking or of shear deformation 
of the building as a whole requires measurements 
directly on the load-bearing members which afford 
the structures' stiffness. This usually means three 
components of measurement in corners, although 
other arrangements are possible. 

Sometimes, floor or wall motions are of concern, 
with maximum amplitudes at mid-span locations. 
Although sometimes very severe, these vibrations 
are usually unrelated to structural Integrity. l^M 

Investigations associated with sources within a 
building usually Involve a trial-and-error exploratory 
phase 

In cases where measurements related to equipment 
are to be made, such as when monitoring comput- 
ers, relays and other installations sensitive to vi- 
bration, the measurement should reflect the 
incoming vibration. The point of measurement 
should be placed on or at the foundation or on the 
frame of the equipment In this case, the equipment 
should if possible be switched off for the measure- 
ment 

In cases where measurements related to ground- 
transmitted vibration are to be made, such as where 
ground vibration sources are being studied, it is 
usual to orientate the sensors with respect to radial 
direction def]ned as the line joining the source and 
the sensor. When studying structural response to 
ground vibration. It Is more realistic to orientate with 
respect to the major and minor axes of the structure 
It Is often not possible to make measurements at the 
foundation proper so instruments have to be cou- 
pled to the ground. 

Vibration measurements made on or below the 
ground surface may be affected by the variation of 
the amplitude of a surface wave with the depth 
Building foundations may then be exposed to a mo- 
tion which Is different from the one observed on the 
ground surface depending on the wavelength, foun- 
dation depths and geotechnical conditions 

For wind-induced vibration, vertical components are 
often dispensed with and test instrument disposition 
should be made with rotational and translatlonal 
modes In mind. 



IS 14884 : 2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



7.2 Fixing of transducers 

7.2.1 Coupling to structural elsmants 

The mounting of vibration transducers to vibrating 
elements or substrate should comply with ISO 5348 
with regard to accelerometers. The aim should be 
to reproduce faithfully the motion of the element or 
substrate without Introducing additional response 
Care should be taken with triaxial assemblies to 
avoid rocking or bending. 

The mass of the transducer and monitoring unit (if 
any) shall not be greater than 10 % of the building 
element to which it is fixed. Mounting shall be as stiff 
and as light as possible. 

Brackets should be avoided. It is better to fix three 
uniaxial transducers to three faces of a metal cube 
rigidly mounted by means of studs or quick-setting, 
high modulus resin The transducer mounting can 
be secured to the frame of the building by expansion 
bolts. Gypsum joints are preferred when measuring 
on lightweight concrete elements. 

In special circumstances, it is acceptable to glue the 
transducer or attach It using magnetic attraction. For 
measurements Indoors on horizontal surfaces, 
double-sided adhesive tape may be used on all hard 
surfaces for accelerations below 1 m/s2, although 
mechanical fixings are preferred 

Measurements on floors having compliant coverings 
tend to give distorted results and should be avoided 
Where it Is not possible to relocate the transducers, 
comparative measurements with different mass and 
coupling conditions for the mounting block should 
be made to evaluate the effect of the compliant 
coverings 

7.2.2 Coupling to the ground 

Soil conditions permitting, the transducer may be 
fixed to a stiff steel rod (having a diameter of not 
less than 10 mm), driven through a loose surface 
layer. This rod should not project more than a few 
millimetres above ground surface. Care should be 
taken to ensure close contact between the 
transducer and the ground. In cases where acceler- 
ation greater than 2 m/s^ is expected, a firm ground 
mounting is needed to prevent slippage. Where 
transducers have to be mounted In the ground In 
order to minimize coupling distortion, they should 
be buried. 

Where transducers have to be mounted In the 
ground, in order to minimize coupling distortion, 
they should be buried to a depth at least three times 
the main dimension of the transducer/mounting unit. 
Alternatively, they can be fixed to a rigid surface 
plate with a mass ratio {mlpr) not more than 2, 



where m is the mass of the transducer and plate and 
r Is the equivalent radius of the plate. The rigid sur- 
face plate may, for example, be a well-bedded pav- 
ing slab. For most soils, the mass density, p, ranges 
from 1 500 kg/m^ to 2 600 kg/m3. 

8 Data coiledlon, reduction and analysis 

8.1 General 

The aim of measurement is to acquire sufficient in- 
formation to enable the selected method of evalu- 
ation (see clause 9) to be carried out with a 
sufficient degree of confidence. 

The amount of information required to characterize 
vibration properly Increases as the complexity of the 
vibration Increases from simple periodic to non- 
stationary random and transient motion. 

Data collection systems which are adequate for de- 
fining a periodic motion over a specified frequency 
range may not be adequate for establishing even a 
single parameter index (for example peak particle 
velocity) for a more complex motion 

8.2 Description of data 

Any data resulting from the observation of a physical 
process can broadly be described as deterministic 
or random Deterministic data are those that can be 
described by an explicit mathematical function 

Figure 1 Illustrates categories of the types of data 
that^may be encountered. A description of each cat- 
egory is given in ISO 2041. 

8.3 Data analysis procedures 

Having decided Into which of the main categories il- 
lustrated in figure 1 the data fall, the type of analysis 
will normally be apparent. If the data is categorized 
as deterministic, then a simple analysis (r.m.s., 
peak-to-peak, mean square) will often suffice. 

If the special case of non-periodic deterministic 
data, peak amplitude should be determined without 
preconditioning (although a d.c. component may be 
compensated by analysis of a section of the record 
prior to capture of the signal) Details are given in 
[10] and [12] A dynamic range of 40 dB Is ade- 
quate for most purposes, but 50 dB is preferred 

Random data should be tested for statlonarity 
(see [13]). 

If the data are deemed to be stationary, the proce- 
dures outlined in annex C are appropriate and are 
described In more detail In [10], [12]. [13] and 
[14]. 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 





Deterministic 






































Periodic 




Quasi-periodic 




Non-periodic 






































Sinusoidal 




Complex 




Transient 




Shock 



a) Deterministic data 



Ergodic 



Random 



Stationary 



Non-ergodic 



Self-stationary 



Strongly 



Weakly 



Non-stationary 



b) Random data 
Figure 1 — Categories of the types of data 



^ 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



9 Method of data evaluation 



9.1 General 

Evaluation of measurements should reflect tjoth the 
purpose of those measurements and the type of In- 
vestigation. 

A full response analysis for predictive purposes re- 
quires Information on structural details and condi- 
tions not usually readily obtainable. An investigator 
may, therefore, need to have an appropriate method 
of assessing the severlty^of vibration of a structure 
or a component with regard to the probability of 
damage. In such an assessment, the following fac- 
tors need to be taken into account; 

a) resonant frequencies of basic structure and 
component parts (walls, floors, windows); 

b) damping characteristics of basic structure and 
component parts; 

c) type of construction, its condition and material 
properties; 

d) spectral structural features; 

e) characteristics of excitation; 

f) deflected form; 

g) non-linearity in amplitude response 

Although this International Standard is primarily 
concerned with the measurement and evaluation of 
the response, the chain of action, source, trans- 
mission path and transfer-function have to be borne 
In mind when evaluation is being made 

9.2 Types of investigation 

For many of the parameters of interest, listed in 9 1 
a) to g), the choice of instrumentation, its location 
within the building, the type of recording device and 
the number of data channels or measurement points 
desired, the duration of monitoring for the phenom- 
ena and the speed of data collection will Imme- 
diately be decided. The outlining of Instrumentation 
requirements in clause 6 and annex C has been 
arranged in such a way as to facilitate the selection 
of instrumentation to meet particular requirements 
Beyond this it is important to delineate the degree 
of sophistication to be applied to the Investigation. 
Instruments which characterize the vibration envi- 
ronment by a single quantity, such as those used In 
connection with human response and machine con- 
dition, may be used In a preliminary survey so long 
as the limited frequency responses are taken into 
account. For the purposes of this International Stan- 
dard, a preliminary assessment, a monitoring pro- 



gram, a field survey and a detailed engineering 
analysis are under consideration. 



9.2.1 Preliminary assessment 

Situations may arise where an assessment has to 
be made of vibration problems by desk study alone, 
usually before field measurements Empirical meth- 
ods can be used to estimate response provided that 
data on the source parameters and building re- 
sponse characteristics, such as fundamental fre- 
quency and damping, are available 

9.2.2 Exploratory monitoring 

Very limited measurement of vibration on a building 
or over an area can indicate the existence of a 
problem requiring further Investigation High errors 
are not uncommon and this fact has to be kept in 
mind (See also final paragraph in 9 2 3 ) 

9.2.3 Field survey 

A Held survey would consist of a limited number 
(see also 7 1) of vibration measurement locations In 
order to assess the vibration severity often in com- 
parison with values stipulated in codes or regu- 
lations. 

In the case of vibrations which can be reproduced 
for a sufficient time, the same transducers can be 
used for the different points keeping a reference 
point at the foundation level near r>ource 

As regards exploratory monitoring (see 9 2 2) and 
Held surveys, measurements should be of an accu- 
racy compatible with the uncertainties implicit in the 
vibration indices and empirical relationship used 
Single parameter indices, such as peak particle ve- 
locity or peak acceleration and r.m s values, need, 
generally, only to be known to within ± 10 % at the 
68 % confidence level 



9.2.4 Engineering analysis 

When complex structures of vital Importance are 
being subjected to vibration excitation of a magni- 
tude that requires serious consideration of the con- 
sequences, the structural behaviour needs to be 
assessed in a more detailed way 

Instrumentation for monitoring the time history 
should be mounted at a number of locations to en- 
sure that specific values for that structure are not 
exceeded. 

If the ground-to-foundation transfer function Is of 
concern, simultaneous recording outside and on the 
foundation should be carried out. The recording 
position on the foundation is at a point on the main 
wall at ground floor level or the basement. 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4M8 : 1M0 



The number of measuring points and their location 
have to be defined and modified according to the 
characteristics of the building and the observations 
noticed during monitoring 

The natural frequencies of buildings should be de- 
termined, if possible 

In the case of vibrations which can be reproduced 
for a sufficient time, the same transducers can be 
used for the different points keeping a reference 
point at the foundation level near the source. 

For structures of vital importance, response analysis 
should be carried out as well as an estimate of 
structure loading A full engineering analysis re- 
quires a system which would enable frequency to 
be estimated to ± 1 % and damping to + 10 % 



9.3 Reporting of control activities 

The style of reporting should be consistent with the 
type of investigation (see 9 2), but as a minimum the 
report should include the following: 

a) Risk analysis 

1) Description of the source 

2) Type and condition of building, in accordance 
with annex A 

3) Purpose of (he measurement 

4) Reference to the standard being used and 
type of investigation 

b) Measurements 

1) Position of transducer and manner of coupl- 
ing 

2) Type and make of transducer, signal condi- 
tioning and recording equipment 

3) Calibration factors for the instrumentation 
system 

4) Frequency range and linearity 

5) Assessment of the sources of error. 

6) — For monitoring or survey investigation (see 
9.2.2 and 9 2.3), it is sufficient to make con- 
tinuous registrations of peak particle velocity 
values. 

— For further investigation (see 9 2.4), a per- 
manent record of time history should be 
made available 

c) Building inspection 



1) Inspection of buildings before vibration expo- 
sure, with graphical reporting of cracks and 
other damage 

2) Inspection of the same buildings after the vi- 
bration exposure. 

3) Evaluation of observed damage 

d) Reference to other relevant International Stan- 
dards. 



9.4 Evaluation for prediction 

An existing building may be exposed to a new 
source, external or internal, and some assessment 
of the expected vibration response is needed. Given 
sufficient information about the characteristics of the 
input and the properties of the structure, numerical 
analyses using one or other well known techniques 
of response spectra, Fourier response, time step in- 
tegration(^5) rnay be used for important buildings 
Alternatively, a characteristic index, such as a 
kinematic quantity (displacement, velocity, acceler- 
ation) (see 9 6). can be related to expected per- 
formance using empirical data appropriate to the 
type of building. (7) 

A convenient way of expressing a vibration in the 
frequency domain is the "response spectrum", 
widely used In engineering. f^) (See lEC 68-2-27 ) For 
the special case of zero damping, it is close to the 
Fourier amplitude spectrum. 

In most cases, the response characteristics of the 
structure are ill defined although dynamic test pro- 
cedures are now available ('') 



9.5 Evaluation for vibration study In existing 
buildings 

The evaluation of vibration status in existing 
buildings may be carried out at different levels of 
sophistication consistent with the investigative pro- 
cedures outlined in 9 2 Indications of vibration se- 
verity may be in terms of stresses or kinematic 
quantities In some cases, the direct obsenyation of 
crack opening or extension affords valuable infor- 
mation on the response and may indicate progres- 
sive deterioration (^^l- M^) 

9.6 Kinematic cfuantltles as Indices of 
vibration severrty ki structures 

For several decades studies have been carried out 
to relate the vibration severity in terms of a quantity 
such as peak displacement, velocity, acceleration, 
related to visible effects on structures 

Where measurements are made upon a component. 
a kinematic quantity, such as peak velocity, can be 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866:1990 



expressed as a stress (see annex B) and, In turn, 
related In structural terms to allowable stress. When 
the kinematic quantity refers to whole-body struc- 
tural response measured at some chosen position, 
the response frequency and damping of the struc- 
ture, and duration of the Input affect vibration se- 
verity The kinematic quantity Is then an empirical 
Index and shall be qualified by the kind of building 
to which It refers (see 3 3) 

Some account of these factors is embodied In the 
use of the peak spectral acceleration or velocity as 
a damage Index (6],I111 applicable to low-rise (one to 
three storeys high) and "whole " building response. 

(16) 

The dependence of severity rating on response fre- 
quency of both building and frequency content of the 
excitation is also recognized in the empirical corre- 
lations which strictly apply to buildings with a limited 
range of fundamental frequency in shear, and Iden- 
tify different severity ratings In different frequency 
bands. A broad guide to vibration levels of Interest 
is given in table 1 

9.7 Probabilistic aspects 

There Is Increasing evidence that the criteria relat- 
ing vibration to visible effects on buildings (cos- 
metic, minor and major damage) should be 
approached in a probabilistic way 

For possible combinations of age and condition of a 
building, It may not be possible to establish an eco- 
nomic absolute lower limit 

This is particularly the case where either a peak 
kinematic value (usually particle velocity) of ground 
motion within a specified frequency band or a peak 
spectral velocity response spectrum acceleration or 
displacement is being used as an index of damage 
potential Minimal risk for a named effect is usually 
taken as a 95 % probability of no effect. 

The evaluation of the response of a building or 
component part may be assisted by measurements 



of local strain or relative displacement (for example 
crack monitoring), although this would not constitute 
a measure of vibration status. W may, however, per- 
mit (with difficulty) a direct evaluation of composed 
dynamic stress for comparison with design criteria. 

9.8 Fatigue factors 

Repeated stress reversal over many cycles carries 
a risk of Increasing fatigue failure. Reference for 
steel members can be made to appropriate design 
codes Such guidance Is not available for concrete, 
masonry and other building materials. Reference 
would have to be made to research Long-term, 
low-level vibration amounting to 10^0 load reversals 
may have to be taken into account for special struc- 
tures, monuments, etc. M7] 

9.9 Description of damage 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the 
damage is classified into the following categories: 

— Cosmetic 

The formation of hairline cracks^> (21] on drywall 
surfaces, or the growth of existing cracks in 
plaster or drywall surfaces; in addition, the for- 
mation of hairline cracks in mortar joints of 
brick/concrete block construction. 

— Minor 

The formation of large cracks or loosening and 
falling of plaster or drywall surfaces, or cracks 
through bricks/concrete blocks. 

— Major 

Damage to structural elements of the building, 
cracks In support columns, loosening of joints, 
splaying of masonry cracks, etc. 

NOTE 2 The description of damage has its equivalent in 
the intensity scales used by seismologists. 



2) See ISO 4356. 



10 



IS 14864:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Classification of buildings 



A.1 General 

This annex provides simplified and helpful guide- 
lines for classifying buildings according to their 
probable reaction to mechanical vibrations trans- 
mitted by the ground 

A dynamic system, for the purposes of this classi- 
fication, consists of the sol! and strata, in which are 
set the foundations (if existing), together with the 
building structure itself 



Table A. 2 gives 14 simplified classes taking 
consideration the following factors: 



into 



— type of construction {as ascertained from 
tableA 1). 

— foundation (see clause A 5); 

— soil (see clause A. 6); 

— political importance factor 

The frequency range is taken from 1 Hz to 150 Hz 
(see also 3.3), which covers most events met in in- 
dustrial practice, blasting, piling and traffic. Shock 
directly introduced into the structure by industrial 
machinery is not included though its effects at some 
distance are. Shock produced by blasting, piling and 
other sources outside the strict confines of the 
structure are not included but the effects on the 
structure are. The buildings referred to exclude very 
tall structures with more than 10 storeys 

A.2 Structures Involved 

A. 2.1 The following structures are included in the 
classification 

— all buildings used for living and working (houses, 
offices, hospitals, schools, prisons, factories, 
etc.); 

— publicly used buildings (town halls, churches, 
temples, mosques, heavier industrial mill-type 
buildings, etc ); 



— elderly, old and ancient buildings of architec- 
tural, archeologlcal and historical value; 

— lighter industrial structures, often designed to the 
codes of building practice. 

A. 2.2 The following structures are not included in 
the classification: 

— heavier structures such as nuclear reactors and 
their adjuncts and other heavy power plants, 
rolling mills, heavier chemical engineering 
structures, all types of dams, and containing 
structures for fluids and granular materials, for 
example water towers and tanks, petroleum 
storage, grain and other silos, etc.; 

— all underground structures; 

— all marine structures. 

A.3 Definition of classes (see table A 2) 

The classes are defined by taking as a reference a 
well maintained building in good repair. The refer- 
ence building shall not have any constructional de- 
fects nor shall it have sustained accidental damage 
from earthquakes If the construction does not fulfil 
these requirements, it shall be allocated to a lower 
class. 

The order in which the structural types are classified 
depends on their resistance to vibrations, and also 
on the tolerances that can be accepted for the 
vibrational effects on structures, given their archi- 
tectural, archeologlcal and historical value. 

Three important elements enter into the reaction of 
a structure under the effects of mechanical vi- 
brations The three elements are as follows: 

— the category of the structure — table A 1 gives a 
preliminary classification of the categories of 
structures based on the groups defined in 
clause A 4 ; 

— the foundation (see clause A 5); 

— the nature of the soil (see clause A 6). 



11 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4886 : 1900 



A.4 Cat«gorl«8 of 8tructyro8 

A.4.1 Group 1 — Ancient and eldorly buildings 
or traditionally built structures 

The types of buddings considered In this group can 
be divided into the two following sub-groups: 

a) elderly, old or ancient buildings; 

b) all modern buildings constructed In older, tradi- 
tional style using traditional kinds of nnaterlals, 
methods and worknaanshlp. 

This group, generally, Is of heavier construction and 
has a very high damping coefncient, for instance due 
to soft mortar or plaster. This group also includes 
traditionally resilient structures in earthquake 
zones. Buildings In this group seldom have more 
than six storeys. 

A.4.2 Group 2 — Modern buildings and 
structures 

The types of buildings considered in this group are 
all of modern structure using relatively hard materi- 
als tied together In all directions, usually light in 
weight overall, and with little damping coefficient. 

This group includes frame buildings as^ well as cal- 
culated load-bearing wall kinds. Buildings vary from 
being single- to multi-storey. All types of cladding 
are Included. This group also Includes some older 
types of buildings which are constructed using 
modern materials, tying and damping. 

A.5 Categories of foundations 

A.5.1 Class A 

Class A includes the following types of foundation 
— linked reinforced concrete and steel piles; 



— stiff reinforced concrete raft; 

— linked timber piles; 

— gravity retaining wall. 

A.5.2 Class B 

Class B Includes the following types of foundation: 

— non-tied reinforced concrete piles*'; 

— spread wall footing; 

— timber piles and rafts 
A.5.3 Class C 

Class C includes the following types of foundation: 

— light retaining walls; 

— large stone footing; 

— no foundations ~ walls directly built on soil. 

A.6 Types of soli 

Soils are classified into the following types: 

Type a: unTissured rocks or fairly solid rocks, 
slightly fissured or cemented sands; 

Type b: compact, horizontal bedded soils; 

Type c: poorly compacted, horizontal bedded 
soils; 

Type d: sloping surfaces with potential slip 
planes; 

Type e: open granular, sands, gravels (non- 
cohesive), and cohesive saturated clays; 

Typef: fill. 



3) Piles, structurally connected, usually at level of pile caps. 



12 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



Table A.I — Categoiizatlon of ttructuret accordlf>g to group of bulUlIng 



CaUgory of 
structure 



1 



Group of buttdtng (see clause A. 4) 



Heavy Industrial multi-storey buildings, five to 
seven storeys high, Including earthquake-resistant 
forms 

Heavy structures, including bridges, fortresses, 
ramparts 



Two- and three-storey Industrial, heavy-frame 
buildings of reinforced concrete or structural steel, 
clad with sheeting and/or infilling panels of 
Wockwofk, brickwork, or precast units, and with 
steel, pre-cast or In situ concrete floors 

Composite, structural steel and reinforced concrete 
heavy industrial buildings 



Timber frame, heavy, putjiic buildings, including 
earthquake-resistant forms 



Five- to nine-storey (and more) l>lock8 of flats, of- 
fices, hospitals, light-frame industrial buildings of 
reinforced concrete or structural steel, with InfiHing 
panels of blockwork, brickwork, or precast units, not 
designed to resist earthquakes 



Timber-frame, single- and two-storey houses and 
buildings of associated uses, with infilling and/or 
cladding, including "log cabin" kinds, Including 
earthquake-resistant forms 



Single-storey moderately lightweight, open-type in- 
dustrial buildings, braced by Internal cross walls, 
of steel or aluminium or timber, or concrete-frame, 
with light, sheet-cladding, and light panel-infilling, 
Including earthquake-resistant types 



Fairly heavy multi-storey buildings, used for me- 
dium warehousing or as living accommodation 
varying from five to seven storeys or more 



Two-storey, domestic houses and buildings of as- 
sociated uses, constructed of reinforced blockwork. 
brickwork or precast units, and with reinforced floor 
and roof construction, or wholly of reinforced con- 
crete or similar, all of earthquake-resistant types 



Four- to six-storey houses, and buildings of asso- 
ciated urban uses, made with blockwork or 
brickwork, load-bearing walls of heavier con- 
struction. Including "stately homes" and small 
palace-8tyle buildings 



Four- to ten-storey domestic and similar buildings, 
constructed mainly of lightweight load-bearing 
blockwork and brickwork, calculated or uncalcu- 
lated, braced mostly by internal walls of similar 
material, and by reinforced concrete, preformed or 
in situ floors at least on every other storey 



Two-storey houses and buildings of associated 
uses, made of blockwork, brickwork or pis-^-terre, 
with timber floors and roof 

Stone- or brick-built towers, including earthquake- 
resistant forms 



Two-storey domestic houses and buildings of asso- 
ciated uses, including offices, constructed with walls 
of blockwork, brickwork, precast units, and with 
tlmt>er or precast or in situ floors and roof struc- 
tures 



Lofty church, hall and similar stone- or brick-built, 
arched or "articulated" type structures, with or 
without vaulting, Including arched smaller 
churches and similar buildings 

Low heavily constructed "open" (I.e. non-cross- 
braced) frame church and barn type buildings in- 
cluding stables, garages, low industrial buildings, 
town halls, temples, mosques, and similar 
buildirvgs with fairly heavy timber roofs and floors 



Single- and two-storey houses and buildings of as- 
sociated uses, made of lighter construction, using 
lightweight materials, pre-fabrlcated or in situ, sep- 
arately or mixed 



Ruins and noar-rulns and other buildings, all in i 
delicate state 

All class 7 constructions of historical lmp>ortance 



13 



IS 14684:2000 
ISO 4666 : 1990 



Table A. 2 — ClassHlcatloii of butkHngs accordtno to their resistance to vibration and the tolerance that can be 

accepted for vibrational effects 







Category of ttructure 

(see table A.I) 


CltM Of 

building^) 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 




Categoriet < 


ji foundations (capital letttrt) and types of soil (tower case letter) 
(see clause A. 5 and clause AS ) 




i 


1 


Aa 
















2 


Ab 


Aa 


Aa 


A a 










3 




- Ab 
B a 


Ab 
B a 


A b 


A a 
A b 








4 




Ac 
Bb 


Bb 


A c 


Ac 
B a 
B b 








5 




Be 


Ac 




Be 


Ba 






6 




A f 




Ad 


Bd 


B b 
C a 


B a 




7 






A f 


Ae 


B e 


Be 

Cb 


B b 
C a 




8 












Be 
Cc 


Be 
Cb 




9 




Bf 








Cd 


Bd 

Cc 


A a 


10 






Bf 






C e 


B e 
Cd 


A b 


11 








Cf 


Cf 




C e 


B a 


12 












C f 




Be 
C a 


13 














Cf 


Bd 
Cb 
Ce 


14 
















Cd 
Ce 
C f 


1) High da 


8S number - 


high degree 


of protection required 









14 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Estimation of pealc stress from peak particle velocity 



The stresses In beams or plates vibrating close to 
resonance can be calculated from measurement of 
velocity or displacement and frequency, if the 
measurement Is performed at the points of maxi- 
mum vibrating displacements. In this case a know- 
ledge of the boundary conditions and the stiffness is 
not necessary for estimating the stresses 

For beams with full rectangular cross-section and 
constant stiffness and weight loading, the following 
relationship applies, independent of the length, 
height and width of the beam, between the largest 
bending stress <Tmax. sind the vibration velocity v^^^ 



«y^ 



dyn P 



0^ 



X K 



where 



^max X <^ 's the maximum amplitude of the 
vibration velocity occurring at a point at 



r^r 



dyn 



0,. 



the beam length [where q) Is the forcing 
frequency approximately equal to <^n 
(natural frequency of the beam)]; 

Is the dynamic elasticity modulus; 

is the mass density; 



is the load coefficient, where the beam 
is stressed by other evenly distributed 
loads in addition to its own weight 

(^to4 ~ ^b«am "^ ^other load*)- 

is the mode coefficient (dimensionless), 
1 to 1,33; the eigenmode coefficient k^ 
depends on the boundary conditions 
and the degree of the mode, which only 
has a slight influence 



For further details, see [18]. 



15 



IS 14864:2000 
ISO 48M : 1990 



Annex C 

(informative) 

Random data 



C.I General 

Random data may be encountered In practice (wind 
loading, crusher machinery). Spectral analysis 
techniques can be used to estimate response char- 
acteristics. The estimate may be more or less pre- 
cise depending on the structural characteristics 
(frequency and damping of a selected mode) and the 
precision required of the analysis M^l Two kinds of 
error, bias and variance, are involved (^^) Choice of 
recording duration depends on the permissible er- 
rors chosen. If bias error is to be 4 % and variance 
error 10 %, for example, the recording duration, T, , 
in seconds, may be calculated using the following 
common formula 



T,- 



200 



where 



is the modal damping ratio; 

Is the natural frequency of mode n, under 
consideration, in hertz. 



For instance, if ^ = 1 % of critical and f^ - 1 Hz, 
then a recording duration of 20000 s is needed to 
estimate to the bias and variance errors selected 
above If ^; Is 2 % of critical and /, is 10 Hz, a re- 
cording duration of 1000 s is needed Acceptance 
of higher errors would reduce the required record- 
ing duration 

These requirements are independent of the type of 
equipment used for analysis (It is common practice 
to use magnetic type recorders ) Structural damping 



will be dealt with In a future addendum to this Inter- 
national Standard. 

Non-stationary random data presents special prob- 
lems and reference should be made to appropriate 
literature; see [14] 

The analysis of random data is conducted in one of 
two domains, frequency and time, and these are 
considered in clause C 2 and clause C 3 

C.2 Frequency domain 

In general vibration analysis, the quantity most often 
used is the Power Spectral Density (PSD). In the 
analysis of structural vibration, the amplitude spec- 
tral density Itself may be presented. Other types of 
analysis in this domain Include transfer function, 
cross PSD, coherence function, and quadrate spec- 
tral density. These results are presented as the 
"physical quantity" squared per hertz versus fre- 
quency, respectively as dimensionless numbers and 
ratios of physical quantities. 

C.3 Time domain 

In the time domain covariance, autocorrelation, 
cross-correlation, and covariance analyses may be 
carried out. The autocorrelation function, which Is 
the Inverse of the power spectrum, is the most 
commonly used Many of the quantities in the time 
domain can be used with deterministic data. How- 
ever, the more complex functions are often used 
with random data. Time-domain analysis covers 
mean, root-mean-square, peak counting, zero 
crossing counting as well as probability density, 
probability distribution, skewness and Kurtosls. 



16 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



Annex D 

(informative) 

Bibliography 



[1] Broch, J.T. Mechanical Vibration and Shock, 
BrOel & Kjaer. Naerum, Denmark, 1972 

[2] Jeary, a. p. Private communication Building 
Research Establishment Note, 1980 

[3] Applied Technology Council, Tentative pro- 
visions for the development of seismic regu- 
lations for buildings (ATC Special Publication 
3 06; NBS Special Publication 510; NSF Publi- 
cation 78 8, p 56; NSF Publication, pp 65-70, 
NSF Publication, pp 381-400), 1978. 

[4] DIN 4149/1, Bauten in deutschen Erdbeben- 
gebieten, Lastannahmen, Bemessung und 
Ausfuhrung Oblicher Hochbauten (Buildings in 
German earthquake areas; design loads, 
analysis and structural design; unusual 
buildings) 

[5] DIN 4150/1, Erschutterungen im Bauwesen, 
Grunds^tze, Vorermittlung und Messung von 
SchwingungsgrbBen (Vibrations in building; 
principles, predetermination and measure- 
ment of the amplitude of oscillations) 

[6] Medearis, K. Development of rational damage 
criteria for lov^ rise structures subject to blast- 
ing vibrations, KM Assoc. Report, 1976 

[7] Newmark, M. and Rosenbluth, E. Fundamen- 
tals of earthquake engineering, Eaglewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey Prentice Hall, 1973. 

[8] Seed, H B Soil liquefaction and cyclic mobility 
evaluation for level ground during earthquake. 
American Society of Civil Engineers, GT2, 1979, 
pp. 201-25 

[9] Pyke, R . Seed, H.B and Chan, C K Settlement 
of sands under multidirectional shaking. 
American Society of Civil Engineers, GT4, pp. 
379-398 



[10] Rabimer, L.R. and Gold, B. Theory and Appli- 
cation of Digital Signal Processing, Eaglewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey; Prentice Hall, 1974. 

[11] SiSKiND, D.E.. Stagg. M.S., Kopp. J.W, and 
DowDiNG, C.H. Structure response and damage 
produced by ground vibration from surface 
mine blasting; United States Bureau of Mines 
Report of Investigations No. Rl. 8507, 1980. 

[12] Otnes, R. and Enochson, L. Digital Time Series 
Analysis, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1972. 

[13] Bendat, J S and Piersol, AG. Random data. 
Analysis and measurement procedures, New 
York John Wiley & Sons, 1971 

[14] Oppenheim, a V. and Schafer. RW Digital 
Signal Processing, Eaglewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey; Prentice Hall, 1975 

[15] Fang, H.Y. and Kroener, R M. Soil-structure 
Interaction during blasting International Sym- 
posium on Soil Structure Interaction, University 
of Roorkee, India, 1977 

[16] DIN 4150/3, Erschutterungen im Bauwesen; 
Einwirkungen auf bauliche Aniagen (Vibrations 
In building; effects on structures). 

[17] Crockett. J. HA Piling vibrations and struc- 
tures failure. Recent Development in the De- 
Sign and Construction of Piles, Institution of 
Civil Engineers London, 1979 

[18] Gasch, Elgnung der Schwingungsmessung zur 
Ermittlung der dynamischen Beanspruchung in 
Bautellen Berichte aus der Bauforschung, 58, 
Wllhelm Ernst & Sohn, Berlin, 1968 

[19] Douglas, B. Modal Damping Determinations 
from Resonance Spectral Shape Measure- 
ments Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 58, SuppI No. 1, 1975. 



17 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : IQM 



[20] Paolillo, a. Suitability of existing vibration [22] ISO 3010:1988, Bases for design of structures 

criteria for rail rapid transit system. Acoustical ~ Seismic actions on structures. 

Society of America, Atlanta, Georgia, April 21 

to 25, 1980. [23] GuTOWSKi. T.G., Wittig, L.E. and Dym, C.L. 

Some aspects of the ground vibration 

[21] Building Research Establishment (UK), Crack- problem. Noise Control Engineering, 10, No. 3, 

Ing in buildings. Digest No. 5, 1966 (reprinted 1978. 

1975). 



IS 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



AMENDMENT 1 



Page 17 

Add the following annex as annex D and change the present annex D to annex E. 

Page 18 

Add references (24! to [381 to annex E. 



19 



18 14884:2000 
ISO 4868 : 1M0 



Annex D 

(informative) 

Predicting natural frequencies and damping of buildings 



Introduction 

ISO 4866:1990 specifies methods of measuring 
building response including fundamental natural 
frequencies. When direct measurements cannot be 
made or are limited in usefulness by high damping, 
sub-component resonances or other practical prob- 
lems, it becomes necessary to estimate natural fre- 
quency and damping values. 

This annex offers guidance on the ways in which the 
fundamental natural frequency and associated damp- 
ing value may be assessed. It draws attention to the 
uncertainties involved which should be taken into 
account wherever an estimation of fundamental 
natural frequencies of a building is used in measuring 
or evaluation procedures. 



D.1 Predicting natural frequencies of tall 
buildings using empirical methods 

There are many empirical formulae for predicting the 
frequency / or period T, of the fundamental 
translation mode; of these the simplest is/= 10/iV Hz 
(i.e. T = Q,^N s). where N is the number of storeys. 
Various other formulae are given in the codes of 
different countries and these can be grouped into 
three categories: 



where 

H is the height in metres; 

T is the period, in seconds; 

jki ranges from 0, 1 4 sm-^ to 0,03 sm-'' 
(references (241 to (271). 



.. D.1 



r=ib2//VD . . . D.2 

where 

D is the width parallel to the force, in metres; 

k2 ranges from 0,087 sm"^ to 0, 1 09 sm-^ 
(references (251 and (281). 

T^k^H yfo func(//,D,/) ... D.3 

(see, for example, reference (291). 
NOTE 1 k-i has the units sm""*; k2 has the units sm~^. 

A later study [301, considering a sample of 163 rec- 
tangular-plan buildings, recommended / = A6JH Hzm 
(i.e. T = 0,022// sm-*") for the fundamental translation 
mode, / = 58/// Hzm for the orthogonal fundamental 
translation mode and / = 72/// Hzm for the fun- 
damental torsional mode (sample size of 63 buildings). 

NOTE 2 These formulae for /are empirical. They may also 
be considered as numerical value equations yielding values 
of / in hertz v^hen values of H in metres are inserted, for 
instance /= 46///. 

Figure D.1 shows the resulting fit of the curve 
/ = 46/// Hzm to the data and it can be appreciated 
that large errors are likely to be encountered. It can be 
seen t^t errors of ± 50 % are not uncomnruDn, and 
this is typical of the accuracy which can be expected 
using empirical formulae. Based on measured data, it 
appears that the mode shapes of the fundamental 
modes of tall buildings can be reasonably approxi- 
mated by straight lines. 



20 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866: 1990 



D.2 Predicting natural frequencies of tall 
buildings using computer-based methods 

It has long been realised that comparatively large 
errors are likely to occur using the sinnple empirical 
formulae, but it has also been generally accepted that 
a satisfactory estimate of frequency can be obtained 
using one of the standard computer-based methods. 
However, buildings are complicated structures and it 
is not a simple task to create an accurate 
mathematical model; consequently it must be 
accepted that these models will only provide 
approximate predictions. In a study [301 examining 
published evidence, the correlation between 
computed frequencies and measured frequencies 
was actually considerably worse than the correlation 
between the frequencies predicted using / = 46/// 
Hzm and the measured values. This discrepancy can 
be attributed to inadequacies in modelling the real 



properties of buildings. Predictions of fundamental 
frequencies should therefore be treated with caution. 

Special methods have been developed for analysis of 
core buildings [311, shear buildings [32] and sway 
frame and frame buildings [331, but with any method it 
is important to check whether the method has been 
calibrated using a range of reliable experimental data 
and to understand what errors are likely to be 
encountered. If the method has not been proven, then 
accuracies greater than those obtained for empirical 
predictors should not be assumed. Only the 
fundamental frequencies have been discussed, but 
the predicted frequencies of higher frequency modes 
will suffer from similar or (more probably) greater 
errors. This means that, except for special cases 
where the mathematical model has been tuned to 
experimental results, predictions involving many 
calculated modes must be regarded as unreliable. 



100 - 



so 



25 - 



12.5 



f = k6/H Hz-m 




0.25 



0,5 



8 

Frequency, Hz 



Figure D.I — Plot of height versus fundamental frequency for 163 rectangular-plan buildings 

using logarithmic scales 



21 



IS 14684:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1990 



D.3 Predicting damping values of tall 
buildings 

The damping (or rate of energy dissipation) In any one 
mode limits the motion in that nr>ode, and 
consequently to estimate the building response to a 
given load it Is necessary to estimate or measure the 
amount of damping. No proven methods of predicting 
damping exist and the measured data show that 
damping values between 0,5 % and 2 J % critical can 
occur (see figure D.2). Higher values nr\ay also be 
encountered In buildings where soil/structure inter- 



action Is significant. Simple steel frames are likely to 
have much lower damping. Methods of predicting 
damping have been developed (see refs. (34) and (35)) 
but, again, the expected accuracy Is not quoted. 

Figure D.2 shov^ a plot of damping versus building 
height for a selected sample of buildings [36]. It can 
be seen that large differences in damping can be 
obtained for orthogonal translation modes of the 
same building. Damping Is partly a function of the 
construction procedures and workmanship involved 
and cannot be predicted accurately. Consequently, 
large errors in estimation must be anticipated. 



e 


A Lowest frequency mode 






i 


O Orthogonal mode 












1 


A O 






200- 


^ 






100- 


£i 








o 


£^ 






. °o 




£i 



Damping ratio. % critical 

Rgure D.2 — Building height versus damping ratio for the fundamental translation modes of 10 buildings 
where soil/structure interaction was negligible (from decay measurement) 



22 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866: 1M0 



D.4 Natural frequencies and clamping 
values in low-rise buildings 

The characteristics of 96 low-rise buildings are 
presented in references [37] and [38]. The buildings 
were located in the USA and are described as 1, 1^ 
and 2 storey buildings with basennents, partial 
basements or crawl spaces. The data show that the 
average measured frequency decreases with building 
height. 



Figure D.3 shows a histogram relating the number of 
buildings to their measured frequencies. It is 
important to note the range of frequencies which is 
encountered and thus the error involved in using an 
empirical prediction. There is no obvious tendency for 
the frequencies to vary with the age or location of the 
houses, and there is no correlation of the frequencies 
with plan dimensions. 



Figure D.4 shows a histogram relating the number of 
buildings to their damping ratios. This indicates 
generally higher damping ratios than for taller 
buildings and shows the range of damping values 
which may be encountered. No obvious relationship 
between damping and building geometn/ exists. 



D.5 Non-linear behaviour 

The previous clauses discuss the natural frequency 
and the damping of each mode and this might give 
the impression that these quantities are invariant. 
However, they do vary with amplitude of motion and 
for earthquake analyses this might be important 
(albeit difficult to quantify). In general, wind loading 
induces small amplitude motion (in comparison with 
large earthquakes) and the changes in natural 
frequency and damping over the range of amplitudes 
normally encountered is small. In one building which 
was subjected to forces equivalent to a range of 
winds from light to hurricane force, changes of 3 % in 
frequency and 30 % in damping were recorded 136). It 
can be appreciated that these changes are perhaps 
not significant and can be ignored for design 
purposes. 



D.6 Final comment 

The general conclusion which can be reached from 
this annex is that theoretical predictions are likely to 
involve considerable inaccuracies. Consequently, 
theoretical analyses should consider these possible 
inaccuracies by carn/ing out parametric variation and, 
for important structures, the design calculations 
should be verified using experimental measurements 
when the structure is complete. 



^ 16 



12- 



h n 



10 



15 



FundomerifQl frequency, Hz 

Rgure D.3 — Frequencies measured in 96 low-rise buildings 



23 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1900 



I ■ 

O 

f 16- 



12 



□ 



^ 5 10 15 

Damping ratio, % critical 

Rgure D.4 — Damping ratios measured in 96 low-rise buildings 



24 



IS 14884:2000 
ISO 4866 : 1M0 



Bibliography 



1241 Kawecki, J. Empirical formulae used for 
calculating the natural periods of vibrations of 
buildings. Czasopismo Techniczne, Z 7-B (129), 
1969. 

125] Steffens, R.J. Structural vibration and damage. 
Building Research Establishment Report, UK, 
1974. 

[261 Barkadze, E.I. Problems of determining the 
results of instrumental measurements of natural 
periods of buildings. Soobs AN Groz, 39 (6), 
1962. 

[271 Naka, T. Structural design of tall buildings in 
Japan. ASCE-IABSE Joint Committee Report; 
Planning and design of tall buildings, Proc. 3rd 
Regional Conference, Tokyo, Sept. 1971. 

[281 Anderson, A.W. et al. Lateral forces of earth- 
quake and wind. Proc. ASCE, 77 (Separate) 
No. 66, 1951. 

(291 Recomnnendations Association Frangaise du 
Gdnie Parasismique - 90. Presse des Ponts et 
Chauss^es, Pans. 

(301 Ellis, B.R. An assessment of the accuracy of 
predicting the fundamental natural frequencies of 
buildings and the implications concerning the 
dynamic analysis of structures. Proc. Inst. Civ. 
Eng., 69, Sept. 1980. 



[311 ESDU 81036, Undamped natural frequencies of 
core buildings. ESDU, London, Nov. 1981. 

[321 ESDU 79005, Undamped natural vibration of 
sfiear buildings. ESDU, London, May 1979. 

[331 ESDU 82019, Undamped natural vibrations of 
sway frame buildings and frame structures. 
ESDU, London, Aug. 1982. 

[341 ESDU 83009, Damping of structures — Part 1: 
Tall buildings. ESDU, London, May 1983. 

[351 Jeary, a. p. Damping in tall buildings — A 
mechanism and a predictor. Earthquake 
Engineering and Structural Design, 14, 1986. 

[361 Ellis, B.R. Dynamic soil-structure interaction in 
tall buildings. Ph.D. Thesis, University of London, 
1984. 

(371 Medearis, K. The development of rational 
damage cntena for low-rise structure subjected 
to blasting vibrations. Report to National Crushed 
Stone Association, Washington DC, Aug. 1976. 

[381 SiSKiND, D.E. et al. Structural response and 
damage produced by ground vibration from 
surface mine blasting. US Dept. of Interior, 
Bureau of Mines, Rl 8507, 1980. 



25 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course ol 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review oflndian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of commcnLs. Suindards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian SLandards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of *BIS Handbook' and ^Standards Monthly Additions' 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ME 28 (0237). 

Amendments Issued Since Puhlication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CMENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMB AI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHCPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHaZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanslha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



f235 02 16, 235 04 42 
1235 15 19,235 23 15 

f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Prea, Ddhi^ India 



