**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10596-1 (1983) : Code of practice for selection, 
installation, operation and maintenance of pumps for 
industrial applications, Part 1: Selection [MED 20: Pumps] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10596 ( Parti ) -1983 

UDG 62V65 ( First Reprint JUNE 1991 ) ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, 

INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

OF PUMPS FOR INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS 

PART 1 SELECTION 



1. Scope — Intends to provide general guidelines for the selection of pumps for industrial 
applications. 

1-1 This standard is not applicable to pumps for agricultural applications. 

2. Selection— In the process of ordering a pumping unit the person concerned is required to 
identify system requirements, select the pump type, lay down the pump specification and develop all 
information necessary for the supplier. 

2.1 Fluid Characteristics — Physical and chemical properties of the fluid to be handled, such as its 
viscosity, density, corrosiveness, lubricating properties, chemical stability, volatility, amount of 
suspended particles, etc, are of paramount importance in the process of selection of a pump. Depend- 
ing upon the process and the system, some or all of these properties may have an important influence 
on pump and system design; for example, the degree of corrosiveness of the fluid will influence the 
material of construction, while if the fluid contains suspended solid particles, suitable type of pump 
seal designs, abrasion resistant pump construction material and type of impeller may have to be 
considered. The effect of change of temperature, pressure, time, etc, upon the fluid properties are 
also worth considering with regard to its possible effects on pump operation. 

2.1.1 Generally the selection of a centrifugal pump is based on the water equivalent duties that is 
total head/effective head and volume rate of flow. Fluid characteristics should be considered while 
calculating water equivalent duties, for example, in case of viscous liquids head, capacity and efficiency 
is greatly affected and correction factors for these need to be considered. Reference should be made 
to IS : 5120-1977 Technical requirements for rotodynamic special purpose pumps {first revision)' for 
such corrections. Similarly for liquids with consistancies more than 3 percent correction for head- 
capacity should be applied. Similar considerations need to be apptred for liquids with solids. Proper 
correction should be applied for volume rate of flow depending upon solid percentage, nature and size 
of solids. 

2.2 Total Head— A clear picture of the system, wherein the pumping system is expected to operate, 
should be kept in mind while calculating total head requirements. Since hydraulic losses are invari- 
ably present in the system due to pipe friction, bends and other fittings, due weightage should be 
given to these. 

Based on the layout of the system and head losses, total head should be determined. 

2.2.1 The NPSH requirement in case of centrifugal pump shall be based on water performance with 
on hydrocarbon correction factor. The NPSH required shall be based on 3 percent head drop. 

2.3 Volume Rate of Flow — A pump is designed mainly on the basis of head requirements and 
required volume rate of flow. Hence exact requirements of volume rate of flow should be calculated. 

2.4 Alternate Mode ixf Operation — The various modes of operation of the system are important 
considerations when specifying pumping unit. 

The following parameter may be determined ; 

a) Operation of pump — continuous or intermittent, 

b) Rate of flow or head — constant or flunctuating, and 

c) Difference in flow and head requirements for different flow path. 

2.4.1 These and many other questions arising from different modes of operation influence decisions 
regarding number of pumps and their volume rate of flow and need of booster pumps, to a great 
extent. To meet variable requirements of flow and head, number of pumps may have to be operated 



Adopted 30 June 1983 



© October 1983, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10596 ( Parti ) -1983 

in series or parallel. In such cases the effect of failure of one of the pumps shall also have to be 
considered as rated conditions for individual pumps shall abruptly change because of this and pumps 
may run on full open side beyond operating range of pump. The failure of pumping system may 
occur due to motor failure, power supply failure, and loss of control in electrical power, namely, 
frequency, voltage, etc. Hence proper importance should be given to these factors and occurrence of 
these causes should be evaluated beforehand as a part of selection of pump unit, especially the prime 
mover. The use of I.e. engines shall have to be considered. 

2.5 Wear — Wear occurs in the system with a lapse of time causing operating characteristics to 
change. The extent of such wear over the life time of the equipment should be properly assessed and 
adequate margin provided in the system parameters so that the pump can render satisfactory service 
even up to the end of the use of the equipment. Where abrasive or suspended material particles are 
to be handled, pump with replaceable liners should be specified. These liners may be of resilient 
material, such as rubber compound or extremely hard alloys of cast iron. Plastic linings including 
those on impeller are also suitable for such services. 

2.6 Expected Future System Changes — The requirements of future system changes should be incor- 
porated taking into consideration the effect on performance of a pump due to its wear and tear if they 
can be predicted with any degree of certainity. 

2.6.1 In any event, it should be kept in mind that the equipment must operate satisfactorily in the 
present system for which the pumping unit is being specified and this should be a factor in every 
evaluation being made. 

2.7 Selection of Pump — The selection of the pump class and type for a particular application is 
influenced by such factors as system requirements, system layout, fluid characteristics, intended life, 
energy consumption, material of construction, code requirements, etc. The behaviour of the system 
greatly influences the choice of the basic type of pumps. Such as : 

a) the required volume rate of flow and heads at different loads; 

b) the effect of changes in volume rate of flow on system head; 

c) the required head remain steady; 

d) available NPSH; and 

e) system details, such as : 

i) relief value, 
ii) surge chambers, and 
iii) expansion joints. 

These are some of the parameters for which answers are to be found out. 
2.7.1 Pump characteristics 

2.7.1.1 Centrifugal, pumps are considered suitable for variable-head, variable volume rate of flow 
applications. 

2.7.1.2 Constant-speed reciprocating pumps find wide application in situations where the required 
vofume rate of flow is expected to be constant over a wide range of system — head variations. This 
type of pumps is available in a wide range of design pressures, however the volume rate of flow is 
relatively small for the size of the equipment required. 

2.7.1.3 While selecting a reciprocating pump, it should be kept in mind that the output from a 
reciprocating pump will be pulsating. Where this is objectionable, the use of rotary pumps may be 
made. However, the application of rotary pumps is limited to low- to-medium pressure ranges only, 
and are mostly recommended for handling oil and other viscous liquids. 

2.7.1.4 It is to be noted that while rotary and reciprocating pumps are self-priming, centrifugal 
pumps are not, unless designed specifically. As reciprocating and rotary pumps are positive displace- 
ment type units, they wijl continue to build up excessive pressures on the delivery side if the 
discharge of liquid from them, while they are in operation, is restricted or stopped either by throttling 
or completely closing the gate valve in the delivey pipe line or if any other obstruction is produced 



IS : 10596 (Parti ) -1983 

in the pipe for restricting or stopping the flow of the liquid. It is, therefore, always necessary to 
provide either an inbuilt type or a separate pressure-relieving t>r relief valve on discharge side of these 
pumps with arrangements to set them for opening at the desired pressures and by passing the flow 
back to suction. 

2.7.1.5 In certain cases the system layout may have a very important bearing on the choice of 
. pump type. Normally, centrifugal pumps require less floor space for installation than reciprocating 

pumps and vertical pumps less floor space than horizontal pumps. However vertical pumps may 
require more head room for maintenance and installation purposes. 

2.7.1.6 Where the available NPSH is limited, such as when handling a saturated liquid, and the 
application calls for the use of centrifugal pump, the engineer may have to investigate the use of 
providing an inducer in place of the impeller nut in the case of end-suction pumps or a vertical canned- 
suction-type centrifugal pump to gain adequate NPSH. In certain other cases the design may call for 
the installation of a pump immersed in the liquid to be handled and hence, the use of a vertical 
submerged type pump may be advantageous. 

2.7.2 Code requirements — The statutory codes of the regulatory bodies may impose certain 
additional requirements which can affect both pump rating and construction. Such additional require- 
ments may affect the selection. 

2.7.3 Fluid characteristics — Sometimes exceptionally severe service conditions based on fluid 
characteristics may rule out some classes of pumps at once. For example, the handling of fluids 
having high solid content will exclude the use of reciprocating pumps or pumps with close clearances. 
On the other hand, rotary-type pumps are suitable for viscous liquids and centrifugal pumps for both 
clean and clear fluids or fluids with high solid content. If it is undesirable for the process liquid to 
come in contact with the moving parts, diaphragam type pumps may have to be used. Centrifugal 
pumps are also suitable for handling viscous fluids and also handle liquids with solid contents. 

2.7.4 Material — Materials of construction should be selected on the basis of service conditions. 
Indian Standards on various types of pumps, a list of which is given in Appendix A, give recommenda- 
tions on suitable materials of construction. 

Following main aspects should be considered while selecting the material of construction : 

a) Liquid handled and its corrosion properties. 

b) Solids present in the liquid and their abrasiveness and wear and tear due to that. 

c) Temperature of liquid and effect of the same on corrosion rate of material and mechanical 
properties. 

d) Maximum discharge pressure of the liquid in the casing, thickness of the casing and feasibility 
of casting the same. 

e) Peripheral speed of the rotating parts. 

2.8 Selection of Prime Mover 

2.8.1 Selection of prime mover is as important as selection of the pump. Depending on the 
available energy sources, pumps may be driven by electric motor, I. C. engines, steam engines, gas 
turbines, steam turbines, etc. Also, they may be driven at constant speed or at variable speed. 

2.8.2 Generally electric motors are used in constant-speed service unless a hydraulic coupling gear 
box or other speed varying device is introduced in the system for varying the speed. I.C. engines are 
chosen because of non-availability of power, portability or loss of power back-up requirements. 
Moreover they can operate as constant speed prime mover as well as variable speed prime mover. For 
variable speed applications, steam turbines, eddy-current couplings, adjustable speed motors, fluid 
couplings, gears and belts arelrequently used. 

2.8.3 In large complex installations where the equipment is to be operated continuously, the 
decision on the choice of the type of prime mover and variability of the pump speed should be based 
on the comparison of the total operating and capital costs for the pump system over the intended plant 
life for the several alternatives available. Variable speed operation would usually result in lower 
operating costs; however the total first cost of the driving equipment to accomplish this would 
frequently be higher than for constant speed pump. 

2.9 Specify ing the Pump — Reference may be made to the Indian Standards, a list of which is given 
in Appendix A. 



IS : 10596 ( Parti ) - 1983 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 2.7.4 and 2.9 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS ON PUMPS 

IS : 1520-1980 Horizontal centrifugal pumps for clear, cold, fresh water {second revision) 

IS : 1710-1972 Vertical turbine pumps for clear, cold, fresh water (first revision) 

IS : 5120-1977 Technical requirements for rotodynamic special purpose pumps 

IS : 5600-1970 Sewage and drainage pumps 

IS : 5639-1970 Pumps handling chemicals and corrosive liquids 

IS : 5659-1970 Pumps for process water 

IS : 6536-1972 Pumps for handling volatile liquids 

IS : 6596-1972 Pumps for handling paper stock 

IS : 8034-1976 Submersible pumpsets for clear, cold, fresh water 

IS : 8418-1977 Horizontal centrifugal self-priming pumps 

IS : 8472-1977 Regenerative self-priming pumps for clear, cold, fresh water 

IS : 9137-1978 Code for acceptance tests for centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps — Class C 

IS : 9201-1979 Pumps for handling slurry 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In modern age pumps find a very wide field of applications, such as domestic water lifting, 
irrigation, fire fighting, hydraulic presses, hydraulic servosystems, mining, chemical and petroleum 
industries. For proper functioning and life of the pumps two requirements should be met with, namely : 

a) proper selection of the type suitable to the working conditions; and 

b) proper installation, operation and maintenance. 

To deal with this situation effectively we will have to recognize the various factors responsible 
for the smooth and efficient working. This knowledge can ±>e acquired only through long experience 
in the field and through investigations where required. 

Old users can have the knowledge based on their long experience in the field while coming 
across various problems varying in nature. On the other hand new users without any guidelines find 
themselves helpless in making use of optimum life in the smooth functioning. Here point of 
paramount importance is the proper installation and maintenance of genuine pump selected for the 
purpose. 

This code of practice has been prepared only with an intension to provide guidelines for the 
proper selection, installation, operation and maintenance of pumps excluding agricultural pumps. 

This code is being issued in the following four parts for easy reference : 

Part 1 Selection 
Part 2 Installation 
Part 3 Operation 
Part 4 Maintenance 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



