**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^Nj^?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15 13259:1992 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

AIRCRAFT TOW TRACTORS — PERFORMANCE 

REQUIREMENTS 

UDC 629-1 14'2 : 6297 



® BIS 1992 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Aiarch^\992 Price Gronp 3 



Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee, HMD 13 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

This Indian Standard identifies and summarizes the various factors that shall be considered and 
evaluated in establishing performance requirements for aircraft tow tractors. 

It is not within the scope of this standard to specify a comprehensive set of design criteria for 
aircraft tractors. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO 7717-1985 'Aircraft — 
Four-wheel-drive tow tractors — Performance requirements factors for design', issued by the 
International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 



IS 13259 . 1992 



Indian Standard 

AIRCRAFT TOW TRACTORS — PERFORMANCE 

REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides a summary of design 
factors that shall be considered in establishing 
performance requirements as well as various 
tabulated design data and explanatory examples, 

2 DESIGN FACTORS 

The following design factors shall be considered 
and evaluated in establishing aircraft tow tractor 
performance requirements. 

2.1 Aircraft Characteristics 

The following parameters shall be taken into 
account: 

a) Dimensions; 

b) Number of landing gear and wheels; 

c) Attach point for towing; 

d) Gross weight, empty weight, and weight 
distribution on the wheels; 

e) Breakaway resistance of the aircraft as a 
percentage of aircraft weight for initial 
motion directed: 

1) straight ahead, and 

2) in a turn; 

f) Rolling resistance of the aircraft as a 
percentage of aircraft weight for constant 
motion on various surfaces on: 

1) a horizontal plane, and 

2) a grade; 

g) Turn radius of the aircraft; 

h) Angularity limitation of the aircraft tow 

fitting; 
j ) Strength of the aircraft tow fitting when 

loads are applied: 

1 ) directly fore and aft, and 

2) in the direction of minimum strength; 
and 

k) Amount of thrust of engines at idle. 

2.2 Airport Environment 

The following parameters shall be taien into 
account: 

a) Maximum grades to be negotiated^ 

b) Minimum speeds required for crossing 
active taxiways and runways; 

c) Parking requirements: 



1) Parallel or nose-in at gates, 

2) Spacing from other aircraft, 

3) Proximity to other fixed physical 
features, 

4) Need for remote parking; 

d) Paving strength and surfacing of ramps, 
taxiways, runways and access roads; 

e) Road clearance and bridge and overpass 
limitations; 

f ) Anticipated towing distances and routes 
between aircraft maintenance/storage 
areas and cargo/passenger terminals; 

g) Maximum approach and breakover angles 
to be negotiated on ramps, taxiways, 
runways and access roads; and 

h) Other towing equipment limitations, 
physical or regulatory. Particular consi- 
deration shall be given to th« local 
applicable government or airport authority 
regulations. 

2.3 Tow Vehicle — General Cliaracteristics 

The following parameters shall be taken into 
account: 

a) Dimensional limitations; 

b) Visibility requirements; 

c) Operator's location(s); 

d) Steering characteristics to accommodate 
the requirements identified in 2.1 and 2.2 
for the possible configuration of: 

1) single axle, 

2) multiple axle; 

i) co-ordinated steering, 
ii) crab steering; 

e) Braking capability; 

f ) Wheels and tyres to accommodate the 
requirements identified in 2.2 and 2.5; 

g) Vehicle power and power train; 

h) Maintenance requirements and service 

accessibility; 
j ) Requirements for integral electrical power 
, equipment to support the aircraft systems 

during towing and standby operations; 
k) Method of attachment to the aircraft 

(for example, type and location of the 

tow hitch ); 
m) Requirements for ground control 

communications ; 



1 



IS 13259 : 1992 



n) Operational lighting and service compart- 
ment lighting; 

p) EnviroBHiental protecting for operator's 
location; 

q) Special requirements imposed by aircraft 
manufacturers and/or regulatory bodies; 
and 

r) Special requirements imposed by the 
tractor owner. 

2.4 Tow Vehicle — Power Train Requirements 

The parameters given in 2.4.1 to 2.4.3, shall 
be taken into account. 

2.4.1 Engine Power 

The tow vehicle shall be capable of developing 
enough power to move both the tow vehicle and 
the aircraft under the design considerations of 
weight, direction, speed, surface conditions and 
resistance to motion. 

2.4.2 Rim Pull 

It is necessary to consider the engine power and 
torque, the rature of the drive, which may be a 
torque converter and transmission, a generator 
and electric motor, or other type, plus the axle 
and wheel characteristics, to ensure that 
adequate torque is developed and transmitted 
as available rim pull to move the towing and 
towed vehicles. For the tractor to move itself, 
its resistance to motion shall be subtracted 
from 'rim pull'. This is the towing capability 
usually referred to as 'drswbar pull'. 

NOTE — 'Rim pull' is the effort available at the 
ground due to the tractor driving mechanism. 

2.4.3 Applied Force Limits 

Consideration shall be given to a means of 
limiting the forces applied to the aircraft tow 
fittings to prevent damage to them. This may 
be accomplished through the use of shear 
devices in the aircraft towbar or through a 
means of limiting the drawbar pull of the tow 
vehicle ( that is, imposing a torque limit on the 
available rim pull or, removing ballast from the 
tractor). 

2.5 Tow Vehicle — Weight and Traction 

2.5.1 Weight 

The ability of a tow vehicle with suflScient 
power to start a given load without slipping its 
wheels is dependent upon its weight. W^en 
the resistance to motion has been defined for the 
specific design situation, the weight required to 
allow the tow vehicle to develop the drawbar pull 
necessary to accomplish the desired motion on 
a surface with a given coefficient of friction can 
be determined. 



For this purpose, the weight of the tow 
vehicle is considered as being equally distributed 
on the four wheels. The effect of load transfer 
due to the drawbar height and to acceleration 
or deceleration is not considered, since it is 
usually of minor effect. 

2.5.2 Traction 

Traction needs can be changed to match 
changing friction co-eflScients by sj)ecifying the 
capabihty to ballast the tow vehicle to higher 
weights. However, the transmitted engine 
power shall be suitable to use the extra ballast 
weight. Single and multiple wheel slippage 
may also be alleviated by specifying the use of 
such items as 'limited slip' differentials that 
transmit the available torque to the wheel(s) 
that are not slipping. 



3 DESIGN DATA 
EXAMPLES 

3.1 General 



EXPLANATION AND 



The following .items, although correct at this 
time, should only be considered as general 
guidance. It is highly recommended that the 
design or specifying engineer reverify any data 
that he uses for a specific situation. The 
multiple and inter-related factors affecting the 
towing forces make it impossible to devise 
formulae that account for all variables. 

3.2 Acceleration Resistance ( AR ) 

This is the inertial resistance to a change in 
velocity that shall be overcome to cause an 
aircraft on a level surface to move from 
standstill to some constant speed, or from one 
constant speed to another constant speed. 

The factor normally used to calculate aircraft 
AR is 0"5 percent of the aircraft weight for 
each 0"05 m/s^ of acceleration. Thus, if the 
desired acceleration is 0'15 m/s^ to minimize 
impact loading, then: 

AR = 0'5 percent X -^— tt- X aircraft weight 

= 1*5 percent X aircraft weight 

3.3 Rolling Resistance ( RR ) 

This is a dynamic resistance which is composed 
of the friction between the tyres and the surface 
on which they move, the friction of the wheel 
bearings and the adhesion between the tyres and 
the surface on which they move. 

The force required to overcome this 
resistance can be expressed as a percentage of the 
weight of the aircraft to be moved. It is the 
force, in kilonewtons, needed to keep the 
aircraft rolling at a constant speed over a level 
surface. Based on empirical tests, various 



IS 13259 : 1992 



factors of rolling resistance have been developed 
and are tabulated as follows; 

Surface Type Rolling Resistance 

( Percentage of Aircraft 
Weight ) 

^ A ^ 

Dry Surface Wet Surface 



Hard asphalt 


1-4 


1-8 


Concrete road 


rs 


2-2 


Snaw and ice 


2-0 


2-5 


Snow ( hard packed ) 


2-5 


31 


Snow ( soft ) 


3-3 


41 



Under normal conditions, RR is usually 
considered to be about 1 percent to 2 percent 
of aircraft weight in a straight pull and 2 percent 
to 4 percent in a turning manoeuvre. An 
average rolling resistance of 2 percent is 
considered reasonable and RR = 2 percent of 
aircraft weight. 

3.4 Grade Resistance ( GR ) 

This is the amount of drawbar pull needed to 
maintain movement of an aircraft at constant 
speed on a given grade. GR is considered to 
he 1 percent of aircraft weight for each 1 percent 
of grade. Percent of grade is the number of 
metres vertical rise for every 100 m in the 
horizontal. 

Generally, for airports, an average grade of 
2 percent is considered reasonable and the 
GR = 2 percent of aircraft weight. 

3.5 Engine Thrust ( ET ) 

The thrust produced by idling jet engines is an 
important consideration in determining tow 
tractor design criteria. Although the thrust can 
be positive or negative, depending upon 
whether thd aircraft is being towed forwards or 
backwards, the primary concern is for the 
thurst produced during a push out operation. 
This thrust is additive to the other factors 
resisting motion of the aircraft and shall be 
overcome by the tractor. The total force, in 
kilonewtons, produced by engine thrust will 
vary depending on the type of engine and the 
nurnber of engines running. Idle thrust data are 
available from the engine manufacturer. The 
number of engines started prior to push out, if 
any, is a matter of individual airline operating 
procedure. 

3.6 Breakaway Resistance (BR ) 

This is the sum of the inertial and frictional 
resistance to initial motion offered by the 
aircraft which shall be overcome to start 
the aircraft moving. The highest value of 
static resistance to motion occurs at that point 



at which motion is impending. Therefore, at 
the point of impending motion, the combined 
value of the acceleration and rolling resistances 
is higher than it is after motion has been 
initiated. This static breakaway resistance 
(BR) is considered to be 4 percent of aircraft 
weight on a straight pull and nearly 8 percent 
in a turn. Total breakaway resistance ( BRt ) is: 

BRt = BRa + GR + ET 

As soon as the aircraft begins to move, the 
breakaway requirement falls off and the 
acceleration and rolling resistances revertto their 
dynamic values. Average BRa. = 4 percent of 
aircraft weight. 

3.7 Rim Pull ( RP ) 

This is the total force, in kilonewtons, which is 
available at the outer radius of the tractor tyres 
for transmission to the surface on which the 
tyres rotate: 

T,„ TXRXexC 
KJr — 

r 

where 

T = gross engine torque, in kilonewton 
metres; 

R = overall gear reduction of the drive 

train; 
e — mechanical efficiency of the drive 

line ; 
C = correction factor for engine torque 

to determine net torque available at the 

fiyw-heel; 

r ■= rolling radius of the loaded driving 
tyres, in metres, 

3.8 Tractive Effort ( TE ) 

Assuming adequate rim pull is available, TE is 
the maximum force which can be exerted by the 
tractor to produce motion without slipping the 
wheels. It is a function of the tractor weight 
and the coefficient of traction of the surface: 

TE = w X tractor weight 

The coefficient of traction ( u ) is a series of 
constants for varying road surface conditions. 
These constants are normally tabulated as 
follows: 





Condition 


u 






Average 


0-45 






Glaze ice 


Q-IO 






Wet asphalt 


0'40 




^ 


Dry asphalt 


0-80 






Wet concrete 


050 






Dry concrete 


080 






Hard snow 


0-20 






Oily concrete 


0-40 





IS 13259 : 1992 



3.9 Drawbar Pull ( DBP ) 

3.9.1 Drawbar Pull Available ( DBPa ) 

This is the force, in kilonewtons, which the 
tractor is capable of producing at its tow hitch. 
It is the tractive effort minus the force required 
to move the tractor. Assuming, with the 
exception of engine thrust ( ET ), that the same 
resistances to motion which apply to the aircraft 
also apply to the tractor: 

DBPa ( at breakaway ) 

=TE — BRt ( of the tractor ) 
= ( « X tractor weight ) — (4 percent 
X tractor weight + GR of the 
tractor ) 

DBPa ( after breakaway ) 

= TE - ( AR + RR + GR ) of the 
tractor 

3.9.2 Drawback Pull Required ( DBPr ) 

This is the force required to move the aircraft, 
that is: 

DBPr ( at breakaway ) = BRt 

( of the aircraft ) 
DBPr ( to accelerate the aircraft on a slope ) 
= ( AR + RR + GR + ET ) 

DBPr ( to maintain the aircraft at a constant 
speed on a slope ) 
= ( RR + GR + ET ) 

To make sure that the tractor is sized for the 
worst condition, it is assumed that the aircraft 
is being pushed up the slope with engine thrust 
working against the tractor. 

3.10 Example 

It is desired to specify a tractor to move a 
250 000 kg aircraft against 25 kN of engine 
thrust. Design parameters are established as 
follows: 

a) Coefficient of friction = 0*45 ( average ) 
or 0*10 ( worst ) 

b) Maximum surface slope = 2 percent 

c) Maximum tow speed = 16 km/h 

d) Coefficient of static breakaway resistance 
BRa == 4 percent. Max 

e) Coefficient of acceleration resistance 
AR = rs percent, Max 

f ) Coefficient of rolling resistance 
RR = 2 percent. Max 

g) Coefficient of grade resistance 
GR = 2 percent, Max 

h) Assume that resistance constants for the 
aircraft also apply to the tractor 

j ) Drawbar pull required ( DBPr ) for 
breakaway equals the sum of the aircraft 
resistances or BRt- 



DBPr = BRt = BRs + GR + ET 

DBPr = 0*981 [ ( 004 X 250 000 ) + 

+ ( 0*02 X 250 000 ) ] + 2 500 

= 9 810 + 4 905 + 2 500 
DBPr = 17 215 daN Si 172 kN 

k) The tractive effort of the tractor at break- 
away, therefore, shall equal the drawbar 
pull required to move the aircraft ( DBPt ) 
plus the force required to move the 
tractor, that is: 

TE = DBPr + BRt ( of tractor ) 

= 172 + (BRs X tractor weight) + GR 

= 172 + (0*04 + 0*02) 

( tractor weight ) 

= 172 + 0-08 ( tractor weight ) 
Also 

TE = w X tractor weight 
= 0*45 X tractor weight 
172 + 006 ( tractor weight ) 
= 0'45 ( tractor weight ) 
172 = 0*45 ( tractor weight ) — 

— 0*06 ( tractor weight ) 
172 = 0*39 ( tractor weight ) 

172 
Tractor weight = ^.^„ (^ 441*4 kN 



Tractor mass 



0*39 

441*4 



45 000 kg 



0*009 81 
TE = 0*45 X 41*4 = 198-63 kN « 200 kN 

m) For icy conditions u = 0*10 and 

172 
Tractor weight = 



0*10 
172 
004 



- 0*06 

= 4 SCO kN 



Since it would be impratical to ballast the 
tractor to get this extra weight, an 
alternative means shall be found to change 
the coeflScient of traction. Consideration 
should be given to chains, studded tyres* 
sanding the road surface, etc. 

n) The approximate power, in kilowatts, to 
overcome breakaway for both tractor and 
aircraft assuming an increase in speed 
-from up to 1 km/h can be computed as: 

p _ Required tractive effort ( kN ) 

4 



Power 



200 



50 kW 



The approximate power, in kilowatts, required 
at various speeds can be expressed as; 

Required tractive effort x speed ( km/h ) 



IS 13259 : 1992 



Consider the example of accelerating the 250 000 
kg aircraft and 45 000 kg tractor from just above 
breakaway to a speed of a km/h up a 2 percent 
grade with the engines off, that is: 

„ TE X Speed 

Power = —■ 

4 

^ ( AR + RR + GR U 295 OOP X Speed ) 

4 

( 0-15 + 0'02 + 0'02)( 295 OOP X 009 81 X 1 

~ 4 

= 40 kW 

Under the same conditions, to accelerate to 
5 km/h would require: 

5X40=200 kW 

On a level surface the power required 
accelerate to 2 km/h would be: 

( AR + RR)(295 000) X 2 
4 
_ ( 0-015 + Q-02 ) ( 295 OOP X 0*009 81X2) 
~ 4 

= 50 kW 
To accelerate to 10 km/h would require 250 kW. 



allowances for unusual or extreme conditions of 
operation. 

In many cases, the assumed values of the 
example will be found to be quite stringent, 
with normal operation not requiring anywhere 
near the computed values of the example. 

The primary requirements of an airplane tow 
tractor are: 

a) A configuration, that is, compatible with 
the airplane; 

b) Adequate rim pull to start the load; and 

c) Enough weight to provide adequate 
traction. 



Power 



To keep the aircraft and tractor moving at a 
constant speed on the grade requires: 

0.04 X 295 000 X 0.981 = 11 576 daN tractive 
effort or 29 kW per kilometre/hour. 

A tractor capable of developing a tractive 
effort of 150 kW could keep this aircraft 
moving on the grade at 5 km/h. If the 
2 percent grade were eliminated, the tractor 
could then keep the aircraft moving at 
10 km/h. 

The power in this example is expressed as 
tractive eflFort. However, a type mechanical 
drive tow tractor can probably deliver about 
six-tenths of its engine power as tractive effort. 
The drive train eflSciency, peculiarities of the 
ratios and other power-sapping factors require 
about four-tenths of the grosspower.Electric- 
drive tractors deliver approximately eight-tenths 
of their engine power as tractive effort. 

The tractor which develops 150 kW tractive 
effort, therefore, has an engine of 250 kW for 
mechanical drive or 188 kW for electric drive. 

In practice, the design oi specifying engineer 
should determine, by actual test the correct 
values for normal operation in the required 
circumstances, and should make the necessary 



^Q 3.11 Braking 

3.11.1 In practice, an aircraft is usually 
accelerated slowly from standstill to desired 
velocity, both to minimize shock and to 
conserve both fuel and the drive machinery. 

3.11.2 When braking of the aircraft is done by 
the tow tractor, it shall also be done slowly to 
minimize shock and to conserve the drive 
machinery. 



3.11.3 The design engineer shall remember that 
the aircraft is being handled by a tractor which 
has between one-fifth and one-tenth of the 
aircraft weight. 

3.11.4 The tractor is connected to the aircraft 
by a towbar which swivels at the tractor and is 
rigidly attached to the aircraft nose wheel- 
Should the tractor skid during braking, 
directional control is lost, and the aircraft tends 
to aggravate the skid due to the towbar angle. 
For this reason, it is imperative that the tractor 
maintains directional control; hence, it shall 
not skid. 

3.11.5 Experience indicates that the maximum 
deceleration that can be expected of a tow 
tractor is a force of approximately 06 times the 
tractor weight, and this requires ample brakes 
with good thermal capacity. For normal 
operation, no more braking shall be used than 
the acceleration, or at most 4 percent, the same 
as the breakaway resistance ( BR ). 

3.11.6 Braking of an aircraft by a tow tractor 
could be likened to pulling ten automobiles 
with just one automobile. Consider the problem 
of deceleration of the entire eleven using the 
brakes of the first car. The first car shall not 
lose directional control. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1936 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This doss not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implemsnting the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright b3 addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc: No. HMD 13 (0947) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P, Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600M3 235 0216 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE- BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR, 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



