**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10783 (1983) : Patients-Lifting Devices, Mobile, Manually 
Operated [MHD 12: Hospital Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 61547832 IS : 10783 - 1983 



Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 

PATIENT-LIFTING DEVICES. MOBILE, 

MANUALLY OPERATED 



1. Scope— Specifies requirements for the mechanical safety aspects of mobile patient-lifting devices 
and describes the related type tests and the production test for individual devices. In addition the 
standard makes recommendations for the design, performance and routine maintenance testing. 

2. Design 

2.1 Patient-lifting devices shall be designed to handle a minimum safe working load of 150 kg. 

2.1 .1 The safe working load shall be marked on the lifting device in such a position that it can be 
clearly seen by the operator of the device. 

2.1 .2 The marking shall be of a permanent nature and shall be such that it can be read at a distance 
of 600 mm by a person having norma! eye sight. 

2.2 Where foot controls are provided, particular attention shall be paid to ensuring that they do not 
disturb the equilibrium of the lifting device. 

3. Construction 

3.1 Mast — The mast of the lifting device shall be so located in relation to the base that it can be 
assembled only in the correct working position. 

3.2 Base 

3.2.1 Where adjustment of base width is provided, positive stops shall be incorporated so that 
failure of any component of the adjusting device shall have no effect on the maximum and minimum 
base width obtainable. 

3.2.2 The base width adjusting device shall be such that the base members are locked in the desired 
position so that there shall be no risk of the base changing should the castor, or castors, meet an 

obstruction. 
/ 
f 

3.3 Jib arid Spreader ^ar — Where the design is such that a spreader bar is used to couple the slings 
to the jib, it shall be secured in such a manner that movement relative to the jib is limited to rotation 
about the vfertical, and the spreader bar remains in the vertical plane for all positions of the jib. 

3.4 Propulsion Handles 

3.4.1 Where propulsion handles are provided, they shall be securely fixed, that is welded or bolted 
to the mast. 

3.4.2 Plastics or rubber grips shall be securely fixed to the propulsion handles. 

3.5 Castors 

3.5.1 Castors shall comply with the requiremsnts of IS : 4034-1979 ' Specifications for castors for 

hospital equipment ( first revision ) '. 

3.5.2 Castors fixings other than for plug-fitting castors, shall be provided with full thread engage- 
ment and a thread locking device. 

3.5.3 Plug-fitting castors shall not be used unless a positive locking device is included to prevent 
their accidental detachment. 



Adopted 26 December 1983 



© April 1984, ISI 



Gr 3 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10783-1983 

3.6 Slings, Harness and Chains 

3.6.1, Where chain is used, it shall be of steel, and it shall be side welded. The load imposed on 
the chain by the safe working load shall not excead one-fifth of the breaking load of the chain. 

3.6.2 Any hook used for raising or lowering or as a means of suspension either shall be provided 
with an efficient device to prevent displacement of the load from the hook, or shall be of such a shape 
as to reduce as far as possible the risk of displacement. 

3.6.3 Where metallic loops of a material less than 8 mm diameter form part of the sling, a device 
shall be provided to prevent accidental displacement of the sling or the loop when in use. 

3.6.4 All harness and slings shall be of rot-proof material, for example nylon or terylene. 

3.6.5 Stitching shall be carried out with rot-proof thread, for example nylon or terylene. 

3.6.6 Riveting of slings or harness shall not be used except to supplement stitching. 

3.7 General 

3.7.1 All threaded fastenings that are likely to work loose in use shall have full thread engagement 
and shall be fitted with a locking device. 

3.7.2 Cap nuts aiid blind nuts shall not be used unless they are locked to a shoulder or locked with 
supplementary pins. 

3.7.3 Self-tapping screws shall not be used except to secure such items as identification plates, 
covers and similar light duty items. 

3.7.4 Threaded sections shall not be used as a bearing surface as pivoting points. 

3.8 Welding and Brazing 

3.8.1 Welding and brazing shall fully penetrate and shall be sound in every detail and it shall be 
finished flush. In the finished stage, there shall be no exposed sharp edges in the frame-work or other 
unsealed formations which may harbour dirt or foreign matter. 

3.8.2 Where welding is used, it shall be carried out in accordance with the following Indian 
Standards as appropriate : 

IS : 823-1964 Code of procedure for manual metal arc welding of mild steel, 

IS : 2811-1964 Recommendations for manual tungsten inert-gas arc welding of stainless steel, and 

IS ; 2812-1964 Recommendations for manual tungston inert-gas arc-welding of aluminium and 
aluminium alloys. 

4. Finish 

4.1 All parts of the lifting device shall be free from sharp edges or projections that could cause a 
hazard to the user or operator or damage to clothing. 

4.2 All surfaces that are likely to corrode shall be protected against corrosion by one of the following 
methods. 

a) Steel components shall be plated chromium over nickel to service Grade No. 3 of IS : 1 068-1 968 
' Specification for electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium on iron and steel {first 
revision ) ', or they shall be finished with an enamel, plastics or powder coating which shall be 
hardened and shall not readily chip or flake. 

b) Small components made of steel, for example nuts, bolts, etc, may be electro-plated in 
accordance with IS : 1572-1968 ' Specification for electroplated coatings of cadmium on iron 
and steel {first revision) ', and IS : 1573-1970 'Specification for electro-plated coatings of zinc 
on iron and steel ( first revision ) '. 



IS : 10783 - 1983 

c) Aluminium shall be anrodized in accordance with 18:1868-1968 ' Specification for anodic 
coatings on aluminium ( first revision ) \ 

5. Marking 

5.1 Each lifting device shall carry a permanent lable marked with the following : 

a) Manufacturer's name and initials or recognized trade-mark, 

b) Serial number, 

c) Date ( year and month ) of manufacture, and 

d) Safe working load. 

5.2 For the marking of the safe working load ( see 2.1 .1 . and 2.1 .2 ). 

5.3 Each sling provided for use with the lifting device shall be clearly marked with : 

a) Manufacturer's nanrre, initials or recognised trade-mark; 

b) Model number, or name of the hoist for which the sling is designed and the safe working 
load of the sling; 

c) Model number, or name of the sling; 

d) Size, for example large, medium, small; and 

e) Washing and drying instructions. 

Note -— Relevant symbols similar to those used for clothes may be used. 

The method of marking shall be such that it will remain legible after the cleaning/laundering 
procedures recommended by the manufacturer [ see ( e ) above ]. 

5.4 is / Certification Mar/cing — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

6. General Tests Requirennents 

6.1 Testing for Compiiance — One lifting device representative of each type shall be tested as 
specified in 7 and it shall comply with the corresponding requirements. Every device shall be 
tested as specified in 7.2 and it shall comply with the corresponding requirements in 8. 

6.2 Conditions of Test 

6.2.1 Accuracy of linear measurement shall be ± 2 mm. 

6.2.2 Accuracy of load measurement shall be ± 1%. 

6.2.3 Accuracy of angle measurement shall be 0'5°. 

6.2.4 The rate of application of load shall be such that there is no significant risk of shock. 

6.2.5 Tests shall be carried out in an ambient temperature of between 24''C, and ZV'C. 

6.2.6 Tests shall be carried out on a fully assembled lifting device with accessories such as slings, 
etc, excepting that, where it is impracticable to carry the required load in the patient-carrying acces- 
sories, the load may be imposed directly on the lifting device. Where this procedure is adopted, a 
separate test at an equivalent load shall be applied to each of the slings and other accessories. 

7. Type Tests and Requirements 

7.1 Performance Reiiahi/ity Test — A load equivalent to the declared safe working load shall be raised 
from the lowest to the highest operating position 10 000 times. At the conclusion of the 10 000 
operations the lifting device shall comply with the requirements of the test defined in 7.2. 



is : 10783 - 1983 

Note — It is permissible, where more convenient, to carry out this cyclic oparation test on the raising and lowering 
mechanism as a separate assembly provided it is subjected to stresses equal to those to which it would be subjec- 
ted when assembled in a lifting device carrying the safe worlcing load. In this case the m3chanism should be 
re-assembled In the lifting device before carrying out the test specified in 7.3, 

7.2 Load Raising and Lowering Test 

7.2.1 The lifting device shall satisfactorily raise a test load equivalent to 125 percent of the safe 
working load. 

The test load shall be raised from the lowest operating position to an upper position defined as 
follows : 

a) If, when the device is in use, raising of the load is effected by changing the angle between 
the mast and the jib, the upper position shall correspond to the jib's being at an angle of 60° 
above the horizontal. 

b) In all other cases the upper position shall be the highest operating position. 

7.2.2 The load, as detailed in 7,2.1, shall remain at the high position for a period of 15 minutes 
and during this period it shall not fall from its initial position by more than 3'0 mm. 

7.2.3 A load equivalent to the safe working load shall be raised from the lowest operating position 
to the highest position as defined in 7.2.1. The maximum force that the operator needs to exert shall 
be measured and shall not exceed 120 N. 

7.2.4 When the safe working load suspended at the highest position, the release device shall be 
operated and the load allowed to fall to the lowest position. Where the descent rate is not controlled 
by the direct physical effort of the operator, the rate of fall shall not be more than 108 mm/s. 

If a staged or stepped release control is provided, this test^hall be carried out with the release 
device moved to the initial position intended to allow the lowering of a patient. 

7.3 Stability Test 

7.3.1 Stability tests shall be carried out by placing the lifting device carrying the safe working load 
on an inclinable surface and measuring the angle to which the surface has to be inclined to cause the 
lifting device to±)ecome unstable. 

7.3.2 The load shall be so suspended on the lifting device that the distance between the centre of 
gravity of the load and the highest point on the lifting device at which the system of suspension allows 
rotation about the vertical axis is 650 mm. 

7.3.3 The position of the spreader bar/jib and attachments and the setting of the base width, where 
this is adjustable, shall be such as to cause maximum tendency for the lifting device to overturn when 
the surface is tilted. Where the jib is set at maximum height to achieve minimum stability, the height 
shall be as defined in 7.2.1. 

7.3.4 The test shall be carried out with the Hfting device in each of the four positions indicated in 
Fig. 1 (a), (b), (c) and (d) and with the respective pair of castors prevented from movement by a 
suitable locking device. 

7.3.5 The angle of inclination of the surface at which instability occurs shall be measured and it 
shall not be less than the following values: 

a) With the plane of the longitudinal axis of the jib approximately parallel to the axis about 
which the supporting surface is to be inclined the angle shall be 5"" [ see Fig. 1(a) and ( b ) ], 

b) With the plane of the longitudinal axis of the jib approximately normal to the axis about 
which the supporting surface is to be inclined and with the mast at the lower end of the 
surface, the angle shati be 1 0"" [ see Fig. 1 ( c ) ] . 

c) With the plane of the longitudinal axis of the jib approximately normal to the axis about 
which the supporting surface is to be inclined and with the mast at the higher and of the 
surface the angle shall be 5"" [ see Fig. 1 ( d ) ]. 



IS -.10783-1983 








JIB-' *-BASE 



-MAST 





(a) 



{ b) Cc ) 

FIG. 1 POSITIONS FOR STABILITY TESTS 



ANGLE OF INCLINATION-' 
(d ) 



7.4 Tests for Structural Strength 

7.4.1 Preliminary static loading — In preparation by static load testing, a load equivalent to the safe 
working load shall be applied to the lifting device 100 000 times. Where the raising of the load in 
normal operation is effected by changing the angle between the jib and the mast, the cyclic loading 
shall be carried out with the major axis of the jib horizontal. Where the angle between the jib and the 
mast is not changed when raising the load in normal operation, the cyclic loading shall bB carried out 
with the jib at maximum height. 

1 A.2 Static Load Test — A static load shall be applied incrementally to the device with the jib in 
the same position as in 7.4.1 until collapse occurs. The load at this point shall be not less than 2'5 
times the declared safe working load. 

7.5 Static Load Tests for Load-Bearing Accessories — The tests detailed in 7.4 shall be applied 
to all load-bearing accessories provided for use with the lifting device. 

8. Production Tests and Requirennents 

8.1 After manufacture each lifting device and its accessories shall be subjected to the tests specified 
in 7.2. 

8.2 The manufacturer shall provide with each lifting device a certificate confiming that the tests have 
been carried out. The certificate shall carry the serial number of the lifting device and the date of 
testing. 

9. Servicing Facilities and Maintenance Testing 

9.1 Preliminary — This clause specifies requirements regarding information on the servicing and spares 
to be provided by the manufacturer. It also includes recommendations on the tests to be carried out 
in connection with routine maintenance and repair procedures. 



18:10783-1983 



9.2 Documentation 



9.2.1 In addition to the certificate called for in 8.2 tlie manufacturer shall supply with each lifting 
device one copy of the operating and maintenance instructions, including details of the routine inspec- 
tion tests that are required at regular intervals to ensure a satisfactory standards of safety and efficient 
operation. 

9.2.2 The following information shall be available from the manufacturer on request : 

a) Parts lists covering all items, and 

b) Details of any inspection and servicing arrangements that the manufacturer is prepared to 
offer. 

9.3 Routine Testing — It is recommended that tests, as defined in 7.2 of this specification, should be 
carried out at regular intervals of not more than 12 months and, additionally, whenever major overhaul, 
repair or modification of the lifting device has taken place. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from BS 5827-1979 
' Specification for patient'^lifting device, manually operated'; issued by the British Standards institution, 
U,K. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



