**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10044 (1981) : Guide for Treatment and Disposal of 
Effluents of Petroleum Refining Industry [CHD 32: 
Environmental Protection and Waste Management] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



iS : 10044-1981 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF 

EFFLUENTS OF PETROLEUM 

REFINING INDUSTRY 

(First Reprint JUNE 1992) 



UDC 628-543 ( 026 ) : 665-66 



® Copyright 1982 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 December 1982 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF 

EFFLUENTS OF PETROLEUM 

REFINING INDUSTRY 

Water Sectional Committee, CDC 26 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Nilay Chaudhuri Central Board for the Prevention & Control of 

Water Pollution, New Delhi 

Members 

Member-Secretary ( Alternate to 
Dr Nilay Chaudhuri ) 
Shri J, S. Chaudhri Haryana State Board for the Prevention & Control 

of Water Pollution, Chandigarh 
Shri H. G. Garo ( Alternate ) 
Chief Water Analyst, King Insti- Director of Public Health, Govt of Tamil Nadu, 

tute, Madras Madras 

ShriJ. D'Cruz Delhi Water Supply & Sewage Disposal Under- 

taking, New Delhi 
Shri K. R. Sahu ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), RDSO, Railway Board, Ministry of Railways 
Lucknow 

Chemist & Metallurgist, W. Rly, 
Bombay ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Desai Indian Chemical Manufacturer's Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri Mangal Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. L. Duggal Ballarpur Industries Ltd, Ballarpur 

Shri R. Varadhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Dutta Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. Ramachandran ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Dwivedi U. P. Water Pollution Prevention & Control 

Board, Lucknow 
Shri S. P. Saxena ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1982 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of .copyright under the said act. 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri R. S. Ekbote Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 

Dr M. I. Gurbaxani The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri S. Hanmanth Rao Karnataka State Board for Prevention & Control 

of Water Pollution, Bangalore 
Shri C. H. Govinda Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. P. Jain Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Shri J. Jha ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Kamath Kerala State Board for Prevention & Control of 

Water Pollution, Trivandrum 
Shri J. D. Joysingh ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. K. Mathur Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Prof R. S. Mehta Gujarat Water Pollution Control Board, 

Gandhinagar 
Shri M. D. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Member-Secretary Maharastra Prevention of Water Pollution Board, 

Bombay 
Shri S. K. Mitra West Bengal Prevention & Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Calcutta 
Shri S. D. Mundhra Geo-Miller & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri U. C. Mankad ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. V. S. Murthy M. P. State Prevention & Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Bhopal 
Shri P. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Natarajan Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri G. Krishna yya ( Alternate I ) 
Dr A. Prabhakar Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Shri S. K. Neooi Institution of Public Health Engineers, India, 

Calcutta 
Dr M. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr V, Pachaiyappan The Fertiliser Association of India, New Delhi 

Shri R. Paramasivam National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Shri M. V. Nanoti ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Poddar Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. Puri Punjab State Board for the Prevention & Control 

of Water Pollution, Patiala 
Shri Qimat Rai ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. B. Rao Ministry of Work & Housing 

Dr I. Radhakrishnan {Alternate) 
Shri G. S. Ray The Fertilizer ( Planning & Development ) India 

Ltd, Sindri 
Dr S. K. Roy The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri P. K. Chakravarty ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Rudrappa Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri S. N. Chakrabarti ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Saha National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. Bhattacharyya ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. M. Shah Tata Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Gandhi ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 19 ) 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF 

EFFLUENTS OF PETROLEUM 

REFINING INDUSTRY 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 19 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Water Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

0.2 There are a number of oil refineries in India engaged in crude refining, 
both imported and indigenous. Large quantities of water are used in 
refining processes in this industry; these may be for cooling purpose, power 
plant or refining processes. The eifluents from the refineries pose pollution 
problems if discharged untreated. 

0.3 A waste treatment system is an essential part of every petroleum 
refinery installation. This should be considered during the development, 
selection and design stages of new refineries or of any major modifications 
of existing facilities in refineries. Further, importance should be given for 
recycling wastes after treatment within the refinery itself. Its waste control 
facilities should also be reshaped to meet the needs of process modernization 
and changing demands on water resources. Consequently, a waste control 
system is not a static thing and its day-to-day operation should not be 
expected to remain constant. The design of a waste treatment system should 
be one which is adaptable to needs that vary with production rates and to 
overloads that result from emergency conditions. 

0.4 The object of this guide is to provide basic information on methods of 
treatment of effluents of oil refineries and to make definite recommendations 
for treatment of these effluents in India. This guide does not seek to 
provide detailed information on the designing or operation of an effluent 
treatment plant. Further, the methods recommended have been selected 
taking into consideration the practicability of their adoption by the industry. 
As and when more information and data are available, this guide will be 
revised. 

0.5 Since the water consumption and effluent volume per unit of oil refined 
vary from one refinery to another, no cost figure of a treatment unit has 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

been included in this guide. Refineries in India with once-through cooling 
system use water between 18 000 and 27 500 m 8 per 1 000 tonnes of crude 
processed resulting in waste water generation of almost the same range in 
contrast to those having cooling water recirculation system utilizing water 
between 1 350 and 5 650 m 8 per 1 000 tonnes of crude processed and gene- 
rating waste water between 320 and 1 800 m* per 1 000 tonnes of crude 
processed. 

0.6 The extent of pollution of inland surface waters and marine coastal 
areas permitted by discharge of effluents is laid down in IS : 2296-1982* 
and IS : 7967-1976t respectively. IS : 2490 ( Part I )-1981J laysdown the 
tolerance limits for industrial effluents. 

0.7 Methods of sampling and test for industrial effluents are covered in 
IS : 2488 ( Part I )-1966§, IS : 2488 ( Part II )-l968§, IS : 2488 ( Part III )- 
1968§, IS : 2488 ( Part IV )-1974§ and IS : 2488 ( Part V)-1976§. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the methods of treatment and disposal of effluents 
of petroleum refineries. 

2. SOURCES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFLUENTS 

2.1 Sources 

2.1.0 The major water pollutant in refinery operations is oil, besides 
chemicals that may be formed during treatment of petroleum products by 
chemical processes for removal of undesirable constituents. 

2.1.1 The effluents may be classified under the following five categories: 

a) Effluent free from oil and dissolved organic material; 

b) Effluent accidentally contaminated with oil; 

! 

c) Effluent continuously contaminated with oil but not contaminated 
with other soluble organic material; 



♦Tolerance limits for inland surface waters subject to pollution ( second revision ). 
tCritcria for controlling pollution of marine coastal areas. 
{Tolerance limits for industrial effluents: Part I General limits ( second revision ). 
§Methods of sampling and test for industrial effluents ( Parts I to V ). 



IS: 10044-1*81 

d) Process effluent; and 

e) Sanitary and domestic effluent. 

2.1*1.1 Effluents free from oil and dissolved organic material — These 
originate from: 

a) Boiler blow-down, 

b) Water treatment plant effluent, and 

c) Storm water from oil-free areas. 

2.1.1.2 Effluents accidentally contaminated with oil — These originate 
from: 

a) Storm water from tank farms; and 

b) Blow-down from circulating cooling water system. 

2.1.1.3 Effluents continuously contaminated mth oil hut free from soluble 
organic material — These originate from: 

a) Storm water from oil processing areas, and 

b) Ballast water. 

2.1.1.4 Process effluents — These originate from: 

a) Desalter, 

b) Condensate from steam stripping operations, 

c) Pump gland cooling water, 

d) Barometric condenser water containing emulsions, and 

e) Wash water from treating plants. 

2.1.1.5 Sanitary and domestic effluents — These originate from: 

a) Toilets, and 

b) Canteen. 

2.2 Characteristics — General characteristics of the composite oil refinery 
waste water ( before treatment ) are likely to be as given in Table 1 
( see also 3.1 ). 

3. EFFECTS OF POLLUTION 

3.1 The principal public health hazard caused by untreated refinery effluents 
is pollution of water courses and land with toxic chemical compounds such 
as oil, hydrogen sulphide, ammonia, mercaptans, phenol, cyanides, fluorides, 
acids, alkalis, chromates, and traces of heavy metals. 



IS : 10044 - 1981 



TABLE 1 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF COMPOSITE OIL REFINERY 

WASTE WATER 


(Clause 2*2 ) 




Sl Characteristic 
No. 


Range of Value 


(1) (2) 


(3) 


i) Free oil, mg/1 


2 000 to 3 000 


if* Fmulsified oil, mg/1 


80 to 120 


iii) Sulphides ( as H 2 S ) and mercaptans, mg/1 


10 to 220 


iv) Phenolic compounds ( as C 6 H 5 OH ), mg/1 


12 to 30 


v) Biochemical oxygen demand ( 5 days at 20°C ), mg/1 


100 to 300 


vi) Suspended solids, mg/1 


200 to 400 


vii) Chromate ( as Cr0 4 ) and zinc ( as Zn ) or phosphate 


5 to 20 



( as P0 4 ) from cooling water, mg/1 

viii) pH value 6*5 to 9*0 

Note — Cyanides and ammonia may be present in the waste water from refineries 
where cracking process is practised. 

3.1.1 Acids and alkalis are toxic to aquatic life and inhibit self-purification 
of water courses. Fluorides cause dental fluorisis and dental caries which 
affect teeth, joints and bones. Presence of hydrogen sulphide, mercaptans 
and phenol produce disagreeable odour in water and, at the same time, 
increases biochemical oxygen demand of water. Oils, which are difficult to 
biodegrade, form a thin film over water surface, causing unsightly appear- 
ance and interfere with the natural process of aeration and photosynthesis, 
and also cause fire hazards. 

4. TREATMENT 

4.1|Oil-free waste waters should never contain oil and, hence, they may 
bypass waste treatment facilities and discharge directly into the refinery 
outfall line after decontamination through gravity separators or surge 
ponds to take care of for accidental contamination ( see 2.1.1.2 ), ( facilities 
should be provided for oil removal ). 

4.2 The general treatment methods to handle waste waters from refinery 
operations are as follows. 

4.2.1 Primary Treatment — It consists of free oil removal. Oil removal is 
also affected by in-plant processes like stripping and extraction. Further, 
removal of oil from the waste water is carried out principally in two 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

stages — the first stage featuring gravity separation and tlie second stage 
floatation with or without addition of chemicals/coagulants ( see 4.2.2 ). 
Gravity separation is meant for removal of separable free oil. 

4.2.1.1 Oily effluents originating from various sources in the refinery 
are collected in a sump and routed to an oil separator for removal of free 
oil. Oil separators are designed considering hydraulic load, density and 
viscosity of the oil and diameter of oil globules. A brief description of a 
typical API oil separator ( see Fig- 1 ) is given below. 

The API separator mainly consists of an inlet bay, a middle or a 
separator bay and an outlet bay. The inlet bay contains sluice gates for 
commissioning or decommissioning the individual bays of the separator. It 
contains a vertical hanging baffle to retain the oil and also arrangement to 
collect the separated oil. 

The middle or separator bay is the place where remaining portion of 
the oil is separated by reducing the velocity, so that the water becomes 
almost quiescent. The separated oil is retained in the middle bay by another 
vertical hanging baffle situated at the end of this bay and the collected oil is 
skimmed by a skimmer provided near this baffle. A flight scraper provided 
in the middle bay brings oil to the skimmer for its removal and also at the 
same time pushes the sludge collected at the bottom to the sludge pit or 
hopper for periodic removal. 

The outlet bay contains a weir over which the oil-free water flows out 
for further treatment. Oil content in the effluent after the API separator is 
normally less than 100 mg/1 in water. 

4.2.1.2 It is very important that the oily effluent be sent to a primary 
oil removal basin and to the API or gravity separators by means of gravity 

I flow. Pumps, especially centrifugal type, should be avoided to minimize 
formation of oil emulsion with water which would call for additional 
chemical method for its removal. Where pumping of oily effluent is essen- 
tial after the primary oil removal basin, screw type or diaphragm type pumps 
should be used. 

4.2.1.3 Stripping — Stripping is another physical method. It is done 
with the aid of steam to remove gases like hydrogen sulphide, mercaptans 
and ammonia and to some extent phenol and free cyanides. 

4.2.1.4 Extraction — Extraction is yet another physical method which is 
used to remove phenolic compounds in refinery operations. In this process, 
solvents like tricresyl phosphates and mixed organic esters are used for 
extraction of phenol from wastes. Use of petroleum fractions or crude oil 
is also made for extraction in some of the refineries. 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

4.2.2 Secondary Treatment Methods — The secondary treatment methods 
may be classified as follows: 

a) Chemical method, and 

b) Biological method, 

4.2.2.1 Chemical method — The main purpose of a chemical method is 
to remove emulsified oil with addition of flocculating agents and also to 
remove suspended solids and toxic substances, thereby conditioning the 
effluents for further treatment by biological method- Sedimentation is 
normally employed to remove suspended solids after chemical treatment. 
Various chemical methods available may be further classified under the 
following four categories: 

a) Neutralization method, 

b) Precipitation and clarification method, 

c) Chemical oxidation method, and 

d) Regeneration method. 

a) Neutralization — Neutralization methods are applied to many types 
of refinery wastes as primary treatment. The wastes considered here 
are: 

1) Dilute acid or alkaline wastes from various refining processes and 
from water treatment plant — Neutralized to produce a neutral 
effluent. 

2) Spent caustic solution — Neutralized with either spent acid or 
acidic stack gases. 

3) Sulphuric acid sludges — Neutralized with alkaline wastes. 

4) Spent catalyst — Neutralized with spent caustic wastes. 

5) Hydrofluoric acid wastes — Neutralized with caustic soda 
solution. 

b) Precipitation and clarification method — Precipitation method is used 
in the treatment of several types of refinery wastes such as: 

1) Spent caustic solutions — Acidic oils in caustic are precipitated 
by neutralization. 

2) Sulphide water — Precipitated with iron salts. 

3) Solutions of sulphonates — Precipitated by the addition of lime. 



TRASH 
RACK 



PLATFORM 

COVER 
FOREBAY ' 
IF 
DESIRE 




IS: 10044* 1981 



OIL SKIMMER- 



DESIGNED FOR INSERTING RUBBER BALLOON 
STOPPERS FOR DIVERTING FLOWS FOR 
CLEANING SEPARATOR SECTION 
SLUICE GATES OR GATE VALVES MAY BE 
INSTALLED IF DESIRED 



SLUDGE PUMP 



SKIMMED 
OIL PUMP- 




FLIGHT SCRAPER 
CHAIN SPROCKET 



OIL - RETENTION 
BAFFLE 



DIFFUSION DEVICE 
(VERTICAL BAFFLE) 



PLAN 



dh 




WOOD FLIGHT 
SCRAPER 



OIL-RETENTION 
BAFFLE 



OfL SKIMMER 




FLOW 



^Us 



SLUDGE HOPPERS^ 



SECTION AA 
Fig. 1 API Oil- Water Separator 
9 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

4) Chromates from cooling water — Reduced to trivalent with 
ferrous sulphate, sulphur dioxide or hydrogen sulphide and 
precipitated with lime as chromium hydroxide. 

c) Chemical oxidation method — This method may be used for: 

1) Treatment of phenols and cyanides in wastes; and 

2) Combustion of certain wastes* 

d) Regeneration method — Production of spent caustic solutions is 
reduced by the regeneration of a chemical like monoethanolamine 
which is used to absorb hydrogen sulphide and mercaptans. It is 
regenerated by steam stripping for further use. 

4.2.2.2 Biological method — This is intended to remove the bio- 
degradable organic substances and toxic substances like phenol. Biological 
treatment also reduces the residual oil after primary treatment ( but the oil 
is not recoverable ). The biological method of treating the waste water is 
done by application of conventional methods like trickling filter, activated 
sludge process and low cost waste treatment methods like aerated lagoon 
and oxidation pond. Trickling filters can tolerate oil up to 100 ppm, whereas 
activated sludge process can tolerate oil up to 25 ppm. Presence of oil in 
oxidation ponds retards reaeration. Besides oil, biological treatment 
methods are influenced by BOD, toxic substance like chromium, lead, 
nickel, hydrogen sulphide, etc, temperature, pH and nutrients. 

a) Activated sludge process — The activated sludge process is an 
aerobic biological treatment process in which waste waters are 
treated with microorganisms that are suspended uniformly within a 
reaction tank into which oxygen is introduced by mechanical means. 
The microorganisms are maintained in the reaction tank by 
recycling activated sludge which is formed by the microorganisms in 
the process. Essentially, the organic matter is removed from the 
waste waters by synthesis and oxidation. An aerobic environment 
is necessary to maintain the proper microbial balance in the system. 
The basic process consists of a aeration tank followed by a sedi- 
mentation tank. The activated sludge removed from the sedimenta- 
tion tank is recycled to the aeration tank to maintain a high concen- 
tration of activated sludge. The activated sludge will continue to 
build up until it is necessary to * waste ', or discard, some of the 
excess. In most activated' sludge systems, sludge wasting is carried 
out on a continuous basis at a relatively low rate. Activated sludge 
forms naturally and does not need any special seeding for proper 
development. 

b) Trickling filters — The trickling filter is a bed of broken stone or 
coarse aggregate. A bed is from 1 m to 3 m deep and may be either 

11 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

rectangular or circular. It may be deeper when plastic packing is 
used. Fixed or moving sprinklers distribute the waste water over the 
surface of the bed. A gelatinous film of slime composed of aerobic 
organisms develops on the surface of the aggregate. As the waste 
water trickles over the film, both dissolved and suspended organic 
matter are removed by adsorption. The adsorbed matter is 
oxidized by the organisms in the slime during their metabolic 
processes. Air flows through the filter by convection, thereby provid- 
ing the oxygen needed to maintain aerobic conditions. The oxidized 
waste water from the filter is clarified in a sedimentation tank before 
discharge into a watercourse. The microbial film that develops on 
the surface of the rocks is responsible for removing the organic 
materials from solution. 

c) Oxidation and stabilization ponds and aerated lagoons — The oxida- 
tion pond is a popular type of biological waste treatment system 
where land is plentiful. Fundamentally, the oxidation pond 
depends on the bacteria to aerobically stabilize the organic wastes 
added to the pond. In heavily loaded ponds, a certain amount of 
the stabilization occurs anaerobically rather than aerobically. 

The oxygen for the bacteria is supplied by surface transfer from the air 
and from the metabolism of algae that grow in the pond. The production 
of oxygen by algae occurs only as a result of synthesis of cellular proto- 
plasm. Thus, as the algae produce oxygen in synthesizing algae protoplasm, 
the bacteria utilize the oxygen in synthesizing bacterial protoplasm. The 
net effect of this process is the production of organic matter in the oxidation 
pond. In hard-water areas, more organic matter is produced than stabilized. 
The important relationship, which permits the oxidation pond to produce a 
more stable effluent than influent, is that the rate of degradation of cellular 
protoplasm is very slow compared to the rate of degradation of organic 
matter for synthesis of cellular protoplasm. Also, many of the microorgan- 
isms settle out in the pond and are not removed in the effluent. The organic 
loading on the oxidation pond is limited by the oxygen transfer capacity. A 
broad, shallow pond with considerable surface agitation, caused by wind 
action, will have a high rate of oxygen transfer. A small pond with little 
exposed surface area will be able to handle a relatively low organic load per 
unit of surface area. Although the tendency is to construct a single pond, 
there are some areas that require at least two ponds. The dual ponds tend 
to reduce short-circuiting and permit retention of floating organics in the 
first pond. The second pond is usually very lightly loaded in comparison to 
the first pond and may build up a sufficiently large animal population 
during the warmer months to remove most of the algae and produced 
clearer effluent. 

Oxidation ponds have been used to treat the entire plant wastes as well 
as to polish the effluent from other biological waste treatment processes. 

12 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

/Although oxidation ponds have been constructed for refinery wastes, very 
few data are available on their operation. Retention periods in oxidation 
ponds range from a little more than 1 day up to 90 days. For the most part, 
the reduction in organic matter is a function of the retention period and 
effluent concentration. Generally, the entire plant wastes are treated in the 
oxidation ponds, so that the organic concentration applied is quite low. 
The net result is a low rate of microbial metabolism, and a long period of 
retention is required for organic reduction. As a rule, simple oxidation 
ponds are ineffective if the holding time is less than 7 days. 

Oxidation ponds for refinery may employ surface aeration units in the 
first stage to permit loadings at 10 times the conventional oxidation pond 
loadings. Conventional lagoons may be used as a second-stage treatment 
for producing a high quality effluent. This system has been termed the 
* aerated lagoon ' system. One of the major problems with oxidation ponds 
is emulsions which block sunlight penetration and prevent algae growth. 
Normal oxidation pond operation is retarded until the emulsion is broken 
by bacterial metabolism. The low rate of bacterial metabolism in the 
absence of oxygen requires a large pond volume to break the emulsion. 

4.2.3 Tertiary Treatment Method — Tertiary treatment has been limited to 
activated carbon filtration process and ozonation which are effective in 
removal of the taste and odour and organics from biologically treated waste 
waters. However, these methods are extremely costly. Many of the 
refineries prefer to use oxidation ponds after biological treatment to serve as 
tertiary treatment. This is one of the cheapest methods of treatment where 
enough land is available. A general plan for the sources, the collection, the 
treatment and the disposal of refinery liquid wastes is shown in Fig. 2. 

4.2.4 The treated liquid wastes which satisfy the relevant tolerance limits 
are finally disposed by controlled dilution into the neighbouring stream, 
river or sea. 

5. POLLUTION CONTROL PRACTICES 

5.1 In waste control, preventive methods other than treatment should be 
used for reducing the amount of polluting wastes. New techniques should 
be tried with the aim of lowering treatment costs. The preventive measures 
can be studied under the following headings: 

5.1.1 Pollution Control Measures — These may include: 

a) Provision of separate drainage and sewer systems to prevent pollu- 
tion of large volumes of clean water by small volumes of dirty 
water; 

13 



IS; 10044- 1981 

b) Segregation of waste water streams may be done, so that non-oily 
chemical wastes and oily process wastes are collected and treated 
separately; 

c) Following water conservation measures at refinery will reduce both 
water supply and cost of waste treatment: 

Installation of air cooled exchangers and cooling towers; pump 
gland cooling water to serve as cooling tower blow-down and use 
of oily water emulsion from barometric condenser; and stripped 
sour water and phenolic waste water as make-up water for desalter. 

5.1.2 Process Design Modifications — These may include: 

a) Acid sludge or spent clay disposal problems may be eliminated by 
replacing acid treatment or clay treatment of lubricating oil with 
propane deasphalting or with hydrofinishing process. 

b) Substitution of continuous process for batch processes. 

c) Use of processes which include regeneration of chemicals used for 
hydrogen sulphide and mercaptan removal may avoid problems 
associated with disposal of caustic wastes. 

d) Use of downgraded chemicals is economical for both process and 
waste control. Fresh caustic used for washing light hydrocarbon 
streams is used for gasoline treating. 

e) Use of methods for conversion of hydrogen sulphide to elemental 
sulphur. 

5.13 Local Pretreatment or Disposal 

5.1.3.1 In general, it is advantageous to treat or dispose of concentrated 
and unusual wastes locally. Treatment of highly polluted waste streams at 
the sources can prevent gross pollution of large volumes of relatively clean 
waste water. Such treatment is a more economical solution to the problem 
than discharging directly into the refinery sewers. For example: 

a) Stripping ammonia and hydrogen sulphide condensate before 
discharging into sewer. 

b) Neutralizing the spent caustic waste before discharging into sewer. 

5.1.4 Operation Control Measures 

5.1.4.1 Operating procedure has a significant effect on waste control. 
However, control practices should have the interest and support of manage- 
ment, process supervisors and operators. A waste control group or a 
qualified supervisor may be appointed who should be responsible for the 

14 



IS : 10044 - 1981 



TYPES OF 

Waste 

WATER 



OIL FREE 



OILY 



PROCESS 



SANITARY 



SOURCES OF WATER 



1 OIL-FREE STORM WATER 

2 ONCE THROUGH COOLING WATER 

3 COOLING TOWER BLOWOOWN 

U STEAM TURBINE CONOENSER WATER 

5 AIR-CONOITIONING COOLING WATER 

6 ROOF DRAINAGE 

7 BOILER BIOWDOWN 



8 WATER TREATMENT PLANT WASTES 



1 OILY STORM WATER FROM 
PROCESS AND TANK FARMS 

2 BALLAST WATER 

3 DIKED TANKS WATER 

k EFFLUENT FROW LOAOlNG PARTS 



\ CONDENSATE FROM STRIPPING 



2 OESALTER WATER 

3 TANK DRAW OFFS 

A PUMP GLAND COOLING WATER 

5 BAROMETRIC CONOENSER WATER 

6 TREATING PLANT WASH WATER 



LAVATORIES THROUGHOUT THE PLANT 



COLLECTION SYSTEM 



OIL- FREE SEWERS 



TREATMENT 



GRAVITY SEPARATORS 

OR 

SURGE POND 



N £ U T RALISATIQN BASIN 



NEUTRALISATION 



OILY WATER SEWERS 



GRAVITY SEPARATORS 



PRIMARY TREATMENT 
PHYSICAL METHOO 
STEAM STRIPPING 



PROCESS WATER SEWERS 



PRIMARY TREATMENT 



PHYSICAL METHODS 

BAFFLING, FLOATA- 
TION AND 
SKIMMING AT 
o| SEWER 8AS1N 
bi API SEPARATOR 
FOR OIL REMOVAL 

EXTRACTION 



SECONDARY TREATMENT 



CHEMICAL METHODS 

I PRECIPITATION AND 
CLARIFICATION 

2 CHEMICAL 
OXIDATION 

3 REGENERATION 



DISPOSAL 



TO RECEIVING 
WATERS 



BIOLOGICAL 
METHODS 

1 ACTIVATED SLUDGE 
PROCESS 

I TRICKLING FILTER 

3 OXIDATION POND 

U AERATEO LAGOONS 



SANITARY SEWERS 



REFINERY SEWAGE PLANT 



TERTIARY 
TREATMENT 



ACTIVATEO 
CARBON 

OZONATION 



OR 



OR 



MUNICIPAL SEWAGE SYSTEM 



Fig. 2 General Plan for the Treatment and Disposal of Effluents of Petroleum Refining Industry 



15 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

quality of waste water that leaves the refinery. In addition, the following 
should be practised: 

a) The group or supervisor, with the aid of the refinery laboratory 
should maintain a complete record of data concerning sources, 
characteristics and quantities of all wastes and waste water streams. 
These data should be reported periodically. 

b) Operating departments should be held responsible for their own 
discharges of waste water. They should advise the control group or 
supervisor of each special discharge they intend to make, so that 
precautions can be taken to prevent adverse effects. 

c) Both management and control group should be informed of any 
process changes or new sewer connections. Current accurate maps 
and plans of all waste disposal facilities should be maintained. 

d) Close, and cooperative relations between the operating and waste 
control group personnel are essential for successful waste control. 

e) Waste control group should make all the employees conscious of 
waste problems by continually reminding them of the problems 
through booklets or leaflets. 

5X5 Periodic Inspections — Periodic inspection of the waste system is 
essential as preventing oil and other polluting wastes from getting into plant 
sewers is preferable to the heavy expenditure of both money and efforts 
necessary to remove them, 

5.1.6 Good House-keeping — Good house-keeping should be emphasized. 
Apparently, it can be attained by instilling the proper attitude in operating 
personnel and then it can be maintained by periodic inspection. 

6. DESIGN OF COLLECTING SYSTEMS 

6.1 Refinery collection or drainage systems should be constructed, so that 
waters subject to contamination by oil do not drain directly into adjoining 
properties or into adjacent surface waters. Drainage lines should be laid 
out so that the oil-contaminated wastes flow by gravity to the oil- water 
separators. Pumping of oil-water mixtures tends to form emulsions and 
should be avoided. If pumping cannot be avoided before separation of at 
least the bulk of the oil, pumps specially designed to minimize emulsification 
should be used. 

6.2 Accurate maps and plans of the drainage systems, separators, catch 
basins, and other facilities should be maintained to show all details of the 
original installation, as well as any changes or additions. 

17 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

6.3 Intakes to storm water sewers should be provided with adequate 
sediment chambers. As a precautionary measure, separate storm sewers 
should be provided with water-sealed connections. 

6.4 Drainage systems for cooling and process waste waters should be 
provided with water-sealed intakes at every point where waste waters enter 
in order to prevent hydrocarbon vapours, present in the sewer system, from 
escaping into process areas. When process waste water contains quantities 
of sediment, suitable inlet catch basins should be provided. 

6.5 Sewer systems should be provided with manholes and junction boxes to 
permit ready access. These openings are necessary to permit gaging and 
cleaning of sludge accumulations to maintain the full capacity of the sewer 
system. Access points are also needed for sampling and visual observation 
when the sources of oil or other waste material are to be determined. 

6.6 In general, all branch or lateral sewers should be isolated from main 
sewers by the use of suitable water seals and manholes. This prevents the 
travel of hydrocarbon vapours from one section of the system to another and 
confines to a limited area any fire or explosion that might occur. To 
prevent trapping oil layers, manholes in refinery areas should usually be 
provided with water-sealed inlets and open outlets. In specific locations 
where trapped outlets are to be installed, the outlets should be provided with 
vents to prevent syphoning and vapour locks. Properly designed vents 
should be provided to vent hydrocarbons safely from manholes of sewer 
systems handling light hydrocarbons. Failure to do so may create a fire 
hazard at ground elevation. Vents should be installed at manholes where a 
pressurized sewer is converted to gravity sewer. Vents should be discharged 
in areas that are remote from furnaces or other permanent sources of 
ignition; they should not be located near operating platforms or air intakes, 
and they should be high enough to disperse vapours safely. Furthermore, 
vents should be distinctly marked. Indiscriminate venting may create 
hazards if the design permits air to be sucked into the system, thereby 
diluting a safety-rich atmosphere to one that is potentially explosive. 

6.7 It is clear that the design considerations for venting and sealing or 
trapping refinery waste drainage systems differ from engineering practice for 
sanitary sewage systems. Safety precautions to prevent an explosive 
condition and/or the spread of fire are paramount design requirements in a 
refinery drainage system. 



18 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri P. R. Seth Excel Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. P. Iyer ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Suriyanarayanan Ail India Distillers' Association, New Delhi 

Shri G. C. Gautam ( Alternate ) 
Dr Hari Bhagwan, Director General* ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Shri A. K. Bahl 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 

Waste Treatment Methods Subcommittee, CDC 26 : 1 

Convener 
Shri A. Raman National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 

Members 
Shri S, K. Bhattacharjya Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. Ramachandran ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. K Chakrabarty Universal Envirosciecce Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Chaudhrt Haryana State Board for the Prevention & Control 

of Water Pollution, Chandigarh 

Shri H. G. Garg (Alternate ) 
Chief Water Analyst, Kino Insti- Director of Public Health, Govt of Tamil Nadu, 

tute, Madras Madras ... 

Dr D. Choudhury Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Asssociation, 

Calcutta 

Shri V. K. Dikshit ( Alternate ) 
Director ( CSMRS ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Shri N. C. Rawal ( Alternate ) t . • ^ * t 

Shri R. C. Dwivedi U. P. Water Pollution, Prevention & Control 

Board, Lucknow 

Shri S. P. Saxena ( Alternate ) t v 

Dr A. K. Gupta Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd, Durgapur 

Shri T. P. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Gupta Central Board for the Prevention & Control of 

Water Pollution, New Delhi 

Shri H. S. Matharu ( Alternate ) . 

Shri John Raiu Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. P. Sinha ( Alternate ) , _ T J ,, _ , 

Shri R. V. Kadam Paramount Pollution Control Pvt Ltd ,Vadodara 

Shri N. V. Vashi (Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Krishnaswami Madras Fertilizers Ltd, Madras 

Shri A. K. Majumdar Geo-Miller & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri U. C. Mankad ( Alternate ) 
Shri S* V. Mani Greaves Cotton & Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Luthra ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page ?0 ) 
19 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

( Continued from page 19 ) 

Members Representing 

Member-Secretary Maharashtra Prevention of Water Pollution Board, 

Bombay > 

Shri V. S. More Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineries & Pipe- 

lines Division ), New Delhi 
Shri Paramjit Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. V. S. Murthy M. P. State Prevention & Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Bhopal 
Dr G. K. Khare ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. M. Rahul ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Pachaiyappan The Fertiliser Association of India, New Delhi 

Dr R. Pitchai College of Engineering, Madras 

Shri H. S. Puri Punjab State Board for the Prevention & Control 

of Water Pollution, Patiala 
Shri Qimat Rai ( Alternate ) 
ShriG. S.Ray The Fertilizer (Planning & Development) India 

Ltd, Sindri 
Shri M. K. Roy Chief Inspectorate of Factories, Ranchi 

Shri J. M. Tuli Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri K* Rudrappa ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. K. Vedaraman Ministry of Works & Housing 

Dr S. R. Shukla ( Alternate ) 

Panel for Oil Refineries Wastes, CDC 26:1:14 

Convener 
Shri P. C. D. G. Samuel Madras Refineries Ltd, Madras 

Members 

Dr S. N. Bhattacharya Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 

Shri S. K. Chakrabarti ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. N. Chakrabarty Universal Enviroscience Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. L. Tikhe ( Alternate) 
Shri R. R. Chowdhury Board for Prevention and Control of Water 

Pollution, Assam, Gauhati 
Shri A, Barthakur ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Das Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. K. Das National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Shri S. Rajagopalan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. D. Dikshit Oil India Ltd, Dulauan 

Shri A. Chandwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. B. Gulati Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun 

Shri C S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Gupta Central Board for the Prevention & Control of 

Water Pollution, New Delh* 
, Dr H. S. Matharu ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. S. Lakshminarayan Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. Hassan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 21 ) 
20 



IS : 10044 - 1981 

( Continued from page 20 ) 

i Members Representing 

shri Manuel Karna Cochin Refinery, Cochin 

hri V. S. More Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineries & Pipelines 

Division ), New Delhi 
Shri S. R. Lokeshwar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. Rudrappa Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri J. M. Tuu ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. P. Vora Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. Z. Jagani ( Alternate ) 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31 Telegrams : i 

331 13 75 (Common 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. 

NEW DELHI 110002 
* Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, 

V.I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 
t Western : Manakalaya, E9 Ml DC, Marol, Andheri (East), 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices : 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 
t Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road. 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
Kalai Kathir Building, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 
Quality Marking Centre, N-H. IV, N-I-T-, FARIDABAD 121001 
Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 
53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, 

GUWAHATI 781003 
5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampally Station Road ) 

HYDERABAD 500001 
R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Plot No. A-9, House No. 561/63, Sindhu Nagar, Kanpur Roaa, 

LUCKNOW 226005 
Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

District Industries Centre Complex, Bagh-e-Ali Maidan. 
SRINAGAR 190011 

T. C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam. 

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 
Inspection Offices (With Sale Point) : 
Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 

PUNE 411005 



Manaksansthe 


to all Offices) 


Telephone 


J 331 01 31 

I 331 13 75 

37 86 62 


218 43 

41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 


I 2 63 48 
39 49 55 


55 40 21 


5 36 27 

2 67 05 


8-71 19 96 
3 31 77 


23 10 83 


6 34 71 


21 68 76 


5 55 07 



*Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, 
P. O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 

t Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY 

X Sales Office is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square. 
BANGALORE 



6 23 05 

6 21 04 

52 51 71 
5 24 35 

27 68 00 

89 65 28 
22 39 71 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



