**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12455 (1988) : Performance requirements of aircooled 
spark ignition automotive engines [TED 2: Automotive 
Primemovers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62r432-3/-4-018-7l2 IS . ^2455 - 1988 



£ 
o 
CJ 

"(0 

c 
o 

*^ 

o 

0} 

CO 



o 



Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 1999) 

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS OF 
AIRCOOLED SPARK IGNITION AUTOMOTIVE ENGINES 



1. Scope — Specifies performance requirements of spark ignition engines of two- and four-stroke 
cycles type, naturally aspirated, air cooled used for propelling two/three wheeled vehicles. 

2. Definitions — Shall be in accordance with IS : 10000 (Part 1)-1980 'Methods of tests for internal 
combustion engines: Part 1 Glossary of terms relating to test methods'. 

3. Types of Engines — The engines covered under this standard are of the following types; 

a) Automotive air cooled spark ignition engines which do not have built-in cooling air fans such 
as those used on motorcycles and mopeds. 

b) Automotive air cooled spark ignition engines of the type which have a built-in cooling fan, 
such as those used on scooters and their three wheeled derivatives ( autorickshaw ), etc. 

4. General Requirements 

4.1 Any engine taken from production and prepared for the type test shall have been well run-in 
according to manufacturer's recommendations. 

4-2 The auxiliaries, if any attached to the engine shall be specified by the manufacturer, 

4.3 The exhaust smoke emission levels shall comply with IS : 9057-1986 'Emission limits for carbon 
monoxide for vehicles powered by spark ignition engines ( first revision )\ 

5. Installation and Adjustments 

5,1 The air cooled automotive engines of the type described in 3 (a) (which do not have built-in 
cooling fan ) shall be provided with an external air cooling arrangement provided on the test bed 
installation. The external air cooling may be provided by a blower or fan or any other suitable air 
handling system. The cooling air from the external blower shall flow past the engine in approximately 
the same direction as it would, when the vehicle is in motion. The air velocity is to be so adjusted that 
the spark plug seat temperature does not at any time exceed the value specified by the manufacturer. 
However, the air velocity shall not exceed the maximum vehicle speed plus 5 km/h at level road at 
same engine/vehicle operating conditions. The minimum value of spark plug seat temperature shall 
not be lower than the value specified by the manufacturer. In the absence of such data by the 
manufacturers, the testing authority may arrive at or deduce suitable values in consultation with the 
manufacturers. 

5.1-1 The blower shall be capable of being moved into such positions with respect to the engine 
which will give the requisite direction and velocity to cooling air. Any other air handling system shall 
have suitable means to regulate air velocity. In case duct is used, the area of the duct shall be enough 
to cover at least the frontal area of the engine. 

5.1.2 The temperature of the cooling air shall be substantially close to the atmospheric temperature, 
say, within ±5 K, to ensure that the air flow past the engine will be simulating the vehicle operational 
conditions. The temperature shall be measured at the point of entry to the engine and beyond the 
radiation zone of the engine. 

5.1.3 The spark plug seat temperature shall be measured by placing a copper washer on the spark 
plug seat below the spark plug and connecting it to a suitable thermocouple or by any other suitable 
method keeping the spark plug tip position same. 



E 5.1.4 The engine shall be mounted on the dynamometer stand at the angle at which the engine is 
installed for the particular vehicle application. 

5.1.5 The exhaust shall be lead out into atmosphere by suitable ducting so that the change in back 
i pressure in the silencer is not appreciable. It is not permissible to interchange the systems of intake 
5 and exhaust. 



Adopted 12 July 1988 



January 1989, BIS 



Gr 4 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS 8 12455 -1988 

5.1-6 The engine shall be tested at the crank shaft end or at the gear box output shaft depending 
upon the manufacturer's declaration and provision on the engine. The point of testing shall be 
recorded in the test data. 

5.1.7 The manufacturer shall give complete instructions before the commencement of the tests, 
with regard to the spark plug cleaning period, exhaust port cleaning period and silencer decarbonization 
period, etc. The manufacturer shall also give details of overhaul and maintenance schedules for the 
engine. 

5.1.8 A complete record of all deviations and minor adjustments made on the engine during the test 
shall be maintained and given as appendix to the test report. Minor adjustments and maintenance 
include spark plug cleaning, exhaust port cleaning, any adjustments of magneto contact breaker points, 
replacement of ignition coil ( if running hot ), etc. 

6. Fuels and Lubricants 

6.1 Fuel — The fuel shall conform to IS : 2796-1971 'Specification for motor gasolines ( first revision )'. 

6.2 Lubricating Oil — The manufacturer shall provide the complete technical particulars of the 
lubricating oil that has to be used. A statement of a viscosity grade alone shall not be sufficient for 
undertaking the tests. 

6.2-1 For two-stroke engines that are lubricated by oil mixed in the fuel, the manufacturer shall state 
the grades of lubricating oils that have to be used alongwith the percentages to be mixed with the fuel. 
This shall be stated separately for: 

a) Running-in, and 

b) Performance and endurance tests. 

7. Declaration of Power Fuel Consumption 

7.1 The declarations of power are required for two main purposes as follows: 

a) Declaration by a manufacturer of value of the power which the engine will deliver under 
standard reference conditions. This declared value is known as the 'rated power'. The rated 
power shall correspond to IS rating as defined in 7.3. 

b) Verification by measurement that the engine delivers the power which has been declared in 
7,1 (a) under the same set of reference conditions or after proper allowance has been made 
for any difference in the ambient site conditions from the standard reference conditions. 

7.2 The declaration of the engine output shall be presented by the manufacturer in the form of 
performance curves at different operating speeds at full throttle obtained under the reference 
conditions. 

7.3 IS Rating — The power measured on a test bed at the crankshaft or its equivalent at the rated 
speed specified by the manufacturer and corrected to the standard reference conditions, the engine 
being equipped with auxiliaries, if any, for determination of net power. The power is also defined as 
rated net brake power. 

7.4 Power Adjustment Factor 

7.4.1 The power adjustment factor is determined by the following formula: 

( P \ ( 300 \0-5 

where 

P — pressure at site ambient conditions, kPa; and 
T = air intake temperature at site ambient, K. 

7.5 Declaration of Fuel Consumption 

7.5.1 The engine manufacturer shall state the specific fuel consumption ( SFC ) at rated output under 
the standard reference conditions and also at 75, 50 and 25 percent of rated load. 

7.5.2 A tolerance of +5 percent in fuel consumption at 100 percent of the rated load throughout 
the speed range shall be allowed, unless otherwise agreed to between the manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 



18:12455-1988 

7.5.3 Before the commencement of the tests, the specific gravity of the fuel shall be measured. In 
case of two-stroke spark ignition engines where pre-mixing of lubricating oil and fuel is done, the 
specific fuel consumption shall be calculated taking the specific gravity of the fuel alone into 
consideration (not the specific gravity of the fuel mixed with lubricating oil). However, while 
carrying out the arithmetical calculations for determining the gravimetric specific fuel consumption, a 
due allowance for the volume of lubricating oil shall be made. 

Example 

If / ml of fuel containing v percent of lubricating oil takes t seconds for being consumed, 
while the engine is developing P kW and the specific gravity of the fuel is S g/ml, then 
the specific fuel consumption is given by the following relationship: 



SFC ^x(-i|?^)gftWh 



Note — l^ percent of oil means v ml of oil in 100 ml of fuel, that is, in ( 100 + v ) ml of fuel and oil. 

13 A Specific Fuel Consumption Adjustment Factor 'P'~\t is the ratio of the specific fuel 
consumption under ambient site conditions to the specific fuel consumption under standard reference 
conditions, that is, 

o __ Specific fuel consumptio n under ambien t si te conditions 

^ ~ ^pecffic fuel consumption under standard reference conditions 

7.6 The lubricating oil consumption shall be declared by the manufacturer and shall be determined by 
any method agreed to between the manufacturer and the testing authority. 

8. Standard Reference Conditions 

8.1 The standard reference conditions, when different from the stated, shall be recorded. The reference 
conditions are: 



Total barometric pressure 


100 kPa 


Air temperature 


298 K 


Relative humidity 


30 percent. 


Note: 




Totai barometric pressure 


=: 100 kPa 


Air temperature 


= 300 K 


Relative humidity 


= 60 percent 



These conditions are also still permissible as reference conditions for a period of five years. 

8.2 Performance data shall be obtained under stabilized normal operating conditions, with an adequate 
fresh air supply to the engine. If the ambient test conditions are different from the standard reference 
conditions as given in 8.1 the performance data shall be adjusted to the standard reference conditions. 

8.3 No data shall be recorded until torque, speed and temperature have been maintained within one 
percent for at least 30 seconds. 

8.4 Observed brake load and fuel consumption data shall be taken simultaneously and shall be the 
average of two stabilized sustained values which do not vary by more than one percent. A time 
measurement of not less than 10 seconds shall be used when measuring speed and fuel consumption 
with an automatically synchronized counter-timer combination. For hand operation, the time of 
measurement shall be not less than 20 seconds. 

9. Tests 

9.1 Type Tests — Shall be carried out on engines when first offered and shall also be conducted when 
there is any significant change in design of the engine or change in any of the critical component or 
change in any declared parameter such as power and specific fuel consumption. Type tests shall 
include the tests in the following sequence: 

a) Preparation of tests according to IS : 10000 (Part 5)-1980 'Methods of tests for internal 
combustion engines; Part 5 Preparation for tests and measurements for wear', 

b) Preliminary run, 



IS : 12455 - 1988 

c) Initial performance tests, 

d) 100 hour test, and 

e) Final performance tests. 

9.1-1 Preparation of tests and wear measurements — General requirements for tests: 

a) The manufacturer shall supply the performance characteristics of the engine prior to the 
commencement of the tests and all other information, as required. 

b) The engine offered by the manufacturer for the tests shall be from regular production Ime, 
and run-in for the period recommended by him. All parts essential for engine operation shall 
be included. 

c) The manufacturer shall supply a set of printed literature giving technical specifications, 
operating instructions, servicing schedule and wear limits of various components listed 
in 9.1.1 (d). 

d) Preparai/on for Zesis — The engine shall be completely dismantled and examined physically 
so that design features and also the conditions of the various parts may be noted before 
tests are commenced. After the physical examination, the dimensions of the main working 
parts, listed below, shall be checked and recorded in the proforma given in 
IS : 10000 (Part5)-1980: 

1) Cylinder head, 

2) Cylinder bore/cylinder liner, 

3) Piston, 

4) Piston rings, 

5) Gudgeon pin, 

6) Valves ( inlet and exhaust ), 

7) Valve seats ( inserts ), 

8) Valve guides, 

9) Valve springs, 

10) Connecting rod, 

11) Big end bearing, 

12) Small end bush, 

13) Connecting rod bolts and nuts, 

14) Crankshaft, 

15) Crankshaft bearings and journals, 

16) Camshaft, and 

17) Timing gears ( backlash shall be measured before and after endurance test). 

e) The engine shall then be re-assembled by ( or under the supervision of ) the manufacturer, 
mounted on a suitable test bed and run-in for the period and in the manner recommended 
by the manufacturer. The running-in period shall be stated by the manufacturer. In case the 
engine has not been run-in by the manufacturer prior to offering for test, the engine shall be 
run-in for a period and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer and this shall be 
mutually agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser or the inspecting authority. 
During the running-in, none of the critical components listed above shall be allowed to be 
replaced. In case any of these parts need to be changed during running-in, the engine shall 
be discarded and fresh engine selected for testing. 

f ) After completion of running-in, the servicing of the engine shall be carried out in accordance 
with the manufacturer's schedule. 

g) No modifications/replacements shall be allowed during the running-in and regular testing 
which have direct bearing on the performance of the engine. If any modification/alternation 
is considered necessary by the manufacturer, he may withdraw the engine from the test and 
submit another engine incorporating the required changes. The changes carried out by the 



IS : 12455 - 1988 

manufacturer shall be stated and he shall have to complete all the necessary formalities for 
tests separately for the testing of the modified engine. 

9.1.2 Preliminary run — Shall be carried out after the engine is well run-in. The engine shall be 
fitted with the auxiliaries required to enable it to give the net output at standard reference condition. 
The sequence of running shall be as given in Table 1. The speeds shall be rounded to nearest 100. 





TABLE 1 PRELIMINARY RUN 




Engine Speed 


Load 


Time 


{ percent of 


( Percent of 


(Minutes) 


Maximum Speed ) 


Rated Load ) 




Idling 





Up to 30 


40 


30 


30 


50 


30 


30 


70 


40 


30 


85 


40 


30 


40 


50 


30 


45 


60 


30 


50 


60 


30 


60 


60 


30 


70 


60 


30 


80 


60 


30 


85 


60 


30 


95 


60 


30 


100 


80 


30 


60 


80 


30 


70 


80 


30 


100 


100 


30 


70 


100 


30 


85 


100 


30 


100 


100 


30 



9.2 Initial Performance Test 

9.2.1 Test procedure — The performance of the engine shall be assessed by drawing a power curve 
over normal full load speed range. Readings shall be taken at a minimum of six approximately evenly 
spaced settings after stable conditions are reached over the normal speed range from maximum rated 
speed at full load to 45 percent of this speed or 1 000 rev/min, whichever is lower. At all these points, 
the fuel pump shall be set at its maximum fuel delivery stop. 

9.2.2 The performance data shall be presented in the form of graphs recording power output, torque, 
specific fuel consumption and smoke density duly corrected. 

9.2.3 Idling test— With engine at the working temperature specified by the manufacturer, it shall be 
ascertained if the engine idles satisfactorily for at least five minutes. 

9.2.4 Acceleration test — With dynamometer set for speed giving the maximum brake power at full 
throttle, the engine shall be accelerated abruptly from idling to full throttle. The engine shall pick up 
the speed easily This test shall be carried out three times. The test shall also be repeated on 
40 percent maximum dynamometer speed. 

9.2.5 Speed limiter {or governor) check — The speed limiter or governor shall be checked for the 
high idling sr>eed specified by the engine manufacturer. 

9-3 Endurance Test 

9.3.1 Test procedure — Ihe test shall be conducted after the initial performance test and the speed 
limiter or governor check as specified in 9.2.1, 9.2.2 and 9.2-5. The test shall last for a total of 
100 hours running time and shall consist of not-stop running periods of 10 hours duration with not less 
than 2 hours stoppage between consecutive running periods. 

9.3.2 Each running period shall consist of five cycles of two hours duration made up of the following 
sequence of engine running conditions: 

a) 50 minutes at 75 percent of full load at the declared maximum speed; 



18:12455-1988 

b) 45 minutes at full load at speed corresponding to maximum torque; 

c) 5 minutes at idling; and 

d) 20 minutes at full load at declared maximum speed. 

9.3.3 During the tests, lubricating oil recommended by the manufacturer shall be used. 

9-3.4 Before starting the next cycle/ the engine shall have reached within 5 K of the room 
temperature. 

9.3.5 Results of the test — The above results corrected to standard reference conditions shall be 
plotted on a time scale in accordance with IS : 10000 (Part 6)-1980 'Methods of tests for internal 
combustion engines: Part 6 Recording of test results'. 

9.3.6 The corrected power and the corrected torque shall at no time fall by more than 5 percent of 
the initial readings (at corresponding speeds) for more than two consecutive readings. 

9.3.7 The corrected specific fuel consumption shall at no time increase by more than 5 percent above 
the initial performance test values. 

9-3.8 A maximum of two interruptions to correct any fault or mal-adjustment shall be permitted 
during the full duration of the test. The nature of such adjustments shall be recorded. 

9.3.9 If the engine needs to be stopped during any cycle for any minor attention, the running time of 
that cycle shall not be counted as part of the test and the cycle shall be recommended. In case of 
power breakdown or breakdown of testing epuipment, the test cycle shall not be scrapped and the 
remaining cycle time shall be completed on resumption of power or repair of test equipment as the 
case may be. In case of major breakdown, the entire test shall be repeated from the beginning on 
another engine. For this purpose, a minor breakdown is one which requires normal service adjustments 
and replacements as recommended by the manufacturer and a major breakdown is one which requires 
complete overhaul and changing of parts not covered by normal service adjustments and replacements. 
The major breakdown will also mean the breakdown or replacement of any of the critical components 
of the engine. 

9.3.10 During the endurance tests, periodic checks shall be made of the fuel and oil. The oil shall 
conform to the specifications of the manufacturer. 

9.4 Final Performance 

9.4.1 After the 100 h tests, the engine shall be tested for final performance in the way outlined 
in 9.2. 

9.4.2 The corrected power and torque throughout the running speed range shall not drop by more 
than five percent from the corresponding initial performance test values. 

9.4.3 The corrected specific fuel consumption shall at no point throughout the running speed range 
increase by more than five percent from the corresponding value obtained during initial performance 
test. 

9.4.4 The corrected exhaust gas opacity shall at no point in the running speed range exceed the 
limiting values given in IS : 10000 ( Part 10)-1980 'Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: 
Part 10 Tests for smoke levels, limits and corrections for smoke levels for variable speed compression 
engines'. 

9.5 Fuel Consumption — Shall be measured at the beginning of the endurance and final performance 
tests. The specific fuel consumption shall be stated by the manufacturer at rated net power under 
standard reference conditions. The specific fuel consumption at site conditions shall be connected to 
standard reference condition, 

9.6 Determination of Power — Shall be computed after taking at least five approximately evenly spaced 
operating speed, to define complete the power curve between the lower stable speed on load and the 
maximum engine speed on load recommended by the manufacturer, 

9.7 Test Results — Shall be recorded as per IS : 10000 ( Part 6 )-1980. 

9.8 Information on Enquiry or Order and Information to be Supplied by the Manufacturer — Shall be as 
given in IS : 10000 (Part 11)-1980 'Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 11 
Information required with enquiry or order and information supplied by manufacturer with the engine'. 
Any other special characteristics or relevant data for testing shall also be supplied by the engine 
manufacturer. 

6 



15:12455-1988 

10. Marking — The engines shall be clearly marked with the following on the engine name plate/data 
plate; 

a) Engine number; 

b) Volumetric capacity; and 

c) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark and code number. 

10.1 The information regarding maximum rated output at rated speed in kW, maximum speed (rpm), 
maximum torque (Nm). SFC (g/kWh), and specifications of lubricating and fuel oil shall be given in the 
manual provided to the purchaser. 

10.2 Standard Mark — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

11. Test Certificate — Shall be provided by the testing authority/manufacturer in the proforma given 
in 15:10000 (Part 12)-1980 'Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 12 Test 
certificates'. 

12. Packing — The engines shall be suitably crated so as to avoid damage during transist. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard has been prepared for covering special needs for conducting all tests on the 
classes of engines which are used in motorcycles, mopeds. These tests are also applicable to engines 
which are used on scooters, threewheelers and car be extended to, in the absence of any standard, 
outboard motors for marine or rivercraft. The testing needs of all these classes of engine covered 
under this specification are covered by the following three characteristic problems: 

a) Difficulties of ascertaining the mechanical efficiency, 

b) Simulating the vehicle slip stream on test beds, and 

c) Lubrication being provided by mixing of lubricating oil with the fuel. 

This Indian standard specification has been drawn to supplement IS : 10000 (Parts 1 to 12)- 
1980. IS : 10004-1981 'Performance requirements for spark ignition engines for automotive purposes' 
and IS : 7347-1974- 'Performance of small size spark ignition engines'. 



Printed at Ar«ee Pr«8s, New Delhi. India 



