**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12837  (1989) :  Hydraulic  Turbines  for  Medium  and  Large 
Power  Houses  -  Guidelines  for  Selection  [WRD  15: 
Hydroelectric  Power  House  Structures] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


IS  12837 :  1989 

(  Reaffirmed  2000 ) 


HYDRAULIC  TURBINES  FOR  MEDIUM 
AND  LARGE  POWER  HOUSES  —  GUIDELINES 

FOR  SELECTION 


UDC    621-224  :621-3ir21 


©  BIS  1990 

BUREAU     OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN.     9     BAHADUR    SHAH     ZAFAR     MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

July  1990  Prke  Group  2 


Hydroelectric  Power  House  Structures  Sectional  Committee,  RVD  15 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  20  October  1989,  after  the 
draft  finalized  by  the  Hydroelectric  Power  House  Structures  Sectional  Committee. 

Water  turbine  is  basically  a  machine  to  convert  hydraulic  energy  into  mechanical  energy.  The  type 
of  water  turbines  influences  the  layout  of  power  stations  and  other  civil  engireering  structures.  The 
different  types  of  turbines  are  suitable  for  specific  parameters  of  a  hydro-development  like  head  and 
discharge,  etc,  and  these  turbines  have  different  identifying  characteristics  like  specific  speed,  runaway 
speed  and  efficiencies,  etc,  which  are  dealt  in  the  standard. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the 
final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  \a]uts(  reyised)\  The  number  of 
significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in 
this  standard. 


IS  12837  :  1989 


Indian  Standard 


HYDRAULIC  TURBINES  FOR  MEDIUM 
AND  LARGE  POWER  HOUSES  —  GUIDELINES 

FOR  SELECTION 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  guidelines  for  selection 
of  types  of  hydraulic  turbines  for  medium  and 
large  power  houses. 

2  REFERENCES 

2.1  The  following  Indian  Standard  is  a  necessary 
adjunct  to  this  standard: 

[S  4410  Glossary  of  terms    relating  to 

(Part  10) :  1987  river  valley  projects:  Part  10 
Hydroelectric  power  station 
including  water  conductor  sys- 
tem (first  revision  ) 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

3.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard  the  defini- 
tions given  in  IS  4410  (  Part  10  ):  1987  and  the 
following  shall  apply. 

3.1  Maximum  Net  Head 

Maximum  effective  head  available  for  power 
generation  which  is  maximum  gross  head  less  all 
the  losses  in  the  water  conductor  system  including 
penstock. 

3.2  Minimum  Net  Head 

The  net  head  resulting  from  the  differences  in 
elevation  between  the  minimum  head  water  level 
and  the  tail  race  level  minus  losses  with  all  turbines 
operating  head  full  gate  opening, 

3.3  Over  Load 

Additional  turbine  output  in  percentage  over  the 
rated  output  of  the  machine  at  a  head  to  be 
specified. 

3.4  Part  Load 

Fraction  of  rated  output  for  which  machine  is 
designed  to  operate  continuously  with  safety. 

3.5  Rated  Output 

Maximum  guaranteed  turbine  output  at  rate  head. 

3.6  Rated  Speed 

Speed  corresponding  to  synchronous  speed  of  the 
generator  connected  to  the  turbine. 


3.7  Submergence 

Difference  in  elevation  of  minimum  tail  water  level 
above  distributor  centre  line  or  runner  centre 
line. 

4  TYPES  OF  HYDRAULIC  TURBINES 

4.1  Following  are  the  types  of  hydraulic  turbines 
used  for  medium  and  large  power  houses: 

a)  Impulse  Turbines 

A  turbine  in  which  all  the  potential  energy 
of  water  is  converted  to  kinetic  energy  ^- 
fore  it  acts  on  the  runner. 

b)  Reaction  Turbine 

Under  this  type,  the  following  turbines  are 
described  below: 

1)  Francis  turbine 

It  has  fixed  blades  runner,  where  the 
water  under  pressure  enters  the  runner 
through  guide  vanes  in  radial  direction 
and  leaves  the  runner  practically  in 
axial  direction. 

2)  Kaplan  turbine 

It  has  movable  blades  where  flow  direc- 
tion is  axial  and  remains  unchanged. 

3)  It  is  a  Kaplan  type  of  turbine  with  fixed 
runner  blades. 

4)  Bulb  turbine 

Kaplan  turbine  with  horizontal  arrange- 
ment and  having  generator  located  inside 
bulb  over  which  water  flows  while 
approaching  to  runner, 

c)  Deriaz  Turbine 

It  is  a  diagonal  type  of  Kaplan  turbine  with 
runner  blade  axis  at  an  angle  of  less  than 
90*"  to  the  shaft  axis. 

5  CRITERIA  FOR  SELECTION  OF 
HYDRAULIC  TURBINE 

5.1  Type  of  turbine  is  selected  from  techno  eco- 
nomic considerations  of  the  generating  equipment 


1 


IS  12837  :  1989 


power  house  cost  and  relative  benefits  of  power 
generation.  The  factors  given  in  Table  1  determine 
the  type  of  turbine  to  be  used  depending  upon  the 
site  conditions. 

Table  1   Criteria  for  Selection  of  Hydraulic 
Turbine 

(Clause  5.1  ) 


for  each  of  the  turbines  generally  adopted  is  given 
below; 


Type  of 
Machine 

Head  Varia- 
tion Percent 
of  Rated 
Head 

Load  Varia- 
tion Percent 
of  Rated 
Output 

Specific 

Speed 
(m-mhp) 

Peak 
Effici- 
ency in 
Percent 

Pelton 

120  to  80 

50  to  100 

15  to  065 

90 

Francis 

125  to  65 

50  to  100 

60  to  400 

93 

Deriaz 

125  to  65 

50  to  100 

200  to  400 

92 

Kaplan 

125  to  65 

40  to  100 

300  to  800 

92 

Propeller 

no  to  90 

90  to  100 

300  to  800 

92 

Bulb 

125  to  65 

40  to  100 

600  to  1  20C 

►     92 

NOTES 

1  Performance  of  turbine  is  ideal,  at  design  head. 
Fall  of  efficiency  in  case  of  Pelton,  Kaplan  and  Bulb 
is  much  less  in  comparison  to  Francis  and  Propeller 
types.  Therefore  in  overlapping  head  ranges  selec- 
tion of  type  of  turbine  is  affected  by  head  variation 
existing  at  site. 

2  Turbine  efficiency  varies  with  load.  Fall  of  effici- 
ency at  part  load  for  Francis  and  Propeller  is  much 
steeper  in  comparison  to  that  for  Kaplan  and  Pelton 
turbines,  therefore,  necessity  of  operating  turbines  at 
part  loads  for  longer  time  influences  choice  of  tur- 
bines in  the  overlapping  head  ranges.  Thus  in  the 
head  ranges  where  both  Kaplan  and  Francis  are 
suitable,  in  case  of  requirement  of  large  head  and 
load  variation,  Kaplan  turbine  in  superior  to  Francis 
turbine  from  considerations  of  higher  power  genera- 
tion on  account  of  better  overall  efficiency.  Simi- 
larly, in  the  overlapping  head  ranges  where  both 
Francis  and  Pelton  could  be  used,  Pelton  has 
advantages  over  Francis  in  overall  performance 
level  when  variation  of  load  and  head  is  higher, 

3  Highest  specific  speed  of  turbine  resulting  in 
higher  speed  of  rotation  for  generator  with  conse- 
quent reduction  in  cost  of  generator.  This  criteria 
is  very  important  for  selecting  type  of  turbine  from 
cost  consideration  in  the  overlapping  head  ranges 
(  see  Fig.  1  ). 


5.2  Head 

Maximum  net  head  acting  oa  the  turbine  is  one 
of  the  most  important  criteria  dictating  type  of 
turbine  to  be  used  for  the  power  station  under 
consideration.  In  general,  Pelton  turbines  are 
recommended  for  high  heads,  Francis  for  medium 
heads,  Kaplan  and  Deriaz  for  low  heads  and  bulb 
for  very  low  heads.  Tlie  above  criteria  of  selection 
is  on  account  of  turbine  constructional  features, 
requirement  of  strength  and  from  all  cost  con- 
siderations. Normal  range  of  maximum   net  head 


Type  of  Turbine 

Range  of  Maximum  Net 
Heads 

Pelton 

Above  300  m 

Francis 

30  to  400  m  (  sometimes 
even  up  to  500  to  600  m  ) 

Kaplan 

10  to  60  m 

Bulb 

3  to  20  m 

Deriaz 

50  to  150  m 

In  the  overlapping  head  ranges  more  detailed 
analysis  shall  be  carried  out  to  optimise  cost  for 
selecting  the  exact  type  of  turbine. 

5.3  Minimum  load  up  to  which  turbine  may  be 
continuously  operated  without  undue  cavitation 
and  vibration  is  dictated  by  type  of  turbine.  Nor- 
mal range  for  continuous  operation  for  various 
types  of  turbines  from  this  criteria  is  given  below: 


Type  of  Turbine 


Pelton 

Francis 

Kaplan/Bulb 

Propeller 

Deriaz 


Minimum  Output  for 

Continuous  Operation 

(  Percent  ) 

30-50 

50 

30-40 

85 

40 


5.4  Turbine  Setting  and  Excavation  Requirement 

Setting  of  reaction  turbine  with  reference  to  mini- 
mum tail  water  level  is  dictated  by  requirement 
from  cavitational  considerations.  Further  in  view 
of  bent  draft  tube,  excavation  up  to  bottommost 
point  of  knee  that  is  much  deeper  than  runner 
centre  line  is  required.  In  general  cavitation  co- 
efficient for  Francis  turbines  is  much  less  than  that 
for  Kaplan  tui  bines  necessitating  relatively  lesser 
submergence  and  exacavation  for  Francis  turbine. 
Pelton  turbine  shall  be  installed  above  maximum 
tail  water  level,  thus  requiring  minimum  excava- 
tion cost. 

5.5  Transport  Consideration 

In  case  of  large  unit  rating  machines,  this  criteria 
plays  important  role  in  selecting  type  of  turbine. 
Normally  runner  is  one  of  the  costliest  and  most 
critical  part  which  shall  be  handled  in  one  piece 
from  consideration  of  cost,  reliability  and  reduced 
site  work.  Transport  requirement  of  large  Kaplan 
size  runner  is  much  less  on  account  of  possibility 
of  removing  runner  blades  easily  as  they  are  fixed 
by  bolts  and  keys.  In  case  of  Francis  turbines, 
necessity  of  limiting  runner  size  during  transport, 
requires   manuiacture    of  runner  in  two    pieces 


IS  12837  :  1989 


increasing  cost  of  the  turbine  by  about  10  percent. 
Pelton  turbine  runner  as  a  rule  shall  be  transport- 
ed in  one  piece. 

5.6  Pressure  Rise  and  Speed  Rise  Consideration 

This  criteria  is  more  important  in  high  head 
machines  as  higher  pressure  rise  affects  the  cost 
of  penstock  substantially.  Necessity  of  limiting 
pressure  rise  is  accomplished  by  use  of  pressure 
relief  valve  in  case  of  Kaplan  and  Francis  turbine 
with  relatively,  long  water  conductor  system  result- 
ing in  increased  cost  of  equipment  and  power 
house.  Pelton  turbine  as  a  rule  does  not  require 
this  device  on  account  of  availability  of  design 
feature  of  deflector.  Pressure  rise  and  speed  rise 
can  therefore  be  limited  to  very  economical  level 
in  case  of  Pelton  turbine,  without  increase  cost  of 
turbine.  Permissible  pressure  rise  and  speed  rise 
for  various  turbines  are  given  below: 


Type  of  Turbine 

Pressure  Rise 
{  Percent ) 

Speed  Rise 
{  Percent ) 

Pelton 
Francis 
Kaplan/Bulb 
and  Propeller 
Deriaz 

15  to  30 
30  to  35 
30  to  50 

20  to  45 

20  to  45 
35  to  55 
30  to  65 

35  to  65 

5.7  Maintenance  Consideration 

In  hydraulic  turbines  guide  vanes/nozzles  and 
runner  blades  are  most  critical  components  which 
get  damaged  by  cavitation  and  silt  and  have  to  be 
repaired  regularly.  Large  Kaplan  turbines  may  be 
designed  to  enable  replacement  of  all  the  runner 
blades  without  dismantling  generator  and  top 
covers,  Francis  turbine  may  be  designed  to  have  a 
feature  of  removing  and  replacing  the  runner  in- 
cluding other  under  water  parts  without  dismantl- 
ing generator.  For  large  size  Francis  runners 
usually  in  situ  repair  is  recommended.  Cavitation 
and  erosion  damage  for  Kaplan  and  Francis 
turbines  are  relatively  much  serious  in  comparison 
to  Pelton  turbines,  Pelton  turbines  have  an  advan- 
tage of  replacing  spear  and  nozzle  quickly  which  is 
normally  not  possible  incase  of  guide  vanes  of 
Kaplan  and  Francis  turbines. 

5.7.1  Choice  of  turbine  is  normally  dictated  by 
rated  head  consideration.  In  case  of  overlapping 
heads  where  two  types  of  turbines  could  be  con- 
sidered suitable  more  detailed  analysis  need  to  be 
carried  out  when  a  number  of  factors  are  favour- 
ing diflFerent  types  of  turbines. 


1  000 


10 


50         100 
SPECIFIC  SPEfID  (N.5) 


o  o 

O    fN| 


Fig,  1 


(HEAD  F* 

Relationship  Between  Head  and  Specific  Speed 

3 


Standard  Mark 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on 
products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced 
to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the 
producer.  Standard  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity 
to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the 
use  of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained 
from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.    No  part  of  these  publications  may  be   reproduced  in 
any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.    This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the 
course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.    Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (  Publications  ),  BIS. 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any,  are 
issued  from  time  to  time.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of 
the  latest  amendments  or  edition.  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent  to  BIS  giving  the 
following  reference: 

Doc:  No.    RVD  15  (4005  ) 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No,  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 

Telephones  :  331  01  31,    331  13  75  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

(  Common  to  all  OflSces  ) 

Regional  Offices  :  Telephone 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  C331  01  31 

NEWDELHI  110002  ^331  13  75 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road.  Maniktola  37  86  62 

CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036  2  18  43 

Southern  :  C  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  60011 3  41  29  16 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (  East )  6  32  92  95 

BOMBAY  400093 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATL  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
PATNA.  TRIVANDRUM. 


Printed  at  Printwell  Printers,  Delhi,  India 


