**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13624 (1993) : Methods of sampling and analysis of water 
formed deposits - Guidelines [CHD 13: Water Quality for 
Industrial Purposes] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13624: 1993 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS 

OF WATER FORMED DEPOSITS — 

GUIDELINES 



UDC 663-6 : 543-3 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 1993 Price Group 7 



Water Sectional Committee, CHD 013 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Water Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division CounciL 

In industry, water is used for various purposes and comes in contact with different materials of 
constructions either in liquid or gaseous state at different temperatures. When the surfaces of 
the materials of construction or equipment get fouled with scales, corrosion products, biological 
deposits or sludges, may lead to their premature failure. These products are either formed by 
the undesirable soluble or insoluble contents carried over by the water from the source or formed 
by the reaction of water or its contents with surfaces in contact with it. 

Examination and analysis of these water formed deposits will provide sufficient information to 
diagnose the reasons of formation of such deposits and would help to take corrective steps such 
as suitable treatment of water before its use and prevention of pollution of either water or the 
environment, etc. The analysis will further help for evolution of methods for removing these 
deposits easily without jeopardising the further utility of the materials and equipment. 

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has derived from ASTM. 

In reporting the test result or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it should be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised y. 



IS 13624 : 1995 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND ANALYSTS 

OF WATER FORMED DEPOSITS — 

GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the types cf deposits 
on equipment surfaces in steam-water system and 
the methods of sampling for analysis and iden- 
tification of their constituent describing briefly 
the nature of the deposits. 

l.U Attempt has been made to frame the 
guidelines for presentation of those methods 
that shall be suitable for most deposits, if not 
alL Methods of sampling may, however, be con- 
veniently replaced or modified with improved 
techniques as they become available from time 
to time. However, it is important that sampling 
devices capable of giving a representative sample 
shall be used. 

1.1.2 These guidelines are based on the experi- 
ence gained over the years, with only those 
water formed deposits which are encountered 
while using water in the industry involving heat 
exchangers, steam raising equipment ( boiler and 
other accessories ) and steam rotating equip- 
ment with accessories, which include the end use 
of the steam. 

2 REFERENCES 



The Indian 
adjuncts to 

IS No, 

460 
( Part 1 ) : 

1917 ; 1962 



Standards listed below are necessary 
this standard : 



Title 

Specification for test sieve : 
1978 Part 1 Wire cloth test sieve 
( second revision ) 

Methods of chemical analysis 
of quartzite and high silica 
sand 

5194 : 1969 Methods of determination of 

nitrogen — Kjeldale method 

6361 : 1971 Methods of colorimetric 

determination of phosphates 



3 TYPES OF DEPOSITS 

3.1 Each water formed deposit may have diffe- 
rent characteristics depending upon the parti- 
cular processing, conditions of use of water in 
the process, materials of constructions in contact 
with water, temperature and pressure of the 
system and overall quality of water used in the 
process. For example, in heat exchangers, 
general form of deposits include: 

a) sediments of the suspended materials 
present in the water under use, 

b) erosion products of the materials, 

c) hardness scales consisting of calcium 
carbonate, magnesium hydroxides, 
calcium sulphate due to ( temporary and 
permanent ) hardness present' in water, 
and 

d) m.etal oxides and hydroxides due to corro- 
sion of the materials, etc. On the other 
hand, the deposits on the turbine blades 
may generally be of silica, or complex 
silicates, a very hard and adherent scale 
and is quite difficult to remove. If the 
water quality or the steam quality toge- 
ther with details of process are known, 
there may not be any difficulty in predict- 
ing the nature of deposits formed in any 
section of the system. 

However, in most of the industries including 
the power stations ( nuclear and thermal ) the 
steam-water cycle is quite large and there is a 
full fledged possibility of mass transport involv- 
ing transfer of deposits from one part to the 
other part of the system. Hence detailed ana- 
lysis of the individual deposits are the only way 
to know the causes of deposits and to take 
corrective action accordingly. 

3.2 Table 1 illustrates the location of certain 
substances or mineral species in boilers. 



IS 13624 : 1993 



Table 1 Location of Mineral Species in Boilers 

( Clause 3.2 ) 



Nature of Cottipound 



SI 
No. 

1. Carbonates of alkaline 
earth and heavy metals 



2. Hydroxides of alka- 
line earth and heavy 

metals 



3. Metal oxides and 
compounds of metals 
under contact with 
water 



4. Phosphates of alkali 
and alkaline earth 
metals and iron 



Silica and silicates 



Mineral Species 

Aragonitc ( CaCOg ) 
Calcite ( CaCOs ) 
Dolomite ( CaCOg Mg CO3 ) 
Ankerite ( CaCOg ) 
( Fe, Mg, MnCOs ) 
Gaylusite ( CaCOg ) 
Na^Cos. 5H2O 

Brucite [Mg ( OH )2 ] 



Lime [ Ca ( OH )2 ] 



Ferrous [ Fe ( OH )2 ] hydroxide "1 



Ferric [ Fe ( OH )3 ] hydroxide 
Nickel hydroxide [ Ni ( OH ja ] 

Haematite ( FCa O3 ) 
Magnetite ( Feg O4 ) 
Iron oxide ( FeO ) 
Cuprite ( Cug O ) 
Tenorite ( CuO ) 

Corundum 6 ( — AlgOg ) 
Zincite ( ZnO ) 



Atacamite 6 [ 
( OH )2 ] 



. CuCla.3Cu 



"1 



Azurite [ 2 C^xCO^, Cu ( OH )a ] f 
Brochantite [ CUSO4. 3Cu 
(OH)^] J 

Hydroxyapatite [ Caio ( OH)g "^ 

( PO4 )6 ] ] 

Wilkeite [ Ca^oO ( Si, P, S)04 jg {^ 
Sodium calcium phosphate 
NaCa ( PO4 ) 

Whitlockite ( B-Cag Pa Og ) 
Dicalcium phosphate ( CaHPOi ) ^ 

Magnesium hydroxyphosphate 
[ Mg3 PO4. Mg ( OH )2 ] 

Vivianite [ Fca ( PO4 )a, SH^ O ] 
Cristobalite (SiOa ) 



Free Silica ( SiOg ) 

Surpentine ( 3MgO. 2SiOa. 2H2O ) ^ 

TaIc(3MgO. 4S1O2.H2O) \ 

Sepiolite ( 2MgO. 3Si02 . 2H2O ) J 



Areas Where Found 



In heat exchange, softener and boil 
sludges due to precipitation of bicar- 
bonates under heat or high /jH influ- 
ence . 

In low pressure boilers. Precipitate 
under high heat influence 

In boiler and softener sludges, due 
to hydrolysis under high /?H condi- 
tions 

In lime slurry dosing line and in 
steam line due to thermal hydrolysis 
previously deposit calcium carbonate. 

In corrosion pits to reaction of metal 
with water 

In cupronickel stage heaters due to 
exfoliation. 



In boiler sludges on tube surfaces 
to corrosion by due water/steam 



In boiler sludges and on turbines due 
to material corrosion 



On metallic surfaces and on corro- 
sion products 



In boiler sludge due to treatment 
chemicals 

In boiler scale due to high concentra- 
tion of treatment chemicals and in 
boiler sludges 



In boiler sludge one to high phosphate 
low silica concentration. 

On cooling system surfaces due to 
phosphate dose 

In boiler scale and turbine scale due 
precipitation of silicic acid and carry- 
over in steam respectively 

On heat exchanger surfaces due to 
deposition of sand or dirt in cooling 
water 



111 boiler sludge due to reaction of 
Mg ( OH )2 with silica 



IS 13624 : 1993 



Table 1 ( concluded ) 



SI 

No- 



Nature of Compound 



Mineral Species 

Cryolite ( 2CaO. 2SIO2, HjO ) ^ 

Xonotlile ( 3CaO, SSiOa- HjO ) \ 

Foshagite ( 5CaO. SSiO^. SH^O ) \ 

Pectolite ( NaaO. 4CaO, eSiOs ) J 



Sulphates of alkali 
and alkaline earth 



7. 



Sulphides of copper 
and iron 



8. Organic salts 



1 
J 



Fayalite ( 2FeO. SiOa ) 
Mullite(3AU03.2Si02) 
Olivine [ 2 ( Mg. Fe ) O. SSiO^ ] 
Forsterite (2MgO. SiO^ ) 

Sodium silicates ( Nag SiOg and 1 

-NajSi^Og ) J 

Acmite ( NaaO. Fe^Oa. 4Si02 ) 1 

Analcite ( NagO. AI2O3, 4810^ 1 

2HsO ) 1 

Natrolite ( Na^O. AU03. Y 

BSiOa. 2H2O ) I 

Neselite ( SNagO. 3AI2O3 I 

6SiOa. 2SO3 ) J 

Calcium sulphates ( CaSOi ) ^ 

Plaster of Paris ( CaSO*. HgO ) J- 

Gypsum ( CaS04. 2H2O ) J 

Thenardite ( Nag SO4 — V ) ^ 
Metathenardite ( Na^ S04 — I ( 

and in ) { 

Burkeite ( INagSO*, NagCOg ) J 

Chalcocite ( Cua S ) 1 
Covellite( CuS ) ;> 

Pyrrhotite ( FeS ) ) 

Troilite ( FeS ) y 



Calcium oxalate \ CaC204. H2O ) 

or 
( CaCsOi ) 



Areas Where Found 



In boiier scales due to reaction 
calcium hardness with silica 



of 



On turbine parts due to dehydration 
of the correspond form 

On turbine parts due to solubility in 
temperature steam 



In boiler sludge, boiler scale and 
turbine scale due to high temperature 
and more concentration of the 
components 



On heat exchanger surfaces due 
precipitation and dehydration 



to 



On superheater and turbine blades 
due to precipitation on high temp- 
erature 

Copper tube heat exchanger due to 
presence of HgS in water or sulphur 
getting reduced in the system 

On boiler and super heater tubes due 
to high temperature reduction of 
sulphate or sulphite in the region 

On heat exchanger surfaces due to 
precipitation of organic materia] in 
water 

In evaporator due to precipitatioa 
reaction of oxalic acid ( if present ) 
with calcium 



4 METHODS OF SAMPLING 

4.1 Mode of sampling shall be such that the 
deposits drawn are representative of the areas 
and location so that subsequent analysis is able 
to provide sufficient useful information regard- 
ing the mechanism of formation of deposits in 
those specific areas. Sufficient care shall be 
exercised while removing deposits from the 
metallic surfaces to avoid damage to the equip- 
ment and any metallic contamination in the 
deposits from the surface of constructional 
materials. If any deposit is extremely adherent 
on the surface and may neither be removed 
totally nor may be taken out alongwith the por- 
tion of metallic surface, a sample, even unrep- 
resentative, may be drawn, even though it may 
not be suitable for all purposes. 

The following techniques shall be adopted while 
drawing samples of deposits for analysis. 



4.2 Collections 

a) The sample collected from the point of 
forniation shall be called 'gross sample', 
which will then be suitably prepared in 
the laboratory for final examination, 
which shall be called as ^sample for ana- 
lysis', 

b) The deposits are to be examined visually 
on site before sampling 'gross sample'. 
Deposits with different appearances shall 
not be mixed together and a separate 
sampling has to be done. Separate samp- 
ling, areawise or different processes 
stagewise, is desirable. 

c) Loosely adherent deposit on the surface 
(such as sludge, corrosion products, 
biological deposits, etc ), may be drawn 
by a suitable scrapper like spatula, spoon, 
thin piece of wood, cardboard piece, chisel, 
sharp edged steel, scrapper including 



IS 13624 : 1993 



knife or by any mechanical shock includ- 
ing the use of hammer. 

d) Hard adherent deposits on the surface 
shall be removed by scrapping method 
with the aid of sharp pen, knife, 
cautiously and by keeping plain 
paper or suitable envelope below the 
surface for collecting the scrapped pow- 
der. Scrapping of the deposits shall be 
done layerwise ( starting from upper most 
layer of the deposit ), each time using 
the knife in such a way that the cutting 
edge of the knife is horizontal to the 
surface. This will avoid scratch on the 
metal surface while scrapping the last 
layer of the deposit. If a portion of the 
surface on w^hich the deposit has been 
formed, may be taken out by cutting a 
small section of the pipeline or tube, then 
the deposits may be removed by applying 
mechanical or thermal shock to the piece. 

e) If the deposits can not be removed in the 
original form by the above means then it 
is advisable to put the portion of the sur- 
face containing deposit into an inhibited 
acid ( to avoid reaction with bare m.etal ), 
This will help in disintegration of the 
deposits and a simple mechanical shock 
may ease their dislodging from the sur- 
face. Both soluble and insoluble portions 
of the deposit in acid may then be joined 
together and evaporated to dryness. 
Analysis of such a sample will indirectly 
predict the composition of the deposit. 
The nature of reaction with the acid used 
may, ho>vever, be noted immediately to 
correlate the findings of the analysis. 
Inhibited hydrochloric, hydrofluoric or a 
few organic acids may be usefully emp- 
loyed in the above process. 

f) If the deposits are found on rough or 
irregular surfaces, pointed end of knife or 
needle shall be used to scrap the deposits 
or otherwise, mechanical or thermal shock 
shall also be applied. Deposits of loosely 
adherent nature may however be taken 
out by using iron brush and samples are 
collected as usual on paper sheet or in 
suitable envelopes. 

g) If the deposits are in the form of slimes, 
it is always better to collect the samples 
before they get dried. The moist depo- 
sits or the deposits in the form of slurry, 
so dislodged shall be kept in sealed con- 
tainers under refrigerated conditions for 
bacteriological examination. Subsequently, 
the samples can be preserved in the dried 
form for further examination. 



4.3 Quantity 

There is no specified quantity of deposits to be 
drawn as a sample for analysis. Depending 
upon the nature of tests to be carried out the 
quantity of sample may be decided by the ana- 
lyst. As some deposits cannot be dislodged 
totally from the surface and individual samples 
has to be considered for different process 
stages to identify the problem of deposition. 
A sample as little as 0-1 g is usually sufficient 
to get sufficient informative data. About 5 g 
of deposit sample is desirable for an extensive 
X-ray diffraction study. Routine chemical 
analysis usually is possible with about 10 g of 
sample while elaborate investigations may 
require about 100 g sample. 

4.4 After collection, the sample shall be kept 
in a suitable container properly sealed to pre- 
vent any contamination during the transport. 
For dry deposits, a glass or plastic container 
shall be adequate with proper sealing arrange- 
ment. 

4.5 The sample after being sealed in a suitable 
container shall be labelled properly, with name 
and description of the equipment from which 
the sample was obtained, the precise location, 
the appearance and the precise extent of depo- 
sit prior to removal, method used in removing 
the sample, etc, and any other information 
noted during collection of the sample. 

4.6 Laboratory Sampling 

The 'gross sample' shall be first air dried 
properly. If the quantity is very less ( less 
than 1 g ) it is advisable to mix the identically 
appearing sample of the same area and make a 
composite. Part of the sample shall be kept 
as it is for reference and the rest shall be pow- 
dered suitably in an agate mortar, and mixed 
properly to make it thoroughlv homogeneous. 
This shall then be treated as laboratory sample. 

5 PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF 
DEPOSITS 

Before removing the deposits from the surface, 
an assessment of the deposit thickness, area 
covered and approximate quantity shall be 
made and recorded. It is desirable to have 
photograph of the deposits, if possible, and 
compare the same with that of the bare surface 
of the metal. Then, the means of removal of 
deposits from the surface shall also b^ recorded 
with any other observation noted during dis- 
lodging the deposits. In case of mechnical 
removal, using knife or brush of any copper 
coating on the tube surface ( below the depo- 
sits ) may be noted and reported. 



IS 13624 : 1993 



After the removal of the deposits, the deposits 
shall be examined for the following and 
recorded: 

a) The physical appearance of the deposits, 
visual examination viz, size, shape colour, 
odour, crystalline or amorphous consis- 
tency, hardness, magnetic property, etc. 

b) The texture of various layers and recog- 
nition of individual crystals if any under 
microscopic examination and compare 
with the standard compound which is 
suspected to be present in the deposit. 

c) The solubility of the deposits on treating 
a portion with water and note down the 
pR of the water extract. 

d) The possible form of compound present 
in the deposit, namely, organic matter, 
sulphur, etc, and the change in colour 
and odour on heating a portion of the 
sample. 

e) The free water present on drying a por- 
tion of the deposits between 35 to 40°C. 

f) The presence of oil on shaking a portion 
of the deposits with chloroform or solvent 
ether. 

g) Observations, if any, on grinding a por- 
tion of deposits. 

h) The presence of carbonates, iron sulphide, 
etc, on treating a portion of deposits 
with hydrochloric acid. 

j) The major, minor or trace constituents on 
spectrographic, or petrographic, examina- 
tion, if the facility available. 

k) Loss in mass due to decomposition of 
organic and a few other inorganic C, N 
and S compounds. 

6 LABORATORY SAMPLE PREPARATION 

6.1 If sufficient information is available with 
the preliminary examination of the deposits, it 
would be possible to predict its likely com- 
position. Further, when significant differences 
in deposit structure and behaviour are available 
with preliminary examination, it is desirable to 
divide the different portions to analyse separa- 
tely. Separations are sometimes even made with 
a sharp blade, preferably under a high power 
lens. The different portions are taken, then 
kept in different bottles or even test tubes with 
proper markings. 



6.2 It is further advisable to keep a portion of 
the deposits as a reference sample and for X-ray 
diffraction or absorption spectroscopy exami- 
nation and the rest is ground in a mortar after 
getting rid of free water and oil from the depo- 
sits namely by drying at 35 to 40^C and washing 
by chloroform and ether respectively. 

6.3 The oil free and dried material after grind- 
ing is quartered down to a sample of approxi- 
mately 10 g ( if so available, otherwise the 
whole quantity w^hatever is available ) and is 
further ground to pass an IS Sieve of 150 micron 

[see IS 460 ( Part 1 ) : 1978 ]. This is further 
bottled or tubed and properly capped after 
thorough mixing. The bottle or tube is further 
labelled with all necessary information. This 
laboratory sample is then ready for chemical 
analysis. 

6.4 It is however, necessary to have special size 
sample for some particular tests for which a 
separate sampling shall be done from the gross 
sample after due crushing or grinding, whatever 
may be applicable. As for example, portions 
on which refraction index is required shall be 
crushed to finer size so that it is not too small for 
clear solution, whereas the portion shall be 
ground to 63 micron or finer for X-ray and 
spectrographic examination, 53 micron or finer 
and 150 micron or finer for microscopic exami- 
nation. Various other physical and chemical 
treatments may be given to portions of the 
sample undergoing identification. 

7 METHODS OF IDENTIFICATION OF 
DEPOSITS 

7.1 The identification of water formed deposits 
does aot involve using single method but of 
co-ordinating a number of methods to make 
each supplement to the other. No single 
method is available to tell all about a sample. 
The following types of analysis are made to 
identify the constituents of the deposits: 

a) Chemical Analysis 

The results of analysis are generally 
reported in terms of basic oxides and acid 
anhydrides to verify w'hether the sum of 
all the constituents approximates to 
about 100 or not. This procedure does 
not provide for reporting definite mole- 
cular combinations or it signifies that any 
of the oxides are present in the sample. 
However, probable compound can be 
interpreted if sufficient information is 
available with preliminary examination 
or any other selective tests applied. 



IS 13624 : 1993 



b) Microscopic Analysis 

Results of analysis are in the form of 
definite combinations but without indicat- 
ing any amount. Under this heading, 
identification of individual crystals and 
amorphous lumps and also of micro 
organisms present, if any, are made. 

c) X~ray Diffraction Analysis 

The results give the identification of 
crystalline compounds present in the form 
of definite combinations. 



d) Spectroscopic Analysis 

The results give both qualitative and 
quantitative estimation of cationic cons- 
tituents provided the sample has low 
volatile constituents. 



8 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 

8.1 The following scheme of analysis with brief 
procedures of individual items outlined there- 
after, shall be followed : 



1 g Laboratory Sample of Deposit ( Moisture and Oil Free ) 
Treated with Water, Boiled and Filtered 



1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 



FiJtrate 

Add equal volume of hydrochloric acid 

Precipitate, if any, filter otherewise evaporate the liquid 
portion in a porcelain basin to dryness on water bath 

Heat for 1 h at 130oC 

Add 1 : 1 hydrochloric acid ( 30 ml ) and mix 



5. Warm for 10 minutes on water bath 



Filtrate 

(A) 

Mix the filtrate (A) and 
(B) if the water soluble 
portion of deposits are 
less; otherwise proceed 
the analysis individ- 
ually 



1. 

2. 
3. 

4. 



Residue 

(B) 

Take into a platinum crucible 

Ignite and weigh 

Add hydrochloric acid and little 

perchloric acid 

Evaporate and fume out ( 80°C ) 
and finally ignite for a minute 
( 800°C ) and weigh ( loss in mass 
is due to water soluble silica ) 

Fuse the residue with sodium 
bicarbonate and extract with hot 
water. Mix it with the filtrate (A) 



Residue 

1. Take in platinum crucible 

2. Dry 

3. Ignite and cool 

4. Mix with fusion mix six times (approxi- 
mately) the mass of residue 

5. Extract with hot water and transfer into 
porcelain basin 

6. Add concentrated hydrochloric acid (30 ml) 

7. Evaporate to dryness on water bath 

8. Heat for 1 h at 130«C 

9. Add 1 : 1 hydrochloric acid 
10, Warm for 10 minutes in water bath 



Filtrate 

(B) 



Residue 
( Ignite and Weigh ) 



NOTES 

1 Solution of water formed deposits is first tried with a mixture of mineral acids, iacludiag hydrochloric, 
nitric and perchloric acids, and the method of analysis is followed as per scheme outlined above, but without 
fusing the sample. In case, the deposits are partially soluble in the mineral acids, it is advisable to fuse 
the sample as outlined and proceeds for analysis. If the main part of deposits are soluble in acid, it is 
better to filter the sample and proceed for analysis, in two parts, one soluble portion and the other 
insoluble portion fused with fusion mixture. 

2 During hydro fluorization ( HF ) use of little sulphuric acid may also be made in place of perchloric acid. 
Perchloric acid is however preferable which will not impart introduction of sulphate ion making some of the 
analysis interfered. 

3 If a large quantity of phosphate is present in the deposit fuming the samples with mineral acids will 
separate phosphate alongwith the silica and some of the phosphates may be loss as phosphoric acid, if too 
much sulphuric or perchloric acid is used in hydro fluorization treatment to the silica residue. 

4 The silica residue after, hydro fluorization treatment may also include barium sulphate and tin, as well 
as sodium and potassium which are however, reiurned to the original sample, after fusion. 

5 The solution reserved for testing the different mixed oxides is divided into several aliquots, as to yield 
the best volume for each determination as per procedures given in 8.2. 



IS 13624 : 1993 



8«2 Procedures 

8.2,1 Water Soluble Portion and pH 

One g of laboratory sample is dissolved in 50 ml 
of distilled water. After shaking well, it is 
allowed to settle. A drop of clear water is, then 
put on a pH paper with glass rod and the pH 
of water soluble portion is recorded. The pH 
of the distilled water used may also be record- 
ed for comparison. The mixture shall be heated 
to 50 to 60"C, well stirred. It shall be then 
allowed to settle and cool. Then it is filtered 
in previously dried and weighed asbestos Gooch 
crucible or sintered glass Gooch crucible and 
washed properly. Finally the crucible is allow- 
ed to dry in an oven at 105 ± 5°C for an 
hour and weighed. 



Loss on ignition, j^ 

percent by mass L = - 



M, 



-^^x 100 



Water soluble portion, 
percent by mass 



Ml - M 



xlOO 



where 



M = mass of empty crucible; 

A/j " mass of crucible before heating; and 

A/2 = mass of crucible after heating. 

NOTE — Normally the water-soluble content of a 
water formed deposit will be low, but presence of 
sodium salts of chloride, phosphate, silica, carbo- 
nate and bicarbonates along with calcium hydroxide, 
etc, shall not be ignored and tested for. 

^.2.2 Moisture 

One g of laboratory sample is taken in a clean 
porcelain crucible, previously heated up to 
:800°C, cooled in a desiccator and weighed. 
The sample alongwith the crucible is then kept 
in an oven maintained at 100 ± 5°C, for an 
hour. After taking out the crucible from oven, 
it is cooled in a desiccator and weighed again. 

Moisture content, M — M 
percent by mass = ~jr^ ^x 100 

where 

M = mass of empty crucible; 

Ml = mass of crucible with sample; and 

M2 = mass of crucible after heating. 

8.2.3 Loss of Ignition 

After weighing out the crucible for final mass 
Ma in 8.2.2, the crucible is kept in a furnace at 
400 ± 50°C and then the temperature of furnace 
raised to 800°C, within half an hour. The 
temperature of 800 ± 25°C is then maintained 
for one full hour and then the crucible is taken 
out, cooled in a desiccator and weighed. 



where 

M^ = mass of crucible as in 8.2,2, and 
Afg = mass of crucible after ignition. 
NOTES 

1 While the moisture content of the sample will 
indicate the presence of certain hydrates in the 
deposits, ignition loss will indicate the presence of 
organic matter, carbon ( carbonate, bicarbonate ), 
sulphur ( sulphite, sulphide ) nitrogen ( nitrate, 
ammonium salts ), etc. 

2 If the deposits are suspected to have considerable 
carbonaceous material including algae, fungi, etc, 
it is better to have a separate ignition loss test 
as above, but at 500"C, and the percentage loss shall 
be recorded. After this test, the totalloss on igni- 
tion shall be determined at 800°C. 

8.2.4 Determination of Oil and Grease 

One g of laboratory sample is taken in an asbestos 
pulp thimble having sufficient porosity, but not 
allowing by any solid particles of sample to 
pass on. The sample in thimble is then covered 
with a small piece of cotton fibre and the 
thimble is put into Soxhlet distillation appara- 
tus, with about 50 ml of benzol (1:1 ratio of 
benzene and alcohol ) in the Soxhlet flash of 
100 ml capacity. After circulating cold water 
into the condenser, the Soxhlet flask is heated 
on a water bath for about an hour. 

On completion of the extraction, the thimble 
is taken out and dried in an oven at 100 ± 5°C 
for 2 h and weighed. (If presence of ammonium 
nitrate is suspected in the sample, it is better 
to dry at 70°C. ) The loss in mass of sample in 
the thimble represents all benzol soluble 
material including oil and the moisture in the 
original sample. 

NOTES 

1 In water formed deposits, generally the *benzol' 
soluble portion is oil, grease, etc. Though benzol may 
dissolve sulphur, resins, some specific organic com- 
pounds also, the presence of these is very unlikely 
in the deposit. 

2 Presence of oil in the deposits is indicated where 
even after drying, the sample smears or agglomera- 
tes, during its pulverization. 

8.2.5 Carbonates and Bicarbonates 

One g of laboratory sample is taken in a previ- 
ously weighed Schroetter's apparatus and fitted 
with the drier column properly filled with 1 • 1 
hydrochloric acid in the thistle portion. Then 
hydrochloric acid is allowed to fall into the 
sample chamber by opening the stopcock of the 
thistle portion very slowly. Finally when all 
the acid is in contact with the sample, the 
Schroetter apparatus is kept on the surface of 
40 to 50°C for 5 minutes and then finally 



IS 13624 : 1993 



weighed. The loss in mass of Schroetter's 
apparatus gives the mass of carbon dioxide 
escaped from the sample which may be due to 
the presence of carbonates and bicarbonates. 

NOTE — A qualitative test for carbon dioxide shall 
be first made, by boiling the sample mixture with 
water and then by adding mineral acid to the mix- 
ture and then passing the evolved gas in both cases 
in lime water. If, in both cases the result is positive, 
preser.ce of both bicarbonates and carbonates are 
indicated. In case, both are present, carbon dioxide 
evolved by heating the sample water mixture is 
absorbed in soda lime bulb and bicarbonate is calcu- 
lated out. However, chances of presence of both 
bicarbonate and carbonate in deposit sample are 
rare. 

8.2.6 Sulphides 

One g of laboratory sample is taken in a 250-ml 
conical flask with an inlet tube reaching nearly 
the bottom. The outlet tube from the flask is 
connected to two absorption bulbs containing 
lead acetate solution and previously weighed. 
In the flask 10 ml concentrated hydrochloric 
acid and 20 ml ether are placed and a current 
of pure carbon dioxide is passed. The genera- 
ting flask is slightly heated to ensure complete 
decomposition. By the difference in mass of 
the bulbs before and after the experiment, the 
hydrogen sulphide content absorbed shall be 
known and using this hydrogen sulphide, sulphur 
is calculated. 

NOTE — A qualitative test for hydrogen sulphide 
using sulphuric acid and lead test paper may first 
be made before undertaking the above estimation. 

8.2.7 Alkalis 

Alkalis are determined by flame photometric 
method as given in IS 1917 : 1962 after fuming 
a known mass of the sample to near dryness 
with hydrofluoric acid and perchloric acid, 
dissolving the residue in dilute hydrochloric 
acid and making up to a definite volume. 

NOTE — Alkali salts usually are found with the 
water soluble portions of the deposits, but in some 
cases they may be water insoluble also when they 
occur in complex compound form. Hence determi- 
nation for alkalis, both water soluble and total, 
is advisable to account for the nature of the 
deposit. 

8.2.8 Ammonia 

Ammonia as total nitrogen is determined by 
Kjeldahl method, as prescribed in IS 5194: 1969. 
One g of laboratory sample is placed in the 
distillation flask with splash bulb as described 
in the modified Kjeldahl procedure for organic 
substances and the material decomposed with 
ammonia free caustic solution. The ammonia 
is distilled into an excess of standard acid and 
the ammonia content is determined as usual by 
titration of the excess of acid. 



NOTE — If ammonia is present in the deposit, some 
of ammonium salts would always be present in 
water soluble form. Hence it is advisable to have 
spot test for presence of ammonia before undertak- 
ing the above laborious test. Spot test for ammonia is 
conducted by heating the deposit with a solution of 
sodium or calcium hydroxide and smelling the evol- 
ved gas for the characteristic odour or seeing the 
effect of the gas on mercuric chloride, moistened 
filter paper which would turn black, if ammonia is 
present . 

8.2.9 Phosphate 

One g of the laboratory sample is placed in a 
porcelain dish and is digested for an hour with 
concentrated nitric acid, the dish being cover- 
ed by a watch glass placed on a steam bath. 
The acid is then diluted with half of its volume 
of water and the solution is filtered into a por- 
celain dish of sufficient capacity to hold the 
filtrate and washings (1:1 nitric acid ). The 
filterate and washings are then evaporated to 
dryness. Meanwhile the insoluble residue with 
filter paper are ignited in a platinum crucible 
and the residue fused with ten times its mass 
of sodium carbonate. The fused mass is extract- 
ed first with water and then with 1 : 1 nitric 
acid and this solution is added to the main 
solution. The combined solutions are then 
evaporated to dryness and baked to dehydrate 
the silica at 130°C. The residue is taken 
up with a few ml of nitric acid, the solution 
diluted, filtered and silica washed with dilute 
nitric acid solution. The filtrate is then taken 
for estimating phosphate either gravimetrically 
(magnesium ammonium phosphate ) or colo- 
rimetrically ( molybdenum blue ) as per 
IS 6361 : 1971. 

NOTE — If a large amount of phosphate is present 
in the deposit sample, some of the phosphate may 
be separated with the silica and loss as phosphoric 
acid, during fuming with hydrofluoric acid, sulphu- 
ric acid/perchloric acids. Hence, it is advisable to 
conduct examination and estimation of phosphate 
on the original deposit sample, rather than in the 
alkali extract of the sample after fusion with sodium 
carbonate/fusion mixture. 

9 ANALYSIS OF FINAL FILTRATE AFTER 
SILICA DETERMINATION 

9.1 The final filtrate from the silica determina- 
tion kept reserved for analysis ( as under the 
scheme of treatment of main analytical sample ) 
is made up to 1 litre in a volumetric flask. 
From this, suitable aliquots are drawn for esti- 
mating different contents as below. The size 
of the aliquots shall however be based on pre- 
liminary examinations so as to yield the best 
volume for each determination. 

9.1.1 Sulphate 

A suitable aliquot is taken and the hydrochlo- 
ric acid concentration is adjusted to 2 to 5 



8 



IS 13624 : 1993 



percent ( v/v ) and the aliquot is boiled. While 
boiling, 10 ml of 10 percent barium chloride is 
added to it and the boiling is continued for 5 
more minutes. The container is then kept on 
water bath till precipitate settles. It is then 
filtered and washed with 0-1 percent hydro- 
chloric acid solution. The precipitate is dried, 
ignited and weighed as barium sulphate, from 
which the mass of sulphate is calculated by 
multiplying the mass of barium sulphate by 
0-342 97. 

9.1.2 Manganese 

To a suitable aliquot, sufficient quantity of sul- 
phuric acid with little ammonium sulphate is 
added and the solution is first boiled for a few 
minutes and then evaporated to dryness and 
further to fumes of sulphite. The residue is 
then brought into a solution containing atleast 
10 to 15 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid and 
5 to 10 ml of concentrated phosphoric acid per 
100 ml. Then 0-2 to 0*4 g of potassium iodate 
is added and the solution is boiled for a 
minute, kept hot for 5 to 10 minutes, cooled, 
diluted to a proper volume and compared with 
a solution of known manganese content, pre- 
pared in a similar manner. Not more than 
1 mg of manganese per 50 ml shall be present 
at the time of comparison. 

9.1.3 Titanium 

The separation of titanium from molybdenum, 
phosphorus and vanadium is made by carefully 
neutralizing the greater part of the free acid 
present by addition of a solution of sodium 
hydroxide and pouring the mixture into 150 ml 
of a hot, normal solution of sodium hydroxide 
filtering the washing with hot dilute sodium 
hydroxide ( 0-5 N ). It is advisable to repeat 
the precipitation to remove traces of the inter- 
fering elements. The titanium is then brought 
into solution with sulphuric acid. Hydrogen 
peroxide is then added to it, and the colour 
produced is compared with standard colour 
obtained from standard solution of titanium. 
Colour comparison can best be made on sam- 
ples containing 0-05 to 5 mg of the element, as 
larger amounts produce too deep a colour for 
accurate comparison. Further aliquot to be 
taken shall not have more than 4 percent iron 
which would also produce colour. However, 
O'l g ferric oxide in 100 ml solution = 0-2 g 
of titanium oxide shall be allow^ed. 

9.1.4 Chromium 

A suitable aliquot containing not more than 
0-17 g chromium ( as chromate ) is boiled with 
hydrochloric acid to expel oxidizing reagents 
from the solution. 5 ml of I : 1 hydrochloric 
acid is then added followed by a known 



amount of standard 0*1 N ferrous ammonium 
sulphate till the solution changes from yellow 
through olive green to deep grass green. For 
every 0*1 g chromium about 65 to 70 ml of 
0-1 N ferrous salt solution shall be added. 
After 5 minutes, the excess of this reducing 
reagent is back titrated with dichromate in 
presence of diphenylamine indicator. 

Mass in g of chromium 

in the aliquot = 0*001 734 x A 

where 

A = ferrous ammonium sulphate in ml 
consumed 

9.1.5 Vanadium 

To a suitable ahquot, cooled to 15 to 20°C, add 
approximately 0*1 N potassium permanganate 
solution until very strong pink colour remains 
for a minute ( an excess permanganate does 
not harm ). Then the vanadium is reduced by 
adding approximately 0*1 N ferrous ammonium 
sulphate until a drop of solution on spot plate 
to a drop of OT percent solution of potassium 
ferricyanide results m immediate formation of 
a blue colour (presence of excess of ferrous 
iron ). 3 to 5 ml ferrous ammonium sulphate is 
then added in excess and the solution is stirred 
for 1 minute. The excess ferrous ammonium 
sulphate is then oxidized with 15 ml of 10 per- 
cent freshly prepared ammonium persulphate 
and the solution is stirred vigorously for one 
minute. The solution is then titrated with 0*1 N 
permanganate solution with constant stirring 
until a faint pink colour appears, persisting for 
one minute. Care shall be taken that all along 
the temperature of the solution is kept between 
15to20°Cand a blank determination is also 
carried out in the same way. 

Mass in g of vanadium 

in the aliquot = 0-005 096 x A 

where 

A = volume in ml of potassium permanga- 
nate solution consumed less blank. 

9.1.6 Calcium, Magnesium and Barium 

With a suitable aliquot taken, calcium and 
magnesium are determined in series, as already 
given. To the solution taken, a few ml of 
concentrated nitric acid is added and boiled. 
After coohng, 2 g of ammonium chloride is 
added and again boiled. The solution is then 
neutralized with ammonia and slight excess 
ammonia is added. After settling hot for a few 
minutes, filter the solution through Whatman 
No. 30 filter paper, where iron and aluminum 
are removed as residue. The filtrate is again 
made slightly excess alkaline with ammonia 



IS 13624 : 1993 



and boiled. While boiling saturated ammonium 
oxalate solution is added till complete preci- 
pitation and slightly in excess. The precipitate 
of calcium oxaiated is allowed to settle for 
30 minutes and then filtered hot through 
Whatman No. 30 filter paper. After redissol- 
ving the precipitate in hydrochloric acid again, 
the calcium oxalate is reprecipitated and filtered 
and washed thoroughly with hot water. The 
residue is then dried, ignited, and weighed as 
calcium oxide. 

9.1.6.1 To the filtrate, properly cooled to room 
temperature, excess ammonia is added followed 
by 10 to 15 ml ammonium hypophosphate and 
the solution is vigorously agitated with glass 
rod for a few minutes and then kept over night. 
It is then filtered cold through Whatman No. 40 
filter paper and the residue washed thoroughly 
with ammoniated water. The residue is then 
dried, ignited and weighed as combined mass 
of manganese and magnesium. This residue 
is then dissolved in hot concentrated nitric 
acid. A few ml cf concentrated sulphuric 
acid is added and fumed. Manganese content 
is then determined as given in 9.1.2 and the 
amount of magnesium from the above residue 
is calculated by difference. 

9.1.6.2 To another aliquot, about 200 ml of 
water is added to make the solution slightly 
acidic ( about 1 to 2 percent ) and is heated 
to boiling. Then a slight excess of hot dilute 
sulphuric acid is added. The precipitate is 
allowed to settle and then filtered through 
Gooch crucible and washed twice with dilute 
sulphuric acid ( 0*5 percent ) and finally with 
hot water till free from acid. The precipitate 
is dried and weighed as barium sulphate. 

NOTES 

1 Doi;ble precipitation of calcium reduces occlusions 
to significant proportion of the interfering radicals 
of the group, while the phosphate of copper, nickel 
and zir.c v.ill largely remain soluble in ammoniacal 
solution though they are insoluble in neutral 
medium. 

2 If more accuracy in magnesium determination is 
required or if the original deposit contains very 
large amounts of copper, nickel, zinc and lead it is 
better to remove the interferences by passing hydro- 
gen sulphide and filtering off the sulphide precipitate 
but the metallic constituents usually present in water 
formed deposits do not warrant this. 

9.1.7 Lead, Copper, Nickel, Zinc, Iron, Tin, 
Aluminium 

9,1.7.1 From a suitable aliquot taken, copper 
and lead are first removed and determined, 
phosphate is eliminated and then the rest of 
the constituents are determined as per the 
method of analysis already stated. 



9.1.7.2 The acidic solution containing 2 to 3 ml 
of free concentrated nitric acid is taken and 
warmed to 50 to 60''C and electrolyzed with a 
current of 1 ampere and 2 to 2-5 volts. The 
progress of electrolysis is watched and the 
cathode is removed as soon as completion of 
deposition is detected by evolution of gas on 
its surface. The completion of action shall be 
ascertained with by addition of water to the 
electrolyte and observing whether the newly 
exposed surface of the cathode remains bright. 
Then the detachment of the cathode is preceed- 
ed by removal of the electrolyte and simultan- 
eously washing the cathode without interrupting 
the current. The cathode after detachment is 
washed properly with water and then with alco- 
hol and dried and weighed. The amount of 
copper and lead deposit is then known by 
difference in mass of the bare cathode. This 
deposit is then redissolved in nitric acid and 
replated where copper remains as deposit and 
the lead remains in solution. 

This solution is then evaporated to dryness and 
fumed with sulphuric acid. After cooling, 1 : 6 
hydrazine sulphuric acid is added and the 
solution is boiled, filtered into a Gooch cruci- 
ble washed with dilute sulphuric acid to remove 
soluble impurities. The residue is finally was- 
hed with 50 percent alcohol solution till free 
acid is removed. The residue after drying is 
weighed as lead sulphate, from which the 
amount of lead is calculated by multiplying 
with 0'683 3. 

9.1.7.3 The main mother liquor obtained after 
first plating of copper and lead together is then 
divided in two parts: 

a) To the first part, nitric acid is added to 
adjust the concentration as 5 ml of con- 
centrated acid for every 100 ml solution. 
The solution is then warmed to 45°C 
and ammonium molybdate reagent is 
added to it with constant stirring till 
complete precipitation. 

It is then allowed to settle for an hour, 
filtered through asbestos Gooch crucible. 
The residue is washed with 1 percent 
potassium nitrate and discarded. 

The filtrate together with washing is 
boiled, made alkaline with ammonia, 
settled, warmed and filtered. After 
discarding the filtrate, the residue is tin 
and aluminium. 

The residue properly washed with hot 
water, is dissolved in dilute hydrochloric 
acid and boiled till clear solution is 
obtained. The acidity is maintained at 5 
to 10 ml acid per 200 to 500 ml solution. 



10 



IS 13624 : 1993 



The solution is then chilled and an 
excess of 10 percent freshly prepared 
cupferron solution is slowly added with 
stirring. When the precipitate becomes 
brittle after 20 to 30 minutes, it is filtered 
and the residue washed speedily with 
cold water. The precipitate is then dried 
and ignited very carefully and slowly at 
low temperature until filter paper is 
consumed and precipitate is converted to 
stannous oxide in which form it is 
weighed after strong ignition. 



The mass of tin 



Mass of stannous 
oxide X 0-787 7 



The filtrate after filtering the tin residue 
is dried and fumed with sulphuric and 
nitric acids. After getting cooled, 1 : 1 
hydrochloric acid is added to dissolve 
the residue. To the solution, a few 
millilitre of concentrated nitric acid is 
added and boiled to expel nitrous fumes. 
The solution is then made alkaline with 
ammonia maintaining some excess 
ammonia and boiled. It is then allowed 
to settle warm for a few minutes and 
filtered hot through Whatman No. 31 
filter paper. The residue is washed with 
1 percent ammonium nitrate solution and 
finally with hot water till it is free from 
soluble impurities, dried, ignited and 
v/eighed as aluminium oxide quickly ( as 
it will absorb moisture to gain in mass ). 

NOTES 

1 Only freshly prepared solution of cupferron 
shall be used, as it decomposes slowly. Stability 
of cupferron is sometimes enharxed by adding 
50 mg of acctophenetidide per litre of 6 percent 
aqueous solution. It is also better to suspend a 
smaU bag containing ammonium carbonate in 
the bottJe of dry cupferron to maintain its 
quality for larger period. 

2 Iron-cupferron precipitate is only slowly 
attacked in the cold by 2 IS! hydrochloric acid, 
but hot acid decomposes it. For this reason, 
the precipitation must be done in the cold, 

3 Nitric acid shall be absent when cupferron is 
used as a precipitant. 

4 If the mixed oxides precipitate is bulky, it Is 
advisable to oxidize it with nitric and sulphuric 
acid and then rep^ecipitated with ammonia . 

5 Large amounts of aluminium may be deter- 
mined by sodium fluoride, sulphuric acid 
filtration using phenolphthalein indicator. 

b) The other part of the mother liquor is 
boiled to expel nitrous acid fumes and 
then made alkaline with ammonia while 
it is hot. Allowed to settle for a few 
minutes and filtered through Whatman 
No. 31 filter paper, while it is hot. The 



residue is dissolved in 1:1 hydrochloric 
acid and boiled. While boiling it is 
reduced by freshly prepared stannous 
chloride solution, till yellow colour is 
destroyed and a few drops are then added 
in excess. It is then cooled, about 10 ml 
of saturated mercuric chloride solution 
is added, and the mixture shaken. Then 
it is titrated against standard potassium 
dichromate in presence of diphenylamine 
indicator. 

1 ml of 0,1 N potassium 

dichromate = 0-005 584 g iron 

The filtrate is acidified with sulphuric 
acid to aljDUt 0-02 N concentration. 
Hydrogen sulphide is then passed to it 
rapidly under pressure. The precipitate 
is then filtered, washed thoroughly with 
cold water, and ignited and weighed as 
zinc oxide. 

Mass of zinc, mg =^ Mass of zinc oxide 
( Zno ) X 0-803 4 

After filtering of zinc precipitate, the 
filtrate is boiled to remove hydrogen 
sulphide and cooled. One to two g of 
tartaric acid is added to prevent the 
precipitation of hydroxides of iron, alu- 
minium and chromium, etc, and 5 to 
10 ml of 10 percent solution of ammonium 
chloride is added to keep manganese in 
solution. Ammonium hydroxide is then 
added till the solution is slightly alkaline. 
It is then heated to nearly boiling and 
the alcoholic solution of dimethyl- 
glyoxime is added until reagent is 
approximately seven times the mass of 
nickel present in the sample. Ammonium 
hydroxide is now added until the solution 
has a distinct odour of this reagent. The 
precipitation of the scarlet red nickel salt 
is then hastened by stirring. The mixture 
is kept on steam bath for 15 to 20 minutes 
and filtered off in a Gooch crucible and 
the residue washed with cold water and 
dried for about 2 hours at 110 to UO^'C 
and weighed as ( C6Hi4N404Ni ) : 

Mass of nickel, mg = mass of precipitate 
X 0-2031 

10 MICROSCOPIC ANALYSIS 

10.0 The aim of this analysis is to magnify the 
deposits under observation, so that their 
distinctive form and features become 
recognizable. 



11 



IS 13624 : 1993 



10.1 Biological Examination 

For this the deposit is taken with its environ- 
mental water, properly refrigerated and preser- 
ved. If the sample can not be preserved 
properly, it is advisable to kill the bacteria by 
adding suitable bactericide to the sample and 
then examined under microscope. In no case, 
the biological slime shall be allowed to dry, 
otherwise identification would be difficult. 

10.1.1 A small drop of the sample bearing 
liquid is put between a glass slide and a cover 
glass, and kept, under microscope, to examine 
shape, colour or characteristic reaction to 
some reagents. The image of the micro orga- 
nisms is magnified as the light continues 
upward through the lenses of the objective and 
the eye piece. The magnified image is either 
observed directly at the eye piece or photo- 
graphed with a camera and compared with 
standard micro organisms behaviour towards 
their living functions, metabolic by-products 
and skeletons of dead organisms. 

10.1.2 Recognition by shape is sometimes diffi- 
cult and for confirmatory information, the 
organisms may be inoculated into a culture 
medium. After a suitable incubation period, 
the medium is tested for specific metabolic by- 
products of the organism. For example, the 
formation of hydrogen sulphide in a sulphate 
culture medium is confirmatory evidence of the 
presence of sulphate reducing bacteria. 

10.1.3 Similarly, when the organisms are cove- 
red with iron oxide sheaths, the sheath is first 
dissolved in dilute acids, the dissolved iron will 
colour the liquid between the cover glass and 
slide indicating the presence of an iron 
bacteria. 

10.1.4 Some organisms will absorb specific dyes 
and be recognizable by this property also. 

NOTES 

1 A microscope with three objectives ( X 10, X 43 and 
oil immersion X 91 ) two eye pieces ( X 5 and X 10 ) 
and an Abbe condenser, assembled with an illumi- 
nator and mechanical stage is most suitable for 
biological examination. 

2 Microscopic examination generally gives a quali- 
tative idea of presence of organic matter including 
bacteria. Quantitative values are assigned only 
when specific cultures can be made. 

3 Samples containing too much clay or other suspen- 
ded matter may first be separated from these 
before microscopic examination by suiUble decan- 
tation and filtration. When the number of organisms 
is so small that a single drop of liquid might not 
contain any observable species, the sample should 
be centrifuged to concentrate the organism and the 
observations should be made on the concentrate. 

4 If on heating, an original dried sample of deposit 
gives pronounced darkening of the sample on heat- 
ing, it gives an indication of presence of organic 



matter. The odour of the burnt compound may alsa 
be used to identify many types of organic material 
such as carbohydrates, proteins, amines, oil, coal, 
sulphur compounds. This may further be verified 
by extracting the sample with suitable solvent and 
using the microscopy, X-ray diffraction or molecular 
absorption spectroscopy to confirm the initial 
suspicion. 

10.2 Petrographic Examination 

A pinch of powdered sample preferably 150 
micron size or finer supported by a glass slide is 
kept on the chemical microscope and the image 
of the object is magnified as the light passes 
upward through the objective. The magnified 
structures, which are generally constituted of 
more than one species are compared individu- 
ally with known structures of certain ions or 
species. The examination thus gives qualitative 
picture permitting distinction between several 
ions like phosphate, ferrous and ferric iron^ 
copper, zinc, nickel, calcium, magnesium, 
manganese, sodium, sulphate, chloride and 
others and also furnish the information of the 
presence of specified compounds and elements 
in the deposit. 

10.2.1 To estimate further the amount of certain 

species like amorphous material and glasses, 
examination is accomplished under a chemical 
microscope equipped with polarized light and 
the resolution noted. 

10.2.2 Identification of the species in the depo- 
sit is also accomplished by immersion ol the 
powder in oils of various refractive indices and 
then determination of the indices. 

NOTE — The chemical microscope is a standard 
instrument and differs from the biological microscope 
in that, it is equipped with a graduated rotating 
stage and polarizing prisms. Light from a source is 
reflected by the mirror and passes through the pola- 
rizer and condenser. The polarized light passes 
through the sample and the image of the object, is 
magnified as the Hght passes through the objective,, 
the analyser and the cross hair eye piece. 

11 X-RAY DIFFRACTION EXAMINATION 

The finely grounded sample enclosed in an air 
tight capsule or a suitable piece of large sample 
in flat form as required, is put into the diffrac- 
tometer where the pencil of X-rays is intercep- 
ted by the sample. The position of the peaks 
on the recorder chart is then determined for 
any given type of X-radiation, by the distances 
between layers of atoms in the crystalline com- 
ponents of the sample. These interatomic 
distances are then calculated from the measured 
position of the peaks and used to identify 
the crystalline compounds of a sample. 

11.1 To determine the compound quantitati- 
vely, use of detection of X-ray intensity is 
made by employing counter tubes in the difif- 



12 



IS 13624 : 1993 



ractometer, where a better integration of the 
overall composition of the sample is possible 
and sufHcient patterns are almost quantitatively 
available within 30 minutes to 1 h. 

NOTE — Accurate quantitative analysis depends on 
careful consideration of the absorption characteri- 
stics of the sample and how the sample is prepared. 
The minimum amount that can be detected may 
vary from 1 to 30 percent depending upon the effi- 
ciency of the compound as a diffractor and the absor- 
ption characteristics of other materials in the 
mixture. For example, 1 percent copper may be 
detected in magnesium hydroxide whereas 5 to 10 
percent copper shall be present for detection in an 
iron oxide sample. Further, the different sample 
preparation techniques may have preferred orienta- 
tions to increase the intensity of the strongest line, 
which although is acceptable for qualitative analysis 
{ to detect even smaller amounts ), but marks the 
other lines for quantitative analysis. 

X-ray diffraction analysis may also be made with 
photographic method by taking pattern of diffracted 
lines on photographic film which however, takes 
much time, but giving pattern of high quality lines 
on a very small amount of sample ( 2 to 3 mg of 
finely ground sample only ). However, the report of 
an X-ray diffraction analysis should give the name 
and formula for the crystalline species identified to- 
gether with an estimate of the relative amounts of 
the identified phases present; and any remarks 
regarding crystal size, solid solution or other 
pertineni information that may have been obtained. 

12 SPECTROSCOPIC ANALYSIS 

12.1 Atomic Absorption 

The finely ground sample in the form of solu- 
tion is atomized into the wide vaporizing 
oxyacetylene flame provided with the atomic 
absorption spectrophotometer and the absor- 
bance of the radiation is measured by the 
photometer in reference to a calibration curve 
showing the relationship of absorbance to con- 
centration. As the equipment has relative 
freedom of interference of one element from 
another, all elements present in the sample 
of the deposit may be easily determined one 
by one separately, and quantitatively. 

NOTES 

1 The principle of measurement is that when atoms 
of an element are diffused by atomization into a 
flame, they absorb light of the same wave length as 



is emitted at high temperature by that element. The 
amount of light absorbed by the atomized atoms 
is proportional to the element concentration in the 
vapour of the sample flame. 

2 By noting down the absorption levels at a given 
wave length over a given time, the amount of ele- 
ment present is determined generally by integrating 
the area under the various peaks observed u sing a 
recorder for a given time period in which the sample 
was atomized. 

12.2 Molecular Absorption 

The sample is ground briefly with powdered 
potassium bromide and the mixture is placed 
in an evacuable die. A mechanical vacuum 
pump removes the entrapped air, and the mix- 
ture is then pressed at about 1 000 kg/cm^ The 
pellet is then kept into the sample socket of 
molecular absorption spectrophotometer where 
the light from the source of infrared radiation 
( the filament of which operates at a low tem- 
perature ) is passed through the sample, and 
absorption bands in the infra-region of the 
spectrum is noted that is in the wave length 
range from about 2 to 15 micrometer. Each 
absorption band will be characteristic of a par- 
ticular grouping of organic substances which 
may be compared with the known sample. 

NOTES 

1 The method detects the presence ef organic com- 
pounds with their nature and grouping, but does 
not measure the compound quantitatively. 

2 Detection of oil in turbine deposits and the type 
classification determination of the type and degree 
of degradation of amines, and possible identification 
of the source of stream pollutants may be made by 
molecular absorption analysis. 

3 The temperature of the source must be carefully 
controlled to prevent change in the distribution of 
spectral intensity, 

4 The principle of operation of the equipment is 
such that the source light after passing through the 
sample is broken up into various wavelengths by a 
prism or diff'raction grating and after isolation of the 
desired wavelength band by a variable slit, the radia- 
tion falls on a detecting and measuring device most 
commonly using lead sulphide photocells. The out- 
put of the detecting device is then further amplified 
and fed to a recorder. 



13 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. CHD 13 ( 9037 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text AfiFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices ; Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 ^331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola C37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 {37 86 26. 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 |^^ ^^ ^^' ^^ ^^ "^^ 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 \lll ^l |^' ll^ ^^ "^^ 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) [632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 1632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GLWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at PnntweU Printers, Aligarh India 



