•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 14954 (2001) : Distress and Remedial Measures in Earth 
and Rockfill Dams - Guidelines [WRD 9: Dams and Spillways] 



* 



<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 



" 



* 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14954 : 2001 

fte£t rf 5TT ^TCFT ^RcT «M ^ cf^y cf cfrf P|c|KU| 
cf> ^TPT - HI'M Rh^KI 

Indian Standard 

DISTRESS AND REMEDIAL MEASURES IN EARTH 
AND ROCKFILL DAMS — GUIDELINES 



ICS 93.160 



©BIS 2001 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 200\ Price Group 5 



Dams and Reservoirs Sectional Committee, WRD 9 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Dams and 
Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 

Conservation of water is the most important prerequisite for proper management of water resources and hence, 
large number of earth and rockfill dams have been constructed in India, most of them after independence. While 
these dams have contributed to the development of the nation, some of them also pose as potential hazard because 
of catastrophic damage which can take place if the reservoir water stored behind the dam is suddenly released due 
to any failure or accident. The safety of the dam is thus of paramount importance and any deterioration or disorder 
observed in the dam, therefore, warrants immediate suitable strengthening. Strengthening may sometimes be necessary 
to restore the stipulated utility of the dam and reservoir. Strengthening may also be required for upgrading the 
stability of the dam due to inadequacies in original design, deficiencies in construction, ageing, increase in storage/ 
spillway capacity/seismicity or modification in codal design requirement. However, remedial measures imply restoration 
of original state and stability of dam after it has experienced some distress like breach, slope failure, settlements, 
crack formation, piping, subsidence/upheaval etc. 

The main object of strengthening the dam through remedial measures is not only to improve its safety alone but 
also to restore it fully to meet the designed requirements and estimated benefits. 

There is no ISO standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on indigenous manufacturers' 
data/practices prevalent in the field in India. 

The composition of the committee responsible for formulating this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 149S4 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

DISTRESS AND REMEDIAL MEASURES IN EARTH 
AND ROCKFILL DAMS — GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

This standard deals with the various causes of distress, 
detecting methods and implementation of the remedial 
measures for earth and rockfill dams. The distress and 
remedial measures pertaining to concrete/asphalt faced 
rockfill dams are not covered in this standard. The 
remedial measures for the works relating to increase 
in spillway capacity and construction of fuse plug 
or breaching secton are also not covered in this standard. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 



IS No. 
6066 : 1994 



7894:1975 



8826:1978 



9296:1979 



3 GENERAL 



Title 

Pressure grouting of rock 
foundations in river valley 
projects — Recommendations 
( second revision ) 

Code of practice for stability analysis 
of earth dams 

Guidelines for design of large earth 
and rockfill dams 

Guidelines for inspection and 
maintenance of dam and appurtenant 
structures (first revision ) 



The remedial measures best suited for a dam depend 
upon many factors. The type of treatment should be 
selected/adopted on the basis of techno-economic 
considerations to ensure the safety and restoration 
of embankment within stipulated period. The types 
of treatments discussed in the standard are overall 
and general and should be considered together with 
specific instructions that might have been stipulated 
during design, construction or maintenance. 

4 CAUSES FOR DISTRESS IN DAMS 

4.1 An evaluation of the existing rules of the art and 
any modification of the criteria used to evaluate the 



safety may result in disagreement with standard actually 
followed in design and construction of the dam. 

4.2 Distress in the dam generally takes place on 
account of the following: 

a) Natural factors like ageing, earthquake, 
unprecedented rains and floods, etc; 

b) Design inadequacies and deficiency; 

c) Imperfections and deficiencies during 
construction, operation and maintenance; 

d) Incorrect estimation of design parameters such 
as density, shear parameter, permeabi lity, etc; 
and 

e) Non-observance of design requirements with 
regard to construction of structures on 
upstream and downstream within specified 
zones. 

5 TYPES OF DISTRESS IN DAMS 

5.1 Types of distress most frequently observed in 
embankment dams are as follows: 

a) Distress due to deteriorations in the 
foundations, and 

b) Distress due to deteriorations in the dam body. 

5.2 Distress Due to Deteriorations in the Foundations 

5.2.1 Percolation and Internal Erosion 

The main cause of the deficient behaviour is due to 

(a) inadequacies of existing-seepage control system, 
namely seepage barriers and drainage system; and 

(b) excessive pore pressure or degradation in the 
foundation. 

5.2.2 Loss of Shear Strength 

Saturation of the soil may result in high value of pore- 
pressure and reduction in shear strength of the 
foundation which create disorders in and the form of 
downstream slips degradation of foundation material 
etc. 

5.2.3 Deformation and Subsidence 

Differential settlement in the foundation may lead to 
excessive seepage, high exit gradient through the strata 
of the foundation itself or opening/cracks development 
in the cut-off. 



IS 14954 : 2001 



5.3 Distress Due to Deteriorations in the Dam Body 

5.3.1 Percolation and Internal Erosion 

The distress is mostly associated with the following: 

a) Deficiency in construction with respect to 
moisture content control, earth placement and 
compaction particularly at junctions of zones 
and method dealing with frost effects; 

b) Unsatisfactory and sub-standard 
construction of the impervious core and other 
water barrier systems; and 

c) Use of undesirable construction materials 
without proper compliance to design 
parameters and without adequate precautions, 
in respect of fine clays, organic clay, dispersive 
clays, silt and fine uniform sands, soluble soils 
with boulders, decomposed rocks, weathered 
rocks, soils with unsuitable grain-size- 
distribution, etc; and 

d) Inadequacies of drainage system and filters. 

5.3.2 Slope Protection Works 

The distress in the slope protection works is generally 
attributed to: 

a) material decomposition or weathering; 

b) unforeseen actions or actions of exceptional 
magnitude such as precipitation or waves in 
reservoir; 

c) differential movements and/or slips of the 
protection measures at upstream; 

d) inadequate protective drainage filter layers 
below revetment and improper packing of 
revetments; 

e) splashing due to wave action, in case of 
inadequate free board, resulting in the 
downstream slope erosion; and 

f) Presence of too small size of stones. 

5.3.3 Differential Movements 

The differential movements including uneven load 
transfer, cracking, arching and hydraulic fracture in 
the dam body are liable to occur due to unsuitable 
embankment materials, improper construction methods, 
poor compaction and heterogeneity in foundation 
strata. 

5.3.4 Interface Between Embankments and Concrete/ 
Masonry/Steel Structures/ Adjoining Embankments 

Improper contact at interface leads to: 

a) Preferential path of seepage associated with 



internal erosion; and 
b) Differential movements. 

5.3.5 Upstream Slips 

The upstream slips are mostly associated with the 
following: 

a) Inadequate shear strength of the foundation; 

b) Inadequate strength of the embankment 
materials; 

c) Poor construction; 

d) Excessive pore pressure; 

e) Sudden drawdown; and 

f) Liquefaction. 

5.3.6 Downstream Slips 

The downstream slips are mostly associated with the 
following: 

a) Inadequate shear strength of the foundation; 

b) Inadequate strength of the embankment 
materials; 

c) Poor construction; 

d) Excessive pore pressure; 

e) Percolation and/or internal erosion; 

f) Liquefaction; and 

g) Saturation due to sustained rainfall. 
6 DETECTION METHODS 

6.1 Direct Observation and Monitoring 

Direct observation is one of the most effective methods 
of detecting the following deteriorations in foundation 
and dam body: 

a) Deformation and land subsidence; 

b) Excessive seepage and internal erosion; 

c) Slope protection; 

d) Differential movements; 

e) Upstream slips; and 

f) Downstream slips. 

Embankment dam should be monitored and examined 
for cracks, leakages, saturated areas or wet spots, 
springs, sinkholes, evidence of piping, erosion, 
excessive growth of vegetation, frost, heave, crest 
alignment, bulging or depression of slopes and berms, 
animal burrows, and deterioration of rip-rap or other 



IS 14954 : 2001 



slope protection materials. The major areas needing 
attention in inspection have been listed in IS 9296 
which may be referred to for guidance. 

6.1.1 Under- Water Observation 

Under-water observations with video equipment and 
remotely operated vehicles ( ROV ) or divers for 
inspecting inaccessible areas under-water may be used 
for detecting the deterioration in foundation and 
reservoir side of dam. 

6.2 Measurement 

Periodic and systematic measurements in respect of 
seepage, phreatic level, uplift, pore pressure, turbidity, 
horizontal displacement, vertical displacement and 
rainfall may also be used in detecting the deterioration 
in foundation and dam body. 

6.3 Investigation 

Test results on soil samples from dam and foundation 
and chemical and physical analysis of seepage can 
be used to investigate the deterioration in respect of 
shear strength, seepage and internal erosion of the 
foundation and dam body. 

7 REMEDIAL MEASURES 

7.1 Strengthening, repairs and remedial measures are 
not amenable to standardization and should be carefully 
selected depending upon (a) the risk element as 
influenced by the height of the dam, reservoir volume 
and potential loss to life and properties, etc, (b) the 
economic value of water stored, (c) nature of foundation 
stratum, and (d) materials and methods used in 
construction of the dam. Measures generally used 
areas follows: 

1) Monitoring distress level; 

2) Seepage control measures; 

3) Construction and/or repair of drains filters 
and relief wells; 

4) Strengthening by grouting or other methods; 

5) Filling of fractures, cavities and sink holes; 

6) Construction or repair of slope protection; 

7) Reconstruction of deteriorated zones; 

8) Upstream stabilization methods; 

9) Downstream stabilization methods; 

10) Raising of dam; 

1 1 ) Increase in spillway capacity; 

1 2) Construction of fuse plug/breaching section; 
and 

13) Lowering of reservoir level. 



Construction methods which may be used for 
rehabilitation are given in 7.2 to 7.10. 

7.2 Treatment for Control of Excessive Seepage 

The main objective of treatment is to restore the water 
tightness of the dam and foundation. The method of 
treatment may differ for foundation, dams with upstream 
membrane, dams with impervious core and 
homogeneous dams. 

7.2.1 Foundation 

7.2.1.1 Rock 

Depending upon the nature of rock, grouting may be 
done either from the upstream or top of the dam 
ensuring the formation of continuous barrier in the 
rock along with core. The grouting may be carried out 
with ordinary portland cement or chemicals 
(see IS 6066). 

7.2.1.2 Soil 

During the service time of reservoir it is usually 
impractical to provide a positive cut-off or open partial 
cut-off through out the length of the dam as a remedial 
measure. However, a full cut-off may be adopted by 
way of providing any one of the following: 

a) R.C.C. diaphragm; 

b) Plastic diaphragm; 

c) Sheet piles; and 

d) Alluvial grouting. 

Sometimes clay blanket constructed by suitably 
spreading impervious material upstream under minimum 
water condition in the reservoir combined with 
downstream relief wells may be the most appropriate 
solution. 

7.2.2 Dams with Impervious Core and Homogeneous 
Dams 

Problems related with seepage through the dam body 
having homogeneous section or core may be 
effectively tackled using the following measures: 

a) The seepage at about FRL and above is 
mainly as a result of siphon effect over the 
dam body and may be eliminated by extension 
of core up to at least one metre above MWL 
by open excavation and construction of 
continuous additional core above the existing 
one according to specification, 

b) Seepage through homogeneous section may 
be reduced by providing upstream geo- 
membrane lining with suitable cover of 
protective layer (see Fig. 1), 



IS 14954 : 2001 




1 . Anchoring of LDPE Film in Trenches 

2. Existing Slope Prof ite 

3. LDPE Film 350 Micron Thickness 



4. 90 cm Thick Earth Cover 

5. 30 cm Thick Stone Pitching 



Fig. I Typical Detail of Laying of LDPE Film on the Upstream Slope 



c) Construction of a cement-bentonite/plastic 
or concrete diaphragm wall through or 
adjacent to the core of the dam, 

d) Cement-beiuonite or chemical grouting, and 

NO'FT — Proper care is to be exercised to avoid 
reduction in the efficiency of downstream filter 
arrangements due to grouting. 

e) Removing and rebuilding the damaged parts 
of the dam including core with generously 
provided filter layers with very precise 
specifications in respect of the filter. 

7.3 Drains and Filter Construction or Repair 

The main aim of the remedial measure is to collect the 
seepage water inside the dam and through foundation 
and provide it a safe exit through the drainage system. 

7.3. 1 Perched Water 

To drain the perched water or high phreatic lines at 
different places leading to local slushiness in the 
downstream slope or piping, the following methods 
may be adopted: 

a) Constructing vertical drains in the downstream 
slope of the dam section going down and 
joining the extended horizontal filters. This 
will drain the perched water into the existing 
downstream drainage system of the dam 
section {see Fig. 2), 

b) Providing a new filter section with berm at the 
appropriate level of the downstream section 
covering the entire area of seepage. This 
section will serve the purpose of downstream 
loading and safe exit to the seeping water, 



c) Providing an inclined chimney filter and 
transverse filter drain for the seepage in 
downstream and covering the chimney 
section by constructing additional 
downstream section of dam {see Fig. 3), 

d) Provid ing filter and rock toe at the downstream 
toe and improve drainage, and 

e) Combination of above measures may also be 
adopted on account of safety and economic 
grounds. 

7.3.2 Sand Boils and Slushy Conditions on 
Downstream of Dam 

The main cause of sand boils and slushy conditions 
on the downstream of dam is the excess hydrostatic 
pressure and seepage through deep pervious strata 
underlying the dam. The severity of under-seepage 
both in respect of excessive hydrostatic pressure and 
seepage-flow is dependent upon head of water, 
permeability of substratum and characteristics of the 
upper strata of downstream portion. This problem may 
be tackled by properly designed and constructed 
downstream loading berm with suitable inverted 
filter, drainage trench, upstream clay blanket with or 
without relief wells or their suitable combination. 

7.4 Strengthening byCrouting 

Multiple-row-grout-curtain may be used for sealing 
deep permeable alluvium in foundation. However, dam 
body grouting may also be done if need arises. Special 
care has to be taken in working out the allowable 
grouting pressure and grout intake to avoid the 
possibility of further cracks in the core and rise of 
pore water pressure within the dam endangering its 



IS 14954 : 2001 



320- 



310 -f 




300- 



1. Vertical Drains 

2. Filter 

3. Clean Gravel 



4. Extended Horizontal Filter 

5. Existing Downstream Drainage System 

Fig. 2 Typical Details of Vertical Drains in the Downstream Slope 




7. Hydraulic Gradient Line with Water Level ( for 
Reservoir Condition A ) 

8. Stable Slope Suitable to Site Conditions 

9. Hydraulic Line with Water Level ( for Reservoir 
Condition B ) 

10. 1.5 m Thick Sand Filter 

11. Cross Filter Drains 

Fig. 3 Typical Detail of Inclined Chimney Filter in the Downstream Slope 



1. Existing Profile 

2. Proposed Profile 

3. Vertical Stand Pipe Piezometer 

4. Earthfill Compacted in Layers 

5. Cut Line 

6. Cut Line 



safety. Grouts, usually clay-cement-bentonite mixtures 
with certain additives and reagents, have to be adjusted 
to suit varying local conditions based on extensive 
laboratory and field tests to optimise the mix 
proportions with regard to stability, bleeding, fluidity, 
lubricity and strength. Clay-gels and silica-gels may 
be used but resins which are too expensive should 
be used judiciously depending on the necessity. 

7.5 Filling in Fractures and Cavities 



quality materials used for construction and defective 
placing of embankment or inefficient drainage system. 
The methods described in 7.5.1 to 7.5.3 are generally 
employed for strengthening. 

7.5.1 Removing the zone of cavities by open 
excavation and refilling the cavities with the dam 
material by placing, dumping, spreading, moistening 
and compacting as per specification adopted for dam 
construction. 



The main reasons for fractures and cavities are poor 7.5.2 Filling the cracks with thick slurry consisting 



IS 14954 : 2001 



primarily of natural clayey soil. Thoroughly mixed slurry 
is pumped with low head" pump under gravity head. 
Before pumping any slurry, the cracks are washed with 
water under pressure. Slurry filled into the cracks are 
allowed to dry for several days/weeks. In case of 
appreciable shrinkage of the slurry due to drying, the 
process is repeated. Finally the cracks should be sealed 
at the surface by trenching filling and recompacting 
with appropriate soil to a depth of 0.3 to 0.6 m. 

7.5.3 Sealing of sink holes in the reservoir or in the 
upstream of dam section by encircling the area by sheet 
piling and filling the hole with dense mixture of 
appropriate materials such as sand, gravel, pebble, 
boulder and rock fragments etc and then compacting 
as per specifications adopted for dam construction. 

7,6 Repair of Slope Protection 

7.6.1 The following measures are generally adopted 
to repair slope protection (see Fig. 4): 



a) Partial repair with the same material and 
methods as adopted in the original dam 
construction, 

b) Enlarging the upstream protection by dumping 
selected rockfill along the entire upstream 
slope, 

c) Enlarging the upstream protection zone by 
dumping selected rockfill over the platform 
constructed out of dumped coarse fractioned 
rockfill, 

d) Replacement of slope protection, and 

e) Partly enlarging the upstream protection from 
dumped coarse fractioned rockfill. 

7.7 Reconstruction of Deteriorated Zones 

Some times it becomes inevitable to reconstruct the 
dam section in part or whole length due to severe rain 





-ir* 



Om min 




~*1 ■ h~ A ' 



Om mm 





A. Partial Repair 

B. Enlarging 

C. Enlargine from Dumped Coarse Fractioned Rockfill 

Fio. 4 Different Ways of Repairing and Strengthening Upstream Slope Protection 



D. Replacement of Slope Protection 

E. Partly Enlarging from Dumped Coarse Fractioned 
Rockfill 



IS 14954:2001 



cuts, bulges, slope slides, settlement, unwarranted 
human and animal activities etc. In such cases, a fresh 
dam section based on IS 8826 and IS 7894, be evolved 
and fitted over the existing dam section in most 
economical methods. 

7.8 Upstream Slope Stabilization Methods 

Following methods may be employed for upstream 
slope stabilization: 

a) Flattening of the slope and/or reloading on 
the upstream toe. This may be done by 
constructing large width rockfill berm at lower 
level. Properly designed flatter slope can then 
be constructed from this lower level berm to 
the top of the dam, 

b) Stabilizing the upstream slope by grouting 
with sand cement grout, 

c) Restoration of failed slopes using geogrids, 
and 

d) Providing additional earthfill with horizontal 
filters within. 

7.9 Downstream Slope Stabilization Methods 

The following methods may be employed for 
downstream stabilization: 

a) Installing drainage system, 

b) Flattening of slope, 

c) Reinforcing of earth, 

d) Stone pitching, 

e) Providing an effective rain-water drainage 
system, 

f) Providing good and effective turfing, and 

g) Employing any other treatment suggested 
in 6.3. 



7.10 Raising of Dam Crest 

Raising of dam crest may be required on free board 
consideration. For raising a dam crest, strengthening 
of the profile by downstream loading may be done. 
While taking up the upstream strengthening for raising 
the dam crest, necessary precautions should be taken 
in respect of maintaining the reservoir outlet, removal 
of embankment protection, possible presence of 
sediments etc. In case of a zoned dam, the prolongation 
and strengthening of the core should be given due 
consideration. 

8 PLANNING, DESIGN AND EXECUTION OF 
REMEDIAL WORKS 

8.1 Design Procedure 

For any enlargement, alteration, rehabilitation, repair 
or abandonment of existing structures or facilities, 
the original design documents and all available 
construction and operation records should be carefully 
studied. 

If the rehabilitation would require substantial structural 
modification or if basic assumptions and environmental 
conditions which form the basis of the original design 
have considerably changed, the whole structure should 
undergo a new stability analysis. 

8.2 Principles and Criteria of Design 

Designing of any part or whole of any component of 
the embankment dam should be done as per current 
relevant Indian Standards. Before starting detailed 
design work, the actual condition of those parts or 
components of the structures to be enlarged, modified 
or repaired should be carefully surveyed anH 
documented. 

8.3 A close watch should also be kept to study the 
effectiveness of the treatment. AH necessary data and 
procedures adopted should be properly documented. 
Regular inspection of the distressed area, depending 
upon its importance, should be carried out. 



IS 14954 : 2001 



Chairman 
DrB. K. Mittal 

Members 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Dams and Reservoirs Sectional Committee, WRD 9 

Representing 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 



Chief Engineer ( Bhakradam ) 
Director ( Design ) B&B Design 
Directorate ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. P. Kaushish 

Shri T. S. Murthy ( Alternate ) 

Director 

Shri A. K. Dhavan ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. M. Khatsuria 

Shri P. B. Deolaijkar ( /Alternate ) 

Director [ CMDD-NW&S ] 

Director Reservoir ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. K. Narasimhajya 

Shri S. S. Narang ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. K. Kaistha 

Shri R. N. Singh ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( Medium & Minor ) & Additional 
Secretary 

Superintending Engineer ( CDO ) ( Alternate ) 

Head of the Civil Engineering Department 

Chief Engineer [ l&CAD ] 

Superintending Engineer ( Dams ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri A. Dasgupta 

Shri H. P. Chakrabarti ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( Dam Design ) 

Superintending Engineer Dam Design Circle 1 
( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( RSDD ) 

Director Dams ( RSDD ) ( Alternate ) 

Superintending Engineer ( MD ) 

Executive Engineer ( MD-4 ) ( Alternate ) 

Chiff Engineer ( Projects ) 

Director { Engg ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri A. K. Rishi 

Director ( Dams ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri D. G. Kadkade 

Shri Narendra Singh ( Alternate ) 

Shri P, R. Malti Karjuna 

Shri S. M. Chehbi ( Alternate ) 



Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal 

Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Material Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Consulting Engineering Services ( I ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Shillong 

Narmada and Water Resources Department, Government of Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh 

Irrigation and Water Ways Directorate, Government of West Bengal, 
Kolkata 

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee 

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik 

Irrigation Departmant, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 

Water Resources Department, Goverment of Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhopal 

Jaiprakash Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Karnataka Power Corporation Limited, Bangalore 



( Continued on page 9 ) 



IS 14954 : 2001 



( Continued from page 8 ) 

Members 

Shri George Cheriyan 

Shri M. S. Bisaria 

Shri R. D. Varangaonkar { Alternate ) 

Shri K. S. Nagaraja 

Shri Utpal Bora 

Dr S. M. Seth 

Dr P. K. Mhapatr ( Alternate ) 

Engineer in Chief 

Chief Engineer ( Alternate ) 

Shri L. K. Bansal 

Shri S. S. Sethi 
Director & Head ( WRD ) 



Representing 
Kerala State Electricity Board, Thiruvananthapuram 
Gammon India Ltd, Mumbai 

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 

Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 

Tehri Hydro Development Corporation, Noida 
Director. General, BIS { Ex-officio Member ) 



Member-Secretary 

Shri B. K. Sinha 

Joint Director ( Water Resources Department ), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; astandard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicatesthat no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or editionby referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 9(125). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

ManakBhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah ZafarMarg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 3 1, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : ManakBhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah ZafarMarg f 323 76 17 

NEWDELHI 1 10 002 \ 323 38 41 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I. T. Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road, Kankurgachi / 337 84 99,33785 61 

CALCUTTA 700 054 1337 86 26,3379120 

Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 f 603843 

\ 6020 25 
Southern: C. I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI600 113 / 23 5 02 16, 2350442 

12351519,2352315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, AnHheri (East) J* 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400 093 1 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches: AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



