**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13620 (1993) : Fusion bonded epoxy coated reinforcing 
bars - [CED 54: Concrete Reinforcement] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 13620:1993 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

FUSION BONDED EPOXY COATED 
REINFORCING BARS — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 669-14018-26-422 : 621-793-7 ( 678-686 ) 



© BIS 1993 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1993 Price Group 4 



Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 2 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

Corrosion of reinforcing bars in R. C. C. constructions, particularly those located in the saline 
corrosion prone and industrially poluted area, is one of the major problems encountered by the 
structural engineers in our country. Amongst the long term measures, one of the method for 
protection of concrete reinforcing bars against corrosion is epoxy coating on these bars by 
electrostatic spraying of fusion bonded epoxy powder. Therefore, Iceeping in view the country's 
need for appropriate corrosion resistance reinforcing bars, it was felt necessary to prepare this 
standard in order to help the users to procure epoxy coated reinforcing bars of accepted quality. 
The use of such bars is not recommended as a substitute for good construction practices 
including adequate cover and other durability requirements specified in the relevant standard. 

While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 

ASTM Designation : A 775/ A 775 M-84 Standard specification for epoxy- coated reinforcing 

bars, American Society for Testing and Materials 
ASTM Designation : D 3963-1986 Standard specification for epoxy-coated reinforcing bars 

American Society for Testing and Materials 

The composition of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is 
given in Annex B. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



IS 13620 : 1993 



Indian Standard 

FUSION BONDED EPOXY COATED 
REINFORCING BARS — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers deformed steel reinforcing 
bars with protective epoxy coating appHed by 
electrostatic spray method. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards mentioned below are a 
necessary adjunct to this standard: 

IS No, Title 

1786 : 1985 High strength deformed steel 

bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement ( third revision ) 

6885 : 1973 Method for knoop hardness 

testing of metals 

3 COATING MATERIALS 

3.1 The coating material shall meet the require- 
ments specified in Annex A.. 

3.2 The patching or repairing material or both, 
shall be compatible with the coating, inert in 
concrete and feasible for repairs at the coating 
plant or in the field. This material shall be 
approved by the purchaser prior to use. The 
patching or repair shall be performed in accor- 
dance with the recommendation of the material 
manufacturer. 



4 REINFORCING STEEL 

4,1 Steel reinforcing bars 
conform to IS 1786 : 1985. 



6 APPLICATION OF COATING 

The coating shall be applied as an electrostati- 
cally charged dry powder sprayed onto the 
grounded steel bar using an electrostatic spray 
gun. The powder may be applied to either a 
hot or cold bar. The coated bar shall be given 
a thermal treatment specified by the manufac- 
turer of the epoxy resin which will provide a 
fully cured finish coating. Temperature shall 
be controlled as recommended by the manufac- 
turer of the coating to ensure a workman like 
job without blistering or other defects. 

7 REQUIREMENTS OF COATED BARS 

7.1 Coating Thickness 

7.1.1 For acceptance purposes at least 90 percent 
of all coating thickness measurements shall be 
O'l mm to 0*3 mm after curing. The coating 
thickness limits do not apply to patched areas. 
A minimum of 15 measurements shall be taken 
approximately evenly spaced along each side 
of the test bar. At least 90 percent of these 
measurem-cnts shall be within the specified 
limits. 

NOTE — By mutual agreement between thepurchaser 
and the manufacturer, thicker coating may be 
accepted where the bars are not to be bent or worked 
after the coating has been applied. 



to be coated shall 7.2 Continuity of Coating 



5 SURFACE PREPARATION 

5.1 The surface of the steel reinforcing bars to 
be coated shall be cleaned by abrassive blast 
cleaning to near white metal. The surface 
profile shall be free from mill scale, rust and 
foreign matter when viewed under well-lit 
conditions. 

5.2 The coating shall be applied to the cleaned 
surface as soon as possible after cleaning. Any 
formation of rust blooms on the cleaned bars 
are to be removed by blast cleaning before 
application of the coating. However, in no case 
shall the coating be delayed more than eight 
hours after cleaning unless otherwise permitted 
by the purchaser. 



The coating shall be visually inspected after 
curing for continuity of the coating and shall 
be free from holes, voids, contamination, 
cracks and damaged areas discernible to the 
unaided eye. In addition, there shall be not 
more than an average of two holidays per 
300 cm when tested in accordance with 8.2. 

NOTE — Holiday means a pinhole not discernible 
to the unaided eye. 

7.3 Adhesion 

The adhesion of coating shall be evaluated on 
a representative number of bars selected in 
accordance with 9.4 from each production lot. 
No visible cracks or disbonding in the coating 
on the outside radius shall be allowed when 
tested in accordance with 8.3. 



IS 13620 : 1993 



8 TEST METHODS 

8.1 The thickness of the coating shall be 
measured on the body of reinforcing bar 
between deformations and ribs or both, on a 
straight length. Non-destructive coating thick- 
ness measurements using magnetic gauges shall 
be used. 

8.1.1 "Pencil' type pull-off gauges which require 
the operator to observe the reading at the 
instant the magnet is pulled from the surface 
and do not hold shims tightly against the steel 
plate during calibration are not recommended 
for use. 

8.1.2 Gauge calibration with shims shall be 
performed on a smooth, clean, low-carbon 
steel plate ( at least 75 x 75 x 13 mm ), rather 
than on a clean reinforcing bar. 

8.1.3 A correction factor defining the effect of 
the bar preparation process shall be obtained 
as the difference between ( a ) the average of 
the 10 gauge readings on a cleaned but uncoated 
reinforcing bar of the size and lot being coated 
and (b) the average of 5 gauge readings on a 
smooth mild steel plate. This correction factor 
shall then be subtracted from all subsequent 
gauge readings on coated bars. 

8.1.4 Fixed probe gauges shall be checked to 
ensure that the force generated by the spring 
loaded probe housing is sufficient to ensure 
intimate contact between the probe tip and the 
coating on the curved bar surface. If intimate 
contact does not result, it will be necessary 
to remove the probe housing and utilize hand- 
pressure to obtain valid indicated thicknesses. 

8.2 Holidays 

A 67-5 volts holiday detector shall be used in 
accordance with the detector manufacturer's 
instructions. The detector may be an in line 
DC detector or a hand held DC detector. 

8.3 Adhesion of Coating 

The adhesion of the coating shall be evaluated 
by bending production coated bars 120 degrees 
( after rebound ) around a mandrel of size as 
prescribed in Table 1. The bend test shall be 
made at a uniform rate and shall take up to 
90 seconds to complete. The two longitudinal 
deformations shall be placed in a plane 
perpendicular to the mandrel radius and the 
test specimen shall be at thermal equilibrium 
between 25°C and 35°C. 

NOTE — The fracture of partial failure of steel 
reinforcing bar in the bend test for adhesion of 
coating shall not be considered as an adhesion 
failure of the coating. 



Table 1 Mandrel Diameter for Bend Test 
Requirements 

( Clause 8.3 ) 



Bar Diameter, 


Madrel Diameter, 


mm 


mm 


(1) 


(2) 


6 


60 


8 


80 


10 


100 


12 


100 


16 


125 


18 


150 


20 


150 


22 


200 


25 


200 


28 


225 


32 


280 


36 


280 


40 


400 


45 


450 


50 


500 



9 FREQUENCY OF TEST 

9.1 Coating thickness shall be tested at a 
frequency of not less than one full length bar 
every twenty bars for each size. 

9.2 Continuity of coating shalJ be determined 
by testing one full length bar in every twenty 
bars for each size. 

9.3 Coating thickness over the whole of the 
coated bar section shall be determined by 
sectioning and examining one bar in every 
twenty tonnes for each size. 

9.4 For testing adhesion of coating, samples 
shall be selected from each size according to 
the frequency given below: 

Nominal Size of Bar, mm No. of Samples 

Up to 16 1 for every 1 tonnes 

Above 16 and up to 25 1 for every 2 tonnes 
Above 25 1 for every 4 tonnes 

10 RETEST 

10.1 If the specimen for coating thickness or 
for adhesion of coating fails to meet the 
specified requirements, twice the number of 
samples originally selected shall be tested for 
each failure test. If the results of these retests 
meet the specified requirements, the coated 
bar represented by the samples shall be 
accepted. 



IS 13620 : 1993 



11 HANDLING AND IDENTIFICATION 

11.1 All systems for handling coated bars shall 
have padded contact areas. All bundling bands 
shall be padded or suitable banding shall be 
used to prevent damage to the coating. All 
bundles of coated bars shall be lifted with a 
strong back, spreader bar, multiple supports, 
or a platform bridge to prevent bar-to-bar 
abrasion from sags in the bundles of coated 
bars. The bars or bundles shall not be dropped 
or dragged. 

11.2 The identification of all reinforcing bars 
shall be maintained throughout the fabrication 
and coating processes to the point of shipment. 

12 INSPECTION 

All tests and inspection shall be made at the 
place of manufacture prior to shipment, unless 
otherwise specified. 

13, PERMISSIBLE COATING DAMAGE AND 
REPAIR AFTER COATING APPLICATION 

13.1 Coating damage due to fabrication and 
handling need not be repaired in case where 
the damaged area is 40 mm® or smaller. 

13.2 All damaged areas larger than 40 mm^ 
shall be repaired with patching material. 

13.3 Maximum amount of damage shall not 
exceed 2 percent of the surface area of each 
bar ( total of damage in 13.1 and 13.2 ). 



13.4 Patching shall be done in accordance with 
the patching material manufacturer's recom- 
mendations. 

14 REJECTION 

Coated bars represented by the samples that do 
not meet the requirements of this specification 
shall be rejected. By mutual agreement 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer, 
such bar may be stripped of coating, recleaned, 
re-coated, and resubmitted for acceptance test 
in accordance with the requirements of the 
specification. 

15 MANUFACTURER'S CERTIFICATE 

If requested by the purchaser, the manufacturer 
shall furnish, at the time of shipment, a 
written certificate that 'he coated reinforcing 
bars meet the requirements of this specification. 

16 IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING 

16.1 The manufacturer or supplier shall mark 
the bars in such a way that all finished bars can 
be traced to the cast from which they are made 
or the original identification mark of the bars. 

16.2 Each bundle containing the bars may also 
be suitably marked with the Standard Mark in 
which case the concerned test certificate shall 
also bear the Standard Mark. 

16.2.1 For each bundle of bars a tag shall be 
attached indicating the Cast No. /Lot No.,, 
grade and size of the bars. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 3.1 ) 

REQUIREMENTS FOR ORGANIC COATINGS 



A-1 COATING MATERIAL 

The coating material shall comply with the 
requirements given in A-2 to A-8 the pigment, 
if used may be inorganic compound. 

A-2 CHEMICAL RESISTANCE 

A-2.1 The chemical resistance of coating shall 
be evaluated by immersing coated reinforcing 
bars in each of the following: 

a) Distilled water, 

b) A 3 M aqueous solution of CaCL, 



c) A 3 M aqueous solution of NaOH, and 

d) A solution saturated with Ca ( OH )^. 

A-2.2 Specimens without holidays and speci- 
mens with 6 mm diameter intentional holes 
drilled through the coating shall be tested. The 
temperature of the test solution shall be 
30 ± 5°C. Minimum test time shall be 45 days. 
The coating shall not blister, soften, lose bond, 
nor develop holidays during this period. The 
intentionally made holes shall exhibit no 
undercutting during the 45-day period. 



IS 13620 : 1993 



A-3 RESISTANCE TO APPLIED VOLTAGE 
( TYPE OF ACCELERATED CORROSION 
TEST) 

A-3.1 The effects of electrical and electroche- 
mical stresses on the bond of coating to steel 
and on the film integrity of the coating shall 
be assessed. 

A-3.2 Apparatus and Electrolyte 

A-3.2.1 Test Vessel 

A non-conductive plastic material shall be used 
for the vessel or as a lining in a metallic 
vessel. Dimensions of the vessel shall permit 
the following requirements: 

a) Test specimens shall be suspended verti- 
cally in the vessel with at least 25 mm 
clearance from the bottom. 

b) Test specimens shall be separated by not 
less than 40 ram. 

c) Test specimens shall be separated from 
any wall of the vessel by not less than 
40 mm. 

d) Depth of the electrolyte shall permit the 
test length of the specimen to be 
immersed, but the immersed area shall not 
be less than 23, 200 mm^ 

A-3.2.2 Electrodes 

The cathode and anode shall be reinforcing 
bars coated with the proposed material. 

A-3.2.3 Electrolyte 

The electrolyte shall be an aqueous solution 
of 7 percent NaCL. 

A-3.2.4 Electrical Connection 

A potential of 2 V shall be applied. 

A-3.3 No film failures as evidenced by evolu- 
tion of hydrogen gas at the cathode or 
appearance of corrosion products of iron at 
the anode, shall take place during first hour 
of testing. 

A-3.4 The test shall be continued for 30 days 
and the elapsed time for development of the 
first holiday shall be recorded. No under- 
cutting of the coating shall occur at any 
holiday that develops during the test. If no 
holiday has developed during the 30 days, 
single intentional hole 6 mm in diameter shall 
be made in both the cathode and the anode. 
Then the test shall be continued for an addi- 
tional 24 h in which time no undercutting shall 
occur. 



A-4 ADHESION OF COATING 

A-4.1 The adhesion of the coating shall be 
evaluated by bending three coated reinforcing 
bars 120 degrees ( after rebound ) around a 
150 mm diameter wooden mandrel. The bend 
test shall be made at a uniform rate and shall 
take up to 1 min to complete. The two longi- 
tudinal deformations may be placed in a plane 
perpendicular to the mandrel radius and the 
specimen shall be at the thermal equilibrium 
of 30 ± 5°C. 

A-4.2 No cracking of the coating shall be 
visible to the unaided/naked eye on the outside 
radius of any of the three bent bars. 

A-5 BOND STRENGTH TO CONCRETE 

A-5.1 The bond strength of the reinforcing 
bars in concrete shall be determined with 
pull-out specimens ( two coated bar specimens 
and two uncoated uncleaned bar specimens ) 
by method outlined in IS 1786 : 1985 as modi- 
fied in A-5.2 to A-5.8. The test specimens 
shall be coated and uncoated bars of 20 mm 
nominal diameter. Bond strength shall be 
calculated from the load at a measured slip 
of 0-025 mm and 0-25 mm. 

A-5.2 The age of the concrete shall be 28 days. 

A-5.3 The test shall be carried out applying 
axial force on the bar and by measuring the 
slip at free end of the bar. The test shall be 
continued up to the failure of the bond between 
bar and the surrounding concrete. The failure 
shall deemed to have occurred when the free 
end slip of the bar exceeds 0-2 mm. 

A-5.4 The load and slip measurements are 
recorded at a slip of 0-0 1mm, 0-1 mm and at 
failure. 

A-5.5 The mean bond strength at the measured 
slip of 0-025 mm and 0-25 mm for coated bars 
shall not be less than 80 percent of the corres- 
ponding mean bond strength for uncoated 
bars. 

A-6 ABRASION RESISTANCE 

A-6.1 The resistance of the coating on each of 
the steel panels to abrasion by a Taber abrasor 
or its equivalent using CS-10 wheels and 1 kg 
load, shall be such that the weight loss shall 
not exceed 100 mg/1 000 cycles. 

A-7 IMPACT TEST 

A-7.1 The resistance of the reinforcing bar 
coating to mechanical damage shall be deter- 
mined by the falling weight test. 



IS 13620 : 1993 



A- 7.2 Apparatus 

A-7.2.1 Tup 

The tup shall have 1-8 kg mass, and should be 
used over a drop range of 0-60 to 1-25 m. The 
head of the tup shall terminate in a hemisphe- 
rical 15*875 mm diameter nose. 

A-7.2.2 Drop Tube 

A tube approximately 1-50 m long shall be used 
to contain the tup and guide it during free falL 
A scale shall be attached for measuring the 
height of the drop to the nearest 2*0 mm* 

A-7,2.3 Specimen Holder 

The base plate of the apparatus shall include a 
device for positioning and holding the test 
specimen on line with the axis of the vertical 
<lrop line. 



A-7.3 Impact shall occur on the low laying 
areas on the coated bars, that is, between 
deformations and ridges. The test shall be 
performed at room temperature. With an 
impact of9Nm, no shuttering, cracking, or 
bond loss of the coating shall occur except at 
the impact area, that is, area permanently 
deformed by the tup, 

A-8 HARDNESS TEST 

A-8.1 The hardness of the reinforcing bar 
coating shall be determined by knoop hardness 
tester according to the method given in 
IS 6885 : 1973 using a 10 g mass. The average 
of four individual hardness measurements made 
in the area between deformations or ribs on at 
least two coated reinforcing bars shall be equal 
to, or shall exceed the Knoop Hardness 
number of 16. 



IS 13620 : 1993 



ANNEX B 

( Foreword ) 
Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 2 



Representing 
In personal capacity ( University of Roorkee, Roorkee 247667 ) 

Orissa Cement Limited, New Delhi 
B. G. Shirke and Co, Pune 

The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhinagar 

Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 

National Building Organization, New Delhi 

A. P. Engineering Research Laboratories. Hyderabad 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Hyderabad Industries Limited, Hyderabad 

Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), Ghaziabad 
The India Cements Limited, Madras 

Gannon Dunkerley & Company Limited, Bombay 

Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee 

Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 



Chairman 
Dr H. C, Visvesvaraya 

Members 
Shri H. Bhattacharya 
Shri G. R. Bhartikar 

Shri U. N. Rath ( Alternate ) 

Dr a. K. Chatterjee 

Shri S. H. Subramanian ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( Designs ) 

Superintending Engineer ( S & S ) 
( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer, Navagam Dam 
Superintending Engineer, QCC 
( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( Research-cum- 
Director ) 
Research Officer ( Concrete 
Technology ) 

Deputy Director ( I ) 

Assistant Director ( EH ) ( Alternate ) 

Director 

Joint Director ( Alternate ) 
Director ( CMDD ) ( N & W ) 

Deputy Director ( CMDD ) 

' ( NW &S ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. H. Gangwal 

Shri V. Fattabhi ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. K. Ghanekar 
Shri S. Gopinath 

Shri R. Tamflakaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, K. Guha Thakurta 

Shri S. P. Shankaranarayanan 
( Alternate ) 

Dr Irshad Masood 

Dr Md Khalid ( Alternate ) 

Shri N, C. Jain 

Dr. S. p. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director, Standards ( B & S ) (CB-I) Research, Designs and Standards Organization ( Ministry of 

Joint Director, Standards ( B & S )/ Railways ), Lucknow 



(CB-Il ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Joshi 

;bHRi P. D. Kelkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Kanungo 

Shri B. R. Meena ( Alternate ) 

Shri P. Krishnamurthy 

Shri S. Chakravarthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Reddy ( Alternate ) 

Dr a. G. Madhava Rao 

Shri K . Mani ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. K. Majumdar 

Shri S. O. Rangari ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. K. Mufcherjee 

Shri M. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 

Member Secretary 

Director ( Civil ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri Nirmal Singh 

Shri S. S. Miglani ( Alternate ) 



Indian Hume Pipes Co Limited, Bombay 
National Test House, Calcutta 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), Madras 

Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation ( India ) Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Roads Wing, Department of Surface Transport ( Ministry of 

Transport ), New Delhi 
Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Development Commissioner for Cement Industry ( Ministry of 
Industry ) 



Members 

Shri R. C. Par ate 

Col R. K. Singh ( Alternate ) 

Shri Y- R. Phull 
Shri S. S. Seehra 

Shri Y. R. Phull 

Shri N. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 

Dr C. Rajkumar 

Dr S. C. Ahluwalia ( Alternate } 

Shri G. Ramdas 

Shri R. C . Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. A- Reddi 

Shri N. Prabhakar ( Alternate ) 

Representative 

Shri J. S, Sanganeria 

Shri L. N. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. B. Suri 

Shri N. Chandrasekaran ( Alternate ) 

Superintending Engineer ( Design ) 

Executive Engineer ( S. M. R. Divison ) 
( Alternate ) 

Shri Tarwinder Singh 

Shri Alok Aggarwal ( Alternate ) 

Dr H. C. Visvesvaraya 

Shri D. C. Chatturvedi ( Alternate ) 

Shri Y. R. Taneja, 
Director ( Civ Engg ) 



IS 13620 : 1993 

Representing 
Engineer-ln-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 

Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 

Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

Builder's Association of India, Bombay 
Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Public Works Deartment, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 

The Institution of Engineers ( India ). Calcutta 

Director General, BIS ( Ex-Officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri J. K. Prasad 

Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 



Convener 
Dr C, Rajkumar 

Members 



Concrete Reinforcement, Subcommittee, CED 2 : 13 

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi 



Dr Anil Kumar ( Alternate to 
Dr C. Rajkumar) 

Brig S- V. Abhyankar 

Dr J. L. Ajmani 

Shri S. C. Mohanty ( Alternate ) 

Shri C R. Alimchandani 

Executive Director ( Special Projects ) 
( Alternate ) 

Shri K. G. Balram 

Shri V. Narayanaswamy ( Alternate) 
Shri S. N. Chanda 

Shri R* D. Choudhry ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Chellani 

Shri Ramesh Kohli ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( Design ) 

Superintending Engineer ( CDO ) 
( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer ( KAD ) 

Director ( PP ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Dasgupta 

Shri S. Gopalan ( Alternate ) 



Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 
The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Stup Consultants Ltd, Bombay 

Multiweld Wire Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Metallurgical & Engigeering Consultants ( India ) Ltd, Ranchi 

Usha Ismal Ltd. Ranchi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab 
Bhilai Steel Plant, Bhilai 



IS 13620 : 1993 



Members 

Sum D. I. X>ESAJ 

Shri a. L. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. R. Desai 

Shri M. S. PatHAK ( Alternate ) 

Director 

Deputy Director ( Alternate ) 

Director ( HCD — NW & S ) 

Director ( N&W ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. R. Doctor 

Shri V. C. Trickur ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. K. Ghanescar 

Shri D. S. Prakash Rao ( Alternate ) 

Shri P. K. Gupta 

Shri J. N. Jambusaria 



Representing 
Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

Tensile Steels Ltd, Bombay 

National Buildings Organization, New Dejhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Structural Engineering Research Centre, Ghaziabad 



Nattonai Metaiiurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jamshedpur 
Killick Nixon Ltd, Bombay 
Shri P- S. Venkat Subramanian ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. P. Jasuja Research & Development Centre for Iron & Steel (Steel 

Authority of India ), Ranchi 

Joint Director Standards ( B & S ) CB-II Research Designs & Standards Organization, Lucknow 
AssTT Design Engineer ( B & S ) ( CS-I ) 
( Alternate ) 

Steel Re-rolling Mills Association India, Calcutta 

Tor Steel Research Foundation in India, Calcutta 



Joint Secretary 

Shri H.N. Krishna Murthy 

Dr p. C. Chowdhury ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. N. Madge 

Shri S. B. Malekar ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. K. Mathur 

Shri M. K . Mukherjee 

Shri N. K. Sinha y Alternate ) 

ShriS. N. Pal 

Shri Salil Roy { Alternate ) 

Shri a. S. Prasada Rao 

Shri H. G. Sreenath ( Alternate ) 

Shri T. Sen 

Dr C. N. Srinivasan 

Shri C. N. Raghavandran ( Alternate ) 



Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Public Works Department, Government ofU. P., Lucknow 
Roads Wing ( Department of Surface Transport, Ministry of 
Transport ), New Delhi 

M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Structural Engineering Research Centre, Madras 

IRC Steels Ltd, Calcutta 

C. R. Narayana Rao, Madras 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bareaa of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Stanaards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of tbe activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. CED 2 ( 4737 ) 

Amendments issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Teiegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices t Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. !. T. Scheme V!I M, V, L P, Road, Maniktola C37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 137 86 26, 37 86 62 

\53 U43, S3 16 40 



p3I 01 31 
^331 13 75 

137 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 T ^ ^^ ^^ 

Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 {^^^ ^^ j^* ^^J ^^\ ^^ 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) J632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 |632 78 9i, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZiABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prtntwell Printers. Aligarh, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 APRIL 1994 

TO 

IS 13620 : 1993 FUSION BONDED EPOXY COATED 

REINFORCING BARS — SPECIFICATION 



(Page 1, clause 7.2, line 7 ) — Substitute '300 mm' for '300 cm.' 



(CED54) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi. India 



