**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14907 (2001) : Human/Human Surrogate Impact (Single 
Shock) Testing and Evaluation - Guidance on Technical 
Aspects [MED 28: Mechanical Vibration and Shock] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14907:2001 
18010227:1996 

VH<^H i^Hch ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

^mRT/^TRcT ^MIMH TT W {W^ W\^) qft^W tt^ 

Indian Standard 

HUMAN/HUMAN SURROGATE IMPACT 

(SINGLE SHOCK) TESTING AND 

EVALUATION — GUIDANCE ON TECHNICAL 

ASPECTS 



ICS 13.160 



©BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 2001 Price Group 3 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, ME 28 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 1 0227 : 1 996 'Human/human surrogate impact (single 
shock) testing and evaluation — Guidance on technical aspects' issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the 
recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (.) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian 
Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place 
are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Corresponding Indian Degree of 

Standard Standard Equivalence 

ISO 5805 : 1997 IS 13281 : 1999 Mechanical vibration and shock Identical 

affecting man — Vocabulary 

ISO 8727 : 1997 IS 14910 : 2001 Mechanical vibration and shock do 

— Human exposure — Biodynamic coordinate 
system 



IS 14907 : 2001 
ISO 10227:1996 



Indian Standard 



HUMAN/HUMAN SURROGATE IMPACT 

(SINGLE SHOCK) TESTING AND 

EVALUATION — GUIDANCE ON TECHNICAL 

ASPECTS 



1 Scope 

This International Standard defines technical aspects 
of experiments dealing with hunnan or hunnan surro- 
gate testing and procedures for collecting and report- 
ing biomechanical data. Reconnnriended practices 
regarding measurements, instrumentation and report- 
ing of results are outlined. These recommended prac- 
tices are provided as guide for ease of interpretation 
and comparison of data among different organizations. 

This International Standard is limited to experiments 
involving indirect (inertial) impact and does not ad- 
dress direct impact with vehicle surfaces or the use of 
the airbag-type of active restraining device. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this International Standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this International Standard are encouraged to in- 
vestigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below. Members 
of lEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid In- 
ternational Standards. 

ISO 5805: — ^\ Mechanical vibration and shock affect- 
ing man — Vocabulary. 

ISO 8727: — 2)^ Mechanical vibration and shock — 
Human exposure — Biodynannic coordinate systems. 



3 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the 
definitions given in ISO 5805 and the following defini- 
tions apply, 

3.1 test subject: Human being or human surrogate 
(e.g. cadaver, animal, manikin) that serves as the test 
occupant of the vehicle, 

3.2 test subject coordinate system: Right-handed 
orthogonal coordinate system U, y, z), in accordance 
with ISO 8727, which is used to locate the position of 
the instrumented segments of the test subject. 

3.3 vehicle: Structure to which the driving force or 
impact is delivered. This includes all elements of the 
system which transmit forces to the test subject, in- 
cluding any integrated support/seat and restraint sys- 
tem. 

3.4 vehicle coordinate system: Right-handed or- 
thogonal coordinate system (jc, y, z) which is used to 
locate the occupant position and restraint or impact 
surface configuration. Its origin should be defined rela- 
tive to a rigid structure (one that is not significantly de- 
formed during the test) on the vehicle. 



4 Measurement requirements 
4.1 initial conditions 

All measurements of location and orientation should 
be transformable to the vehicle coordinate system. 



1) To be published. (Revision of ISO 5805:1981) 

2) To be published. 



IS 14907 : 2001 
ISO 10227 :1996 



4.1.1 The numbers, surveyed locations, orientations, 
mounting and coupling characteristics of all trans- 
ducers and photometric targets should be reported. 

4.1.2 The initial position of the test subject, the re- 
straint and support or seat configuration should be 
described as fully as possible. The restraint system 
description should include the following: 

a) location and orientation of anchor attachment 
points; 

b) angles of belt restraints relative to body contact 
points and anchor attachment points; 

c) distances along webbing from anchor points to 
the points where the belts contact the occupant; 

d) webbing properties, dimensions and type of 
hardware; 

e) webbing retractor characteristics; 

f) webbing connector characteristics; 

g) preloads on restraint components; 

h) webbing force-elongation properties. 

The description of the support/seat fixture should in- 
clude the following: 

a) geometry and materials adequate to establish the 
deformation and friction characteristics of the 
support/seat surface; 

b) dimensions and orientations relative to the ve- 
hicle coordinate system; 

c) energy absorption or deformation characteristics 
of support structures between the origin of the 
vehicle coordinate system and the occupant, if 
pertinent; 

d) location of point of impact. 

4,1.3 Ambient environmental factors affecting the 
outcome of the experiment should be reported. 

4.2 Input variables 

The input variables include time-dependent displace- 
ment, velocity, acceleration and force. All measure- 
ments of variables should be transformable to the 
vehicle coordinate system and should be accom- 
plished in the number of degrees of freedom mat- 
ching those included in the response measures. 
Typical amplitude-time histories of the input are desir- 
able; otherwise, a statement of the methodology used 
to measure these variables should be reported. 

4.3 Subject parameters 

Measurement of body dimensions are crucial for de- 
scribing the test subject and estimating mass distri- 
bution properties. Mass distribution properties of the 
whole body and anatomical segments can be obtained 
directly in cadaveric research but must be estimated 
for live volunteer subjects. Biomechanical parameters 



such as segment mass, centre of gravity, moment of 
inertia, etc., can be used in extrapolating results to 
populations of interest. 

4.3.1 Anthropometric measures 

These should include, but need not be limited to, the 
following: 

a) mass; 

b) stature; 

c) sitting height; 

d) shoulder height; 

e) head height; 

f) head breadth; 

g) head length; 

h) head circumference; 

i) neck circumference; 

j) shoulder breadth; 

k) shoulder/elbow length; 

1) elbow-rest height; 

m) elbow/finger tip length; 

n) chest circumference; 

o) thoracic thickness; 

p) popliteal height; 

q) buttock/knee length; 

r) knee height (sitting). 

4.3.2 Condition and prehistory 

For live human subjects, complete medical histories 
including age and gender should be recorded and any 
anomalies noted. Similar information, where possible, 
should also be provided for cadavers. Cadaveric exper- 
iments should be conducted on specimens free from 
injuries, wounds, or other anomalies which may inter- 
fere with the conduct of the test or interpretation of 
results. Cadavers should be as fresh as possible and 
embalming procedures should be completely de- 
scribed. Storage conditions of the cadaver, up to the 
time of the experiment, should also be described. Any 
ancillary procedures, such as vascular injection or con- 
trol of the thoracic volume of cadavers, should be 
completely defined. 

For all types of testing (live human subject, human 
surrogate), anatomical landmarks should be identified, 
marked and measured in relation to defined anatom- 
ical coordinate systems (in accordance with 
ISO 8727). If possible, radiographic records of the 
subjects with instrumentation mounts and measure- 
ment scales should be made. Insufficiently visible ana- 
tomical landmarks should be enhanced via the use of 
radio-opaque spheres. Photographs or schematics 
with dimensions identified should be maintained if 
radiographic records are not possible. 



IS 14907 : 2001 
ISO 10227 :1996 



5 Instrumentation 



5.1 Transducers 

Data collected from transducers mounted on the 
subject and within the seat, restraint or other force- 
transmitting structure, as well as physiological sen- 
sors, are used to quantify both the severity of the test 
and local responses of the anatomy to crash and im- 
pact forces, and to delineate transmission character- 
istics and transfer functions of anatomical segments. 
Subclauses 5.1 .1 to 5.1 .6 give the required transducer 
characteristics. 

5.1.1 Transducers and other sensors mounted on the 
subject should have low mass so as to affect mini- 
mally the responses of the monitored anatomical 
segment. 

5.1.2 Transducers and other sensors mounted on the 
subject should be mounted as solidly as possible to 
well-defined anatomical structures relative to the 
skeletal system so that their data are unaffected by 
relative motion artifact. If solid attachment is not poss- 
ible (as may be the case in the testing of live human 
subjects), a complete description of the attachment 
method should be provided. 

5.1.3 Transducers and sensors should have appro- 
priate frequency response with respect to the antici- 
pated phenomena to be measured- In cases where 
the frequency characteristics of the body segment are 
not known, broad-band frequency measurements 
should be attempted, with subsequent analysis con- 
ducted to identify the significant frequency content of 
the signal. 

5.1.4 All transducers and other sensors mounted on 
the subject should be surveyed with respect to the 
anatomical coordinate system of the particular ana- 
tomical segment. If translation to other points of 
interest is warranted, then both linear and angular 
response shall be monitored. 

5.1.5 Transducers mounted within the seat, restraint 
system or other force-transmitting structure should be 
surveyed with respect to the vehicle coordinate sys- 
tem. 

5.1.6 Transducers and sensors should be in current 
calibration. Each data path should also be calibrated to 
assess the effects of environmental factors such as 
drift of the data signal, etc. 

5.2 Displacement tracking 

Data from surface-mounted targets is used to quantify 
the displacement responses of the anatomy to crash 
and impact forces. Photographic or video cameras and 
targets may be used as well as solid-state target 



tracking systems. Subclauses 5.2.1 to 5.2.5 give the 
requirements for displacement tracking. 

5.2.1 The requirements given in 5.1.1, 5.1.2 and 
5.1.4 apply with "target" substituted for "transducers 
and other sensors". 

5.2.2 If motion is confined to one plane, and a cam- 
era can be located on an axis perpendicular to this 
plane, then only one camera is required. Otherwise at 
least two cameras are needed. 

5.2.3 Camera location and orientation should be 
measured relative to the target and other cameras, in 
the vehicle coordinate system. 

5.2.4 If time-dependent measurenrients are made 
from displacement data, then an accurate timing 
source shall be precisely synchronized to the dis- 
placement recording system. Timing signal accuracy 
and frame rate measurement techniques should be 
described. 

5-2.5 If applicable, the (ens type, focal length and 
aperture opening should be described and calibrated 
as used in the test. 



&.3 Data acquisftion 

The data chartnel includes the entire signal path from 
the transducer to the recording device. All procedures 
implementing the requirements given in 5.3.1 to 5.3.6 
should be documented. 

5.3.1 Each data channel should be calibrated against 
a reference signal traceable to known standards. 

5.3.2 The entire data channel should be calibrated as 
a unit. As a less desirable alternative, each subsystem 
in the data channel path may be calibrated individually 
and the overall accuracy of the channel computed 
from these results. 

5.3.3 If used in data analysis, the linearity error of 
each data channel should be determined. 

5.3.4 For each channel, the amplitude-frequency re- 
sponse, phase-frequency response, damping charac- 
teristics and the roll-off rate and phase lag should be 
determined and reported. The cut-off frequency 
should be consistent with the anticipated frequency 
response of the anatomical segment monitored. 

5.3.5 For each transducer, the cross-axis sensitivity 
should be determined. 

5.3.6 For each transducer, the sensitivity coefficient 
should be determined. A recommended method is the 
linear least-squares computation to determine the 
sensitivity coefficient on the basis of calibration data. 



IS 14907 : 2001 
ISO 10227 :1996 

6 Data retrieval and processing 

This clause deals with storage, retrieval and process- 
ing of data. The guidelines given should be considered 
the nnininnum requirements, 

6.1 Filtering and recording 

The data channel (see 5.3.4) filtering should be conn- 
patible with the dynamic range of the recorder, pre- 
cluding high-frequency saturation of the recorder or 
aliasing error in the digitizing process. 



6.2 Digitization 

6.2.1 In cases where the analog signal is digitized, 
the amplitude resolution should be a minimum of ten 
bits. Twelve bit or greater resolution is preferred for 
minimizing digitization error in the analog-to-digital 
conversion. 

6.2.2 The sampling frequency used should be com- 
patible with the cut-off frequency and roll-off rate to 
minimize aliasing error associated with non-band- 
limited signals. 



6.3 Processing 

All filtering of recorded data should be reported in 
terms of amplitude response, cut-off frequency, roll- 
off characteristics and phase shift. The cut-off fre- 
quency should be consistent with the anticipated 
frequency response of the anatomical segment moni- 
tored. 



7 Reporting of results 

7 . 1 Inertial response 

The inertial responses used to quantify both the 
severity of the test and local responses and transfer 
properties of the anatomy to crash and impact forces 
should include the results described in 7.1.1 to 7.1.5. 
Results should be translated to anatomically based 
reference points to provide a basis for comparison 
among subjects. 

7.1.1 Hciad inertial response 

Results should include 

a) orthogonal components of linear acceleration at 
the centre of gravity of the head along the axes of 
the head anatomical coordinate system, and 

b) angular acceleration or velocity about the ana- 
tomical axes of the head. 



7.1.2 Neck inertial response 

Neck response can be characterized by the relation- 
ship between the measured accelerations at T1 (first 
thoracic vertebra! body) and the accelerations at the 
occipital condylar point computed from the head iner- 
tial response. The shear and axial forces, as well as 
the equivalent torque at the occipital condyles, can be 
calculated using results which should include 

a) linear and angular head accelerations translated to 
the occipital condylar point, 

b) orthogonal components of linear acceleration at 
the origin, and along the axes, of the T1 anatom- 
ical coordinate system, and 

c) angular acceleration or velocity about the T1 ana- 
tomical axes. 

7.1.3 Thorax inertial response 

For live human subjects, the thorax is not rigid so is 
not easily instrumented, and measurements are sub- 
ject to inaccuracies. Invasive methods have been 
used in the case of human surrogates to improve the 
coupling between the transducer and the bony ana- 
tomical landmark. Since tissue and bone properties 
may be affected, resulting data may be less valid than 
those obtained from rigid anatomical segments such 
asthe head. Documented procedures should be used 
to minimize these effects. Results should include the 
orthogonal components of the linear accelerations at 
the chosen anatomical locations. 

7.1.4 Pelvis inertial response 

The pelvis, although rigid, poses unique problems in 
mounting transducers, due to its complex interaction 
with the seating and restraint system. These interac- 
tions can severely degrade the mechanical coupling 
between the transducers and the bony anatomy, in- 
troducing measurement errors. Documented pro- 
cedures should be used to minimize these effects. 

Invasive methods (i.e. rigidly mounting transducers to 
bony anatomical features) have been used in the case 
of human surrogate testing. Results should include 

a) orthogonal components of linear accelerations at 
the origin, and along the axes, of a well-defined 
anatomical coordinate system, and 

b) angular accelei'ations or velocities about the y- 
axis, used to define petvis-lap belt interaction 
(possible submarining, etc.). 

7.1.5 Additional inertial responses 

The inertial response of body segments other than the 
head, neck, thorax or pelvis should include 

a) orthogonal components of linear accelerations at 
the origin, and along the axes, of a well-defined 
anatomical coordinate system, and 



IS 14907 : 2001 
ISO 10227 :1996 



b) when appropriate, angular acceleration or velocity 
about well-defined anatonnical axes. 



7.2 Force transmission 

If the transmission of forces through the restraint sys- 
tenn, seat and other supporting structures is nneas- 
ured, the data should include the force connponents 
with respect to the vehicle coordinate system. 

7.3 Displacement 

If displacement results are reported, the consider- 
ations regarding transducer placement discussed in 
7.1 .1 to 7.1 .4 also apply to target placement. 

7.3.1 Head displacement 

Results should include 

a) orthogonal components of linear displacement 
with respect to the initial location of the head ana- 
tomical coordinate system, and 

b) angular displacement about the initial location of 
the head anatomical axes. 

7.3.2 Neck displacement 

Neck displacement can be characterized by the rela- 
tive displacement between T1 and the occipital condy- 
lar point. Results should include 

a) head linear and angular displacements (see 7.3.1) 
translated to the occipital condylar point with res- 
pect to the initial location of the T1 anatomical 
coordinate system, and 

b) orthogonal components of the linear and angular 
displacements at the origin of the T1 anatomical 
coordinate system with respect to the initial lo- 
cation of the T1 anatomical coordinate system. 

7.3.3 Thorax displacement 

Results should include the orthogonal components of 
the linear displacements at the chosen anatomical lo- 
cations with respect to the initial locations of well- 
defined anatomical coordinate systems. 



7.3.4 Pelvis displacement 

Results should include 

a) orthogonal components of linear displacements 
with respect to the initial location, and along the 
axes, of a well-defined anatomical coordinate sys- 
tem, and 

b) angular displacements about the initial location of 
the y-axis, used to define pelvis-lap belt interac- 
tion (possible submarining, etc.). 

7.3.5 Additional body segment displacement 

The displacement of body segments other than the 
head, neck, thorax or pelvis should include 

a) orthogonal components of linear displacements 
with respect to the initial location, and along the 
axes, of well-defined anatomical coordinate sys- 
tems, and 

b) when appropriate, angular displacements about 
the initial location of well-defined anatomical axes. 

7.4 Physiological data 

Physiological data collected during tests with live hu- 
man subjects or live human surrogates should be re- 
ported where these data represent deviations from 
the normal range for the measurement. Other physio- 
logical data should be reported in the form of a sum- 
mary. 

7.5 Subjective data 

Written or verbal data collected from live human sub- 
jects to determine their subjective response to the 
test variables should be collected in a reliable and 
consistent manner. This should enable comparison 
with physical and physiological data. 

7.6 IVIedicai findings 

Observations of injury, physiological changes or other 
indications of medical significance should be reported. 
Records of these findings should be permanently 
maintained for each live subject used in impact tests. 



IS 14907 : 2001 
ISO 10227 :1996 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Bibliography 



[ 1 ] ISO 1 503: 1 977, Geometrical orientation and directions of movements. 

[2] ISO 2041 : 1 990, Vibration and shock — Vocabulary. 

(31 ISO 7250:— 3), Basic list of anthropometric measurements. 



3) To be published. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Catalogue* and 'Standards: Monthly Additions*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ME 28 ( 0541 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAUOFINDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New D^lhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 323 01 31 . 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI1 10002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 1 3 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



{ 



Telephone 

323 7617 
323 38 41 



( 



337 84 99, 337 85 61 
337 86 26, 337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



{ 
{ 



235 0216,235 04 42 
2351519,235 2315 

832 92 95, 832 78 58 
832 7891,832 78 92 



Branches AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printogr^h, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847 



