**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 11261-1 (1985) : Methods for assessment of post harvest 
grain losses by rodents, Part 1: General considerations, 
direct measurement techniques and biological aspects of 
survey procedures [FAD 16: Foodgrains, Starches and Ready 
to Eat Foods] 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i %^sfi^^^>9i^: 



^^CVVVfa^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 112G1 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST 

GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS 

PART 1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS, DIRECT MEASUREMENT 

TECHNIQUES AMD BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF 

SURVEY PROCEDURES 



UDG 611*1553 j [ 632'693'2 ] : 63 MM 28 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAfAK MARG 

NKW DELHI I104JO? 

Gp2 Orf^fr 1985 



IS : 11261 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST 

GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS 

PART 1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS, DIRECT MEASUREMENT 

TECHNIQUES AND BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF 

SURVEY PROCEDURES 

Storage Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee, 

AFDG 28 

Chairman Representing 

Dr K. Krishnabiurthy Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies (Department of 

Food ) 

Members 

Dr G. K. Girish ( Alternate to 
Dr K. Krishnamurthy ) 
Dr R. A. Agarwal Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
Dr ( Shrimati ) S. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Agricultural Marketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Ministry of 

Adviser to the Government Agriculture and Rural Development, Faridabad 

of India 
Shri A. P. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. Alam Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Dr A. P. Bhatnagar Punjab Agricultural University* Ludhiana 

Chief Engineer Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Dr C. D. Dwivedi Defence Materials & Storage Research & Develop- 

ment Establishment, Kanpur 
Shri V. K. Mathtjr ( Alternate ) 
Brig V. N. Kapoor QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of 

Defence ), New Delhi 
Brig R. N. Vaema ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Pandithurai Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Moorjani { Alternate) 
Shri M. V. Pavate Planning Commission, Government of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri Rakesh Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Plant Protection Adviser to Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & 
the Government of India Storage, Faridabad 

Shri T. R. Sharma ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11261 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. S. N. Raju National Co-operative Development Corporation, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. L. Gaur ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Vishwambhabam Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri K. G. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shrimati Shashi Sareen 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Grain Storage Data Subcommittee, AFDG 28 : 10 

Convener 
Prof A. P. Bhatnagar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Members 
Prof Malvinder Singh ( Alternate to 
Prof A. P. Bhatnagar ) 
Prof N. G. Bhole Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 

Joint Director ( WS ) Planning Commission, Government of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. V. S. Murthy Triveni Structural Ltd, Nairn ( Allahabad ) 

Shri M. N. Paul ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. P. Ojha Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 

Shri K. Pandithurai Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Moorjani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. T. Ramanathan Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. V. Gadekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Sharangafani Central Food Technological Research Institute, 

Mysore 
Dr B. P. N. Singh G. B. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, 

Pantnagar 
Prof C. K. TeckchaNdani J. N. Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya, Jabalpur 

Shri B. K. Verma Indian Grain Storage Research Institute, Hapur 

Shri S. R. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 



IS : 11261 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

ASSESSMENT OF POST-HARVEST 

GRAIN LOSSES BY RODENTS 

PART 1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS, DIRECT MEASUREMENT 

TECHNIQUES AND BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF 

SURVEY PROCEDURES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Storage 
Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Foodgrain losses due to rodents are very high, sometimes ranging as 
high as 25 to 30 percent. A number of studies and investigations have 
been carried out to assess these damages. Most efforts at rodent damage 
assessment have been focussed on crops under field conditions. However, 
each component namely cropping, handling, transportation, local storage 
and bulk storage is important in assessing these losses. 

0.3 Although a methodology for assessing post harvest grain losses will 
not in itself reduce these losses, the methodology is essential to post 
harvest operational programmes so that priorities for loss reduction can 
be determined. In addition to serving as a much needed assessment 
tool, the methodology and other activities proposed can serve as a 
means to persuade all concerned that change is necessary and that 
effective techniques to control losses may be utilized. 

0.4 This standard is being dealt within the following two. parts: 

Part I General considerations, direct measurement techniques and 
biological aspects of survey procedures; and 

Part 2 Loss determination by population assessment and estimation 
procedures. 

0.5 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
taken from the following publication: 

Harris ( Kenton L. ) and Lindblad ( Carl J. ). Post Harvest Grain 
Losses Assessment Methods. 



IS : 11261 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) elaborates general conditions, direct 
measurement techniques and biological aspects of survey procedures for 
the purpose of assessment of post harvest losses due to rodents. 

2. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

2.1 In order to assess field losses, if comparable fields without rodents 
can be found, weight or volume differences in the ultimate harvest would 
provide a good estimate of rodent losses provided micro-organisms, 
insects, birds or large mammal depredations are not involved or are 
assessable. 

2.1.1 If a crop is left in sheaves or stacks in the field for a time, serious 
damage may be caused by rodents. This damage can be measured by 
comparing grain losses and contamination in the damaged portions with 
sheaves and stacks that were protected from rodents. 

2.1.2 Threshing yards are known to be sites where considerable rodent 
damage and loss can occur. Comparing pre-threshing harvest estimates 
with grain finally used may ascribe losses to the wrong operational 
sector. 

2.2 In post harvest storage losses, moisture-losses and damage from 
insects, fungi, birds or other parts must be assessed separately. 

2.2.1 Unlike insects, which are often distributed throughout the grain 
stores, rodents will be at the periphery of bulk storage and often non- 
randomly distributed through bagged or boxed products. To ascertain 
rodent damage and contamination in the total contents of bulk storage 
units, such stores can be sampled around their perimeter to determine 
incidence of droppings and of gnawed kernels, but this is likely to be 
most difficult because of inaccessibility of this layer. 

2.2.2 On a limited basis, direct and total counts of population may 
be obtained in a circumscribed area and losses estimated by calculating 
the food eaten by the population. A minimum estimate can be made by 
multiplying the daily consumption of an individual by the number of 
individuals in the population. Consumption is related to the liveweight 
of the animals. Mean daily consumption varies with the nature of the 
food stuffs and especially with its nutritive value. For cereals, the 
amounts of grain to be used for different species of rats per 100 g of 
body weight are as follows; 

— Funambulus pennanti 4-10 g 

— Tatera indica 6-8 g 

— Meriones hurrianae * 3-5 g 



IS : 11261 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

— Rattus meltada 4-6 g 

— Rattus rattus 7-1 1 g 

— Mas Musculus 10-14 g 

— Bandicota bengalensis 6-7 g 

3. DIRECT MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 

3.1 The direct measurement techniques for estimating the post harvest 
losses to rodents can be considered in the following three aspects. 

3.1.1 Losses to Ears or Heads of Corn Millet and Sorghum — In such type 
of losses, the grain is eaten from cobs, heads or ears. Measurement 
consists of estimating the percentage of grain removed from the heads, 
shelling and weighing undamaged heads of the same size, and calcu- 
lating losses by percent or actual weight loss. Samples may be taken 
so as to be representative of the lot as a whole if the damage is distri- 
buted throughout the lot. When damage is located in a particular 
portion of the stack, pile, or windrow, sampling needs to be representa- 
tive of that situation. 

3.1.2 Losses to Threshed or Shelled Grain — Problems of sampling bagged 
or bulk grain are of three types. 

3.1.2.1 Those in which before and after weights are available or 
may be obtained. In many market, transport and warehousing 
situation, the grain has been previously weighed. Reweighings will give 
the amount of loss to rodents, if this is the only source of change. Initial 
moisture content and that at the time of reweighings are to be deter- 
mined and correction factor incorporated for accurate loss estimates. 

3.1.2.2 Comparison of weights of damaged and undamaged bagged grain — 
Rodents often concentrate their feeling and nesting in fairly well- 
delineated areas of bagged grain storage. When this is the case, damaged 
bags may be weighed and compared with the weight of undamaged 
bags taking appropriate care to obtain representative samples of bags if 
weights before loss are not available. 

3.1.2.3 When the individual bags have already been weighed direct 
and actual losses may be readily obtained. Moisture contents of grain 
at the time of storage and the time of final weighings are to be taken 
into account for accurate results. 

3.1.3 Overall Losses to Grain in Storage — In long term storage, losses 
involved are estimation of the rodent population and the food loss is cal- 
culated on the basis of the number of rodents x time X food consump- 
tion. Simple but suitable methods for general use of rodent population 
estimation are given in IS : 11261 ( Part 2 )-1985*. 



♦Method for assessment of post harvest grain losses by rodents: Part 2 Loss determi- 
nation by population assessment and estimation procedures. 



IS: 11261 (Parti) -1985 

4. BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF SURVEY PROCEDURES 

4.1 Changes in quality of stored food is also an important aspect. Losses 
of germ by selective feeding markedly reduces the value of cereals. 
Urine, feacal or hair contamination of stores may provide a disease 
potential and alter the aesthetic valuation. In addition to the grain 
eaten by rodents, there are partially eaten grains which are also unfit for 
human consumption. Decision of discarding such grain will vary with 
season, with the abundance of any particular harvest, with local or 
national requirements, etc. 



