**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^Nj^?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 11426 (Parti) : 2006 

( Won ^^mr ) 

Indian Standard 

ALTERNATING CURRENT PRECISION ELECTRICITY 
METERS FOR TESTING PURPOSES 

PART 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRO-MECHANICAL METERS 

(First Revision ) 



ICS 17.220.20 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



-^^'■''2006 PrkeGroup3 



Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee, ET 13 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1985. This revision covers the requirements of alternating current precision 
kilowatt hour meters of the electro-mechanical type. The requirements of such meters of the static type would be 
covered under Part 2 of the standard, which is under preparation. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance wivh 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 11426 (Part 1) : 2006 

Indian Standard 

ALTERNATING CURRENT PRECISION ELECTRICITY 
METERS FOR TESTING PURPOSES 

PART 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRO-MECHANICAL METERS 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers the requirements 
of single phase two-wire and poly phase, 3 phase 
3 wire/3 phase 4 wire electro-mechanical meters 
requiring a degree of accuracy of 0.5. Performance 
characteristics will be suitable for the purpose of 
testing electro-mechanical meters with an accuracy 
of not better than class 2. The meter may be either 
whole current or transformer operated. It does not 
apply to poly phase meter in which the principle of 
measurement requires balanced conditions of load or 
supply. 

1 .2 This is applicable to meters constructed to register 
MWh/kWh and (or alternatively) the number of 
revolutions of the meter rotor both for fixed and 
portable meters. 

Meters of metering equipments may have single or 
multi-current and single or multi-voltage ratings. 

1.3 Since manufacture of such electro-mechanical 
meters has almost ceased and with the growing use 
of more precision static meters [to be covered in 
IS 11426 Part (2)], the requirements covered under 
this standard are merely restricted to continued usage 
of old meters by utilities. 

2 EXTERNAL INDUCTORS FOR VOLTAGE 
CIRCUITS 

If provrded, external inductors of voltage circuits shall 
be associated specifically with their particular meters 
and shall be appropriately marked. 

3 ASSOCIATED TRANSFORMERS 

When a current and/or voltage transformer is associated 
with the meter and bears the same associated serial 
number, the combination shall comply with the 
requirements for a meter. 

4 PHASE SEQUENCE 

4. 1 Poly phase meters are required to comply with this 
part of the standard only when they are connected to a 
system in which the voltages of the phases read their 



maximum positive instantaneous values in the order 
shown on the diagram of connections supplied with 
the meter. 

4.1.1 Unless the phase sequence of the mains at the 
point where the meter is used is known with certainty, 
it shall be determined by one of the devices available 
for checking phase sequence, before the meter is 
connected. 

5 CASE/HOUSING 

The portable precision meters may be provided with 
housing of wood or any other suitable material. 
However it shall have a robust construction. 

6 REGISTERS/COUNTERS 

The registers, if provided, must consist of minimum 
four dials provided in the energy registers, and the 
gearing of the registering mechanism shall be such that 
at minimum rated current, minimum rated voltage and 
unity power factor, the pointer of the dials of lowest 
denomination makes one complete revolution in less 
than half an hour. It is permissible to apply a multiplying 
factor to convert the indication of the register to kWh, 
MWh, the value of the multiplying factor(s), if any, 
being marked on the meter, or on a label securely 
attached to some convenient part. The multiplying 
factor(s) need only be marked for one combination of 
marked current and marked voltage in a multi-voltage 
and/or multi-current meter but shall be associated 
clearly with that particular combination. 

The revolution counter shall be of electronic digital 
display type or pointer type and shall be capable of 
registering at least 100 revolutions of the rotor. In 
case of pointer type, the scale of the fastest moving 
pointer shall be divided into 100 parts, and its 
diameter and the rotational speed of the pointer shall 
jointly be so proportioned that at minimum rated 
current, minimum rated voltage and unity power 
factor, the tip of the pointer traverses the scale at a 
speed of not less than 4 cm/s. The rotor may be 
mechanically coupled to the register/counter but no 
other auxiliary devices. 



IS 11426 (Parti): 2006 



7 STANDARD TEST CONDITIONS 

7.1 The test conditions are: 

a) Meter cover shall be in normal position. 

b) For cycloroUer type register, right hand side 
cycloroller shall be moving continuously with 
the movement of rotor. 

c) Voltage circuit must be energized for at least 
half an hour, or the meter attains a steady 
temperature as the case may be before starting 
the test. 

The measuring current shall be increased/ 
decreased progressively and be energized at 
the test value for sufficient time to obtain 
thermal stability for the corresponding speed 
of revolutions. 

d) For poly phase mieters: 

1) connection diagram should have phase 
sequence indication. 

2) voltage and current should be balanced 
as per Table 1 . 

7.2 Reference conditions of testing are given in 
Table 2. 

8 LIMITS OF ERROR AND REPEATABILITY 
OF MEASUREMENTS 

8.1 The error of the meter or metering equipment at 
marked voltage, standard frequency and standard 
temperature shall not exceed the percentage errors 
shown in Table 3 . Metering equipment having more 
than one marked current and/or marked voltage shall 
comply with these requirements for ail combinations 
of marked current and voltage. 

8.2 A sequence of repeated measurements is recommended 
at test points 20 percent 1^^ and /^ax' unity and 0.5 
lagging power factors. Not less than five measurements 
shall be made at each test point. Throughout the 
measurement the meter shall be in thermal equilibrium, 
but the controlling devices shall be operated between 
successive measurements. 

The results of the repeated measurements are used to 
calculate the value 's' which is the elimination of the 
standard deviation, by the formula given below: 



.y = 






where 

£i = error of the meter determined by .one individual 
measurement of a sequence of repeated 
measurements at a certain test point, 
E = mean value of the error £., and 
n = total number of individual measurements. 



The maximum values of s, that is, s^^^, are given in 
Table 3 for the specified test points of the working 
ranges. 

8.3 A meter for testing purpose is required to have 
stable errors over a narrower load range, compared to 
revenue meters. In other words, a testing meter in 
service with a high mean value of error, but a low value 
for s, may still be used for measurements of high 
accuracy when correction is applied by calculation or 
otherwise, on the basis of such mean value of low 
uncertainty. This is to be borne in mind during continual 
usage of these electro-mechanical meters and the values 
of E^^^^ may be relaxed to double the values specified 
in Table 3 for such cases. 

9 EFFECT OF INFLUENCE QUANTITIES 

9.1 When determining the effect of individual influence 
quantity, the conditions and the values of all other 
influence quantities shall be stated under test conditions. 
The influence quantities taken into consideration for 
fixing the above reference conditions are as per Table 2. 

9.2 Influence of Ambient Temperature 

The determination of the mean temperature coefficient 
for a given temperature shall be made over a 
temperature range of 20°C, that is, 10°C above and 
10°C below that temperature, but in no case shall the 
temperature be either lower than 0°C or higher than 
40°C. The mean temperature coefficient shall in all 
cases be determined at least for reference temperature 
and shall not exceed the limits given in Table 4. 

9.3 The variation of errors due to other influence 
quantities shall be as given in Table 5. 

9.4 Methods of testing for effects of influence 
quantities are given in Annex A. 

10 NON-REGISTRATION WITH CURRENT 
ALONE 

The rotor of a meter shall not make Tnore than one 
revolution in 15 rain with the voltage circuit(s) 
open and with marked current flowing in the main 
circuit(s). 

11 NON-REGISTRATION WITH VOLTAGE 
ALONE 

The rotor of a meter shall not make more than one 
revolution in 1 5 min with the main circuit(s) open when 
the voltage circuit alone is energized either when the 
marked voltage is applied or when it is increased 
by 10 percent (see Annex B). 

12 PERCENTAGE ERROR LIMITS AT 
UNBALANCED LOADS 

12.1 For poly phase meters carrying a single phase 



IS 11426 (Part 1): 2006 



Table 1 Voltage and Current Balance 

{Clause l.\) 



SI No. 

(1) 



Poly Phase Meter 

(2) 



Class 0.5 Meter 

(3) 



i) Each of the voltages between line and neutral or between any two lines shall not differ from average ±0.5 percent 

corresponding voltage by more than 
ii) ■ Each of the currents in the conductors shall not differ from the average current by more than 1.0 percent 

iii) The phase displacements of each of these currents from the corresponding line to neutral voltage; 2° 

irrespective of the power factor shall not differ from each other by more than 



Table 2 Reference Conditions 

{Clause 12) 



SI 
No. 

(1) 



Influence Quantity 



(2) 



Reference Value 



(3) 



Permissible Tolerance for 
0.5 Class Meter 

(4) 



i) Ambient temperature 

ii) Working position 

iii) Voltage 

iv) Frequency 

v) Wave form 

vi) Magnetic induction of 
external origin 



Reference temperature 25°C {see Note 1) 

Vertical working position 

Reference voltage 

Reference frequency 

Sinusoidal voltage and current 

Magnetic induction equal to zero {see Note 2) 



±2''C 

±0.5° 

±0.5 percent 

±0.3 percent 

Distortion factor less than 2 percent 

Induction value which causes a variation of 
error not greater than 0.1 percent 



NOTES 

1 If the tests are made at a temperature other than the reference temperature, including permissible tolerances, the results shall be 
corrected by applying the appropriate temperature coefficient of the meter. The temperature characteristics should be supplied with 
reference meters. 

2 The test consists of: 

a) for single phase meter, determining the errors at first with the meter normally connected to the mains and then after inverting 
the connections to the current circuits as well as to the voltage circuits. Half of the difference between the two errors is the value 
of the variation of error. Because of the unknown phase of external field, the test has to be made at 0.1 /^at unity power factor 
and 0.2 /^at 0.5 power factor. 

b) for three phase meter, making three measurements at 0. 1 /(.with unity power factor after each of which the connections to the 
current circuits and to the voltage circuits are changed over ) 20°, while the phase sequence is not altered. The greatest difference 
between each of the errors so determined average value is the value of the variation of error. 



Table 3 Percentage Error Limits and Standard Deviation (Single Phase Meters and 
Poly Phase Meters with Balanced Loads) 

{Clauses 8. 1 and 8.3) 



SI No. 


Value of Current 


Power Factor 


Percentage Error Limits 

^Max 


Standard Deviation 

iMax 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) 


5 percent I^, 


1 


±1.0 


— 


ii) 


1 percent h 


1 


±0.5 


— 


iii) 


20 percent V/mbx 


1 


±0.5 


0.09 


iv) 


10 percent /b 


0.5 lagging 
0.8 leading 


±1.2 
±1.2 





V) 


20 percent /b-Zwav 


0.5 lagging 
0.8 leading 


±0.8 
±0.8 


0.13 



IS 11426 (Parti): 2006 



Table 4 Temperature Coefficient 

{Clause 9.2) 



SI 
No. 

(0 


Value of Current 

(2) 


i) 
ii) 


0.1 /b-/b 
0.2 h-h 



Power Factor 

(3) 



Mean Temperature Coefficient 
Percent/°C 

(4) 



1 
0.5 lag 



0.03 
0.05 



Table 5 Other Influence Quantities 

(Clause 9.3) 



SI 


Change in the Value of Influence 


Value of Current 


Power Factor 


Limits of Variation in 


No. 


Quantities with Respect to 
Reference Conditions 


(Balanced Load Unless 
Stated) 




Percentage Error 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) 


Oblique suspension 


0.05 /b 
0.5 /b 


1 

1 


1.0 per degree change 
0.5 


ii) 


Voltage ± 10 percent 
Frequency ± 5 percent 


0.2 4 to 4 4 
4 
4 


1,0.5 lag 

1 

0.5 


0.5 ±0.7 
0.5 
1.0 


iii) 


Magnetic induction of external origin 


4 


1 


1.5 



0.5 mT {see Note 1) 

iv) Wave form 10 percent of third harmonic 
in the current (see Note 2) 

v) Reverse phase sequence 



vi) Heating of meter current circuit(s) 
(see A-5) 

vii) Heating of voltage circuit(s) (see A-6) 



0.1 4 to 4 

0.5 4 

(single phase load) 


1 
1 


4 
4 


1 
0.5 


4 
0.24 


1 
1 



0.5 

1.5 
2.0 

0.3 
0.5 

0.75 
0.75 



NOTES 

1 A magnetic induction of external origin of 0.5 mT produced by a current of the same frequency as that of the voltage applied to the 
meter and under the most unfavourable conditions of phase and direction shall not cause a variation in the percentage error of the meter 
exceeding the values shown in the table. This magnetic induction may be obtained by placing the meter in the centre of a circular coil, 
Im in mean diameter, of square section and of small radial thickness relative to the diameter, and having 400 ampere turns. 

2 The distortion factor of the voltage shall be less than 1 percent. The variation in percentage error shall be measured under the most 
unfavourable phase displacement of the third harmonic in the current compared with the fundamental current. 



load, but with balanced poly phase voltage applied to 
the voltage circuit, percentage error shall be as given 
in Table 6. 

12.2 The percentage error of the meter shall not 
exceed 2.5 at marked current (/(j) lagging 60° behind 
the voltage on that element. 

13 EXCESS CURRENTAPPLICABLE TO METER 
ONLY (TYPE TEST) 

The meter shall be capable of carrying continuously 
without any damage to the meter 120 percent of marked 
current. 

NOTE — Measuring equipment excess current — Where a 
meter is operated from external current transformer(s) not 



specifically associated with the meter (see 3), the excesscurrent 
rating of the metering equipment may be governed by the 
performance of the current transfonner(s), but in no case the 
equipment will carry more than 120 percent of marked current. 

14 MARKING 

14.1 The meter shall not be marked for use on a range 
of voltage, for example, 200/250. A single voltage 
meter shall be marked for a specific voltage and a multi- 
voltage meter shall be marked for specific voltages. 

14.2 Both the voltage and current for single and/or 
multi-tapping should be marked either on the name plate 
or on the case. Number or revolutions per unit 
corresponding to voltage and current combination 
should be marked. 



IS 11426 (Part 1) : 2006 



Table 6 Percentage Error Limit at Unbalanced Loading 

{Clause 12.1) 



SI No. 

(1) 


Value of Current 

(2) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 


From 0.2 /b to /b 
0.5 4 



Power Factor 

(3) 



Percentage Error Limits 

(4) 



1 
0.5 lagging 
0.5 lagging 



±1.5 
±1.5 
±1.5 



NOTE — The difference between the percentage error when the meter Is carrying a single phase load at basic current and unity power 
factor and the percentage error when the meter is carrying a balanced load at basic current and unity power factor shall not exceed 
1 percent. 



ANNEX A 

{Clause 9.4 and Table 5) 

METHODS TO BE ADOPTED IN CARRYING OUT TESTS FOR CONFORMITY 

WITH THE SPECIFICATION 



A-1 Except where the provisions of a clause require 
otherwise, tests for confonnity with this specification 
shall be carried out with all the meter voltage circuits 
energized at marked voltage, standard frequency, and 
in the correct phase relationship as indicated on the 
diagram of connections supplied with the meter. For 
precautions in use, see Annex C. 

When making tests, care should taken to see that the 
percentage error of the meter has become constant at 
the test current and voltage, particularly when making 
tests after the meter has been subjected to the 
application of higher currents. Observations should be 
extended over a sufficiently large number of revolutions 
to ensure the determination of mean error. 

A-2 CHANGE OF ERROR DUE TO VARIATION 
OF VOLTAGE 

The over-or-under voltage shall be applied for a period 
long enough (with a minimum of 60 min) to ensure 
that the meter has reached a reasonably steady 
temperature. The change in percentage error of meter 
due to change of voltage is the difference between the 
percentage error the meter under this condition, after a 
reasonably steady temperature has been reached, and 
the percentage error of the meter at marked voltage. 

A-3 CHANGE OF ERROR DUE TO VARIATION 
OF AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 

This test requires an enclosure which can be kept at a 
steady temperature for several hours and which is free 
from draughts. The meter under test shall be kept at 
the initial temperature for at least 4 h or until the 
percentage error is substantially constant for 3 



consecutive readings at that temperature; after 
temperature has been raised or lowered it shall be kept 
at that temperature or else to the new value until the 
percentage error of the meter is substantially constant 
for three consecutive readings. 

A-4 CHANGE OF ERROR OF THE ENERGY 
ELEMENT DUE TO VARIATION OF FREQUENCY 

This test may take several hours at each frequency, in 
order to ensure, when determining the value of the 
change, that the percentage error of the meter has become 
constant, both at the standard and altered frequencies. 

A-5 CHANGE OF ERROR DUE TO HEATING 
IN METER CURRENT CIRCUIT(S) 

The marked voltage shall be applied (with not more 
than one quarter of the marked current) for a period of 
at least 6 h before the test; the test current shall then be 
applied and an immediate reading (i) of the percentage 
error of the meter be obtained. The test current shall be 
maintained until the percentage error (ii) is constant at 
that current. The change permitted under 9.3 is the 
difference between (i) and (ii), power factor conditions 
being as specified in 9.3 {see Table 5). 

A-6 CHANGE OF ERROR DUE TO HEATING 
IN VOLTAGE CIRCUIT(S) 

Before making observations of percentage error, the 
test current(s) shall be applied for a period of not less 
than 2 h with the voltage circuit(s) disconnected. The 
initial observation of percentage error shall be made 
immediately when the voltage circuit is energized, at 
marked voltage and subsequent observations of the 
percentage error shall be made after a period of 6 h. 



IS 11426 (Parti): 2006 



ANNEX B 

{Clause 11) 

VOLTAGE CREEP IN METERS USED FOR TESTING 



B-1 Some methods of meter testing involve 
interruptions of the current supply whilst the voltage 
supply is maintained. When a meter is to be used for 
testing other meters in this way, sometimes with an 
associated current transformer and sometimes without, 



it is important for the user to check that the meter does 
not register with voltage alone if the secondary or the 
current transformer concerned is left connected across 
the meter current terminals, the primary circuit being 
interrupted. 



ANNEX C 

{Clause A-1) 

PRECAUTIONS DURING INSTALLATION 



C-1 To ensure maximum accuracy, the meter should 
be mounted vertically in a situation away from extremes 
of heat or cold avoiding the proximity of apparatus 
liable to produce strong magnetic fields. The supporting 
structure should be free from vibration such as that 
caused by rotating machines or energized transformers, 
since this tends to increase the rate of wear of the lower 



bearing. Where a meter is fitted with mechanical (as 
distinct from electro-mechanical) means for resetting 
the pointers to zero reading, care should be taken to 
avoid exerting undue and sudden force to the 
mechanism. A slow steady pressure should be applied 
to the resetting device otherwise it may be damaged 
and the accuracy of the meter impaired- 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
. periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Imdian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ET 13 (5330). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 website : www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r 2323 7617 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 12323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.l.T. Scheme VII M, V.l.P. Road, Kankurgachi r2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 L2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 r 260 3843 

1260 9285 

Southern : C.l.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 j-2254 1216, 2254 1442 

12254 2519,2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) r2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 12832 7891,2832 7892 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



