•*•*•••••*•*•••• 






^ 



m^% 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 1382 (1981) : Glossary of terms relating to glass and 
glassware [CHD 10: Glassware] 




.^^_ 



^sf m 



^ 



1 w 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




- M 






BLANK PAGE 




><3 



^ri*jr.-^. 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO GLASS AND Gl^S^ARB 



iW^t Revision) 



B0 Reprint AUGUST 1990 



UDC 666-1: 001-4 



C Copyright 19$2 



B |* ■ tf.« O F ! IAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAK, $ BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gill Jmeim 



15:1342-1981 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO GLASS AND GLASSWARE 

( First Revision ) 

Glassware Sectional Committee, CDC 10 

Chairman Representing 

Dr S . Kumar Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR ) 

Calcutta 

Members 

Dr K. P. Srivastava {Alternate to 
Dr S. Kumar ) 

Shri P. N. AoARWAt Hindustan Safety Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Aoarwal ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. K. Saran Aggarwal Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. K. Wadhwaney ( Alternate ) 

Shri C. G. Auin Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri I. K. Kapur ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. R. Bhidr Victory Flask Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Dr K. H. Davb " Haffkine Institute, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Chavan ( Alternate) 

Deputy Director Standards Ministry of Railways 

( Carriage ) - II, RDSO, 

L.UCKNOW 

Dr S. P. Singh Dhakarey Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri Narendra Singh {Alternate) 

Shri S. K. Gupta J. G. Glass Industries Pvt, Pune 

Shri A. B. Karandikar ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. P. Gupta Hindustan Pilkington Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri C. K. Mbhrotra Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri O. P. Dhamija ( Alternate ) 

Dr A. V. R. Rao National Building Organization, New Delhi 

Shri Johar Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 

{Continued en page 2) 



*S Copyright 1982 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 19S7 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

psjMither shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Ad* 



IS: 1382 -1981 

(Contimud from fiagt 1 ) 

Mtmbtrs Rtprtstttting 

Sail R. Sahai Hindustan Vacuum Glass Ltd, Faridabad 

Sum S. G. Sharha ( AlUrnaU ) 

Shri K. Shimizu Indo-Asahi Glass Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. B. Prasad ( AlUrnaU) 

SaaiU. V. Sinoh Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri C. K. Somany Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. K. Gupta ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri B. M. Roy ( AlUrnaU ) 

Shri C. K. Taktawala Shree Vallabh Glass Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Hemant C. Patel ( AUtrnaU ) 
Dr Hari Bhaowan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offitio Mmbtr) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Sttretory 

Shri Anjan Kar 

Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 

General Glass Subcommittee CDC 10 : 4 

Conoentr 
Shri K. H. Parikh Vazir Glass Works Ltd, Bombay 

Mtmbtrs 

Shri S. D. Markbtkar ( AlUrnaU to 
Shri K. H. Parikh ) 
Shri G. C. Aqarwal Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 

Shri C. G. Amin Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri I. K. Kapur ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri V. R. Bhioe Victory Flask Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Deputy Superintendent Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Risbikesh 

Shri R. N. Ghanti Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri N. C Bose ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri G. S. Johar J. G. Glass Industries Ltd, Pune 

Shri O. N. Tandon ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr J. Mukerji Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Calcutta 

Dr K. P. Srivastava ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri J. L. Muxherjee Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri R. C. Palhan ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri M. V. Nadkarni Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd, Pimpri 

Shri S. B. Phadke ( AUtrnaU ) 

( Contimud on pagt 57 ) 



IS: 1381 -1981 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO GLASS AND GLASSWARE 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 
30 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Glassware Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1961, under the title 'Glossary of 
terms relating to glass industry'. However, the Committee responsible for 
the preparation of the standard decided to revise it taking into consideration 
that a number of new terms have come to be used in the glass industry 
and needed incorporation in the glossary to make it comprehensive. In the 
preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from 
the following publications: 

C 162-71 Standard definitions of terms relating to glass and glass 
products. American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. 

ISO/DIS/4791/1 Laboratory apparatus — Vacabulary for termino- 
logy relating to apparatus made essentially from glass, procelain 
or vitreous silica : Part I Names for items for apparatus. Inter- 
national Organization for 'Standardization ( ISO ). 

ISO/DP/7086/I Glass and glass-ceramicware intended to come into 
contact with food — Release of toxic materials — lead and 
cadmium : Part I Method of test. International Organization 
for Standardization ( ISO ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the terms and definitions relating to glass, glass- 
ware and related products. 

1.2 This standard does not cover terms related to glass containers and 
their defects. 



IS: 1382 -1981 



Add Polishing — The polishing of a glass surface by acid treatment. 

Air Bells — Bubbles of irregular shape formed generally during the pressing 
or moulding operations in the manufacture of optical glass. 

Air line — A greatly elongated bubble of small cross-section, usually 
excsedino 25 mm in length; occurring in tubing, rod or drawn fiat glass. 

Alabaster Glass — A miiky-white glass that difuses light without fiery 
colour. 

Alcove — A narrow channel to convey molten glass from refiner to fore- 
hearth, or to the revolving pot where it is gathered by the Owens machine. 

Alkali — The oxides of sodium or potassium; less frequently of lithium. 

Alkalinity — A measure of the alkali extracted from the glass under 
specified conditions. 

Amber Glass — Glass varying in colour between light yellowish-brown and 
deep reddish-brown. 

Ampoule — A glass container designed to be filled and sealed by fusion of 
the glass neck. 

Angular Cut — See 'Out-of-Square End*. 

Annealing — A process to prevent or remove objectionable stresses in 
glass/glassware by controlled heating at and /or cooling from a suitable 
temperature. 

Anne aling Point — The temperature at which internal stresses disa nn ear 
rapidly without deformation of the glass. It is also termed as upper 
annealing point. It corresponds to the equilibrium temperature at which 
the glass has a viscosity of 10"** poises ( see also 'Strain Point* ). 

Annealing Range — The range of glass temperature in which stresses in glass 
articles can be relieved at a commercially desirable rate. For purposes of 
comparing glasses, the annealing range is assumed to correspond with the 

ICUipciaxui^ i/vhtsa/u uiv auubaiiug p/mi ^ at j auu tub suaiu puiui ^ l»UT j. 

Antimony ( Sb,O t ) — An industrial term for antimony trioxide used as a 
refining agent 

Arch — A part of a furnace; a crown. 

Arsenic ( AgO, ) — An industrial term for arsenic trioxide used as a refining 



K* 13*2.1981 
B 

Back Wall — The charging end wall of a glass-melting furnace. 

bad Distribution — Deviation from the intended distribution of wall 
thickness. 

Badging — Marking of glass or glassware to indicate capacity or ownership 
or for other purposes, for example, trade-mark; also termed 'Labelling 1 . 

Baffle — The part of a blank mould which seals the delivery or baffle hole. 

wuuv vrMMim. 

a) Mark or seam on glass container resulting from a mould joint 
between blank mould and baffle plate, 

b) A seam on the base corresponding to the joint of the baffle plate. 

Baffle Watt — A waii used to deflect gases or names in a furnace structure, 

Bait— The tool dipped into molten glass to start any drawing operation. 

Barium Crown Glass — An optical crown glass containing a substantial 
quantity of barium oxide. 

Barium Flint Glass — An optical pint glass containing a substantial quantity 

fif barium oxide. 



- The bottom of a container. 

Bask Fibre — Unprocessed glass fibres directly from the forming equipment. 

Batch — The raw materials, properly proportioned and mixed, for delivery 
to the furnace. 

Batch Charger — A mechanical device for introducing batch to the furnace. 

Batch Feeder — See 'Batch Charger*. 

Batch House — The place where batcq. materials are received, handled, 
weighed, and mixed for delivery to melting units. 

Batch Stone — Incompletely dissolved material from the glass making 
batch. 

Bead 

a) A small piece of glass rod or tubing fused round a wire. 

b) An enlarged, rounded edge of a glass article, or any raised section 
extended around the article. 

c) i\ smau piece of giass, . souu or uouow, oi a given suape; ior 
instance, beads used for jewellery. 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Beading -*• See 'Bead* (b). 

Bearer Arch — One of a scries of arches that support the checkerwork in 
regenerator. 

Belt Marks — Marks made on the bottom of glass articles as they ride 
through the lehr on a chain belt slightly over-heated. 

Bench — Floor of a pot furnace ( see also 'Siege' ). 

Bench Worker — A worker who forms glassware from tubing or rod by 
heating in a gas flame at a work bench, also called 'Table Blower', 'Blow 
Pipe Worker', 'Lamp Woker' and 'Glass Blower'. 

Bend — See 'Bow'. 

Bending — The manipulation while hot of all or part of a flat glass to form 
curved shapes. 

Bent Glass — Flat glass that has been shaped while hot into cylindrical or 
other curved shapes. 

Bent Neck — A neck which has been bent so that its axis no longer lies in 
the intended direction. 

Bevelling — The process of edge finishing flat glass to a bevel angle. 

Bicheroux Process — An intermittent process of making plate glass in which 
the glass is cast between rollers on to driven conveyor roller or a flat 
moving table. 

Birdcage — A thread of glass joining two points on opposite internal faces 
of an article. 

Black Glass — A dark coloured glass having little or no visible trans- 
mission. 

Black Spec — An almost insoluble grain of very dark coloured mineral 
coming from certain refractories or impurities in the raw materials. 

Blank 

a) A parison or preliminary shape from which a finished article is 
further formed; or mould for producing the same. 

b) Any article of glass on which subsequent forming or finishing is 
required. 

Blanks — Optical glass formed by pressing into the rough shape and size 
required in the finished, article, also called 'Pressings'. 

Blanket Feed — A method for charging batch designed to produce an even 
idstribution of batch across the width of the furnace. 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Blank Mould — The metal mould that first shapes the glass in the manu- 
facture of hollow ware. 

Blending Batch — Step- wise changes in batch composition to arrive at final 

change in finished glass. 

Blib, Blibe — An elongated bubble. 

Blisters — Relatively large bubbles or gaseous inclusions. 

Bloach — An imperfection resulting from incompletely grinding plate glass, 
caused by a low place in the plate which retains part of the original rough 

surface. 

Blob — See 'Hang Up'. 

Blobby Line — - Graduation line starting or ending in a thickend blob. 

Block 

a) Refractory block any large piece of refractory. 

b) Hollow translucent glass units having various patterns moulded 
on their interior, exterior or on both surfaces. 

c) A lump of glass used for remelting for making generally bangles 
or beads. 

Blocking 

a) The process of shaping a gather of glass in a cavity of wood or 

metal. 

b) The process of stirring and fining glass by immersion of a wooden 
block or other source of bubbles. 

c) The process of reprocessing to remove surface imperfections. 

d) The mounting of optical glass blanks in a shell for grinding and 
polishing operations. 

e) The process wherein a furnace is idled at reduced temperatures. 

f ) The process of setting refractory blocks in a furnace. 

Block Mould — A one-piece mould. 

Block Reek, Rake — A, scratch imperfection caused by cullet lodged in the 
polishing operation. 

Bloom 

a) A surface film resulting from attack .by the atmosphere or from 
the deposition of smoke or other vapours ( see also 'Smoked* ). 

b) A surface film caused by slight chemical attack. This film can be 
removed by washing. 



IS: 13*2 -1981 



a) Application to optical glass lenses of a non-reflecting film to 
reduce light scattering and back reflection. 

b) Generally etching of an inadequately protected surface. 

Blow-and-Blow Process — A process of forming hollow-ware in which both 
the preliminary and final shapes are formed by air pressure. 

Blower — One who forms glass by blowing ( see also « Gaffer' ). 

Wow Head — Part of a forming machine serving to introduce air under 
pressure to blow any hollow glass as article. 

Blow Mould — The metal mould in which a blown glass article is finally 
shaped. 

Blow-over — The thin-walled bubble formed above a blow mould in hand- 
shop operation to facilitate bursting off. 

Blow Pipe 

a) The iron pipe used by a glass maker for gathering and blowing by 
mouth, also called 'Blowingtion'. 

b) The burner used for working glass at a bench. 

Blowing Iron — See *Blow Pipe (a)\ 

Blown Away — Deficiency of glass in the neck of an internal screw-neck 
bottle {see also * Hollow Neck'). 

Blown Glassware — Glassware formed by air pressure produced by mouth 
or by a machine. 

Body — The attribute to molten glass, associated with viscosity and 
homogeneity, which is conductive to workability. 

Body Mould — The part of a mould which forms the outer surface of a 
pressed glass article. 

Boll 

a) An imperfection consisting of a gaseous inclusion larger in size 
than seed; small bubbles. 

b) The commotion caused by gases escaping from the melting batch. 

Boost Melting — See * Electric Boosting'. 

Boosting — An auxiliary method of heating in a glass furnace, for example, 
by passing an electric current through the molten glass, or by using an 
auxiliary burner. 

Boot — A suspended enclosure in the nose of a tank protecting a portion 
of the surface and serving as a gathering opening. 



IS: 1382- 1981 

Borate Glass — A glass in which the essential glass former is bone oxide 
( B,0» ) instead of silica. 

Borax Glass — Vitreous anhydrous sodium tetraborate (Na»B 4 7 ). 

Bore — The internal diameter of a glass tube or the neck of a glass 
container. 

Borosilicate Crown Glass — An optical crown glass containing substantial 
ntjantities of silica and boric oxide, 

Borosilicate Glass — A silicate glass having a sufficient amount of boric 

~— :j.~ / t> f\ \ ±~. ;~a.m~~~. :*™ __ n ...~.*;. &n !.. .i.^:«i1nr wtirnAnnitta 1l1flrtl 
UA1UC ^ ft****) W lUUUVUVQ IU» pupvlUbS, 111 poiubliuu jmwwui^ — » " 

chemical and thermal resistances. 

Bounce — See broken Ring*. 

Bow — Accidental departure from straightness in rod or tubing. 

Bowl — &e 'Spout'. 

Breast Wall 

a) The entire side wall of a furnace between the flux block and the 
crown, but not including the ends. 

b) Refractory wall between pillais of a pot furnace and in front of, or 

auiiuuuuwg iuk uvui \ix a j«j».. 

Breezing — Buckwheat anthracite coal or coarse sand spread on siege 
before setting of pots. 

Bridge — The structure formed by the end walls of the adjacent melter and 
refiner compartments of a tank and the covers spanning the gap between 
the bridge walls. 

Bridge Wall — That part of a glass melting furnace forming a bridge of 
or separation between melter and refiner. 

Bridge ( Wall ) Cover — Refractory blocks spanning the space between 
bridge walls. 

Bright Patch — A patch accidentally not ground on a ground surface. 

Broken Ring — The 'dotted' character of a graduation line caused by the 
scriber uouncing and removing insuuicieut wax resist ucicre etching. 

Broken Seed — A bubble, near the surface of the glass, the wall of which 
has been broken, most often during grinding. 

Braise — Localized surface crack, often star-shaped, caused by impact. 

9 



IS :1381 -1981 

Brash Marks 

a) A series of fine vertical laps on the outside surface of a bottle. 

b) Fine parallel lines or laps running vertically on the external 
surface; similar in size and spacing to those left by a paint brush. 

Bubble 

a) Gaseous inclusion more than 0*5 mm. 

b) A gaseous inclusion in the glass; generally spherical in shape but 
may be deformed in many ways during feeding ( to the forming 
machine ) or fabrication. 

Buck — A dead plate. 

Bulb Blower — A worker who blows glass into a mould. 

Bulb Edge — The heavy rounded edge or bead of sheet-drawn glass. 

Buldged Finish 

a) A finish blown out so that the closure will not fit. 

b) The mouth of an article blown out so that the closure will not fit. 
Bulged Sides — Sides of an article bulged outwards. 

Bull's Eye 

a) A thick lens or round piece of glass. 

b) Irregularity in thickness in the form of a convex lens, often in the 
base. 

Burner 

a) See'YorV. 

b) A burner like Bunsen burner, blow pipe burner, fish tail burner, 
etc, used also for table blowing. 

c) A burner for oil or gas heating furnaces. 

Burner Block — Refractory block with one or more orifices through which 
fuel is admitted to a furnace. 

Burn Off— The process of severing an unwanted portion of a glass article 
by fusing the glass. 

Burnt Lime — Calcined limestone; CaO, MgO ( dolomitic ), or CaO 
( calcitic ), or a mixture of these. 

Burnt Mould — Discoloration or dulling due to local overheating of the 
mould. 

Bursting Off — Breaking off a blown article from the end of the blow pipe. 

Bursting Pressure — The internal pressure at which a glass container breaks. 

10 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Bush— See 'Orifice*. 

Bushing — A liner in the orifice of any feeder for molten glass; for example, 
the orifice ring of a gob feeder, or the unit through which molten glass is 
drawn in making glass fiures. 

Button 

a) A portion of a piece of pressed ware so designed that it is possible 
to knock it off to make a hole. 

b) The portion at which a glass article is broken off from the pipe. 

c) A small mass of molten glass stuck either on to the glass article or 
the pipe for further manipulation. 

Bye-Hole — See 'Observation Hole*. 



Calibration — The process of checking the accuracy of graduated glass- 
ware. 

Calibrator— A person who checks the accuracy of glass articles with 
appropriate instruments. 

Camel Back — A constriction in capillary tubing for thermometer ( see also 
'Choke' V 

Cameo — Glass of more than one layer of different colours, the top layers 
being carved in relief. 

Campaign — The working life of a tank between major repairs which 
involve the cooling down of the tank to room temperature. 

Canal — The part of a tank leading from the relatively wide fining area to 
tuc macuine. 

Cane — Solid glass rods. 

Cap 

a) Another name for crown. 

b) To cut off the ends of a glass cylinder. 
c\ A tvoe of bottle closure. 

Cap Seat — The ledge inside the mouth of a milk bottle. 

Carboy — Large narrow necket glass container, usually a ballon shape but 
sometimes more of a cylindrical shape having a capacity of more than 20 
litres. 

Carry-in — Manual lehr loading. 

II 



IS: 1383 -1981 

Cased Glass — Glassware whose surface layer has different composition 
from that of the main glass body. 

Casehardened — A term sometimes used for tempered glass ( see 'Tempered 
Glass'). 



WaU — See 'Breast Wall (a)\ 

Casing WaU — See 'Breast Wall (a)'. 

Castiag — A process of shaping glass by pouring hot glass into moulds or 
onto tables or moulds. 

Cat's Eye 

a) An imperfection; an elongated bubble containing a piece of 
foreign matter. 

d) A crescent-shaped blister. 

Cat Scratch — An imperfection; surface irregularities on glassware resem- 
bling the marks of a cat's claws. 

Ceateriag — The operation on lens elements wherein the element is 
optically lined up with the axis, of rotation and the edges ground concentric 
with the optical axis. 

Chan Marks —See *Be» Marks'. 

Change Over — See 'Reversal'. 

Channel — That part of a forehearth which carries the glass from the tank 
to the flow spout and in which temperature adjustments are made. 

Charge — The glassforming mixture for melting. 

Chatter — See 'Broken Ring'. 

Check 

a) An imperfection; a surface crack in a glass article. 

b) A fine, short surface crack caused by contact between hot glass 
and a cooler surface. 

Check Marks — See 'Check'. 

Checker Bricks — Refractory pieces used for packing a regenerator, also 
called 'Checker Tiles'. - 

Checker Tiles — See 'Checker Bricks'. 

12 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Checkers 

a) The refractory bricks, alternating with openings, in the chambers 
of a regenerative furnace. 

b) The regenerator built in such a fashion. 

c) The refractory pieces used in such a fashion. 

Chemical Durability — The lasting quality ( both physical and chemical ) 
of a glass surface. It is frequently evaluated, after prolonged weathering 
or storing, irk terms of chemical and physical changes in the glass surface, 
or in terms of changes in the contents of a vessel. 

Chemical Glass — A chemically durable glass suitable for use in making 
laboratory apparatus. 

Chicken Boost — See 'Birdcage'. 

Chill Mark — A wrinkled surface condition on glassware resulting from 
uneven cooling in the forming process. 

Chip 

a) An imperfection due to breakage of a small fragment out of an 
otherwise regular surface. 

b) A small fragment of glass broken from the surface by mechanical 
action. 

Chipped Glass — A glass article with chipped surface produced intentially. 

Chipping — The process of removing thin extra glass prior to grinding. 

Choke 

a) An imperfection consisting of an insufficient opening in the finish 
and neck of a container. 

b) A contriction in the bore. 

Chunk Glass — Optical glass obtained in breaking open a pot of transfer 
glass. 

Chunks — Random sizes of glass sheets that are smaller than standard 
sizes of stocksheets. 

Clear Glass — Transparent glass. 

Close Graduation — Scale in which the first short line is too close to its 
adjacent long line in a group (caused by faulty machine setting). 

Closed Pot — A pot made with a roof to protect the contents from flames 
and combustion gases in the furnace and with a mouth for removal of 
molten glass, also called 'Covered Pot' or 'Hooded Pot*. 

13 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Cobalt ( CoO ) — An industrial term for cobalt oxide. 

Colburn Sheet Process — A method of making sheet glass by bending the 
vertically drawn sheet over a driven roller which determines the- rate 
(definition ) of draw. 

Colouring Agent — Batch constituent used to give colour to the glass 
produced. 

Colourless Glass — A glass which absorbs negligibly small amount of 
visible radiation. 

Compact — To treat glass in a manner, such as by heat treatment to ap- 
proach maximum density. 

Concave Bottom — Undue concavity of base. 

Conditioning Zone — Part of the feeder, away from the furnace wall, where 
the glass is conditioned at a required working temperature, also called 
'Normalizing Zone*. 

Conicity — Conical taper of an article which should be cylindrical. 

Constriction — See 'Choke'. 

Container — General term applied to glass bottles and jars. 

Continuous Filament — See 'Fibre*. 

Continuous Tank — A glass furnace in which the level of glass remains 
constant because the feeding of batch continuously replaces the glass 
withdrawn. 

Covex Bottom — Undue convexity of base, 
Cooling Down Period 

a) The time elapsing after a covered pot is opened before the glass is 
cool enough to work. 

b) Period between fining stage and the removal of the glass from the 
furnace. 

Cooling Rate — See 'Setting Rate'. 

Cord 

a) An attenuated glassy inclusion possessing optical and other pro- 
perties differing from those of the surrounding glass. 

b) Very obvious and relatively thick thread of glass, sometime stand- 
ing out from the surface. 

Corrosion — Chemical attack of the surface. 

Covered Pol — See * Closed Pot*. 

14 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Cracking Off— Breaking off a glass article from the mould, for example, 
by scratching and then heating. 

Crackled — Glassware, the surface of which has been intentionally cracked 
by water immersion and partially healed by reheating before final shaping. 

Crack-Off— The process of severing a glass article by breaking, as by 
scratching and then by heating, 

Crizzle — An imperfection in the form of a multitude of fine surface 
fractures. 

Crookes Glass — A glass having low transmission for ultraviolet light, and 
containing cerium and other rare earths. 

Cross-Fired Furnace -^ See 'Side-Fired Furnace'. 

Crown — The part of a furnace forming the top or roof. 

Crown Flint Glass — An optical crown glass bordering on optical flint glass 
because of the addition of a substantial content of lead oxide and with 
somewhat higher dispersion than optical crown glass. 

Crown Glass 

a) A transparent glass made in disc form by blowing and spinning. 
Crown glass has a natural fire-finished surface but it is of varying 
thickness with a slight convexity and so gives a marked degree of 
distortion of vision and reflection. 

b) A type of optical glass not containing lead among its constituents 
and having low dispersion and usually low in refractive index. 

Crown Optical Glass — An optical glass with a low dispersion and low 
index of refraction, usually forming the converging element of an optical 
system (see also 'Optical Crown Glass'). 

Crush — A lightly pitted area resulting in a dull grey appearance over the 
region. 

Crystal Glass — A colourless glass, highly transparent, frequently used fcr 
art or table ware. 

Collet 

a) A waste or broken glass, usually suitable as an addition to raw 
batch. 

b) Domestic cullet (factory cullet); cullet from within the plant. 

c) Foreign cullet; cullet from an outside source. 

d) /'\e portion of a glass article that will later be cut off and dis- 
ca. Jed or remelted. 

Collet Cut — Synonymous witu 'Block Reek*. 

15 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Curtain Wall -See 'Baffle Wall'. 

Cut Glass — Glassware decorated by grinding figure or patterns on its 
surface with an abrasive wheel, followed by polishing, also called 'Deep 
Cut'. 

Cut-Off Mark — See 'Shearing Mark'. 

Cot Sizes — Any flat glass cut to specific dimensions. 

Cutter 

a) A worker who cuts flat glass to the required size. 

b) A tool used in cutting glass. 

c) A workman engaged in grinding designs on glass. 

Cutting 

a) Scoring flat glass with a diamond or a steel wheel, and breaking 
it along the scratch. 

b) Producing cut glass. 

Cycle — In open-pot practice, the time between the first filling of batch and 
the emptying of the pot. 

Cylinder Process — A process for manufacture of window glass wherein 
molten glass is blown and drawn into the form of a cylinder, which is sub- 
sequently split longitudinally, reheated in a flattening kiln, and flattened. 



Damper — The contrivance which controls the flow of gases. 

Danner Process — A mechanical process for continuously, drawing glass 
cane or tubing from a rotating mandrel. 

Day Tank — A periodic melting unit, usually designed to be emptied by 
each day of hand-gathering. 

Dead Plate — In automatic production, a stationery plate receiving a glass 
article awaiting transfer. 

Debiteuse — A slotted, floating clay block through which glass issues in the 
Fourcault process. 

Decolorizer — A substance or mixture of substances added to the batch for 
counteracting the colouring effect of impurities. Its action is either physi- 
cal (by imparting the colour complementary to that of the impurity), or 
chemical (for example, by oxidation). 

Decolorizing — The process of producing a colourless appearance in glass. 

16 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Decorated — Glass to which a process of decoration has been applied. 

Decorating 

a) The firing of enamels on glassware, 

b) Applying designs to formed glassware by means of etching, sand 
blasting, cutting, engraving or similar methods. 

Decorator — A craftsman who decorates glassware by silk screen, transfer, 
spraying colour, brush or pallette knife or by cutting, aW called 
'Engraver*. 

Deep Cut — See 'Cut Glass'. 

Deformation Point — The temperature observed during the measurement of 
expansivity by the interferometer method at which viscous now exactly 
counteracts thermal expansion. The deformation point generally corres- 
ponds to a viscosity in the range from 10 11 to 10 18 poises. 

Delivery 

a) The final act of any glass forming unit on a particular article, con- 
sisting of motion to remove the article from the mould. 

b) The process or equipment used for directing charges or gobs of 
glass to a forming machine. 

Demi-crystal Glass — See 'Crystal Glass'. 

Dense — In optical glass, the sub-class of a higher index of refraction. 

Devitrification — Crystallization in glass. 

Dice — Approximately cubical fragments formed when toughened glass is 
broken. 

Digs — Deep, short scratches. 

Dimming — A whitish surface film being a further stage of bloom; it cannot 
be removed without damaging the surface. 

Direct-Fired Furnace — A melting furnace having neither recuperator nor 
regenerator. 

Dirt — A small particle of foreign matter embedded in the glass surface. 

Dirty Finish — A scaly or rough appearance of a finish, sometimes with 
black spots. 

Discoloration — A fault in pulled jets where a whitish or blackish deposit 
becomes fused into the glass during prolonged heating while drawing. 

Dispersion — Variation of refractive index with wave length of light (see 
also *R-vaIue' and *Na-value*). 

17 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Distortion 

a) An optical effect due to variation of thickness of sheet glass. 

b) An optical effect due to uneven wall thickness, uneven surfaces 
or inhomogeneities in the glass. 

Distribution — The thickness of the walls of a glass article over its entire 
area. 

Document Glass — An ultraviolet absorbing glass used for protecting 
documents. 

Dog Hole— See 'Throat*. 

Dog House — A small box like vertibule on a glass furnace into which the 
batch is fed or which facilitates the introduction and removal of floaters. 

Dolomite — A mineral having the empirical composition, 1 mole of calcium 
carbonate and 1 mole of magesium carbonate. 

Dope — Slang for mould lubricant. 

Dope Mark — A dark mark on the surface, being the residue of mould 
lubricants. 

Double-Cavity Mould — A mould possessing two cavities for simultaneous 
fabrication of two articles of glass. 

Double-Cavity Process — Any glass-forming process that uses two charges 
of glass and forms them simultaneously. 

Double-Gob Process — See * Double-Cavity Process'. 

Down Draw — Process of continuously drawing glass tubing downwards 
from an orifice. 

Down Draw Process — A process of continuously drawing glass turning 
downwards. 

Drag Ladle — To produce cullet by ladling glass from the melt into the 
water. 

Dragade — See 'Drag Ladle'. 

Dragaded Cullet — See 'Quenched Cullet'. 

Draw — The quantity of glass delivered by a furnace in a given time of 24 
hours, also called 'Load', 'Output' or 'Pull*. 

Draw Bar — A submerged refactory block used to define the position of 
sheet giass during drawing. 

Draw Gang — Group of men employed to cut and handle glass as it comes 
from the lehr. 

18 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Drawn Glass — Glass, usually in sheet form made by a continuously 
mechanical drawing operation. 

Drop Throat — See 'Submarine Throat'. 

Droplets — See 'Tear Drop'. 

Dropped Throat — A throat, the bottom of which is below the level of the 
melting end of the tank, also called 'Submerged Throat' or 'Sunken Throat'. 

Dropping — Forming of glass by heating in a mould without the use of 
pressure. 

Dry Gage — See 'Drag Ladle'. 

Dry Joint — A fragile seal caused by insufficient heating. 

Dummy — A mechanical device, operated by the blower's feet, for wetting, 
raising, opening and closing the paste mould in mouth-blowing operations. 

Durability — See 'Chemical Durability' and * Weathering'. 

£ 

Edge-Polished — Usually applied to flat glass, the edges of which have been 
polished after cutting. 

Edging — Grinding the edge of flat glass, to a desired shape or size ( see 
also 'Centering' ). 

Eggshell — Excessive thinness of a blown bulb. 

Electric Boosting — An auxiliary method of adding heat to the glass in a gas 
or oil-fired tank by passing electric current through the molten glass. 

Embossing — Marking or decorating glassware by raised lettering or devices 
formed in the mould by blowing or pressing ( see also 'Acid Embossing' ). 

Enamel Back — A glass tubing or rod in which an interlayer of opal glass 
is fused in. • 

End-Fired Furnace — A furnace with fuel supplied from the end wall. 

End-Port Furnace — A furnace with ports for fuel and air in the end wall. 

Engraved— Glass upon which a pattern has been incised with abrasive 
wheel. 

Engraver 

a) A craftsman who engraves glass-forming moulds with lettering or 
other devices. 

b) See 'Decorator'. 

19 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Engraving — The process of carving figures, letters, etc, upon glass by 
abrasive means. 

Etch — To attack the surface of glass with hydrofluoric acid or other agent, 
°enera!l v for roarkm** or decoration. 

Etched 

a) Treated by etching. 

b) Weathered so that surface is roughened. 

Etching — Treating the surface of glass with hydrofluoric acid or some 
other chemical, generally for marking or decoration, also called 'Acid 
Etching'. 

Eye — The opening in the bottom of a pot furnace through which the flame 
enters. 



Fade 

b) Decrease in transparency or reflectivity, or colour intensity of 



a) Attack on the surface of glass causing an oily or whitish surface. 






Feathers — An imperfection consisting of clusters of fine seeds caused by 
dirt or foreign material entering the glass at the time of casting or shaping. 

Feeder — A mechanical device for regularly producing and delivering gobs 
of giass to a forming unit. 

Feeder Channel — Refractory channel between the working end of a furnace 
and the feeder. 

Feeder Connection — The opening or surrounding blocks in a furnace well 
to receive the channel leading to the feeder. 

Feeder Gate — A niece pf refractory material lowered into the feeder 
orifice. 

Feeder Nose — A refractory block of special shape containing the orifice 
forming the delivery end of the feeder. 

CoaJa* n>uuiinn , Cos *17aaAar fAnHaptiAn' 

Feeder Plunger — A reciprocating refractory plunger above a feeder orifice. 
Feeder Process — See 'Gob Process'. 

Fibre — An individual filament made by attenuating molten glass. A con- 
tinuous filament is a glass fibre of great or indefinite length. A staple fiber 
is a glass fibre of relatively short length ( generally less than 432 mm ). 

20 



IS: 1382-1981 

Figured Glass — Flat glass having a pattern on one or both, surfaces. 

Figured Rolled Glass — A translucent rolled glass having a pattern on one 
or both surfaces. 

Fill — The unit charge of batch into a tank of pot. 

Filling — See Patching'. 

Filling Point — The level up to which a glass bottle has the nominal 
capacity. 

Fin 

a) An imperfection caused by entrance of glass into a seam between 
mould parts during forming. 

b) A thin projection on the surface or edge, often produced by pene- 
tration of glass into the mould joint. 

Fine Annealing— Annealing to an extremely low stress and uniform index 
of refraction. 

Fine Seed — A bubble of size less than 0*2 mm. 

Fining — The process by which the molten glass approaches freedom from 
undissolved gases. 

Finish 

a) The part of a bottle for holding the cap or closure. 

b) Stage in melting process after glass appears free of seeds. 

Finisher 

a) Person having charge of a furnace during the melting and fining 
of the glass. 

b) The workman who does the final work, such as polishing or put- 
ting the handle on foot on a piece of ware. 

Fire Cracks — Cracks in ware caused by local temperature shock. 

.Fire Finish — To make glass surface smooth and glossy by heating usually 
in a flame, also called 'Fire Polish'. 

Fire Over — To allow a melting unit to idle at operating temperature. 

Fire Polish — To make glass smooth, rounded, or glossy by heating in a fire. 

Fired On — A term used to describe permanent application to the glass sur- 
face of enamels, transfers, metallic stains, etc, by heat treatment. 

First Side — The surface of plate which is ground and polished first. 

21 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Flakes — Fragements of glass from an overblown bulb which become fused 
to an assembled apparatus. 

Flaking — Peeling of a skin from the surface, usually as a result of corro- 
sion and sometimes leaving the glass iridescent. 

Flame-Proof Glass — See 'Heat Resisting Glass'. 

Flamming — See 'Striking'. 

Flanged Bottom — An imperfection; an offset bottom of a bottle. 

Flash — See 'Fin'. 
Flashing 

a) Applying a thin layer of glass to the surface of a glass of a diffe- 
rent colour in the forming stage. 

b) See 'Striking'. 

Flat Drawn Process — A process in which a sheet of glass is drawn from 
bath of molten glass and is passed between coolers to control thickness. 

Flat Glass — A general term covering sheet glass, float glass, and various 
forms of rolled and plate glass. 

Flat Spot — A flat region on a surface which should be curved. 

Flatterer's Assistant — See *Pusher'. 

Flatware — Articles having internal depth not exceeding 25 mm, measured 
from the lowest point to the horizontal plane passing through the overflow 
point. 

Flies — Very small, often superficial cracks arising from internal strain. 

Flu* Glass 

a) A lead-containing glass. 

b) Term used by container industry for colourless glass. 

Flint Optical Glass — An optical glass containing lead oxide and usually 
with a high dispersion and high index of refraction. 

Float Glass — A form of flat glass produced by reheating the continuous 
ribbon of glass whilst it floats over a bath of molten metal. 

Float Glass Process — A process in which a ribbon of hot glass is floated 
upon a heated liquid of greater density than that of glass, to produce a 
transparent glass, the two surfaces of which are flat, parallel and fire polish- 
ed so that they give clear, undistorted vision and reflection. 

Floater — Floating clay shape to skim foreign materials or control their 
passage in a furnace. 

22 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Floater Hole — An opening in a tank through which floaters are placed. 

Flow Hole — See 'Throat'. 

Flow Line — See * Chill Mark'. 

Flow Process — See 'Gob Process'. 

Flour Crown Glass — An optical crown glass containing a substantial 
quantity of fluorine and having a very low index of refraction and low 
dispersion. 

Flush — See 'Fin'. 

Flux — A substance added to the batch to promote fusion. 

Flux Block — A refractory furnace block used in contact with glass in 

melting. 

Flux Line — The level of the molten glass surface in a tank, also the 
boundary line between unmelted batch and clear glass in a tank. 

Flux Line Block — The top course of refractory blocks, forming the side 
walls of a tank. 

Foam — A layer of bubbles on the surface of molten glass. 

Foam Glass — A light weight multi-cellular glass having a homogeneous 
mass of sealed cells. 

Foam Line — Line in tank dividing foam-covered areas from clear area. 

Fold — See 'Lap'. 

Foodware — Articles produced from glass and glass-ceramic which are 
intended to be used for the preparation, cooking, serving and storage of 
food or drinks including packaging ware. 

Foot Blower — A device operated by foot for supplying air. 

Forehearth — A section of a furnace, in one of several forms, from which 
glass is taken for forming. 

Forming — The shaping of hot glass. 

Forming Hood — The chamber of the forming equipment in which glass 
fibres are formed and collected. 

Forming Rolls — Rolls used in forming flat glass. 

Fourcault Process — The method of making sheet glass by drawing glass 
vertically upward through a slotted debiteuse block. 

Free-Blown — See 'Offhand Glass'. 

23 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Frit — Calcined or partly fused materials which are subsequently melted to 
glassy stage. 

Fritting Zone — See 'Soaking Area'. 

Frosted — Surface treated to 'scatter light to simulate frost. 

Frosted Finish — A finish having areas of numerous checks, particularly on 
the lipi which thus appears frosted. 

Frosting — See 'Blooming'. 

Fused Silica — See 'Quartz Glass 1 . 

Fusion 

a) Joining by heating, 

b) Remelting for bead making. 

c) See 'Melting'. 

G 

Gable Wall — The charging end wall of a glass-melting furnace. 

Gaffer — Head workman, foreman, or blower of a glass hand shop. 

Gall — Layer of molten sulphates floating upon glass in a furnace, also 
called 'Salt Water*. 

Gaseous Inclusions — Elongated bubbles in sheet glass. 

Gate — A refractory slab lowered in the forehearth channel for shutting 
off the flow of glass. 

Gather 

a) The mass of glass picked up on the blowing iron or punty. 

b) To collect glass from a pot or tank at the end of a blowing iron 
or punty. 

Gatherer — A worker who collects molten glass on the end of a blowi 
iron or punty preparatory to blowing, pressing or drawing. 

Georgian — See 'Wired Glass'. 

Glass — An inorganic, non-metallic material produced by the complete 
fusion of raw materials at high temperatures, into a homogeneous liquid 
which is then cooled to a rigid condition essentially withbut crystallization. 

Note — Glass is typically hard and brittle, and has a conchoidal fracture. It may 
be colourless or coloured, and transparent to opaque. Masses or bodies of glass may 
be made coloured, translucent, or opaque by the presence of dissolved, amorphous, or 
crystalline material. 

24 



IS: 1382 -1981 

When a specific kind of glass is indicated, such descriptive terms as flint glass, barium 
glass, and window glass should be used following the basic definition, but the qualifying 
term is to be used as understood by trader custom. 

Objects made of glass are loosely and popularly referred to as glass; such as 'glass' for 
a tumbler, a barometer, window, a magnifier, or a mirror. 

Glass Blower 

a) A craftsman who blows hollow-ware on a blowing iron or a semi- 
automatic machine. 

b) See 'Bench Worker' and 'Table Blower'. 

Glass Blowing — The shaping of hot glass by air pressure applied 
internally. 

Glass Ceramic — An inorganic, non-metallic material produced by the com- 
plete fusion of raw materials at high temperatures into a homogeneous 
liquid which is then cooled to a rigid condition with a certain degree of 
crystallization. It may be translucent or opaque. 

Glass Container — General term applied to glass bottles and jars. 

Glass Dust — See 'Small Glass'. 

Glass Making Sand — See 'Sand'. 

Glass Shell (for Lamp) — A protective glass casing for preventing combus- 
tion of light emitting element of a lamp and for providing vacuum or gas 
filled space required for the above element. 

Glass Wool — Fleecy mass of plain glass fibres, also called, 'Wool'. 

Glazed Pot — A new pot, coated inside with a thin layer of glass to protect 
it from the attack of raw batch. 

Glory Hole— An opening exposing the hot interior of a furnace used to 
reheat the ware in hand-working. 

Gob 

a) A portion of hot glass delivered by a feeder. 

b) A portion of hot glass gathered on a punty or pipe. 

Gob Process — A process whereby glass is delivered to a forming unit in 
gob form. 

Graduated Glassware — Glassware that is marked with one or more 
graduations for volumetric measuring purposes. 

Graduation — The process of marking graduations on glassware. 

Ground Glass — Glass roughened by grinding with abrasive materials. 

25 



IS: 1382 -1981 

H 

Hackle Marks — Fine ridges on the fracture surface of glass, parallel to 
direction of propagation of the fracture. 

Hair Line — See ' Air Line'. 

Half-Crystal Glass — See Crystal Glass'. 

Hang Up — Localized thick section at a point on the internal surface of 
the body. 

Hard Glass 

a) Commonly refers to a glass difficult to melt or fuse. 

b) A glass of relatively high viscosity at elevated temperatures. 

c\ A glass of high softening point and low coefficient of expansion, 
d) Erroneously used also to describe glass of high chemical resistance. 

Hardness — See 'Oversea!'.. 

Head Space — The unfilled space in a glass container fitted with a closure. 

Heat Absorbing Glass — Glass having the property of absorbing a subs- 
tantial percentage of radiant energy in the near infrared of the spectrum. 

Heat Proof Glass — A term generally used to describe 'Heat Resisting 
Glass'. 

Heat Resisting Glass — Glass able to withstand high thermal shock, 
generally because of low expansion coefficient. 

Heat Treated (Glass) — Term sometimes used for tempered glass, see 
'Tempered Glass'. 

Heavy Bottom 

a) Excessive thickness of the bottom of a glass bottle. 

b) Excessively thick part of an article. 

Heavy Cord — See 'Cord'. 

Heavy Corner — See 'Heavy Bottom*. 

Heavy Panel — See 'Heavy Bottom'. 

Heavy Seed — A group of small bubbles, less than about 0*2 mm, clustered 
together. 

Heavy Shoulders - • See 'Heavy Bottom . 

26 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Heel Tap 

a) An imperfection in which the base or bottom of a bottle is very 
thick in one area and very thin in another. 

b) See 'Slogged Bottom'. 

High Alumina Glass — Glass containing substantial ( more than 6 percent) 
amount of aluminium oxide. 

High Spots — Local areas of a ground surface which stand proud and 
prevent perfect mating with a second ground surface. 

High Transmission Glass — Glass which transmits an exceptionally high 
percentage of the visible light. 

Hollow Neck — Deficiency of glass in the neck of bottle ( see also 'Blown 
Away* ). 

Hollows ( Stopcocks ) — The gradual entry of the side arm bore into the 
ground barrel creating a pocket 

Hollow-Ware — Articles having an internal depth greater than 25 mm 
measured from the lowest point to the horizontal plane passing through 
the overflow point. 

Note — Hollow-ware may be termed large or small according to its capacity. A 
ware with a capacity up to 2 litres is termed as small and that with capacity above 
2 litres is termed as large hollow-ware. 

Hood — &e<Potette'. 

Hooked Graduation — A line which turns up or down at one or both ends; 
a machine fault. 

Hot Check — A crack less open than a check; dull in appearance because 
of the presence of a foreign matter. 

Hot End — The manufacturing operations concerned with hot glass, that 
is, melting, forming, annealing. 

Hot Mould — The process of forming glassware in hot uncoated moulds. 

Hot Spot — The zone of highest temperature within a glass melting 
furnace. 



Ice-Proof — A term used to describe containers ( primarily tumblers ) able 
to withstand sudden temperature gradients from the room temperature to 
that of ice. 

Installed Capacity of a Glass Factory — The maximum possible production 
of finished glassware and is limited by the least capacity of any manufac- 
turing operation in the factory. 

27 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Intaglio — A form of decoration in which the depth of cutting is inter- 
mediate between deep cutting and engraving, 

Interlayer — Term used to describe a plastic layer between the glass sheets, 
such as for making laminated safety glass, also called 'Interleaf. 

Interleaf — See * Interlayer'. 

Irising — See 'Iridescence'. 

Iridescence — Interference colours caused by a slight chemical attack of 
the surface. 



Jack Arch — A brick arch above the port arch extending into and support- 
ing the main crown of the tank furnace. 

Jack Bricks 

a) Bricks used for making the jack arch. 

b) Bricks used for stopping round a newly set pot. These bricks 
have recesses or holes to take a brick fork. 

Jamb — Sidewall of port of furnace superstructure carrying port crown 
load. 

Japanese Furnace — Direct coal fired pot furnace. 

Japanese Tank — Direct coal fired small tank furnace. 

Joint line 

a) See 'Parting Line*. 

b) A Hne or seam on glassware formed at the joint of two mould 
parts, also called 'Parting Line'. 

c) See 'Mould Joint*. 

Jointing Yard — Place between the grinding and polishing operations in 
the continuous manufacture of plate glass, where the piaster joints are 
remade, sometimes called 'Middle Yard'. 

K 

Kettle — A hemispherical vessel about one metre in diameter, into which 
molten glass is ladled. 

Knockout — A portion of a piece of pressed ware which has been so 
designed that it may be knocked out to make a hole. 

Knot 

a) An imperfection consisting of an inhomogeneity in the form of 

vitreous lump. 
3f>) A nodular glassy inclusion, often having an attenuated tail. 

28 



IS: 1382-1981 

L 
Labelling — See *Badging'. 

Ladle — A long-handled, cup-shaped tool for ladling glass out of or from 
one pot to another. Also used for filling open pots. 

Ladders — See 'Washboard'. 

Laminated Glass — A transparent sheet formed from interleaved, firmly 
adherent layers of glass and plastics material, the latter known as interlayer 
or interleaf; having glass layers outermost ( see also 'Safety Glass' ). 

Lampblown — Glass articles made, usually from tubing or rod, with the aid 
ofagasflame. 

Lamp Worker — See 'Bench Worker'. 

Lamp Working — Forming glass articles from tubing and cane by heating 
in a gas flame. 

Lap 

a) An imperfection; a fold in the surface of a glass article caused by 
incorrect flow during forming. 

b) A tool used for polishing glass. 

Layer — Person who has charge of laying the rough glass in plaster on the 
grinding and polishing tables. 

Laying Yard — Place where the rough glass is laid on grinding and polishing 
tables with plaster. 

Lead Barium Crown Glass — See 'Crown Flint Glass'. 

Lead Crown Glass — Optical glass intermediate in lead content and dis- 
persion between crown and flint, also called 'Crown Flint Glass'. 

Lead Glass — Glass containing a substantial proportion of lead oxide 
( PbO ) ( usually more than IS percent ). 

Leaded Glass — Pieces of glass fixed together with strip of lead of 'H* or 
'U* section to form a window. 

Leaner — An article which leans instead of standing upright when stood on 
its base. 

Lehr — A long, tunnel-shaped oven for annealing glass by continuous 
passage. 

Lehr Loader — A device for properly placing and spacing glass articles on 
a continuous lehr belt. 

Lens — See 'Ball's' Eye. 

29 



IS: 1382-1981 

Leas-Fronted Tubing — Thermometer tubing formed so oat the apparent 
width of the column of mercury or spirit thermometric liquid is magnified. 

Light — In optical glass, the subclass of a lower index of refraction. 

Light Bottom 

a) Deficient thickness of the bottom of a glass container. 

b) Excessively thin part of an article. 

Light Comer — See 'Light Bottom'. 

Light Panel — See 'Light Bottom*. 

Light Shoulder — See 'Light Bottom'. 

Lime — Calcium oxide ( CaO ), or a mixture of calcium oxide ( CaO ) and 
magnesium oxide ( MgO ). 

Lime Crown Glass — An optical crown glass containing a substantial 
-\ quantity of calcium oxide. 

Lime Glass — A glass containing a substantial, proportion of lime, usually 
associated with soda and silica. 

Lime Stone — Either calcific limestone (CaC0 9 ) or dolomitic limestone 
(CfcC0 3 .MgC0 8 ). 

Lines — Fine cords or strings, usually on the surface of sheet glass. 

y Xiqnidus Temperature — The maximum temperature at which equilibrium 
exists between the molten glass and its primary crystalline phase. 

Load — &e<PuU'. 

Locking Ring — Part of the finish of a container for securing a closure in 
position. 

Long Glass — A comparative term signifying a slow-setting glass. 

Lubricant — A solution which, When applied to glass fibres, facilitates their 
handling by reducing mutual abrasion ( see also * Mould Lubricant' ). 

M 

Main Arch — See 'Crown*. 

Mandrel — Refractory tube used in the manufacture of glass tubing or rod. 

Manganese 

a) Commercial manganese dioxide ( MnO, ). 
cb) An industrial name for pyrolusite. 

30 



18:1381-1981 

Mantle Block— Refractory block fitting in the gable wall, over the dog 
house. 

Marbles — Spherical balls of glass. 

Marver 

a) A flat plate on which a hand gather of glass is rolled, shaped, and 
cooled. 

b) Also the process of doing same. 

Mat — A glass-fibre product of felt like nature. 

Match Mark — See 'Mould Joint'. 

Matt Finish — A kind of rought finish deliberately obtained for decorative 
purposes. 

Mechanical Boy — A foot operated device for manipulating the opening 
and closing the mould during blowing. 

Melt — A specific quantity of glass made at one time. 

Melter 

a) The chamber of a tank furnace where the glass batch is melted. 

b) Person in charge of the furnace during the early stages of filling 
and melting of batch. 

Melting — The thermal process by which the charge is completely converted 
into molten glass free from undissolved batch. 

Melting Area — The area of a furnace under fire. Usually the area up to 
the bridgewall or floater. 

Melting End — The chamber of a tank furnace where glass is melted and 
refined. 

Melting Temperature — The range of furnace temperature within which 
melting takes place at an economically desirable rate, and at which the 
resulting glass generally has a viscosity of 10 1,6 to 10 a * 5 poises. For 
purposes of comparing melting temperature of glasses, it is assumed that 
the glass at its melting temperature has a viscosity of 10 1 poises. 

Meniscus — See 'Onion'. 

Metal — Molten glass in a melting unit. 

Metal Line — The surface line of the metal or glass in a tank furnace or 
pot. 

Mg Point — See 'Deformation Point'. 

Micro Glass — Very thin glass used for microscope cover slips. 

31 



15:1381-1981 



a) A condition of pronounced opalescence in glass. 

b) A white surface layer caused by volatilization of certain consti- 
tuents or by devitrification during lamp working. 

Millefiori — A form of decoration used, for example, in paper weights, in 
which sections of multi-coloured glass canes are set in a clear glass matrix 
to form a design. 

Mirror — A general term covering a flat or curved specially treated glass 
having on one of its sides a thin coating of silver or other metal deposited 
by chemical or other suitable processes, to provide a reflecting surface. The 
coated surface may be provided with protective coating(s). 

Mixing Room — See 'Batch House'. 

Moil 

a) The glass remaining on a punty or blowing iron after the gather 
has been cut off oi after a piece of ware has been blown and 
severed. 

b) The glass originally in contact with the blowing mechanism or 
head, which becomes cullet after the desired article is severed 
from it. 

Moonstone Glass — A type of opal glass resembling the mineral moonstone. 

Mosaic*— Small glass pieces cemented together, usually on to a flat backing 
surface to form designs. 

Mould — A form ( usually metal ) in which glass is shaped. 

Moulded Glass — Glass that is formed in a mould as distinct from cast, 
rolled, drawn, or offhand ware. 

Mould Joint — Small flange or rim formed on the surface of the glass 
along the joint of two parts of the mould. 

Mould Lubricant — A substance applied on or into moulds to reduce 
friction or prevent adhesion. 

Mould Mark 

a) A mark or seam on glassware resulting from a mould joint. 

b) A mark on the external suface caused by an irregularity or rough- 
ness on the surface of the mould ( see * Mould Joint' ). 

Mould Pull— A sharp line on the exterior surface caused by variation in 
the degree of a<ihesion to the mould. 

Month Blowing — Shaping hot glass by air pressure applied with the mouth. 

32 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Mnd-Up — To seal a pot stopper or a joint in a furnace or in a producer 
gas line, by the application of wet clay. 

Muffle — An enclosure in a furnace protecting the ware from the flame and 
products of combustion. 

Murgatroyd Belt — Portion of the sidewall of a bottle near the bottom. 

N 

n t n D Line — Abbreviation for index of refraction, generally used with a 
subscript indicating the special line, for example, n D = index of refraction 
for D or sodium line. 

Neck 

a) Part of a bottle between finish and shoulder. 

b) The structure connecting the melting and working chambers of a 
tank furnace. 

c) The structure connecting the uptake and port in a tank furnace. 

Neck Ring — A metal part used to form the finish of a hollow glass ware. 

Needle — The vertical, reciprocating, refractory part of a feeder which 
alternately forces the glass through the orifice and pulls it up after shearing, 
also called 'Plunger'. 

Neutral Glass — A glass of high chemical durability. 

Normalizing — See 'Conditioning Zone'. 

Nose — The working end or refining chamber of a tank. 

Notch — A hole left by a chip. 

Nu Value — Expressed by the Greek letter or by the English letter 'V. 
Designates reciprocal dispersive power as follows: 

Nu-value — ( n D — 1 )/( n F — n c ) 

O 

Observations Hole — A small opening in a furnace wall through which 
observations may be made, also called 'Peep Hole', 'Bye Hole' or 'Sight 
Hole'. 

Obsidian — A highly siliceous natural glass. 

Offhand Glass — Glass produced by the offhand process. 

Offhand Process — The process of forming glassware by an expert, working 
without the aid of moulds. 

33 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Offset — An imperfection resulting from mould parts not properly matched, 
that is, a finish or base offset from body or neck. 

Offset Finish — A finish which is unsymmetrical about the centre axis of 
the neck of a bottle. 

Offset Finish ( Horizontally ) — A finish which is not correctly centred 
relative to the vertical axis of the neck. 

Offset Finish ( Vertically ) — A finish the ha vies of which are displaced 
vertically relative to each other. 

Offset Punt — A base which is unsymmetrical about the centre axis of a 
bottle. 

OH Mark — Small, very obvious mark looking like a feather; due to 
vapours produced by evaporation of oil. 

Onion — A term sometimes used for the bulblike mass of a glass at the 
origin of the drawn sheet in the Furcault process. 

O pacifier — A mineral or chemical compound added to the batch to pro- 
duce opal glass. 

Opal Glass — Glass with fiery translucence. Loosely, any translucent glass. 

Open Pot — A pot open to the flames and gases of combustion. 

Open Seed — A seed which has burst or opened leaving a cavity in the 
finished surface. 

Ophthalmic Glass — Glass used in spectacles, generally having specified 
optical and physical properties and quality. 

Optic 

a) Having variations in wall thickness, producing refractive effects. 

b) A lens or prism in an optical instrument. 

Optical Blanks — Optical glass formed by pressing into the rough shape 
and side required in the finished article, also called 'Optical Pressings'. 

Optical Borate Flint — Optical flint glass consisting essentially of boric 
oxide ( B a Oj ) and lead oxide ( PbO ). 

Optical Crown Glass — An optical glass with a low dispersion and low 
index of refraction, usually forming the converging element of an 'optical 
system. Any optical glass possessing a nu-value of at least 55 J 0; or any 
optical glass with a nu-value between 500 and 550 having a refractive 
index greater than 1*60. 

Optical Glass — Glass of high quality having closely specified optical 
properties, used in the manufacture of optical systems. 

34 



IS (1382 -1981 

Optical Glass Numerical Designation — The numerical designation in com- 
mon usage is base4 on the index of refraction for medium (^ n D ) and the nu- 
value (v). The unity factor for the index is dropped (that is, 1-496 becomes 
496), and the decimal point for the nu-value is also dropped ( nu = 6M 
becomes 644). Thus, the glass is specified 496/644 without reference to 
chemical composition. In some cases, it is permissible to precede the 
numerical designation by the abbreviated name indicative of composition. 
For instance, Borosilicate Crown (BSC) 496/644 may be used. For 
example, Dense Barium Crown may be crown 610/574 or DBC 6 10/574, 
or just 610/574 meaning n D «= 1-610 and nu-value =» 574. 

Optical Pressing — See 'Optical Blanks'. 

Optical Zinc Crown — Optical crown glass containing a substantial propor- 
tion of zinc oxide ( ZnO ). 

Orange Peel — Numerous small regular defects giving the surface the 
appearance of orange peel. 

Orifice — An opening through which glass flows, also called 'Orifice Ring' 
or 'Bush'. In a feeder, the term refers to the opening formed by an 
orifice ring in the bottom of the spout. 

Out-of-FIatness — Deviation from the intended form. 

Out-of-Ronnd 

a) The imperfection of nonroundness in glass articles. 

b) See «Out-of Flatness'. 
Out-of-Shapc — See 'Out-of Flatness'. 

Out-of-Square End — End of tubing not perpendicular to the axis. 

Ontput — See 'Draw'. 

Ovality — Deviation of a cylindrical or spherical glass article from circular 
towards an elliptical cross-section. 

Oven-Glass 

a) Glass suitable for manufacture of articles to be used in baking and 
roasting foods. 

b) Glassware made from oven glass. 

Overfiush — An excess of glass round the joint line of the finish or the 
flange of a glass article. 

Overlap — A fault in a ring graduation line where the line is scribed more 
than 360° and the overlapping section is thickened or doubled. 

Overpress — An imperfection consisting of the projecting excess glass 
resulting from imperfect closing of mould joints. 

35 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Oversea! — The result of over-heating a sintered disc during sealing which 
reduces the porous area, 

Owens Process — A bottle making process in which the blank or parison 
mould is filled by suction. 

Oxidizing Agent — A compound that decomposes during the melting or 
fining stages supplying oxygen to other batch chemicals. 

P 

Pack 

a) The quality of ware packed. 

b) The ratio of packed ware to theoretical. 

Paddling — The rough shaping of a piece of glass in a furnace by means of 
paddles or tools preparatory to the pressing operation for making optical 
glass blanks. 

Parison — A preliminary shape or blank from which a glass article is to be 
formed. 

Parison Mould — See 'Blank Mould'. 

Parting Line — Line or seam on glassware resulting from joint of two 
mould parts. 

Paste Mould — A mould lined with adherent carbon, used wet for blown 
ware. 

Patching — Placing of a refractory block outside a badly worn block while 
the furnace is operating, or a block so placed, also called 'Filling'. 

Pearl Ash — Commercial potassium carbonate. 

Peephole — A small opening in a furnace wall for observation purposes. 

Phosphate Crown Glass — An optical crown glass containing a substantial 
quantity of phosphorous pentoxide ( P,O s ). 

Phosphate Glass — A glass in which the essential glass former is phos- 
phorous pentoxide instead of silica. 

Pig — A rest for blowpipe or punty during the gathering operation. 

Pilkington Process — A process for making flat glass in which the glass 
continuously pours from a tank into a spout and then between forming 
rolls and is subsequently annealed as one continuous sheet. 

Pillar Arches — The arches spanning the pillars of a pot furnace. 

Pillar Block — Columns supporting the crown of a pot furnace between 
which the pots are set. 

36 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Pin Hole — A minute hole 

Pip — A local smooth lump or thickening in a rim or bead. Results from 
the glass-cutting method. 

Pipe — See 'Blow Pipe'. 

Pipe Blister — A large bubble on the inside surface of a glass article often 
arising from dirt or scale on the blowpipe. 

Pit — A notch produced during grinding or sandblasting. 

Pitch Polishing — Polishing operation in which pitch rather than felt is the 
resilient carrier for the polishing agent. 

Pittsburgh Sheet Process — The method of making sheet glass by drawing 
vertically upward from a free bath surface wherein definition of draw is 
established by a submerged refractory member. 

Plain — Relatively free from bubbles and seed during the melting process. 

Plain Glass — Glass free from seed or bubbles. 

Plaining — See * Refining'. 

Plaster — Partially dehydrated gypsum used with water for welding plate 
glass to tables during the grinding and polishing of plate glass. 

Plate Glass — Flat glass formed by a rolling process, ground and polished 
on both sides, with surfaces essentially plane and parallel. 

Ping — The reciprocating metal part which forces glass into the contours 
of a mould, or which, in a blank mould forms the initial cavity for sub- 
sequent blowing ( see also 'Needle* ). 

Plunger Pull — A protuberance on the internal surface caused by glass 
sticking to the plunger. 

Plunger Tip — See 'Plug'. 

Ply — glassware having a layer of opal glass covered on one or both sides 
with coloured or colourless transparent glass, normally used for illuminated 
globes and lighting shades. 

Pock Mark — Surface roughness, produced by very small protrusions. 

Poling — See 'Blocking*. 

Polished Plate Glass — See 'Plate Glass'. 

Pontil — See 'Punty'. 

Port — Any opening in a furnace through which fuel or flame enters or 
exhaust gases escape. 

37 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Port Tongue — Refractory structure inside the port to/ prevent early mixing 
of fuel gas and air in the port. 

Pot — A one-piece refractory container for melting glass, Open pot; a pot 
wherein the glass surface is not protected from the furnace atmosphere*: 
Closed pot; a pot having a crown protecting the glass from the furnace 
atmosphere. 

Pot Arch — A furnace for firing or preheating a pot. 

Pot -Furnace — A furnace for melting glass in pots. 

Pot Glass 

a) Glass melted in a pot as distinct from a tank. 

b) Glass suitable for pot melting. 

Pot Opening — The opening between the pillars of a pot furnace. 

Pot Ring — See 'Ring'. 

Pot Setting — Placing a pot in position in a pot furnace. 

Pot Spout — A channel block connecting the working end of a tank furnace 
with a revolving pot. 

Pot Wagon — A vehicle used for transferring a pot from a pot arch to a 
pot furnace. 

Potash — Potassium oxide ( K a O ). Loosely, a carbonate of potassium. 

Potette — A refractory shape introduced into a furnace and partly immersed 
in the glass to protect the gathering point from the furnace gases; also 
called 'Hood'. It is used for hand gathering and also for certain suction 
machines. 

Powder Blue — ■ A prepared, finely ground pigment containing cobalt oxide 
( CoO ) added to the batch as a physical decolorizer. 

Press and Blow Process — A process of glass manufacture in which the 
finish and parison are pressed and the parison is subsequently blown to form 
the final shape. 

Pressed Glass — Glassware formed by pressure between a mould and a 
plunger. 

Pressing — The operation of forming pressed glass. 

Pressings — See 'Blanks*. 

Pressure Check 

a) An imperfection; a check or crack in a glass article resulting from 
too much pressure in forming. 

38 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

b) A fine, unobtrusive check caused by excess pressure during forming 
or by second contact with the mould. 

Prismatic — Translucent rolled glass, one surface of which consists of 
parallel prisms made in three designs giving three different nominal angles 
of refraction to a beam of light passing through the glass. 

Proof — See *Rod Proof. 

Pull _ The quantity of glass delivered by a furnace in a given time, usually 

24 hours. 

Poach Ware — Handmade, thin, blown glassware, especially tumblers. 

Punty 

a) A gathering iron of solid cross-section. 

b) A device to which ware is attached for holding during fire pol : shing 
or finishing. 

Posher — A worker who pushes glass into the kiln after flattening, also 
called 'Flattener's Assistant'. 

Q 

Quart Block — See 'Burner Block'. 

Quartz Glass — A term applied to silica glass made by fusing vein quartz. 

Quenched Cullet — Cullet made by running molten glass into water, also 
called 'Dragaded Cullet' or 'Dragladled Cullet'. 

R 

R-Value — The partial dispersion ratio given by the following equation: 
R-Value = ( n D — n c )/( n f — n c ) 

Rack Mark — A surface imperfection in rolled glasses due to faulty gearing 
in the forming roller drive. 

Raw Batch — A glass charge without cullet. 

Raw Cullet — A glass charge made totally of cullet. 

Ream — An imperfection consisting of nonhomogeneous layers or strings 
in flat glass. 

Reboil — Reappearance of bubbles in molten glass after it had previously 
appeared free of undissolved gases. 

Recuperative Furnace — A furnace having a recuperator. 

39 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Recuperator — A continuous heat exchanger in which heat is conducted from 
the products of combustion to incoming air through flue walls. 

Red Edge — Numerous rouge pits located around the edges of a large Sheet 
of polished plate glass. 

Reducing Agent — A chemical that, at high temperature, lowers the state 
of oxidation of other batch chemicals. 

Refill ( of Vacuum Flask ) — A double walled glass container, with the walls 
silvered and the space in between maintained under vacuum to reduce to a 
minimum the transfer of heat to and from the contents placed on it. 

Refiner — A compartment of a glass tank furnace, for the purpose of con- 
ditioning the glass ( see also Wose' ). 

Refining — The stage in the melting process of glass at which the undissolved 
gases are removed from molten glass, also called 'fining* or 'plaining'. 

Refining Agent — A chemical which promotes refining of glass, also called 
'Plaining Agent'. 

Reflector — A prismatic glass which reflects light. 

Refractor — A prismatic glass which refracts light. 

Refractory Stone — A fragment of refractory material coming from the 
furnace or pot in which the glass was melted. 

Regenerative Furnace — A furnace having regenerators. 

Regenerator — A cyclic heat interchanger that alternatively receives heat 
from gaseous combustion products and transfers heat to air or gas before 
combustion. 

Remoulding — A process in which optical glass is preheated and pressed 
into lens blanks. 

Reversal — A periodic operation of reversing the direction of firing in a 
regenerative furnace, also called 'Change-Over'. 

Reverse — To reverse the direction of flow of gas and air in a regenerative 
furnace. 

Revolving Pot — A rotating circular container from which the Owens 
machine gathers glass. 

Revolving Tube — - A hollow cylinder, concentric with the needle of a feeder, 
revolving in the glass. 

Ribben — A continuous strip of glass in the process of making. 

40 



IS: 1383-1981 

Ribbon Process — A process whereby molten glass is delivered to a forming 
unit in a ribbon form. 

Rib Marks — Characteristic arc-shaped lines on a fractured surface of glass 
indicating the direction of fracture travel. 

Rider Arch — One of a series of arches that support the checkerwork in a 
regenerator. 



a) A floating refractory body surrounding a glass surface from which 
gathers are made. 

b) A mould part that forms the rim of a pressed article. 

Ring Section — Narrow, peripheral section cut from a glass article for 
optical examination. 

Ringhole — An opening in a tank through which glass is gathered. 

Rock ( Blownware ) — Deformation of a base so that an article does not 
stand firmly on a flat surface. 

Rock (Ground Surface) — Excessive play between ground surfaces. 

Rock Crystal 

a) Transparent quartz. 

b) Highly polished blown glassware, handcut or engraved. 

Rocker— An imperfection — A bottle with bottom deformed so that it does 
not stand solidly ( rocks ). 

Rocker Bottom 

a) See 'Rocker'. 

b) See «Rock\ 

Rod Proof — A test specimen taken from the melt on an iron rod. 

Rolled Glass 

a) Optical glass formed by rolling into plates at the time of manufac- 
ture, as distinguished from transfer glass. 

b) Flat glass formed by rolling. 

Roller — A blown cylinder for making window glass by the nearly absolete 
hand process. 

Roller Mark — An imperfection in the surface of sheet glass due to contact 
with the rollers in the tower of a fiat glass drawing machine, also called 
'Roller Scratch*. 

41 



IS: 1382- 1981 

Roller Scratch — See « Roller Mark*. 

Rolling Process — A process for making plate glass in which it is formed 
between rollers. 

Rouge Pits — An imperfection consisting of traces of rouge remaining in an 
incompletely polished glass surface. 

Rough* Cast — Flat glass, one surface of which has a definite texture, made 
by rolling molten glass either on a plate or between rollers. 

Rough Glass — A glass obtained by cutting the original sheet of rolled glass 
into workable sizes. 

Rough Grinding — Producing a coarse ground surface on flat glass or glass- 
ware, also called 'Roughing' or 'Rough Polishing*. 

Roughing — See 'Rough Grinding'. 

Rough Polishing — See 'Rough Grinding'. 

Round Table — A type of laying table used for supporting plate glass for 
grinding and polishing, now largely superseded by the continuous system. 

Rubber Cut — An imperfection in plate glass resulting from rupture of the 
surface by the runner bar. 

Rubs — Abrasion of glass surfaces producing a frosted appearance. A 'rub' 
differs from a 'scratch' in having appreciable width. 

Run Back — Deformation due to glass movement after the plunger is 
raised. 

Runner Bar — Iron casting attached to a circular grinding runner or head 
for abrasive grindong of plate glass. 

Running Batch — The regular batch formulated to produce the desired 
composition when used with its own cullet. 



Safety Glass — Glass so constructed, treated, or combined with other 
materials, as to reduce, in comparison with ordinary sheet, float or plate 
glass, the likelihood of injury to persons by objects from exterior sources or 
by these safety glasses when they may be cracked or broken. 

Type of Safety Glass include: 

a) Laminated Safety Glass — Two or more pieces of glass held 
together by an intervening layer or layers of plastics materials. It 
will crack and break under sufficient impact, but the pieces of 
glass tend to adhere to the plastic and not to fly. If a hole is 
produced, the edges are likely to be less jagged then would be the 
case with ordinary glass. 

42 



IS: 1382-1981 

b) Tempered ( Toughened ) Safety Glass — A single piece of specially 
heat treated glass, with a stress pattern such that the piece when 
fractured reduces to numerous granular fragments, with no large 
jagged edges. 

c) Wired Safety Glass — A single piece of glass with a layer of meshed 
wire completely imbeded in the glass, but not necessarily in the 
centre of the sheet. When the glass is broken, the wire mesh 
holds the pieces together to a considerable extent. 

Sagging — Process of forming glass by reheating until it conforms to the 
shape of the mould or form on which it rests. 

Salt Petre — Commercial potassium nitrate ( KNO a ). 

Salt Water — Molten sulphates floating on the surface in a glass melting 
unit { see also 'Gall' ). 

Sand — A source of silica for the glass batch, also called 'Glass Making 
Sand'. 

Sand Blasting — Producing a matt surface on glass by projecting on to the 
surface a jet of small abrasive particles at high velocity. 

Sand Holes — Small fractures in the surface of glass, produced by the 
rough grinding operation, which have not been removed by subsequent 
fine grinding. 

Scale — Flakes of metal oxide or graphite included in the glass or stuck tp 
the surface during forming. 

Scar — See 'Shear Mark'. 

Schellback Tubing — Tubing generally used for burettes and thermometer 
having an opal backing with a central blue line to facilitate reading of 
graduation marks. 

Score Marks — Lines round a barrel or key caused by excessive turning 
of the key with a high spot or foreign body present. 

Scratch — A deep score mark, or tearing of the surface, in the course of 
-manufacturing or handling, appearing as though made by a hard rough or 
sharp body. 

Scrub Marks — See 'Brush Marks (b)'. 

Scuff— An area covered by fine scratches, usually due to abrasion of one 
piece cf glass against another. 

Scam — A floating layer of unmelted material on the molten glass surface. 
Sealing — See 'Fusion'. 

43 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Sealing Surface — The portion of the finish Which makes contact with the 
sealing gasket or liner ( see also 'Finish' ). 

Seam 

a) Mark on glass surface resulting from joint of matching mould 
parts. 

b) To slightly grind the sharp edges of a piece of glass. 

Seat — Prepared position on the siege where the pot rests. 

Second Side — The final side of a plate glass to be ground and polished. 

Seed — An extremely small gaseous inclusion in glass not more than 0*5 mm 
in any direction, measured by the average of the maximum and minimum 
dimensions. 

Selenium — Selenium metal used as a decolorizer and also as a colouring 
agent in glass 'batch. 

Selvedge — The edge of a ribbon of rolled glass which is automatically 
formed during manufacture. 

Semi-Crystal Glass — See 'Crystal Glass'. 

Setting Rate — A comparative term referring to the time required for the 
glass surface to cool through the working range. A short time implies a 
fast setting rate and a long time implies a slow setting rate. 

Settle Mark 

a) See 'Chill Mark*. 

b) Annular thickening of the container wall, generally in the lower 
third. 

Settle Wave — See 'Settle Mark'. 

Shadow Wall — A more or less solid structure built on the top of the 
bridgewall or suspended from the crown to limit the flow of heat from the 
melter to the refiner. 

Snapping Block — A piece of wood used in shaping the glass on the 
blowing iron before blowing in the mould. 

Sharp Finish 

a) Rough finish with sharp edges. 

b) A rough finish with sharp edges left on glass which has been cut. 

Sharp Fire — Combustion with excess air and short flame. 

Shear Cake — A counter weighted refractory slab used as a gate or door 
to a small furnace or oven. 

44 



IS: 1382 -1*81 

Shear Mark — A scar appearing in glassware, caused by the cooling action 
of the cutting shear. 

Sheet Glass — Flat glass made by continuous drawing. 

Shell — &>e«Cfti»'. 

Shoe — A clay vessel, in the shape of a crucible, laid horizontally at the 
side of the pot mouth for heating the ends of blowing irons. 

Shop 

a) A unit group of workmen producing glassware; and 

b) Also, its location at the furnace. 

Short — A comparative term signifying a fast setting glass. 

Short Finish — An imperfection in plate glass, resulting from incomplete 
polishing. 

Shoulder — The curved surface between the walls and the neck of a bottle 
or other container. 

Shrend — The process of making cullet by running molten glass into a water 
stream. 

Side Black — Refractory blocks forming the sides of a tank furnace in 
contact with glass. 

Side-Fired Furnace — A furnace with fuel supplied from the sides ( see also 
'Cress-Fired Funeoee* ). 

Side-Port Furnace — A furnace with ports on the sides. 

Siding — Variation in wall thickness at a given cross-section, usually a 
result of eccentricity of the internal section. 

Siege — Floor of a pot furnace, often called 'Bench*. 

Sight Hole — See 'Oiaw rvntion Hole'. 

Signal Glass — Glasses in the shape of roundels or lenses used for signalling 
purposes, for example, in the railways, aviation, etc. 

Sifica Glass — Vitreous silicon dioxide (SiO t ); quartz glass; pure silicon 
dioxide ( SiO*) glass. 

SBk Screen Process — A decorating process in which a design is printed on 
glass through a silk mesh, woven wire, or similar screen. 

Silvering— The application by chemical methods of a film of silver to a 
glass surface. 

Sintered data — Porous glass made for filtration or other purposes by 
heating graded glass powder, 

45 



IS: 1382- 1981 

Skewbacks — Specially shaped blocks forming a furnace crown or other 
arch. 

Skimmer — A worker who skims surface metal from a tank or pot furnace, 

Skin Blister — A thick, often elongated, blister on or near a glass surface. 

Skin Cracks — See <Crizzle'. 

Skittle Pot — A pot for melting small quantities of glass in a furnace 
containing pots otherwise of normal size. 

Skylight — A very poor quality of plate glass. 

Slab Glass — Optical glass obtained by cutting or forming the chunk glass 
into plates or slabs. 

Slag — Partially fused mixture of spilled batch, overflowed glass, breeze' 
coal, and clay from the siege. 

Slag Glass — Glass in which slag is the principal constituent of a batch. 

Slanting Line — A graduating fault in which the plane of the line is not at 
right angles to the axis of the workpiece. 

Sleek — An imperfection; a fine scratch like mark having smooth bounda- 
ries, usually produced by a foreign particle in the polishing operation. 

Sliver — Bundles of noncontinuous or shortlength fibres that have reached 
that stage of their fabrication into yarn wherein they are parallel and 
overlapping and have no twist. 

Slug 

a) Any nonfibrous glass in a glass-fibre product. 

b) A thick part, due to an excess of glass at a point on the internal 
surface. 

Slagged Bottom — An imperfection; very heavy glass on one side and very 
light On the opposite side of the bottom of a bottle or container ( see also 
•Heel Tap'). 

Small Glass — Small particles of glass adhering to the interior surface. 

Smear — A check, especially on the neck finish. 

Smoke — Streaked areas appearing as slight discoloration. 

Smoked 

a) A term applied to the discolouring of glass in a reducing flame. 

b) Glass covered with smoky film ftStn open-fired lehrs. 

Smooth — Finely ground, as applied to a flat glass surface, prior to 
polishing. 

46 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Soake,jSnaking 

a) Progressive longitudinal cracking in continuous flat glass 
operation. 

b) Variation in width of sheet during the sheet glass drawing process. 

Soap — A device for gripping a piece of formed glass for fire polishing and 

finishing. 

Soaking Area — The area between the gablewall and the first pai: of ports 
in a cross-fired tank furnace also called 'Fritting Zone'. 

Soaking Pit — A conditioning furnace used to bring the glass in open pots 
to a uniform temperature for casting. 

Soda 

a) Sodium oxide ( Na a O ). 

b) Commercial anhydrous sodium carbonate ( Na 3 CO a ). 

Soda Ash — See <Soda\ 

Soda-Lime Glass ( Soda-Lime-Silica Glass ) — A glass in which the main 
constituents are normally silica, lime and soda; also called 'Lime-Soda 
Glass'. 

Soft Fire — A flame with a deficiency of air. 

Soft Glass 

a) Glass with relatively low softening point. 

b) Glass having a low resistance to weathering. 

Softening Point — The temperature at which a uniform rod 0'5S to 075 mm 
in diameter and 23*5 mm in length, elongates under its own weight at a rate 
of one millimetre per minute when the upper 10 cm of its length is heated 
in a prescribed manner at a rate of approximately 5°C per minute. For 
glass of density near 2*5 g/cm*, this temperature corresponds to a viscosity 
of 10 7 ' poises. 

Softness — Friability, or liability to Crumbling, caused by underfirifig a 
sintered disk. 

Solarization — Change in transmission of glass as a result of exposure to 
sunlight or other radiation in or near visible spectrum. 

Soluble Glass —v Silicate of soda or potash, also called 'Water Glass*. 

Spalling — Breaking off of small fragments caused by internal stress of 
thermal or mechanical origin. 

Spectacle Crown — A type of crown glass used specially for making 
spectable lenses and usually of refractive index 1*52. 

47 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Spider 

a) A wheel-like casting consisting of a rim and radial spokes on 
which are mounted felt polishing pads. 

b) Assembly of radiating tie rode on the top of a furnace. 

Spider Web — Water soluble crystals produced by chemical attack and 
forming patterns resembling spider web. 

Spike — A pointed protuberance, particularly on the inside of the base. 

Spiral Fracture — A crack which propagates in a spiral (helical) path 
along a tube. 

Split 

a) An imperfection; crack or check going from surface to surface of a 
glass article. 

b) A crack which penetrates from one surface to another either 
through the thickness or at an edge. 

Spoon Proof— Test ladle specimen taken during various stages of melting 
and fining. 

Spent — The part of a feeder that carries the orifice, revolving tube, needle, 
etc. 

Spreading — The irregular thickening of a line in which the etchant 
penetrates the resist. 

Span Glass — See 'Fibre*. 

Saaare-Cat Glass — Optical glass cut in small squares, separated and 
designated by weight. 

Stability 

a) Resistance to devitrification. 

b) Chemical durability, resistance to weathering. 

StabUbei Gkm 

a) Glass beat-treated in such a way that it is in an equilibrium state 
corresponding to some particular temperature. 

b) Glass articles, for example, thermometers, heat-treated so that they 
suffer no permanent change of dimensions or properties over a 
particular range of temperature. 

c) Glass resistance to darkening by high energy short-wave radiation 
( Radiation Stabilised ). 

48 



IS: 1383- 1981 

Stacker — See <Lehr Loader*. 

Stein 

a) An imperfection consisting of chemical corrosioi of glass. 

b) Colour applied to glass by absorption at an elevated temperature. 

Stained Glass 

a) Glass coloured by fusing pigments to the surface. 

b) Windows made of pieces of stained glass, or of coloured sheet. 

Sfapler Fibre — See 'Fibre'. 

Star Crack — See 'Bruise*. 

Stemware — General description of stemmed glass drinking vessels. 

Stepped Line — See 'Stepping Out'. 

Stepping Out — A dislocation in a line resembling the cross-section of a 
step. 

Sting Out — Combustion gases or flames issuing from openings in furnace 
walls due to positive internal pressure. 

Stone — An imperfection comprising crystalline contamination in glass. 

Stopper — A refractory piece shaped to fit a channel and used for con- 
trolling the flow of glass into a revolving pot of a suction machine, also 
called 'Gate'. 

Straight Throat — A throat at the same level as the bottom of the melting 

-^ j _ * it. ^ a i- 

cnu oi me mux. 

Strain — Elastic deformation due to stress. 

Strain Disc — A disk of glass having a calibrated amount of birefringence 
at a specified location, and used as a comparative measure of the degree of 
stress. 

Strain Point — The temperature at which the internal stress is removed in 
about 16 hours. It corresponds to the equilibrium temperature at which 
the glass has a viscosity of 40 x 10" poises. 

Strand — A multiplicity of continuous glass filaments combined in a single 
compact unit, without twist. 

Streak 

a) Dark or differently coloured inclusion of linear form in colourless 
or coloured glass. 

b) A thread of glass differing in colour from the surrounding glass, 

49 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Strength 

a) A term to indicate relative thickness in sheet glass. 

b) Tensile strength of glass. 

Stress — Any condition of tension or compression existing within the 
glass, particularly due to incomplete annealing, temperature gradient, or 
inhomogeneity, 

Striai 

a) A cord of low intensity generally of interest only in optical glass 
( see also 'Cord' ). 

b) Glassy threads or veins finer than cord. 

Striking — Development of colour or opacity during cooling or reheating, 
also called 'Flaming* or 'Flashing'. 

Strings — Transparent lines appearing as though a thread of glass has been 
incorporated into the glass. 

oiuugy i\uui — r\ sii/iic »unuuiiu^u vy an cuvvivrpc w giaaa, puuuwu uy 

dissolving of the stone, and generally having a tail of cord. 

Stripping Yard — The place where glass plates are removed from table 
after grinding and polishing. 

Structural Glass 

a) Flat glass, usually coloured or opaque, and frequently ground and 
polished, used for structural purposes. 

b) Glass block, usually hollow, used for structural purposes. 
Submarine Throat — A throat with level below the bottom of melter. 

Submerged Throat 

a) See 'Dropped Throat*. 

b) A throat wiii ievei below the bottom of meiier, also called 
•Submarine throat*. 

Substance — The thickness of sheet or rolled glass. 

Suck and Blow Process — A process of glass forming in which glass is sucked 
into a parison mould, and then blown to its final shape in a blow mould. 

Suction Process — Any process where glass is gathered by vacuum into the 
mould. 

Sulphur Stain — A surface defect in sheet glass, in the form of streaky lines 
or multicoloured blemishes caused by sulphur dioxide, if present in furnace 
atmosphere. 

50 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Samp Throat — See 'Submarine Throat'. 

Sunken Sides — An article with sides bulged inwards. 

Sunken Throat — See 'Dropped Throat'. 

Super Structure — All the parts of a tank furnace above the side blocks. 

Surface Blows — Air inclusions on the outer surface ( particularly in petri- 
dishes ), leaving small sharply defined impressions. 

Surface Polishing — Further polishing of plate glass to remove slight 
defects. 

Suspended Arch — An arch in a furnace which is suspended independent of 
the side or jamb walls. 

Sweet — A term applied to easily workable glass having a long working 
range. 



Table Blower — See 'Bench Worker Glass Blower', 

Take-Out — A mechanical device for removing a finished article from any 
glass-forming unit. 

Taker-In — An operator who takes hot glassware from the forming machine, 
glass blower or presser to the lehr for annealing. 

Taker-Out — A worker who removes glassware from the forming mould 
for collection by the 'Taker-in'. 

Taking Down Period — See 'Cooling Down Period (b)\ 

Tank — A melting unit, in which the container for molten glass is 
constructed from refractory blocks, also called Tank Furnace'. 

Tank Block — A refractory block used in the construction of a tank 
compartment of a glass- melting furnace. 

Tank Furnace — See 'Tank*. 

Tank Glass 

a) Glass melted in a tank as distinct from a pot. 

b) Glass suitable for tank melting. 



Tap 



a) To drain a furnace. 

b) To remove excess slag from the floor of a pot furnace. 

c) Opening in the side wall of furnace for (a) or (b). 

51 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Taper — See Tonicity' 

Tarnish — A thin film of stain on the surface of glass. 

Tear 

a) An imperfection consisting of a small surface section of glass torn 
out by sticking to a hot metal. 

b) See 'Pip'. 

Tear Drop — A small, rounded protuberance left in an article. 

Teaser — The worker in direct charge of furnace operations who regulates 
to charging of batch and adjust fires. 

Teemer — The person who teems or casts the pot of glass (see also 
•Casting'). 

Telescope Flint — Optical flint with very high relative partial dispersion 
usually containing a substantial proportion of zinc oxide ( ZnO ). 

Temper — The amount of residual stress in annealed ware measured by 
comparison with strain discs. 

Tempered Glass — Glass that has been rapidly cooled from near the soft- 
ening point, under rigorous control, to increase its mechanical and thermal 
endurance ( see also 'Safety Glass' ). 

Tg Point — See * Transformation Points'. 

Thermal Endurance — A measure of the relative ability of glass to withstand 
sudden changes of temperature. 

Thermal Shock — A sudden variation in temperature as applied to glass- 
ware. 

Thermal Shock Test — A test in which glass is subjected to relatively sudden 
changes of temperature in order to determine its thermal endurance. 

Timble — A refractory shape used for stirring pot-made optical glass. 

Thread — A very fine but clearly defined cord. 

Throat — A submerged passage between the melting and refining ends of a 
tank, also called 'Dog-Hole*. 

Tinsel — Small flaky pieces of glass of paper thickness, powdered, graded 
and silvered or lacquered. 

Tit — An imperfection; a small protrusion on a glass article. 

Tongue Tile — In a port, the projecting partition between gas and air 
streams. 

52 



IS: 1381-1981 

Tougfaened Glass — See 'Tempered Glass' and Safety Glass'. 

Tower — A vertical chamber through which drawn sheet glass is passed in 
the Fourcault and the Pittsburgh processes. 

Transfer Decoration — , A decorative process in which a design is applied to 
the glass by means of a transfer. 

Transfer Glass — Optical glass cooled in the pot in which it is melted. 

Transformation Points — In the measurement of the thermal expansion 
coefficient of glass there may be two temperatures, the M f and T ( points, 
at which the slope of the graph of expansion against temperature changes 
fairly sharply. At the M* point (Deformation Point ), viscous deformation 
of the sample makes accurate measurement of the thermal expansion, as 
such, impossible. The term is subject to the same lock of definition as the 
softening point. The Tg point occurs at a lower temperature usually below 
the annealing range of the glass. 

Translucent Glass — Glass transmitting light mainly by diffuse transmission. 

Transparent — Allowing light rays to be transmitted, without noticeable 
absorption so as to be distinctly seen through. 

Triple-Cavity Process Mould — A mould possessing three cavities for 
simultaneous fabrication of three articles of glass. 

Triple-Cavity Process — Any glass- forming process that uses three charges 
of glass and forms them simultaneously. 

Triple-Gob Process *- See 'Triple-Cavity Process'. 

Tubular Container — A container made from glass tubing. 

Tackstone — Blocks placed on top of flux blocks to protect them from 
flame and gases and as a seal between them and the supported side and end 
walls. 

Tuck Wall — The series of tuckstones or a wall serving the same purpose 
made of courses of bricks. 

Tweel, Tuille— - A counterweighted furnace door, opening vertically. 

Twisted Scale — A scale with its centre line helically disposed on the tube. 

U 

Uneven Lines — Graduation lines of random dissimilarity in length. 

Unfilled — An article incompletely formed when the glass is not entirely 
in contact with the mould wall during forming. 

53 



IS : 1382 - 1981 

Updraw — The process of continuously drawing glass of various cross- 
sections, such as cane or tubing, by a method similar to the Fpurcault 
process. 

Updraw Process — The process of continuously drawing glass of various 
cross-sections, such as rod or tubing, upwards from an orifice and/or over a 
refractory cone. 

Uptake — A flue connecting the portneck with the top of the regenerator 
or recuperator. 



Vacuity — The space .left above a liquid in a closed container to allow for 
possible expansion of the liquid. It may be expressed as a percentage of 
the liquid volume at the time of sealing. In the case of containers made of 
glass it is known as ullage. 

Vacuum-aad-Blow Process — A bottle manufacturing process whereby glass 
is gathered by vacuum and subsequently blown. 

Vacuum Flask — A composite container comprising on outer protective 
case housing a refill and provided with a closure, stopper, and suitable 
means for its carrying. 

V-Value — See <Nu-Value\ 

Velle Process — A process for continuously drawing glass tubing ( or cane ), 
in which glass is fed downward to the draw through an annular orifice. 

Vent 

a) Small hole drilled through the wall of a low mould to allow air 
trapped between the mould and the glass to escape during final 
blowing. 

b) See « Check'. 

Vitrite • — Black glasses used in the caps of electric lamps. 

Volumetric — A term applied to graduated glassware, usually for laboratory 
or medical purposes. 

Volumetric Glassware — See 'Graduated Glassware'. 

Warmiog-In — Reheating glass to permit further working, also for striking. 
Warp 

a) Lack of flatness of sheet or rolled glass. 

b) Departure from straightness in length of glass tubing. 

54 



IS: 1382 -1981 

Washboard — An imperfection; ripples, waves, etc, on the surface of 
glassware. 

Washboard-Ladders — Fine laps or ripples running horizontally on the 
external surface, usually on the sides of the article. 

Water Glass — Sodium silicate glass that is soluble in water. 

Water Marks — Local deformation or pattern caused by water in a paste 
mould. 

Ware 

a) An optical effect due to uneven glass distribution, or striae. 

b) A defect resulting from irregularity of the surface of glass, making 
objects, viewed through it at varying angles, to appear wavy or 
bent. 

Wavy Bottle — • A glass bottle with an irregular inside surface. 

Wavy Cord — Fine, rather diffuse cord(s) in the course of resorption. 

Wavy Line — Graduation lines having a damped periodic or oscillatory 
character. 

Weathering — Attack of a glass surface by atmospheric elements. 

Wedged Bottom — See 'Slugged Bottom*. 

Welding — Joining two pieces of glass by heating and pressing together. 

Welding Glass — Coloured glass to protect a welder's eyes from injurious 
radiations. 

Westlake Process — An automatic process using vacuum gather for produc- 
ing articles in paste moulds, simulating the action of a hand shop. 

White Bead — A localized milkiness. 

White Line — Occulsions of air bubbles in a joint of which the components 
had roughly cut or ground ends. 

Wicket — A properly designed opening in a furnace normally kept sealed 
by a brick structure known as 'Wicket Wall*. 

Wicket Wall — A wall, built into an opening in a furnace, which may be 
removed and rebuilt without disturbing the main furnace structure [ see also 
'Breast Wall (b)' ]. 

Window — See 'Bright'. 

Window Glass — See 'Sheet Glass*. 

55 



£5:1382-1981 

Wired Glass — Flat glass with embedded wire mesh, squire or hexagonal, 
wired glass with embedded square mesh is called 'Georgian (see also 'Safety 
Glass )'. 

Fire Cast Glass — See 'Wired Glass*. 

Wired Safety Giass — See 'Wired Glass'. 

Wobble — See 'Rock'. 

Wool 

a) See 'Glass Wool'. 

b) Fleecy mass of plain glass fibres. 

Working End — The compartment of tank furnace where giass is condition- 
ed and from which it is delivered or gathered for forming. 

Working Range — The range of temperature in which glass is formed into 
ware in a specific process. At the upper end of the working range the glass 
is ready for workingXijenerally at a viscosity of 10 s to 10* poises ), while at 
the lower end the glass is sufficiently viscous to hold its formed shape 
( generally at a viscosity of greater than 10* poises ). For comparative pur- 
poses, but not necessarily in relation to any specific process, the working 
range of glass is assumed to correspond to a viscosity range from 10* to 
10 7,6 poises. 

Wrinkle — See 'Chill Mark 1 . 



X-ray Protective Glass — Glass which contains a high percentage of lead 
oxide and sometimes also barium oxide, and which has a high degree of 
opacity to X-rays, also called 'X-ray Shielding Glass'. The opacity of an 
'X-ray glass is usually expressed in terms of the thickness of metallic lead 
which would give equal absorption of X-rays of specified wavelength. 

X-Ray Shielding Glass — See 'X-ray Protective Glass'. 



Zinc Crown Glass — A crown glass containing a substantial proportion of 
zinc oxide ( ZnO ). 



56 



IS: 1382-1981 



( ContimudJTOtn pagt 2 ) 

Mtmbtrs 

Shri I. H. Padamsee 

Shri S. N. Kaul (AlttrnaU) 

Shri P. R. Rao 

Shri A. K. Bansal ( AlUrnatt ) 

Shri R. K. Sahai 

Shri S. G. Sharma ( AlttrnaU) 

Dr F. L. Saldhana 

Shri A. B. Chunodkar ( AlttrnaU ) 

Shri G. K. Somanv Hindustan 

Calcutta 
Shri R. K. Gupta (AlUrnaU ) 
Shri B. M. Roy ( AlttrnaU ) 

Shri B. N. Thakore Pfizer Ltd, Bombay 

Shri & G. Vakshnei Seraikella Glass Works Ltd, P. O. Konnagar 

Shri B. Chandra ( AlttrnaU ) 



Ktprtstnting 
Eagle Flask Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Bombay 

Hindustan Vacuum Glass Ltd, Faridabad 

Haffkine Institute, Bombay 

National Glau & Industries Ltd, 



57 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all offices ) 



Regional Offices; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 

NEW DELHI-1 10002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 

CHANDIGARH 160033 



Central 

♦Eastern 

Northern 



Southern 
tWestern 



C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 

AHMEDABAD 380001 
JPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 

BH OPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 

GUWAH ATI 781003 
5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KAN PUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA800013 
T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam 

TRIVANDRUM 69503b 
Inspection Office (With Sale Point) : 
Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205- A West High Court Road, 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 

PUNE 411005 



*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep 
Street, Calcutta 700072 

tSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 
Bombay 400007 

tSales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square 
Bangalore 560002 



Telephones 

[331 01 31 

L331 1 3 75 

36 24 99 

T218 43 

L316 41 

f 41 24 42 

<(41 2519 

[_41 2916 

6 32 92 95 



\2 63 48 
1.2 63 49 

"38 49 55 

.38 49 56 

6 6716 

5 36 27 
3 31 77 

2310 83 

[6 34 71 
L6 98 32 



f21 68 76 

L21 82 92 


6 23 05 


[6 21 04 

1.6 21 17 


2 51 71 


5 24 35 


27 68 00 


89 65 28 


22 36 71 



Printed at Slmco Printing Press, Delhi, India 



