**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12829 (1989) : Mango Seed Kernel (Solvent Extracted) as 
Livestock Feed Ingredient [FAD 5: Livestock Feeds^ 
Equipment and Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

MANGO SEED KERNEL ( SOLVENT 

EXTRACTED ) AS LIVESTOCK FEED 

INGREDIENT — SPECIFICATION 



IS 12829 : 1989 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



UDC 636-087-2 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1990 Price Group 2 



Livesttck Feeds Sectional Cemmitteei FADC 5 



FOREWORD 

Thii Indian Standard wai adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 25 November 1989, after 
the draft finalized by the Livestock Feeds Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and 
Agriculture Division Council. 

Mango seed ( Manpfira indica ) kernel is an agro-industrial by product. Through extensive work, 
it has been established that this can be a rich energy source when used as an ingredient for livestock 
feed and thereby augment feed resources and improve nutritional standards of livestock. 

In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the Iprovisions of Solvent 
Exiractton Urdir^ 1975 and the Rules framed thereunder. However^ this standard is subject Co the 
restrictions imposed under these^ wherever applicable. 



IS 12829 : 1989 



Indian Standard 



MANGO SEED KERNEL ( SOLVENT 

EXTRACTED ) AS LIVESTOCK FEED 

INGREDIENT — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the requirements and 
the methods of sampling and test for solvent 
extracted mango seed ( Mangijera indka ) kernel 
meant for use as a livestock feed ingredient. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No, Title 

1070 : 1977 Specification for water for 

general laboratory use ( second 
revision ) 

3470:1966 Specification for hexane, food 

grade 
4905 : 1968 Methods for random sampling 

7874 Methods of tests for animal 

( Part 1 ) : 1975 feeds and feeding stuffs: Part 1 
General methods^ 

3 REQUIREMENTS 

3*1 Description 

The solvent extracted mango seed kernels shall 
be obtained by extraction of oil by means of a 
solvent from the mango seed kernels. The solvent 
extracted mango seed kernels shall be subjected 
to heat and steam treatment under controlled 
and regulated condition so as to remove traces 
of solvent, The material shall be free from musty 
and stale odour, sour or rancid taste, dirt and 
extraneous matter. The material shall be free 
from visible fungal growth and insect infestation. 

3.2 Solvent for Extraction 

Only hexane of food grade conforming to 
IS 3470 : 196u sliall be used for extracting oil 
from mango seed kernels. 

3.3 The material shall also conform to the 
requirements prescribed in Table 1. 

4 PACKING AND MARKING 

4.1 Packing 

Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser 
and the vendor, the material shall be packed in 
sound jute bags lined with a layer of polyethylene 
or HDPE bags. The mouth of each bag shall 
be either machine stitched or rolled over and 
hand stitched with strong twine. 



Table 1 Requirements for Solvent 

Extracted Mango Seed Kernels as Livestock 

Feed Ingredient 

( Clauses 3.3, 6.1, A-4.2 and A 5.1 ) 



SI Characteristics Require- 
No. ment 


Method of Test, 
Uef to Gl No. in 
IS 7874 ( Part 1 ) : 
1975 


(0 i^} (3) 




(4) 


i) Moisture, percent by 8*5 
mass, Max 




4 


ii) Crude protein ( N X 6'0 
6*25 ). percent by 
mass, Min 




5 


iii) Crude fibre, percent 1*75 
by mass, Max 




8 


iv) Total ash, percent by 5-0 
mass. Max 




9 


v) Acid insoluble ash, I'O 
percent by mass, Max 




10 


NOTE — The requirements for items (ii) 
moisture-free-basis. 


to (v) ar« on 



4.2 Marking 

Each bag shall be legibly and indelibly marked 
to give the following information: 

a) Name of the material, 

b) Name of the manufacturer, 

c) Batch or code number, 

d) Net mass in kg, and 

e) Date of packing, 

5 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 

5.1 The scale of sampling and criteria for 
conformity of the material to tlie requirements 
of this specification shall be according to the 
procedure given in Annex A. 

6, TESTS 

6*1 The tests shall be carried out by appropriate 
methods referred to in col 4 of Table 1. 

6.2 Quality of Reagents 

Unless specihed otherwise, pure chemicals and 
disdlled water {^ see IS 1070: 1977) shall be 
employed in the tests. 

NO'Tlii 'Pure cheniirals' shall mean ( hernicals that do 
liut Luntaiu impurities which affecl the results of 
analysis. 



i 



IS 12829 ! 1989 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1 ) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY OF SOLVENT EXTRACTED 
MANGO SEED KERNEL AS LIVESTOCK FEED INGREDIENT 



A-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF 
SAMPLING 

A-I.O In drawing, preparing, storing and handl- 
ing samples, care should be taken such that the 
properties are not affected. The following 
precautions and directions shall be observed, 

A-1.1 Samples shall be taken in a protected place 
not exposed to damp air, dust or soot. 

A-L2 The sampling instrument shall be clean 
and dry when used. 

A-1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the 
samples, the material being sampled, the sampl- 
ing instrument and the containers for samples 
from adventitious contamination. 

A-1.4 The samples shall be placed in clean and 
dry glass containers. The sample containers shall 
be of such a size that they are almost completely 
filled by the sample. 

A-1,5 Each container shall be sealed air-tight 
with a glass stopper or a suitable closer after 
filling in such a way that it is not possible to 
open and reseal it without detection and marked 
with full details of sampling, date of sampling, 
batch or code number, name of the manufac- 
turer and other important particulars of the 
consignment. 

A-1.6 Samples shall be stored in such a manner 
that there is no deterioration of the material. 

A-L7 Sampling shall be done by a person agreed 
to between the purchaser and the vendor and if 
desired by any of them, in the presence of the 
purchaser ( or his representative ) and the vendor 
( or his representative ). 

A-2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 
A-2.1 Lot 

All bags oi the jnaago seed kernels extracted in 
one chamber under relatively similar conditions 
in a day shall constitute a lot. 

NOTE — Relatively similar conditions would mean the 
use of raw materials having insignificant variations, 
similar conditions of manufacture, etc. 

A-2-1.1 Samples shall be tested for each lot for 
ascertaining conformity of the material to the 
requirements of this specification. 

A-2. 2 The number of bags to be selected from 
the lot shall depend on the size of the lot and 
shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table 2. 

A->2.3 The bags shall be chosen at random from 
the lot. In order to ensure the randomness of 



selection, procedures given in IS 4905 : 196B 
may be followed. 

Table 2 Number of Bags to be 
Selected for Sampling 

( Clauses A-2.2 ««d/ A-3.1 ) 



No. of Bags to be 
Selected for Sampling 

(2) 

3 

4 

5 

C 



Lot Size 


(1) 


Up to 50 


51 to 100 


101 to 300 


301 to 500 


501 and above 



A-3 PREPARATION OF TEST 
AND REFEREE SAMPLES 



SAMPLES 



A-'S.l Preparation of Individual Samples 

Draw with an appropriate sampling instrument, 
equal quantities of the material from the top, 
bottom and the sides of each bag selected accor- 
ding to Table 2. The total quantity of the 
material drawn from each bag shall be not less 
than 1*5 kg. Mix all the portions of the material 
drawn from the same bag thoroughly. Take out 
about 0*75 kg of material and divide into three 
parts. Each portion, thus obtained, shall consti- 
tute the test sample representing that particular 
bag and shall be transferred immediately to 
clean and dry sample containers and sealed air- 
tight. These shall be labelled with particulars 
given under A-1,5. The individual samples 
obtained as above shall be formed into three sets 
in such a way that each set has a test sample 
representing each bag selected. One of the sets 
shall be for the purchaser, another for the vendor^ 
and the third for the referee. 

A-3.2 Preparation of Composite Samples 

From the mixed material i'rom each selected bag 
remaining after the individual samples have been 
taken, equal quantities of material from each 
ba^ shall be taken and mixed up together so as 
to form a composite sample weighing not less 
than 075 kg. Tiiis composite sample shall be 
dividend into three equal parts and transferred 
to clean and dry containers and labelled with 
the particulars given under A-1. 5 and sealed aii- 
tight. One of these samples shall be for tiie pm- 
chaser, another for the vendor, and the third for 
the referee. 



IS 12829 : 1989 



A-3.3 Referee Sample 

Referee samples shall consist of a set of test 
samples ( see A-3.1 ) and composite samples 
( see A-3,2 ) and shall bear the seals of the pur- 
chaser and the vendor and shall be kept at a 
place agreed to between the two so as to be used 
in case of a dispute. 

A-4 TESTING OF SAMPLES 

A-4.1 I'ests for acid insoluble ash shall be 
conducted individually on each of the samples 
constituting a set of test samples ( see A-3.1 ). 

A-4.2 Tests ibr the remaining characteristics, 
prescribed in Table 1, shall be conducted on the 
composite sample ( see A-3.2 ). 



A-5 CRITERION FOR CONFORMITY 

A-5,1 A lot shall be considered as conforming to 
the specification when the following conditions 
are satisfied: 

a) The expression { X + 4 R ) is less than 
or equal to the maximum limit for acid 
insoluble ash given in Table 1, 

where 



.V ( Mean ) = 
R ( Range ) ^ 



Sum of the test results 
No. of test results 

Difference in largest and 
smallest values of test 
results 



b) The test results on the composite sample 
satisfy the other requirements specified in 
Table 1. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bunau ef Indian 
Standards Act^ 1986 znd the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bareaa of Indian Standards . 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. FADG 5 ( 2837 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters; 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Othces; Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg (331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 (331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 G. L T. Scheme VII M, V, I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C. 1. 1. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western ; Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches ; AliMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
GOIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUVVAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Frintograph, Delhi, India 



