**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 12430 (1987) : Safety code for installation, maintenance 
and servicing of sterlizers [MHD 14: Hospital Planning] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 12430- 1887 
( Reaffirmed 1997) 

Indian Standard 

SAFETYCODEFOR 

INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND 

SERVICING OF STERILIZERS 



UDC 615-47873004-5 : 614.8 



^Copyright 1989 

BUREAU OF 'INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 15 jftdy IQQ^ 



IS t 12430 . 1987 



CONTENTS 



Page 

0. Foreword ... 3 

1. SCOPE ... 3 

2. General Information ■■■ 3 

3. Definitions, Policy and Implementation ... 4 

4. Types and Other Requirements of Sterilizers ... 5 

5. Noise and Vibration Levels ••• 6 

6. Specifications to be Included in Hospital Ten d e r 

Documents ... 7 

7. Installation ... 9 
8. Testing of Sterilizers ... 12 
9. Procedure for Dealing with Defective Sterilizees and 

Reporting the Accidents ... 13 

10. Maintenance, Operation Policy and Procedure — 13 

11. Hot AIR Sterilizers ... 18 

Appendices 

A Steam Q uality ... 19 
B Instruments to be Mounted on Sterilizers and FOr 
Testing and Commissioning Sterilizers and to be 

Visible to the Operator ... 24 

C Planning Information ... 35 
D Commissioning, Operation and Maintenance of 

Sterilizers ... 38 

E Check-List OF Pre-commissioning Procedures ••• 45 

F Summary of Sterilizer Performance Tests ... 47 

G Performance Tests for Porous Load Sterilizers ... 49 
H The Bowie/Dick Tape Test for Porous Load 

Sterilizers ... 50 

J Leak Rate Test for Porous Load Sterilizers ••• 55 

K Air Detector Tests for Porous Load Sterilizers ... 56 
L Performance Tests for Sterilizers for Fluids in 

Sealed Containers ( Bottled Fluids Sterilizers ) ... 57 
M Performance Tests for Sterilizers for Unwrapped 

Instruments and Utensils ... 59 

N Performance Tests FOR Hot Air Sterilizers ... 60 

P Typical M aster Temperature Record ( MTR ) ... 64 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS J 12430 - 1987 



Indian Standard 



SAFETY CODE FOR 

INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND 

SERVICING OF STERILIZERS 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by tlie 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 14 July 1987,^ 
after the draft finalized by the Hospital Equip- 
ment Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments 
Division Council. 

0.2 This safety code is intended as a guide for 
medical personnel and engineers, both specialists 
in sterilizers and sterilizing procedures, and those 
responsible for their maintenance. It is also intend- 
ed for pharmacists and sterile supply administra- 
tors. It is anticipated that the code will prove 
useful to supplies officers, architects, service engi- 
neers and to others not directly involved in 
sterilizers but who may have an interest. 

0.3 The best working of the sterilizers could be 
ensured by: 

a) optimum decontamination by suitable 
cleaning equipment and process, as meti- 
culously as possible, with bacteriological 
monitoring; 

b) use of suitable packing materials and size 
of packs; 



c) sterilizing, preferably, similar materials in a 

process; 

d) using, preferably, different sterilizers appro- 
priate for their use; 

e) appropriate loading of sterilizers; and 

f ) suitable handling/ transportation/ use of 
sterilized packs. 

0.4 In the preparation of this code, assistance has 
been derived from 'Health Technical Memoran- 
dum: Part 10 Sterilizers', issued by the Depart- 
ment of Health and Social Security, U.K. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a parti- 
cular requirement of this standard is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS : 2- 1960*. The 
number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of 
the specified value in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This safety code gives guidance to hospitals 
and other users of sterilizers regarding the choice, 
purchase, installation, testing and commissioning, 
use, maintenance and servicing of steam sterili- 
zers used for porous loads, fluids in sealed 
containers and unwrapped instruments and 
utensils. It gives similar guidance on electrically 
heated sterilizing ovens ( hot air sterilizers ). 

1.2 Guidelines on sterilizers working on low 
temperature ethylene oxide, formaldehyde, and 
radiation shall be considered separately. 

1.3 The sterilizers described in this code may not 
be suitable ( without modification) for safely pro- 
cessing of articles infected with Category A 
pathogens*. 



^Organisms so dangerous as to present great risks to the 
health either of laboratory workers or of the human or 
animal communities, 



2. GENERAL INFORMATION 

2.1 Close limits have to be placed upon the 
quality of steam supplied for most sterilizing pur- 
poses. The problems are considered in depth in 
Appendix A. Steam for sterilizers, other than 
those for bench top use, is normally obtained from 
the hospitals mains. The disadvantage of other 
methods of steam raising are also discussed in 
Appendix A. Independent steam generators should 
be used only where there is no practical alternative. 

2.2 It is usually counter-productive to conserve 
energy by shutting off the steam supply to jacket- 
ed sterilizers during any part of the day or night 
during the normal week, and it is also preferable 
to keep the steam on the jackets during the week- 
ends. 

2.3 The correct functioning of a sterilizer can best 
be monitored by fitting and intelligent use of 
reliable instruments on the machine and by use 
of other high quality instruments for commission- 
ing and periodic checking of sterilizer and the 



3 



IS : 12430 -1987 



instruments fitted to it. Appendix B wliicli deals 
fully with all aspects of the subject, has been 
closely studied in conjunction with sterilizer and 
industrial instrument industries. 

2.4 It is essential that proper provision be made 
for entry of thermocouples into the sterilizer 
chamber. 

2.5 Appendix C indicates the space required 
around sterilizers for maintenance purposes and 
service requirements for them. 

2.6 Many technical advances have taken place in 
recent years in the design of sterilizers and their 
associated cycles. These advances shall continue 
for many years to come. It is essential, therefore, 
that sterilizers for a particular scheme are not 
ordered and stored on site for long periods but 
are deUv ered, installed, commissioned and put 
into service with the minimum of delay. Failure 
to observe this procedure will often result in 
installation of a technically obsolete sterilizer. 

2.7 Continuous control of sterilizing cycle can be 
based upon the intelligent use of instruments, 
careful commissioning, adoption of a properly 
designed planned preventive maintenance (PPM ) 
programme and the regular comparison of tem- 
perature records of production cycles with corres- 
ponding records obtained during commissioning. 
This requires close and continuous collaboration 
between engineers and operators, the details of 
which are given in Appendix D. 

2.8 The commissioning of sterilizers is covered 
in 7.11. Appendix E is a check-list of pre-commis- 
sioning procedures and commissioning tests; all 
other tests are covered in Appendices G to N. 

2.9 Appendix D deals with operation and main- 
tenance in considerable details. 

2.10 Appendix F summarizes all tests required on 
sterilizers. Appendices G to N describe in detail 
the various tests required for porous loads, fluids, 
unwrapped instruments and utensils and hot air 
sterilizers. 

3.DEFINITI0NS, POLICY AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 

3.1 Terms and abbreviations used in this code 
have the following definitions. 

3.1.1 Engineer I Sterilizer Engineer — This person 
should have a specialist knowledge of sterilizers 
and sterilizing procedures. He wilt be required to 
liaise closely with professionals at various levels, 
and it is preferable that he should be a qualified 
engineer and should be conversant with sterilizers 
and have received specific training on sterilizers 
and their maintenance. 

3.1.2 Operator — Any person who operates a 
sterilizer under the guidance of an engineer. 



3.1.3 Batch — The contents of one load of a 
sterilizer ( 'batch' and 'load' are synonymous in 
this standard ). 

3.1.4 PPM — Planned preventive mainten- 
ance. 

3.1.5 TRC — Temperature recorder chart; a 
complete chart recording from a temperature 
recorder fitted permanently to the machine. 

3.1.6 AfTTi — Master temperature record; 
MTR is required for each type of batch of medi- 
cinal products processed by a fluids sterilizer and 
each type of load processed by hot air sterilizer 
as agreed by the user. MTR is not normally 
required for a porous load sterilizer nor for a 
sterilizer for unwrapped instruments and utensils 
except for reference by engineers. It is a trans- 
parent 1 : 1 undistorted copy of an acceptable 
temperature record chart obtained by the engi- 
neer after satisfactory commissioning by the con- 
tractor, or subsequently. The original is retained 
with the commissioning documents by the steri- 
lizer engineer. A new MTR is also required after 
any sterilizer used for processing medicinal 
products and any hot air sterilizer is re- 
commissioned. 

A typical example is given in Appendix P. 

3.1.7 Saline — Solutions of chloride salts such 
as are processed in sterilizers described in this 
code. 

3.2 Abbreviations for departments with centraliz- 
ed sterilizing functions are as given below: 

a) TSSU — Theatre sterile supply unit, 

b) CSSD — Central sterile supply department, 

and 

c) H SSU — ■ Hospital sterile supply unit. 

3.3 Policy and Implementation 

3.3.1 There are five principal classes of load 
to be sterilized: 

a) Porous loads, 

b) Fluids in sealed containers, 

c) Unwrapped utensils and instruments, 

d) Equipment and materials for asceptic 
manufacture of medicines, and 

e) Materials associated with specific pathogen 
free ( SPF ) procedures. 

3.3.2 The use of sterilizers with a door at each 
end assists in segregation of processed from the 
unprocessed. 

3.3.3 Sterilizers of the same class in a parti- 
cular installation should generally be of the same 
size and made by the same manufacturer. 

3.3.4 It is a normal practice for the manufac- 
turer of the sterilizer to be either the contractor 
for the supply only or for the supply, installation 



IS: 12430. 1987 



and commissioning of the machine. Where the 
term 'manufacturer' is used in this standard, it is 
to be construed as if it includes the obligations of 
the contractor. 

3.3.5 The importance of close and continuing 
collaboration between engineers and those res- 
ponsible for the production of sterile supplies, 
including sterile medicinal products, cannot be 
too highly stressed. 

336 Reserve sterilizing capadty should always 
be available so that it is possible to withdraw a 
sterilizer for planned maintenance purposes and 
periodic testing in normal working hours without 
jeopardizing production; production schedules 
should be arranged accordingly. 

3.3.7 Consideration must be given to the use 
of a CSSD or other similar centralized service 
before replacing any sterilizer which is not in a 
centralized department, and before purchasing 
any new sterilizer for use anywhere else in a 
hospital. 

3.3.8 Intending purchasers of sterilizers are 
recommended to study the current editions of the 
relevant Indian Standards in conjunction with 
this code. 

4. TYPES AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 
OF STERILIZERS 

4.1 Types of Sterilizers 

4.1.1 Sterilizers for Porous Loads and Instruments — 
These sterilizers are intended to deal with dress- 
ings, textiles and equipment madeof rubber, such 
as gloves, wrapped instruments and wrapped 
utensils. Sterilizers in this category must have 
means to remove air from the chamber and load 
prior to the admission of steam for sterilization, 
and to dry the load under vacuum after steriliza- 
tion. 

4.1.2 Sterilizers for Fluids in Sealed Containers 

4.1.2.1 The sterilizers should have the 
following optional extras: 

a) Means to accelerate cooling by use of cool- 

ing water sprayed over the fluid containers, 
and 

b) Means for sterilization of fluids in plastic 
bags by maintaining equilibrium pressure 
conditions between the inside and the out- 
side of the bags ( air ballasting ). 

4.1.2.2 When accelerated cooling, or air 
ballasting systems, or both are used, it is essential 
to estabi ish that the contai ners shal I remai n sealed 
throughout the process. 

4.1.2.3 It should not be possible to open the 
door of a sterilizer until the temperature of the 
contents of the containers has failed below 70°C. 



CAUTION- Failure to observe this require- 
ment may lead to serious accidents resulting 
from the explosion of contai ners. 

4.1.2.4 Fluids in some non-rigid containers 
do not present the same hazard, and it may be 
necessary to remove them from the sterilizer at 
a temperature in excess of 70°C for operational 
reasons. 

4.1.3 Sterilizers for Unwrapped Instruments and 
Unwrapped Utensils — Instrument and utensils 
sterilizers are intended to deal with unwrap- 
ped instruments and unwrapped utensils within 
a complete cycle time of approximately 10 
minutes. 

4.1.4 Small Electrically Heated Steam Sterilizers 
for Unwrapped Instruments and Utensils — These are 

normally used for similar duties to those in 4.1.3 
above, but have internal steam raising equipment 
and the cycle time may be longer, for example, 
a cycle may take 20 minutes from cold. The 
sterilizers are free-standing and do not require 
any piped services. Demineralized or distilled 
water, for example, purified water, must be used 
in them and they must not be allowed to boil 
dry. 

4.1.5 Hot Air Sterilizers — Hot 'air sterilizers 
are dry air ovens, operating at ambient pressure 
and should comply with IS : 3119-1978* except 
as indicated in 11; in particular, it is recommend- 
ed that they can be automatically controlled and 
befitted with door locks. 

4.2 Sizes of Sterilizers and the Number 
Required 

4.2.1 Sterilizers for Porous Loads — It is difficult 
to give precise information on types and sizes of 
sterilizers required for particular hospitals beca- 
use in practice, there are substantial variations 
in patterns of use. It is recommended that when 
assessing the number and size required, the bulk 
volume of the work load to be handled should, if 
possible, be measured, such as by reference to the 
present source of supply for sterilizing. The size 
and number of sterilizers necessary can then be 
calculated having regard to the work load, bulk 
volume and the number of productive cycles 
which are practicable within the intended work- 
ing hours. A porous load sterilizer is required to 
complete its cycle of operations in not more than 
30 minutes. The drying stage time is, however, 
sometimes extended when the sterilizer is used 
for processing trays of instruments and other 
difficult loads. If the total cycle time is to be 
extended, this must be allowed for when calculat- 
ing the number of sterilizers required. The 
preferred chamber size for porous load sterilizers 
is 600 x9C0xl 200 mm and above. 



'Specification for hot air sterilizers {first revision)- 



IS : 12430- 1987 



4.2.2 Sterilizers /or Fluids in Sealed Containers — 

It is generally accepted that the best method of 
providing sterile fluids is by the use of individual 
container, for example, 1 litre and 500 ml bottles. 
The size of sterilizer required shall be determined 
by the number of containers to be sterilized in a 
given time. The daily load may be dealt with in 
one cycle of several hours' duration or by several 
shorter cycles, using a rapid cooling device. If a 
rapid cooling de/iceand/or air ballasting is requir- 
ed, this must be specified by the purchaser. 

4.2.3 Sterilizers for Unwrapped Instruments and 
Unwrapped Utensils — Wherein existing hospitals, 
separate rapid cycle sterilizers are required for 
individual theatres, one sterilizer 400 mm in 
diameter and 600 mm long is generally sufficient 
to meet the needs of a si ngle operati ng theatre. 

4.2.4 Small Electrically Heated Steam Sterilizers 

^or Unwrapped Instruments and Utensils — These 
usually nave cylindrical chambers and the most 
commonly used machine has a chamber 200 mm 
in diameter and 300 mm long. They are generally 
fitted with up to four removable trays about 
150 X 300 mm. These sterilizers may be used in 
theatre suites ( 1 per pair of theatre ) where there 
is no TSSU, and in certain other clinics. 

4.2.5 Hot Air Sterilizers — The chamber size of 
the oven most suitable for use is 450 x 450 x 
400 mm. In any specialist unit where there is a 
high usage of this type of equipment ( for exam- 
ple, ophthalmology ), the demand would be met 
by a number of units of this size. 

5. NOISE AND VIBRATION LEVELS 

5.1 General 

5.1.1 The overall noise level anywhere in a 
room containing the sterilizer(s) should not 
exceed the following levels for more than 10 
minutes at one stretch in an interval of one 
hour: 

a) CSSD: 70 dB, 

b) Operating theatre suites, pharmacies and 
treatment rooms: 55 dB, and 

c) Other noise sensitive areas: 60 dB, 

5.1.2 In nonsensitive areas, the maximum 
poise level anywhere in the room should not 
exceed 85 dB. The above levels are for an area 
or space when the sterilizer is operating under 
normal working conditions. The Jevels include 
noise from all sources including the sterilizer. 

5.2 Mean Near-Field Sound Pressure Level 

5.2.1 The mean near-field sound pressure level 
of each sterilizer should be determined in accor- 
dance with 15:4758-1968*. 



*Methods of measurement of noise emitted by macliines. 



5.2.2 The mean near-field sound pressure level 
should be found for the noisiest part of the steri- 
lizer cycle from at least five readings on a refe- 
rence radius of 0-3,l-0,3-0 or 10-0 m centred on 
the geometric centre of the equipment. The 
reference radius should be less than twice the 
leading dimension of the equipment or that part 
of the equipment being tested. In the case of 
built-in sterilizers, the geometric centre should be 
that of the projection into the user space, and the 
leading dimensions shall be the projection from 
the fascia. 

Note — Transient noise of less than 5 seconds 
duration., that is, between different parts of the cycle, 
may be Ignored. 

5.2.3 The measured mean near-field noise level 
of the sterilizer should be less than the general 
levels given in 5.1.1 above when reduced as 
appropriate as follows: 

a) Generally, if there is only one or two pieces 
of major noise producing equipment, not 
necessarily all sterilizers, operating at the 
same time in the room under considera- 
tion, the reduction should be 50dB for 
each sterilizer; 

b) If there are three noisy items, the reduc- 
tion should be7dB; 

c) For four and five items, 8 dB; 

d) For six items, 9 dB; and 

e) For seven or more items, 10 dB, 

5.3 Installation Considerations 

5.3.1 The room in which the sterilizer is to be 
installed should be planned and designed so that 
the noise transmitted from the room does not 
give rise to excessive noise levels in adjoining 
areas. 

5.3.2 Open louvers in walls and internal doors 
should be avoided if the sterilizer room is in or 
adjacent to a main building or a noise sensitive 
area. In such situations, the doors should be self- 
closing and a good fit in their frames, preferably 
with compressed rubber seals. This may prevent 
natural ventilation and mechanical ventilation 
may, therefore, be required as detailed elsewhere. 

The need for such a solution can usually be 
avoided in the planning stage. The fascia panel 
cannot always be relied upon for sound attenua- 
tion, for example, when it incorporates louvers or 
sliding doors. 

5.3.3 The total vibration transmitted through 
the supporting feet and service connections to the 



'6 



15:12430- 1987 



building structure should not exceed the amplitu- 
d es given below at any part of the cycle or under 
any load condition: 

Octave Band Maximum Acceptable 

Mid-Frequency Vibration Amplitude 

HZ mm 

2 0-04 

4 0.025 

8 0.014 

16 0007 

32 0003 

63 O'OOl 

Note— Transient vibrations of greater amplitude 
than those above may be tolerable, if of short duration. 

5.3.4 If vibration is likely to be a problem in a 
particular situation, it is recommended that: 

a) The whole sterilizer assembly be secured on 

properly designed anti -vibration mounts, 

b) Vibration transmission through service 
connections should be avoided by use of 
suitable flexible connections, and 

c) Pumps and motors associated with steri- 
lizers should be resiliently mounted whether 
or not they are integral with the main 
unit. 

6. SPECIFICATIONS TO BE INCLUDED IN 
HOSPITAL TENDER DOCUMENTS 

6.1 General Specifications 

6.1.1 The specification should state that the 
sterilizer must comply with the apropri ate Indian 
Standards and with any additional requirements 
as indicated in this code. 

6.1.2 Hot air sterilizers should meet the specifi- 
cation of IS :3n9-1978* except that the maxi- 
mum error of the thermometer should be in accor- 
dance with B-2.4. These sterilizers should also be 
fitted with high temperature limit switches and 
the d oors shou I d be abl e to be I ocked . 

6.1.3 All invitations to tender for sterilizers 
should request full information from the manu- 
facturers ( see Note below ) on all services and 
connections to be provided by the hospital for 
operating the sterilizers. Manufacturers should 
also be required to state the maximum flow rates, 
the minimum and maximum acceptable pressure 
and the maximum consumption of each service 
for one cycle of the largest load. 

NoTK — ' It is normal for the manufacturer of the 
sterilizer to be the contractor for its supply and/or 
installation. The term 'manufacturer' in this code 
relates to the manufacturer as such or in his capacity 
as contractor. In this code, the term contractor is used 
when it specifically refers to the manufacturer in his 
capacity as a contractor, in particular as an installation 
contractor ( or sub-contractor ). 



*S peel fi cation for hot air sterilizers ( first revision). 



6.1.3.1 The services required may include 
the following: 

a) Steam supply (j«^ Appendix A ); 

b) Electricity — the specification should state 
the type of supply available, that is, voltage, 
frequency and number of phases ( local or 
integral steam generators usually result in 
high electrical loading ); 

c) Water supply for condensers, water sealed 
pumps and occasionally for rapid cooling 
devices on sterilizers for sealed fluid con- 
tainers ( the fitting of temperature limiting 
valves and other devices to reduce water 
consumption should be encouraged ( see 
also 7.6.1 ); 

d) Condensate return from the jacket, steam 
separator and traps; 

e) Open gravity drain, except for effluent 
containing harmful gases or pathogenic 
material, in which case special closed and 
protected drainage systems may be necess- 
ary; 

f) Waste cooling water outlets from con- 
densers; and 

g) Compressed air ( air ballasting on some 
bottled fluids sterilizers and for air operated 
valves or other mechanisms on some sterili- 
zers). 

6.1.4 The manufacturer should state the heat 
energy released under continuous full load operat- 
ing conditions when the ambient temperature 
in the adjoining rooms is 27°C in a period of one 
hour in: 

a) the operating area, and 

b) the maintenance area. 

6.1.5 The controls and instruments must 
function correctly under the worst summer con- 
ditions, that is, at 48°C in the plant room. 

6.1.6 The manufacturer should be given 
sufficient information to enable him to confirm 
that the noise and vibration level after installation 
shall not exceed that specified for the location, as 
in 5. 

6.1.7 Clear and simple instructions for operat- 
ing the sterilizer should be prominently displayed 
in indestructible form and preferably on or near 
the operating panel. These instructions should be 
suitable for the guidance of staff unfamiliar with 
the machine. 

6.1.8 The type and standard of packing for 
delivery of the sterilizer should be specified unless 
the manufacturer is to be responsible for the 
installation of the machine. 



IS: 12430- 1987 



6.1.9 Consideration must be given to the proba- 
ble conditions of installation ( for example, 
whether the machine will be installed and used 
at once or will be positioned adjacent to building 
operations in dusty conditions, or will stand on the 
site unconnected for a long period ). It may be 
necessary in some cases to specify dustproof 
packing and a substantial transit case to prevent 
damage on site. 

6.1.10 The manufacturer should be required 
to supply two complete sets of technical literature 
on operation, maintenance and overhauling of all 
major functional items of equipment incorporated 
in the sterilizer, as well as two copies of record 
drawings showing the pipework and electrical 
circuits on the machine itself. This should indicate 
all parts which should be held in stock and may 
require replacement during the normal working 
life of the sterilizer. The literature must include 
a complete PPM programme. 

Thus it must show the tasks to be performed 
weekly, three-weekly, six-weekly, quarterly, half- 
yearly, yearly and multi-yearly. 

6.1.11 The manufacturer should also be requir- 
ed to provide, at the time of tendering, details of 
routine tests suitable for determining sensitivity of 
the air detectors fitted to porous load machines 
made 'by him and details of any extra devices and 
thermocouples required to be supplied or fitted 
by the user for the purpose of conducting the test. 

6.1.12 Adequate arrangements will be required 
for regular servicing of sterilizers and early consi- 
deration should be given to the nature of the 
arrangements. If contract servicing is necessary, 
enquiries on terms and conditions of a suitable 
contract should be made at the time when the 
tenders are issued. 

6.1.13 The manufacturer should be required 
to tender for quarterly maintenance inspections 
during the first year and to submit written reports 
promptly on the result of each inspection unless 
this is automatically provided under the guarantee. 
The contract will not normally cover daily, 
weekly, three-weekly or six-weekly maintenance 
which must start at hand-over. 

6.1.14 The manufacturer should be required 
to undertake to replace, free of cost to the pur- 
chaser, any part of the sterilizer found, within 12 
months of the handing-over date, to be defective 
due to faulty materials or workmanship or poor 
design. 

6.2 Particular Specification 

6.2.1 The specification should be based on 
Indian Standard specification amended as neces- 
sary to conform with the requirements of this code. 

6.2.2 Adequate details of design of proposed 
location of the sterilizer and the appropriate noise 
level should be stated clearly in the specification. 



6.2.3 Side, back and top panels of free-standing 
sterilizers should be easily removable and 
replaceable for maintenance purposes. 

6.2.4 Power-operated doors are desirable on 
porous load and fluids sterilizers of 300 litres 
capacity and above. Designs available at present 
are: 

a) Sliding doors ( vertical or horizontal ), and 

b) Side-hinged doors. 

6.2.5 In 6.2.4 (a), the possibility of operator 
touching the hot inside face of the door is reduc- 
ed. Other considerations may influence the 
choice of door operating system in any particular 
installation, for example, work load, space res- 
trictions, price and ease of maintenance. Vertical 
chamber sterilizers require special guards to 
ensure the safety of the operator when the chamber 
is being lowered. 

6.2.6 If the capacity of the sterilizer chamber 
exceeds 600 litres, a device shall preferably be 
fitted so that the door can be secured open by a 
lock, the key of which can be removed and kept 
by a person entering the chamber. 

6.2.7 The door control mechanism should 
perferably incorporate a safety device which will 
prevent the entry of steam until the door is fully 
closed and secured. This feature should remain 
operative at all times, including during a manual 
operation of the machine and/ or failure of any 
service to the machine. The requirement does not 
apply to sterilizers in which steam is generated 
within the chamber itself. 

6.2.8 The specification for any sterilizer requir- 
ed to have a door at each end should ensure that 
it meets the following additional requirements 
during normal operation: 

a) It should not be possible to have both doors 
open at the same time; 

b) The automatic process control, when 
provided, should be operated from the 
unsterile side only; 

c) A device should be provided at each end 
of the sterilizer indicating 'DOORS 
LOCKED' when both doors are closed and 
secured; and 

d) The chamber pressure gauge should be 
provided at the unloading end in addition 
to any process indication fitted at the 
loading end of the sterilizer. 

Note -J he machines shall be installed for uni- 
directional' How. 

6.2.9 If hinged doors are required, the specifi- 
cation should state whether these are to be hinged 
on the left-hand or right-hand side of the opening 
when facing the machine, or whether either is 
acceptable. 



8 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



6.2.10 The door should be readily accessible 
for cleaning, adjustment and replacement. 

6.2.11 Sterilizers designed to be built into a 
pre-formed recess are not necessari ly made so that 
there are no gaps between the front and the rear 
of the unit. Exceptionally, where it is necessary 
that the area in which the sterilizer is operated 
must be completely sealed from the machine 
maintenance areas to prevent the transfer of 
micro-organisms ( for example, animal research 
laboratories ), the requirement must be clearly 
stated in the specification. 

6.2.12 In the event of a sterilizing stage failure 
on an automatically controlled machine a 'NON- 
STERILE' sign should automatically be illuminat- 
ed and an audible alarm should sound. A switch 
may be provided to mute the alarm but it should 
NOT extinguish the illumination of the sign until 
the door is released. The door must be so inter- 
locked that on a sterilizing failure, it will not be 
released until some special manual action has 
been taken. This usually involves the use of a 
key. 

6.2.13 Any control which is variable but pre- 
set, should be accessible only to authorized 
persons. 

6.2.14 Means must be incorporated to enable 
the engineer or other authorized person to carry 
out the leak rate test without any difficulty on 
porous load sterilizers. 

6.2.15 All exposed wiring at mains voltage on 
the machine should be carried out with mineral 
insulated copper sheathed cables with overall PVC 
sheath, or an approved equivalent. Exposed extra 
low voltage wiring may be carried out in PVC 
cable provided it is suitably protected against 
mechanical damage and the effects of its environ- 
ment. 

6.2.16 Appendix B gives details of all instru- 
ments required to befitted on sterilizers, and also 
the instruments to be used for testing, commis- 
sioning and periodically checking the accuracy 
of the instruments fitted on the sterilizers. 

6.2.17 Where a rapid cooling device is needed, 
the specification should require the manufacturer 
to state the means by which the system may be 
flushed and the frequency at which such flushing 
operations should be carried out. Manufacturers 
should also be advised that it is desirable for the 
flushing operation to be carried out by the user 
without assistance from the engineering staff. On 
some machines, a push-button flushing cycle can 
be provided at a relatively small extra cost. 

6.2.18 Where practicable, the jacket and all 
pipe work, ancillary equipment and exposed 
panels in the working area should be insulated 
to ensure a surface temperature not exceeding 
60°G under continuous operating conditions with 



an ambient temperature of 27°C. It is desirable 
that the thermal insulation be easily removable 
and well Protected to prevent flaking during 
removal and replacement. Asbestos products 
should not be used. The insulation should have a 
flame rating of class 0. 

6.2.19 The manufacturer should be required 
to provide a suitable steam pressure reducing 
valve or valves, with a separator on the high pres- 
sure side of each reducing valve. The vessel should 
be protected by means of pressure relief valves 
fitted to the chamber and/or jacket. 

6.2.20 The manufacturer should provide an 
arrangement to fit a valve or cock adjacent to 
each steam pressure gauge on the sterilizer in a 
vertical position, suitablefor the installation of the 
test gauge 

6.2.21 Any strainer in the steam, condensate, 
drain or water lines must be locked in a readily 
accessible position. Strainers in chamber drains 
should be properly secured. 

6.2.22 Air for ballasting must be oil-free. Air 
for controls must be dry and clean. The sterilizer 
manufacturer must fit any air dryer, oil eliminator 
and filter on the machine in a position where it 
can readily be serviced. 

6.2.23 Steam and condensate pipe work on the 
sterilizer should be arranged so as to exclude, as 
far as practicable, any deadlegs or pockets in 
which water can be retained when the machine 
is not in use. On fluids sterilizers, all condensate 
pipework and water circulating systems should be 
self draining; alternative means of draining must 
be provided wherethis is impractical. 

6.2.24 The manufacturer should be informed 
that after installation, each sterilizer will be 
submitted to a series of tests including functional 
acceptance tests. These tests may have to be 
deferred for considerable time after the sterilizer 
is installed. The required tests should be set out 
in details in the specification. Whenever it is 
feasibleto do so, there should bea clear statement 
of the date when it is expected that they shall be 
witnessed for the purchaser, and of the date by 
which all services shall be available, so that the 
contractor is well aware of his responsibilities and 
can provideaccordingly in hisoffer. 

7. INSTALLATION 

7.1 General 

7.1.1 Sterilizers should be si ted 'and installed 
after careful planning when the problems associ- 
ated with access for installation and removal, 
floor loading, provision of steam and other servi- 
ces, maintenance and ventilation have been fully 
examined. The sterilizer engineer should be 
consulted throughout the planning and purchas- 
ing stages. 



IS : 12430- 1987 



7.1.2 Wha'e the sta'ilizer is built-in, provision 
sinould be made for maintenance staff to gain 
access to the maintenance area without having to 
enter the sterilizing room. Provision should also be 
made for convenient access from the maintenance 
area to the front panel of the sterilizer. 

7.1.3 When a sterilizer with a door at each end 
is installed, arrangements for maintenance should 
as far as possible, be for main access from the 
unsterile 'dirty' end, but adequate access will be 
necessary to both sides of the sterilizer. 

7.1.4 Most machines do not require special 
foundations. Careful attention must be paid to 
height adjustment, specially where several machi- 
nes are to be served by a common loading carri- 
age system, and also to effective drainage from 
chamber and jacket. Attention must be paid to 
the noise attenuation problem when the found- 
ations are designed ( see 5). Attention should be 
drawn to the thickness of fascia panel and to any 
obstructions which will interfere with the loading 
carriage, etc. An excessively thick recess wall may 
be a hindrance to the maintenance work. 

7.1.5 The adverse effects of excessive heat on 
electronic, electrical and pneumatic systems and 
the instruments are emphasized ( see 6.1.4). 

7.1.6 The engineering services to sterilizers 
should be provided by others and terminated 
within the plant room by valves and isolators 
normally within 2 m of the sterilizer, the size and 
location of the terminations having been pre- 
viously agreed with the sterilizer engineer. This 
will allow the contract with the sterilizer manu- 
facturer to include only the supply, delivery, off- 
loading and transportation on site, installation, 
testing and commissioning of the sterilizer within 
the plant room. 

7.2 Ventilation 

7.2.1 Careful attention must be paid to the 
ventilation of sterilizing room and the mainten- 
ance area and theobviousadvantageof a location 
with an outside wall should not be overlooked. 
The rate of air change required for this purpose 
must be related to the heat loss from the plant 
as well as to the vapour produced in and around 
it. The high temperature and humidity in the 
vicinity of the sterilizers will produce uncomfort- 
able working conditions and may have an adverse 
effect on some types of automatic control equip 
ment. The ambient temperature in the plant 
room, with all plants running normally, should 
not be allowed to exceed 60'G under the worst 
summer conditions. 

7.2.2 Excessive water vapour discharging from 
the chamber into the sterilizing room when the 
door is opened, should be collected at high level 
and exhausted to the outside. 



7.2.3 Current experience indicates that a 400- 
600 litre sterilizer with the door closed, will 
release approximately 0-5 kW into the sterilizing 
room by radiation and convection from the 
machine and 3'5kW into the maintenance area. 
Where sliding door machines are mounted behind 
a fascia panel, almost all this heat is released into 
the maintenance area. With the door open, addi- 
tional heat into the user space might typically be 
2 5 kW for a side hinged door and l-5kW for a 
sliding door. 

7.3 Steam Service 

7.3.1 Arrangements should be made for the 
steam service system to be thoroughly examined 
and for any defects to be remedied before a 
sterilizer is put into service. Further notes on this 
subject are in Appendix A. A pressure gauge 
should be fitted on the service main in the plant 
room or an equivalent place. 

7.3.2 It must be emphasized that a continuous 
supply of steam with a dryness fraction of 
approximately 0-9 and at a pressure of 3-5/4-0 
bar is required if steam sterilizers are to operate 
correctly. There is evidence that excessive fluctua- 
tion of steam pressure is more common than is 
generally supposed. 

7.3.3 The design of steam supply pipework 
should be checked to ensure that it is capable of 
meeting the maximum steam demand for short 
periods with a fall in pressure not exceeding 10 
percent before the final reducing valve. The effect 
of nearby connected equipment, such as laundry 
equipment, on steam demand and steam pressure 
should be carefully considered. 

7.3.4 A connection must be provided on the 
steam supply line adjacent to the sterilizer to 
enable steam to be sampled for the presence of 
non-condensable gases. 

7.3.5 The steam supply to sterilizer should 
terminate in the plant room in a header which 
should be adequately vented and trapped. The 
vent should be a separate item having a cooling 
pot; it should be installed on the manifold, 
upstream of any steam supply to individual sterili- 
zers. The header should be of generous propor- 
tions, for example, for an installation comprising 
two 0-6m8 sterilizers, a 150 mm nominal base 
header running along the entire length of the 
plant room, that is, about 43 m, has proved 
successful. 

7.3.6 It is usually impractical in the hospitals 
to generate the steam of requisite dryness, pres- 
sure and peak flow capacity for sterilizing from 
a high pressure hot water installation. 

7.4 Steam Separator and Pressure Reducing 
Valve 

7.4.1 The quality of steam is of vital impor- 
tance to the performance of any sterilizer. Wet 



10 



IS: 12430- 1987 



steam is one of the causes of wet loads in porous 
load sterilizers. Superheated steam cannot be 
relied upon for sterilization. 

7.4.2 There is no completely reliable method 
of measuring the dryness fraction of steam in 
most sterilizer installations. It is a good practice to 
install a separator of known efficiency, upstream 
of the pressure reducing valve or valves at the 
sterilizer. 

7.4.3 If the sterilizer is to be located very near 
a boiler or high pressure main, it may be neces- 
sary to take speci al steps to prevent su perheati ng 
of the steam arising from the pressure reduction. 

7.4.4 The manufacturer is responsible for 
supplying the separator ( where required ) and 
pressure reducing valve for the machine. Pressure 
reducing valves for sterilizers need very careful 
selection. The advice of the sterilizer maker and 
the sterilizer engineer should be sought before 
any new type of pressure reducing valve is fitted 
to an existing sterilizer. 

7.5 Safety Valves — Careful attention must be 
paid to the location of all safety valves to ensure 
that effective protection is afforded to both the 
chamber and the jacket, regardless of the closure 
of any associated control valve. The safety valve 
and discharge pipe should be of a size 
sufficient to prevent an increase in pressure of 
more than 10 percent in the chamber and jacket. 
Any rising discharge pipe must befitted with a 
drain at the lowest point. The discharge pipe 
must terminate in a safe visible position not 
affected by frost. Any external discharge should 
be provided with a tell tale terminating inside 
the plant room. 

7.6 Water Supply 

7.6.1 An adequate supply of main water is 
required; it is not necessary for this to be purified 
or steri I e but hard ness f racti on has to be i nd i cated 
for installation of suitable water softeners. On 
all new installations, the supply must betaken 
to one or more break tanks on the sterilizer to 
prevent back siphonage, and not directly to any 
other component. These break tanks will usually 
have a ball valve fitted in inlet pipe and the water 
level must be (a) not less than 45 mm for tanks 
up to 4 600 litres capacity, and (b) not less than 
75 mm for tanks exceeding that capacity. The over- 
flow pipe diameter must be twice the inlet diameter 
or 32 mm diameter whichever is greater, and the 
highest level of water must be not less than 25 mm 
below the bottom of the overflow. The distance 
between the bottom of the valve inlet pipe and the 
bottom of the overflow pipe must not be less than 
the diameter of the overflow pipe. On existing 
installations, the supply required for ejectors, 
vacuum pumps, condensers and heat exchangers 
of all types should be taken from a break tank 
for the machines. All break tanks should be 
covered, easily cleaned and suitably vented. 



Automatically operated valves should be of the 
non-percussive type. On large installations, 
secondary re-circulating water cooling systems 
should be considered. Groups of sterilizers could 
be served by a common tank or tanks, provided 
that appropriate cleaning arrangements can be 
made. 

7.6.2 For optimum performance, the water 
supplied to water ring pumps, condensers and 
heat exchangers should be at a temperature below 
15°C. Considerable economy in water may be 
secured by recycling the water through cooling 
towers. The performance of water ring pumps, 
condensers and heat exchangers will also deteri- 
orate if the water is very hard or contains large 
quantities of solids in suspension; this problem 
can be overcome by installation of simple water 
treatment plant at the sterilizer site. 

7.7 Compressed Air Supply — A compressed 
air supply may be required. A pressure gauge 
should be fitted on the compressed air supply 
mains in the plant room. If a mains supply is used, 
the manufacturer must provide a drier, oil eli- 
minator and a filter required for the sterilizer 
(see 6.2.22). 

7.8 Steam or Air Supplies for Door Seals ~ 

Where a sterilizer incorporates a door seal which 
is either pneumatically operated or steam- 
operated, the pressure required is in excess of the 
chamber pressure and, for practical purposes, is 
of the order of 3-4 bar. A suitable supply for door 
seal serviceshould be provided. This service must 
be protected by a separate safety valve. 

7.9 Drainage 

7.9.1 Condensate from the chamber may be 
contaminated and unsuitable for recovery, and 
it must pass via a clear air break into a tundish 
or tank which should discharge by gravity into a 
suitable trapped foul drain of adequate size and 
capacity ( except as in 7.9.2 ). The air break in 
the tundish or tank must be preserved at all times 
so that the sterilizer and its associated piping 
cannot be contaminated by the foul drainage 
system ( that is, the disclnarge rate from the 
tundish under all working conditions should be 
such that the maximum flow rate of effluent from 
the sterilizer will not cause the water level in the 
tundish to rise sufficiently to reach the outlet end 
of the sterilizer effluent pipe, thus eliminating the 
air break ). Where a tank supplies water to a 
water ring vacuum pump or a water pump used 
for water ejector vacuum system, the overflow 
discharge from the tank must include an air 
break. 

7.9.2 The advice of the consultant micro- 
biologist should be sought where a bacteriological 
hazard is likely to arise. A sealed break tank in 
lieu of a tundish may be required for each steri- 
lizer. This should be vented to the outside of the 
building and the vent should terminate above 



11 



15:12430- 1987 



roof level clear of any ventilation inlet, window, 
etc. A trap should be provided between the break 
tank and the connection to the drainage system. 
These arrangements will be required where the 
sterilizer is to be used for processing bacteriologi- 
cally hazardous material which has to be made 
safe, for example, in certain laboratory applica- 
tions. STERILIZERS USED IN THE PRODUC- 
TION OF STERILE PRODUCTS FOR 
EITHER PHARMACEUTICAL OR CLINICAL 
USE SHOULD NO T EMPLOY THIS TYPE OF 
DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The consultant micro- 
biologist must be consulted on this subject about 
all sterilizers for any high security infectious 
diseases unit. 

7.9.3 Condensate from jacket, steam separator 
and other trapping points on the steam pipework 
may be recovered when it is convenient and 
economic to do this. 

7.9.4 Means should be provided to prevent, as 
far as possible, flash steam being liberated into 
the atmosphere or causing condensation on 
electrical items. Tundishes should be appropri- 
ately shaped and sited. The use of plastic drain- 
age pipework may be inappropriate because of 
discharge of hot water. 

7.10 Pipework Arrangements 

7.10.1 All steam pipework shall be designed 
in such a way so that any condensate flows by gra- 
vity in the same direction as the steam. This general 
principle applies equally to steam mains, branch 
connections and pipework on the sterilizer itself. 
Care should be taken to trap and drain any 
condensate which may be collected in pockets in 
the pipework or the sterilizers. Deadlegs should 
be avoided. 

7.10.2 Care should be taken to ensure that 
sterilizers are connected to mains services which 
are of adequate capacity and otherwise suitable 
for the sterilizer load requirements. Inadequate 
services may cause malfunctioning; for example, 
compressed air operated valves or door seals may 
fail if the pressure fluctuates. 

7.11 Commissioning Procedure 

7.11.1 The process of setting sterilizers into 
full working order should be undertaken by the 
contractor in accordance with the instructions set 
out in the contract documents. It will be necess- 
ary for him to provide test instruments and 
equipment and to perform the tests and demonstra- 
tions which are required before the installation 
can be accepted for use in accordance with the 
contract, to the satisfaction of the contract super- 
vising officer ( CSO ), or someone appointed by 
him to act on his behalf in this matter. The 
hospital will provide the load. The various checks 
and tests are referred to in Appendix E and 
summarized in Appendix F. The most important 
individual tests are described in detail in other 



appendices. The sterilizer engineer should be 
nominated either as the CSO or nominated to act 
on his behalf. 

7.11.2 The contractor must satisfy the CSO 
that the accuracy and condition of his instru- 
ments and equipment meet the requirements for 
test instruments specified in B-7.1.1 in the 
sequence listed and that they have been cali- 
brated on site as described therein. 

7.11.3 Commissioning is process in which work 
is completed on site in the following order by the 
contractor or contractors: 

a) Demonstration of adequacy of services; 

b) Demonstration of general engineering per- 
formance of the sterilizer; 

c) Testing of mechanical and electrical func- 
tions of the sterilizer, including the safety 
devices; and 

d) Testing of specific sterilizing performance 
for the class of the sterilizer ( see Appen- 
dices G to N ). 

These procedures should be witnessed by the 
sterilizer engineer. Some guidance on procedures 
(b) and (c) is given in Appendix E but it is not 
exhaustive and does not cover every case. The 
contractor shall not be responsible, unless other- 
wise specified, for tests to establish Master Tem- 
perature Records ( MTRs ) for production control 
purposes. 

7.11.4 On satisfactory completion of the work 
as in 7.11.3, the sterilizer engineer should carry 
out further tests on the sterilizers, as necessary, 
to obtain initial performance data for the use of 
the engineer. He should also establish MTRs for 
sterilizers processing medicinal products and for 
hot air sterilizers. 

7.11.5 Arrangements should be made to ensure 
that all staff concerned with the operation and 
maintenance of the sterilizer have ready access 
to manufacturer's instructions, service manuals 
and the data recorded during commissioning. 
Maintenance and operating procedure is covered 
extensively in Appendix D. The importance and 
subsequent use of records taken during commis- 
sioning is also referred to in Appendix D. 

8. TESTING OF STERILIZERS 

8.1 Normal Test Procedures 

8.1.1 The instruments required for testing 
sterilizers are described in Appendix B. The 
frequencies at which tests should be undertaken 
in a routine manner are set out in the table of 
sterilizer performance tests in Appendix F. 

8.1.2 In addition, tests will be required follo- 
wing certain maintenance work which may be 
either scheduled or unscheduled, as described in 
the notes accompanying the table in Appendix F. 



12 



IS:12430 -1987 



8.1.3 The tests are as fol lows: 

a) Performance tests for porous load sterilizers 
( see Appendix G ), 

b) Bowie/Dick tape test for porous load 
sterilizers (see A ppendixH ), 

c) Leak rate test for porous load sterilizers 
( seeAppendixJ ), 

d) Air detector performance test for porous 
load sterilizers ( see Appendix K ), 

e) Performance tests for fluids sterilizers ( see 
Adpendix L ), 

f) Performance tests for unwrapped instru- 
ments and utensils sterilizers ( see Appen- 
dix M ), and 

g) Performance tests for hot air sterilizers 
( seeAppendix N ). 

8.2 Non-standard Test Procedures — The 

use of spore tests or chemical test devices ( other 
than Bowie/Dick tape test for porous load sterili- 
zers ) for routine testing of positive pressure steam 
sterilizers and hot air sterilizers is not recommend- 
ed. Wherethe attainment of sterilizing conditions 
cannot be confirmed by measurement of physical 
parameters, the advice of the responsible micro- 
biologist should besought in evaluating a steriliz- 
ing process. 

9. PROCEDURE FOR DEALING WITH 
DEFECTIVE STERILIZERS AND 
REPORTING THE ACCIDENTS 

9.1 General 

9.1.1 No attempt should be made to open a 
chamber door under 'fault' conditions by defeat- 
ing the door interlock unless: 

a) The chamber is at atmospheric pressure, 
and 

b) Any fluids in the fluid containers are at a 
temperature below 70°C. 

In case of (b) above, the fluid containers 
should be allowed to cool naturally overnight. 

9.1.2 Reference should be made to Appendix 
D, which sets out the responsibilities of various 
parties involved and includes sections on fault 
procedures, recording of faults and the plant 
history record. 

9.2 Reporting of Defects — The importance 
of prompt reporting and recording of all faults or 
abnormalities is emphasised. When complaints 
about performance have arisen, it has often been 
found that known faults have not been recorded 
and reported to the engineer. Failure to report 
and/ or withdraw machines from service, following 
difficulty or abnormality affecting doors on their 
closing and locking mechanisms has resulted in 
serious accidents. 



9.3 Reporting and Recording the Acci- 
dents — Accidents in which anyone is injured or 
could have been injured are reportable under the 
Industrial Safety Act and must be recorded in the 
accident record book. 

9.4 Reporting to Department — The types of 
occurrence which should be reported are those 
where some central action may be helpful in 
bringing about necessary improvements in the 
standards of sefety, construction, performance, 
reliability or economics of sterilizers and would 
include, for example: 

a) A cedents involving sterilizers; 

b) Failures of integrity of pressure level, that 
is, failures of door mechanisms, explosions 
and bursting or cracking of parts of the 
chamber, door, jacket or structural mem- 
bers; 

c) Incipient or potential defects likely to lead 
to failures as at (b) above; 

d) Failure of basic safety devices connected 
with closing/ opening of the door and pres- 
surization of the chamber; 

e) Failureof electrical safety; 

f) Constructional features which do not 
comply with safety codes or with accepted 
good practice or are hazardous in some 
way; 

g) Unusual circumstances which may jeopar- 
dize safety or proper functioning, for 
example, if safety devices or automatic 
process controls can be defeated under 
certain conditions; 

h) Inability of properly maintained and 
operated machine to meet the performance 
standards specified for it; and 

j) Unreliability, persistent malfunctioning, fre- 
quent failures of particular components or 
any other feature which generates excessive 
and/ or abnormally expensive maintenance 
or operational requirements, having regard 
to the intensity of use and operating 
conditions. 

10. MAINTENANCE, OPERATION POLICY 
AND PROCEDURE 

10.1 General 

10.1.1 Planned maintenance arrangements 
should be made for sterilizers as soon as possible. 
A rrangements for proper maintenance of all steri- 
lizing equipment should be made by concerned 
authorities. The maintenance and testing of 
sterilizers are specialized functions. 

10.1.2 Reference should be made to Appendix 
D, which sets out the responsibilities and proce- 
dures involved and emphasizes the need for 
close co-operation between the sterilizer engineer 
and the operators. 



13 



ISt 12430- 19S7 



10.13 The engineer should have the necessary 
testing facilities to monitor sterilizer performace 
by fully instrumented tests. 

10.1.4 Attention is drawn to advice and assis- 
tance available from the following sources: 

a) Manufacturers, and 

b) The appropriate authorities in the country. 
10.2 Maintenance and Testing Philosophy 

10.2.1 The philosophy on maintenance and 
testing embodies three main principles to ensure 
that adequate standards of performance and 
safety are attained and sustained. These are as 
follows: 

a) That all sterilizers are subjected to a care- 
fully planned programme of tests to 
monitor their performance ( see Appendix 
F ), and 

b) That all sterilizers are subjected to a pro- 
gramme of planned preventive mainten- 
ance ( PPM ) under the control of the 
engineer, irrespective of whether or not a 
planned preventive maintenance scheme is 
being operated in the hospital generally. 

10.2.2 The scheduled test programme includes 
simple testing methods undertaken by the 
operator as well as the more complicated tests 
undertaken by the sterilizer engineer. The test 
programme fulfils the objectives set out in 
Appendix D by demonstrating whether or not the 
equipment is functioning satisfactorily. 

10.2.3 The maintenance philosophy has the 
following requirements: 

a) All parts of the sterilizer which are vital to 
correct functioning and/ or safety must be 
tested at least weekly. This is interpreted 
thus: 

i) There is no need to test components 
individually in those cases where any 
malfunction will be revealed by the 
sterilizer performance tests prescribed for 
weekly or more frequent intervals; and 

ii) Where correct functioning of particu- 
larly important components is not 
necessarily verified by the performance 
tests prescribed for the sterilizer at least 
weekly, those components must be 
individually tested each week and refe- 
rence to testing them must be included 
in the schedules of maintenance tasks. 
This applies, for example, to some door 
interlocks which may only be required 
to perform their safety function when 
presented with an abnormal condition. 

b) The maintenance routines should include 
those tasks such as lubrication and occa- 
sional dismantling of particular components, 
such as pumps, the need for which, at 



appropriate intervals, is indicated by 
normal good practice, manufacturer's advice 
and experience. Apart from those tasks, 
the maintenance routines should concen- 
trate on verifying the condition of the 
sterilizer and its components by means of 
testing and examination without dismantl- 
ing, such as parts which are working well 
should be left alone and not disturbed 
unnecessarily. 

10.3 Plant History Record and Sterilizer 
Processing Log — A plant history record must 
be kept for every sterilizer and that a processing 
log book must also be kept for sterilizer processing 
medicinal substances and for porous load steri- 
lizers ( see D-7.1 ). 

10.4 Routine Cleaning and Preparation — 
The operational duties to be carried out by the 
operator should be recorded in a written form, 
and the procedures include those mentioned 
below: 

a) It will not usually be necessary to clean the 
chambers of porous load sterilizers daily, 
but each day the interior of the chamber 
of other machines, including trays and 
shelves, should be wiped down with a 
clean damp cloth. Cleaning is specially 
important for fluids sterilizers dealing with 
saline solutions. The use of abrasives or 
cleaning materials which leave deposits 
must be avoided. A mild detergent may 
sometimes be used, followed by a clean 
water rinse. A detergent cleaning proce- 
dure must not be adopted on fluids 
sterilizers which use rapid coolers of the 
'condensate-collecting' type. On such 
machines, the chamber, etc, should be 
wiped down and cleaned in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions. 

b) The grating in the opening to the chamber 
discharge line should be cleaned daily, or 
more often if necessary. This can normally 
be done by the operator where it is readily 
accessible, or otherwise by the maintenance 
engineer's staff. 

c) The door seal should be wiped clean each 
day with a damp cloth and inspected for 
damage. This can normally be done by the 
operator if the seal is completely exposed 
when the door is open, though the inspec- 
tion will then be a cursory one. Where 
access is difficult, it should be done by the 
engineer. 

d) Attention must be paid to the require- 
ments that certain instrument readings are 
to be recorded at the commencement of 
the day ( see D-8.8.3 ). Any deviation from 
normal should be reported and investigated 
before the work proceeds. 



14 



IS : 12430 -1987 



e) On many fluid sta'ilizers fitted witii rapid 
cooling, the chamber condensate is collect- 
ed for use as the coolant; if a container 
fails the contents will, therefore, flow into 
the coolant pipework and tank The con- 
densate should be dumped at the end of 
each cycle. If it is not dumped, some 
solutions, particularly saline, may cause 
serious damage to the sterilizer. For this 
reason, the cooling system of such machines 
should be flushed after such leakage has 
occurred; the system should in any case be 
flushed periodically ( usually weekly ) as 
part of the PPM routines carried out by 
the engineer. For this purpose, it may, in 
some cases, be necessary to open a drain 
plug in the storage tank. 

10.5 Temperature Recorders and Record 
Charts 

10.5.1 A temperature recorder should be treat- 
ed as a valuable instrument to monitor general 
functioning and performance of a sterilizer. 
Temperatures read from a recorder should, 
however, be regarded with caution and interpret- 
ed only in the light of previous records and tests, 
and knowledge of the characteristics of the parti- 
cular sterilizers/ load/ recorder combination and 
the position from which the recorder senses. 
Temperature sensing and measuring instruments 
( specially recorders ) are subject both to inherent 
calibration errors and to loss of calibration with 
use. No batch of sterile fluids or load processed 
by a hot air sterilizer should be passed as sterile 
unless the temperature recorder chart ( TRC ) is 
satisfactory when compared with the correspond- 
ing MTRs, and any abnormal trace should be 
reported to the maintenance engineer. 

10.5.2 A recorder should not be interfered with 
more than is absolutely necessary whilst it is 
working correctly. The manufacturer's instruc- 
tions on operation and adjustment must be strictly 
adhered to. Maintenance of these instruments 
demands specialized attention and is best under- 
taken by the manufacturer. 

10.5.3 All persons who may need to change 
charts and/or replenish ink supplies on recorders 
during the course of their duties should be pro- 
perly instructed so that they appreciate the 
delicate nature of these instruments, and effecti- 
vely trained in the performance of these duties. 

10.5.4 The instrument case should never be 
left open; broken glass should be replaced 
promptly. 

10.5.5 The preparation and use of MTRs and 
TRCs and the vital rolethese play in the manage- 
ment and control of sterile material production 
is set out in Appendix D. The special importance 
of recorder charts in the quality assurance 



documentation associated with the production 
of sterile aqueous fluids and other medicinal 
substances should be described in a document 
form. 

10.6 Maintenance — Staff and Training 

10.6.1 It is most important that staff at all 
le/els whose duties include responsibilities for the 
maintenance of sterilizers have a sound general 
knowledgde of the principles, design and func- 
tions of sterilizers. They must be thoroughly 
instructed and familiar with those types and 
models of machine with which they are directly 
concerned. They should have some knowledge of 
the basic elements of microbiology in order to 
ensure personal safety, the safety of others and 
general safety. In particular, the engineer should 
be fully conversant with all the machines for 
which he is responsible. There will usually be 
some routine tasks which have to be done by 
hospital staff, even if maintenance is normally 
carried out under contract. In addition, the engi- 
neer must be in a position to be able to deal with 
any breakdown in an emergency. He should also 
have the ability to diagnose faults and carry out 
repairs or to arrange for repairs to be carried out 
by his staff. He must be competent to supervise 
and monitor work carried out either by hospital 
staff or under contract, and to conduct quarterly 
and half-yearly tests (seeAppendixF). 

10.6.2 Detailed instruction about particular 
sterilizer models is usually best obtained from the 
manufacturers, either on site, for example, during 
commissioning, or by courses at their works. 

10.7 Planned Preventive {Maintenance (PPM) 

10.7.1 A suitable system of planned preventive 
engineering mainterance should be followed. 

10.7.2 The PPM programme supplied by the 
manufacturers should be used for all new sterili- 
zers. For existing sterilizers, the manufacturer's 
recommeded PPM programme should be used 
wherever it is available. 

10.7.3 The schedules must be adopted, after 
taking manufacturer's advice, wherever possible, 
to suit each particular sterilizer and the prevail- 
ing conditions. The PPM frequencies in most 
manufacturer's schedules, are based on an average 
intensity of use, typically that of a sterilizer in a 
CSSD or TSSU working on a normal single shift 
basis If the intensity of use differs significantly 
from that, some of the frequencies may need to 
be adjusted accordingly; in any case, frequencies 
should bekept under review in the light of opera- 
tional experience. It is important to ensure that 
sterilizer maintenance work is pre-planned as 
much as possible to fit in with the production 
schedules. 



15 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



10.7.4 Although the manufacture" is required 
to carry out certain inspection and maintenance 
procedures under the terms of his guarantee, it 
is essential that engineering staff undertake the 
PPM programme at all times, including the guar- 
antee period, unless otherwise stipulated in the 
contract. The engineer must also implement any 
further reasonable instructions given by the 
manufacturer during the period of the guarantee. 
Failure to do this may involve the manufacturer 
an additional expense for which he may seek 
reimbursement and it might also jeopardize the 
protection afforded by the manufacturer's 
guarantee. 

10.7.5 Before commencing the weekly tasks, 
the maintenance engineer should satisfy himself 
that the daily tasks have been carried out by the 
operator on the lines indicated in air elimination 
tests from the chamber and load, and that any 
approved routine tests, Bowi^ Dick tape test, and 
air elimination tests from the chamber and load 
have been carried out and the results properly 
recorded by the operator. If he is not satisfied, he 
should record his dissatisfaction in detail in steri- 
lizer processing log, or in plant history record 
where a processing log is not required, and draw 
the attention of the operator to the matter. 

10.8 Overhauls — The engineer should arrange 
for each sterilizer to receive -a thorough overhaul 
every two years. This should be arranged to 
coincide with the statutory inspection by insurance 
company's engineer surveyor. The overhauls and 
inspections should be staggered in the mainten- 
ance programme so that in any particular 
installation, only one machine at a time need be 
withdrawn from service. Arrangements should be 
made for assistance from another department 
and/ or for overtime working if the need for 
standby capacity arises during normal overhauls. 

10.9 Calibration of Instruments Fitted to 
Sterilizer — Every three months, or more 
frequently, if considered necessary, the accuracy 
of the gauges and the thermometers should be 
ascertained by the engineer. Any instrument 
which is found to read seriously in error or which 
is inconsistent, that is, will not repeat satisfac- 
torily, must be discarded, or repaired by the 
makers if that is practical and economic. Instru- 
ments which do repeat satisfactorily but read 
slightly in error should bedealt with as follows: 

a) Instruments fitted with pointer adjustment 

facility should be adjusted to read correct- 
ly at the normal working temperature or 
pressure, and 

b) If the instrument has no provision for poin- 

ter adjustment, it should be replaced as 
soon as possible by the engineer and the 
operator should be advised accordingly. 



10.10 Air-Tightness of Chamber 

10.10.1 Air-tightness of the chamber is of 
fundamental importance to the correct function- 
i ng of al I steri I izers. The effectiveness of door seal 
is the chief factor in air-tightness of the chamber 
as a whole and it must receive particularly careful 
attention as advised by the manufacturer. The 
working life of door seals varies widely, but it is 
essential that all seals are renewed regularly at 
the intervals recommended by the manufacturer. 
Seals must also be renewed when there is any 
evidence of damage or deterioration. 

10.10.2 Although the door seal is the major 
potential source of air leakage into the chamber, 
there are many other points at which leakage is 
liable to occur; these include joints in pipework, 
connections to gauges, blanked off connections for 
test gauges, thermocouple entry points ( both 
when in use and when blanked off ), glands or 
seats of various valves and door safety interlocks. 
Pipework joints and connections to the chamber 
sometimes develop leaks after a period in service, 
probably due to slight loosening caused by the 
repeated stress reversals associated with alternat- 
ing pressure and vacuum conditions, specially 
where compression fittings have been used. 
Occasionally, air leakage into the chamber may 
be the first recognized symptom of cracks 
de/el oping in the chamber wdds or platework. 

10.11 Air Detection Devices on Porous Load 
Sterilizers 

10.11.1 A leak in an air detection de/ice might 
be so small that it would be unnoticed by the 
ordinary leak rate test but such a small leak would 
have a very serious effect in most machines since 
it would permit the expulsion by steam of any air 
present in the device. This would indicate falsely 
that all air had been removed from the chamber. 
With certain designs of air detector, the reverse 
may also be true and a leak may cause the air 
detector to reject every load. 

10.11.2 Particular care must be taken when 
installing, removing or adjusting any part of this 
device. It is preferable not to interfere with it 
except when necessary. The routine procedure to 
be adopted for determining the sensitivity of the 
detector is normally as stated by the manufac- 
turer ( see also Appendix K ). 

10.12 Stainless Steel Chambers — Stainless 
steel is used in the manufacture of many cham- 
bers and these may be of solid stainless steel or of 
stainless steel clad mild steel. Over a wide varia- 
tion in specification, stainless steel are susceptible 
to crevice corrosion and stress corrosion cracking, 
initiated by chemical attack. These phenomena 
occur when the material is subjected to a combi- 
nation of stress, heat and contact with chemicals, 
notable chlorides or strong alkalis. Damage is 
likely to occur when these factors are acting 
togetha, even though they are at levels far below 



16 



IS ! 12430 - 1987 



anything which would be of significance tal<en 
separately. The first two factors, stress and heat, 
are necessarily present in all steam sterilizers. 
The third factor, chemical contact, may also be 
present in sterilizers under the following circums- 
tances: 

a) In sterilizers processing certain fluids, a 
spillage, for example, by breakage of 
a bottle of saline solution, will introduce 
chloride salts into the chamber; 

b) In small electrically heated sterilizers where 
steam is generated within the chamber by 
an immersion heater, a build-up of both 
alkalis and chloride salts may occur if 
these machines are supplied with tap 
water; 

c) If there is excessive carry over of boiler 
water with the steam, this is likely to 
include significant concentrations of both 
alkalis and chloride salts; and 

d) In addition to the risks of stress corrosion 
cracking, cases have occurred in certain 
parts of the country where the use of tap 
water in electrically heated bench top 
sterilizers has resulted in severe pitting 
corrosion leading to perforation of the 
chamber [see 3.4 ). 

Both crevice corrosion and stress corrosion 
cracking can largely be prevented by correct 
operational procedures together, where appro- 
priate, with regular cleaning and light hand 
polishing of the chamber to remove microscopic 
initiating sites. It is particularly important to 
ensure that the stainless steel chambers of fluids 
sterilizers are polished at quarterly intervals, and 
that the cooling systems are flushed as required 
in 10.4 (e). Manual use of iron free abrasives 
should be employed for polishing. Conventional 
engineering abrasives, such as, fine emery and 
Carborundum may be used. Household or domes- 
tic scouring and polishing compounds must not 
be used since they often contain chlorine or other 
corrosive agents and might thus cause, rather 
than prevent, trouble. The manufacturer's advice 
should be followed and care taken not to damage 
the door seal. Precautions must be taken to 
prevent the entry of foreign matter into the 
chamber drain during polishing and cleaning; 
the drain should be disconnected while the work 
is in progress and the chamber should be thorou- 
ghly flushed out before the drain is re-connected. 

10.13 Maintenance of Ancillary Equipment — 
Because of wide variation in design of devices 
performing similar duties, manufacturer's instruc- 
tions should be consulted about maintenance and 
operation of these items. 

18.14 Steam Generators 

10.14.1 Local steam generators, whether 
provided separately or as an integral part of 



a sterilizer, are steam boilers and they must be 
recognized and treated as such. Although they 
are equipped for automatic operation, they must 
receive regular supervision such as would be 
accorded to any other automatic steam boiler 
plant. It is not acceptable for them to be left 
unattended for more than 24 hours; they must be 
looked at by a competent boiler attendant or 
engineer at least daily whilst in use and in many 
cases, more frequently. They are notoriously 
liable to trouble from scale formation. 

10.14.2 The amount and frequency of atten- 
tion necessary in each case will depend largely 
on the nature of the water supply, water treat- 
ment arrangements and the intensity of use. 
Because there is often little or no condensate 
returned to these steam generators, their feed 
water is usually almost 100 percent 'make-up', and 
as a result, the concentrations of dissolved and 
suspended solids in the boiler water build up 
quickly to very high levels. It is essential that an 
effective blowing-down regime be established, and 
adhered to, in order to contain the concentration 
of dissolved and suspended solids in the boiler 
water within acceptable limits. The advice of 
the manufacturer about water supply, water 
treatment, blowing-down and other operational 
practices should be strictly observed ( see also 
Appendix A ). 

10.14.3 Attention to water quality inside the 
generator is specially important if, as is often the 
case, the generator vessel is of stainless steel since 
this may be subject to the same risk of stress 
corrosion cracking encountered in stainless steel 
sterilizer chambers. 

10.14.4 Failure to provide adequate supervi- 
sion, with consequential inadequate control of 
water quality including insufficient blowing-down, 
have resulted in such severe corrosion of steam 
generators that in some cases, internal parts have 
collapsed and the safety of operators has been 
seriously jeopardized. 

10.15 Return of Sterilizers to Service after 
M aintenance 

10.15.1 Whenever any maintenance work, 
either scheduled or unscheduled, has been carried 
out on a sterilizer, it should not be returned to 
service unitl the following requirements have been 
satisfied: 

aj It has passed functional tests appropriately 
to its type and the particular circumstances 
( see Appendix F ), and 

b) In certain circumstances [ see D-8.6.3(a) 
to (h) ], the sterilizer engineer is also 
satisfied that it is functioning correctly. 



17 



IS : 12430- 1987 



10.15.2 In every case, the tests to be applied 
will include running the machine through a full 
cycle under automatic control, with a standard 
load, whilst significant cycle parameters ( such 
as temperature, pressure and time ) are logged 
and checked against the normal values for that 
machine [ see D-4.4 and D-8.2.1 (a) ]. Other 
tests will also be involved, including approved 
standard tests such as the Bowie/Dick tape test 
and the leak rate test, where relevant, and on 
some occasions fully instrumented tests using 
multi-channel thermocouple recorders will be 
required. 

11. HOT AIR STERILIZERS 

11.1 Introduction 

11.1.1 Hot air sterilizing is an accepted method 
for those loads into which the steam cannot 
readily penetrate, such as assembled syringes, 
pneumatically operated and multiple wide pointed 
instruments and for non-aqueous products, such 
as oils and powders. 

11.1.2 In steam sterilizers, the heating of the 
contents is effectively achieved by latent heat 
transfer whereas hot air sterilizers rely on sensible 
heat transfer only. Even temperature distribution 
throughout the chamber and load is essential, 
and this is best achieved in hot air sterilizers by 
forced air circulation, that is, by means of a fan. 

11.1.3 Most existing hot air sterilizers are not 
equipped with safety devices and automatic cycle 
controls usually associated with steam sterilizers, 
and most are at present manually operated. It is 
essential, therefore, that their use is controlled by 
responsible persons who are adequately trained. 

11.1.4 The tim^ temperature relationships 
normally used are as follows: 

160°C for 60 minutes 

170°C for 40 minutes 

180°G for 20 minutes 

Additionally, for "I 

certain pharma- f- 150°C for 60 minutes 

ceutical products j 

N o TE - The items to be sterilized must be held at 
the stated temperature for at least the time given 
above, heating up and cooling down times are addi- 
tional. 

11.2 Recommendations in respect of Hot 
Air Sterilizers for the Health Service. 

11.2.1 Sterilizers should conform to IS : 3119- 
1978*. 

11.2.2 A hot air sterilizer is not suitable for 
use as a drying cabinet. 

11.2.3 Suitable thermocouple entry ports should 
be provided. 

11.2.4 Automatic process control is desirable 
and should be introduced. All new sterilizers 
should be automatically controlled. 



^♦Specification for hot air sterilizers {first revision). 



11.2.5 The door must be capable of being 
locked. It is preferable that the locking system be 
automatic as in 11.4.3 and 11.4.4. Alternatively, 
a simple key-operated lock for control by the 
operator is acceptable. 

11.3 Instrumentation and Process Control 

11.3.1 Instrumentation ( which should include 
a chart recorder and indicating thermometer ) 
required for hot air sterilizers is referred to in 
Appendix B. The sensors for indicating thermo- 
meter and temperature recorder should be per- 
manently fixed. The thermometer and recorder 
may show different temperatures because the 
sensing elements may be located separately but 
their sensors should be sited in positions which 
will minimize this difference. 

11.3.2 An overheat cut-out should be fitted to 
all hot air sterilizers ( see 11.4.2 ). 

11.3.3 Although fully automatic controls with 
full stage indication are desirable on all sterilizers, 
and essential on new sterilizers; where these 
cannot be provided, the following table indicates 
those features considered either essential or 
desirable for effective manual control. 

Item Feature Essential Desir- 

able 

a) Controls 

1. Push button or starting Yes 
switch for process, separate 

from mains isolating switch 

2. Manually adjustable pro- Yes 
cess timer ( 0-6 hours ) 

3. Sterilizing temperature Yes 
control thermostat, adjus- 
table over the range 140- 

180°G 

4. Overheat cut-out, adjus- Yes 
table up to but not exceed- 
ing 200°G, with manual 

reset facility 

5. Independent adjustable Yes 
thermostat ( 0-100°C ) to 

permit fan to continue to 
run after sterilizing stage 
until load temperature has 
fallen to preselected tempe- 
rature ( normally around 
60°C) 

b) Stage Indicators 

6. Electricity supply switched Yes 
on 

7. Chamber heaters energized Yes 

8. Fan run-on timer operating Yes 

(if appli- 
cable) 

9. Process complete Yes 

10. Fault condition Yes 

11. Door release Yes 

12. Three digit process counter Yes 



18 



IS: 12430- 1987 



11.3.4 Adjustment of timers and the sterilizing 
temperature tliermostats should either require the 
use of tools or the controls which should be pro- 
tected against inadvertent adjustment; the settings 
should, however, be visible to the user. The reset 
button for the chamber over-heat cut-out and the 
door release over-ride should be similarly protec- 
ted; alternatively, key switches may be used. 

11.4 Safety Features Required 

11.4.1 All controls should be designed to fail 
safe, wherever practicable. 

11.4.2 A manually re-settable, non-self re- 
setting overhead cut-out, set to operate at a tem- 
perature not exceeding 200°G, should be fitted to 
all hot air sterilizers. 

11.4.3 The door should be interlocked so that 
the operating cycle can neither be started until it 
is closed and secured nor opened until a satisfa- 
ctory sterilizing cycle has been completed, except 
by the use of a manual over-ride release not 
normally accessible to the operator. 

11.4.4 A sterilizer with doors at opposite ends 
should have interlocks to ensure that both doors 
cannot be opened together, and the door at the 
'unloading end can be opened only after the com- 
pletion of a satisfactory sterilizing cycle. 

11.4.5 If the electricity supply is interrupted 
before a cycle is completed, the process timer 
should automatically reset to zero and require 
manual reset. Restoration of electrical supply 
should be signalled by the fault indicator, but 
there should be no automatic re-starting of the 
process. 

11.5 Use of Hot Air Sterilizers 

11.5.1 Users must ensure that the selected 
process time is that stated on the MTR as defined 



in Appendices N and P. In addition, the batch 
type and size, loading pattern and shelving system 
must be in accordance with the information 
stated on the MTR. 

11.5.2 The process time is the sum of: 

a) Time taken for the free chamber space to 
achieve the temperature, 

b) Time required for all parts of the load to 
reach the temperature, and 

c) The sterilizing time. 

Note — If a separate cooling thermostat is fitted, 
the total cycle time will be longer, that is, the process- 
ing time plus the cooling time. 

11.5.3 Variation from established loading 
pattern may seriously affect the heat distribution 
in the chamber and sterilization may, therefore, 
not be achieved throughout the load. 

11.5.4 Consideration should be given to the 
provision of either purpose-made shelving, or 
spacers, for accurate and repeatable positioning 
of specific load items, so that the loading pattern 
used for the preparation of the MTR is repeated 
in production loads. 

11.5.5 The chamber should not be over-filled. 

11.5.6 Good thermal contact is desirable 
between load items and their containers. In the 
case of particular heavy instruments, it is desira- 
ble to support the instrument by a metal cradle 
within its container to assist heat transference by 
conduction and thus avoid an excessively long 
time for the whole load to reach the sterilizing. 

11.5.7 Improved heat transfer can be obtained 
by wrapping the items in an aluminium foil. This 
may be preferable to wrapping them in paper, or 
enclosing them in glass tubes or metal containers. 



APPEN DIX A 
[ Clauses 2.1, 6.1.3.1(a), 7.3.1, 10.14.2, G -4.3, H-7.5 and M-4.3] 

STEAM QUALITY 



A-l. GENERAL 

A-I.l The requirements given below apply mainly 
to steam supplies for porous load sterilizers and 
sterilizers for instruments and utensils. 

A-l. 2 The pre-requisite for efficient steam 
sterilizer performance is a steam supply of suita- 
ble quality. Problems are unlikely to occur if the 
dryness fraction is approximately 09 before the 
final reducing valve and the pressure reduction 
ratio through the valve is of the order of 2 : 1. 



A-l. 3 Although experience has shown that 
acceptable conditions are sometime achieved 
when optimum conditions do not prevail, signifi- 
cant deviations are likely to cause the following 
problems: 

a) Wet loads, resulting from too low a dryness 
fraction; 

b) Difficulties with reducing valve operation, 
resulting from too low pressure reduction 
ratio; and 



19 



15:12430-1987 



c) Superheating, resulting from eitlier too 
liigh a dryness fraction before the reducing 
valve, or excessive pressure reduction 
through the valve; superheating may be 
severe if both conditions are present 
simultaneously. 

A-1.4 The steam supply to the reducing valve on 
the sterilizer should not be subjected to pressure 
fluctuations in excess of 10 percent. 

A-1.5 Adequate trapping and venting of steam 
supply system, good installation practice to 
remove condensate air and non-condensable 
gases, and efficient thermal insulation are import- 
ant if problems arising from poor steam quality 
are to be avoided. 

A-1.6 When existing sterilizing equipment is to 
be replaced; it is desirable to appraise the steam 
supply system because the dryness fraction of the 
existing supply may not be appropriate for the 
proposed new equipment. 

A-1.7 Superheating of steam in the chamber may 
be avoided by using two or more stages of pres- 
sure reduction. The reducing valves should be 
installed some distance apart, so that the normal 
heat losses from the pipe will sufficiently reduce 
the energy of the steam and expansion through 
each valve will not result in superheating. 

A-2. WET LOAD 

A-2.1 This section is directed almost entirely 
to problems arising with porous load sterilizers 
and with sterilizers for unwrapped instruments 
and utensils. 

A-2.2 Although wet steam supplies shall usually 
result in wet loads, experience has shown that a 
high proportion of wet load problems can be 
attributed to improper wrapping or packing of 
load and improper loading ot the sterilizer, parti- 
cularly when metal or other heavy objects are 
being processed in a porous load machine. 

A-2.3 The energy which heats the load is derived 
almost entirely from the latent heat given, as the 
steam condenses. The greater the mass of the 
individual objects in the load, the greater is the 
amount of steam condensed during this heating 
process and the greater is the energy absorbed by 
each object. ■ The process is substantially rever- 
sible. By subjecting the chamber to vacuum during 
the drying stage, the lowered boiling point of 
water associated with the reduced pressure enable 
the heat energy stored in the object to be used to 
re-evaporate the condensate, and as a consequence 
the object is cooled. It is evident that the re- 
evaporation process will not occur if the conden- 
sate becomes separated from the object to which 
the latent heat has been imparted. In order to 
ensure dry loads, it is necessary either to retain the 
condensate close to the object on which it was 
formed during heating or to ensure that the 



condensate is drained clear of the load. Parts of 
the wrapping are likely to become saturated in 
certain cases. This saturation may occur at an 
early stage of the heating process when objects 
such as metal instruments having a relatively 
high thermal mass are sterilized. The excess con- 
densate in these cases may migrate to other parts 
of the load from which it may not be evaporated; 
it is likely to be a particular problem when the 
objects are heavy. This migration of condensate 
may be avoided by including absorbent material, 
suitably positioned inside each pack and quite 
separate from the wrapping. The optimum 
amount and arrangement of this extra padding 
can only be determined by experiment. 

A-2.4 As far as possible, loads should be arranged 
so that the condensate runs direcly to the drain, 
away from the individual objects, for example, 
holloware should not be processed in an upright 
position ( holloware must, in any case, be inverted 
in unwrapped bowl and instrument sterilizers so 
that the air will be displaced ). In porous load 
sterilizers, it may not be practicable to ensure 
that wrapped holloware is always processed 
inverted but the drainage problem may then be 
overcome by placing absorbent material inside 
the vessels. 

A-2.5 Wet patches on loads may also result from 
condensate dripping or draining on to the load 
from load containers or from loading carriages of 
poor design. They may also result from processing 
tiers of instrument trays without using drip 
deflectors between each tier. 

A-2.6 The advice of the sterilizer engineer should 
be obtained when all normal procedures fail to 
secure dry loads. 

A-3. WET STEAM SUPPLY 

A-3.1 Some wet loads are undoubtedly due to 
supply of wet steam to the sterilizers. The under- 
mentioned are some of the causes and remedies 
for this situation: 

a) Existing or new steam mains or manifolds 
which are inadequately sloped and drain- 
ed. The remedy is obvious. 

b) Defective and/ or inefficient thermal insula- 
tion of the pipework between the boiler 
and the sterilizer will cause excessive 
condensation of the supply steam. Effective 
lagging is essential. 

c) There must be a properly designed and 
correctly installed separator and steam 
trap set adjacent to the sterilizer. 

d) The sterilizer should be connected to a live 
steam main, not to an inadequately 
drained or inadequately vented 'deadleg'. 
Long branch connections to sterilizers 
should be avoided. 



20 



IS: 12430- 1987 



e) The steam supply pipework between the 
mains connection and final separator 
should fall towards the separator, for drain- 
age into the trap. Additional drain points 
and traps may be required, depending 
upon the piping arrangement. The accu- 
mulation of condensate in the periods when 
the sterilizer is not in operation should be 
avoided, particularly in any part of the 
pipework and fittings between the take-off 
from the steam main and the sterilizer 
chamber. This can be achieved by the 
correct inclination of each portion of 
pipework and by adequate trapping. 

f) The steam supply to the sterilizer should be 
taken from the top of the main pipe. 

g) 'Priming' may be occurring in the boilers. 
Modern compact and highly rated boilers 
are particularly sensitive to feed water 
treatment and are much more likely to 
prime than boilers of traditional design. 
Priming or foaming which results in carry- 
over of the boiler water, may be caused 
by: 

1) Incorrect feed water treatment ( see 
A-5.1 and A-5.2 ), 

2) Forcing a boiler which needs internal 
cleaning, and 

3) Violent boiling, under fluctuating load 
conditions ( specially with high water 
levels). 

A-4. NON-CONDENSABLE GASES 

A-4.1 The presence of non-condensable gases in 
steam mains supplying sterilizers may cause the 
sterilizer air detector to abort cycles when a leak 
rate test can otherwise be satisfactorily performed. 
The presence of these gases may also be revealed 
by the Bowie/Dick tape test ( the setting of the 
air detector should NOT be modified to compen- 
sate for this ). 

A-4.2 Some causes of the presence of non-con- 
densable gases in the steam supply are as follows: 

a) Boiler feed water which is not properly 
de-gassed or is allowed to fall below 80°C 
during periods of high demand ( this is 
often due to general failure to return con- 
densate from the hospital and is sometimes 
due to inadequate insulation of the con- 
densate return pipe ), 

Note — A simple base exchange system of 
water treatment does not remove bicarbonate 
ions from the water but, in effect, exchanges the 
scale forming bicarbonates for sludge forming 
bicarbonates which can be removed by blowing 
down. Carbon dioxide will be liberated during 
heating, regardless of whether or not this form of 
treatment is used. 

b) Inadequate venting and trapping of the 
steam lines. 



c) Boiler feed pump glands leaking, and 

d) Incorrect water inlet to feed tanks. 

A-4.3 Certain boxes or trays, for example, Bripac 
boxes when first used, are likely to give off non- 
condensable gases which will cause the air 
detector to abort the cycle. Such material should 
be pre-processed separately before first being used 
in the normal sterilizing procedure. 

A-5. WATER TREATMENT 

A-5.1 The quality of steam may be greatly influe- 
nced by the boiler water treatment and a study 
of the treatment is essential in many cases. The 
study should cover the analysis of water, the 
facilities for venting and the blow-down regime 
required in order to optimize the total dissolved 
solids ( TDS ) content and ensure protection of 
boiler against corrosion whilst minimizing the 
entrainment of non-condensable gases in the 
steam supply. This study should be carried out 
by a water treatment specialist. 

A-5.2 It may be necessary to re-assess the water 
treatment procedure for existing boilers in those 
cases where the steam quality indicates the need, 
for example, where repeated and unaccountable 
Bowie/Dick tape test failures, or cycle abortion 
by air detector system, or both have occurred. 
This would certainly be the case when investiga- 
tion shows that the sterilizer is in good order but 
that the steam supply may be suspected. 

A-6. SMALL STEEL GEN ERATORS/ BODI ES 

A-6.1 Small local boilers and boilers constructed 
integrally with sterilizers are particularly suscep- 
tible to the problems of low boiler feed water 
temperatures, inadequate venting and trapping 
and incorrect water inlet to feed tanks. These 
problems are accentuated because the condensate 
from the sterilizers is not returned to the feed 
tank. 

A-7. SUPERHEATED STEAM 

A-7.1 General 

A-7.1.1 Superheated steam is an unsuitable 
medium for moist heat sterilization ( in properly 
designed sterilizers, moist steam at, for example, 
134°C will sterilize in three minutes while dry 
heat at 160°G will sterilize in one hour ). Super- 
heat conditions within the load and chamber may 
result from: 

a) Adiabatic expansion, 

b) Exothermic reaction, and 

c) Heating from an outside source ( such as 
overheated jacket ). 

Superheating from any cause may result in 
failure to sterilize, scorching of textiles and paper 
and rapid deterioration of rubber. 



2t 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



A-7.1.2 Superheating due to adiabatic expan- 
sion is usually the result of an excessive reduction 
in pressure through a throttling device, such as 
a reducing valve or a partially closed main steam 
valve. It is unlikely to be of significance in the 
circumstances normally encountered in hospital 
steam distribution systems but it may arise if the 
main steam supply is unusually dry, or the 
pressure unusually high before the throttling 
device. 

A-7.1.3 Practical considerations sometimes 
dictate the need to accent limited adiabatic super- 
heating in the chamber provided it can' be 
demonstrated to be a transient condition. Speci- 
fically, the maximum superheat measured in the 
chamber space must not exceed 5°C and for the 
last two minutes of the sterilization hold time, 
must not exceed 2°C. 

A-7.1.4 When adiabatic superheating occurs, 
it can sometimes be overcome by installing a 
second reducing valve in the steam main well 
upstream of the sterilizer, so that the pressure 
reduction ratio at the sterilizer is not greater than 
2: 1 thus permitting the heat losses from the 
pipework to reduce the dryness fraction upstream 
of the final reducing valve, whilst minimizing the 
effect of expansion through the reducing vaive 
drying ( but if steam is used for door seal infla- 
tion, the first reducing valve must not reduce the 
pressure below that required for the seal ). 

A-7.2 Exothermic Superheating 

A-7.2.1 Superheating arising from exothermic 
reaction may occur during sterilizing as a result 
of dehydration of exceptionally dry material. In 
these circumstances, the superheat condition is 
not necessarily transient; it may be severe and 
may persist for the entire sterilization hold time, 
with consequential risk of a failure to sterilize. 
This phenomenon is usually associated with 
certain textiles, particularly those incorporating 
cotton which have become excessively dry before 
sterilization. It may occur at any time when the 
ambient humidity is unusually low. It is generally 
revealed by thermocouple testing but only if the 
material used for the test pack has been exposed 
to the same environmental conditions as the 
production material. 

A-7.2.2 It is unlikely to be a problem in most 
installations during normal Indian climatic condi- 
tions, but it may occur during the periods of very 
cold, dry weather, specially in those departments 
which are heated and mechanically ventilated 
without humidification. It is also likely to occur 
in air-conditioned areas if the humidification 
plant is not functioning properly. 

A -7.2.3 Textiles should be allowed a period of 
not less than four hours for airing after launder- 
ing before they are sterilized. 



A. 8. MEASUREMENT OF DRYNESS 
FRACTION 

A-8.1 Where problems with superheating and/ or 
wet loads cannot be readily overcome, it is desir- 
able to measure dryness fraction in order to 
quantify the problem. The most successful method 
involves sampling the steam throughout the air 
removal stage. The sample should be collected by 
inserting a capillary probe ( pitot) into the centre 
of the steam pipe ( see Fig. 1 ). The diameter of 
the probe should be in accordance with Table 1. 



TABLE 1 CAPILLARY 


PITOT TUBE DIAMETERS 


Steam Pressure 
Bar 


Diameter 
mm Bore 


(1) 


(2) 


7 


071 


4 


0.96 



N ote 1 — iBy taking a 'core' sample fiom the steam 
supply line, a close approximation to chamber condi- 
tions is obtained, with the minimum of entrained 
condensate. 

Note 2 — A single pan laboratory balance of 
1'5 kg capacity has been found most satisfactory for 
the accurate weighing, that is, necessary with this 
technique. 

A-8.1. 1 Method — Steam is injected during 
the air removal stage into a calorimeter ( l-Htre 
thermos flask ) which contains a known mass of 
water at a known temperature. At approximately 
80-85°C, the steam is cut off by disconnecting the 
rubber tube so that the steam has been sampled 
during the most active period of steam injection 
to the sterilizer, that is, from the commencement 
of air removal to just after the start of sterilizing 
'hold'. 

Since the increase in mass and temperature is 
known, the dryness fraction can be determined 
from heat balance. A typical equation is shown 
below: 

Let T^ = temperature of water at the beginning 
of the test ( °G ); 

Tj = temperature at the end of the test 
(°C); 

Tj = temperature of steam ( °G); 
L = latent heat of steam at Tg ( from steam 

tables ) ( kj/kg); 
D = dryness fraction of steam; 

Wg = weight of thermos at the beginning of 

the test ( kg ); 
Wt = weight of thermos at the end of the test 

(kg); 
Wq = weight of condensate collected ( kg ); 
Ww= weight of initial water charge ( kg ); 

W''t = total weight of thermos plus bung, 
tubing, etc, excluding water; 



22 



IS : 12430 - 1987 




TO THERMOCOUPLE 
INDICATOR SCALE o-100°C 



A — 1-1 itre flask 

B — Rubber bung ( drilled to accommodate 2 glass tubes — Push fit stirrer and 3 mm dia vent-hole) 

C ~ Thermocouple tube 7 mm OD/5 mm ID, 300 mm long glass. Thermocouple hot junction to be positioned at 

the lower end of the tube. 
D — Stream sponge tube 7 mm OD/5 mm ID, 300 mm long glass. 

E — Stirrer 2"0 mm OD brazing wire with 25 mm square x 0'90 mm dia paddle brazed to end. 
F — 'T' in steam line to sterilizer. 
G — Reducing bush. 
H — Capillary probe brazed into union. 
J — '0' ring union fitting. 
K— Rubber tube 8 mm OD, 300 mm long. 

Fig. 1 Apparatus for Determination of Dryness Fraction 

23 



IS : 12430 . 1987 



Wi = weight of glass thermos ( consider only 
the glass, excluding one weight of cani- 
ster ) ( kg ); 

Wi = weight of glass tubing ( kg ); 

W^3 = weight of rubber bung and tubing 

( kg ); 
Wi = weight of brass stirrer ( kg ); 
W^= weight of entire flask ( canister but not 

Si = specific heat of glass [ 650 ( nom ) 
J/kg °K ]; 

Si = specific heat of rubber ( 2 009 J/ kg °K); 

Ss = specific heat of brass ( 370 J/ kg °K); 
and 

s4 = specific heat of water ( 4 180 J/ kg °K). 

N OTE — It is assumed that the effective weight of 
thermos flask! rubber bung and tube are 75 and 25 per- 
cent, respectively. 

Heat gained by thermos 

= 0-75 Wi (Ti~Ti ) X Si 

Heat gained by glass tubing 
^Wi{Ti-~Ti)xSi 
Heat gained by the rubber bung and tubing 

= 0.25 WaiTi-Ti ) x 5^ 
Heat gained bythe stirrer 

= W^(Ti-Ti) X Ss 
Heat gained by water in the flask 

= W^{Ti-Ti)xS, 

Therefore, total heat gained 

= (T^-~ Ti) (0-75 Si Wi + Wi Si 
+ 0-25 Si Wi +SsWi + Si W^ ) 



D = 



Total heat lost 

= W^x -D X L + Wc {Ts - Ti) Si 
Wt =.W^ + Wi-^W3 +Wt 
W^ = W^- Wt 
Wo = Wj- W^ 

Rewriting and solving for dryness fraction: 
{Ti -~Ti) 0-75 Si Wi +SiWi 
+ 0-25 SiWs +S3Wi+Si{Ws- w t) 
-( Wj-W,) 17-3 ~T,) Si 



{Wr - W^) L 



Using the apparatus shown in Fig. 1 and the 
sizes given for various components ( see also Table 
1) and taking into account the order of magni- 
tude of the various elements, the equation may 
be reduced further with a loss of accuracy which 
should not exceed 1 to 2 percent. 

Let Ti = initial temperature of water in the flask 
{°G); 

Tj= final temperature of water and conden- 
sate in the flask ( °G ) ; 

7'g= average steam temperature during sam- 
pling period ( °G); 

L = latent heat of steam at Tg ( from steam 
tables ) ( kj/kg); 

Ws= weight cf flask, stirrer, etc, and water 
charge ( kg ); 

Wf= weight of flask, stirrer, etc, water and 
condensate ( kg ); 

n _ (^2-^i) (4-18 Pi^„- 2-544) 
L (Wt-W^ ) 
_ (Ts-Tj) 4.18 



APPENDIX B 
( Clauses 2.3, 6 1.2, 6.2.16, 7.11.2, 8.1.1 and 11.3.1 ) 

INSTRUMENTS TO BE MOUNTED ON STERILIZERS AND FOR TESTING AND 
COMMISSIONING STERILIZERS AND TO BE VISIBLE TO THE OPERATOR 



B-l. GENERAL 

B-I.l Where more than one gauge or instrument 
is fitted in the same area, every effort should be 
given to obtain a uniform appearance, for 
example, circular pressure and temperature 
gauges. 

B-1.2 The errors produced in temperature and 
pressure measurement using either indicators or 
recorders arise from a number of factors. Some 
of these are inherent in the design, age and condi- 
tions of the measuring equipment. Others are 
brought about by the conditions on site, the day- 



to-day variations in atmospheric conditions and 
the skill and experience of the operator. Still 
others arise from permissible variations in thermo- 
couple alloys, and even the positioning of the 
thermocouples within the load can produce mis- 
leading readings. Loose terminals and imperfect 
plug and socket connections will also cause 
errors. 

B-l. 3 Every effort should be made to eliminate 
or minimize these errors by attention to detail in 
design, effective maintenance and skill in the 
application and use of the instruments. 



24 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



B-1.4 The levels of accuracy stated in this appen- 
dix assume that the instruments and controllers 
are designed, chosen and located in a manner 
which will ensure a long trouble-free life under 
varying conditions of temperature and humidity 
to which they will be subjected. The normal 
ambient temperature in the plant room with the 
plant idle, may be between 10 and 30°G, and up 
to 40°C with the plant running. 

B-1.5 All instruments should comply with the 
relevant Indian Standards. The sterilizer manu- 
facturers must carry out adjustments to the instru- 
ments on site, as necessary, so that the additional 
requirements of this appendix can be met with 
the 'plant running' conditions normally prevailing 
on site. Accurate test instruments and test 
procedures for site calibration are described 
in B-7.1.1 to B-10.7. 

B-2. INDICATING THERMOMETERS 

B-2.1 Indicating thermometers must be either 
Types 1, 2 or 3 as follows: 

a) Type 1 — Dial type expansion thermo- 
meters, liquid or gas filled or in the case of 
bench top machines and hot air sterilizers, 
vapour pressure instruments. 

The scales of the last-named are non- 
linear and for this reason, vapour pressure 
instruments are not preferred. The thermo- 
meters should be generally be in accord- 
ance with Table 2. 

TABLE 2 SCALES FOR INDICATING 
THERMOMETERS 



Standard Requirements 



Exceptions fob Bench 

Top Electrically 

h eated u nwrapped 

Instbitments and 

Utensil Stbiuzbks 



Single Func- Dual Func- 
tion Ins- tion* Ins- 
truments truments 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

Nominal size (dia) 100 mm 50 mm 50 mm 

Minimum scale length, 160 mm 90mm 50mm 

Scale range (Max) isO'Cf 150°C 150»C 

Graduations over effec- 2°C 5°C 5°C 

tive range 

"These indicate temperature and pressure but must 
have separate sensors for temperature and pressure. 

t200°C for hot air sterilizers. 

b) Type 2 — Indirect electrical indicating 
instruments are calibrated either for resist- 
ance elements or for a particular type of 
thermocouple. 

It should be noted that thermocouple 
instruments indicate correctly only when 
used with the class of thermocouple for 
which they are calibrated (see B-7.6.1 
to B-7.6.7 ). Instruments for mounting on 
machines must be as in Table 3. 



Note — Where a scale is used, it should have 
a scale length of not less than 120 mm; however, 
the newer style of 'ribbon' indicator with a scale 
length of 100 mm is acceptable because of better 
resolution with this type of scale. The scale should 
be calibrated 0-150=;G (0-200°C for hot air sterili- 
zers ) with graduations at 2°C intervals ( if digital 
instruments are used, the maximum increment to 
be displayed should be 0'5°C). Semi-conductor 
resistance elements ( including thermistors ) may 
be used where the normal maximum temperature 
does not exceed 160°C . The instruments must have 
brol<en sensor protection giving full scale deflec- 
tion. Where the instrument is to be used to pro- 
vide a limited control function, the broken sensor 
protection must fail safe; the sterilizer manufac- 
turer should state whether up-scale or down-scale 
drive is required on failure. 



TABLE 3 SELECTION OF INSTRUMENTS 
( Clauses B-2.1 and B-4.4 > 



C ALIBRATED FOR 

USE WITH 


Relevant Indian 
Standard 


(1) 


(2) 


Resistance elements 


IS : 2848-1986* 


Thermocouples 


IS :7358-1984t 




IS :2054-1962t 




IS :10625-1983§ 



*Specification for industrial platinum resistance 
thermometer sensors {first revision). 

fSpecification for thermocoupl es (f i rst revi si on } . 
{Reference tables for nickel/aluminium nicl<el/ 
chromium thermocouple. 

§Reference tables for nicl<el/chromium-copper/nicl<el 
( chromel constantan ) thermocouples. 



c) Type 3 — Dial type expansion thermo- 
meters of the bi-metallic type. These may be 
suitable for use in certain situations where 
direct connection between sensing and 
indicating elements is possible ( for 
example, without the use of capillary 
tubes ). This type is often sensitive to 
vibration, such as by door slamming, and 
must, therefore, be of a design which 
allows for such treatment. They will nor- 
mally be suitable for use only on hot air 
sterilizers. In this situation alone, they 
may also be used to operate in conjunction 
with timers and door interlocks but not to 
control the chamber temperature. They 
must be of the type with the element sealed 
in a stainless steel stem. 

B-2. 2 Table 4 indicates ideal scale ranges for 
various types of sterilizers, the actual scale varying 
from manufacturer to manufacturer. 

B-Z.3 The indicating instrument may sense the 
temperature at a point indicated in Table 5. 



25 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



TABLE 4 TYPICAL ACCEPTABLE RANGES 
FOR THERMOMblRIC SCALES 


( Clause B-2.2) 




Type of Stebiwzee 

• 


Scale 
°C 


U) 
Fluids 


(2) 

40-160 


Porous loads 


60-180 


Unwrapped instruments and 
utensils 


60-180 



Hot air 



50-200 



N GTE — Separate systems must be used for: 

a) Indicating thermometer ( for temperature indi- 
cator/controller where permitted in R-Z.5 ), 

b) The recorder, and 

c) Temperature interlock for fluid sterilizers. The 

interlock to prevent opening of the door with 
load temperature in exce.-? of 80°C should be 
controlled only by means of a load simulator 
and not directly from a load bottle. 





TABLE 5 SENSOR LOCATIONS FOR INDICATING 

THERMOMETERS AND TEMPERATURE 

RECORDERS AND CONTROLLERS 


( Clause B-2.3 ) 




Type of Sterilizes 


Cham- 
ber 

D RAIN 


Coldest Part 

OF Chamber 
Stbak Space (ob 
Chamber Free 
Space) 


Air 
Vent 


(1) 

Porous load 


(2) 
Yes 


(3) 
No 


(4) 
NA 


Fluids with chamber 

drain 


Yes 


No 


NA 


Fluids without cham 
ber drain 


- NA 


Yes 


Yes 


Unwrapped instru- 
meots and utensils, 
with chamber drain 


Yes 


No 


NA 


Unwrapped iostru- 
meotsand utensils, 
without chamber 
drain 


NA 


Yes 


Yes 



Hot air 



NA 



Yes* 



Yes 



*This may be either in the air circulation system or 

in a position agreed with the manufacturer; this may not 
however, be the coldest part of the chamber [ the coldest 
part of the chamber or load may be up to 5°C lower —see 
N -2.7(d)]. 



ambient temperature is outside the limits stated. 
The instrument should incorporate a means of 
adjustment for setting on site so that the accuracy 
required at the mean sterilizing temperature is 
achieved ( seeB-1.5). 

B-2.5 The indicating thermometer may only be 
used for control purposes if the control function 
does not affect the indication of the temperature, 
This limitation need not apply in the case of a 
hot air sterilizer provided that the effect of any 
control function is restricted to a depres- 
sion in indication of a rising true tempera- 
ture not exceeding l-5°Gorl-5 percent of the 
scale span, whichever is lesser, 

B-3. PRESSURE GAUGES 

B-3.1 Pressure gauges should preferably be of the 
Bourdon tube type. It is the normal practice of 
many sterilizer manufacturers to fit pressure 
gauges without syphons. A pressure gauge should 
not be directly exposed either to steam or to work- 
ing fluid at a temperature in excess of 1C0°G. 
For these reasons, the accuracy stated for the 
scale range cannot be guaranteed though sterilizer 
manufacturers can ensure that the stated accuracy 
can be achieved by calibration at the operating 
temperature. 

There is little practical evidence to support 
the omission of syphons on modern sterilizers and 
it may now be preferable to fit them, in order to 
maintain the Indian Standard accuracy of the 
insb'uments. The insb'ument should incorporate a 
means of adjustment for setting on site, so arrang- 
ed that authorized persons may be able to make 
the adjustment without having to dismantle the 
instrument. 

B-3.2 The size and length of scale should be as 
in Table 6. 



TABLE 6 SIZEAND SCALES (LENGTH 
PRESSURE GAUGES 



FOR 



S TANDARD ReQTJIKEMBNTS 



Exceptions fob Bench Top 

Electrically Heated 
Unwrapped InsteumenTS 
AND Utensil Sterilizers 



B-2.4 The maximum error should not exceed rc 

at the sterilizing temperature which, for this 
purpose, may be taken as the mean of the limits 
of a particular sterilizing temperature range, 
for example, 136°C for a range 1341^ "C. The 
permissible error stated here is for an instru- 
ment mounted in a vertical position in an 
ambient temperature of 20 ± 5°C with the 
difference in level between the sensor and the 
instrument as it occurs on the sterilizer. This 
degree of accuracy will not be achieved if the 





Single Func- Dual Func- 
tion Instru- tion* 
meots Instruments 


(1) (2) 


(3) (4) 


Nominal size 100 mm 
(dia) 


50 mm 50 mm 


Minimum scale 160 mm 
length 


90 mm 50 mm 


*These indicate both pressure and temperature but 
must have separate sensors for pressure and temperature. 



26 



15:12430 - 1987 



B-3.3 The scale should be as in Table 7. 

TABLE 7 SCALES FOR DIAL TYPE PRESSURE 
GAUGES 

(Clauses B-3.3 and B-4.9) 



Duty 


Scale ( As 


Graduation 




D EFINED IN IS : 


Intbryals 




3624-1987* ) 


( mbar ) 






Nomi- 


Nomi- 






nal 


nal 






100 mm 


50 mm 






Dials 


Dials 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


Leak testing 


0-150 mbar 
( absolute), Max 


2 


t 


Fluids 


to 2-5 bart 


100 


t 


Porous loads cham- 


-lto-f5 bar 


200 


t 


ber 








Unwrapped Instru- 


-1 to +5 bar, 


200 


t 


ments and utensils 


or to 4 bar 


200 


t 


( chamber ) 








Porous loads and 


to 4bar 


200 


t 


unwrapped instru- 








ments and utensils 








(jackets ) 








Electrically heated 


to 4 bar 


200 


200 


bench top unwra- 








pped Instruments 








and utensils sterili- 








zers — single func- 








tion gauges and 








dual function 








gauges§ 








*Speclflcatlon for 


pressure and vacuum gauges ( 


second 


revision ), 








fXhis size of Instrument Is unsuitable 


for this duty. 


|May be to 4 bar non-rlgid containers. 




§Dual function gauges are combined 


temperatu 


re and 


pressure Instruments. 









B-3.4 The error in pressure indication should not 
exceed ± 1 percent of the scale range at the 
sterilizing temperature which, for this purpose, 
may be taken as the mean of the limits of a parti- 
cular sterilizing temperature range, for example, 
136°C for 134i^°Crapge. 

Note — It Is essential that where two pressure 
gauges are connected to the same source of pressure 
( such as inter-connected chamber and jacket ), they 
should be set on site to indicate identical pressure 
within the above limits of accuracy. 

B-3.5 The leak rate testing gauge should respond 
to any change of pressure exceeding 1 mbar. 

B-3.6 The gauge should be suitable for operation 
either when exposed directly to steam at 28 bar 
or when connected to the chamber via an auto- 
matic isolating valve. This valve must prevent 
exposure of the gauge to steam and to pressures 
in excess of atmospheric pressure. 

Note -The continuing availability of barometri- 
cally compensated absolute pressure gauges within reason- 
able costs Is doubtful. Instrumentation for leak testing Is 
under review. A vacuum gauge with sensitivity In 
accordance with B-3.5 should be adequate. The varia- 
tion In vacuum achieved by the machine under various 
conditions of atmospheric pressure should be Indicated 
by a coloured band or similar means. Calibration may 
be over the entire range of scale or over a 15 mbar 
range Inscribed on a rotating bevel ring. 



B-4. TEMPERATURE RECORDERS AND 
COMBINED TEMPERATURE/ 
PRESSURE RECORDERS 

B-4.1 A temperature recorder should be fitted to 
monitor the performance of each sterilizer for 
porous loads, each sterilizer for fluids in sealed 
containers and each hot air sterilizer. It is not 
mandatory to fit any recorder to a sterilizer for 
unwrapped instruments and utensils but there are 
many situations in which its use can be justified, 
particularly in some operating theatres. 

B-4.2 Recorders should not be used to control 
either temperature or pressure in the chamber or 
any safety interlocks. 

B-4.3 All recorders should incorporate a means 
of adjustment for setting on site. 

B-4.4 The thermometric measuring system should 
sense the temperature at a point as indicated by 
one of the following means: 

a) Indirect acting electrical, either with resisi- 
ance elements or with thermocouples as In 
Table 3. Semi-conductor elements ( includ- 
ing thermistors ) may be used where the 
normal maximum temperature does not 
exceed 160°C; they are not, therefore, 
normally suitable for use in hot air sterili- 
zers. 

b) Liquid expansion system ( vapour pressure 
instruments are unsuitable for this appli- 
cation ), 

B-4. 5 The recorded temperature should be 
within ±, 1°C at the sterilizing temperature 
which, for this purpose, may be taken as the 
mean of the limits of a particular sterilizing 
temperature range, for example, 136 °C for a 
134+*°G range. The temperature chart should 
be scaled with a maximum range of 150 °C (200°C 
for hot air sterilizers ) and a minimum range of 
100°C, with lines at intervals representing a divi- 
sion not exceeding 2°C ( 5°C for hot air 
sterilizers ). 

B-4. 6 Electrical instruments should comply 
generally with IS :302-1979*, with broken sensor 
protection. Where the instrument is to be used to 
provide a control function ( see B-4.2 ), the bro- 
ken sensor protection should fail safe; the sterili- 
zer manufacturer should, therefore, state whether 
up-scale or down-scale drive on failure is 
required. 

B-4.7 The pressure measuring system on a com- 
bined temperature pressure recorder will normally 
incorporate a Bourdon tube. The problem of 
connecting pressure recorders is the same as that 
arising with pressure gauges and the solution is 
similar ( see B-3.1 ). 



^General and safety requirements for household and 
similar electrical appliances (fifth revision ). 



27 



15:12430 - 1987 



B-4.8 Other pressure recording systems may be 
used provided they are suitable for the application 
and are no less accurate than the approved 
Bourdon system. 

B-4.9 The error in recorded pressure should not 
exceed ±1 percent of the scale range at steriliz- 
ing temperature which, for this purpose, may be 
taken as the mean of the limits of a particular 
sterilizing temperature range, for example, 136% 
for 134 +^°G range. The pressure measuring 
system should be suitable for the ranges specified 
for pressure gauges in Table 7. 

B-4.10 On combined instruments, the scale lines 
on the chart should be common for the temperature 
and pressure record, the temperature record 
taking precedence for the major scale lines. 

B-4.11 The recording charts may be either 
circular or strip charts ( preferably the latter) 
and should provide a permanent and immediately 
visible record. If strip recorders are used, they 
should preferably incorporate either a tear-off 
facility or be suitable for Z-fold charts. It will be 
necessary to remove the chart on completion of 
the process so that roll on or pull through is 
required. Circular charts should preferably be 
not less than 240 mm in diameter, with a radial 
scale length not less than 100 mm. Strip charts 
should not be less than 90 mm wide. Recorders 
printing on cards may offer an alternative, but 
in this case it is advisable to provide an interlock 
to prevent commencement of the cycle until a 
card is inserted ( The record is, unfortunately, 
not normally immediately visible with card 
instruments ). 

B-4.12 Selection of an appropriate chart speed 
will be dependent upon the type of recorder 
chosen and the process being monitored. Separate 
charts for each cycle are preferred when medi- 
cinal products are sterilized [ see D-8.8.4 (k) ]. 
Chart speeds should be as given in Table 8. 

TABLE 8 CHART SPEED FOR TEMPERATURE 
RECORDERS MOUNTED ON STERILIZERS 



Type of Recorder 
Chart Speed 


Circular 

hours/ 
revolution 


Strip 
mm/min 


<— -> 

Process 


t ' 
Max 


Min 


Max 


Min 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


Porous load 


3 


2 


20 


5 


Fluids, rapid cooling 


3 


2 


8 


2 


Fluids, natural cooling 


3 


2 


2 


1 


Hot air 


12 


6 


2 


1 



B-4.13 Pressure recording systems of the Bourdon 
tube type can normally be fitted to instruments 
using either electronic or expansion thermometric 
systems but, as a rule, they are used only with 
circular chart recorders. 



B-4.14 Pressure transducer systems are compatible 
with strip chart recorders but are not generally 
available within the price range of a comparable 
mechanical s> stem. 

B-5. CYCLE STAGE INDICATOR 

B-5.1 Means must be provided to indicate each 
stage in progress at any time, such as, air removal, 
sterilizing, cycle completed, 

B-6. CYCLE COUNTER 

B-6.1 A four-digit cycle counter must be provided 
to indicate the cumulative total of completed 
cycles regardless of whether they are sterile or 
non-sterile. The counter should be tamper-proof 
or sealed, and be non-resettable. 

B-7. INSTRUMENTS FOR TEST PURPOSES 

B-7.1 Temperature Recorders — General 

B-7.1.1 The requirement embraces instruments 
used for: 

a) commissioning sterilizers, 

b) re-commissioning sterilizers which have 
undergone major overhaul, and 

c) periodic testing of sterilizers in service. 

B-7. 1.2 The instruments should be of the 
indirect acting electrical type, for use with thermo- 
couples. Instruments calibrated with iron/copper- 
nickel thermocouples are not suitable for use with 
sterilizers because of corrosion problems ( The 
use of resistance elements is impracticable for 
testing some sterilizers ). Details of the Indian 
Standard requirements are given in Table 9. 
They relate to the instruments only, that is, they 
do not allow for errors arising from the thermo- 
couples. Facts relating to accuracy of measurement 
achieved in practice are given in subsequent 
paragraphs ( see also B-7. 1.6 ). 

B-7. 1.3 The two instruments will have the 
intrinsic accuracy stated in Table 9 only under 
the reference conditions stated in Table 10. 

B-7. 1.4 The accuracy of the two instruments 
is permitted to vary from the values in column 
5 of Table 9 for wider ranges in the reference 
conditions. The additional error permitted by the 
extreme limits is shown in Table 11 for the more 
usual influence quantities. 

Typical values are quoted in Table 11 for the 
permissible limit of error for automatic cold 
junction compensation. 

B-7.1.5 The permissible errors may be aggre- 
gated statistically but the instrument should be 
fitted with span and zero adjustment controls for 
the purpose of site calibration ( see Note ). The 
errors shown in Table 11 are the maximum 
allowable; most instruments are capable of achiev- 
ing greater accuracy ( see B-7.1.6 ). 

Note — Defined as the range within which the 
measured quantity may be varied without initiating a 
movement of the indicating or recording device. 



28 



15:12430-1987 



TABLE 9 SPECIFICATION FOR TEMPERATURE RECORDERS REQUIRED FOR TEST PPUROSES 

(Clauses B-7.1.2, B-7.1.3 and B-7.1.4) 



Duty 



(1) 

1. Commissioning, re- 
commissioning and 
yearly testing of 
fluids and hot air 
sterilizers 

2. Commissioning, re- 
commissioning and 
yearly testing of 
other sterilizers 

3. Other periodic test- 
ing of fluids and hot 
air sterilizers 

4. Other periodic test- 
ing of other sterili- 
zers 



Usual 


Minimum 


Minimum 


INTRINSIC 


Dead 


Chart 


Number 


Chart 


E RROR, % 


Band, % 


Width, 


OF 


Spekd, 


OF Scale 


OF Scale 


mm 


Channels 


mm/min 


Span- 


Span 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


250 


12 


5 


0-5 


0'25 



250 



100 



100 



20 



20 



0-5 



I'O 



I'O 



0-25 

0'5 

0-5 



TABLE 10 SOME BASIC REFERENCE 

CONDITIONS FOR INSTRUMENTS 

( Clause B-7.1.3 ) 



Insluenoe 


Reference Con- 


Tolerance for 


Quantity 


dition ( Unless 


A Single Refe- 




Otherwise 


rence Value 




Stated ) 




(I) 


(2) 


(3) 


Ambient tempera- 


20''C 


±1°G 


ture 






Relative humidity 


soy- 


40 to 600/^ 


Supply voltage 


Rated 


±1% 



B-7.1.6 The instrument should be calibrated 
at the test site before a test is commenced. When 
this is done, the combined error arising from 
instrument and thermocouple is unlikely to exceed 
0-75°G ( see Note ) for the sterilizer engineer's 
instrument. 

Note — This error may be increased as a result of 
cold junction compensation error. The importance of 
stable temperatures and avoidance of draught is 
emphasized. 



B-7.1.7 Ideally, these instruments should have 
interchangeable scales and circuitry, calibrated 
0-l50°G and 50-200°G, with the range change 
made, preferably, by an integral switch. If, for 
any reason, it is proposed to use a single scale 
instrument, this should be calibrated 0-200°C. 

B- 7.1.8 The instrument should provide, simul- 
taneously, a scale indication and a permanent 
and immediately visible record with the cover 
closed. 

B-7.1.9 The record should be colour coded or 
colour coded and numbered. Six colours are 
usually adequate provided they are printed in two 
different symbols. 

B-7.1.10 Each instrument should be used only 
with the class of thermocouples for which it is 
calibrated. 

B-7.1.11 The commissioning, re-commissioning 
and annual test requirement can best be met by 
a 12-channel recorder. It may be used for all 
types of sterilizers. For all periodic testing, except 
the annual test, a 3-channel instrument may be 
used. 



TABLE 11 ADDITIONAL ERROR PERMITTED FOR EXTREME LIMITS 



Influence 
Quantity 



(1) 
Ambient temperature 

Rated voltage of power 

supply 
Automatic cold junction 

compensation 



( Clauses B-7.1.4 and B-7. 1.5) 



LjMIT OF 
PERMISSIBLE 

Range 



(2) 
±10°C 
-1-5 to -15% 



Additional Permissible Error 

AT Limit of Pebmissible Range of 

A Single Influence Quantity 



Commissioning 


Periodic Testing 


Instruments 


Instruments 


( % of scale span ) 


( % of scale span ) 


(3) 


(4) 


O'l 


0'2 


125 


0-25 


0'04°C 


0'04°C 


per deg change 


per deg change 



29 



IS .• 12430 - 1987 



B-7.1.12 The 12-channel instruments are all 
very expensive, very large and very heavy. 

B-7.1 .13 All these instruments need considera- 
ble care in handling and transport if they are to 
maintain their accuracy; they deteriorate if not 
regularly used and for this reason, should not 
normally be held at hospital or district level. 

B-7.2 Particular Details of 12-Channel Tem- 
perature Recorder 

B-7.2.1 The instrument should have a maxi- 
mum dotting interval of 3 seconds per point, that 
is, a rated duration of cycle not exceeding 36 
seconds when recording 12-channels. 

B-7.2.2 When a test requires fewer channels 
than those available in the instrument, it is desir- 
able to ensure that the specified dotting interval 
between monitored positions is not exceeded, that 
is, when three positions are to be monitored, the 
effective scan time does not exceed 9 seconds, or 
if two positions are to be monitored, the effective 
scan time does not exceed 6 seconds. It is possi- 
ble to accomplish this by various means, ' such 
as: 

a) Using one thermocouple for each monitor- 
ed position and inter-connecting channels 
in parallel groups by identical thermo- 
couple wire, and 

b) Changing printed circuit boards in the 
instrument ( the instrument should be re- 
calibrated whene\/er a printed circuit board 
is changed ). 

B-7.2.3 In all cases, it is helpful if the printing 
head can be changed so that each record is in 
one colour only ( although it may be made up of 
a variety of symbols ). 

B-7.3 Particular Details of 3>Ghannel 
Temperature Recorder 

B-7.3.1 The instrument should have a maxi- 
mum dotting interval of 10 seconds per point, 
that is the total rated duration of cycle not 
exceeding 30 seconds when recording 3-channels. 
If the instrument is required to monitor one or 
two positions, the rated duration of the cycle 
should be reduced to 10 or 20 seconds, preferably 
by cross-connecting the channels in parallel or 
alternatively, by using more than one thermo- 
couple to monitor one position. In either case, it 
is helpful if the printing head can be changed so 
that each record is in one colour only. 

B-7.3.2 When monitoring two points only, for 
example, the drain and the centre of the pack in 
porous load tests, it is desirable that the pack and 
not the drain is recorded twice in a J-channel 
scan. 

B-7.3.3 There is some merit in using a conti- 
nuous trace instrument for these tests. 



B-7.4 Test Thermometers 

B-7.4.1 Thermometers should be laboratory 
thermometers and of the partial immersion type. 
The most appropriate instruments will be of the 
following ranges: 

a) 2 to 52°G, 

b) 48 to 102''C, 

c) 98 to 152°G, and 

d) 123 to 177°a 

They should be specified as having a stem 
diameter of not less than 7-0 mm. They are 
designed for 125 mm immersion and are 405 mm 
long. 

WARNING— NO M ERCU RY-I N -GLASS 
THERMOMETER SHOULD BE USED IN- 
SIDE A STEAM CHAMBER. 

B-7.5 Test Pressure Gauges 

B-7.5.1 These may be Bourdon test gauges. If 
they are not designed for direct connection to 
steam at 2-6 bar, they should be connected via a 
syphon. They should be calibrated to 150 mbar 
absolute and —1 bar to for vacuum gauges and 
Oto2'5 bar for pressure gauges. They should be 
scaled as shown in Table 12. 



TABLE 12 SCALES FOR TEST PRESSURE 
GAUGES ( DIAL TYPE ) 



Sc aL E 


G RADUATIONS 


(1) 


(2) 


to 150 mbar absolute 


0-5 mbar 


- 1 tD bar 


5 mbar 


Oto2 5bar 


20 mbar 


- 1 to 4 bar 


25 mbar 



B-7.5.2 The minimum scale length should be 
260 mm and the nominal diameter shall be not 
less than 150 mm. They should be tested by a 
recognized testing laboratory and the error should 
not exceed 0'25 percent of the maximum scale 
range. Other test gauges may be used provided 
they are suitable for the purpose and provided 
they are no less accurate than what is prescribed 
for Bourdon test gauges. 

B-7.6 Construction and Use of Thermo- 
couples 

B-7.6.1 Thermocouples should conform to 
IS: 7358-1984. 



^Specification for thermocouples ( fif'st revision ] 



30 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



B-7.6.2 It is essential to use thermocouple wire 
of known output which has previously been 
checked off site. This problem of purchasing pre- 
sents difficulties and draws attention to the 
inherent variations in performance of every reel 
of thermocouple wire and a part thereof, as well 
as the errors arising from imperfections in the 
actual jointing techniques. 

B-7.6.3 Thermocouple wire is available, mark- 
ed to show the limits of variation of the red from 
the figures given in the relevant Indian Stand- 
ard. The variation will have been established by 
the manufacturer by testing samples from both 
ends of the full reel, and for 'selected' wire this 
is typically of the order of 0-015 millivolts ( for 
copper/ constantan ) which is equivalent to 0'4°G 
at 20°C and0-3°G at 134°C. 'Selected' rather than 
'standard wire should be used for this reason. 

B-7.6.4 The wire should be single strand, not 
exceeding 0-7 mm in diameter over the covering, 
and single core or twin core. Tracking of steam 
along the wire to the centre of the Bowie/Dick 
tape test pack may be a problem with the bulkier 
twin core wire, thus defeating the object of the 
test. If it is used, it will be necessary to take extra 
care to minimize disturbance of the towels. 
Steam or fluid may be forced through the wire 
sheath, particularly fluid when thermocouples are 
used in bottles. The sheath should be stripped 
back for a few inches before connecting the wires 
to the recorder so that any droplets forming 
where the sheath has been terminated, fall clear 



of the instrument. Twin core wire is usually 
preferred because it is easier to handle and is 
more durable than single core wire. 

B-7.6.5 Thermocouple should preferably be 
argon-arc welded or microwelded; alternatively, 
they may be suitably cleaned and twisted, or 
crimped together with purpose-made ferrules, to 
form the hot junction. Brazing, silver brazing and 
welding with filler rods may be no more reliable 
in respect of accuracy than twisting or crimping. 
If welding is not employed ( and it rarely is in 
the field), it is a good practice to use new thermo- 
couples each time a sterilizer is monitored. If 
reasonable care is taken, specially with outer 
sheathed wire, it is often possible to re-use the 
wire several times, provided any twisted or crimp- 
ed joints are re-made. Thermocouples should not 
be fitted with a heat sink, neither should they be 
'slugged'. 

B-7.6.6 Three typical methods of introducing 
thermocouples into sterilizer chambers are illus- 
trated in Fig. 2, 3 and 4. Some manufacturers 
adopt other solutions, some of which are to be 
discouraged because they prevent the removal of 
individual thermocouples. In those machines 
having no thermocouple entry socket, entry may 
be made via a tee which can usually be inserted 
into a service entry pipe ( for example, steam 
supply pipe ) to the chamber. The thermocouples 
should not be introduced through the door seal 
except as the last resort. 



METAL BACKING DISC DRILLED 
FOR THERMOCOUPLES 

SILICONE RUBBER VALVE SEAT 
DRILLED FOR THERMOCOUPLES 

RUBBER WASHER 



WASHER BRAZED IN POSITIOK 
min. 19 mm HOLE 



'THERMOCOUPLE LEADS 




Fig. 2 Method of Introducing Thermocouples into Sterilizer 
Suitable for Up to 12 Twin Core Thermocouples 



Chamber 



31 



15:12430.1987 



THERMOCOUPLE LEADS 
BACKING WASHER 
No. le BUNG 




Fig. 3 Method of Introducing Thermocouples into Sterilizer Chamber 
Suitable for Up to 6 Twin Core Thermocouples 



B-7.6.7 Entry of thermocouples through bottle 
caps may be made by means of a trocar and 
cannula; any other suitable method may be used. 
It is essential that the sealing of the bottle remains 
effective with the thermocouples in position. 

B-8. CALIBRATION OF TESTING 

INSTRUMENTS AT STERILIZER TEST 
SITE— GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

B-8.1 A functional test of the temperature recor- 
der should be carried out on site as recommended 
by the makers after any range change, and after 
span and zero adjustment ( see B-7.1.5 ) by one 
of the following methods: 

a) Thermocouple immersed in oil bath, 

b) Potentiometer and standard cell, and 

c) Millivolt source. 

Note — The technique employing thermocouples 
immersed in boiling water is only of use for rough 
checking purposes: it may be affected by the pH of 
water. If the method has to be adopted, the calibration 
should be checked against a standard thermometer, 
immersed with the thermocouples, using distilled or 
purified water. The normal extremes of atmospheric 
pressure result in a change in the boiling point of 
approximately ±2°C. Also, any increase of 150 m 
above mean sea level will reduce the boiling point by 
approximately UB'C. 

B-8.2 All electronic test instruments should be 
allowed a period of at least 2 hours within the 
test site environment to enable the instruments to 
stabilize with the mains switched on. 

B-8.3 All thermocouples used should be checked 
again after completion ofthe tests on the sterilizer 
before they are disconnected from the instrument 
( see B-13.1 ). 



B-9. CALIBRATION OF TEST 

INSTRUMENTS BY OIL BATH 

B-9.1 There are two main versions of the oil bath; 
the first is one in which the oil is in a bath, 
usually, with a magnetic stirrer or fluid circulator, 
and the second, which is to be preferred, where 
the oil is held in pockets in a large, electrically 
heated aluminium block. 

The oil is normally a silicon fluid, for example, 
that used for the basic performance test for hot 
air sterilizers ( see Appendix N ). 

N OTE — If the thermocouples are not welded, there 
may be difficulty in achieving the prospective degree 
of accuracy because of the insulating property of the 
oil. For this reason, additional care is required if 
mechanical jointing is proposed, and this is the reason 
why microwelding or argon-arc welding is the preferred 
method ( see B-7.6.5 ). 

B-9.2 The recorder is first adjusted in accordance 
with the maker's instructions. This usually in- 
volves zero and span adjustments. Any range 
change should be effected before these adjust- 
ments are made. 

B-9.3 The thermocouples are immersed in heated 
oil bath together with a standard thermometer. 
Support clamps are available and may be used 
with advantage to hold the thermocouples and 
thermometer closely together. The stirrer should 
be used to maintain a uniform oil temperature, 
and readings should be taken with the temperature 
on a rising cycle and at the sterilizing tempera- 
ture. It may be necessary to add small quantities 
of cold oil to ensure that the readings are taken 
with rising rather than falling oil temperature. 



32 



15:12430- 198 7 



Note — In practice, this is difficult to effect and it 
may be more convenient at this stage to checl< one of 
the thermocouples only ( see B-13.1). 

B-9.4 The electrically heated block form of oil 
bath has the advantage of greater portability since 
it is necessary only to use sufficient oil to ensure 
intimate contact between thermocouples, the 
standard thermometer and the test block. 

B-9.5 The oil-bath method of calibration also 
suffers from the lack of uniformity in the ther- 
mocouple wire referred to in B-7.6.2. The inherent 
inaccuracy of the potentiometer is eliminated but 
both the hysteresis of the mercury and glass 
thermometer, and the temperature gradient within 



the oil, can give rise to errors unless great care 
and skill are applied. If these errors can be 
eliminated or discounted, the limits of accuracy 
are those imposed only by the dead band of the 
recorder. 

8-10. CALIBRATION OF TEST 

INSTRUMENT BY POTENTIOMETER 
AND STANDARD CELL 

B-10.1 -The potentiometer used for this purpose 
should have an error not exceeding O'l percent 
of the scale range, or 5 microvolts, whichever is 
greater. 




■] 



SECTION A-A 



JUBILEE CLIP 

not shown in section B-B 



SCREWED TO SUIT 
RUBBER DISC 
RUBBER WASHER 




THERMOCOUPLE' LEADS 

SECTION B-B 



Fig. 4 Method of Introducing Thermocouples into Sterilizer Chamber 
Suitable for Up to 12 Thermocouples of Either Twin or Single Core Wire 



53 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



B-10.2 It must first be standardized in accordance 
with the maker's recommendations. This usually 
involves adjustment of the cold junction tempera- 
ture setting in accordance with the reading of a 
thermometer on the instrument itself. The 
potentiometer isthen set to give a millivolt output 
corresponding to the sterilizing temperature of the 
test. 

B-10.3 The recorder is then adjusted in 
accordance with the maker's recommendations 
{see B-8.1). The millivolt output from the potentio- 
meter is connected to the input terminals of one 
channel on the recorder and the instrument is 
adjusted in accordance with the maker's instruc- 
tions so that it indicates 134°C. 

B-10.4 In order to minimize the effect of the 
inherent error of the thermocouples, it is desirable 
to make up ( off the sterilizer site ) a set ( of 12 
or 3 plus two matching spares ) from the same 
reel of wire and chosen by test against a potentio- 
meter so that they have, as near as possible, an 
identical performance. 

B-10.5 The average emf output of the set thermo- 
couples should be measured by the potentio- 
meter, with one of them attached to a standard 
thermometer in an oil bath at the sterilizing 
temperature ( see B-9.1 to B-9.5). For example, 
with the oil bath at 134°G, the difference between 
the thermocouple emf and the Indian Standard 
thermocouple emf is found to be 0-012 mV 
(5-131mV measured, 5-1 19 mV standard ).This 
variation is actually equivalent to +0-25°C. The 
recorder should then be re-set, on the sterilizer 
site, to indicate 134°C with an input of 5-13linV 
from the potentiometer ( that is, to indicate 
133-75°C at 5-119 mV). 

B-10.6 It is recognized that in many instances, it 
will not be practicable to prepare thermocouples 
off the sterilizing site and, in such cases, the cali- 
bration of the recorder should be done by one of 
the other methods referred to in B-8.1. 

B-10.7 The limits of accuracy of calibration by 
the potentiometer method are a combination of 
those imposed by the accuracy of the potentio- 
meter itself and the dead band of the recording 
instrument. The potentiometer method may be 
unsuitable for recorders having a wide dead band 
( that is, greater than 0-15 percent ) because the 
combined errors may be unacceptable. A dead 
band width of 0-15 percent of scale span is 
acceptable. 

B-11. CALIBRATION OF TEST 

INSTRUMENT BY MILLIVOLT 
SOURCE 

B-11.1 A standard laboratory source is used for 
this purpose in lieu of the potentiometer and the 
standard cell. The procedure to be followed is 
similar to that in B-10.1 to B-10.7. 



B-12. CALIBRATION AND MAINTENANCE 
OF TESTING INSTRUMENTS OFF 
SITE 

B-12.1 Routine calibration of temperature recor- 
ders should be carried out with a potentiometer 
and standard cells designed for the purpose. The 
instruments should be re-calibrated by the makers 
or by an appropriate standards laboratory at six- 
monthly or at closer intervals, as suggested by the 
manufacturers. 

B-12.2 Routine checking of accuracy of the test 
pressure gauges should be carried out by a reco- 
gnized testing laboratory. 

B-12.3 Maintenance of temperature recorders 
should be carried out in accordance with the 
makers instructions and should be followed by 
recall bration as recommended by them. 

B-13. CALIBRATION OF INSTRUMENT ON 
SITE FOR TEST PURPOSES 

B-13.1 The following procedure has been found 
satisfactory: 

a) Calibrate the test instrument and one of 
the thermocouples by the oil bath method 
given in B-9.1 to B-9.5 at the sterilizer 
temperature expected prior to arrival on 
site. Ideally, this should be undertaken in 
similar ambient conditions to those expect- 
ed on site. Adjust recorder as required. 

b) Check this calibration with a millivolt 
source as described in B-11.1 and note the 
indicated temperature difference from that 
obtained with the oil bath. This is the 
thermocouple error which should be 
noted. 

c) At site, apply millivolt source to recorder 
and check the reading obtained previouslv 
as a check on the recorder and the milli- 
volt source 

d) Connect all the thermocouples and expose 
the hot junctions of the bundle in the 
chamber space to check tracking of the 
group at the sterilizing temperature. The 
thermocouple error should be unchanged 
from that obtained off site. 

e) If discrepancies are noted, it may be 
necessary to check individual calibration 
with the oil bath ( on or off site ) or check 
those thermocouples which produce anoma- 
lous readings. 

Note -The use of the millivolt source at the 
beginning and the end of a series of testsproduces 
a checl< &the continuing integrity of the instru- 
mentation; similarly, the thermocouple bundle 
should be exposed to steam in the chamber to 
checl< 'tracking'. 



34 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



B-13.2 Tanperature arors are often observed 
when ungrounded thermocouples are placed in 
solutions in glass or plastic containers. These 
errors occur most frequently when water is the 
heating medium. In this situation, the solution in 
the container and the measuring junction should 
be insulated from ground. Grounding the 
thermocouple junction will usually eliminate this 
error. In some sterilizer measurement applica- 
tions, it is a common practice to ground all 
thermocouples. 

B-13.3 The following points should betaken care 
of for thermocouples on PPM programme and for 
validation of the instrument and sterilizing cycles: 

a) Select the proper thermocouple wire for 
the application. Wire of the proper size, 
grade and type of insulation is required, 
for accurate reading. 

b) Choose a measuring unit ( potentiometer, 
etc ), which is appropriate to that steriliz- 
ing instrument and appropriate for the 
application; and do not use it outside its 
limits. 

c) Check the calibration of the measuring 
system before and after the validation tests 
and calibrate the system in accordance 
with the requirements. 



d) Use single unbroken lengths of wire from 
measuring juction to potentiometer. When 
this is not possible, locate connectors in an 
environment of constant ambient tempera- 
ture 

e) Check the measuring junction ( that is, its 
size and arrangements ) so that the condi- 
tions of constant temperature exist for a 
short distance away 'from the junction 
along both thermocouple wires. 

f ) Track down and correct errors in thermo- 
couples during calibration, checking before 
beginning validation and PPM. Zeroing 
out errors may satisfy a calibration require- 
ment but may lead to problems during 
testing programme and PPM. 

g) Protect the measuring junction and lead 
wire against physical abuse. Straining and 
sliding with accompanying cold working 
will change thermocouples' thermoelectric 
power and may lead to errors of tempera- 
ture gradient. 

h) Keep a long of calibration and measure- 
ment activities as well as problems and 
their solutions. 

j) Make required repeated calibration and 
prevalidation tests prior ( and with PPM ) 
to validation. 



APPENDIX C 

( Clause 2.5 ) 

PLANNING INFORMATION 



C-l. GENERAL 

C-i.l Information given in this appendix is 
intended as a general guide for initial planning 
purposes. There are wide variations between 
actual dimensions, weights and service require- 
ments of different makes of sterilizers. The actual 
requirements of the machines to be installed 
should be established before detailed planning is 
undertaken because they can differ widely from 
manufacturer to manufacturer for a given size of 
sterilizer. 

C-1.2 The provision of adequate clearance around 
machines, giving access for maintenace, is essen- 
tial. Not less than the minimum clearance should 
be provided in all cases although some manufac- 
turers may claim that smaller clearances are 
permissible. The minimum clearance should be 
900 mm around all parts to which access 'for 
routine maintenance is necessary ( see Fig. 5 and 
Table 13). 

C-1.3 Particular care should be taken to ensure 
that sufficient clearance is allowed for large 
items, such as vacuum pumps, to be withdrawn 
from the steri I i zer frames. 

C-1.4 Attention is drawn to the need for adequate 
ventilation of the area near the sterilizers to 



remove the heat emitted. The values in Table 14 
are for guidance only. 

C-l. 5 Service pipework, for example, steam and 
water pipes, should not be installed over the top 
of a sterilizer but kept to a wall away from the 
sterilizer. The run-outs to individual sterilizers 
should be at high level. Additional head room 
may be required with this arrangement to permit 
removal of a sterilizer without disturbance of the 
fixed pipework. 

C-1.6 Some useful information in connection with 
the design of services for sterilizers is given in 
Table 15. 

C-2.MINIMUM PLANNING DIMENSIONS 

C-2.1 The following notes refer to Fig. 5 and to 
Table 13 below: 

a) Dimension B does not include the project- 
ing parts associated with sideways sliding 
doors. In most cases, such projections are 
confined to the front end of the machine 
and can be accommodated within the 
recommended dimension A without imped- 
i ng access for mai ntenance. 



35 



18:12430- 1987 



AIR . 
OUT ik 



IW v\\\|\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\< > 



PUMPS AND 
EQUIPMENT 
CAN BE L-H 
OR R.H. SIDE 
OR AT REAR 




SINGLE STERILIZER 




-ACCESS F 
MAINTENANCE 
AND TESTING 



AIR IN AT LOW LEVEL 
UNDER STERILIZER, 
ALTERNATIVE I N D E PEItUOBtlflT 
AIR SUPPLY TO PLAHUT W3JKD1IM 



STERILIZER GROUP 



MINIMUM CLEARANCE 
2m OR TWICE 
LENGTH OF LOADING 
CARRIAGE ETC. 



Fig. 5 Typical Planning Dimensions ( Not to Scale ) 



36 







TABLE 13 


MINIMUM PLANNING 


DIMENSIONS FOR TYPICAL SIZES OF STERILIZERS 












( Clauses C 


-1.2andC-2.1) 










Type of 


Size 


Nominal 




Dimensions as in 


Fig. 5 




Weight 


POBTAOB FOR INSTALLATION/ 




Stebilizeb. 


mm 


Capacity 

Litres 






mm 






( Total ) 
kg 


Removal ( Nominal ) 
„_ _^ .^ _^ _„ — . 








I 

A* 


B 


C 


D 


Height 


1 V 

Minimum WBiGHit 






















Dimensions kg 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9; 


(10) (11) 




Porous loads 


660 dia X 760t 


280 


900 


1300 


1 ooog 


3 000 


2 600 


2 040 


1-3 X 1-0 X 1-5 1000 






660 X 660 X 660 


300 


900 


1100- 
1200 


1 500 


1000 


2 200 


600-1 500 


2'0 X I'O X 1-5 600-1 500 






910 X 660 X 660 


400 


900 


1400 


1 700 


1000 


2 200 


650-1 800 


r9 X ro X 1'5 650-1 800 






910 X 660 X 990 


600 


900 


1400 


2 100 


1000 


2 200 


1 100-1 800 


2'0 X 1'5 X 2-2 1 000-1 800 






910 X 660 X 1 320 


800 


900 


1400 


2 100 


1 200 


2 200 


1 100-1600 


1-8 X 1'4 X 2'0 950-1 600 




Bottled fluids 


910 X 660 X 660 


400 - 


900 


1200- 
1400 


1 700 


1 000 


2 100 


650-1 800 


21 X 1-6 X 1-9 650-1 650 






910 X 660 X 990 


600 


900 


1900 


1 700 


1 000- 
1 50011 


2100 


1 100-2 000 


21 X 1 -5 X 2'3 900- 1900 






910 X 660 X 1320 


800 


900 


1900 


2 400 


1000- 
1 50011 


2 100 


1 100-2 100 


2'1 X 1-5 X 2'6 950-2 000 






910 X 660 X 1600 


970 


900 


1600 


2 300 


1 000 


1 800 


2 540 


2-0 X 1'2 X 2'4 




Unwrapped in- 


300 dia X 500 


35 


600 


690 


900 


900 


1 800 


350 "1 






struments and 

unwrapped 

utensils 


510 dia X 510 
450 dia X 760 
510 dia X 910 


100 
130 
180 


900 
900 
900 


1000 
1000 

1000 


1 000 
1 500 
1 700 


1888 

1 000 


2 000 


400--^ [ 
550 1 


Not normally 
brol<en down 






510 X 510 X 910 


240 


900 


1000 


1 700 


1 000 


1 900 


750 J 





♦Dimension 'A' should include provision for a sliding door ( where appropriate ), typically chamber width plus 450 mm. 

fThere may be considerable variation in weight, depending upon the manufacturer. 

|The figures 660 dia X 760 relate to vertical chamber machine. 

§Excluding tracks for containers for vertical chamber machine. 

IIThis dimension includes the width of compressor plus 600 mm clearance between the wall and the sterilizer. 



in 



M 

O 



ee 



IS : 12430- 1987 



b) The minimum worl<ing lieiglit required for 
maintenance is 2 700 mm above floor level. 

c) The dimensions quoted are also applicable 
to free standing units if allowance is made 
for the casing. 

d) Extra allowance must be made for built-in 
or free standing steam generators when 
these have to be provided in addition. 

e) Spacing should be such that it is possible 
to replace any sterilizer without disturbing 
others in the same installation. In some 
cases, this will entail an increase in dimen- 
sion D. 

f ) The building and room access doors should 



be of a type and size which will permit 
passage of the equipment. 

q) A single door will be required in the front 
pane! if there is no other direct route bet- 
ween the plant room and the front of the 
sterilizer(s). 

h) When sterilizers with vertical sliding doors 
are used, the height of the base of the 
chamber above finished floor level is usually 
higher than with machines having hinged 
or horizontally sliding doors. 

j) Break tanks, as may be required in 7.6.1, 
are not shown in these drawings. 

k) Fire compartmentations should be consi- 
dered. 



TABLE 14 HEAT EMISSION FOR ALL TYPES OF STERILIZER 
( Clause c- 1.4) 







SIZE 




Nominal 
Capacity 


Heat Emission ( Avkeage ) to SriKKOTJNDjNGs at 
20°C (Excluding Emission from Load ) 












t 
Heat Emission 
to User Space 


Heat Emission 
to Plant Room 


Total Heat 
Emission 






(1) 




(2) 


(3) 




(4) 


(5) 






mm 




litres 


kW 




kW 


kW 


10. 




dia X 


510 


100 


cs 




1'5 


20 


450 




dia X 


760 


130 


0-5 




rs 


2-0 


510 




did X 


910 


180 


0-5 




2'0 


2-5 


510 


X 


510 X 


910 


240 


0-5 




2-5 


3-0 


660 


X 


660 X 


660 


300 


0'5 




3'0 


3'5 


910 


X 


660 X 


660 


400 


1-0 




3.5 


4'5 


910 


X 


660 X 


990 


600 


1-0 




4-5 


5'5 


910 


X 


660 X 


1320 


800 


1-0 




6-0 


7-0 


910 


X 


660 X 


1600 


970 


ro 




7'5 


8'5 



N OTE 1 — The figures include emission from pipework fitted to the sterilizer but do not allow for excessive 
lengths of steam pipe manifold. 

Note 2 — The total heat emission given is the maximum which might be expected. The proportion of hfat 
emitted to the user space varies with the type and the make of machine. These figures should, therefore, be used 
as a guide only and the advice of the manufacturer should be sought. 

N OTE 3 — The heat emission to the user space is given for a sterilizer with the door normally closed, if the 
door is left open for a significant time with the steam jacket pressurized, the heat emission to the user space will be 
considerably increased. 

N OTE 4 — The heat emission to the user space is greatly reduced, and the heat emission to the plant room is 
correspondingly increased if the sterilizer door is mounted behind the fascia panel. 



APPENDIX D 

[Clauses 2.7, 2.9, 7.11.5, 9.1.2, 10.1.2, 10.2.2, 10.3, 10.4(d), 10.5.5, 10.15.1(b), 
10.15.2, B-4.12, G-1.1, H -7.1, L-1.1, L-2.1, L-5.1 and M -1.1 ] 

COMMISSIONING, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF STERILIZERS 



D-l. INTRODUCTION 

D-I.l It is of utmost importance that all sterilizers 
are both effective in reaching the performance 
required for sterilization of loads and safe in 
operation. 



D-1.2 For assurance on these points, responsibili- 
ties rest variously with the contractor who installs 
the machine, and the sterilizer engineer. This 
appendix identifies duties and responsibilities of 
those concerned and describes the records which 
should be kept. 



38 



15:12430- 1987 



D-1.3 When a new installation is to be handed 
over in full working order, it is the contractor's 
duty to carry out the commissioning and to per- 
form any demonstration which is necessary before 
the sterilizer may be accepted for use. 

D-1.4 A consultant microbiologist normally exer- 
cises clinical responsibility in CSSD. It is current 
policy to recommend such oversight in any steri- 
lizing unit. 

D-2. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

D-2.lThe Sterilizer Engineer 

D-2.1.1 The person should have direct contact 
with the responsible consultant microbiologist and 
principal pharmacist for quality control in the 
region. His duties in respect of all sterilizers are 
as follows: 

a) Advising on the choice of sterilizer in con- 
junction with the appropriate hospital staff 
advising upon the services requirements; 

b) Advising on the contract details, including 
specification and drawings, and test loads 
for commissioning; 

c) Acting as contract supervising officer (CSO) 
where so nominated, for the purpose of 
supervising the commissioning and accep- 
tance tests in accordance with the contract 
requirements; 

d) Supervising or executing annual perfor- 
mance tests; 

e) Superivising or executing re-commissioning 
of a sterilizer after it has been withdrawn 
from service for the repair of a serious 
defect or for the statutory two-yearly 
inspection of pressure vessels, or for modi- 
fication or for change of duty; 

f) Examining the records of all other perio- 
dical tests, faults and unscheduled main- 
tenance and advising, where necessary, on 
any action which appears to be required 
as a result; 

g) Certifying, after action as in (d) or (e) 
above, that the performance complies with 
that specified when the sterilizer was 
ordered and with any subsequently agreed 
variations, and approving, in agreement 
with the microbiologist and the operator, 
that the sterilizer is fit for service after 
such tests; 

h) Advising the operator upon the application 
of master temperature record(s) [ MTR 
(s) ] to particular sterilizers/ processes and 
the interpretation of such records; 

j) Advising upon the content of the mainte- 
nance schedules applicable to each steri- 
lizer; 



k) Advising upon any sterilizer maintenace 
;ontract and on the general procedure to 
be adopted for calling the manufacturer's 
service engineers in emergencies; 

m) Confirming the proper engineering records 
arising from all commissioning and routine 
tests and checks are kept for each sterili- 
zer; 

N OTE — The form and contents of the records 
should be agreed between the sterilizer engineer, 
and the operator. In the case of sterilizers used 
in the processing of medicinal products, the form 
of these records should also be agreed by both 
{see D-2.3). 

n) Examining the plant history records and 
confirming that the agreed periodic testing 
and maintenance procedures, have been 
undertaken; 

P) Advising the operator in conjunction with 
the contractor and the maintenance engi- 
neer upon the method of operating the 
sterilizer; 

q) Advising on which types of faults are to be 
considered as serious ( see D-8.7.3 ). 

r) Establishing liaison with the maintenance 
engineer and the operator to ensure the 
continuing satisfactory performance of the 
sterilizers, including engineering advice on 
specific problems, such as wet loads on 
porous load sterilizers; 

s) Supervising maintenance tasks and tests, 
ensuring that faults are rectified, and 
seeking the assistance of the operator where 
necessary; 

Note — Maintenance will include cleaning the 
door joints and seals when these are not readily 
accessible to the operator. 

t) Responsibility for the upkeep of the plant 
history record and ensuring that the 
records are kept on the approved test 
report forms; 

u) Executing quarterly and half yearly tests; 

Note — These may, if mutually convenient, 
be undertaken by the operator. 

v) Co-operating with the operator upon the 
method of operating the sterilizer; 

w) Establishing liaison with the operator to 
ensure the continuing satisfactory perfor- 
mance of the sterilizers; 

Note — This will include approving, in 
advance, all the procedures for calling in the 
manufacturer's service engineers in emergencies . 

x) Reviewing weekly, together with the 
operator, the sterilizer performance and 
records for the previous week, comparing 
all temperature recorder charts ( TRGs ) 
with the MTRs and investigating the cause 
of any abnormality; 



39 



I S : 12430 - 1987 



y) Holding all keys requira:! for access to or 
control of the sterilizers, except those 
necessary for the operation of the sterili- 
zers, and the duplicates of the keys neces- 
sary for the operation of the sterilizers; and 

z) Issuing maintenance certificates for each 
sterilizer at agreed intervals to the operator. 

D-2.2 The Operator 

D -2.2.1 The duties of the operator are as 
follows: 

a) Reporting to the engineer any breakdown 
of sterilizing plant which may affect the 
hospital service; 

b) Agreeing on the operating procedure with 
the sterilizer engineer and establishing 
liaison with him to ensure the continuing 
satisfactory performance of the sterilizers; 

c) Reporting to the engineer immediately if 
there is any malfunction or suspected 
malfunction of a sterilizer, including; 

1) A failure to satisfy any approved routine 
test ( such as the Bowie/Dick tape test 
for porous load sterilizers ), 

2) Any accident or incident involving the 
machine, and 

3) Any other feature of a sterilizer per- 
formance or behaviour which suggests 
that something may have happened to 
cause a change from the established 
normal behaviour of the machine. 

d) Co-operating with the maintenance 
engineer to ensure that sterilizers are made 
available for routine maintenance and 
periodic testing; 

e) Examining, at least daily, all TRCs and 
comparing them with the MTR for the 
sterilizer; 

f) Supervising the use of the sterilizer pro- 
cessing log ( see D-8.8.1 to D-8.8.5 ); 

g) Ensuring that the daily maintenance tasks 
are carried out; 

h) Reviewing weekly, together with the main- 
tenance engineer, the sterilizer perfor- 
mance and the records for the previous 
week and comparing all TRCs with the 
MTRs, assisting as necessary in the 
investigation of the cause of any abnor- 
mality; 

j) Holding those keys necessary for the 
operation of the sterilizers, as agreed with 
the engineer; 

k) Ensuring that sufficient forms, charts or 
record books, other than those held by the 
engineers, are readily available since no 
machine may be operated without a record 
of performance being kept; 



m) Ensuring the satisfactory performance of 
the daily Bowie/Dick tape test for each 
porous load sterilizer, examining the result 
and authorizing the use of the sterilizer, if 
appropriate; 

n) Witnessing the leak rate test for each por- 
ous load sterilizer; 

P) Ensuring that he or she is in possession of 
a valid maintenance certificate for each 
sterilizer in use ( see D-6.1 ) ; 

q) Operation of the sterilizer, including the 
following: 

1) Normal housekeeping procedures and 
those daily maintenance tasks on the 
sterilizer which are appropriate for an 
operator to carry out, such as cleaning 
the chamber, the chamber drain, the 
door joints and seals ( where these are 
readily accessible to the operator ), 
removing broken glass, labels and 
debris; 

Note — These tasks should be sche- 
duled by the operator and agreed upon with 
the sterilizer engineer. 

2) Exchanging charts on chart recorders 
and replenishing ink; 

3) Completing entries in the sterilizer 
processing log and on TRCs; 

r) Ensuring that no sterilizer load is released 
for use until the relevant records have 
been checked and approved; and 

Note — These records will include the 
TRC when a recorder is fitted and, where 
relevant, the appropriate entries in the steri- 
lizer processing log. 

s) Ensuring compliance with the procedure 
required in relation to the manufacture of 
pharmaceutical products. 



u-3. DOCUMENTATION 
PROCEDURES 



AND 



D-3.1 In the context of this document, a batch 
is defined as the contents of one load of a steri- 
lizer. 

D-3.2 In order to comply with necessary stand- 
ards, the hospitals should keep records which 
provide assurance that the staff is performing 
duties in a satisfactory manner. 

D-3.3 The records to be kept vary for the type of 
sterilizer in use and should include: 

a) Commissioning data, including M PR 
charts which should be used as the 
standard for each batch; 

b) Insurance surveyor's report ( not applica- 
ble to hot air sterilizers ); 

c) Maintenance contract (where applicable ); 

d) Maintenance certificate; 

e) Plant history record; 



40 



IS:12430 -1987 



f) Sterilizer processing log for the following: 

1) Sterilizers processing medicinal products 
( both steam and hot air sterilizers ); 
and 

2) Porous load sterilizers. 

D-4. COMMISSIONING DATA 

D-4.1 This data should be prepared and kept by 
the sterilizer engineer but, where appropriate, 
provision should be made in the contract docu- 
ments for the test results to be prepared and pro- 
vided by the contractor in a form suitable for 
incorporation in the commissioning data. A 
duplicate should be held by the maintenance 
engineer and kept in association with the plant 
history record. 

D-4.2 The sterilizer should be inspected and 
tested to establish whether it complies with the 
various requirements of the contract specification, 
including the relevant requirements of Indian 
Standards where these are called for in the speci- 
fication. The data to be recorded should include: 

a) Results of the inspection and/ or test for 
each of the specification requirements; 

b) Such records as are necessary to demonst- 
rate that the sterilizer is capable of per- 
forming satisfactorily with each batch size 
and the type of load for which it was 
ordered; 

N OTE — This will require the conduct of fully- 
instrumented tests but will not necessarily entail 
a separate test for every variation of loading condi- 
tion. The tests which are necessary in each case 
should be determined as follows (_ see also D -^.5 ): 

1) For sterilizers to be used for'processingmedicinal 
products., jointly by the sterilizer engineer, and 
the quality controller; and 

2) For all other sterilizers, by the sterilizer engi- 
neer in association with the consultant micro- 
biologist; 

c) Records showing correlation between the 
performance of the instruments fitted on 

the sterilizer and the test instruments used 
for commissioning; and 

d) Records showing correct functioning of the 
control equipment, such as temperature 
controllers, timers, air detectors, load simu- 
lators, signal lights and indicators. 

D-4.3 The commissioning record should indicate 
satisfactory tests on safety "devices, as appropriate, 
safety valves on jacket and chamber; for example, 
door interlock preventing opening of the door 
until temperature has fallen to a safe level; door 
interlock preventing entry of steam until door is 
properly secured; door interlock preventing un- 
authorized opening of the door after an unsatis- 
factory sterilization cycle. 



Note — It may not be practical at present to 
equip some sterilizers with mechanical interlocks to 
prevent the doors or lids opening with the loads at an 
unsafe temperature or when the sterilization cycle has 
not been satisfactorily performed. These additional 
safety devices should be fitted as soon as it becomes 
practicable to do so; meanwhile, operating instructions 
should be in terms to ensure safe operation. 

D-4.4 When correlation is accepted between the 
sterilizer TRC and the multi-channel commission- 
ing recorder, the TRC is to be marked 'MASTER 
TEMPERATURE R EC O R D ' ( MTR ). Each 
MTR and the corresponding chart from the multi- 
channel recorder is to be cross-referenced and 
endorsed as follows: 

a) Sterilizer plant reference number; 

b) Description of load ( for example, 500 ml 
bottles of saline ); 

c) Distribution pattern of load; 

d) Confirmation that all monitor bottles, or 
items of equipment in the load, reached 
the required temperature and were main- 
tained at this temperature for the neces- 
sary time; 

e) Description and distribution pattern of 
other types and sizes of load, if any, for 
which the MTR is to be accepted as valid; 

f) When the load comprises bottled fluids, 
the point during the cycle at which the 
load temperature had fallen to 80°C and 
the temperature interlock on the door 
opening machanism was released; 

g) Signature of sterilizer engineer and date; 
and 

h) Signature of operator and date. 

D-4.5 A sufficient number and variety of MTRs 
should be prepared so that for each loading con- 
dition ( that is, for each batch type and size and 
each type of equipment to be sterilized ), there is 
a suitable MTR available. In many cases, the 
design of the sterilizer and/ or the nature of the 
items to be sterilized will enable worst case load- 
ing conditions to be established or predicted with 
reasonable certainty, and thus allow one MTR 
to be used for several loading conditions. Parti- 
cular care is necessary with respect to certain 
products, such as some solutions, which are sub- 
ject to decomposition when heated. In these cases, 
the shape of the MTR must be such that it not 
only ensures certainty of sterilization but also it 
does not permit the product to be exposed to 
high temperatures for so long that unacceptable 
degradation occurs. The number of MTRs which 
are necessary in each case and the particular 
loading condition(s) for which each MTR is 
suitable should be determined as follows: 

a) For sterilizers to be used for processing 
medicinal products, jointly by the sterilizer 
engineer, and the quality controller; 



41 



IS : 12430. 1987 



b) For hot air sterilizers not processing medi- 
cinal products, jointly by the sterilizer 
engineer and the operator; and 

c) For all other sterilizer, by the sterilizer 
engineer. 

D-4.6 A copy of each MTR for all machines 
processing medicinal products and for hot air 
sterilizers must be supplied for daily reference by 
the operator and should be kept with the sterili- 
zer processing log. Ideally, it should be reproduc- 
ed in transparent form so that it can be laid 
over the TRC for comparison purposes. 

D-4.7 When it is accepted that the sterilizer has 
been correctly set up and is working satisfactorily, 
a record should be made of all the significant 
details of a normal cycle under automatic control. 
The cycle should be performed with a standard 
test load in the chamber, details of which should 
be recorded. In the case of porous loads machi- 
nes, a standard single pack test load of the type 
used for Bowie/Dick and thermocouple tests 
should be used. Observations should also be made 
of details of each stage and sub-stage of the cycle 
such as the time taken, the number of pulses, 
temperatures, pressures and levels of vacuum at 
all significant points during the cycle. For exam- 
ple, at'the end of each stage or sub-stage. 

D-4.8 The commissioning data for porous load 
machines should include records of performance 
tests on the vacuum system as follows: 

a) Maximum level of vacuum achieved during 
the leak rate test; 

b) Maximum acceptable leak rate specified 
for the machine, against which it should 
be tested; 

c) Actual leak rate measured during the leak 
rate test; and 

d) Vacuum level(s) achieved during the 
vacuum stage(s) should be included 
amongst the data to be recorded during 
the cycle as required by D-4.7. 

D-5. MAINTENANCE CONTRACT 

D-5.1 Where applicable, a copy of any sterilizer 
maintenance contract should be held by the 
maintenance engineer. 

D-6. MAINTENANCE CERTIFICATE 

D-6.1 The engineer should certify to the ope- 
rator, at agreed fixed intervals, that the necessary 
schedules of maintenance tasks have been satis- 
factorily completed. A detailed entry should have 
been made in the plant history record. Provided 
it is compiled and endorsed in a suitable manner 
and kept where the operator has free access to it, 
the plant history record may be used to perform 
the function of the maintenance certificate. 



D-7. PLANT HISTORY RECORD 
INCLUDING RECORD OF 
MAINTENANCE AND PERIODIC 
TESTS 

D-7.1 The engineer should be responsible for this 
document but, where appropriate, it may be 
combined with the sterilizer processing log; in 
such cases, the two separate parts of the combined 
document should be clearly identified. 

D-7.2 The document should carry plant reference 
number for the individual sterilizer and the date 
of installation and commissioning. It should con- 
tain records of all performance tests, irregularities 
in performance and modifications to the sterilizer. 
It should also record all maintenance work, both 
scheduled and unscheduled, and show that the 
examinations, tests and checks have been carried 
out as cited in the sterilizing plant section. It 
should be noted, however, that the maintenance 
schedules in these manuals may need to be modi- 
fied to suit a particular sterilizer, in accordance 
with the maintenance schedules recommended by 
the manufacturer or as the result of experience. 
Such variations should be noted in the plant 
history record. 

D-7.3 The engineer should sign and date, at least 
weekly, all entries relating to maintenance, both 
scheduled and unscheduled. 

D-7. 4 The operator should countersign weekly 
that he has seen the entries, indicate whether he 
is satisfied with them and comment, where appro- 
priate. In the case of sterilizers processing medi- 
cinal products, the quality controller should 
examine, sign and date the record weekly, or at 
intervals to be agreed locally. 

D-7. 5 Records for entry in the plant history 
record should include those detailed in the follow- 
ing clauses. 

D-8. DATA FOR SETTING AND TESTING 

D-8.1 All the data necessary for setting and testing 
the sterilizer should be summarized and presented 
in a convenient form for reference, including that 
derived from manufacturing information and from 
commissioning and subsequent performance tests. 

D-8. 2 Weekly Record 

D-8.2.1 This should include as appropriate to 
the type of sterilizer: 

a) Records of tests carried out on automatic 
process control system. These records 
should be made during a normal cycle 
under automatic control, the chamber 
being loaded as it was for the commission- 
ing test at D-4.4 and should include: 

Ij Records of indicating thermometer, 
TRC and pressure gauge readings under 
'steady state' conditions during the 
sterilizing stage; 



42 



I S : 12430 ■ 1987 



2) Records of details of each stage and 
sub-stage of the cycle, such as the time 
taken, number of pulses, temperatures, 
pressures and levels of vacuum at all 
significant points during the cycle such 
as the change from each stage or sub- 
stage to the next; and 

3) Record of the results of investigation 
into the reasons for any deviation from 
their normal values of any of the para- 
meters recorded. 

b) Confirmation that all TRCs have been 
examined and by whom; 

c) Leak rate test results, including the level 
of vacuum achieved as well as the rate of 
leakage into the chamber; 

d) A statement of the maintenance tasks 
carried out during each week and whether 
these have been completed satisfactorily; 
and 

N OTE — The tasks need not be detailed in full; 
identification of the relevant task schedules by, 
for example, weekly or quarterly will suffice, 
exceptions only being detailed. 

e) Confirmation that the door seal has been 
examined and is satisfactory. 

D-8.3 Quarterly Record 

D-8.3.1 Records of quarterly tests which, 
subject to discretion of the sterilizer engineer, 
should repeat the commissioning tests except that 
they may be made with an instrument with a 
minimum of 3 channels instead of a 12-channel 
chart recorder as used during commissioning. 

D-8.3. 2 In the case of fluids sterilizers, one 
batch type and size only need be tested but the 
various batch types and sizes should be tested in 
rotation at subsequent quarterly tests. 

D-8.3.3 The record should include the results 
of the air detector performance test for porous 
load sterilizers and any load simulator test for 
sealed fluids sterilizers. 

D-8.3.4 There are no quarterly tests on hot 
air sterilizers. 

D-8.4 Half-Yearly Record ( For Hot Air Steri- 
lizers Only ) — Records of tests on hot air 
sterilizers which, subject to the discretion of the 
sterilizer engineer, should repeat the production 
lod test. 

D-8.5 Yearly Record 

D-8.5.1 Records of annual performance tests 
which, subject to the discretion of the sterilizer 
engineer, should repeat the commissioning tests. 

D-8.6 Records as Required 

D-8.6.1 A record of faults and unscheduled 
maintenance should be kept ( see D-8.7.1 
to D-8.7.3 ). 



D-8.6.2 A record of modifications to the sterili- 
zer should be kept [ see D-2.1.1 (e) ]. 

D-8.6.3 A record of re-commissioning tests 
should be kept which should repeat some or all of 
the commissioning tests. The particular tests which 
are appropriate in each case should be determined 
as in D-4.5. In the case of sterilizers processing 
sealed fluids for which MTRs have previously 
been established, re-commissioning tests need 
only be performed for two batch/ contents sizes*. 
The two test loads should be distinctly dissimilar, 
for example, 1 litre bottles and 20 ml bottles ( or 
the largest and smallest bottle sizes regularly 
processed ). The following circumstances will 
indicate the need for re-commissioning tests to be 
carried out: 

a) When a machine has been moved and re- 
installed at a new site ( not applicable to 
portable 'bench top' machines ); 

b) When a machine has been withdrawn from 
service for the repair of a 'serious' defect 
( see D-8.7.3 ); 

c) When a machine has been subjected to the 
statutory two-yearly inspection of pressure 
vessels; 

d) When a machine has been overhauled or 
modified; 

e) When there is a change to a cycle or type 
of load for which no suitable MTR is 
available, such as the introduction of a 
new loading pattern, a new type of load, a 
change in container volume or a change in 
batch size; 

f) When there is a significant change in the 
pattern of the TRC from that of the 
MTR; 

Note — If there is any doubt about whether 
a change is significant, the advice of the sterilizer 
engineer should be sought. In the case of machi- 
nes processing sealed fluids, any change in the 
time of stage 1 ( heat up ) or stage 2 ( sterilizing ) 
of the sterilizer cycle by more than 3 minutes from 
that shown on ttie MTR should be regarded as 
significant 

g) When there is a demand for re-commission- 
ing by an authorized inspectorate; and 

h) When the sterilizer engineer considers re- 
commissioning to be necessary. 

Note — The advice of the sterilizer engineer 
about whether re-commissioning is necessary 
should be sought when there is any replacement 
of a component or alteration or adjustment affect- 
ing the steam pressure, operational pressure or 
temperature setting or cycle timing or when there 
has been a replacement or adjustment affecting 
the continuous discharge rate of the chamber 
drain, where this is possible. 



*A complete range of new MTRs will be required if the 
two batch tests reveal significant changes in the MTRs. 



43 



IS : 12430- 1987 



D-8.6.4 Each record as in D-8.3.1, D-8.4, D-8.5, 
D-8.6.2 and D-8.6.3 should include a statement 
of the fitness for use and be signed and dated as 
following: 

a) For annual tests, for re-commissioning 
tests and for modifications, by the sterilizer 
engineer; and 

b) For quarterly and half-yearly tests between 
the annual tests, by the sterilizer engineer 
or the operator. 

D-8.7 Fault Procedures and Records of 
Faults 

D-8.7.1 Any fault found by the sterilizer engi- 
neer or the operator should be recorded in the 
plant history record. 

D-8.7.2 If the sterilizer engineer or the main- 
tenance engineer finds a fault, he should inform 
the operator forthwith. 

D-8.7.3 If a serious fault occurs, the sterilizer 
should be withdrawn from service and should not 
be used for the production of sterile materials 
until it has been approved for re-use jointly by 
the sterilizer engineer and the operator. The 
sterilizer engineer should advise, for each type of 
sterilizer as to which types of faults are to be con- 
sidered as serious. The list should include all 
faults, which may result in failure to sterilize or 
danger to personnel or damage to the product. 
In the case of faults not classified as serious, the 
machine may be taken back into service immedia- 
tely after rectification of the fault and on satis- 
factory completion of the tests; listed as weekly 
tests in Appendix F. 

D-8.7.4 Details of remedial action and subse- 
quent performance checks should also be record- 
ed. These entries should be signed and dated by 
the engineer and should be countersigned by the 
operator before the machine is returned to 
service. 

D-8.8 Sterilizer Processing Log: General 
Requirements 

D-8.8.1 The operator should be responsible 
for this document but, where appropriate, it may 
be combined with the plant history record; in 
such cases, two separate parts of the combined 
document should be clearly identified. 

D-8.8.2 The entries as in D-8.8.4 or D-8.8.5 
below should be made, where relevant, by the 
operator for each load sterilized, and the log 
should be countersigned weekly by the engineer 
to indicate that he has seen it. 

D-8.8.3 At the commencement of each work- 
ing day, the readings on the cycle counter should 
be recorded in the processing log ( or in the 
plant history record where a processing log is not 
required ). The thermometer and pressure gauge 
reading during the sterilizing stage of the first 
cycle in the data should be similarly recorded. 



D-8.8.4 The sterilizer processing log for medi- 
cinal products, whether the machine is of the 
steam or the hot air type, should include: 

a) Product title and batch, size, or description 
of load; 

b) Batch number; 

c) Sterilizer cycle number; 

d) Indicating thermometer, TRC and pressure 
gauge readings at steady state during the 
sterilizing stage; 

e) Time at sterilizing temperature ( determin- 
ed from TRC ); 

Note — It is the duty of the operator to ensure 
that (a) to (e) are properly completed for each 
batch. 

f) An entry in respect of each batch, signed 
and dated by the operator stating whether 
the TRC matches the MTR for the batch 
or product; 

g) Details as in (a) to ( f) above need not be 
recorded separately if they are already 
recorded in a batch manufacturing record; 
the sterilizer engineer requires access to 
these records; 

h) An entry, signed and dated by the quality 
controller at least weekly, confirming that 
he has examined the entries for the week 
in both the plant history record and the 
sterilizer processing log or batch manu- 
facturing record and stating whether he is 
satisfied with them; 

j) An entry, signed and dated by the engineer 
at least weekly, to acknowledge that he has 
seen the entries; and 

k) The TRC, marked to link unambiguously 
with the sterilizer serial number and, for 
each cycle, the product title, batch size or 
description of load, batch number and 
sterilizer cycle number. 

Note — The TRC should be signed and dated 
either by the operator or by the quality controller 
to confirm that it matches the MTR and that the 
loading pattern was the same as that specified on 
the MTR. A separate chart for each cycle is 
preferred. 

D-8.8.5 The sterilizer processing log for porous 
loads should include: 

a) The daily Bowie/Dick tape test result; 

N OTE — The test sheet should be marked to 
show the sterilizer serial number, sterilizer cycle 
number, data and signature of the operator. The 
sheet should also be marked to identify it with 
the corresponding entry in the processing log. 

b) An entry signed by the operator stating 
whether the TRC for each load is satisfac- 
tory; 



44 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



Note —TheTRCs should each be marked to 
identify the sterilizer, cycle number(s) and date. 
A separate chart for each cycle is not required. 
The record should be clearly marked to show any 
TRC relating to any unsatisfactory cycle. The 
record must include details of any load which is 
automatically rejected as non-sterile. 

c) An entry signed by the operator to con- 
firm that he has seen all records made in 
the plant history record during the week 
and indicating whether he is satisfied with 
them; and 

N OTE — The entries should include the results 
of the weekly temperature and automatic control 
rest, including vacuum levels. 

d) An entry, signed and dated by the engi- 
neer to confirm that he has examined the 
details in the log at least weekly, and that 



the daily Bowi^ Dick and TRCs compare 
satisfactorily with the temperature record 
obtained during commissioning. 

D-8.9 Retention of Records 

D -8.9.1 For pharmaceutical products, records 
should be kept as required by theGovernment re- 
gulations or, if not specified, records relating to the 
process, including the sterilizer processing log, 
TRCs and Bowie/ Dick tape test sheets, should be 
kept for at least twelve months. 

D-8.9.2 Records relating to the plant, includ- 
ing commissioning data, MTRs insurance sur- 
veyor's reports and the plant history records 
should be kept throughout the life of each steri- 
lizer. 



APPENDIX E 
(Clauses 2.8, 7.11.1 and 7.11.3) 

CHECK-LIST OF PRE-COM M ISSIONING PROCEDURES 



El. CHECKS OF ADEQUACY OF 

ENGINEERING SERVICES AND OF 
GENERAL ENGINEERING 
PERFORMANCE OF STERILIZER 

E-I.l The sterilizer has been provided and 
installed in accordance with the specification and 
the drawings. 

E-1.2 Tests have been satisfactorily completed on 
all the services provided by the services con- 
tractor or sub-contractor. 

E-1.3 The electrical equipment on the sterilizer 
has been provided, installed, connected and 
tested, and is acceptable. 
E-1.4 The noise and vibration levels during 
operation are acceptable. 

E-1.5 There are no leaks of steam, water, air or 
effluent at any temperature or pressure within 
the working range. 

E-1.6 All supports, bases and fixings are rigid 
and secure, and without imposed strain from pipe- 
work connections. 

E-1.7 When the sterilizer appears to be function- 
ing in a proper manner, there is no evidence 
of interference with the performance of other 
equipment connected to the same services or of 
unsatisfactory operation of existing drainage 
services. 

:e-2. tests of performance of 
sterilizer mechanical and 
electrical functions 
( including safety devices ) 
under working conditions 

E-2.1 Steam, water and air supply pressures 
during the full cycle of operation are satisfactory. 



E-2.2 Drains effectively remove effluent when all 
plants in the vicinity, including the sterilizer, 
are connected. 

E-2.3 There is no adverse effect of the full ope- 
ration of all services on other connected plants in 
the vicinity. 

E-2.4 Safety de/ices ensure the following: 

a) Doors are locked before the admission of 
steam, 

b) Doors cannot be unlocked when under 
internal pressure greater than 0-2 bar, 

c) Steam valve closes on failure of power 
supply ( simulated ), and 

d) Chamber is vented to atmosphere during 
the opening of the door via the door 
opening and before the securing mechanism 
isfully released. 

E-2.5 The interlock between manual and auto- 
matic control allows Only one system to be used 
at onetime. 

E-2.6 Operation of an automatically controlled 
sterilizer ensures that it meets the specification 
requirements as set out in the manufacturer's 
operating details. 

E-2.7 Operation nf a manually controlled steri- 
lizer ensures that it meets the specification require- 
ments as set out in the manufactuier's operating 
details. 

E.2.8 During each stage of the operating cycle. 



45 



15:12430 -1987 

the controls react correctly and safely under the E-2.10 Calibration of all instrumentation and 

following conditions: controllers is satisfactory. 

a) Low steam pressure, 

b) Low water pressure, E-2.11 Temperature of exposed surfaces of the 

c) Incorrect vacuum, and sterilizer, including all valve handles and door 

d) Simulated power failure. operating gear does not exceed the ambient 
E-2.9 Operation and readings of all instruments temperature by more than 20°C. 

appear satisfacto ry, including return to zero*. ^-2.12 Loading trolleys or other aids are effective 

*This may not be achievable with combined pressure "^ ^^ 
and vacuum gauges. 



46 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



APPENDIX F 

[ Clauses 2A0, 7.11.1,8.1.1,81.2, 10 2.1(a), 10 6.1, 10.15.1(a) anrf D-8.7.3 ] 

SUMMARY OF STERILIZER PERFORMANCE TESTS 

F.I. PERFORMANCE TESTS 

F-I.I The Various Performance Tests are Given Below in the Tabular Form: 



Undbb-taxxn by 


Stsbilizbb 

EsOIHEBB 


Ofbbatob 

i 


StkbiUzeb 


Stssilizkb 
Ehoikexs 

BY LOOAL 
ABBAHOianilT 


Stkbilizxb 
Emqisbbb 
BrLooAZ. 

ABSAHaBUNT 


Stbbilizkb 
Ehoihbbk 


Stbbilizbr 
Ehoihxbb 

1 


-^^^Frequency 


When commission- 
ing and re-com- 
mission ing(«<t>>c) 


DaiIy«I) 


WeeklyCt.e) 


Q,uarterly(e) 


Half-yearly(e) 


Vearly(e> 


2-yearIy, or 
yearly in 
certain cases(e) 


Poroui loads 


(1) Perform weelcly 
tests {see Appen- 
dices D, G, H 
and J) 

(2) Thermocouple 
test ( using 3 

_ thermocouples ) 
( see Appendix 
G) 

(3) Air detector 
tesU (SM 
Appendix K ) 


Bowie/Dick tape 
test ( see 
Appendix H ) 


(1) Temperature 
and automatic 
process control 
test ( see 
Appendix G ) 

(2) Bowie/Dick tape 
test (see 
Appendix H ) 

(3) Leak rate test 

(see 
Appendix J ) 


(1) Repeat weekly 
tests 

(2) Thermocouple 
test ( using 2 
or 3 

thermocouples) 
( ^*e 
Appendix G ) 

(3) Air detector 
function test (s« 
Appendix K ) 


Repeat quarterly 
tests 


(1) Repeat 
quarterly tests 

(2) Air detector 
performance 
test (see 
Appendix K ) 


Statutory 
inqiection 
by competent 
penon, in 
addition to 
yearly 

performance 
testW 


Fluid! 


(1) Perform weekly 
test ( set Appen- 
dices D and L ) 

(2) Thermocouple 
test (uaing 11 or 
12 thermo- 
couple! ) u» 
Appendix L) 


NU 


Temperature and 
automatic process 
control test 
(JM Appendix L) 


(1) Repeat weekly 
lest 

test (using 
3 thermo- 
couples ) (.tee 
Appendix^) 


Repeat quarterly 
tests 


(1) Repeat weekly 
tests' 

(2) Thermocouple 
test (using 11 
or 12 thermo- 
couples ) ( tet 
Appendix L ) 


Unwrapped 
imtruments 
and uteosils 


(1) Perform weekly 
test ( see Appen- 
dicesDandM) 

(2) Thermocouple 
test ( using 3 
thermocouples ) 
(iM Appendix 


Nil 


Temperature and 
automatic process 
control test 
(»« Appendix M) 


Thermocouple test 
( using 2 or 3 
thermocouples ) 
(so Appendix M) 


Repeat quarterly 

test 


Repeat quarterly - 
test 


Hot air iterilizers 


Thermocouple 
test{s) ( usually 
using 12 thermo- 
couples ) ( see 
Appendices D 
andN) 


Nil 


Nil 


Nil 


Thermocouple 
test(s) ( using 3 
thermocouples) 
(i«« Appendix N) 


Thermocouple 
test(s) ( usually 
using 12 thermo- 
couples ) ( see 
Appendix N ) 


Nil 



a) Tests on completion of installation of a machine by a contractor will be carried out by the contractor under the supervision of the sterilizer engineer. 

b) These tests must also be carried out after unscheduled maintenance under certain circumstances ( see D^.6^ and D-8.7.3 ). 

c) The sterilizer engineer has some discretion on the test conditions to he applied ( s^e D-4.2, D-4.5, D-8.3.1, D-«^.4, D-8.4, D-8,6*l and D-8.6^ ). 

d) Readings of temperature and pressure during sterilizing stage of first daily cycle ( not the 'warm-up* cycle ) should be recorded in processing log ( see D-8.8.3 ). 
Cycle counter reading should be similarly recorded. Temperature and pressure at steady state are to be recorded in processing log for each batch of medicinal 
products, 

e) These tests should be performed in association with and on completion of PPM tasks. 



47 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS t 12430 - 1987 



APPENDIX G 
[Clauses 2.8, 2.10, 7.11.3 nnd 8.1.3 (a) ] 

PERFORMANCE TESTS FOR POROUS LOAD STERILIZERS 



G-1. GENERAL 

G-1.1 The tests required are those referred to in 
Appendix D, the records of which are required 
for day-to-day production control purposes. They 
areas follows: 

a) Bowie/Dicktapetest( see Append ixH ); 

b) Leak rate test ( see Appendix] ); 

q) Temperature and automatic process control 
test; 

(j) Quarterly tests; 

e) Yearly, commissioning and re-commission- 

ing tests; and 

f ) A i r d etector performance test ( see A ppen- 
dix K ). 

■G-1.2 For all these tests, except at (b), the 
sterilizer should be loaded with a test casket or 
pack containing about 30 freshly laundered and 
aired towels as for the Bowie/Dick tape test. They 
should be carried out after a warming-up cycle 
has been performed ( or otherwise in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions ). 

G-1.3 The Bowie/Dick tape test and the leak rate 
test are complementary. 

G-1.4 Machines which satisfactorily pass these 
tests are deemed to be capable of sterilizing all 
porous loads. Packaging and loading and operat- 
ing procedures must be de/ised which will enable 
the sterilizer to process 'difficult' loads in a satis- 
factory manner, for example, by extending the 
drying time. 

G-2.WEEKLY TEMPERATURE AND 

AUTOMATIC PROCESS CONTROL 
TEST 

G -2.1 This test may be performed simultaneously 
with the daily Bowie/Dick tape test where this is 
possible without contravening any of the essential 
test conditions. 

G-2.2 The sterilizer should be operated under 
automatic control and the complete test cycle 
should be observed. At least three readings of 
chamber temperature and pressure should be 
taken from the sterilizer instruments at equal time 
intervals during the sterilization hold time. A 
record should be made in the plant history record 
of all these observations, and this should also 
include details of each stage or sub-stage of the 
cycle, such as the time taken, the number of 
pulses, temperature, pressure and le/els of vacuum 
at all significant points in the cycle, for example, 
at the change from each stage or sub-stage. 



G-2.3 The test should be considered satisfactory 
if all thefollowing requirements are met: 

a) The TRC agrees satisfactorily with the 
MTR. 

Note — This is not the I^TR referred to for 
sterilizers, processing medicinal products which 
are required for production control purposes for 
checking individual batches but the record obtain- 
ed during commissioing which is retained for 
checl<ing performance. 

b) The measured parameters are consistent 
with pre/iously recorded test results. 

c) The engineer observing the test does not 
detect any mechanical or other anomaly. 

d) On completion of the test, the towels 
which comprise the test pack, or the con- 
tents of the casket, are sensi bl y d ry . 

G-2.4 A satisfactory Bowie/ Dick tape test is 
required (seeAppendixH ). 

G-3.C0MM0N REQUIREMENTS FOR 
QUARTERLY, YEARLY, 
COMMISSIONING AND 
RE-COMMISSIONING TESTS 

G-3.1 Each quarterly, yearly, commissioning and 
re-commissioning test requires temperature 
measurements to be recorded by separate thermo- 
metric equipment, using a minimum of two 
thermocouples during two separate performance 
tests, that is a small load test and a full load test. 

G-3.2 For each of these performance tests, one 
thermocouple should be placed in the chamber 
drain, within 100 mm of the exit from the cham- 
ber, and another at the geometric centre of the 
towels comprising the test pack, the wires being 
carefully arranged to prevent steam tracking 
along them. 

G-3.3 The first test should be performed with 
the single test pack in the chamber. 

G-3.4 For the second test, the chamber should be 
fully loaded with a supply of packs of laundered 
and aired cotton fabrics sufficient to fill the steri- 
lizer to a density of about 160 kg/m' including the 
test pack which may be placed at any convenient 
position within the chamber. 

G-3.5 The temperature and automatic process 
control test should be carried out in association 
with the first test, and observations should be made 
as described and recorded. It may be necessary 
to perform the leak rate test without the single 
test pack in the chamber. 



49 



IS: 12430- 1987 



G-3.6 The sa:ond test should be carried out on 
satisfactory completion of the first test. 

G-3.7 The tests should be considered satisfactory 
if all the following requirements are met. 

a) The temperature in the test pack is within 

the limits of 134+*°G during a continuous 
period of 3 mi nutes of stage 2. 

b) During the last 2 minutes of this sterilizing 
hold' period, the temperature in the test 
pack and drain should be coincident with- 
in the accuracy limits of instrumentation. 

c) The duration of stage 2 does not exceed 
6 minutes. 

d) The cycle is completed in not more than 
30 minutes, 

I n the case of machines which are set to 
operate with an extended drying time, the 
drying stage only must be re-set for the pur- 
poses of this, so that the cycle is completed 
in not more than 30 minutes. 

e) The packs are sensibly dry. 



G-4.YEARLY, COMMISSIONING AND 
RE-COMMISSIONING TESTS 

G-4.1 The minimum number of thermocouples 
which should normally be used is three — one in 
the chamber drain, one in the centre of the test 
pack and the other, for detecting superheat, fixed 
about 50 mm above the test pack. 

Note — The thermocouple in the chamber drain, 
should be In contact with the condensate at the phase 
boundary condition. This may sometimes require 
deeper insertion than the recommended 100 mm. 

G-4.2 The geometric centre of the test pack may 
not always be the most appropriate location for 
the load' thermocouple and additional thermocou- 
ples may be placed in the test pack, for example, 
in the upper and lower halves; the temperature 
indicated by any one of the load thermocouples, 
must be coincident with that indicated by the 
thermocouple in the chamber drain during the 
Iast2 minutes of the sterilizing hold period, with- 
in the accuracy limits of the instrumentation. 

G-4.3 The limits for superheating are given in 
Appendix A. 



APPENDIX H 
[Clauses 2.S, 2.10, 7.11.3, 8.1.3 (b), G-I.l andG-2A] 

THE BOWIE/DICK TAPE TEST FOR POROUS LOAD STERILIZERS 



H-l. INTRODUCTION 

H-I.l There will be even and rapid penetration 
of steam into the load in a porous load sterilizer 
only if sufficient air and non-condensable gases 
are removed from the chamber and load before 
steam is admitted during the sterilizing stage. If 
air and non-condensable gases are not removed 
from the chamber and the load or from the steam 
supply, they may become trapped within the 
load. This would prevent penetration of that part 
of the load by steam and consequently, sterilizing 
conditions may not be achieved. 

H -1.2 A method of demonstrating that even and 
rapid nenetration by steam has occurred is by the 
use of thermometric equipment, with thermocou- 
ples appropriately placed within the chamber and 
the load. 

H-1.3 This method of testing is not practicable 
on a daily basis and it was for this reason that 
the Bowi^ Dick tape test was developed. The 
Bowie/Dick tape test on its own does not confirm 
that the sterilizing condition have been achieved 
in the load. The test does prove whether or not 
the steam penetration of the test pack has been 
even and rapid and that air or other non-con- 
densable gases were not present and have not 
entered the test pack Consequently, daily assur- 
ance that a porous load sterilizer is functioning 



correctly is achieved by a combination of tests,, 
records and observations, of which the Bowie} 
Dick tape test is only a part. The other tests, 
records and observations which must be made 
regularly are considered elsewhere in this docu- 
ment but the vital evidence which can be gather- 
ed from each is summarized in the table below. 
From this table, it can be seen that no single test 
or observation gives conclusive evidence that the 
sterilizer is processing the load correctly. A satis- 
factory result from all the tests and observations 
is necessary for such assurance 



Test, Record or 
Observation 



Evidence 



1. Temperature re- a) Whether the correct 
cord chart for number and profile of 
each load p re-sterilization pulses 

have been obtained. 

b) Whether the correct 
temperature has been 
maintained in the cham- 
ber for the necessary 
time. 

2. Indicating therm- a) Whether the correct 
ometer temperature has been 

abtained in the chamber. 



50 



IS : 12430 - 1987 



Test, Record or 
Observation 



3. Air detector 
function 



4. Bowie/ Dicl< tape 
test 



Evidence 

b) By comparison of 1 and 
2, during steady state 
conditions whetlier 

eitlier instrument is 
faulty. 

Wliether air and otiier non- 
condensable gases are pre- 
sent within a sample of the 
chamber atmosphere. 

Whether there has been 
even and rapid penetration 
of steam into the test load 
at the commencement of 
the sterilizing stage ( not 
necessarily whether a steri- 
lizing temperature time 
relationship has been achiev- 
ed in the load ) 



5. Leak rate test 



Whether the 
chamber is 
sealed. 



evacuated 
adequately 



-2. TECHNICAL PROCESS ON 
THE TEST IS BASED 



WH ICH 



H-2.1 An adhesive tape which is printed with a 
chemical substance, is fixed in the shape of a 
cross to a piece of suitable paper and this test 
sheet is placed at the centre of a stack of towels 
( the test pack ). The chemical substance shows 
a colour change related to time and temperature 
when exposed to phase boundary steam. The 
depth of colour change is dependent on the time 
of exposure, the temperature and the moisture. 
The indicator is much less sensitive to dry heat; 
exposure to air at 134°C for 3 minutes will cause 
no discernible colour change whereas exposure to 
phase boundary steam at 134°C for 3 minutes 
will cause a marked colour change. To obtain an 
optimum colour change for interpretation, the 
Bowie/Dick tape test must not be run for longer 
than 3i minutes at 134-138°G. If this period of 3^ 
minutes is exceeded, the tape may undergo such 
a colour change as to make it practically impossi- 
ble to detect colour variations along the tape in 
a fail condition. 

H-2.2 Steam will penetrate rapidly and com- 
pletely and the tape will show a uniform colour 
change if all the air is removed. If all the air is 
not removed before the steam is admitted for the 
sterilizing stage, the air will collect within the 
pack as a bubble. The colour of the tape in the 
region of the bubble will be paler than elsewhere 
along its length because of the lower temperature 
and/ or reduced moisture level. This will be obser- 
ved when the paper with the tape cross is 
examined. 



H-2.3 The test pack is chosen since it represents 
the maximum density of porous load which a 
sterilizer is designed to process, that is, about 160 kg 
of fabric material per cubic metre of chamber 
space. The more air there is to remove, the more 
exacting will be the test; that is why, the test pack 
is used by itself in an otherwise empty chamber. 

H-2.4 The Bowie/Dick tape test was originally 
applied to high vacuum sterilizers, in which air 
removal was effected by a single evacuation of 
the chamber. Most modern porous load sterilizers 
employ a pulsing or multistage process to remove 
air from the chamber and the relevance of the 
Bowie/Dick tape test to this type of sterilizer is 
sometimes queried. 

H-2.5 It must be emphasized that the test is still 
valid in these circumstances because the time/ 
temperature characteristics of the steam pulses do 
not significantly change the colour of the test 
tape. There is, therefore, no significant danger 
of obtaining a spurious result unless the air 
removal stage is unusually long. If the air removal 
stage exceeds about 15 minutes, the advice of the 
sterilizer engineer should be sought on the 
method of performing the Bowie' Dick test so as 
to ensure its validity. 

H-3. MATERIAL USED IN THE TEST 

H-3.1 The test is invalid if materials of correct 
quality are not used. The requirements are. 

H -3.1.1 Towels — These must be huckaback 
towels. After purchase and before use, the towels 
must be thoroughly washed to remove the dress- 
ing. If this is not done, the towels become 
hardened and their ability to entrap air is 
diminished. 

When towels are washed, they should not be 
starched, ironed or calendered since this also 
diminishes the ability of the towels to entrap air. 
Towels in use should be washed at least once a 
week. 

Towels should be unfolded and hung out for 
at least an hour between tests so that their humi- 
dity is stabilized. The use of slightly damp or 
compressed towels can result in the test giving a 
pass result when it should have been a failure. 
Towels which have become excessively dehydrat- 
ed may lead to superheating in the pack which 
might also produce misleading results. 

H -3.1.2 Tape — The tapes currently recom- 
mended are autoclave tapes. Under normal storage 
conditions, the tape has a 12-month shelf life. 
Tape which is more than 12 months old should 
not be used for the Bowie/Dick tape test, but is 
perfectly satisfactory as a packaging tap^ process 
indicator. 

The tape should be stored in cool, dry condi- 
tions away from direct sunlight and artificial 
light. 



51 



15:12430 - 1987 



The exact colour change shown by a processed 
tape will vary between different rolls and batches 
of tape; consequently, tape from the same roll 
should be used for each test. 

H-3.1.3 Paper — The use of waxed, grease- 
proof or heavily glazed art papers will seriously 
impair the accuracy of the test. The test sheet 
may be conveniently standardized on an A4sheet 
of white, wood free, duplicator paper ( 80 g/m*). 

H-4. MAKING UP THE TEST PACK 

H-4.1 Each towel should be folded in half, three 
times, to provide eight thicknesses, each with an 
area of 300 x 225 mm, and placed one above 
the other to form a stack about 270 mm high 
( Fig. 6). The exact number of towels needed 
will depend on how often they have been used, 
but 25 to 36 may be needed. A piece of paper 
to which autoclave tape has been applied in the 
form of a diagonal cross is placed inthemiddleof 
the stack. The format suggested is shown in Fig. 7. 
It is not necessary to add more tape than is 
indicated since the use of additional tape may 
impair the interpretation of the text. The stack 
may be placed in a dressings casket or in a box 
made of cardboard or metal which is not airtight. 
If preferred, the stack can be wrapped in fabric 
or paper, or it can be secured with tape. Which- 
ever method is used, the towels must stay in 
position when the test pack is handled. The 
towels must be laid quite flat with no ridges. 
When more than 36 towels are needed to give 
the required height, it indicates that the towels 
are worn and should be replaced. 

H-5. PERFORMING THE TEST 

H-5.1 The test pack shall be placed on the longi- 
tudinal centre line of the chamber, 100 mm from 
any door and approximately 100 mm above the 
chamber base of an otherwise empty sterilizer, 
with the towels lying horizontally. It must be 
subjected to a standard sterilizing cycle. The 
holding or sterilizing time shall not be more than 
3 J minutes if a temperature of 134 to 138°C is 
being used. 

H-5.2 The test should normally be carried out 
under automatic control but if the automatic 
control is set for a longer holding time than 3 J 
minutes, the stage must be cut short, for the 
purpose of the test, by using the manual control. 
If there is any doubt about how to do this, the 
engineer should be asked for advice. Machines 
should be modified, where necessary, with the 
advice of the sterilizer engineer so tlnat the test 
can be done under automatic control. 



H-5.3 It is important that a warming up cycle is 
performed on the machine before the test run is 
started since the effectiveness of air removal may 
depend on all parts of the sterilizer being at the 
working temperature. A satisfactory sterilizer 
may give a fail result if this is not done. 

H-6. READING THE TEST 

H-6.1 When interpreting the result of the test, it 
is important to place the corner of the test sheet 
adjacent to its centre in order to make a direct 
comparison of the colour indicator density. For 
the test result to be accepted as a pass, the same 
colour change must occur along the length of the 
tape ( see Fig. 8 ) and if there are any discernible 
differences, the test should be recorded as failed 
and the paper should be marked accordingly. 
Where there is a large area of unchanged indicator 
at the centre of the sheet, this is indicative of a 
gross failure! see Fig. 9). 

H-7. ACTION FOLLOWING THE TEST 

H-7.1 The paper from each test should have 
been marked as indicated above and be kept for 
reference for 12 months, together with the associ- 
ated chart from the temperature chart recorder 
( seeAppendixD). 

H-7.2 It is important to realize that if a sterilizer 
fails to pass the Bowi^ Dick tape test, it cannot 
be made safe merely by increasing the holding 
time until a uniform colour change is produced. 
Such a sterilizer is in urgent need of skilled 
attention. 

H-7.3 A satisfactory test result does not indicate 
the ability of the machine to sterilize. It only 
indicates that the steam will evenly penetrate a 
load. Satisfactory temperature and pressure 
readings during the sterilizing stage and an accept- 
able temperature record chart are required as 
assurance of sterility. 

H-7.4 An unsatisfactory test result indicates that 
the machine should not be used until the fault 
has been rectified. 

H-7.5 If the sterilizer does not indicate non- 
sterile when a failed Bowie/ Dick tape test is 
obtained, this implies that the air detector is not 
working properly. The machine should not be 
returned to service until the air detector has been 
overhauled and the machine performance checked 
by means of independent thermometric equipment 
( see Appendix A ). 



52 



IS ! 12430 . 1987 



;«:'■ U;*:■■3^"^^^"ii:■^'^ 







W^^^^ ./V.s ■■■■>■,.. iis,~ft--.:»;^ ..T.- *. 
,. ,.■ ..-'■'■■■-.■v>-^fc#i!ia\:j'-,-.^.4^:' 




Fio, 6 Towels Ready for Test 




Fro. 7 Format of Tape 



53 



IS ; 12430 -1987 




•■^v 



'?■■ ■ ... - ^<. 'M<-' 



'.*^..-s^^:;?;' 

■.■ ,"* : , ■ ■■■ft 



^jr 



,*^' 



^ 




jjfS**-'" 



^■<^ 




Fig. 8 A SATisFACTORY Test Result 




A.^O^':V^.^ 



Fig. 9 A Failed Test Result 

54 



IS: 12430- 1987 



APPENDIX J 
[Clauses 2.8, 2.10,7.11.3, 8.1.3 (c), G-I.l andK-l.9.l] 

LEAK RATE TEST FOR POROUS LOAD STERILIZERS 



J-l. PROCEDURE 

J -1.1 This test is applicable only to porous load 
sterilizers on which it is performed at least 
weekly. 

J-1.2 There are two reasons why leakage of air 
into the chamber at a rate greater than that 
specified ( see J -1.9 ) is unacceptable. They are 
as follows: 

a) The presence of air prevents proper pene- 

tration of load by steam and thus inhibits 
sterilization, and 

b) The air leaking into the chamber at the 
end of the sterilization stage will not have 
passed through the bacteria-retentive filter 
and, therefore, there is a potential risk of 
re-contaminating the load. 

J-1.3 The leak rate test involves the drawing of 
a vacuum in the chamber, followed by the closure 
of all valves leading to the chamber, stopping the 
means of drawing the vacuum and observation of 
the chamber pressure for a timed period. The 
manufacturer's instructions should be followed in 
the conduct 'of the test; in case of doubt, the 
advice of the steri I izer engi neer should be sought. 
During the leak rate test, it is desirable to record 
the maximum level of vacuum attained as this 
gives an indication of the performance capability 
of the air removal system. 

J -1. 4 The test requires the use of an absolute 
pressure gauge. These gauges are usually calibrat- 
ed to cover the range O-lOO mmHg absolute or 
0- 150 mbar absolute. 

J-1.5 The leak rate test must be carried out when 
the machine is at normal working temperature. 
On machines where the test is performed during 
the drying stage of a completed cycle, a previous 
full cycle is not necessary. 

J -1. 6 Most modern sterilizers have an automatic 
leak test position, operated usually by a key 
switch on the fascia of the sterilizer. During the 
test, this switch is turned to the leak test position, 
the cycle is commenced with an empty chamber 
and at the appropriate time ( usually in the drying 



stage), the chamber is automatically isolated and 
the vacuum pump stopped. The vacuum level 
achieved at this point should be recorded. A 
period of approximately 5 minutes should be 
allowed after the pump has stopped for the full 
closure of valves and for stabilization of condi- 
tions in the chamber. The absolute pressure gauge 
reading should then be recorded and a period of 
10 minutes timed (preferably with a stop watch). 
After this period has elapsed, the absolute pres- 
sure gauge reading should again be recorded. 

J-1.7 Experience indicates that a leak rate equi- 
valent to a rate of change in pressure of 1-3 mbar/ 
minute ( 1 mm Hg/minute) over a period of 10 
minutes after stabilization is the maximum which 
should normally be permitted. Leak rates in 
excess of this level tend to create inconsistencies 
in sterilizer performance. 

J -1. 8 The leak rate test and the Bowi^ Dick tape 
test are complementary tests. A sterilizer which 
fails to meet the requirements of either of these 
tests must not be used until thefault(s) has been 
rectified and the sterilizer satisfies both of these 
tests. 

J -1. 9 Considerable care and knowledge must be 
applied in the interpretation of results of leak 
tests. On a typical test, the absolute pressure may 
rise by 20 mm of Hg or more ( for example, 25 
mbar) in the first few minutes of the test due to 
evaporation of moisture remaining in the chamber 
and connecting pipework. Such a result does not 
necessarily indicate a leak. If there is an initial 
rise in pressure due to this evaporation ( 5 minutes 
is usually allowed ), the test should be continued 
for a further period of 10 minutes and during this 
further period, the rise in absolute pressure should 
be noted. 

J-l. 10 It is recommended that those sterilizers 
which are neither technically obsolete nor reach- 
ing the end of their useful working life and which 
are not fitted with an automatic leak test position 
should be modified to provide this facility. Until 
the modification has been completed, it may be 
necessary to ensure that certain hand-operated 
valves are closed during the tests. 



55 



IS : 12430-1987 



APPENDIX K 

( Clauses 2.8, 2.10, 7.11.3, 8.1.3, 10.11.2 and G-l 1 ) 

AIR DETECTOR TESTS FOR POROUS LOAD STERILIZERS 



K-l. PROCEDURE 

K-1.1 An air detector is fitted as part of the 
control system of a porous load sterilizer. Its 
function is to monitor the conditions within the 
chamber to determine whether or not the air 
present is sufficient to impair the sterilizing 
process. 

Note — Some air detectors monitor part and some 
the whole of the sterilizing stage; others monitor only 
the start of the sterilization hold stage or some other 
part of the air removal stage. 

K-l. 2 A correctly adjusted air detector will 
contribute to a minimum standard of product 
security; it should not be regarded as an alterna- 
tive to effective maintenance. 

K-l. 3 The air detector does not monitor the 
residual air in the load. The air detector and the 
Bowi^ Dick tape test are complementary. The air 
detector should be tested for function only when 
consi stent Bowie/ Dick f ai I u res occu r. 

K-1.4 A leak rate test should always precede an 
air detector test to establish whether or not the 
leak rate of the sterilizer is within the acceptable 
limits. ( The air detector tests may require the 
leak rate test procedure to be used. ) 

K-l. 5 There are two air detector tests. These 
are: 

a) Air Detector Function Test 

1) This test should be undertaken when 
the air detector performance is suspect. 
It does not require separate instrumen- 
tation other than a simple metering 
device ( for example, a small valve by 
means of which air may be introduced 
into the chamber ) used in conjunction 
with the absolute pressure gauge fitted 
to the sterilizer. 

2) The test entails establishing that the 
air detector will fail a cycle before the 
maximum leak rate specified by the 
manufacturer is introduced ( the maxi- 
mum leak rate should be equal to or 
less than the leak rate established 
during commissioning which resulted 
in the temperature measured at the 
centre of the Bowie/Dick test pack 
being 2°C lower than the temperature 
measured in the drain line during the 
last 3 minutes of the 6 minutes permit- 
ted to stage 2). 

3) In practice, it is usual to quote the 
maximum and the minimum of a range 



of leak rates over which the air detec- 
tor may be expected to cause indica- 
tion of a failure to sterilize. These are 
commonly, pass at 3-0 mbar/minute 
and fail at 6-0 mbar/minute. 

b)Air Detector Performance Test 

1) This test should be performed during 
commissioning and also when the air 
detector has failed a function test. The 
test requires the use of separate thermo- 
metric equipment with tliermocouples, 
one inserted in the geometric centre of 
a Bowie' Dick test pack, in an otherwise 
empty chamber, and one in the cham- 
ber drain, and in conjunction with 
either the metering device referred to 
for the function test. 

2) This test entails establishing that the 
air detector will fail a cycle before the 
temperature measured at the centre of 
the test pack differs by more than 2°C 
from that in the drain during the last 3 
minutes of the 6 minutes ,permitted to 
stage 2. 

K-l. 6 Features Common to Both Tests — It 

is necessary to introduce air into the chamber at 
a controlled rate whilst one or more cycles are 
performed under automatic control. Because the 
different types of air detector may operate at 
different parts of the cycle, it is usually necessary 
to regulate the introduction of air into the cham- 
ber during a leak rate test by observing the 
absolute pressure gauge fitted to the sterilizer. 
The regulating device should be screwed into an 
entry boss in the front lower part of the chamber. 

K-l. 7 Particular Features of the Function 
Test 

K-1.7.1 This test is performed with an empty 
chamber, using the reigulating device. During a 
leak rate test, or otherwise as indicated by the 
manufacturer, the regulating device should be 
opened to allow sufficient air in-leakageto result 
in the maximum change of pressure over a given 
time interval specified by the manufacturer. The 
sterilizer should then be operated under automatic 
control with the regulating device open at this 
setting. The air detector should then fail the 
cycle. 

K-l. 7.2 The sterilizer should be checked at 
regulating device settings which result in both the 
maximum and minimum leak rate if the manufac- 
turer specifies a range of leak rates over which 
the air detector should operate, such as 2 mm/ 
min and 4mm/min leak rates. 



56. 



IS : 12430 -19S7 



K-1.7.3 If the air detector fails to operate in 
accordance witli tine specified parameters, it 
sliould be adjusted in accordance witli the manu- 
facturer's instruction by personnel who are com- 
petent to undertake the work, using separate 
thermometric equipment, and adopting the per- 
formance test procedure. 

K-1.8 Particular Features of the Perform- 
ance Test 

K-1.8. 1 The sterilizer should be operated 
under automatic control and the regulating device 
should be opened up over successive cycles until 
the 2°C temperature difference between the pack 
and the drain line is reached. The air detector 
should fail the cycle either when or before this 
temperature difference is reached during the last 
3 minutes of the 6 minutes permitted to stage 2. 

Note — Certain designs of air detector have parti- 
cular characteristics which permit other methods of 
testing, for example, where the device is sufficiently 
sensitive to residual air., omission of Dart of the air 
removal stage may have the same effect as a delibera- 
tely induced leak. In this case, the efficiency of air 
removal stage should be progressively downgraded until 
the 2°C depression is obtained. 

K-1.8.2 When adjustment of the air detector 
is necessary, it should be carried out in accordance 



with the manufacturer's recommendations and 
only by personnel competent to undertake the 
work. 

K-I.g Comparison Between Function Test 
and Performance Test 

K-1.9.1 During commissioning or re-com- 
missioning tests, the leak rate required to result 
in 2°C differential should be measured_ and 
noted. This should be equal to or greater than 
the maximum leak rate specified by the manufac- 
turer. 

Note 1 — Any change in leak rate necessary to 
cause the 2°C differential should be recorded in the 
plant history record? and the new value should be used 
for subsequent function tests. 

Note 2 — The leak rate measured in these tests 
will automatically include any permissible leak rate for 
a particular machine because the air entering via the 
regulating valve will be additional to any leaking in at 
the door seal, etc. Satisfactory air tightness of the 
chamber, demonstrated by a satisfactory leak rate test 
as described in Appendix J, is essential to ensure the 
repeatability and thus the validity of these tests. The 
regulated part of the total leakage in these tests should 
be as large as possible. If possible, the door should be 
left closed between consecutive test runs because it may 
cause variations between the normal leak rate and the 
regulated leak introduced in the tests. 



APPENDIX L 
[ Clauses 2.8, 2.10, 7.11.3 and 8.1.3 (e) ] 



PERFORIVIANCE TESTS FOR STERILIZERS FOR FLUIDS IN SEALED CONTAINERS 

( BOTTLED FLUID STERILIZERS ) 



L-l. GENERAL 

L-I.l The tests required are those referred to in 
Appendix D, the records of which are required 
for batch and day-to-day production control 
purposes and apply to sterilizers processing sealed 
bottles. They are as follows: 

a) Weekly temperature and automatic process 
control tests; 

b) Qjiarterly tests; and 

c) Yearly, commissioning and re-commission- 

ing tests. 

L-l. 2 For all these tests, the bottles should be 
filled with fluid to a level which should normally 
not exceed 80 percent of their capacity. The 
temperature of all the filled bottles should be 
similar before the test is commenced. 

L-2. WEEKLY TEMPERATURE AND 

AUTOMATIC PROCESS CONTROL 
TEST 

L-2.1 One standard batch should be used for the 
performance of this weekly test. It should be 
typically representative of all batches normally 



processed and one for which an MTR has been 
established during commissioning ( see Appendix 
D ). Ideally, the specification of the test batch 
should be identical to that of a commonly pro- 
cessed batch type so that the test observations 
may be made during a normal production run. If 
the test is satisfactory, the batch may be passed 
into stock. 

L-2. 2 The sterilizer should be operated under 
automatic control and the complete test cycle 
should be observed. At least four readings of 
chamber temperature and pressure should be taken 
from the sterilizer instruments at equal time 
intervals during the sterilization hold time. 
Observations should also be made of temperatures 
and pressures at other significant points of the 
cycle, and the duration of the various stages and 
sub-stages of the cycle. A record should be made 
in the plant history record of all these observa- 
tions. 

L-2.3 The test should be considered satisfactory 
if all the following results are observed: 

a) The temperature record chart agrees satis- 
factorily with the appropriate MTR; 



57 



IS:12430 .1987 



b) The measured parameters are consistent 
with the previously recorded tests results; 

c) The engineer observing the test does not 
detect any mechanical or other anomaly; 
and 

d) The interlock which prevents opening of 
the door whilst the load temperature 
exceeds 80°G, is not released at a point in 
the cycle significantly before that shown 
on the MTR. 

Note — In those cases where it is not physically 
possible to observe operation of the interlock, it will be 
necessary to attempt to operate the door mechanism as 
if to open the door. Very great care must be exercised 
to ensure that if the door mechanism moves at all, it is 
moved only just sufficiently to establish whether the 
interlock is engaged or released. The mechanism must 
not be allowed to move far enough for the door to be 
inadvertently opened if the interlock has released before 
the safe temperature had been reached. 

L-3. COMMON REOUIREMENTS FOR 
OUARTERLY, YEARLY 
COMMISSIONING AND 
RE-COMMISSIONING TESTS 

L-3.1 Each quarterly, yearly, commissioning and 
re-commissioning test requires temperature 
measurements to be recorded by separate thermo- 
metric equipment, using thermocouples in test 
bottles and in the chamber drain. Each thermo- 
couple in a bottle should be on the vertical axis, 
between 20 and 30 mm above the base of the 
bottle. 

L-3.2 The thermocouple in the chamber drain 
should be within approximately 100 mm of the 
exit from the chamber. In the case of a small 
sterilizer having no drain, this thermocouple 
should be inserted in an appropriate position 
within the chamber steam space but below the 
bottom of the lowest bottle. 

Note — The thermocouple in the chamber drain 
should be in contact with condensate at the phase 
boundary condition. This may sometimes require 
deeper insertion than the recommended 100 mm. 

L-3.3 The test recorder chart should be marked 
to show the start and finish of the sterilization 
hold time, details describing the test load, the 
distribution pattern of the load within the cham- 
ber, and the point at which the door may be 
opened ( that is, release of the door interlock 
mechanism so that the door may be opened ). 

L-3.4 A temperature and automatic process con- 
trol test should be carried out in association with 
these tests, and observations should be made as 
described under weekly test and recorded. 

L-3.5 The tests should be considered satisfactory 
if all the following results are observed: 

a) The thermocouples and fluid remain sealed 
in the test bottles throughout the cycle; 



b) Not more than 1 or I percent* ( whichever 
is greater ) of the containers composing 
the load has broken; 

c) The temperatures measured are within the 
permissible limits for sterilization through- 
out the appropriate sterilization hold time. 
These are: 



Sterilizing Temperature 


Time 


'C 


min 


115 + ^0 


30 


121 + I 


15 



d) The temperatures measured differ by not 
more than 1°C during the last 5 minutes 
of the sterilization hold time (this indicates 
that excessive stratification is not occurr- 
ing within the chamber ); and 

e) The temperatures measured in the test 
bottles have fallen to 80°Ct or below 
before the door interlock is released to 
allow the door to be opened on completion 
of the cycle [ see L-2.3(d)]. 

L-3. 6 It should be noted that the total heat 
energy input to the load over the whole steriliz- 
ing cycle and its effect on the product is a matter 
for the quality controller. However, only in 
exceptional case will these problems be met in 
practice. 

L-4. ADDITIONAL REOUIREMENTS FOR. 
OUARTERLY TEST 

L-4.1 The sterilizer should be loaded with test 
bottles to duplicate a batch for which an MTR 
has previously been established and which has 
been chosen ( normally on a rotating basis with 
the other standard batches ) for this particular 
test. 

L-4.2 Thermocouples should be inserted into the 
two bottles located in positions established during 
commissioning where they were slowest to heat 
up and slowest to cool down. A third thermo- 
couple should be inserted in the drain line. 

L-4.3 The complete cycle temperatures should 
be recorded during a full automatic cycle for the 
selected test load by a test instrument having a 
minimum of three channels. 

L-5. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR. 
YEARLY, COMMISSIONING AND 
RE-COMMISSIONING TESTS 

L-5.1 Reference should be made to Appendix D 
on the selection of test loads. MTRs should be 
established after commissioning for all batch types 
to be processed by the sterilizer. These are 
required for production control purposes, the 



*The breakage rate for new unprocessed bottles may 
exceed this. 

fThis may be higher for non-rigid containers. 



58 



IS; 12430 - 1987 



yearly and re-commissioning tests. The sterilizer 
engineer may apply his discretion in the choice of 
test loads for commissioning, yearly and re- 
commissioning tests and, in most cases, tests on 
two repesentative but dissimilar batch types will 
be sufficient. 

L-5.2 The sterilizer should be loaded with test 
bottles appropriate to the selected test load 

L-5.3 Thermocouples should be inserted into 
bottles which are distributed at eight corners of 
the load and in a bottle at the centre of the 
bottom layer. Two additional thermocouples 
should be inserted, the first in the chamber drain 
and the second within the upper third of the free 
chamber space*. 



*The temperature distribution of fluids in sealed non- 
rigid containers should be ascertained during separate tests 
and thermocouples should be positioned accordingly. 



L-5.4 The complete cycle temperature should be 
recorded during a full automatic cycle, by a test 
instrument having a minimum of 12 channels. 

L-5.5 Attempts to sterilize or disinfect the cooling 
water do not compensate for inadequately sealed 
containers nor for containers not designed for 
processing in rapid-cooled sterilizers. However, if 
the temperature characteristics of the spray cool- 
ing system are required to be known, an addi- 
tional thermocouple may be inserted either in the 
spray water inlet pipe to the chamber, within 
100 mm of its entry to the chamber, or in the 
coldest position in the spray water hold tank. 

L-5.6 If the temperature of the spray cooling 
water has been recorded, it should comply with 
the stated performance specification. 



APPENDIX M 
[ Clauses 2.8, 2.10, 7.11.3 and 8.1.3(f) ] 

PERFORMANCE TESTS FOR STERILIZERS FOR UNWRAPPED INSTRUMENTS AND 

UTENSILS 



M-l. GENERAL 

M-I.l The tests required are those referred to in 
Appendix D, the records of which are required 
for batch and day-to-day production control pur- 
poses. They are as follows! 

a) Weekly temperature and automatic process 
control test; 

b) Ouarterly test, and 

c) Yearly, commissioning and re-commission- 
ing tests. 

M-1.2 For all these tests, the sterilizer should be 
fully loaded with a mixed load of unwrapped in- 
struments and utensils of the type normally 
processed. They should be conducted after a 
warming up cycle has been completed. 

M-2. WEEKLY TEMPERATURE AND 
AUTOMATIC PROCESS CONTROL 
TEST 

M-2.1 It is helpful if the sterilizer is fitted with a 
chart recorded but this is not essential for satis- 
factory operation of the sterilizer or for the 
performance of this test. 

M-2.2 The sterilizer should be operated under 
automatic control and the complete test cycle 
observed. At least three sterilizer instrument 
readings of chamber temperature and pressure 
should be taken at equal time intervals during 
the sterilization hold time. Observations should 
also be made of temperatures and pressures at 



other significant points of the cycle and the dura- 
tion of various stages or sub-stages of the cycle. 
An entry should be made in the plant history 
record of all these observations. 

M-2.3 The test should be considered satisfactory 
if all the following requirements are met: 

a) The measured parameters are consistent 
with pre/iously recorded test results ( parti- 
cular note should be made of the final 
vacuum level on machines having a 
vacuum drying stage); 

b) The engineer observing the test does not 
detect mechanical or any other anomaly; 
and 

c) The load, when removed from the cham- 
ber, is sensibly dry. 

M-3. COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR 
OUARTERLY, YEARLY, 
COMMISSIONING AND 
RE. COMMISSIONING TESTS 

M-3.1 Each of these tests requires that tempe- 
rature measurements be recorded by separate 
thermometric equipment, using a minimum of 
two thermocouples. The thermocouples should 
be placed, one in the chamber drain within 
approximately 100 mm of the exit from the cham- 
ber and the other in contact with the surface of a 
representative load item, for example, closing a 
pair of large forceps on to it. In the case of a 
small sterilizer having no drain, the former should 



59 



IS : 12i30 • 1987 



be insated in an appropriate position within the 
chamJDer, air vent, discharge pipe or adjacent to 
it. 

Note — The thermocouple in the chamber drain 
should be in contact with the condensate at the phase 
boundary condition. This may sometimes require deeper 
insertion than the recommended 100 mm. 

M -3.2 A temperature and automatic process con- 
trol test should be carried out in association with 
these tests, and observations should be made as 
described under weekly test and recorded. 

M -3.3 The tests should be considered satisfactory 
if all the following requirements are met: 

a) The temperatures in the drain and of the 
representative load item are within the 
limits of 134 _*°G during a continuous 
period of 3 minutes of stage 2, 

b) The temperatu re of the representati ve I oad 
item does not differ by more than 2°C 
from that of the chamber drain during 
that 3-minute period, and 

c) Eitherof the following applies: 

1) The cycle is completed in not more 
than 10 minutes for those machines 
supplied with steam from an external 
source, or 

2) It should be possible to complete 16 
cycles within a period of 4 hours, for 
bench type machines having integral 



M-4. 



electrically heated elements. ( It may 
not be necessary to complete 16 cycles 
in order to ensure that the sterilizer 
will pass this test. ) A sterilizer which 
completes 4 cycles from cold in one 
hour will clearly pass this test ( see 
M-4.1 ). 

Note — It is anticipated that tests for 
small electrically heated bench toQ bowl and 
instrument sterilizers will not talie place at 
the user site but that the sterilizer will be 
exchanged for a spare machine and will be 
removed to a suitable central location for 
maintenance and test purposes. 

YEARLY, COMMISSIONING AND 
RE-GOMMISSIONING TESTS 



M-4.1 The alternative test at M-3.3 (c) (2) 
should, ideally, be continued for full 4 hours to 
ensure that the temperature of water in the reser- 
voir does not exceed 90°C with an ambient air 
temperature of between 20 and 25°C. If the rate 
of temperature rise is observed to be satisfactory 
( say 3 or 4°C per cycle ), the tests may be dis- 
continued after 3 or 4 cycles. This does not apply 
to reservoirs within the chamber. 

M-4.2 A third thermocouple should be inserted 
i nto the upper thi rd of the free chamber space for 
detecti ng the superheat. 

M-4.3 The limits for superheating are given in 
Appendix A. 



APPENDIX N 

( Clauses2.8, 210, 7.11.3, 8.1.3, 11.5.1 «Kd/B-9.1) 

PERFORMANCE TESTS FOR HOT AIR STERILIZERS 



N-l. PROCEDURE 

N -1.1 There are two tests for hot air sterilizers: 

a) Basic performance test, and 

b) Production load test. 

N-1.2 The manufacturer should certify that the 
sterilizer has satisfactorily passed the basic per- 
formance test. 

N-1.3 The sterilizer engineer should witness any 
tests performed on site by the manufacturer. 

N-1.4 The basic performance tests should be 
carried out by the sterilizer eng,ineer: 

a) after any modification which may affect the 
performance; and 

b) when the production load test result has 
proved unsatisfactory. 



Note — An unsatisfactory loading pattern 
may result in a sterilizer failing the production 
load test but passing the basic performance test; 
individual load items or containers should be dis- 
posed within the chamber in a manner which 
permits good air circulation. In such cases, it will 
be necessary to redistribute the load and carry out 
additional tests until a loading pattern is estab- 
lished which enables the sterilizer to pass the 
production load test. 

N -1 .5 If the results of the basic performance test 
are unsatisfactory, the department should be 
advised accordingly. 

N-1.6 The sterilizer engineer should carry out 
the production load test on all sterilizers to esta- 
blish the heat up time and to prepare the MTR. 

N-1.7 A 12-channel recorder is normally adequate 
for both tests; one thermocouple should either be 
attached or close to the sensor which serves the 
sterilizer chart recorder and a second should 
either be attached or close to the sensor for the 



60 



15:12430 . 1987 



sterilizer tliermometer. The remaining 10 
tliermocouples are located at test positions 
disposed throughout the load. 

N 2. PRODUCTION LOAD TEST 

N-2.1 In general, an MTR may be established for 
the worst case load, that is, that which will require 
the longest time to reach the sterilizing tempera- 
ture throughout. If the worst case MTR is used 
for smaller loads, they may well be held at the 
sterilizing temperature for prolonged periods. In 
the majority of cases, the extra time at tempera- 
ture will not affect the items processed and the 
extended time will not, therefore, be a practical 
disadvantage. Where prolonged heating can 
cause deterioration of load items ( for example, 
certain medicinal products ), they should be pro- 
cessed by a separate operating cycle with its own 
specific MTR. 

N-2.2 The test should be performed with the 
worst case load ( and any specific load ) for which 
the sterilizer is to be used. 

N-2.3 Two thermocouples are located as in N-1.7. 
For the remaining 10 thermocouples, a series of 
preparatory tests may be required to establish 
which specific items within the test load show the 
widest temperature variation; these will normally 
be at the corners of the chamber and at the cen- 
tre of each' shelf. Once a distribution pattern for 



the thermocouples has been established, it should 
be used in all subsequent tests for that load type. 

N-2.4 If the load consists of non-volatile fluids or 
powders, the thermocouples should be inserted 
through the caps or the lids of the containers so as 
to be at the centre of the contents. If the load 
consists of glass ampoules, the thermocouples 
should be inserted into them and sealed in 
position by means of a heat stable sealant. 

N-2.5 If the load item is an instrument in a con- 
tainer, the thermocouple should be in intimate 
contact with the instrument. 

N-2.6 The multichannel recorder should monitor 
a complete cycle in each of the tests. 

N-2.7 The parameters are defined as follows: 

a) Temperature Overshoot — It is first necessary 
to identify the steady state period. The 
steady state period is the first total period 
of 30 minutes during which the tempera- 
ture varies by not more than 1°C. Under 
certain conditions, the temperature before 
the steady state has been reached is greater 
than the steady state average; when this 
occurs, the difference between the maxi- 
mum temperature attained and the steady 
state average is the temperature overshoot 
( see Fig. 10 ). 































1 


— 1 


1 




120 


-1 — 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 1 

MINUTES PERIOD 


1 


1 

A 


' 
















-4-^' 1 




1 1 1 1 / 1 












i 


ovf 

2 


ERE 


HO 

ma 


OT 

X. 














1 ' 

AVE 
1 


" 1 
RAGE-i 
1 




1 


DR 


FT 


TEMPERATU 
AVERAGE 


RE 


1°C 


max . 






1 








k 
















i 






































y 








^ 




"" 






"^ 






















1 




> 

















jL 


< 
































"h 

U3 

E 

UJ 

on 
< 

IX. 
UJ 

-a. 

z 

UJ 

*- 


1 




t 






1 






o 






^ 


' 










T 


o 














1 


! 


3 


C 








/ 










< 1 1 1 
30 MINUTES 




FVTR 


FMF 


TF 


MP 


1 
FRATURE 


1 1 1 1 
30 MINUTES 


1 
1 


'< 




STEADY 


D.I.FFER. BY LESS THAN 


FINAL PERIOoH 


a. 

Z 

UJ 






/ 


' 












ST/ 


aE 


P£ 


ERI 


DD 






1 


"C 


























> 


o 

O 

o 

** - 




1 


/ 


























































A 


1 




























A 5 


1 1 
MINUTES 


x/ 




















NOT MORE 
THAN 2°C-, 


V 










^ r 


1 




/ .1 

HEAT U 


r~ 1 1 

P TIMF* 




















































35 MINUTES max. 




1 


Ambient 




■ A 


^ 














































■ V ■ 


SWITCH ON 




TT 









TEMPERATURE 



TIME (5MINUTE INTERVALS) 



*Heat up time is the additional parameter to be identified for a 140°C temperature rise during a basic performance test. 
Note 1 ~ The recording will normally be that obtained from a multichannel 'dotting' instrument which will also 
show the test jar thermocouple temperatures. 

Note 2 — The illustration represents the recording obtained from the thermocouple in contact with the sterilizer 
chart recorder sensing element, and indicates which significant parameters require to be identified. 

Note 3 — The illustration shows both overshoot, and ripple, neither of which may be evident in a test because of 
thermal hysteresis effects. 

Fig. 10 Temperature Overshoot Curve 

61 



15:12430 - 1987 



Note — Temperature overshoot as defined in 
15:3119-1978* sliould be used as a guide for 
establisliing MTRs. In practice, it may be found 
tliat tfie 2°C limit may be exceeded by virtue of 
the load distribution. The disposition of load items 
should not, however, result in overshoot in excess 
of 5°C. 

b) In a repeat test, the chamber temperature 
as indicted by the thermocouple attached 
to the sensor of the sterilizer chart recorder 
and the thermocouple attached to the 
sensor of the sterilizer thermometer are 
reproduced to within rc of their pre^/ious 
reading ( the tests to determine reproduci- 
bility may be performed independently 
with an empty chamber ); and 

c) When tested during a separate test, the 
overheat cut-out operates satisfactorily. 

N GTE — This test may be carried out with an 
empty chamber and either by setting the chamber 
control thermostat above 200°C or by preventing 
its operation. The temperature is measured in 
this test by means of the thermocouple in contact 
with the chart recorder element. 

N-2.10 Tests to determine all these parameters 
may be performed simultaneously. Therefore, if 
the recorder is of the multichannel dotting type 
care is required when scrutinizing the resultant 
traces. For each of these tests, it is necessary to 
identify separately the trace obtained from the 
thermocouple attached to the sterilizer chart 
recorder sensing element. 

N-2.11 All the multichannel recorder charts 
should be retained as part of the commissioning 
documents. These records should include details 
of the worst ca';e test load as follows: 

a) Type of product; 

b) Size, volume and type of container or 
wrapping material; 

c) Number of product items; 

d) Distribution within the chamber; 

e) Shelving system used; and 

f) Location of thermocouples used in the test 
to establish the MTR. 

N-3. ESTABLISHING THE MTR 

N-3.1 The TRC obtained during the final satis- 
factory worst case load test can be used for the 
production of MTR. 



N-3.2 The MTR should be annotated to show the 
details in N-2.11 and: 

a) The description of the worst case load; 

b) The thermostat setting to ensure all parts 
of the load reach temperature and to 
account for temperature variation ( the 
coldest load item may be 5°C below the 
temperature recorder on the MTR ); and 

c) The timer setting to ensure heat-up of all 
load items and exposure to the sterilizing 
temperature for the appropriate time. 

Note — Tests undertaken to establish an 
MTR should commence with the sterilizer and 
load temperature within 2°C of the ambient 
temperature. 

N-3.3 The number of MTRs required is a matter 
of agreement between the sterilizer engineer and 
the operator. Only one MTR should be in use 
for each sterilizer unless products are likely to be 
adversely affected by extended heating ( see 
N-2.1 ). 

N-4. HALF-YEARLY TEST 

N -4.1 For this test, a 3-channel temperature recor- 
der may be used and the test should be performed 
using the worst case load for which the MTR has 
been established. 

N-4.2 Two thermocouples should be placed as 
in N-1.7 the third being used to measure the 
temperature of a load item located in one of the 
positions used during the commissioning tests. 

N-4.3 The test should be considered satisfactory 
if all the following requirements are met: 

a) The test requirements of N-2.9 are met 
[ except for item (c) ], and 

b) The temperature of the load item is within 
2°C of the temperature measured at the 
same position during the commissioning 
or re-commissioning tests. 

N-5. YEARLY TEST 

N-5.1 For this test, a 12-channel recorder is 
required and the test should be conducted with 
the. worst case load for which the MTR was 
established. 

N-5.2 The test should be considered satisfactory 
if all the requirements of N-2.9 are met. 



*Specifi cation for hot air sterilizers { first revision) ■ 



62 






100 



■NO. 1- THERMOCOUPLE OR 
, RECORDER SENSOR 

NO. 11 THERMOCOUPLE 
IN BOTTOM LEFT 
HAND CORNER JAR-^ 



120 




LESS THAN»5 C 



In this test the temperature variation was +3'5°G and — 0'5°C. A temperature variation of ±5°C is acceptable. 
• Fio. 11 Typical (Good ) 12 CHANNEL RECORDING and Shows the Distribution of Test J ar Temperature 



(» 



N3 






15:12430 - 1987 



APPENDIX P 
( Clauses 3.1.6 and 11.5.1) 

TYPICAL MASTER TEMPERATURE RECORD 



P-l. GENERAL 

P-I.l A typical master temperature record is 
sliown in Fig. 12. Tliis is a copy of tine cliart from 
tine sterilizer chart recorder. A simultaneous 
temperature recording using a 12-channel chart 
recorder was used to validate the MTR; the 12- 
channel chart recording showed that the 
temperatures of fluid in the test bottles varied 
between 116 and 118°C at the start of the 
sterilization hold time. These temperatures were 
maintained within the sterilization temperature 



limits for a period of 30 minutes, and during 
the last 5 minutes of the 30 minutes hold time 
were all within rc. 

P-l. 2 The sensor of the sterilizer recorder res- 
ponded to the temperature at one point, in this 
case the chamber drain; the MTR is, therefore, 
an analogue, representing a time/ temperature 
profile of a satisfactory sterilization cycle with 
which all subsequent production load TRCs for 
similar loads can be compared. 



64 



IS: 12430 • 1987 




BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah ZafarMarg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones 1 3310131, 3311375 

Regional Offices; 

Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW DELHI 10002 

*Eastern i1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern iSCO 445-446, Sector 35-C,CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern iC. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 

fWestemt Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Maroi, Andheri ( East ), 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams i Manakaanstha 
( Common to all offices ) 

Telephone 

3310131) 3311375 

362499 

21843, 31641 

412442, 412519, 412916 

6329295 



Branch Offices: 
Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 

Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 
BANGALORE 560058 

Gangotrl Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 
BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane.GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg (Nampally Station Road), 
HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KA NPUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam, TRIVANDRUM 695035 

Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 

'Pushpanjali', First Floor, 205A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar 
Square, NAGPUR 440010 

institution of Engineers ( India) Building, 1332 Shlvajl Nagar, 
Rune 411005 



26348, 28349 
384955, 384956 

66716 

53627 

231083 



63471, 


69832 


216876, 


218292 




62305 


62104, 


62117 




25171 




52435 



'Sales OfDcB in Calcutta Is at 5 Chowrlngnes Approach, P. 0. Crlnsep Street, 
Calcutta 700072 

tSaJB* Office In Bombay lo at Novelty Chambeis, Giant Road, Bombay 40009T 



276800 
886588 



Printed at New India Printlno Press, Khuria, India 



