•*****••*•••***• 



* i&$z 




• 



■*■ 



Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 





Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



:^a^ \ I *7SS^X^^«^> 



sfrWMfrf* 



IS 12833 (1989) : Agricultural produce milling machinery - 
Roller flour mills - Flow diagram [FAD 20: Agriculture and 
Food Processing Equipments] 



K^V/l/I^^S>^fe 



[SS^l M>*Sy!^^S?» 



&rti\X&k 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge " y^S' 



H 



<*c e *j> 



% 



m^ tt^t ^tit <smhi | *fr wt ^tftt ^f ^rr ^^n If 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



• 



* 



• 



BLANK PAGE 




<_<**££ 




*£j> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 12833: 1989 

(Reaffirmed 1999) 



AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MILLING 
MACHINERY — ROLLER FLOUR MILLS 

FLOW DIAGRAM 



UDC 664733 : 65*015*13 : 66011 



© BIS 1990 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1990 Price Group 3 



Agricultural Produce Milling Machinery Sectional Committee,, FADC 39 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 27 October 1989, 
after the draft finalized by the Agricultural Produce Milling Machinery Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

This standard has been prepared to provide a basic idea for various processes and equipment 
involved in roller flour milling for the guidance of the millers particularly for modernization and 
setting up of new mills. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from Central Institute of Agricul- 
tural Engineering ( ICAR ), Bhopal. 



IS 12833 : 1989 



Indian Standard 

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MILLING 
MACHINERY — ROLLER FLOUR MILLS — 

FLOW DIAGRAM 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers flow diagrams for 
roller flour milling. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the follow- 
ing definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Equipment 

2.1.1 Aspirator 

An equipment used for aspiration. 

2.1.2 Break Roll Mill 

A mill equipped with a pair of corrugated rolls 
placed diagonally or horizontally in parallel 
alignment, rotating at differential speed towards 
each other. 

2.1.3 Conveyor 

An equipment or component through which 
material is moved from one point to other. 

2.1.4 Cyclone Separator 

A separating device in which strong contrifugal 
force acting radially is used in place of relative- 
ly week gravitational force acting vertically 
downwards. 



2.1.5 Destoner 

A mechanical device 
from the grain. 



which separates stones 



2.1.6 Disc Separator 

An equipment in which particles longer or shor- 
ter than wheat grains but similar in diameter 
can be separated from wheat by means of inden- 
ted discs with indents of pre-determined shape 

and size. 

2.1.7 Elevator 

A conveyor in which the material is moved up- 
wards. 

2.1.8 Magnetic Separator 

A device to remove magnetic materials from the 
grain mass. 

2.1.9 Middlings Rolls 

A pair or pairs of smooth rolls used to reduce 
middlings in process, to flour particles size. 
Also called reduction rolls. 



2.1.10 Plane S'fter 

A shifting machine consisting of a number of 
super-imposed sieves gyrating together in a hori- 
zontal plane, having a rotary motion. 

2.1.11 Purifier 

A machine with one to three layers or ducts of 
sieves set in an oscillating frame. It employs the 
principle of separation by size and density to 
separate a mixture of pure endosperm, composite 
pieces of endosperm and bran and branny 
material from each other. 

2.1.12 Reels or Revolving Screens 

Cylindrical screens with slight inclination into 
which the material enters at one end and falls 
through openings into a collecting mechanisms 
while over-size material is discharged at the 
opposite end. 

2.1.13 Roller Mill 

A mechanism used to grind wheat into flour and 
by-products. It consists of one or more pairs of 
cylindrical rolls arranged with their axis parallel 
and set in a heavy frame. Rolls may be corruga- 
ed (break rolls) or smooth (reduction rolls). 

2.1 14 Spiral Trieur 

A device used principally for separating raw 
seeds from fractioned or shrivelled wheat ker- 
nels. It consists of several spiral canals wound 
concentrically round on a vertical shaft. 

2.1.15 Thickness Grader 

A machine which separates particles by thick- 
ness. It is efTective for separation of unripe 
grain from whole grain. 

2.1.16 Whizzer 

A machine which removes surface wheat from 
gram after washing by centrifugal force. 

2.2 Operations 

2.2.1 Aeration 

The process of blowing small quantity of air 
through ihe bulk of agricultural produce for 
cooking and equalizing the temperature of the 
produce, to prevent moisture migration and for 
preserving the agricultural produce from 
biological deterioration. 



1 



IS 12833 : 1989 



2.2.2 Air Classification 

A process which uses air currents in 
combination with centrifugal force, to effect the 
separation of flour particles into different ranges 
according to size and density. 

2.2.3 Aspiration 

The process of cleaning by air blast and separa- 
ting the foreign material which is substantially 
lower in specific gravity than the produce to be 
cleaned. 

2.2.4 Blending of Wheat 

The process of drawing measured amount of 
different lots from bins and mixing these parts 
into a uniform blend. 

2.2.5 Bolting 

Sifting of mill stocks (flour) by means of wire, 
silk or nylon covered seives. 

2.2.6 Break System 

The stage in the milling process where the grain 
is broken open and treated on successive rolls to 
separate the endosperm from the bran coat. 

2.2.7 Brushing 

A step in cleaning of wheat, where dust remain- 
ing after scouring is removed by action of 
brushes on the surface of grains. 

2.2.8 Chaffing 

Pneumatic separation of very light materials 
from the produce. 

2.2.9 Cleaning 

The removal of foreign or dissimilar material by 
washing, screening, hand picking, aspiration or 
any other mechanical means. 

2.2.10 Conditioning 

Adjustment of moisture content under control- 
led conditions, followed by a resting period to 
achieve a proper equilibrium of moisture through 
individual grains which toughens bran and 
mellows the endosperm, thereby improving 
the separation of endosperm from bran. 

2.2.11 Vamping 

Addition of water for inducing optimum mois- 
ture for operation of milling process and for 
getting the desired moisture content of the final 
products. 

2.2.12 Grading 

In terms of milling, it means the classification by 
sifting, prior to purification, of the endosperm 
particles emanating from the break system into 
a relatively narrow range of particle size. 



2.2 .13 Gradual Reduction 

The process by which wheat is broken down to 
flour and by-products in several stages. This 
makes it possible to separate much of the bran 
before wheat is pulverized into flour particle 
size, resulting in a whiter flour with improved 
baking properties. 

2.2.14 Impact Milling 

The reduction in size of particles by flinging 
them at very high speed against a hard surface. 

2.2.15 Middling 

Particles of wheat endosperm extracted from the 
break system which have yet to be ground into 
flour. Also commercially, a by-product of mill- 
ing, consisting mainly of the coarse material 
tailing over the end of the reduction system. 

2.2.16 Pneumatic Conveying 

Transporting of material in enclosed tubes using 
air under negative or positive pressure as the 
conveying medium. 

2.2.17 Re constitution 

The blending or mixing together of original con- 
stituents in the same proportions as found in the 
original complex substance. 

2.2.18 Scouring 

Part of the cleaning section in the wheat mill 
where superficial dirt and loose shreds beeswing 
are removed by abrasion of wheat surface against 
perforated metal or emery lined cylinder and 
thereby blowing away the dirt by air current. 

2.2.19 Screening 

Separation of grains by a mechanical device 
where the desired material is carried over the 
device and the undesired material penetrates the 
device. It is a method of separating particles 
according to size alone. 

2.2.20 Tempering 

A process less elaborate than conditioning which 
produces desired physical changes, resulting in 
optimum milling in wheat by means of water 
additions and time for penetration. 

2 3 Products 

2.3.1 ATT A 

Whole wheat flour of 90 to 95 percent extraction 
rate. 

2.3.2 Bleaching Agent 

A substance added to flour to bleach out the 
yellow pigment, naturally present in flour and 
thereby gives a whiter appearance to the flour 
and the bread produce from it, for example, 
benzoyl peroxide. 



IS 12833 : 1989 



2.2.3 Bran 

The outer most covering or seed coat of the 
wheat grain, 

NOTE — Commercially, it is a by-product of the 
milling process consisting of the large pieces of 
bran remaining after the flour has been extracted 
from wheat. 



the break rolls as the grain 
break system of the milling 



2.3.4 Break Flour 

Flour produced by 
passes through the 
process. 

2.3.5 Clean Wheat 

The wheat that has been run through a receiving 
separator for the removal of dockage and other 
extraneous materials such that it is fit for con- 
ditioning and milling. 

2.3.6 Germ 

The embryo in a cereal grain which grows into 
the new plant. 



2.3.7 Resultant ATTA 

A by-product of roller flour mills. After remo- 
val of MAID A, S UJI and bran, the rest of the 
endosperm adhered with bran is ground to make 
resultant ATTA. This ATTA is quite different 
from whole meal ATTA. 

2.3.8 Shorts 

A mixture of small pieces of bran and fibrous 
material remaining after flour has been extracted 
from the wheat. It is a by-product used for 
animal feed. 

3 FLOW DIAGRAM 

3.1 A basie flow diagram of the flour milling is 
given m Fig. 1. 

3.2 A general flow diagram of milling section is 
given in Fig. 2. 

3.3 A flow diagram for roller flour mill is given 
in Fig. 3. 

3.4 Flow diagram for fractioning process of 
flour mill is given in Fig. 4. 




STORAGE CLEANING AND MILLING STORAGE OF 

CONDITIONING FINISHED PRODUCTS 

Fig. 1 Basic Flow 



BRFAK SYSTEM 



REDUCTION 
SYSTEM 




ESSING 
IFUGES 



Fig. 2 Flow Sheet Milling Section 
3 



< ircvoxe. si^r^ta* 




$ 



PURIFIER 



REDUCING 
ROLLS 



e 



BRAN & SHORTS 
REDUCING ROLLS 




SIFTER 



31 



PURIFIER 



a 




■SIFTER — 



EACHING 



f ENRICHING Si 



W 






00 



BRAN P 

R 



SHORTS 





CLEAR FLOUR U 

c 



GERM 



PATENT FLOUR 




HOME & 

gAKERlES 



Fig, 3 Flqw Diagram for Roller Flour 



IS 12833 : 1989 




r?=^ 



REGROUNO 
FLpUR 








RE GROUND FLOUR 



tNOd>A£AM CHUNKS 



c Q O^Wo 
ooo o SbOoQo 



INTERMEDIATE FRACTION 



Fig. 4 Fractionino Process of Flour 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act y 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS 
giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. FADC 39 ( 3059 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T> Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

J 331 01 31 
\ 331 13 75 

37 86 62 



2 18 43 

41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



