**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10471 (1983) : Recommended practice for corrosion 
prevention in electronic component and assemblies [MTD 24: 
Corrosion Protection] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: 10471 -1983 

(Reaffirmed 2002) 



RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

CORROSION PREVENTION IN ELECTRONIC 

COMPONENT AND ASSEMBLIES 



UDG 6aiS8 038: 620193 




® Cvfi^ighl 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAW, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAtAR MARG 

NEW US.IMI 110002 



18:10471-1983 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

CORROSION PREVENTION IN ELECTRONIC 

COMPONENT AND ASSEMBLIES 

Corrosion Protection Sectional Committeej SMDC 29 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi C. p. Db Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Members 

Dn A. G. KxJLKAKNi {Alternate to 
Shri G. P. De ) 
Db M. Balakrishnan Pyrene-Rai Metal Treatments Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Pendhukar ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. D. Bhuptani Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri S. P. Ckakbaborti Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Road Wing ) 

Shri V. K.Jain Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 

Shbi K. S. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Joint Dirkotob Standards Ministry of Railways 
( Carriage-I \, RDSO 
Deputy Diuectob (Met) 4, 
RDSO {Alternate) 
Shbi V. R. Krishnan The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Db Sandif Kitmab Roy ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. K. Lahibi Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi D. K. Singh Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd 

Shbi R. M. Singh ai. ( Alternate I ) 
Shbi R. M. Mishba ( Alternate II ) 
Shbi K, P, Mukherjee National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Db Indeb Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. N. Mukhebjee Steel Authorityof India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Ltd ), 

Bokaro 
Shbi K, Annaiah ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. P. Naoab Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay 

Shri D. P, Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. M. Nath Llyods Tar Products Ltd, New Delhi 



Shbi N. Sbinivas ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10471 - 1983 



( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 

Shri L. Pogazhen^thy 
Dr K. S. Rajagopai^an 



Representing 

Indian Lead Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi 
Central Electro-Chemical Research Institute 
(GSIR),Karaikudi 
Dr K. Balakrishan (Alternate) 
Shri S. Ramajayam Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. S. Nanjunda Rao ( Alternate ) 



Shri G. Ramamubthy 

Shri S. K.Jain (Alternate) 
Dr N. p. Rao 

Shri J. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. H. Rodricks 

Shri S. S, Pitre ( Alternate ) 
Db a. K. Sahu 

Shki D. K. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Sen 
Shri D. Sen Gupta 
Shri H. R. Sreenath 

Shri B, G. S. Goel ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Sbinivasak 

Shri Shashi Kant ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. M. Verma 

Shri R. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, 
Director ( Srtuc & Met ) 



Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, 
Jamshedpur 

Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Fibreglass PilkingtonXtd, Bombay 

National Test House, Calcutta 

Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 
Oil India Ltd, Calcutta 

Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 
Plant), Rourkela 

National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 



Secretary 
Shri B. Mukherji 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS : 10471 -. 1983 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

CORROSION PREVENTION IN ELECTRONIC 

COMPONENT AND ASSEMBLIES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 29 January 1983, after the draft finahzed by the Corrosion 
Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Electronic components and assemblies are used in a variety of 
environments possessing varying magnitude of corrosivity. The high 
degree of performance and precision achieved in the field of electronics 
is quite often nullified by failures caused by corrosion of electronic 
components. Therefore, a standard M^hich establishes the minimum 
requirement for corrosion control in electronic components is a prerequisite 
to maintain a factor of higher reliability. Such a standard can also 
be used as a comprehensive guide for selection of materials and 
protection measures. 

0,3 The purpose of this standard is to establish the requirements for the 
corrosion control of electronic components and to serve as an aid in 
selection of materials as well as corrosion control procedures. Compliance 
with this standard will minimise the corrosion failures in electronic 
components and assemblies. 

0,4 This standard does not attempt to explain the corrosion mechanism 
and does not cover all the eventualities leading to failures which may 
arise in a practical situation. 

0.5 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from 
the following overseas publications: 

a) Mil Standard 1250 (MI ) of 1967, U.S.A. 

b) 'Proceedings of the Triservice Conference on Corrosion* 
Published by Matals and Ceramics Information Centre, Battele, 
1972, U.S.A. 

3 



15:10471-1983 

c) ^Marine Corrosion, Causes and Prevention, by F.L, Laqucj John 

VVilley, 1975. 

d) Trotective Coatings for Metals' by R.M. Burnes and W. W, 

Bradley, Reinhold, 1967. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers recommendations for prevention of corrosion of 
metalHc materials in electronic components and assemblies. It does not 
deal with the electronic uses of non-metallic materials, such as plastics, 
composites, elastomers and other polymeric materials. 

1.2 The scope of this standard is limited to the anticorrosive performance 
of metallic materials used in electronic components and related corrosion 
control measures. 

1.2.1 This standard does not cover electrical or mechanical design 
except those aspects which affect susceptibility towards corrosion. 

1.2.2 This standard however does not debar the use of other proven 
commercial material or process selected and concurred by the procuring 
agency or authority. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions, in addition 
to those given in IS : 3531-1966* shall apply. 

2.1 Case Corrosion ~~ A type of corrosion over the surface of 
component case ( for example, the case of a capacitor ) which obliterates 
identification of markings making it difficult for replacement or repair of 
circuit. 

2.2 Element Corrosion — Corrosion under a coating which progresses 
by entry of moisture through wicking action along metal lead ( for 
example — corrosion of wire wound fixed resistors ). 

2.3 Bimetallic Corrosion — Corrosion of metallic couples due to 
galvanic action through the electrolyte. i 

2.4 Contact Corrosion — Corrosion at contact of electro-mechanical 
devices such as relays and switches caused by build up of contaminants 
or by corrosion product across an insulation barrier. 



*Glossary of terms relating to corrosion of metals. 

4 



18:10471-1983 

2.5 Lead Wire Corrosion — A form of corrosion failure in respect of 
lead wires which corrode near proximity to the part body resulting in 
necking or growing, 

2.6 Hermetic Seal — An impervious seal made by fusion of metals 
or ceramic materials by brazing, soldering, welding or fusion which 
prevents the passage of gas or moisture, , 

2.7 Purple Plague — A brittle gold-aluminium compound formed in 
the presence of silicones. 

2.8 Red Plague — A copper oxide corrosion product found on, silver 
plate over copper at pinholes or breaks. 

2.9 Silver Migration — The migration of silver from one conductor in 
a circuit to another which is at different electrical potential across 
ceramic or plastic insulation under humid conditions. 

3. CORROSIVE ATMOSPHERE 

3.1 General — It is of prime interest to user or manufacturer to identify 
the atmosphere in which the equipment will be put to use. Synergistic 
effects of particulate matter, corrosive gases, humidity and temperature 
should be taken into account, 

3.1.1 Atmospheres vary with respect to moisture, temperature and 
contaminants. In the proximity of seacoast the atmosphere is laden with 
increasing amount of sea salts, which promote and accelerate corrosion. 
In tlie industrial areas, gases containing oxide of sulphur, nitrogen 
and suspended particulate matter are encountered, 

3.1.2 Metals in the atmosphere tend to form oxide scale which posses 
higher electrical resistivity compared to base metals. Rate of oxide 
formation is influenced by temperature. Metal surface at high humidity 
tend to become wet or retain moisture. Particulate matter and 
atmospheric gases catalyse formation of electrolytic corrosion products. 
Protective qualities of the metal/metal oxide surface are liable to 
degrade under high humidity condition and high degree of suspended 
matter. 

3.2 Moisture — Moisture in the electronic assemblies adversely affects 
the corrosion resistance of metals. It encourages growth of microorganisms 
such as fungi and bacteria. Presence of fungi and bacteria accelerate 
the localised corrosion process. 

3.2.1 Adequate housings, seals, gaskets and closures shall be used 
to exclude moisture from the equipment. Electronic components shall 
be preserved at temperature above dew point. 



IS : 10471 " 1983 

3,2«2 Pockets, traps and sump areas where moisture may be trapped or 
collected shall be avoided. 

3.2.3 Hygroscopic materials shall not be used in the electronic 
equipment. 

3.2.4 Dessicants shall not be used unless necessary for moisture level 
control. Dessicants, if usedj shall not be in contact with the unprotected 
part of the equipment. 

3,3 Atmosphere in the Equipment — The design and construction of 
the equipment shall incorporate techniques such as protective coating, 
encapsulation, evacuation, hermetic sealing, filtering of air, removal of 
moisture and air borne corrodents to ensure lowest possible corrosivity. 

3.3.1 Where forced cooling is necessary to maintain equipment at 
permissible operating temperature, mosture and airborne contaminants 
shall be removed externally before cooling air passes over electronic 
components. 

4. SELECTION OF METALS 

4.1 General — Suitability for the purpose and inherent corrosion 
resistance shall be of prime consideration while selection is done. Unless 
otherwise specified, the surface of the metals shall be smooth, bearing no 
crevices and scratches. Metals shall be compatible with each other and 
shall not produce outgas or fumes on welding and brazing. Compati- 
bility of metals may be ascertained by referring to Table 1. Corrosion 
resistance may be determined using neutral salt spray test, 

4.1.1 All metals shall be throughly cleaned before joining, casting, 
rolling, impregnating or encaspulating. Cleaning of surface shall be 
done after welding, brazing ar soldering, 

4.1.2 Steels shall not be cathodically cleaned either in acid or alkali 
except anodic cleaning. 

4.1.3 Organic solvents shall be used with care to avoid contact with 
plastic or polymeric materials. 

4«1*4 Vapour degreasing shall be done in accordance with procedures 
laid down in IS : 3194-1980*. 

4.1.5 All cleaning materials shall be compatible with parts or 
components of the assembly ( see Table I ). 



^Recommended practice for cleaning of metals prior to electroplating ( first revision), 

6 



IS 1 10471 r. 1983 



TABUE; 1 COMPATIBILITY OF MATERIALS 

( Clauses 4.1, 4.1.5, 7.2.2 and 9.4 ) 



Materials 

Copper, iron, manganese 

Cadmium 

Silver 



Copper, brass, tin, lead, tin-lead^ alumi- 
nium, zinc, magnesium, gold coating 
over copper -alloys 

Copper, brass, silver 

Copper, brass, cadmium, humidity in- 



iop^ 



icators containing cobalt salts 

Acrylic, alkyd, cellulosic, polyamide, 
polyester, polyethylene polyurethane 
polymeric materials 

Arcyline, alkyd, cellulosic, polyesters 

Acrylic, cellulosic, polycarbonates, poly- 
styrene 

Vinyl, neoptene 

All organic coating used in electronic 
assemblies 



Incompatible Environment/ 
Materiai, 

Rubber, acid 

Organic vapours 

Sulphide bearing atmosphere 
and polymeric materials 

Polyvinylchloride 



Paper, cardboard 
Ammonia 

Acids 

Alkali 

Hydrocarbon solvents 

Diester oils, ketonic solvents 
Silicon oils and greases 



4.1.6 Dust, dirt and finger prints shall be removed prior to assembly 
storage. 

4.1.7 Contact leads should be of corrosion resistant metal to avoid 
end seal jnigration. 

4.1.8 Metals which are inherently resitant to tarnish and oxidation shall 
be selected. Metals, prone to tarnishing, shall be protected from 
oxidation by plating with noble metals listed in Table 2 or by suitable 
non-insulating coating given in Table 3. 

4.2 Conjoint Action of Stress and Corrosion — Metals and alloys 
which are resistant to stress corrosion and intergranular corrosion shall be 
selected where residual and induced stresses are involed. After 
mechanical working, such as bending, shaping and forming, annealing 
shall be carried out to remove residual stresses. 



IS : 10471 - 1983 



TABLE 2 SELECTION OF CORROSION RESISTANT METALLIC COATINGS 

( Clauses 4A,B, 5,2 and HA) 

Recommended Coating 



PUBPOSB 



Coating Not 
Recommended 



Contact with aluminium 
and magnesium 

Prior to painting 
Tarnish prevention 



Marine expsoure 

Solderability 

Storage 

Wear 

Easy etching for printed 
circuit board manu- 
facture 



Cadmium, tin 

Cadmium, tin 

Nickel between copper 
and silver, gold over 
silver, copper and 
nickel, rhodium over 
silver 

Passivated cadmium 
coatings 

Tin, gold or tin lead 

Reflowtd heavy tin, 
gold or rhodium 

Hard chromium nickle, 
rhodium 

Cadmium, nickel, tin 



Chromium, copper, 
silver, gold 

Chromium, c o p p er, 
nickle, gold, silver 



Nickel, c h r o m i u m, 
rhodium 

Cadmium silver, copper 

Cadmium, tin 

Tin-lead, rhodium, 
silver, gold 



TABLE 3 COMPATIBLE SURFACE FINISHES FOR ELECTRICAL BONDING 

( Clauses ^A.S and 7.2 A) 

Metal . Surface Finish 



Aluminium and aluminium 
clad alloys 

Copper and copper alloys 

Cadmium 

Iron and steel 

Nickel and corrosion resistant 

steels 
Silver 
Tin 



Bare or low electrical resistance chromate 
type film treatment, tin plating, cadmium 
plating or nickel cadmium plating - 

Bare or tin plate, cadmium plating preferred 

Bare or chromate treated 

Tin coating, tin lead plating, cadmium 
coating preferred 

Bare, difficult to bonding because of 
adherent oxide film ' '/ 

Bare ■ ^ 

Bare 



IS : 10471 - 1983 

4.3 Hydrogen Embrittlement — Metals and alloys which are not 
susceptible to delayed frarture due to hydrogen pickup shall be given 
preference. Metals and alloys subceptible to such delayed fracture are to 
be coated by organic coating or vacuum deposition of resistant metals, 

4.3,1 Where electroplating is a necessity, the components shall be 
embrittlement relieved at 190*^ ± 14°G for a minimum period of there 
hours. 

4»3.2 Where practicable parts shall be mechanically stress relieved by 
shot peening in accordance with IS : 7001-1973*. 

4.4 Whisker Growth — Tin, cadmium and iron are susceptible to 
whisker growth in humid atmosphere. Whisker growth shall be mini- 
mized by use of heavier metal coating within permissible limits. Hot dip 
process of deposition, reheating of deposits, by shot peening and 
maintaining low level of humidity may be judiciously used. 

4.5 Silver Migration — Silver migration shall be minimized by the 
following techniques as applicable. 

4.5.1 Spacing between conductors at different voltages shall be as wide 
as possible. 

4.5.2 Conductors shall be protected by organic coatings where 
permissible. 

4.5.3 Contaminants shall be removed by forced air drying. 

4.5.4 Where practicable tin-lead, gold and platinum coatings shallbe 
used. 

4.5.5 Non-hygroscopic insulation shall be used. 

5. TREATMENT OF FERROUS PARTS FOR CORROSION 
PREVENTION 

5.1 Air carbon steels shall be passivated in accordance with 18:6005- 
1970t. 

5.1.1 Precipitation hardenable steels shall be given one coat of zinc 

chromate primer ( see IS : 104-1979+ ) followed by a suitable top coat. 



♦Method for shot peening and test for shot peened ferrous metal parts, 
fCode of practice for phosphating or iron and steel. 

^Specification for ready mixed paint, brushing, zinc chrome^ priming {second 
revision), 

9'^ 



IS : 10471 - 1983 

5.2 Metallic Coating — Where applicable, carbon steels shall be coated 
with cadmium, tin and nickel as applicable ( see Table 2 ). 

5.3 Carbon steel parts, which are totally and continuously immersed in 
oil or contained in a heremetically seald unit, shall not be coated, 

5.4 Laminations used in magnetic circuits shall not be plated or coated. 

5.5 Organic coatings or lacquers shall be preferred in respect of springs 
and component cases which are prone to case corrosion. 

5.6 Contact corrosion may be avoided by use of thick nickel plating. 

6. TREATMENT OF NON-FERROUS FARTS FOR CORROSION 
PREVENTION 

6.1 Aluminium — Anodizing of aluminium parts shall be done in 
accordance with 18:7088-1973* after punching, drilling, machining, 
forming and any other fabrication work is completed, 

6.1.1 Anodizing shall not be carried out in areas of electrical bonding. 

6.1.2 Electrical bond areas shall be suitably masked before anodizing, 

6.1.3 Chromate type anodizing process shall be applied where masked 
bond is involved. 

6.1.4 Other metallic coatings such as electroless nickel shall be 
considered for applications, involving high temperatures such as heat- 
sinks. 

6.1.5 Aluminium components may be treated for a conversion coating 
of either chromate/phosphate or chromate/boride type depending on the 
electrical conductivity requirement for the treated components. 

6.2 Copper — Copper possess a good degree of corrosion resistance to 
atmospheric corrosion. Where tarnish prevention is a necessity, polyure- 
thane or silicone cured resin films may be used. Silicone oils and 
greases shall not be applied. 

6.3 Magnesium — Magnesium possess poor resitance to corrosion. 
Where magnesium is intended to be used, approval for specific application 
shall be obtained prior to its design incorporation from the competent 
authority. 



♦Recommended practice for anodizing aluminium and its alloys. 

10 



IS : 10471 - 1983 

6.3*1 Use of magnesium based alloys shall not hs reommended in 
tropical atmospheres. 

6«3.2 Prior to its incorporation in the electronic assembly, magnesium 
parts shall be anodized and shall be given two coats of alkali resistant 
primer followed by a compatible top coat. 

6.3.3 Extreme precautians shall be taken at magnesium metal contacts 
to avoid destructive corrosion. Where practicable alminum alloy 
gasket shall be interposed between two metals. In case use of gasket is 
not practicable, the joint shall be sealed with moisture proofing 
compound. 

7. CORROSION PREVENTION AT DISSIMILAR METAL 
CONTACTS 

7.1 General — Metals having different emfin the galvanic series are 
prone to corrosion due to galvanic action. Institution and propagation of 
corrosion at dissimilar metal contacts takes place in presence of 
condensed water acting as electrolyte. Anodic member of the couple 
is seriously corroded. 

7.1.1 Dissimilar metals having wide difference of emf [in the galvanic 
series shall not be used for contacts unless fully protected. 

7-1.2 Effort shall be made in design to aviod collection of moisture/ 
electrolyte at metallic contacts. 

7.1.3 Where necessary, dissimilar metals shall be selected from 
the permissible couple, as given in Table 4. 

7.1.4 Metallic contact implies the contact between the two matallic 
materials existing on surfaces; for example, contact between copper 
coated with nickel and copper coated with silver implies contact between 
nickel and silver. 

7.1.5 Joining metal shall not be anodic to the metal being joined. 

7.1.6 Electrically conducting graphite shall be considered as metal for 
the purpose of determining galvanic compatibility. 

7.2 Joining of Metals — Due consideration shall be given to possible 
corrosion due to galvanic action while making a choice of joining method. 
Table 4 may be referred as a guide in selection of solders. Joints 
shall be continuous and crevices shall be avoided. Preventive measures 
that should be taken to minimise galvanic corrosion are given in 
Appendix A. 

11 



IS : 10471 - 1983 



TABLE 4 PERMISSIBLE GALVANIC COUPLES 

( Clause 7.1.3 ) 



Akodic Component 



Zinc, zinc aUoys and zinc coatings 

Aluminium, cast and wrought alloys 
other than duralumin 

Aluminium wrought alloys of dura- 
lumin type 

Tin plate, tin lead solders, solid lead 
and lead alloys 

Stainless steels, martensitic and 
ferritic 

Commercial yellow brasses and 
bronzes 



Nickel, monel, titanium high nickel 
alloys 



Cathodic Component 

Hot dip zinc and galvanised steel 
Cadmium plated articles 



Wrought iron, malleable iron, armco 
iron, low alloy steels 

Chromium plated articles, martenstic/ 
ferritic stainless steels 

High brasses, bronzes, naval brass, 
muntz metal 

Silver solder, german silver, copper- 
nickel alloys, nickel chrome alloys, 
austenitic stainless steels 

Silver plated articles, high silver 
alloys 



7.2.1 Crevice Corrosion — Joints where crevices may exist shall be sealed 
with epoxy or polyurethane based sealent. Marker tapes are to be 
applied on surfaces suitably coated. 

7.2.2 Brazing, Soldering and Welding — Compatible materials as given in 
Tables 1 and 3 shall be used for joining operations. Soldering over gold 
shall be avoided where possible. Minimum joining time at minimum 
possible temperature shall be followed. Lowest acid content flux 
shall be used. Flux residues shall be removed and thoroughly cleaned, 

7.2.3 Formation of purple plague may be avoided by use of copper or 
silver in lieu of gold. 

7.2.4 Surface Finish — Compatibility of surface finishes may be decided 
by referring to Table 3. 

7.2.5 If bonding of dissirnilar metals is necessary the bond area shall 
be coated with epoxy resin sealant. 

7.2.6 If metallic washers are used in' bonding, washers shall be 
passivated. 

7.2.7 Caution shall be exercised to achieve iirm adhesion of the surface 
finish to avoid element corrosion. 



12 



18:10471-1983 



8. USE OF METALLIC COATINGS 



8.1 General — Anticorrosive performance of metallic coatings is 
dependant on its adherence to substrate metal, porosity and uniformity of 
thickness. Attention shall be given to the cracks in coatings. Where 
possible the coatings shall be tested using neutral salt spray test method. 
Table 2 may be used as an aid to choose matallic coatings. The 
recommended minimum thickness for different types of electroplated 
coatings are given in Table 5 for guidance. 



TABLE 5 RECOMMENDED MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR 
ELECTROPLATED METALLIC COATINGS 



{ Clause 8A) 



Coating 



Recommended Minimum 
Thickness, y. m 



Remarks 



Cadmium over mild steel 


130 


-Chromium over mild steel 


0-3 


and copper 




Copper over mild steel 


7-5 


Gold over copper or silver 


0-75 


Nickel over mild steel 


300 


Nickel over copper 


12-0 


Tin over mild steel 


20*0 


Palladium over silver 


0-75 


Rhodium over silver 


0-75 



For protection under corrosive 
conditions 

Generally used for wear resis- 
tance 

As an undercoat or for elec- 
trical conductance purpose 

For better electrical contact 

To avoid contact 

Corrosion of components 

For protection under severe 
conditions 

Moderate conditions 

For prevention of tarnish 



8.2 Cadmium Coatings — Cadmium may be coated by vaccum 
deposition or electroplating process. Cadmium coated parts shall not be 
used in enclosed assembly containing acid, ammonia, plastics, varnishes 
and other organic materials. 

8.3 Chromium Coatings — Chromium coatings shall be used for 
applications involving v^ear and not for corrosion resistance. 

8.4 Copper Coatings — Copper coatings are prone to red plague 
type of corrosion which occur at pores or pin holes. Red plague may be 
avoided by a coat of nickel. 



13 



IS : 10471 - 1983 

8.5 Gold Coating — ■ Gold shall be preferably coated over thin nickel 
coating to retard diffusion of substrate metal. Gold plating is prone 
to purple plague type of corrosion when gold comes in contact with 
aluminium, 

8.6 Nickel Coatings — Nickel coatings are desirable for electrical 
bonding. Nickel may be jcoated by electroplating or electroless process. 
Contact corrosion is minimized by use of nickel coating. 

8.7 Palladium Coating — Palladium may be coated by electroplating 
process. Contact of organic materials shall be avoided to prevent 
polymerization of organic compounds. 

8.8 Silver Coating — Silver may be electroplated. Silver coatings are 
prone to corrosion in sulphide bearing atmosphere and also prone to 
silver migration phenonmenon. Care shall be taken to avoid sulphurous 
fumes during storage and precautions shall be taken to avoid silver 
migration ( see 4.5 ). 

8.9 Tin Coating — Tin may be coated by hot dipping or eleotrodepo- 
sition process. Tin possess tendency to form metal whiskers. 
Precautions shall be taken to avoid metal whiskers ( see 4.4 ). Lead wire 
corrosion is minimized by use of tin coating. 

8.10 Zinc Coating — Zinc coating shall not be used. 

8.11 Vacumum Deposition — Vacuum deposition provide extremely 
thin coatings, and this technique may not be suitable for mechanical 
application like'moving contact. 

9. USE OF ORGANIC COATINGS AND NON-METALLICS 

9.1 Corrosion resistant nonmetalHc materials shall possess low moisture 
absorption, resistance to fungi and microbial attack, stability in the 
specified temperature range, freedom from outgassing, compatibility with 
other materials in the assembly and resistance to weathering. 

9.2 Organic materials shall be thoroughly dried or cured before use. 

9#3 Polyvinyl chlorides and chlorinated rubber shall not be used in closed 
compartments. Where practicable use of neoprene, polysulphides and 
vinyl resins shall be avoided in closed compartments. 

9.4 Compatibility of materials shall be taken into account. Table I may 
be used as a guide for selection of materials. 

14 



IS : 10471 - 1983 

9.5 Silicone oils and greases are not compatible with organic finishes. 
These shall not be used without approval of the competent authority. 

9.6 Graphite containing solid film lubricant shall not be used. 
10. PACKAGING AND PRESERVATION 

lO^l Packaging and preservation shall be done in accordance with the 
procedures given in IS : 8221-1976*. 

10«2 Volatile corrosion inhibitors may be used to protect metals 
against corrosion in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
IS:6263-1972t. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 7.2 ) 

PREVENTIVE MEASURES TO REDUCE GALVANIC 
CORROSION AT JOINTS 

A-1. Selection of materials should be made from permissible couple. 

A-2. Fastener should preferably form a cathodic member of the couple. 

A-3. Brazing and soldering material shall be cathodic to the material 
being joined. 

A-4. Advantage may be derived from the smaller potential difference 
among the members of couple. 

A-5. The metal contact should be so designed, so that the relative area of 
cathodic metal is smaller. 

A-6. Where coating is used, it should be applied to both members of the 
couple. 

A-7. Joints may preferably be sealed by moisture proof coating or 

sealent. 

A-8. Corrosion inhibitor treatment may be used at joints. 



♦Code of practice for corrosion prevention of metals and metal components in 
packages. 

fVolatile corrosion inhibitor ( VCI ) treated paper. 

15 



