**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  14773-1  (2000)  :  Mechanical  Vibration  of 
Non-reciprocating  Machines  -  Measurements  on  Rotating 
Shafts  and  Evaluation  Criteria,  Part  1:  General  Guidelines 
[MED  28:  Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


a^yj  i  imzzmn^a  rafrgamsBs 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14773  (  Part  1  ) :  2000 
ISO  7919-1  :  1996 

( Reaffirmed  2005 ) 


^FI  1    flHM   HHfc*ff  %5T?T 


/nd/an  Standard 

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION  OF  NON-RECIPROCATING 

MACHINES  —  MEASUREMENTS  ON  ROTATING 

SHAFTS  AND  EVALUATION  CRITERIA 

PART  1   GENERAL  GUIDELINES 

ICS  13.160 


©  BIS  2000 

BUREAU     OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9    BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW   DELHI    110002 

April  2000  Price  Group  8 


Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock  Sectional  Committee,  ME  28 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO  791 9  -1  :1 996  'Mechanical  vibration  of  non-reciprocating 
machines  —  Measurements  on  rotating  shafts  and  evaluation  criteria  —  Part  1  :  General  guidelines' 
issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock  Sectional  Committee  and 
approval  of  Mechanical  Engineering  Division  Council. 

The  text  of  ISO  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without 
deviations.  In  the  adopted  standard  certain  conventions  are  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian  Standards. 
Attention  is  especially  drawn  to  the  following  : 

a)  Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be 
read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  current  practice  is 
to  use  a  full  point  (.)  as  the  decimal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  an  International  Standard  for  which  Indian  Standard  also 
exists.  The  corresponding  Indian  Standard  which  is  to  be  substituted  in  its  place  is  listed  below  along 
with  its  degree  of  equivalence  for  the  edition  indicated  : 

International  Corresponding  Indian  Standard  Degree  of 

standard  Equivalence 

ISO  10816-1:1995  IS  14817  (  Part  1  )  :  2000   Mechanical  vibration  —  Identical 

Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on 
rotating  parts  :  Part  1  General  guidelines 


IS    14773  (Parti  ):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Indian  Standard 

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION  OF  NON-RECIPROCATING 

MACHINES  —  MEASUREMENTS  ON  ROTATING 

SHAFTS  AND  EVALUATION  CRITERIA 

PART  1   GENERAL  GUIDELINES 


1    Scope 


This  part  of  ISO  7919  sets  out  general  guidelines  for 
measuring  and  evaluating  machinery  vibration  by 
means  of  measurements  made  directly  on  rotating 
shafts  for  the  purpose  of  determining  shaft  vibration 
with  regard  to 

a)  changes  in  vibrational  behaviour; 

b)  excessive  kinetic  load; 

c)  the  monitoring  of  radial  clearances. 

It  is  applicable  to  measurements  of  both  absolute  and 
relative  radial  shaft  vibration,  but  excludes  torsional 
and  axial  shaft  vibration.  The  procedures  are  appli- 
cable for  both  operational  monitoring  of  machines  and 
to  acceptance  testing  on  a  test  stand  and  after  instal- 
lation. Guidelines  are  also  presented  for  setting  oper- 
ational limits. 

NOTES 

1  Evaluation  criteria  for  different  classes  of  machinery  will 
be  included  in  other  parts  of  ISO  7919  when  they  become 
available.  In  the  meantime,  guidelines  are  given  in 
annex  A. 

2  The  term  "shaft  vibration"  is  used  throughout  ISO  7919 
because,  in  most  cases,  measurements  will  be  made  on 
machine  shafts;  however,  ISO  7919  is  also  applicable  to 
measurements  made  on  other  rotating  elements  if  such  el- 


ements are  found  to  be  more  suitable,  provided  that  the 
guidelines  are  respected. 

For  the  purposes  of  ISO  7919,  operational  monitoring 
is  considered  to  be  those  vibration  measurements 
made  during  the  normal  operation  of  a  machine. 
ISO  7919  permits  the  use  of  several  different 
measurement  quantities  and  methods,  provided  that 
they  are  well  defined  and  their  limitations  are  set  out, 
so  that  the  interpretation  of  the  measurements  will 
be  well  understood. 

This  part  of  ISO  7919  does  not  apply  to  reciprocating 
machinery. 


2    Normative  reference 

The  following  standard  contains  provisions  which, 
through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions 
of  this  part  of  ISO  7919.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the 
edition  indicated  was  valid.  All  standards  are  subject 
to  revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 
part  of  ISO  7919  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  edition  of  the 
standard  indicated  below.  Members  of  IEC  and  ISO 
maintain  registers  of  currently  valid  International 
Standards. 

ISO  10816-1:1995,  Mechanical  vibration  —  Evaluation 
of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on  non- 
rotating  parts  —  Part  1:  General  guidelines. 


|S    14773  ( Parti ) :  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


3    Measurements 


3.1    Measurement  quantities 


3.1.2    Frequency  range 

The  measurement  of  relative  and  absolute  shaft  vi- 
bration shall  be  broad  band  so  that  the  frequency 
spectrum  of  the  machine  is  adequately  covered. 


3.1.1    Displacement 

The  preferred  measurement  quantity  for  the 
measurement  of  shaft  vibration  is  displacement. 
The  unit  of  measurement  is  the  micrometer 
(1  iim  =  1CT6m). 

NOTE  3  Displacement  is  a  vector  quantity  and,  therefore, 
when  comparing  two  displacements,  it  may  be  necessary 
to  consider  the  phase  angle  between  them  (see  also 
annex  D). 

Since  this  part  of  ISO  7919  applies  to  both  relative 
and  absolute  shaft  vibration  measurements,  displace- 
ment is  further  defined  as  follows: 

a)  relative  displacement,  which  is  the  vibratory  dis- 
placement between  the  shaft  and  appropriate 
structure,  such  as  a  bearing  housing  or  machine 
casing;  or 

b)  absolute  displacement,  which  is  the  vibratory  dis- 
placement of  the  shaft  with  reference  to  an 
inertia!  reference  system. 

NOTE  4  It  should  be  clearly  indicated  whether  displace- 
ment values  are  relative  or  absolute. 

Absolute  and  relative  displacements  are  further  de- 
fined by  several  different  displacement  quantities, 
^ach  of  which  is  now  in  widespread  use.  These  in- 
clude: 

S(p_p)    vibratory  displacement  peak-to-peak  in  the 
direction  of  measurement; 

Smax     maximum  vibratory  displacement  in  the 
plane  of  measurement. 

Either  of  these  displacement  quantities  may  be  used 
for  the  measurement  of  shaft  vibration.  However,  the 
quantities  shall  be  clearly  identified  so  as  to  ensure 
correct  interpretation  of  the  measurements  in  terms 
of  the  criteria  of  clause  5.  The  relationships  between 
each  of  these  quantities  are  shown  in  figures  B.1  and 
B.2. 

NOTE  5  At  present,  the  greater  of  the  two  values  for 
peak-to-peak  displacement,  as  measured  in  two  orthogonal 
directions,  is  used  for  evaluation  criteria.  In  future,  as  rel- 
evant experience  is  accumulated,  the  quantity  S(p,p)max,  de- 
fined in  figure  B.2,  may  be  preferred. 


3.2  Types  of  measurement 

3.2.1  Relative  vibration  measurements 

Relative  vibration  measurements  are  generally  carried 
out  with  a  non-contacting  transducer  which  senses 
the  vibratory  displacement  between  the  shaft  and  a 
structural  member  (e.g.  the  bearing  housing)  of  the 
machine. 

3.2.2  Absolute  vibration  measurements 

Absolute  vibration  measurements  are  carried  out  by 
one  of  the  following  methods: 

a)  by  a  shaft-riding  probe,  on  which  a  seismic  trans- 
ducer (velocity  type  or  aecelerometer)  is  mounted 
so  that  it  measures  absolute  shaft  vibration  di- 
rectly; or 

b)  by  a  non-contacting  transducer  which  measures 
relative  shaft  vibration  in  combination  with  a  seis- 
mic transducer  (velocity  type  or  aecelerometer) 
which  measures  the  support  vibration.  Both 
transducers  shall  be  mounted  close  together  so 
that  they  undergo  the  same  absolute  motion  in 
the  direction  of  measurement.  Their  conditioned 
outputs  are  vectorially  summed  to  provide  a 
measurement  of  the  absolute  shaft  motion. 

3.3  Measurement  procedures 
3.3.1     General 

It  is  desirable  to  locate  transducers  at  positions  such 
that  the  lateral  movement  of  the  shaft  at  points  of 
importance  can  be  assessed.  It  is  recommended  that, 
for  both  relative  and  absolute  measurements,  two 
transducers  should  be  located  at,  or  adjacent  to,  each 
machine  bearing.  They  should  be  radially  mounted  in 
the  same  transverse  plane  perpendicular  to  the  shaft 
axis  or  as  close  as  practicable,  with  their  axes  within 
±  5°  of  a  radial  line.  It  is  preferable  to  mount  both 
transducers  90°  ±  5°  apart  on  the  same  bearing  half 
and  the  positions  chosen  should  be  the  same  at  each 
bearing. 

A  single  transducer  may  be  used  at  each  measure- 
ment plane  in  place  of  the  more  typical  pair  of 
orthogonal  transducers  if  it  is  known  to  provide  ade- 
quate information  about  the  shaft  vibration. 


!3    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


It  is  recommended  that  special  measurements  be 
made  in  order  to  determine  the  total  non-vibration 
runout  which  is  caused  by  shaft  surface  metallurgical 
non-homogeneities,  local  residual  magnetism  and 
shaft  mechanical  runout.  It  should  be  noted  that,  for 
asymmetric  rotors,  the  effect  of  gravity  can  cause  a 
false  runout  signal. 

Recommendations  for  instrumentation  are  given  in 
annex  C. 

3.3.2    Procedures  for  relative  vibration 
measurements 

Relative  vibration  transducers  of  the  non-contacting 
type  are  normally  mounted  in  tapped  holes  in  the 
bearing  housing,  or  by  rigid  brackets  adjacent  to  the 
bearing  housing.  Where  the  transducers  are  mounted 
in  the  bearing,  they  should  be  located  so  as  not  to 
interfere  with  the  lubrication  pressure  wedge.  How- 
ever, special  arrangements  for  mounting  transducers 
in  other  axial  locations  may  be  made,  but  different  vi- 
bration criteria  for  assessment  wiii  then  have  to  be 
used.  For  bracket-mounted  transducers,  the  bracket 
shall  be  free  from  natural  frequencies  wh^ch  adversely 
affect  the  capability  of  the  transducer  to  measure  the 
relative  shaft  vibration. 

The  surface  of  the  shaft  at  the  location  of  the  pick-up, 
taking  into  account  the  total  axial  fioat  of  the  shaft 
under  all  thermal  conditions,  shall  be  smooth  and  free 
from  any  geometric  discontinuities  (such  as  keyways, 
lubrication  passages  and  threads),  metallurgical  non- 
homogeneities  and  local  residual  magnetism  which 
may  cause  false  signals.  In  some  circumstances,  an 
electroplated  or  metallized  shaft  surface  may  be  ac- 
ceptable, but  it  should  be  noted  that  the  calibration 
may  be  different.  It  is  recommended  that  the  total 
combined  electrical  and  mechanical  runout,  as 
measured  by  the  transducer,  should  not  exceed 
25  %  of  the  allowable  vibration  displacement,  speci- 
fied in  accordance  with  annex  A,  or  6  jxm,  whichever 
is  the  greater.  For  measurements  made  on  machines 
already  in  service,  where  provision  was  not  originally 
made  for  shaft  vibration  measurements,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  use  other  runout  criteria. 

3.3.3    Procedures  for  absolute  vibration 
measurements  using  combined  seismic  and 
non-contacting  relative  vibration  transducers 

If  a  combination  of  seismic  and  non-contacting  relative 
vibration  transducers  is  used,  the  absolute  vibration  is 
obtained  by  vectorially  summing  the  outputs  from 
both  transducers.  The  mounting  and  other  require- 
ments for  the  non-contacting  transducer  are  as 
specified  in  3.3.2.  In  addition,  the  seismic  transducer 


shall  be  rigidly  mounted  to  the  machine  structure  (e.g. 
the  bearing  housing)  close  to  the  non-contacting 
transducer  so  that  both  transducers  undergo  the 
same  absolute  vibration  of  the  support  structure  in  the 
direction  of  measurement.  The  sensitive  axes  of  the 
non-contacting  and  seismic  transducers  shall  be  par- 
allel, so  that  their  vectorially  summed,  conditioned 
signals  result  in  an  accurate  measure  of  the  absolute 
shaft  vibration. 

3.3.4    Procedures  for  absolute  vibration 
measurements  using  a  shaft-riding  mechanism 
with  ^i  seismic  transducer 

The  seismic  transducer  (velocity  type  or  acceler- 
ometer)  shall  be  mounted  radially  on  the  shaft-riding 
mechanism.  The  mechanism  shall  not  chatter  or  bind 
in  a  manner  modifying  the  indicated  shaft  vibration. 
The  mechanism  shall  be  mounted  as  described  for 
transducers  in  3.3.1. 

The  shaft  surface  against  which  the  shaft-riding  tip 
rides,  taking  into  account  the  total  axial  float  of  the 
shaft  under  all  thermal  conditions,  shall  be  smooth 
and  free  from  shaft  discontinuities,  such  as  keyways 
and  threads.  It  is  recommended  that  the  mechanical 
runout  of  the  shaft  should  not  exceed  25  %  of  the  al- 
lowable vibration  displacement,  specified  in  accord- 
ance with  annex  A,  or  6  \im,  whichever  is  the  greater. 

There  may  be  surface  speed  and/or  other  limitations 
to  shaft-riding  procedures,  such  as  the  formation  of 
hydrodynamic  oil  films  beneath  the  probe,  which  may 
give  false  readings  and,  consequently,  manufacturers 
should  be  consulted  about  possible  limitations. 

3.4    Machine  operating  conditions 

Shaft  vibration  measurements  should  be  made  under 
agreed  conditions  over  the  operating  range  of  the 
machine.  These  measurements  should  beinade  after 
achieving  agreed  thermal  and  operating  conditions.  In 
addition,  measurements  may  also  be  taken  under 
conditions  of,  for  example,  slow  roll,  warming-up 
speed,  critical  speed,  etc.  However,  the  results  of 
these  measurements  may  not  be  suitable  for  evalu- 
ation in  accordance  with  clause  5. 


3.5    Machine  foundation  and  structures 

The  type  of  machine  foundation  and  structures  (for 
example  piping)  may  significantly  affect  the  measured 
vibration.  In  general,  a  valid  comparison  of  vibration 
values  of  machines  of  the  same  type  can  only  be 
made  if  the  foundations  and  structures  have  similar 
dynamic  characteristics. 


IS    1 4773  (  Part  1 ) :  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


3.6    Environmental  vibration  and  evaluation 
of  measurement  system 

Prior  to  measuring  the  vibration  of  an  operating  ma- 
chine, a  check  with  the  same  measuring  system  and 
stations  should  be  taken  with  the  machine  in  an  in- 
operative state.  When  the  results  of  such  measure- 
ments exceed  one-third  of  the  vaiues  specified  for  the 
operating  speed,  steps  should  be  taken  to  eliminate 
environmental  vibration  effects. 


4    Instrumentation 

The  instrumentation  used  for  the  purpose  of  compli- 
ance with  this  part  of  ISO  7919  shall  be  so  designed 
as  to  take  into  account  temperature,  humidity,  the 
presence  of  any  corrosive  atmosphere,  shaft  surface 
speed,  shaft  material  and  surface  finish,  operating 
medium  (esg,  water,  oil,  air  or  steam)  in  contact  with 
the  transducer,  vibration  and  shock  (three  major  axes), 
airborne  noise,  magnetic  fields,  metallic  masses  in 
proximity  to  the  tip  of  the  transducer,  and  power-line 
voltage  fluctuations  and  transients. 

It  is  desirable  that  the  measurement  system  should 
have  provision  for  on-line  calibration  of  the  readout 
instrumentation  and,  in  addition,  have  suitable  isolated 
outputs  to  permit  further  analysis  as  required. 


5    Evaluation  criteria 

5.1     There  are  two  principal  factors  by  which  shaft 
vibration  is  judged: 

a)  absolute  vibration  of  the  shaft; 

b)  vibration  of  the  shaft  relative  to  the  structural  el- 
ements. 

5-2     If  the  evaluation  criterion  is  the  change  in  shaft 
vibration,  then 

a)  when  the  vibration  of  the  structure,  on  which  the 
shaft-relative  transducer  is  mounted,  is  small  (i.e. 
less  than  20  %  of  the  relative  shaft  vibration),  ei- 
ther the  relative  shaft  vibration  or  absolute  shaft 
vibration  may  be  used  as  a  measure  of  shaft  vi- 
bration; 

b)  when  the  vibration  of  the  structure,  on  which  the 
shaft-relative  transducer  is  mounted,  is  20  %  or 
more  of  the  relative  shaft  vibration,  the  absolute 
shaft  vibration  shall  be  measured  and,  if  found  to 
be  larger  than  the  relative  shaft  vibration,  it  shall 
be  used  as  the  measure  of  shaft  vibration. 


5.3  If  the  evaluation  criterion  is  the  kinetic  load  on 
the  bearing,  the  relative  shaft  vibration  shall  be  used 
as  the  measure  of  shaft  vibration. 

5.4  If  the  evaluation  criterion  is  stator/rotor  clear- 
ances, then 

a)  when  the  vibration  of  the  structure,  on  which  the 
shaft-relative  transducer  is  mounted,  is  small  (i.e. 
less  than  20  %  of  the  relative  shaft  vibration),  the 
relative  shaft  vibration  shall  be  used  as  a  measure 
of  clearance  absorption; 

b)  when  the  vibration  of  the  structure,  on  which  the 
shaft-relative  transducer  is  mounted,  is  20  %  or 
more  of  the  relative  shaft  vibration,  the  relative 
shaft  vibration  measurement  may  still  be  used  as 
a  measure  of  clearance  absorption  unless  the  vi- 
bration of  the  structure,  on  which  the  shaft- 
relative  transducer  is  mounted,  is  not 
representative  of  the  total  stator  vibration.  In  this 
latter  case,  special  measurements  will  be  re- 
quired. 

5.5  The  ^haft  vibration  associated  with  a  particular 
classification  range  depends  on  the  size  and  mass  of 
the  vibrating  body,  the  characteristics  of  the  mounting 
system,  and  the  output  and  use  of  the  machine.  It  is 
therefore  necessary  to  take  into  account  the  various 
purposes  and  circumstances  concerned  when  speci- 
fying different  ranges  of  shaft  vibration  for  a  specific 
class  of  machinery.  Where  appropriate,  reference 
should  be  made  to  the  product  specification. 

5.6  General  principles  for  evaluation  of  shaft  vi- 
bration on  different  machines  are  given  in  annex  A. 
The  evaluation  criteria  relate  to  both  operational  mon- 
itoring and  acceptance  testing,  and  apply  only  to  the 
vibration  produced  by  the  machine  itself  and  not  to 
vibration  transmitted  from  outside.  For  certain  classes 
of  machinery,  the  guidelines  presented  in  this  part  of 
ISO  7919  are  complemented  by  those  given  in 
ISO  10816-1  for  measurements  taken  on  non-rotating 
parts.  If  the  procedures  of  both  International  Stan- 
dards are  applied,  the  one  which  is  more  restrictive 
shall  generally  apply. 

Specific  criteria  for  different  classes  and  types  of  ma- 
chinery will  be  given  in  the  relevant  parts  of  ISO  7919 
as  they  are  developed. 

5.7  The  evaluation  considered  in  this  basic  docu- 
ment is  limited  to  broad-band  vibration  without  refer- 
ence to  frequency  components  or  phase.  This  will  in 
most  cases  be  adequate  for  acceptance  testing  and 
operational  monitoring  purposes.  However,  in  some 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


cases  the  use  of  vector  information  for  vibration  as- 
sessment on  certain  machine  types  may  be  desirable. 
Vector  change  information  is  particularly  useful  in  de- 
tecting and  defining  changes  in  the  dynamic  state  of 
a  machine,  which  in  some  cases  could  go  undetected 
when  using  broad-band  vibration  measurements.  This 
is  demonstrated  in  annex  D. 

The  specification  of  criteria  for  vector  changes  is  be- 
yond the  present  scope  of  this  part  of  ISO  7919. 

5.8  The  vibration  measured  on  a  particular  machine 
may  be  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  steady-state  op- 
erational condition.  In  most  cases  this  is  not  signif- 


icant. In  other  cases  the  vibration  sensitivity  may  be 
such  that  although  the  vibration  magnitude  for  a  par- 
ticular machine  is  satisfactory  when  measured  under 
certain  steady-state  conditions,  it  can  become  unsat- 
isfactory if  these  conditions  change. 

It  is  recommended  that  in  cases  where  some  aspect 
of  the  vibration  sensitivity  of  a  machine  is  in  question, 
agreement  should  be  reached  between  the  customer 
and  supplier  about  the  necessity  and  extent  of  any 
testing  or  theoretical  assessment. 


IS    14773  (  Part  1 ) :  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Annex  A 

(normative) 

General  principles  for  adopting  evaluation  criteria  for  different  types  of 

machine 


Introduction 

The  specification  of  evaluation  criteria  for  shaft  vi- 
bration is  dependent  upon  a  wide  range  of  factors  and 
the  criteria  adopted  will  vary  significantly  for  different 
types  of  machine  and,  in  some  cases,  for  different 
rotors  in  the  same  coupled  line.  It  is  important, 
therefore,  to  ensure  that  valid  criteria  are  adopted  for 
a  particular  machine  and  that  criteria  which  relate  to 
certain  types  of  machine  are  not  erroneously  applied 
to  other  types.  (For  example,  evaluation  criteria  for  a 
high-speed  compressor  operating  in  a  petrochemical 
plant  are  likely  to  be  different  from  those  for  large 
turbo-generators.) 

At  present,  there  are  a  limited  number  of  published 
standards  on  shaft  vibration.  Many  of  these  are  for 
specialized  machinery  and  do  not  have  widespread 
applications  in  other  fields. 

This  annex  establishes  a  basis  for  specifying  evalu- 
ation criteria  in  terms  of  peak-to-peak  vibration  values 
(see  annex  B).  No  attempt  has  been  made  to  specify 
vibration  values;  these  will  be  given  for  different 
classes  and  types  of  machinery  in  the  relevant  parts 
of  ISO  7919  as  they  are  developed. 

A.1     Factors  affecting  evaluation  criteria 

There  are  a  wide  range  of  different  factors  which 
need  to  be  taken  into  account  when  specifying  eval- 
uation criteria  for  shaft  vibration  measurements. 
Amongst  these  are  the  following: 

a)  the  purpose  for  which  the  measurement  is  made 
(for  example,  the  requirements  for  ensuring  that 
running  clearances  are  maintained  will,  in  general, 
be  different  from  those  if  the  avoidance  of  ex- 
cessive kinetic  load  on  the  bearing  is  the  main 
concern); 

b)  the  type  of  measurement  made  —  absolute  or 
relative  vibration; 

c)  the  quantities  measured  (see  annex  B); 

/ 

d)  the  position  where  the  measurement  is  made; 


e)  the  rotational  frequency  of  the  shaft; 

f)  the  bearing  type,  clearance  and  diameter; 

g)  the  function,  output  and  size  of  the  machine  un- 
der consideration; 

h)    the  relative  flexibility  of  the  bearings,  pedestals 
and  foundations; 

i)     the  rotor  mass  and  flexibility. 

Clearly,  this  range  of  factors  makes  it  impossible  to 
define  unique  evaluation  criteria  which  can  be  applied 
to  all  machines.  Different  criteria,  which  have  been 
derived  from  operational  experience,  are  necessary 
for  different  machines,  but  at  best  they  can  only  be 
regarded  as  guidelines  and  there  will  be  occasions 
where  machines  will  operate  safely  and  satisfactorily 
outside  any  general  recommendations. 

A.2    Evaluation  criteria 

Two  evaluation  criteria  are  used  to  assess  shaft  vi- 
bration. One  criterion  considers  the  magnitude  of  the 
observed  broad-band  shaft  vibration;  the  second  con- 
siders changes  in  magnitude,  irrespective  of  whether 
they  are  increases  or  decreases. 

A.2.1     Criterion  I:  Vibration  magnitude  at 
rated  speed  under  steady  operating 
conditions 

This  criterion  is  concerned  with  defining  limits  for 
shaft  vibration  magnitude  consistent  with  acceptable 
dynamic  loads  on  the  bearing,  adequate  margins  on 
the  radial  clearance  envelope  of  the  machine,  and  ac- 
ceptable vibration  transmission  into  the  support 
structure  and  foundation.  The  maximum  shaft  vi- 
bration magnitude  observed  at  each  bearing  is  as- 
sessed against  four  evaluation  zones  established  from 
international  experience. 

Figure  A.1  shows  a  plot  of  allowable  vibration,  ir 
terms  of  peak-to-peak  shaft  vibration,  against  the  op 


IS    14773  ( Part  1 ):  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


erating  speed  range.  It  is  generally  accepted  that  lim- 
iting vibration  values  will  decrease  as  the  operating 
speed  of  the  machine  increases,  but  the  actual  values 
and  their  rate  of  change  with  speed  will  vary  for  dif- 
ferent types  of  machine. 

A.2.1.1    Evaluation  zones 

The  following  typical  evaluation  zones  are  defined  to 
permit  a  qualitative  assessment  of  the  shaft  vibration 
on  a  given  machine  and  provide  guidelines  on  possible 
actions. 

Zone  A:  The  vibration  of  newly  commissioned  ma- 
chines would  normally  fall  within  this  zone. 

Zone  B:  Machines  with  vibration  within  this  zone  are 
normally  considered  acceptable  for  unrestricted  long- 
term  operation. 

Zone  C:  Machines  with  vibration  within  this  zone  are 
normally  considered  unsatisfactory  for  long-term  con- 
tinuous operation.  Generally,  the  machine  may  be 
operated  for  a  limited  period  in  this  condition  until  a 
suitable  opportunity  arises  for  remedial  action. 

Zone  D:  Vibration  values  within  this  zone  are  normally 
considered  to  be  of  sufficient  severity  to  cause  dam- 
age to  the  machine. 

A.2.1.2    Evaluation  zone  limits 

Numerical  values  assigned  to  the  zone  boundaries  are 
not  intended  to  serve  as  acceptance  specifications, 
which  shall  be  subject  to  agreement  between  the 
machine  manufacturer  and  the  customer.  However, 
these  values  provide  guidelines  for  ensuring  that 
gross  deficiencies  or  unrealistic  requirements  are 
avoided.  In  certain  cases,  there  may  be  specific  fea- 
tures associated  with  a  particular  machine  which 
would  require  different  zone  boundary  values  (higher 
or  lower)  to  be  used.  In  such  cases,  it  is  normally 
necessary  to  explain  the  reasons  for  this  and,  in  par- 
ticular, to  confirm  that  the  machine  will  not  be  en- 
dangered by  operating  with  higher  vibration  values. 

A.2.2    Criterion  II:  Change  in  vibration 
magnitude 

This  criterion  provides  an  assessment  of  a  change  in 
vibration  magnitude  from  a  previously  established 
reference  value.  A  significant  increase  or  decrease  in 
broad-band  vibration  magnitude  may  occur  which  re- 
quires some  action  even  though  zone  C  of  Criterion  I 
has  not  been  reached.  Such  changes  can  be  instan- 
taneous or  progressive  with  time  and  may  indicate 
that  damage  has  occurred  or  be  a  warning  of  an  im- 
pending failure  or  some  other  irregularity.  Criterion  II 


is  specified  on  the  basis  of  the  change  in  broad-band 
vibration  magnitude  occurring  under  steady-state  op- 
erating conditions. 

When  Criterion  II  is  applied,  the  vibration  measure- 
ments being  compared  shall  be  taken  at  the  same 
transducer  location  and  orientation,  and  under  ap- 
proximately the  same  machine  operating  conditions. 
Significant  changes  from  the  normal  vibration  magni- 
tudes should  be  investigated  so  that  a  dangerous 
situation  may  be  avoided. 

Criteria  for  assessing  changes  in  broad-band  vibration 
for  monitoring  purposes  are  given  in  other  parts  of 
ISO  7919.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  some 
changes  may  not  be  detected  unless  the  discrete 
frequency  components  are  monitored  (see  5.7). 

A.2.3    Operational  limits 

For  long-term  operation,  it  is  common  practice  for 
some  machine  types  to  establish  operational  vibration 
limits.  These  limits  take  the  form  of  ALARMS  and 
TRIPS. 

ALARMS:  To  provide  a  warning  that  a  defined  value 
of  vibration  has  been  reached  or  a  significant  change 
has  occurred,  at  which  remedial  action  may  be 
necessary.  In  general,  if  an  ALARM  situation  occurs, 
operation  can  continue  for  a  period  whilst  investi- 
gations are  carried  out  to  identify  the  reason  for  the 
change  in  vibration  and  define  any  remedial  action. 

TRIPS:  To  specify  the  magnitude  of  vibration  beyond 
which  further  operation  of  the  machine  may  cause 
damage.  If  the  TRIP  value  is  exceeded,  immediate 
action  should  be  taken  to  reduce  the  vibration  or  the 
machine  should  be  shut  down. 

Different  operational  limits,  reflecting  differences  in 
dynamic  loading  and  support  stiffness,  may  be  speci- 
fied for  different  measurement  positions  and  di- 
rections. 

Where  appropriate,  guidelines  for  specifying  ALARM 
and  TRIP  criteria  for  specific  machine  types  are  given 
in  other  parts  of  ISO  7919. 

A.2.3.1    Setting  of  ALARMS 

The  ALARM  values  may  vary  considerably,  up  or 
down,  for  different  machines.  The  values  chosen  will 
normally  be  set  relative  to  a  baseline  value  deter- 
mined from  experience  for  the  measurement  position 
or  direction  for  that  particular  machine. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  ALARM  value  should  be 
set  higher  than  the  baseline  by  an  amount  equal  to  a 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


proportion  of  the  upper  limit  of  zone  B.  If  the  baseline 
is  low,  the  ALARM  may  be  below  zone  C. 

Where  there  is  no  established  baseline,  for  example 
with  a  new  machine,  the  initial  ALARM  setting  should 
be  based  either  on  experience  with  other  similar  ma- 
chines or  relative  to  agreed  acceptance  values.  After 
a  period  of  time,  the  steady-state  baseline  value  will 
be  established  and  the  ALARM  setting  should  be  ad- 
justed accordingly. 

If  the  steady-state  baseline  changes  (for  example  after 
a  machine  overhaul),  the  ALARM  setting  should  be 
revised  accordingly.  Different  operational  ALARM 
settings  may  then  exist  for  different  bearings  on  the 
machine,  reflecting  differences  in  dynamic  loading 
and  bearing  support  stiffnesses. 


A.2.3.2    Setting  of  TRIPS 

The  TRIP  values  will  generally  relate  to  the  mechanical 
integrity  of  the  machine  and  be  dependent  on  any 
specific  design  features  which  have  been  introduced 
to  enable  the  machine  to  withstand  abnormal  dynamic 
forces.  The  values  used  will,  therefore,  generally  be 
the  same  for  all  machines  of  similar  design  and  would 
not  normally  be  related  to  the  steady-state  baseline 
value  used  for  setting  ALARMS. 

There  may,  however,  be  differences  for  machines  of 
different  design  and  it  is  not  possible  to  give  guide- 
lines for  absolute  TRIP  values.  In  general,  the  TRIP 
value  will  be  within  zone  C  or  D. 


ZoneO 


ZoneC 


Zone  A 
Relevant  speed  range 


Rotational  frequency  of  shaft 


NOTE  —  The  actual  values  for  vibration  at  the  zone  boundaries  and  the  relevant  speed  range  will  vary  for  different  types  of 
machine.  It  is  important  to  select  the  relevant  criteria  and  to  avoid  incorrect  extrapolation. 


Figure  A.1  —  Generalized  example  of  evaluation  criteria 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Annex  B 

(informative) 

Derivation  of  measurement  quantities 


B.I     Mechanics  of  shaft  vibration 

The  vibration  of  a  rotating  shaft  is  characterized  at  any 
axial  location  by  a  kinetic  orbit,  which  describes  how 
the  position  of  the  shaft  centre  varies  with  time.  Fig- 
ure B.1  shows  a  typical  orbit.  The  shape  of  the  orbit 
depends  upon  the  dynamic  characteristics  of  the 
shaft,  the  bearings  and  the  bearing  supports  or  foun- 
dations, the  axial  location  on  the  rotor  and  the  form 
of  vibration  excitation,  for  example,  if  the  excitation 
takes  the  form  of  a  single-frequency  sinusoidal  force, 
the  orbit  is  an  ellipse,  which  can  in  certain  circum- 
stances be  a  circle  or  straight  line,  and  the  time  taken 
for  the  shaft  centre  to  complete  one  circuit  of  the  el- 
lipse is  equal  to  the  period  of  the  excitation  force.  One 
of  the  most  important  excitation  forces  is  rotor  un- 
balance, in  which  the  excitation  frequency  is  equal  to 
the  rotational  frequency  of  the  shaft.  However,  there 
are  other  forms  of  excitation,  such  as  rotor  cross- 
section  asymmetry,  for  which  the  frequency  is  equal 
to  multiples  of  the  rotational  frequency  of  the  shaft. 
Where  the  vibration  arises  as  a  result  of,  for  example, 
destabilizing  self-excited  forces,  the  orbit  will  not 
normally  be  of  a  simple  shape,  but  will  change  form 
over  a  period  of  time  and  it  will  not  necessarily  be 
harmonically  related.  In  general,  the  vibration  of  the 
shaft  may  arise  from  a  number  of  different  sources 
and,  therefore,  a  complex  orbit  will  be  produced, 
which  is  the  vectorial  sum  of  the  effects  of  the  indi- 
vidual excitation  forces. 

B.2    Measurement  of  shaft  vibration 

At  any  axial  location,  the  orbit  of  the  shaft  can  be  ob- 
tained by  taking  measurements  with  two  vibration 
transducers  mounted  in  different  radial  planes,  separ- 
ated by  90°  (this  is  the  preferred  separation,  but  small 
deviations  from  this  do  not  cause  significant  errors). 
If  the  angle  between  the  transducer  locations  is  sub- 
stantially different  from  90°,  a  vector  resolution  into 
the  orthogonal  directions  will  be  required.  If  the 
transducers  measure  absolute  vibration,  then  the  orbit 
will  be  the  absolute  orbit  of  the  shaft  independent  of 


the  vibratory  motion  of  the  non-rotating  parts.  If  the 
transducers  measure  relative  vibration,  then  the 
measured  orbit  will  be  relative  lo  that  part  of  the 
structure  upon  which  the  transducers  are  mounted. 

B.3    Measurement  quantities 

B.3.1    Time-integrated  mean  position 

The  mean  values  of  the  shaft  displacement  (jc,y),  in 
any  two  specified  orthogonal  directions,  relative  to  a 
reference  position,  as  shown  in  figure  B.I f  are  defined 
by  integrals  with  respect  to  time,  as  shown  in  the 
following  equations: 


>-5F!tJ>* 


(B.1) 


(B.2) 


where  x(t)  and  y(t)  are  the  time-dependent  alternating 
values  of  displacement  relative  to  the  reference  pos- 
ition, and  (r2  - 1,)  is  large  relative  to  the  period  of  the 
lowest  frequency  vibration  component.  In  the  case  of 
absolute  vibration  measurements,  the  reference  pos- 
ition is  fixed  in  space.  For  relative  vibration  measure- 
ments, these  values  give  an  indication  of  the  mean 
position  of  the  shaft  relative  to  the  non-rotating  parts 
at  the  axial  location  where  the  measurements  are 
made.  Changes  in  the  values  may  be  due  to  a  number 
of  factors,  such  as  bearing/foundation  movements, 
changes  in  oil  film  characteristics,  etc.,  which  normally 
occur  slowly  relative  to  the  period  of  the  vibration 
components  which  make  up  the  alternating  values. 

It  should  be  noted  that,  in  general,  the  time-integrated 
mean  position  in  any  direction  differs  from  the  pos- 
ition defined  by  taking  half  the  summation  of  the 
maximum  and  minimum  displacement  values  (see 
figure  B.2).  However,  when  the  shaft  vibration  is  a 
single  frequency  and  sinusoidal,  then  the  locus  of  the 
shaft  centre  will  be  an  ellipse.  In  such  circumstances, 


9 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


the  time-integrated  mean  position  in  any  direction  of 
measurement  wiii  be  the  same  as  the  position  identi- 
fied by  taking  half  the  summation  of  the  maximum 
and  minimum  displacement  values. 

B.3.2    Peak-to-peak  displacement  of  the 
vibration 

The  primary  quantities  of  interest  in  shaft  measure- 
ments are  the  alternating  values  which  describe  the 
shape  of  the  orbit.  Consider  the  kinetic  shaft  orbit 
shown  in  figure  B. 2  and  assume  that  there  are  two 
transducers  A  and  B  mounted  90°  apart,  which  are 
used  to  measure  the  shaft  vibration.  At  some  instant, 
the  shaft  centre  will  be  coincident  with  the  point  K  on 
the  orbit  and  the  corresponding  instantaneous  value 
of  shaft  displacement  from  the  mean  position  will  be 
Sy  However,  in  the  piane  of  the  transducers  A  and 
B,  the  instantaneous  values  of  shaft  displacement 
from  the  mean  position  will  be  SA1  and  5B1,  respec- 
tively, where 


S:  =s  SM  +  5B1 


. .  (B.3) 


The  values  of  Sv  SM  and  5B1  will  vary  with  time  as  the 
shaft  centre  moves  around  the  orbit;  the  correspond- 
ing waveforms  measured  by  each  transducer  are 
shown  in  figure  B. 2. 

NOTE  6  If  the  orbit  is  elliptical,  then  these  waveforms 
would  be  pure  sine  waves  of  the  same  frequency. 

The  peak-to-peak  value  of  the  displacement  in  the 
plane  of  transducer  A  (5A(pi)))  is  defined  as  the  differ- 
ence between  the  maximum  and  minimum  displace- 
ments of  transducer  A  and  similarly  for  SB  for 
transducer  B.  Clearly  SA(f>P)  and  SB^  vaiues  wiil  not 
be  equal  and,  in  general,  they  will  be  different  from 
similar  measurements  made  in  other  radial  directions. 
Hence,  the  value  of  the  peak-to-peak  displacement  is 
dependent  on  the  direction  of  the  measurement. 

Since  these  measurement  quantities  are  independent 
of  the  absolute  value  of  the  mean  position,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  use  systems  whfch  can  measure  both 
the  mean  and  alternating  values. 

Peak-to-peak  displacement  is  the  unit  which  has  been 
used  most  frequently  for  monitoring  vibration  of  ro- 
tating machines. 

Whereas  measurement  of  the  peak-to-peak  displace- 
ment in  any  two  given  orthogonal  directions  is  a  sim- 
ple matter,  the  value  and  angular  position  of  the 
maximum  peak-to-peak  displacement  shown  in 
figure  B.2  is  difficult  to  measure  directly.  However,  in 
practice,  it  has  been  found  acceptable  to  use  alterna- 
tive measurement  quantities  which  enable  a  suitable 


approximation  for  the  maximum  peak-to-peak  dis- 
placement value  to  .be  obtained.  For  more  precise 
determinations,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  shaft 
orbit  in  more  detail,  as  for  example  with  an 
oscilloscope.  The  three  most  common  methods  for 
obtaining  satisfactory  approximations  are  described  in 
B.3.2.1  to  B.3.2.3. 

B.3.2.1    Method  A:  Resultant  value  of  the 
peak~to-peak  displacement  values  measured  in 
two  orthogonal  directions 

The  value  of  S^^ax  can  be  approximated  from  the 
following  equation: 


*(p-p)max 


-/ 


?A(w>)  +  Sb(p-p) 


■  (B.4) 


The  use  of  equation  (B.4)  as  an  approximation  when 
the  vibration  is  predominantly  at  rotational  frequency 
will  generally  over-estimate  the  value  of  5^jmax  with 
a  maximum  error  of  approximately  40  %. 

The  maximum  error  occurs  for  a  circular  orbit  and 
progressively  reduces  as  the  orbit  becomes  flatter, 
with  a  zero  error  for  the  degenerate  case  of  a  straight 
line  orbit. 

B.3.2.2    Method  B:  Taking  the  maximum  value  of 
the  peak-to-peak  displacement  values  measured 
in  two  orthogonal  directions 

The  value  of  S^^  can  be  approximated  from  the 
following  equation: 


S(p-p)max  -  Sa(w>)  0r  -B(>p) 


whichever  is  the  greater. 


. . . (B.5) 


The  use  of  equation  (Bf5)  as  an  approximation  when 
the  vibration  is  predominantly  at  rotational  frequency 
will  generally  under-estimate  the  value  of  5(„)max, 
with  a  maximum  error  of  approximately  30  %. 

The  maximum  error  occurs  for  a  flat  orbit  and  pro- 
gressively reduces  as  the  orbit  becomes  circular,  with 
a  zero  error  when  the  orbit  is  circular. 

B.3.2.3    Method  C:  Measurement  of  5max 

The  instantaneous  value  of  the  shaft  displacement 
can  be  defined  by  Sv  as  shown  in  figure  B.2,  which  is 
derived  from  the  transducer  measurements  SM  and 
Sousing  equation  (B.3).  There  is  a  point  on  the  orbit, 
defined  by  point  P  in  figure  B.2,  where  the  displace- 
ment from  the  mean  position  is  a  maximum.  The 
value  of  Si  corresponding  to  this  position  is  denoted 
bY  5max<  which  is  defined  as  the  maximum  value  of 
displacement 


10 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Smax  —  L^1  WJnnax  — 


VPaW]2+PbW]2 


. . . (B.6) 


The  point  on  the  orbit  where  Smax  occurs  does  not 
necessarily  coincide  with  the  point  where  SA  and  SB 
are  at  their  maximum  values.  Clearly,  for  a  particular 
orbit,  there  is  one  value  of  Smax  and  this  is  indepen- 
dent of  the  position  of  the  measuring  transducers 
provided  that  the  mean  position  0  does  not  change. 

The  value  of  S(p_P)max  can  be  approximated  from  the 
following  equation: 

. . .  (B7) 


^(p-p)max 


2Sn 


Equation  (B.7)  will  be  correct  when  the  two 
orthogonal  measurements  from  which  Smax  is  derived 
are  of  single-frequency  sinusoidal  form.  In  most  other 
cases,  this  equation  will  over-estimate  S(^max/  since 
this  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  harmonic  vibration 
components  present. 

It  should  be  noted  that  implicit  in  the  definition  of 
Smax  ,s  the  requirement  to  know  the  time-integrated 
mean  value  of  the  shaft  displacement.  The  measure- 
ment of  Smax  is,  therefore,  limited  to  those  measuring 
systems  which  can  measure  both  the  mean  and  al- 
ternating values.  Furthermore,  the  evaluation  of  Smax, 
from  the  signals  produced  by  two  vibration  trans- 
ducers, is  a  relatively  complex  computational  proce- 
dure requiring  specialized  instrumentation. 


i                                ^ — Kinetic  orbit  of  shaft 
\        x  (t) 

K 

V            * 

0 

y 

y(t) 

^ Reference  axes 

0 

K 


\ 


y{t)\ 


Mean  position  of  orbit 
Instantaneous  position  of  shaft  centre 

Mean  values  of  shaft  displacement 


Time-dependent  alternating  values  of  shaft  displacement 


Figure  B.1  —  Kinetic  orbit  of  shaft 


11 


IS    14773  ( Part  1 ):  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Transducer  B 


Transducer  A  waveform 


Transducer  A 


x.y 

0 

x.y 

K 

P 

Si 

SA1,  5B1 
S(f>-p)max 

5A(W>) 


Fixed  reference  axes 

Time- integrated  mean  position  of  orbit 

Time-integrated  mean  values  of  shaft  displacement 

Instantaneous  position  of  shaft  centre 

Position  of  shaft  for  maximum  displacement  from  time-integrated  mean  position 

Instantaneous  value  of  shaft  displacement 

Maximum  value  of  shaft  displacement  from  time-integrated  mean  position  0 

Instantaneous  values  of  shaft  displacement  in  directions  of  transducers  A  and  B,  respectively 

Maximum  value  of  peak-to-peak  displacement 

>         Peak-to-peak  values  of  shaft  displacement  in  directions  of  transducers  A  and  B,  respectively 


Figure  B.2  —  Kinetic  orbit  of  shaft  —  Definition  of  displacement 


12 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Annex  C 

(informative) 

Recommendations  for  instrumentation  to  be  used  for  measuring  relative 

and  absolute  shaft  vibration 


Introduction 

Three  types  of  measurement  system  are  in  common 
use  for  the  measurement  of  transverse  shaft  vi- 
bration, each  using  either  one  or  two  measuring  di- 
rections. One  type  uses  non-contacting  transducers 
which  measure  the  relative  motion  between  the  shaft 
and  a  bearing;  another  uses  shaft-riding  seismic 
transducers  which  measure  the  absolute  motion  of 
the  shaft;  and  the  third  provides  measurement  of  the 
absolute  motion  of  the  shaft  by  combining  the  outputs 
of  non-contacting  transducers  and  structurally 
mounted  (e.g.  on  the  bearing  housing)  seismic  trans- 
ducers. 

NOTE  7  In  the  examples  given  in  clauses  C.1  to  C.3,  two 
transducers  are  described  mounted  90°  apart  in  the  same 
transverse  plane  perpendicular  to  the  shaft  axis.  However, 
m  certain  cases,  measurement  in  one  direction  will  suffice. 
(See  3.3.) 

C.1     Relative-motion  measurement 
system  (non-contacting  transducers) 

Figured  presents  a  schematic  diagram  of  a  typical 
instrument  system  used  to  measure  the  relative  mo- 
tion between  the  shaft  and  a  structural  member  (for 
example,  the  bearing  housing).  This  system  consists 
of  a  non-contacting  transducer,  a  local  signal  condi- 
tioner and  a  readout  instrument. 

During  initial  installation  of  the  transducer,  it  is  desir- 
able to  conduct  an  in  situ  calibration  of  the  transducer 
output  versus  the  gap.  It  should  be  noted  that  ma- 
chine operating  conditions  can  alter  the  average  gap 
position.  Therefore,  care  should  be  taken  to  ensure 
operation  within  the  linear  range  of  the  transducer. 

When  mounting  non-contacting  transducers,  care 
should  also  be  taken  to  ensure  that  they  sense  only 
the  shaft  vibration  and  that  the  accuracy  is  not  af- 
fected by  any  conductive  material  or  magnetic  fields 
in  proximity  to  the  transducer. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  measurement  system 
should    be    capable    of    indicating    both    the   time- 


dependent  alternating  displacement  value  over  the 
frequency  range  of  interest  and  the  mean  position  of 
the  shaft  relative  to  the  support  structure.  The  latter 
provides  a  means  of  setting  the  transducer  at  the 
correct  gap  position  and  assessing  the  amount  of 
runout  obtained  at  low  speed  when  stable  bearing  oil 
films  have  been  established  but  centrifugal  effects  are 
negligible.  (For  example,  on  a  machine  of  rated  speed 
3  000  r/min,  the  runout  could  be  assessed  at  a  speed 
of  the  order  of  200  r/min.) 

It  is  recognized  that  other  measuring  systems,  such 
as  shaft-riding  relative  motion  probes,  are  used. 

NOTE  8  Caution  should  be  exercised  when  interpreting 
slow-roll  runout  measurements,  as  they  can  be  affected  by, 
for  example,  temporary  bows,  erratic  movements  of  the 
journal  within  the  bearing  clearance,  axial  movements,  etc. 

C.2    Absolute-motion  measurement 
system  (shaft-riding  with  seismic 
transducers) 

Figure  C.2  presents  a  schematic  diagram  of  a  typical 
instrument  system  used  to  measure  the  absolute 
motion  of  the  shaft.  This  system  consists  of  a  seismic 
transducer  (velocity  type  or  accelerometer)  mounted 
on  a  shaft-rider,  a  shaft-rider  support  system  which 
permits  the  shaft-rider  to  follow  accurately  the  motion 
of  the  shaft,  and  a  readout  instrument. 

NOTE  9  No  measurement  of  the  shaft  mean  position 
relative  to  the  structure  is  possible  with  this  system. 

The  shaft-riding  mechanism  should  accurately  trans- 
mit the  shaft  vibration  to  the  seismic  transducer,  and 
should  be  free  from  chatter  or  natural  frequencies 
which  could  adversely  affect,  or  distort,  the  measure- 
ments of  shaft  vibration  within  the  frequency  range 
of  interest. 

The  output  of  the  seismic  transducers  should  be 
suitably  conditioned  to  provide  a  signal  which  gives 
an  accurate  measure  of  the  time-dependent  alternat- 
ing displacement  value  for  the  shaft. 


13 


IS    14773  (Parti)- 2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


C.3  Absolute-motion  measurement 
system  (combined  non-contacting  and 
seismic  transducers) 

Figure  C.3  presents  a  schematic  diagram  of  a  typical 
instrument  system  used  to  measure  absolute  shaft 
motion,  and  which  can  also  be  used  to  measure  the 
absolute  motion  of  the  bearing  housing  and  the  rela- 
tive motion  of  the  shaft.  This  system  consists  of  a 
non-contacting  type  of  relative-displacement  trans- 
ducer, a  seismic  transducer  (i.e.  velocity  type  or  ac- 
celerometer),  a  signal  conditioner  and  a  readout 
instrument. 

The  two  transducers  should  be  mounted  on  a  com- 
mon rigid  structure  close  together  with  their  sensitive 
axes  parallel  to  ensure  that  both  undergo  the  same 
absolute  structural  motion. 

The  non-contacting  transducer  portion  of  the  system 
should  be  similar  to  that  described  in  clause  C.1,  and 
should  provide  an  output  proportional  to  the  relative 
shaft  vibration  displacement,  as  well  as  gap  distance. 
This  output  is  the  resultant  of  two  motions:  the  mo- 
tion of  the  shaft,  and  the  motion  of  the  structure  on 
which  the  non-contacting  transducer  is  mounted. 

The  output  of  the  seismic  transducer,  which  is  pro- 
portional to  the  motion  of  the  structure  to  which  it  and 


the  non-contacting  transducer  are  mounted,  should 
be  processed  as  is  necessary  to  provide  a  displace- 
ment signal.  The  amplitude  and  phase  of  this  signal, 
together  with  that  of  the  non-contacting  relative- 
motion  transducer,  should  be  adjusted  and  vectorially 
combined  to  provide  an  accurate  measure  of  the  ab- 
solute motion  of  the  shaft.  It  should  be  noted  that  in- 
dividual measuring  systems  can  modify  the  phase  and 
amplitude  of  the  basic  signal.  Therefore,  corrections 
should  be  made  for  these  inherent  characteristics  be- 
fore vectorial  addition.  The  seismic  transducer  also 
provides  an  output  proportional  to  the  absolute  vi- 
bration of  the  non-rotating  member  (for  example,  that 
of  the  bearing  housing). 

The  measurement  system  should  be  capable  of  indi- 
cating the  mean  position  of  the  shaft  relative  to  the 
support  structure  and  the  time-dependent  alternating 
displacement  value  of  absolute  shaft  vibration,  which 
is  the  vectorial  sum  of  the  absolute  motion  of  the 
structure  and  the  relative  motion  of  the  shaft. 

C.4  Overall  instrument  system 
performance  and  environmental 
considerations 

System  performance  and  environmental  consider- 
ations will  form  the  subjects  of  future  International 
Standards. 


local  signal 
conditioner 


Non-contacting 
transducer 


Remote  readout 
instrument 


•  Optional  output 
for  alarms/trips, 
recording  ^and/or 

.  analysis  instruments 


Figure  C.1  —  Schematic  diagram  of  a  relative-motion  measurement  system  using  non-contacting 

transducers  (see  clause  C.1) 


14 


IS    14773  (Parti ) :  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Machine  structure 


Signal  conditioner 


Remote  readout 
instrument 


H 


...J 


Optional  output 
"for  alarms/trips, 

recording  and/or 
'analysis  instruments 


Shaft  rider 


Figure  C.2  —  Schematic  diagram  of  an  absolute-motion  measurement  system  using  a  shaft-rider 
mechanism  with  seismic  transducers  (see  clause  C.2) 


Local  signal 
conditioner 


Remote  readout 
instrument 


Optional  output 
"for  alarms/trips, 
.recording  and/or 

analysis  instruments 


'Shaft  \ 

-Non-contacting  transducer 

Seismic  transducer 


Figure  C.3  —  Schematic  diagram  of  an  absolute-motion  measurement  system  using  a  combination  of 

non-contacting  and  seismic  transducers  (see  clause  C.3) 


15 


IS    14773  (Parti ) :  2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Annex  D 

(informative) 

Vector  analysis  of  change  in  vibration 


Introduction 

Evaluation  criteria  are  presented  in  annex  A  in  terms 
of  the  normal  steady  running  value  of  shaft  vibration 
and  any  changes  that  may  occur  in  the  magnitude  of 
these  steady  values.  However,  some  changes  may 
only  be  identified  by  vector  analysis  of  the  individual 
frequency  components. 

D.I     General 

The  overall  steady  vibration  signal  measured  on  a  ro- 
tating shaft  is  complex  in  nature  and  is  made  up  of  a 
number  of  different  frequency  components.  Each  of 
these  components  is  defined  by  its  frequency,  ampli- 
tude and  phase  relative  to  some  known  datum.  Con- 
ventional vibration-monitoring  equipment  measures 
the  magnitude  of  the  overall  complex  signal  and  does 
not  differentiate  between  the  individual  frequency 
components.  However,  modern  diagnostic  equipment 
is  capable  of  analysing  the  complex  signal  so  that  the 
amplitude  and  phase  of  each  frequency  component 
can  be  identified.  This  information  is  of  great  value  to 
the  vibration  engineer,  since  it  facilitates  the  diagnosis 
of  likely  reasons  for  abnormal  vibration  behaviour. 

Changes  in  individual  frequency  components,  which 
may  be  significant,  are  more  readily  seen  as  vector 
changes  than  as  changes  in  broad-band  vibration. 

D.2    Importance  of  vector  change 

Figure  D.1  is  a  polar  diagram  which  is  used  to  display 
simultaneously   in   vector  form  the  amplitude   and 


phase  of  one  of  the  frequency  components  of  a 
complex  vibration  signal. 

Vector  A,  describes  the  initial  steady-state  vibration 
condition;  i.e.  in  this  condition  the  vibration  magnitude 
is  30  jim  with  a  phase  angle  of  40°.  Vector  A2  de- 
scribes the  steady-state  vibration  condition  after  some 
change  has  occurred  to  the  machine;  i.e.  the  vibration 
magnitude  is  now  25  jim  with  a  phase  angle  of  180°. 
Hence,  although  the  vibration  magnitude  has  de- 
creased by  5  \im,  the  true  change  of  vibration  is  rep- 
resented by  the  vector  A2  -A^ ,  which  has  a  magnitude 
of  52  |im,  over  10  times  that  indicated  by  comparing 
the  vibration  magnitude  alone. 

This  example  illustrates  the  limitations  of  basing  a 
criterion  for  change  of  vibration  on  vibration  magni- 
tude alone. 

D.3    Monitoring  vector  changes 

The  example  given  above  clearly  illustrates  the  im- 
portance of  identifying  the  vector  change  in  a  vibration 
signal.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  appreciate  that,  in 
general,  the  overall  vibration  signal  is  composed  of  a 
number  of  individual  frequency  components,  each  of 
which  may  register  a  vector  change.  Furthermore,  an 
unacceptable  change  in  one  particular  frequency 
component  may  be  within  acceptable  limits  for  a  dif- 
ferent component.  Consequently,  it  is  not  possible  at 
this  time  to  define  criteria  for  vector  changes  in  indi- 
vidual frequency  components  that  are  compatible 
with  the  context  of  this  part  of  ISO  7919,  which  is 
aimed  primarily  at  normal  operational  monitoring  of 
overall  vibration  by  non-vibration  special 


16 


IS    14773(Part1):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Initial  steady-state  vector 
Steady-state  vector  after  change 
Change  in  vibration  magnitude 
Vector  of  change 


Ay    «  30  urn,  a  =  40° 


A2\  =25  jim,  a  =  180° 


l2|  ~  1^1 1  =  -5  urn 
^2  ~aA  =  52  \im 


Figure  D.1  -  Comparison  of  vector  change  and  change  in  magnitude  for  a  discrete  frequency 


component 


17 


IS    14773  (Parti  ):2000 
ISO    7919-1  :  1996 


Annex  E 

(informative) 

Bibliography 


[1]  ISO  2041:1990,  Vibration  and  shock  —  Vocabu- 
lary. 

[2]  ISO  5348:1987,  Mechanical  vibration  and  shock 
—  Mechanical  mounting  of  accelerometers. 

[3]  ISO  7919-2:1996,  Mechanical  vibration  of  non- 
reciprocating  machines  —  Measurements  on 
rotating  shafts  and  evaluation  criteria  —  Part  2: 
Large  land-based  steam  turbine  generator  sets. 

[4]  ISO  7919-3:1996,  Mechanical  vibration  of  non- 
reciprocating  machines  —  Measurements  on 
rotating  shafts  and  evaluation  criteria  —  Part  3: 
Coupled  industrial  machines. 

[5]  ISO  7919-4:1996,  Mechanical  vibration  of  non- 
reciprocating  machines  —  Measurements  on 
rotating  shafts  and  evaluation  criteria  —  Part  4: 
Gas  turbine  sets. 

[6]  ISO  7919-5:— 1),  Mechanical  vibration  of  non- 
reciprocating  machines  —  Measurements  on 
rotating  shafts  and  evaluation  criteria  —  Part  5: 
Machine  sets  in  hydraulic  power  generating  and 
pumping  plants. 

[7]  ISO  10816-2:1996,  Mechanical  vibration  — 
Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  measure- 
ments on  non-rotating  parts  —  Part  2:  Large 


land-based  steam  turbine  generator  sets  in  ex- 
cess of  50  MW. 

[8]  ISO  10816-3:— 1J,  Mechanical  vibration  —  Evalu- 
ation of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on 
non-rotating  parts  —  Part  3:  Industrial  machines 
with  nominal  power  above  15  kW  and  nominal 
speeds  between  120  r/min  and  15000 
r/min  when  measured  in  situ. 

[9]  ISO  10816-4:— 1),  Mechanical  vibration  —  Evalu- 
ation of  machine  vibration  by  measurements  on 
non-rotating  parts  —  Part  4:  Gas  turbine  driven 
sets  excluding  aircraft  derivatives. 

[10]  ISO  10816-5:— D,  Mechanical  vibration  —  Eval- 
uation of  machine  vibration  by  measurements 
on  non-rotating  parts  —  Part  5:  Machine  sets  in 
hydraulic  power  generating  and  pumping 
plants. 

[1 1  ]  ISO  1 081 6-6: 1 995,  Mechanical  vibration  — 
Evaluation  of  machine  vibration  by  measure- 
ments on  non-rotating  parts  —  Part  6: 
Reciprocating  machines  with  power  ra  tings 
above  100  kW. 

[12]  ISO  10817-1:— 1),  Rotating  shaft  vibration 
measurement  systems  —  Part  1:  Relative  and 
absolute  signal  sensing  of  radial  vibration  from 
rotating  shafts. 


1)   To  be  published. 


18 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  ME  28/LM  04  (  0393  ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU     OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  94  02,  323  33  75  (  Common  to 

all  offices ) 

Regional  Offices:  Telephone 


Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  J  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110002  1  323  38  41 


Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola  f   337  84  99,  337  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700054  \   337  86  26,337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  J  60  38  43 

.60  20  25 


{ 


l 


Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113  /  235  02  16,  235  04  42 

235  15  19,235  23  15 

Western  ;  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  f  832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI  400093  \  832  78  91,  832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.   GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR. 
KANPUR.    LUCKNOW.    NAGPUR.     PATNA.     PUNE.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurja;  India 


