**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  11442  (1996):  Agricultural  Tractors  -  Operator's  Field 
of  Vision  -  Test  Procedures  [FAD  11:  Agricultural  Tractors 
and  Power  Tillers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


18  11442:1996 
ISO  5721  :1989 

(Reaffirmed  2012) 


(  WcTT  ^^^TW  ) 


Indian  Standard 

AGRICULTURAL  TRACTORS  —  OPERATOR'S  FIELD 
OF  VISION  —  TEST  PROCEDURES 

( First  Revision  ) 

ISO  TITLE  :  TRACTORS  FOR  AGRICULTURE  —  OPERATOR'S  FIELD  OF  VISION  ] 


ICS    65.060.10 


OBIS  1996 

BUREAU   OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELH1 110002 

Hovember  1996  Prie«  Group  4 


Agricultural  Tractors  and  Power  Tillers  Sectional  Committee,  FAD  32 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision),  which  is  identical   with    ISO  5721  :  1989  Tractors  for  agriculture 
operator's  field  of  vision',  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  was  adopt 
by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Agricultural  Tractors  and  Power  Title 
Sectional  Committee  and  approval  of  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Division  Council. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  the  year  1985  as  dual  number  standard.  With  the  revision  of  the 
corresponding  ISO  standard  in  1989  It  was  decided  to  revise  this  standard  in  order  to  align  with  the 
corresponding  revised  ISO  standard.  In  this  revision  'Seat  Index  Point  (SIP)'  has  been  used  in  place  of  'See 
Reference  Point  (SRP)'andthe  relationship  of  SIP  90  mm  above  and  140  mm  in  front  of  theSRP  hasbeen 
used. 

While  considering  the  adoption  of  the  standard,  the  committee  considered  and  decided  to  stipulate  radius 
semi-circle  in  Fig.  2  and  3.  Accordingly  the  following  sentence  has  been  added  to  the  adopted  standard  a 
should  be  read  at  the  end  of  6.4.1, 5(b): 

The  radius  of  the  semi-circle  in  Fig.  2  and  Fig.  3  shall  be  12  m.' 

tn  the  adopted  standard  certain  terminology  and  conventions  are  not  identical  with  those  used  in  thelndian 
Standards;  attention  is  drawn  specially  to  the  following: 

Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear,  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be  read 
'Indian  Standard'. 

In  this  Indian  Standard,  the  following  International  Standards  areteferred  to.  Read  in  their  respective  place 
the  following: 


International  Standard 


Indian  Standard 


Degree  of 
Correspondence 


ISO  5353  :  1978  Earth  moving 
machinery,  and  tractors  and 
machinery  for  agriculture  and 
forestry  —  Seat  index  point 


IS  11113:  1993  Earth 

moving  machinery  —  Seat 
index    point  ( first  revision  ) 


Identical 


For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with  the  final  value 
observed,  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  {revised)'.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained 
the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  11442:  1996 
ISO  6721  :  1989 


Indian  Standard 

AGRICULTURAL  TRACTORS  —  OPERATOR'S  FIELD 
OF  VISION  —TEST  PROCEDURES 

(  First  Revision ) 


1    Scope 

This  International  Standard  specifies  prtictical  and  math- 
ematical methods  of  determining  the  masking  effects  of 
obstructions  on  the  angles  of  vision  forward,  to  the  rear  and 
upwards  of  seated  operators  of  tractors  for  agriculture. 

It  does   not   take   account   of   detachable   implements  and 
mounted  elements,  for  example  front  loaders,  pallets,  etc. 


2   Normative  reference 

The  following  standard  contains  provisions  which,  through 
reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of  this  International 
Standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  edition  indicated  was 
valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to 
agreements  based  on  this  International  Standard  are  encouraged 
to  investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  edition 
of  the  standard  indicated  below.  Members  of  lEC  and  ISO 
maintain  registers  of  currently  valid  International  Standards. 

ISO  5353  :  1978,  Earth-moving  machinery,  and  tractors  and 
machinery,  for  agriculture  and  forestry  —  Seat  index  point. 


3    Definitions 

For  the -purposes  of  this  International  Standard,  the  following 
d  efinitions  apply. 


3.1     field  of  vision  :  Area  which  can  be  viewed  from  the 
Crsated  operator's  eye  position. 


3.2     eye    position  :    Specified    notional    location    of    the 
operator's  eye.  (See  clause  5.) 


3.3  semi-circle  of  vision  to  the  front :  Semi-circle  de- 
scribed about  a  point  situated  in  the  horizontal  ptane  of  the  sur- 
face below  the  tractor  and  vertically  below  the  eye  position, 
such  that,  when  facing  the  usual  direction  of  rrYotion,  it  is 
situated  in  front  of  the  tractor  and  its  limiting  diameter  is  at 
hight  angles  to  the  tractor  longitudinal  median  plane.  (See 
figure  2.) 


3.4  semi-circle  of  vision  to  the  rear  :  Semi-circle  de- 
scribed about  a  point  situated  in  the  horizontal  plane  of  the  sur- 
face below  the  tractor  and  vertically  below  the  eye  position, 
such  that,  when  facing  the  usual  direction  of  motion,  it  is 
situated  behind  the  tractor  and  its  limiting  diameter  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  tractor  longitudinal  median  plane.  (See  figure  3.) 

3.5  angle  of  vision  upwards  :  Angle  of  vision  limited 
downwards  by  a  horizontal  plane  passing  through  the  eye  pos- 
ition and  upwards  by  planes  containing  the  rays  of  vision  from 
the  eye  position  to  points  of  obscuration  caused  by  vehicle 
components  other  than  those  which  cause  masking  effects  as 
defined  in  3.6. 

3.6  masking  effects  :  Chords  of  the  sectors  of  a  semi-circle 
of  vision  which  cannot  be  seen  from  the  eye  position  due  to 
structural  components,  for  example  roof  pillars,  exhaust  pipes, 
etc. 


4     Measurement  accuracy 

The  equipment  and  techniques  used  to  make  the  physical 
measurements  shall  be  accurate  to  within  ±  2  %. 


5     Eye  position 

The  eye  position  shall  be  located  670  mm  above  and  10  mm  in 
front  of  the  seat  index  point  when  determined  in  accordance 
with  ISO  5353  (see  figure  1). 


6    Practical  method 

NOTE  ~  An  alternative  mathematical  method  for  the  determination  of 
masking  effects  (see  6,4.1)  is  given  in  clause  7. 

6.1     Test  area 

6.1.1  The  test  area  shall  be  capable  of  being  darkened  suf 
ficiently  to  enable  the  light  sources  (see  6.2.1  b)\  to  cast 
distinct  shadows  or  of  being  illuminated  sufficiently  to  enable 
photographs  to  be  taken  or  a  sighting  instrument  to  be  used, 

6.1.2  The  area  shall  be  large  enough  to  accommodate  the 
semi-circles  of  vision  set  for  the  particular  test.  It  should 
preferably  be  large  enough  to  accommodate  both  semi-circles 
with  a  common  centre  point. 


IS   11442:  1996 
ISO  5721  :  1989 


6.1.3  The  test  area^  surface  shall  be  flat  and  smooth,  with 
a  maximum  slope  of  1  %.  The  deviation  from  flatness  caused 
by  surface  irregularities  shall  be  limited  to  ±  25  mm  in  any 
1  m  length  on  any  radial  line  from  the  centre  point  of  the  semi- 
circle of  vision.  The  surface  shall  also  be  firm  enough  to 
prevent  measurable  penetration  of  the  ground  surface  by  the 
machine. 


6.1.4     The  surface  should  preferably  be  permanently  marked 
out  in  1  m  squares. 


6.2.2  In  order  to  facilitate  manoeuvring  the  machine  under 
test  into  the  required  position,  that  is  with  the  eye  position  ver- 
tically above  the  centre  of  the  semi-circle  of  vision  marked  on 
the  surface  of  the  test  area,  the  following  additional  item  is 
recommended,  particularly  when  testing  a  machine  without  a 
cab  : 

—  a  plumb-bob  suspended  from  a  line  running  over  a 
pulley  attached  to  the  ceiling  or  other  rigid  member  situated 
over  the  test  area,  so  that  it  is  vertically  above  the  centre 
point  of  the  semi-circle  of  vision. 


6.1.5  Where  the  walls  of  the  test  area  constitute  the  vertical 
cylindrical  surfaces  [described  in  6.2.1  a) I,  they  should 
preferably  be  marked  out  in  1  m  squares. 


6.2    Test  equipment 


6.2.1     The  test  equipment  shall  include  the  following: 

a)  Vertical  waits  or  screens,  extending  from  ground  level 
to  a  height  sufficient  to  detect  shadows  at  the  semicircle  of 
vision,  for  example  500  mm  high,  having  inside  surfaces 
which  are  receptive  to  erasable  marking  materials  or  are 
replaceable,  and  comprising  : 


6.3     Tractor 

6.3.1  The    tractor     under    test    shall     be    unloaded     and 

unballasted. 

6.3.2  The  tyres  fitted  to  the  tractor  shall  be  those  recom- 
mended by  the  manufacturer,  in  new  condition  and  inflated  to 
the  pressures  recommended  for  road  use. 


6.4     Procedure 


6.4.1     Angle  of  vision  to  the  front/rear 


1)  cylindrical  surfaces  of  inside  radius  equal  to  that  of 
the  semi-circle  of  vision  set  for  the  particular  test,  or 

2)  surfaces  forming  part  of  a  semi-circle  which  can  be 
progressively  positioned  in  increments  concentrically 
about  the  vertical  axis  through  the  eye  position. 

b)  One  or  more  of  the  following,  which  may  be  used  singly 
or  in  combination,  as  desired  : 

1 )  two  point  light  sources,  of  sufficient  intensity  to  pro- 
ject clear  images  onto  the  ground  and  onto  the  vertical 
screens  or  walls,  and/or 

2)  a  sighting  instrument  having  two  coincident  pivot 
axes,  for  example  a  surveyor's  theodolite  transit 
mechanism,  and/or 

3)  a  camera. 

c)  A  firm  support,  to  hold  the  light  sources,  sighting  in 
strument  and/or  camera  in  two  positions  65  mm  apart, 
which  can  be 

11  rotated  through  360°  about  a  vertical  axis  passing 
through  the  eye  position,  being  the  point  midway  be 
tween  the  light  sources,  and 

2)  pivoted  in  the  vertical  plane  to  at  least  45"  above  and 
below  the  horizontal  plane  passing  through  the  light 
sources,  and 

3)  clamped  in  any  selected  vertical  and  horizontal  pos 
itions. 


6.4.1.1  Set  up  the  apparatus  defining  the  eye  position. 

6.4.1.2  Position  the  tractor  on  the  test  area  with  the  eye  pos- 
ition vertically  above  the  centre  of  the  appropriate  semi-circle  of 

vision. 

6.4.1.3  Locate  the  light  sources,  sighting  instrument  and/or 
camera  with  respect  to  the  eye  position.  In  the  case  of  the 
camera,  the  reference  point  relative  to  the  eye  position  shall  be 
the  intersection  of  its  optical  axis  with  the  focal  plane. 

6.4.1.4  Adjust  the  support  so  that  the  line  joining  the  two 
light  sources  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  joining  the  eye  position 
and  a  component  masking  the  semi-circle  of  vision  to  the  front 
or  to  the  rear,  as  appropriate. 

6.4.1.5  Switch  on  each  light  source  in  turn  and 

a)  record  the  positions  and  lengths  of  the  chords  denoting 
the  presence  of  overlapping  shadows  on  the  vertical  walls  or 
screens; 

b)  additionally,  at  the  option  of  the  manufacturer  or  if 
specified,  determine  and  record  obscuration  of  the  ground 
plane  by  marking  on  the  ground  the  area  obscured  by 
overlapping  shadows  (see  figures  2  and  3). 

6.4.1.6  Repeat  the  procedures  in  6.4.1.4  and  6.4.1.5  for  each 

other  masking  component. 

6.4.2     Angle  of  vision  upwards 

6.4.2.1     Set  up  the  apparatus  defining  the  eye  position. 


IS  11442  :  1d96 
ISO  5721  :  1989 


6,4.2.2  Determine  the  angles  between  the  limiting  planes  for 
the  angles  of  vision  upwards  (see  3.5)  in  four  positions  as 
follows  : 

a)  to  the  front  in  a  vertical  plane  parallel  to  the  tractor 
longitudinal  median  plane  and  passing  through  the  eye  pos- 
ition; 

b)  to  the  rear  in  the  plane  of  a); 

c)  to  the  left  in  a  vertical  plane  perpendicular  to  the  plane 
of  a)  and  passing  through  the  eye  position; 

6)     to  the  right  in  the  plane  of  c). 


7    Mathematical  method 

As  an  alternative  to  the  procedure  set  out  in  6.4.1,  the  in- 
dividual masking  effects  may  be  determined  mathematically. 

For  binocular  vision  using  an  inter-ocular  distance  of  65  mm, 
the  masking  effect,  X,  of  a  component  is  given,  in  millimetres, 
by  the  following  formula  (see  figure  4)  : 


rib  ~  65) 
X^  — +  65 


where 

a  is  the  distance,  in  millimetres,  between  the  component 
and  the  eye  position,  measured  along  the  (visual)  radius 
joining  the  eye  position,  the  centre  of  the  component  and 
the  perimeter  of  the  semi-circle  of  vision; 

b  is  the  width,  in  millimetres,  of  the  component,  measured 
horizontally  and  perpendicular  to  the  visual  radius; 


r    is  the  set  radius,  in  millimetres,  of  the  semi-circle  of 
vision. 

NOTE  —  The  formula  Is  based  on  the  assumption  that  dimension  c  in 
figure  4  is  equal  to  r. 


Z    Test  report 

The  test  report  shall  include  the  details  in  8.1  and  8.2. 

8.1  Tractor: 

a)  make; 

b)  model; 

c)  serial  number; 

d)  make  and  model  of  cab  or  protective  structure; 

e)  sizes  and  types  of  tyres; 

f )  make  and  model  of  operator's  seat; 

g)  details  of  any  other  items  affecting  the  angles  of  vision. 

8.2  Angles  of  vision : 

a)  scale  drawings  showing  the  radius  of  the  semi-circle  of 
vision  and  dimensions  and  relative  positions  of  the  masking 
effects  forwards  and/or  to  the  rear; 

b)  if  applicable,  scale  drawings  showing  the  obscuration 
of  the  ground  planes  and  including  a  plan  view  of  the  tractor 
to  improve  interpretation  of  the  test  data; 

c)  the  four  angles  defining  the  field  of  vision  upwards. 


IS  11442:  1996 
ISO  5721  :  1989 


Eye  position 


Seat  index  point 


figure  1  -  Determination  of  eye  position 


IS   11442:1996 
ISO  5721  :  1989 


Obscuration 


Masking 
effect 


Eye  position 


Limiting  diameter 


Plane  parallel  to  the  tractor 
longitudinal  median  plane 


Semi-circle  to  the  front 


Figure  2  -  Semicircle  of  vision  to  the  front  (showing  typical  obscurations) 


IS  11442: 
ISO  5721 


1996 
1989 


Masking 
effect 


Obscuration 


Plane  parallel  to  the  tractor 
longitudinal  nnedian  plane 


Semi-circle  to  the 


Eye  position 


Limiting  diameter 


Figure  3  -  Semi-circle  of  vision  to  the  rear  (showing  typical  obscurations) 


IS  11442:1996 
ISO  5721  :  1989 


Masking  effect 


Obstruction 


65  mm 

Distance  between  eyes 


Figure  4  -  Mathematical  determination  of  masking  effects 


