**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



g^l/l:^:^i^J^^lf/lJJ^i^N^^ g^^TS^,^^ 



IS 11911 (1986) 
Additives] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Caffeine, Food Grade [FAD 



Food 



i&^^f f /lA^sh^^JS^ rsJ^a^TTTF^ 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11911 •* 1986 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CAFFEINE, FOOD GRADE 



UDC &64n99 : 547 8574 



© ^^pyrighi 1087 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK HHAVAN, 9 UAHAPUR sHaH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI lluaiM 

Gr 3 A'fiJ' 19B7 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CAFFEINE, FOOD GRADE 

Food Additives Sectional Committee, AFDC 19 

Chairman Representing 

Db T. S. Santhanakrishnan* Bush Boake Allen ( India ) Ltd, Madras 

Members 

Shbi B. Hanumantha Rau ( Alternate to 
Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan ) 
Dr J. C. Anand All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 

Db S. Jikdal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Arya Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati ) T. S. Vasundhaba ( Alternate ) 
Shbimati Akita Chaudhaby Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, ( Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development ), New Delhi 
Shbi R. J. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. V. Desai Atul Products Limited, AtuI 

Db J. M. TtJBEL ( Alternate ) 
Bbig S. K. Dewan Technical Standardization Committee, Army 

Purchase Organization, New Delhi 
Shbi K- S. Kbishnamttrthy ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Dhtngba Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Drxtos Controller ( India ) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Deputy Dbugs Contbolleb 
( India ) ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. C. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi S. N. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. S. Iyer Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Db V, S. Mohan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Shrimati Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Db E. K. Jayanabayanan Mohan Meakin Limited, Ghaziabad 

Shbi D. K. Rastogi ( Alternate ) 
Joint Commissionbb ( Dairy Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Agriculture 
Development ) and Rural Development ), New Delhi 

Deputy Commissioneb ( Dairy 
Development ) ( Alternate ) 



♦Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan acted as chairman at the meeting in which the docu- 
ment was finalized. 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement ot copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. Kasthubi King Institute, Madras 

Public Akalyst ( Alternate ) 
Shki J. C. Kathrani Asian Chemical Works, Bombay; and All India 

Saccharin Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 
Dr S. S. Pandit ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Khanna Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Shri V. K. Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Db M. J. MuLKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Db V. R. Shibhatti ( Alternate ) 
Db A. G. Naik KuBADE Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Dr B. K. Nanbi Foods and Nutrition Board, Department of Food 

( Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies ), New Delhi 
Shri M. M. Kwataba ( Alternate ) 
Dr C. S, Narayanan Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Trivandrum 

Dr C. Arttmughan ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. M. Narayanan National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), KarnaJ 

Db M. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. S. Rajadhayksha Corn Products Company ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Palekar ( Alternate ) 
Db R. Rajagopala Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Db R. Seshadbi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Ramamurthy Indian Confectionery Manufacturers' AssociatioDj 

New Delhi 
Representative The Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association 

of India, New Delhi 
Dr A. K. Roy Council for Indian Food Trade and Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. W. Shende Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shri K. P. Rane ( Alternate ) 
Db I. S. Shenolikar National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 

Db Ramesh Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri L A. Siddiqi Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & Fats, 

Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Db T. V. SiTBBAiAH Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr R. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. B. Svls Naarden ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Shbi D. B. Bedekar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Tiwabi Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 

Bhavnagar 
Db R. M. Oza ( Alternate ) 
Db G. M. Tiwabi Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Db C. p. S. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. B. Ttjrakhia Idachem Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. J» Navloor ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. C Vin Vin Flavours, Vadodara 

Shbi T. Purnanandam, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shrimati Shashi Sareen 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), BIS 

( Continued on page 11) 



IS : 11911 < 1986 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
CAFFEINE, FOOD GRADE 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 November 1986, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Additives Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 With the increased production of processed foods, manufacturers 
have started adding a large number of substances, generally in small 
quantities, to improve the appearance, flavour, texture, or storage 
properties of the processed foods. As certain impurities in these subs- 
tances could be harmful, it is necessary to have a strict quality control 
of these food additives. A series of standards is, therefore, bemg 
prepared by this Institution to cover purity and identification of these 
substances. These standards would help in checking purity which 
requires to be checked at the stage of manufacture for it is extremely 
difficult ( and in many cases impossible ) to detect the impurity once 
these substances have been added to the processed foods. Besides, these 
standards are intended to guide the indigenous manufacturers in 
making their product conform to specifications that are accepted by 
scientists, health authorities and international bodies. 

0.3 Caffeine is used as a central nervous stimulant in cola-type 
beverages, 
0.4 Gheznica] Characteristics 

0.4.1 Chemical Name — 1,3,7-trimethylxanthine. 

0.4.2 Empirical Formula — C8H10N4O2 

0.4.3 Molecular Weight — 194*19. 

0.4.4 Structural Formula 



CH 




,<^^ 



CH-: 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

0.5 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from Food Chemical Codex, Pub. National Academy of Sciences 
and National Research Council, Washington, DC, USA. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the resujt of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of 
sampling and test for caffeine, food grade. 

2. TYPES 

2.1 The product shall be of the following two types: 

a) Anhydrous, and 

b) Hydrous, 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Description — Caffeine shall be in the form of a white powder or 
white glistening needles usually matted together. It shall be odorless 
and shall have a bitter taste. Its solution shall be neutral to litmus. 
The hydrate shall be efflorescent in air. 

3.2 Identification 

3.2.1 Dissolve about 5 mg caffeine in 1 ml of hydrochloric acid in a 
porcelain dish. Add 50 mg of potassium chlorate and evaporate on a 
steam bath to dryness. Invert the dish over a vessel containing a few 
drops of ammonia solution ( 400 ml of 28 percent ammonium hydroxide 
diluted to 1 000 ml whh water ). The residue shall acquire a purple 
colour, which disappears upon the addition of a solution of a fixed 
alkali. 

3.2.2 To a saturated solution of caffeine add freshly prepared tannic 
acid solution ( 1 g of tannic acid dissolved in 1 ml alcohol and water 
added to make 10 ml ). A precipitate, which is soluble in an excess of 
the reagent shall be formed. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ), 



IS : 11911 - 1986 



3.2.3 To 5 ml of a saturated solution of caffeine add 5 drops of iodine 
solution ( 14 g of iodine dissolved in a solution of 36 g of potassium 
iodide in 100 ml of water, 3 drops of hydrochloric acid added, and 
solution diluted to 1 000 mi with water and mixed ). No precepitate 
shall be formed. Then add 3 drops of diluted hydrochloric acid solution 
( 10 percent wjo' ). A red-brown precipitate, which redissolves on 
addition of a slight excess of sodium hydroxide solution ( 4'3 g of 
sodium hydroxide dissolved in water to make 100 ml ), shall be formed. 

3.3 Melting Range — The melting range of the sample when dried 
at SO°C for 4 hours shall be between 235 and 237-5^C. 



3,4 The material shall 
Table I. 



also conform to the requirements given in 



TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR CAFFEINE, FOOD GRADE 



Sl 
No. 



(1) 



Characteristics 



(2) 



i) Purity ( as CgHioNiOa ) ( on 
anhydrous basis }, percent by 
mass, Min 

ii) Moisture, percent by mass, Max 

a) Anhydrous caffeine 

b) Hydrous caffeine 

iii) Lead ( as Pb ), mg/kg, Max 

iv) Arsenic ( as As ), mg/kg, Max 

v) Heavy metals (asPb), mg/kg, 
Max 

vi) Readily carbonizable substances 

vii) Residue on ignition, percent by 
mass, Max 



Requihements 



(3) 
98-5 



0-5 
8-5 

10 

3 

20 

To pass test 
0-1 



Method of Test, 
Ref to 

Appendix Clause of 
of this IS : 1699- 
Standard 1974* 



(4) 
A 



D 

E 



(5) 



9 
10 



*Method of sampling and test for food colours (first revision ). 



4- PACKING, STORAGE AND MARKING 

4.1 Packing and Storage — Hydrous caffeine shall be packed and 
stored in well closed containers and anhydrous caffeine in tight 
containers. 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

4.2 Marking — Each container shall be marked legibJy to give the 
following information: 

a) Name of the material whether hydrous or anhydrous and 
including the words 'food grade'; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

c) Minimum net mass of contents; 

d) Batch or code number; and 

e) Date of manufacture. 

4,2*1 The containers may also be marked with the Standard Mark, 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
Standard iviark on products covered by an Indian standard conveys the assurance 
that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard 
under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised 
and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products 
are aiso continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards, 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 The representative samples of the material shall be drawn and 
conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification shall 
be determined according to the procedure prescribed in 3 of IS : 1699- 
1974*. 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Tests shall be carried out by the methods specified in col 4 and 5 
of Table i. 

6.2 Q^uality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070=19771 ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — 'Pure chemicals* shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



♦Methods of sampling and lest for food colours {first revision ). 
fSpecification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision 



IS : 11911 • 1986 

APPENDIX A 

[ Table 1, Item (i) ] 
DETERMINATION OF PURITY 

A-I. REAGENTS 

A-1.1 Acetic Anhydride 

A-I.2 Benzene 

A.1.3 Perchloric Acid — 01 N. 

A.2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Dissolve about 800 mg, accurately weighed, fine powder caffeine, 
with warming, in a mixture of 80 ml of acetic anhydride and 180 ml 
of benzene. Cool and titrate with 0"1 N perchloric acid determining 
the end-point potentiometricalJy. Each ml of O'l N perchloric acid is 
equivalent to 19'42 mg of CgHioN402. 



APPENDIX B 

[ Table 1, Item (ii) ] 

DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE 

B-1. PROCEDURE 

B-1.1 For routine purposes, moisture shall be determined by drying the 
sample at 120''C for 4 hours. In case of dispute moisture shall be 
determined by the Karl Fischer method described in IS : 2362-1973*. 



APPENDIX G 

[ Table 1, Item (v) ] 
DETERMINATION OF HEAVY METALS 

C-1. REAGENTS 

C-1.1 Ammonia Solution — Dilute 400 ml of 28 percent (amaujnium 
hydroxide to 1 000 ml with water. 

C-1.2 Acetic Acid Solution — 6 percent ( m/f ). 



•Method for determination of water by the Karl Fiiher method i^Jirst revisUn ). 

7 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

C-1.3 Hydrochloric Acid — 10 percent. 

C-1.4 Lead Nitrate Stock Solution — Dissolve 159'8 mg of lead 
nitrate Pb ( NO3 )2 in 100 ml of water containing .1 ml of nitric acid, 
then dilute with water to 1 000 ml and mix. This solution should be 
prepared and stored in glass containers which are free from lead salts. 

G»1.5 Standard Lead Solution — On the day of use dilute 10 ml 
of lead nitrate stock solution, accurately measured, with water to 100 ml. 
Each ml of the solution so prepared contains the equivalent of 10 mg 
of lead ion ( Pb ). 

C-1,6 Hydrogen Sulphide — A saturated solution of hydrogen 
sulphide made by passing H2S in cold water. 

C-2. PROCEDURE 

G-2.1 Solution A — Take 1 ml of the standard lead solution in a 
50-ml Nessler tube and add water to make 25 ml. Adjust the pH to 
between 3*0 and 4*0 ( />H indicator paper ) by the addition of diluted 
acetic acid or ammonia solution. Dilute with water to 40 ml and mix. 

C-2.2 Solution B — Make a solution of 500 mg of substance in 2*5 ml 
of hydrochloric acid and 23 ml of water. Place 25 ml of this solution 
in a 50-ml Nessler tube that matches the one used for solution A and 
adjust the pR to between 3'0 and 4*0 ( />H indicator paper ) by the 
addition of dilute acetic acid solution or ammonia solution. Dilute to 
40 ml with water and mix. 

C-2.3 To each tube add 10 ml of freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide 
solution. Mix, allow to stand for 5 minutes and view down over a 
white surface. The colour of solution B shall not be darker than that 
of solution A. 



APPENDIX D 

[ Table 1, Item (vi) ] 
TEST FOR READILY GARBONXZABLE SUBSTANCES 

D-1. REAGENTS 

D-1.1 Sulphuric Acid Solution — Add a quantity of sulphuric acid of 
known concentration to sufficient water to adjust the final concentration to 
between 94*5 and 95"5 percent of H2SO4. Since the acid concentration may 
change upon standing or upon intermittent use, the concentration should 
be checked frequently and solutions assaying more than 95*5 percent 
or less than 94'5 percert discarded or adjusted by adding either diluted 
or fuming sulphuric acid, as required. 

8 



IS : 11911 . 1986 

D-1.2 Gobaltous Chloride Solution — Dissolve about 65 g of 
cobaitous chloride ( GoCl2-6H20 ) in sufficient quantity of a mixture of 
25 ml of hydrochloric acid and 975 ml of water to make 1 000 ml. 
Pipette 5 ml of this solution into a 250-mI iodine flask, add 5 ml 
hydrogen peroxide solution ( a solution containing between 2*5 and 3*5 
grams of hydrogen peroxide in each 100 ml and suitable preservatives, 
totalling not more than '0*05 percent ) and 15 ml of sodium hydroxide 
solution ( I in 5 ), boil for 10 minutes, cool, and add 2 g of potassium 
iodide and 20 ml of dilute sulphuric acid ( 1 in 4 ). When the preci- 
pitate has dissolved, titrate the liberated iodine with O'l JV* sodium 
thiosulphate. The titration is sensitive to air oxidation and should be 
blanketed with carbon dioxide. Each ml of 0' 1 JV* sodium thiosulphate 
is equivalent to 23*79 mg of G0GI2-6H2O. Adjust the final volume of 
the solution by the addition of enough of the mixture of hydrochloric 
acid and water to make each ml contain 59*5 mg of G0CI2.6H2O. 

D-1.3 Gupric Sulphate Solution — Dissolve about 65 g of cupric 
sulphate ( GUSO4.5H2O ) in sufficient quantity of a mixture of 25 ml of 
hydrochloric acid and 975 ml of water to make 1 000 ml. Pipette 10 ml 
of this solution into a 250-ml iodine flask, add 40 ml of water, 4 ml 
of acetic acid, and 3 g of potassium iodide, and titrate the liberated 
iodine with O'l ^ sodium thiosulphate, adding starch solution ( 5^^ 
D-1.3.1 ) as the indicator. Each ml of O'l TV sodium thiosulphate is 
equivalent to 2497 mg of GuS04,5H20. Adjust the final volume of the 
solution by the addition of enough of the mixture of hydrochloric acid 
and water to make each ml contain 62'4 mg of GUSO4.5H2O. 

D-1.3.1 Starch Solution — Mix one gram of a suitable starch with 
sufficient amount of cold water to make a thin paste. Add 20 ml of 
boiling water. Boil for one minute with continuous stirring and cool. 
Use only the clear solution. 

D-1.4 Ferric Chloride Solution — Dissolve about 55 g of ferric 
chloride ( FeCl3.6H20 ) in sufficient quantity of a mixture of 25 ml of 
hydrochloric acid and 975 ml of water to make 1 000 ml. Pipette 10 ml 
of this solution into a 250-ml iodine flask, add 15 ml of water, 5 ml of 
hydrochloric acid, and 3 g of potassium iodide, and allow the mixture 
to stand for 15 minutes. Dilute with 100 ml of water, and titrate the 
liberated iodine with 0*1 N sodium thiosulphate, adding starch solution 
( see D-1.3.1 ) as the indicator. Perform a blank determination with 
the same quantities of the same reagents and in the same manner and 
make necessary correction, if any. Each ml of 0*1 jV sodium thiosulphate 
is equivalent to 2703 mg of FeCl3.6H20. Adjust the final volume of 
the solution by addition of the mixture of hydrochloric acid and 
water to make each ml contain 45*0 mg of FeCl3.6H20. 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

D-2. PROCEDURE 

D-2.1 Add 500 mg of the sample, finely powdered, in small portions to 
the comparison containers, which is made of colourless glass resistant to 
the action of sulphuric acid, containing 5 ml of sulphuric acid solution 
( see D-1,1 ). Stir the mixture with a glass rod until solution is complete. 
The colour should not be darker than the colour produced by mixing 
in a similar comparison container 0*3 parts cobaltous chloride solution 
( 5^^ D-1.2 ), 0*6 parts ferric chloride solution {see D-1,4 ), 0*4 parts 
cupric sulphate solution ( 5^^ D-1.3 ) and 3'7 parts water. The fluids 
in the tubes are to be viewed transversely against a background of 
white porcelain or white glass. 



APPENDIX E 

[ Table 1, Item (vii) ] 

DETERMINATION OF RESIDUE ON IGNITION 

E-l. REAGENTS 

E-1.1 Dilute Sulphuric Acid — 10 percent ( m/y ). 

E-2. PROCEDURE 

E-2.1 Transfer about 2 grams of the sample, accurately weighed, to a 
tared 50-ml to iCO-ml platinum dish or other suitable container and add 
suflficient diluted sulphuric acid to moisten the entire samples. Heat gently, 
until the sample is dry and thoroughly charred, then continue heating 
until all the sample has been volatilized or nearly all of the carbon has 
been oxidized. Cool. Moisten the residue with 0*1 ml of sulphuric acid, 
and heat in the same manner until the remainder of the sample and 
any excess sulphuric acid have been volatilized. Finally ignite in a 
muffle furnace at 800 ± 25''C for 15 minutes. Cool in a desiccator 
and weigh. 

E-3, CALCULATION 

Residue on ignition, ^ 

percent by mass = j. x 100 

where 

Ml = mass in g of residue, and 

M = mass in g of th.^ material taken for the test. 

10 



IS : 11911 - 1986 

{ Continued from page 2 ) 

Food Colours and Flavours Subcommittees AFDC 19:1 

Convener Representing 

Shbi K. V. Naoaraja Central Food Laboratory, Central Food Tech- 

nological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

Members 
Db J, C. Anand All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 

Dr S. JmDAL ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Bhardwaj Ajanta Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shri Kapil Dev ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vam Dev Bhardwaj Arun Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shbi Ashok Dogra ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Dhj:n^oba Food Research and Standardization Laboratory. 

Ghaziabad 
Shbi M. K. Jaik National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnai 

Shri J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Shrimati Debi Mtjkherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Kasthuri King Institute, Madras 

Dr S. K, Khastna Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Shri S. M. Mehta Atul Products Limited, Atul 

Shbi M. V. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Menok Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Db M. J. MtJLKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. R. ShiRHATTi ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. G. Naik Kubade Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Shrt B. a. Rane Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. W. Shende ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. HanuMantha Rah Bush Boake Allen ( India ) Limited, Madras 

Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Db L. V. L. Sastry Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR ), Mysore 
Shri Navinchandba R. Shah Devarsons Private Limited, Ahmadabad 

Db V. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) ^ ^ 

Shbi S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. C. VaSudevan Corn Products Go ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. R. Palekar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. C. Vin Vin Flavours, Vadodara 



11 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 

Qtctantity 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

QPANTITT 

Plane angle 

Solid angle 

Derived Units 

QUANTITy 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



UXIT 


Symboi. 


metre 


m 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candela 


cd 


mole 


mol 


Unit 


SymboI; 


radian 


rad 


steradian 


sr 


Unit 


Symbol 


newton 


N 


joule 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesla 


T 


hertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


volt 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

1 N = 1 kg.m/s^ 
1 J « 1 N.m 
1 W = 1 J/s 
1 Wb =« 1 V.s 

1 T « 1 Wb/m^ 
1 Hz == 1 c/s(s-i> 
1 S *= I A/V 
1 V == 1 W/A 
1 Pa ^ 1 N/m2 



