**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14198-2 (1994) : Rules for Steam Turbines Thermal 
Acceptance Tests, Part 2: Method B - Wide range of accuracy 
for various types and sizes of turbines [ETD 15: Rotating 
Machinery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



t9 UtU (Fvt 2} 1 1114 
I€I3 Pub S51-2 s 14IQ 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

RULES FOR STEAM TURBINE THERMAL 
ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

^ART 1 »ET«00 B - WlOfi HftlteE OF ACCUftACV FOB VAfflC^Ut 
YVPEB AMD 5lZ£S OF TyflBlliE& 



UDC *ill24 5l'0B9"5 



BUKSAU Of" INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, * BAHADUB MAH ZAFAft MA KG 

MEW DELHI I loom 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ET 15 



CONTENTS 

Introduction l 

Clause 

1. Scope and object 4 

1.1 Scope .4 

1.2 Object 4 

1.3 Matters to be considered in the contract 4 

2. Units, symbols, terms and definitions 

2.1 General 4 

2.2 Symbols, units 5 

2.3 Subscripts, superscripts and definitions 6 

2.4 Definition of guarantee values and test results , 8 

3. Guiding principles * 12 

3.1 Advance planning for test 12 

3.2 Preparatory agreements and arrangements for tests 13 

3.3 Planning of the test 13 

3.4 Preparation of the tests 14 

3.5 Comparison measurements 18 

3.6 Settings for tests 19 

3.7 Preliminary tests ,^ 19 

3.8 Acceptance tests 20 

3.9 Repetition of acceptance tests 22 

4. Measuring techniques and measuring instrument 22 

4.1 General 22 

4.2 Measurement of power 27 

4.3 Flow measurement 30 

4.4 Pressure measurement (excluding condensing turbine exhaust pressure) 37 

4.5 Condensing turbine exhaust pressure measurement , 42 

4.6 Temperature measurement 44 

4.7 Steam quality measurement 47 

4.8 Time measurement 55 

4.9 Speed measurement 55 

5. Evaluation of tests 55 

5.1 Preparation of evaluation 55 

5.2 Computation of results , 56 

6. Correction of test results and comparison with guarantee 58 

6.1 Guarantee values and guarantee conditions 58 

6.2 Correction of initial steam flow capacity 58 

6.3 Correction of maximum output 59 

6.4 Correction of thermaLand thermodynamic efficiency 59 

6.5 Definition and application of correction values 60 

(i) 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2:1990 

6.6 Correction methods 60 

6.7 Variables to be considered in the correction .,....* 63 

6.8 Guarantee comparison 66 

6.9 Deterioration of turbine performance (ageing) 68 

7. Measuring uncertainty 68 

7.1 General ....,, 68 

7.2 Determination of measuring uncertainty of stream and water properties 69 

7.3 Calculation of measuring uncertainty of output 71 

7.4 Determination of measuring uncertainty of mass flow 72 

7.5 Calculation of measuring uncertainty of results , 73 

Appendix A — Feedwater leakage and condenser leakage tests 76 

Appendix B — Throat tap nozzle 77 

Appendix C — Evaluation of multiple measurements, compatibility ^ 81 

Appendix D — Mass flow balances 82 

Appendix E — Typical generalized correction curves for correction of test results according to guarantee 

conditions 84 

Appendix F — Short statistical definition of measuring uncatainty and error propagation in acceptance tests ... 103 

Appendix G — Calculation of measuring uncertainty of output — Electrical measurement 106 



(ii) 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



Indian Standard 

RULES FOR STEAM TURBINES THERMAL 
ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with lEC Pub 953-2 (1990), issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission, was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Rotating Machinery 
Sectional Conmiittee (ET 15) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The text of lEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also 
exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with 
their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International Standard 

ISO 31-3 : 1992 Quantities and 
Units — Part 3: Mechanics 

lEC 953-1 (1990) Rules for steam 
turbine thermal acceptance tests — 
Part 1 : Method A — High accuracy 
large condensing steam turbines 



Corresponding Indian 
Standard 

IS 1890 (Part 3) : 1994 Quantities, 
identical units and symbols: Part 3 
Mechanics (first revision) 

IS 14198 (Part 1) : 1994 Rules for 
steam turbine thermal acceptance 
tests: Part 1 Method A — High ac- 
curacy for large condensing steam 
turbines 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Identical 



Identical 



The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of ISO 5167-1 : 1991 referred to in this adopted 
standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 

Only the English language text given in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it as Indian 
Standard, and as such the page numbers given here are not the same as in lEC publication. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1 960 *Rules 
for rounding off numerical values {revised)' . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



(iii) 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



Introduction 

The rapid development of measuring techniques, the increasing capacity of steam turbines and the 
introduction of nuclear power plants necessitated a revision of lEC Publication 46 (1962) regarding 
acceptance tests. 

Since all the needs of the power industry in the different parts of the world could not be satisfied by 
one single publication, the complete standard is divided into two parts, describing two different 
approaches for conducting and evaluating thermal acceptance tests of steam turbines ^nd which can 
be used separately: 

a) Method A, which is Part 1 of the standard (lEC 953-1), deals with thermal acceptance tests with 
high accuracy for large condensing steam turbines. 

b) Method B , which is Part 2 of the standard (I E C 953-2) , deals with thermal acceptance tests with a 
wide range of accuracy for various types and sizes of steam turbines. 



1) Basic philosophy and figures on uncertainty 

Part 1 provides for very accurate testing of steam turbines to obtain the level of performance with 
minimum measuring uncertainty. The operating conditions during the test are stringent and 
compulsory. 

Method A is based on the exclusive use of the most accurate calibrated instrumentation and the 
best measuring procedures currently available. The uncertainty of the test result is always sufficiently 
small that it normally need not be taken into account in the comparison between test result and 
guarantee value. This uncertainty will not be larger than about 0.3% for a fossil fired unit and 0.4% 
for a nuclear unit. 

The cost for instrumentation and the efforts for preparing and conducting the tests will generally 
be justified economically for large and/or prototype units. 

Method B provides for acceptance tests of steam turbines of various types and capacities with 
appropriate measuring uncertainty. Instrumentation and measuring procedures have to be chosen 
accordingly from a scope specified in the standard which is centred mainly on standardized 
instrumentation and procedures, but may extend eventually up to very high accuracy provisions 
requiring calibration. The resulting measuring uncertainty of the test result is then determined by 
calculating methods presented in the standard and normally, if not stated otherwise in the contract, 
taken into account in the comparison between test result and guarantee value. The total cost of an 
acceptance test can therefore be maintained in relationship with the economic value of the guarantee 
values to be ascertained. 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The specifications of the operating conditions during the test are somewhat more flexible in this 
method; furthermore, procedures are recommended for treating cases where these specifications 
cannot be met. 

When good-standardized instrumentation and procedures are applied in a test, the measuring 
uncertainty of the result will usually amount to 0.9% to 1.2% for a large fossil fuel fired condensing 
unit, to 1.1% to 1.4% for a nuclear unit and to 1.5% to 2.5% for back pressure, extraction and small 
condensing turbines. It is possible to reduce these values by additional improvement in instrumen- 
tation, primarily by additional measurements of primary mass flows and/or calibration of measuring 
devices for primary mass flow. 

2) Main differences between Methods A and B 

In Method A, much more detailed information concerning the preparation and conduct of the tests 
and the measuring techniques are contained for guidance of the parties to the test than in Method B. 
In Method B, the detailed treatment of the objectives is left somewhat more to the discretion and 
decisions of :he participants and necessitates sufficient experience and expertise on their part. 

3) Guiding principles 

The requirements concerning the preparation and conditions of the test and especially such 
conditions of the test as duration, deviations and constancy of test conditions and acceptable 
differences between double measurements are more stringent in Method A. 

The test should be conducted preferably within eight weeks after the beginning of the operation. It 
is the intent during this period to minimize performance deterioration and risk of damage to the 
turbine. 

Preliminary tests including enthalpy drop tests should be made during this period to monitor HP 
and IP turbine section performance. However, these tests do not provide LP section performance 
and for this reason it is imperative to conduct the acceptance tests as soon as practicable. 

Whatever the case, when using Method A, if an enthalpy drop test indicates a possible 
deterioration of the HP or IP section, or if the plant conditions require that the tests be postponed 
more than four months after the initial start, then the acceptance tests should be delayed. 

An adjustment of the heat rate test results to start-up enthalpy drop efficiencies or for the effects of 
aging is not permitted when using Method A. 

If the test has to be postponed. Method A proposes that the test be carried out after the first major 
internal inspection; several methods are proposed for establishing the approximate condition of the 
turbine prior to the tests. 

4) Instruments and methods of measurement 

a) Measurement of electrical power 

In addition to the conditions required for the measurement of electric power, which are similar in 
both methods, Method A requires a check of the instruments by a comparison measurement after 
each test run; the permissible difference between double measurements is limited to 0.15% . 

b) Flow measurement 

For the measurement of main flows the use of calibrated pressure difference devices is required in 
Method A. The application of a device not covered by international standardization, the throat- 
tap nozzle, is recommended therein and details of design and appUcation are given. 

The calibration of these devices shall be conducted with the upstream and downstream piping and 
flow-straightener. Methods for the necessary extrapolation of the discharge coefficient from the 
calibration values are given. 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

In Method B standardized pressure-difference devices are normally appHed for flow measure- 
ment. Calibration is recommended where a reduction of overall measuring uncertainty is desirable. 
Double or multiple measurement of primary flow is recommended for the reduction of measuring 
uncertainty and a method for checking the compatibility is described. 

c) Pressure measurement 

The requirements and recommendations for pressure measurements are essentially similar. Only 
the methods for the measurement of exhaust-pressure of condensing turbines differ to some 
extent. 

d) Temperature measurement 

The requirements are essentially similar in both methods. However detail requirements are more 
stringent in Method A: 

- calibration before and after the test, 

- double measurement of the main temperature with with 0.5 K maximum difference, 

- thermocouples with continuous leads, 

- required overall accuracy. 

e) Steam quahty measurements 
Methods A and B are identical. 

5) Evaluation of tests 

The preparatory work for the evaluation and calculation of the test results is covered in a very 
similar manner in Methods A and B. However, quantitative requirements are more stringent in 
Method A. 

Method B contains some proposals for handhng cases where some requirements have not been 
met to avoid rejection of the test. 

In addition, Method B contains detailed methods for calculation of measuring uncertainty values 
of measured variables and tests results. 

Method B recommends other methods for conducting and evaluating of the tests after the specified 
period and without a previous inspection. 

6) Correction of test results and comparison with guarantees 

The correction of test results to guarantee conditions is covered in both Methods A and B. 

Method A provides for the comparison of test results to guarantee without consideration of 
measuring uncertainty. 

Method B gives a broader spectrum of correction procedures. Furthermore, the measuring 
uncertainty of the result is taken into account in the guarantee comparison. 

7) Proposals for application 

Since the acceptance test method to be applied has to be considered in the details of the plant 
design, it should be stated as early as possible, preferably in the turbine contract, which method will 
be used. 

Method B can be applied to steam turbines of any type and any power. The desired measuring uncer- 
tainty should be decided upon sufficiently early, so that the necessary provisions can be included in the 
plant. 

If the guarantee includes the complete power plant or large parts thereof, the relevant parts 
of either method c^n be apphed for an acceptance test in accordance with the definition of the 
guarantee value. 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

1. Scope and object 

1 . 1 Scope 

The rules given in this standard are apphcable to thermal acceptance tests covering a wide 
range of accuracy on steam turbines of every type, rating and appUcation. Only the relevant 
portion of these rules will apply to any individual case. 

The rules provide for the testing of turbines, whether operating with either superheated or 
saturated steam. They include measurements and procedures required to determine specific 
enthalpy within the moisture region and describe precautions necessary to permit testing while 
respecting radiological safety rules in nuclear plants. 

Uniform rules for the preparation, carrying out, evaluation, comiparison with guarantee and 
calculation of measuring uncertainty of acceptance tests are defined in this standard. Details of 
the corditions under which the acceptance test shall take place are included. 

Should any complex or special case arise which is not covered by these rules, appropriate 
agreement shall be reached by manufacturer and purchaser before the contract is signed. 

1.2 Object 

The purpose of the thermal acceptance tests of steam turbines and turbine plants described in 
this standard is to verify guarantees given by the manufacturer of the plant concerning: 

a) turbine plant thermal efficiency or heat rate; 

h) turbine thermodynamic efficiency or steam rate or power output at specified steam flow 
conditions; 

c) main steam flow capacity and/ or maximum power output. 

The guarantees with their provisions shall be formulated completely and without contradic- 
tions (see 2.4). The acceptance tests may also include such measurements as are necessary for 
corrections according to the conditions of the guarantee and checking of the results. 

1.3 Matters to he considered in the contract 

Some matters in these rules have to be considered at an early stage. Such matters are dealt 
with in the following sub-clauses: 

Sub-clause 



1.1 


(paragraph 4) 


1.2 


(paragraph 2) 


3.1 


(paragraph 3 and 4) 


3.3.3 


(paragraph 1) 


6,6 




6.8 




6.9 


(paragraph 1) 



2. Units, symbols, terms and definitions 

2.1 General 

The International System of Units (SI) is used in these rules; all conversion factors can 
therefore be avoided. 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The coherent units for all relevant quantities are given in the Table in 2.2, Some conversion 
factors are given as well for specific heat rates based on units other than WAV. 



2,2 Symbols y units 

For the purpose of these rules the following symbols, definitions and units shall be used: 









Examples of 


Other 


Quantity 


Symbol 


Unit 


multiples and 
sub-multiples 


ISO units 


Power 


P 


W 


kW 




Flow rate 


m 


kg/s 






Pressure, absolute 


Pabs 


Pa 


kPa 


bar»> 


Pressure, gauge 


Pe 


Pa 


kPa 


bar^> 


Ambient pressure (barometric) 


Pamb 


Pa 


kPa 


bar*\ mbar 


Pressure difference 


Ap 


Pa 


kPa 




Thermodynamic temperature 


T,e 


K 






Celsius temperature 


t,0 






'C 


Temperature difference 


At 


K 


> 




Vertical distance 


H 


m 


mm 




Specific enthalpy 


h 


J/kg 


kJ/kg 




Specific enthalpy of saturated water 


h' 


J/kg 


kJ/kg 




Specific enthalpy of saturated steam 


h" 


J/kg 


kJ/kg 




Specific enthalpy drop 


Ah 


J/kg 


kJ/kg 




Specific heat 


c 


J/kgK 


kJ/kg-K 




Quality, i.e., dryness fraction of saturated 










steam by weight 


X 


kg/kg 


g/g 




Rotational speed 


n 


s-» 




rnin"' 


Velocity 


V 


m/s 






Density 


Q 


kg/m^ 






Specific volume 


V 


m*'/kg 






Diameter 


D 


m 


mm 




Acceleration due to gravity 


g 


m/s' 






Thermal efficiency 


Vx 


W/W 


kW/kW 




Thermodynamic efficiency 


rhd 


W/W 


kW/kW 




Heat rate 


HR 


WAV 


kW/kW 


kJ/kW-s, 
kJ/kWh 


Steam rate 


SR 


kgAVs 
orkg/J 


kg/kWs 
kg/kJ 


kg/kWh 


Heat flow rate 


Q 


J/s 


kJ/s 




Cavitation factor * 


K 


1 






Concentration 


C 


According t6 
nature of tracer 






Correction factor according to 6,6a) 


F 


1 






Correction factor according to 6,6b) 


F* 


1 






Isentropic exponent 


K 








Discharge coefficient 


Cd 








Flow coefficient 


a 








General quantity 


x^> 








Weight factor for averaging 


r 








Confidence limit 


V 








Relative measuring uncertainty of jr 










Tolerance of steam table 


R 









'^ Admitted by CJPM and ISO for temporary use with fluids only. 
"^ According to ap/plication. 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

Relation between Heat Rate and thermal efficiency: 
Units used for HR 

W/W, kW/kW, kJ/kW • s 
kJ/kWh 
kJ/MW-s 
kcal/kW • h 
BTU/kW-h 
2.3 Subscripts, superscripts and definitions 



Relation 



HR = 



HR - 



HR - 



HR - 



///? - 



3600 
1000 

85 9.845 
3412.14 



Quantity 



Subscript 



Position or definition 



Power 



Initial steam flow rate and output 
Steam condition and flow rate 



Condensate and feed water condi- 
tions and flow rates 



1 
mech 
max 



6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
b 

d 
a 
is 



At generator terminals 

Taken by auxiliaries not driven by the turbine (sec;^4.2.3); (see also 1 EC 

34) 

Net power output: P^~ P^- P^ 

At turbine coupling, less power required by turbine auxiliaries, if driven 

separately (see 4.2.3) 

Internal to the turbine 

Mechanical losses of pump and pump drive 

Values for fully opened control valves 

Directly upstream of high pressure (HP) turbine stop valve(s) and the 
steam strainer(s) (if any) that are included in the turbine contract 

At exhaust of the turbine HP from which steam passes to the rehcater 
Directly upstream of intermediate pressure IP turbine stop valves 

At exhaust of the turbine(s) discharging to the condenser 
At extraction point of extraction turt>ine 

At condenser discharge 

At inlet to condensate pump 

At discharge from condensate pump 

See Figure la 

At inlet of boiler feed pump 

At outlet of boiler feed pump 

At outlet of final feed heater 

After passage through the condensate pump and any coolers (oil, 

generator, gas/air) included in the contract 

At outlel-from the drain cooler 

At outlet of air ejector condenser 

Refers to water taken from the feed- water system to the superheater for 

regulation of the initial steam temperature 

Refers to water taken froqfi the feed-water system to the reheater for 

control of the reheated steam temperature 



IS 14198 (rart2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



Quantity 


Subscript 


Position or defmition 


Make-up water conditions and 


m 


Measurements adjacent to the inlet flange of the condensate system 


flow rate 




or of the evaporator 


Gland steam conditions and flow 


g 


Steam supplied to glands from a separate source 


rates 








gl 


Leak-off steam from glands and valve stems returned to the system 
and included in the measurement of the initial steam flow 




q 


Flow of leak-off steam from glands and valve stems at inlet end or 
before a reheater which is led away for any extraneous purpose and 
neither it nor its heat is delivered to any part of the turbine cycle 




qy 


Leak-off flows similar to q, but coming from a point or points 
downstream of a reheater 


Main steam flow rate and con- 


M 


Main steam flow at outlet of reactor 


centration 






Mass flow rate and concentra- 
tion 


F 


Refers to feed-water for reactor 


core 


Refers to medium fluid passing through reactor core 




cond 


Refers to condensed steam 




inj 


Refers to injected tracer solution 




E 


At entry into core of PWR 




R 


Recirculated water flow from water separator 


Condenser cooling water 


w 






wi 


Condenser inlet 




wo 


Condenser outlet 




wio 


Average value between condenser inlet and outlet 


Effici^ency 


t 


Thermal 




td 


Thermodynamic 


Enthalpy drop 


s 


Refers to isentropic enthalpy drop 


Velocity 


throat 


At throat of flow-metering nozzle 


Static pressure 


sat 


Saturation pressure of water at pertinent temperature 


Concentration 


wat 


In water phase 




L 


In pump loop of BWR 




B 


In blow-down water of PWR 




inj 


Of injected tracer 




O 


At injection point before tracer injection 


Test results and guaranteed 


g 


Guaranteed 


values 








c 


Corrected 




m 


Measured 


Correction Factor For F* 


tot 


Product of all individual correction factors 




1,2,3 


Numbering of individual correction factors 




^ 


For correction of efficiency 




P 


For correction of output 


General use 


ij 


Numbering subscripts 



For confidence limit Vand relative measuring uncertainty r, subscripts which are identical to symbols for quantities 
always indicate the confidence limit applicable to the relative measuring uncertainty of this quantity. 



Quantity 



Efficiency 
General 



Superscript 



/ 



Definition 



Reference value of computer-calculated efficiency 
Average value 
Weighted average value 



IS 14198 (Part2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

2.4 Definition of guarantee values and test results 

For the quantitative description of the thermodynamic performance of a steam turbine or 
steam turbine plant, several quantities are technically appropriate and generally applied. 
Guarantee values are expressed as such quantities and, consequently, test results are to be 
evaluated in the same manner. 

The general definition of these quantities is always quite obvious. The details, however, may 
be different in each case and shall be fully considered (see also 1 .2). 

2.4.1 Thermal efficiency 

For a power station turbine with regenerative feed heating, the thermal efficiency is the 
significant criterion. It is defined as the ratio of power output to heat added to the cycle from 
external sources. 

P 

2 (iUj Awj) 

where: 

Wj are the mass-flows, to which heat is added 

A/ij are the resuUing enthalpy rises 

For each specific case a guarantee heat cycle, together with the guarantee terminal 
parameter, has to be defined as a basis for guarantee definition and test evaluation. It should be 
as simple as possible and as near as practicable to the cycle configuration to be realized for the 
test (see also 3.4.4). 

A practical definition for a turbine plant with single reheat and feed heating according to 
Figure la is then: 

Pb (or P„ or Fe)* 

ri, ^^ ? (2) 

rh^ (hi - hn) + rh^ (h^ - /12) 



According to contract specification. 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



? i 



<M 



2(1 



11 18 



If ii If If il u il |f |i If 



□ 



m^ 



/"-i 



e 



^C DC OC GC ^16 



^, W3t2?st5:5t«« 



u 




m„ 



483/90 



GC = generator gas cooler 

OC = oil cooler 

DC - drain cooler 

EC = air ejector condenser 

The point number remains the same for the same item of any other turbine type: for example, point 9 will be at the inlet of 
the feed pump, point 8 may be anywhere between downstream of point 6 and point 11. 

Fic. la. - Reheating regenerative condensing turbine with feed-water heating. 



'W- 



1 i) 



4U 



e 



i(> 



484/90 



'"L 



«*U 40 



e 



Fig. lb. —Straight condensing or back-pressure turbine Fig. Ic. - Extraction condensinjg or back-pressure turbine 
without feed-heating. without feed-heating. 



Fig. 1. — Diagram for interpretation of symbols and subscripts. 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

Any additional heat and/or mass flows added to or subtracted from the cycle e.g. , by make- 
up flow rhtn, spray attemperator flow wtir or riti^ or additional extraction for steam air preheater 
has to be accounted for in the evaluation by an appropriate correction of the test result (see 
Clause 6). Losses are not included in this definition, but treated according to 5.2.3.4. 

To keep the sum of corrections small, it may be reasonable to include in the guarantee 
definition, by means of additional terms, important heat and mass flows present in the cycle 
configuration for the test for technical reasons (e.g., spray attemperator, reactor blow 
down, etc.). 

This, however, also modifies the thermodynamic character of the definition and the resulting 
values of the thermal efficiency are not directly comparable with those according to formula 
(2). Furthermore, the correction procedure will not be avoided altogether in this way, because 
it is improbable that the values of these additional flows during the test will coincide exactly 
with those in the amended guarantee definition. 

It is impracticable to describe in these rules all the possible variations in turbine cycles. In 
cases of complicated deviations of test cycle configuration from guarantee definition, it is 
advisable to use the correction procedures according to 6.6.1. 



2.4.2 Heat rate 

The heat rate traditionally has been used (and is still used) for the same objective as thermal 
efficiency, which is appUed in these rules. 

In a coherent unit system (SI): 

1 
HR = (3) 

The unit of the so calculated heat rate is kW/kW = kJ/kW * s. 

Heat rate values expressed in other units can be converted easily to thermal efficiency values, 
taking into account the appropriate conversion factors (see 2.2). 



2.4.3 Thermodynamic efficiency 

For a turbine receiving all the steam at one initial steam condition and discharging all the 
steam at a lower pressure (condensing or back-pressure turbine without regenerating feed- 
heating or reheat), the thermodynamic efficiency is the most appropriate measure of 
performance. It is defined as ratio of power output to isentropic power capacity (product of 
steam mass flow and isentropic enthalpy drop between initial steam condition and exhaust 
pressure): 



^td =—77- w 

m Arts 

The numerical value of thermodynamic efficiency does not depend on the initial steam and 
exhaust conditions, but is the indication for the efficiency of the expansion only. 



10 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The formula defining the thermodynamic efficiency for a straight condensing turbine 
without feed-heating according to Figure lb, is then: 

Tjtd : (5) 

where: 

A/isi.4 is the isentropic enthalpy drop between initial steam condition at point 1 and pressure at point 4 

2.4.4 Steam rate 

The steam rate traditionaiiy has been used (and is stiii used) as a performance criterion for 
turbines as described in 2.4.3. It is defmed as the ratio of initial steam flow rate to power output 
and is connected with thermodynamic efficiency as follows in coherent units (Si). 



SR =-!!L = i (6) 

P r]td A/is 

Steam rate values expressed in other units can be converted to thermodynamic efficiency 
values after determination of the relevant Ah^ value taking into account the appropriate 
conversion factors (see 2.2). ^ 

Since numerical steam rate values depend also on initial steam and exhaust conditions, they 
are not comparable for turbines with different specified conditions. Therefore, thermodynamic 
efficiency is used in these rules. 



2.4.5 Main steam flow capacity 

The maximum flow rate of main steam with all regulating valves wide open under specified 
steam conditions (usually the steam conditions according to the definition of the other 
guarantee values) is the measure of the maximum flow capacity of the turbine. 

2.4.6 Maximum power output 

The power output of the turbine at the maximum flow rate of main steam can be guaranteed 
for a specified heat-cycle, which may differ to some extent from the guarantee heat cycle valid 
for the thermal efficiency. A maximum power output guarantee can be relevant for district 
heating turbines, etc. 

2.4.7 Guarantee values for extraction and mixed-pressure turbines*"^ 

For mixed-pressure turbines and single or multiple-extraction turbines with or without 
regulated extraction pressure(s), in all cases without regenerative feed-heating, the guarantee 
values are most appropriately defined as thermodynamic efficiency in the following 
generalized way: 

where thy and Ah^y are the steam tlow rate and isentropic enthalpy drop respectively for each 
consecutive section of the turbine. 



* According to contract specification. 
** Mixed pressure turbines - several iniets at different pressures during the expansioni 



ii 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

For example, for a single extraction turbine (either back-pressure or condensing), according 
to Figure Ic, this results in: 

In the case of an extraction or mixed-pressure turbine, however, it is necessary to specify in 
addition to the values of output, initial steam flow rate and thermodynamic efficiency, the 
pertinent flow rate value(s) of extraction steam flow(s) and secondary steam flow(s). This 
applies at each load subject to guarantee. 

Guarantee values for mixed-pressure or extraction turbines with regenerative feed-heating 
can be defined, if more practicable, as thermal efficiency also. In this case, too, the pertinent 
flow rate value(s) of secondary steam and extraction steam flow(s) is (are) necessary for a 
complete guarantee definition. 



3. Guiding principles 

3.1 A dvance planning for test 

The parties to any test under these rules shall reach agreement, when the plant is being 
designed, as to the testing procedure, the interpretation of guarantees, the number, location 
and arrangement of measuring points and measuring devices, valves and piping arrangements. 
This especially applies to steam turbines in nuclear power stations where subsequent 
modifications are often impracticable and the measuring points are not always accessible once 
the plant has started to operate. It is recommended that for the most important measurements 
special connection facilities such as flanges and thermometer wells be provided for the 
measuring equipment so that the acceptance tests can be carried out without impairing the 
instruments for normal operation. 

The instrumentation has to be Selected in such a way that power and heat flows which enter 
and leave the "system", as defined in the contract, and the conditions at its boundaries, can be 
determined. 

The parties interested in the test shall reach agreement at a date as early as practicable on the 
measuring accuracy desired for the acceptance tests. This accuracy, with due consideration of 
the cost of the acceptance test, shall be in reasonable relationship with the significance of the 
plant. 

The following is a list of typical items upon which agreement should be reached during the 
plant design: 

a) Location of, and piping arrangement around, flow measuring devices on which test 
calculations are to be based. 

b) Number and location of valves required to ensure as far as practicable that no unaccounted 
for flow enters or leaves the test cycle or bypasses any cycle component. 

c) Number and location of temperature wells and pressure connections required to ensure 
correct measurements at critical points. 

d) Number and location of duplicate instrument connections required to ensure correct 
measurements at critical points. 



According to contract specification. 



12 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

e) Handling of leak-off flows to avoio complications in testing or the introduction of errors. 

f) Means of measuring pump shaft leakages, if necessary. 

g) Method of determining steam quality, including sampling technique as required. The 
recommended methods are given in 4.7. 

3.2 Preparatory agreements and arrangements for tests 

a) Before the test the parties to the tests shall reach an agreement as to the test programme, the 
specific ob j ecti ves of the tests , the measuring methods and the method of operation with due 
regard to limitation of the necessary corrections, the method for correcting the test results 
and for guarantee comparison with due regard to the contract conditions. 

b) Agreement shall be reached as to the variables to be measured, the measuring instruments 
and who is to supply them, the location of the indicating instruments and the operating and 
recording personnel required. 

c) Agreement shall be reached on the methods of obtaining the comparison measurements 
(see 3.5). 

d) Agreement shall be reached on such matters as the means of securing constancy of steam 
conditions and output. 

e) Instruments Hable to failure or breakage in service should be duplicated by reserve 
instruments, properly calibrated, which can be put into service without delay. A record of 
such change of instrument during a test shall be clearly made on the observer's record sheet. 

Instruments shall be located and arranged so that they may be read accurately with comfort 
by the observer. The calibration environment should be as close as practicable to the 
environment in which the instrument will operate during the test. This may be accomplished 
by locating the instruments in a controlled environment. 
/) The determination of the enthalpy of steam superheated less than 15 K, or of the quality of 
steam containing moisture, may be made only when the parties to the test agree upon the 
method to be employed for this determination. The agreement, the method for making the 
determination and the method of applying the enthalpy or quality values to the test results 
shall be fully described in the test report. 

The rate of flow of steam of any quality may be determined, where practicable, by 
condensing it completely and then measuring the condensate flow rate. 

g) Agreement shall be reached as to the method of calibration of instruments, and by whom 
and when, 

h) For any of the measurements necessary for a test under these rules, any methods may be 
employed other than those prescribed in these rutes, provided they are mutually agreed 
upon in writing before the test by the parties to the test. Any such departure from the 
prescribed methods shall be clearly described in the test report. In the absence of written 
agreements, the rules herein shall be mandatory. 

i) An independent expert may be a party to all agreements. 

]) Agreement shall be reached on the minimum number of operating and recording personnel 
that is required. 

3.3 Planning of the test 

3.3.1 Time for acceptance tests 

The acceptance tests shall be performed at the operating plant or, by mutual agreement, on 
the test bed of the manufacturer. Acceptance tests on site shall be carried out , if practicable, 



13 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

within eight weeks* after the first synchronization (see 3.5.). In any event, except with written 
agreement to the contrary, the acceptance test shall take place within the guarantee period 
specified in the contract. 



3.3.2 Direction of acceptance tests 

The responsibility for the direction of the acceptance tests shall be clearly assigned by the 
parties prior to the test, preferably to one person. This person is responsible for the correct 
execution and evaluation of the acceptance tests, and serves as arbitrator in the event of 
disputes as to the accuracy of observations, conditions, or methods of operation. He is entitled 
and obliged to obtain information on all necessary details. 

Accredited representatives of the purchaser and the manufacturer may at all times be 
present to verify that the tests are conducted in accordance with these rules and the agreements 
made prior to the tests. 

A party to the contract who is not responsible for the direction of the acceptance tests shall 
also be given the opportunity of obtaining information a sufficient time before the tests. 



3.3.3 Cost of acceptance tests 

The contract shall stipulate who is to bear the costs of acceptance tests and any repeated 
acceptance tests (see also 3.5, 3.7 and 3.9). 



3.4 Preparation of the tests 

3.4.1 Condition of the plant 

Prior to commencement of the acceptance tests, it is essential to be satisfied that the steam 
turbine and driven machine are in suitable condition, together with the condenser and /or 
feedheaters if included in the guarantee. It is also essential to verify that leaks in the 
condensers, feedheaters, pipes and valves have been eliminated. 

Prior to the acceptance tests, the supplier shall be given the opportunity to check the 
condition of the plant, if necessary by making his own measurements. Any deficiency 
determined at this time shall be rectified. 

Although these rules deal specifically with the performance testing of steam turbine 
generators, it is required that all other equipment supplied as part of the same turbine 
generator contract shall be in full and correct working order and in normal commercial 
disposition during the turbine generator tests. This requirement does not apply if other 
equipment has been ordered as an extra to the contract after the performance guarantees have 
been contractually agreed, or if special measures to render the equipment non-operative 
during the tests have been agreed beforehand between the parties to the test and are described 
in prominent detail in the test report. An example of equipment in this category would be 
piping and valves, supplied as part of the same turbine generator contract, designed to permit 
steam to bypass part or ail of the turbine expansion stages for temperature-matching purposes 
during start-up. 



* 



h is the intent during this period to minimize performance deterioration and risk of damage to the turbine. 
Enthalpy drop tests or preliminary tests should be made during this period to monitor HP and IP turbine section 
performance. However, these tests do not provide LP section performance and for this reason it is imperative to 
conduct the acceptance tests as soon as practicable. 



14 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

3.4.2 Condition of the steam turbine 

The condition of the steam turbine depends on the effects of ageing^^ (see 6.9), of partial 
damage^^ and of deposits^\ 

The condition of the steam turbine can be determined by an internal inspection of the steam 
path generally by opening the steam turbine or by comparison measurements according to 3.5. 

The absence of partial damage and /or deposits shall be confirmed before the test (see also 
3.4.1). 

Opening the turbine or an individual casing in order to locate a defect may be taken into con- 
sideration if large and inexplicable deviations are apparent from the comparison measurements. 

3.4.3 Condition of the condenser 

When the guarantees include the condenser performan(;e and are based upon cooling water 
flow and temperature, the condenser shall be clean and the system shall be tested for sufficient 
air tightness. Agreement of the parties regarding these matters shall be reached. 

The condition of the condenser shall be checked by opening the water boxes or measuring 
the terminal temperature difference. In the case of deposits '^\ the condenser shall be cleaned 
by the purchaser prior to the acceptance tests at the request of the supplier or the parties 
concerned by the test may agree on a suitable correction. 

3.4.4 Isolation of the cycle 

The accuracy of test results depends to a large extent on effective isolation of the system. 
Extraneous flows should be isolated from the system and internal flows which bypass in an 
unaccounted-for way either cycle components or mass flow measuring equipment should be 
eliminated, if practicable, to obviate the need for measurement. If there is any doubt about the 
ability to isolate these flows during the test, preparations shall be made prior to the test to 
measure them. 

All unused connections shall be blanked-off. If this is not practicable, the connections shall 
be broken at a suitable point so that the outlets are under constant observation. 

The equipment and flows to be isolated and the methods to accomplish this should be agreed 
well ahead of the initial operation date of the turbine. The isolation of the cycle has to be 
described in the test report. 

When the system is properly isolated for a performance test, the unaccounted-for leakage 
expressed in percent of initial steam flow at full load should not exceed the relative measuring 
uncertainty of the test result (expressed in percent) multiplied by 0.4 (see 5.2.3.4). Water 
storage in the condenser hotwell, deaerating and other extraction feedwater heaters, boiler 
drum(s), moisture separators, reheaters, and any other storage points within the cycle are to be 
taken into account (see also 5.2.3.4). 



3.4.4.1 Isolation of equipment and flows 

The following list includes items of the equipment and extraneous tlows that should be 
isolated from the primary turbine feedwater cycle, if practicable: 



'* Ageing means deterioration during correct operating and shutdown conditions in a manner such that the 

performance of the turbine is adversely influenced. 
^* Partial damage: damage and variations in the clearance of the bladmg, of balance pistons and shaft glands, valve 

spindle wear; leakages in the valve glands and seats. 
''' Deposits: salts or metal on the Steam side, slime, ashes, bacteria, algae, etc.. on the cooling water side. 



15 



IS 14198 (Tart 2): 1994 
lEC rub 953-2: 1990 

a) Large-capacity storage tanks. 

b) Evaporators and allied equipment such as evaporator condenser and evaporator pre- 
heaters. 

c) Bypass systems and auxiliary steam lines for starting, if compatible with safe operation. 

d) Bypass lines for condensate primary flow-measuring devices. 

e) Turbine sprays. 

/) Drain lines on stop, intercept and control valves. 

g) Interconnecting lines to other units. 

h) Demineralizing equipment. 

Isolation of demineralizing equipment does not necessarily mean removing the equipment 
from the cycle. It does, however, mean that all ties with other units shall be isolated and 
such equipment as recirculating lines that affect the primary flow measurement shall he 
isolated or the flows measured. 

/) Chemical-feed equipment using condensate. 

j) Boiler vents. 

k) Steam-operated soot blowers. 

/) Condensate and feedwater flow bypassing heaters, 

m) Heater drain bypasses. ^ 

n) Heater shell drains. 

o) Heater water-box vents. 

p) Hogging jets. 

q) Condenser water-box priming jets. 

r) Steam or water for station heating. 

s) Blow-down from steam generator. 

3.4.4.2 Flows which shall be determined if not isolated 

The following extraneous flows which enter or leave the cycle in such a manner as to cause an 
error in the flows through the turbine shall be measured or estimated, if they arc not isolated 
from the system. 

a) Boiler fire door cooling flow and boiler-slag-tap cooling coil flow, 

b) Sealing and gland coohng flow on the following (both supply and return): 

1) condensate pumps; 

2) boiler feed pumps; 

3) boiler-water or reactor circulating pump; 

4) heater drain pumps when not self-sealed; 

5) turbines for turbine-drive pumps; 

6) control rod seals on nuclear reactors. 

c) Desuperheating water. 

d) Boiler feed pump minimum-flow lines and balance drum flow. 

e) Steam for fuel oil atomization and heating. 



16 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

f) Boiler blowdowns. 

g) Boiler fill uites. 

h) Turbine water-seal How. 

i) Desuperheating water for turbine cooling steam. 

;') Emergency blowdown valve of turbine gland leakage and sealing system. 

k) Turbine water-seal overflows. 

I) Steam and water lines installed for washing the turbine. 

m) Steam, other than gland leak-off steam, to the steam-seal regulating valve. 

n) Make-up water, if necessary. 

o) Pegging steam (such as higher stage extraction at light loads) for low-pressure operation of 
dea^rator. 

p) Heater vents shall be closed if practicable. If not, they shall be throttled to a minimum. 

q) Deaerator overflow line. 

r) Water leakage into any water-sealed flanges, such as water-sealed vacuum breakers. 

s) Pump seal leakage leaving the cycle. 

t) Automatic extraction steam for industrial uses. 

u) Steam to air preheaters (if isolation is not practicable). 

v) Water and steam sampling equipment. If it is impracticable to isolate water and steam 
sampling equipment, and if the sampling flow is significant, it shall be measured. 

w) Deaerator vents. 

x) Reactor-core spray. 

y) Sub-cooled water used for moisture separator or reheater coil drain cooling. 

z) Continuous drains from wet steam turbine casings and connection lines (if not included in 
the guarantee). 

3.4.4.3 Suggested methods and/or devices for isolating equipment from turbine feedwater cycle 

The following methods are suggested for isolating mi^ellaneous equipment and extraneous 
flows from the primary turbine feedwajer cycle and for checking such isolation: 

a) Double valves and tell-tales. 

b) Blank flanges. 

c) Blank between two flanges. 

d) Removal of spool piece for visual inspection. 

e) Visual inspection for steam blowing to atmosphere - such as safety valves. 

f) Closed valve which is known to be leak-proof (test witnessed by both parties) and not 
operated prior to or during the test. 

g) Temperature indication (only acceptable under certain conditions - mutual agreement 

necessary). 

h) Accurate measurements of levels in any tanks which should be isolated from the system. 



17 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



/) Very important isolating valves (for example, HP and LP bypass valves) should be 
inspected and, if necessary, sealed prior to the test. 



3.4.5 Checks for leakage of condenser and feedwater heaters 

Condensers and feedwater heaters shall be checked for leakage and steps shall be taken to 
eliminate any significant leakage (see Appendix A), 

In case of doubt, the check can be repeated after the test. 

3.4.6 Cleanliness of the steam strainers 

If necessary, the steam strainers shall be cleaned before the acceptance tests. 

3.4.7 Ch€ckin<f of the test measuring equipment 

All measuring equipment shall be examined before the test as to its condition and suitability. 
It shall be further established whether the measuring instrument, the point of installation, and 
the installation are in accordance with relevant requirements. The results of all these checks 
shall be recorded in the test report. 

3.5 Comparison measurements 

For comparison measurements, only those variables are taken into account which are 
essential to establish the condition of the steam turbine. For the comparison, it is advisable to 
measure the internal efficiency, the pressure and temperature at the extractions, the gland 
leakage flows, and the condenser terminal difference as well as the vibration level of the steam 
turbine rotor at suitable points. 

The measuring uncertainty of comparison measurements should not be larger than that of 

the acceptance tests. 

The type and scope of the comparison measurements as well as the costs shall be agreed upon 
by the purchaser and the supplier {see 3.3.3). 

The parties interested in the acceptance test shall participate in the comparison measure- 
ments. 

The reference measurement shall be made immediately after the first start-up, at partial load 
if necessary. Check measurements may be made: 

a) before the acceptance test or during the preliminary test; 

b) after blade washing; 

c) before and /or after an inspection. 

The measurements taken during the acceptance test can normally be evaluated as a final 
check measurement. 

Should the result of a check measurement point towards a deposit which can be removed by 
blade washing, the supplier may require of the purchaser that the steam lurbine be washed. If 
the check measurement sufficiently agrees with the reference measurement after the washing, 
the acceptance test may be carried out. Should the check measurement not agree sufficiently 
with the reference measurement, the, parties to the contract should then decide either to 
eliminate the defect or to carry out the acceptance test. If the tests proceed, the comparison 
measurements shall be included in the test report. 

If the result of the reference, measurement differs considerably from the expected values 
according to the guarantee, remedial measures may be agreed upon by the purchaser and the 
supplier. 



1« 



IS 14198 (Parti): 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

3.6 Settings for tests 

3.6,1 Load settings 

The acceptance tests for a turbine with partial arc admission shall be conducted at ''valve 
points", which are those positions of the control valves where the total throttle effects are 
minimized. 

The output at a ''valve point" may only deviate from the specified value within the limits 
stated in 3.8.2. 

In addition, the position of the LP control valves of extraction turbines should be brought to 
a "valve point", if practicable, by adjusting the extraneous steam flow. Similarly, the "valve 
points" of the secondary initial steam control valves of double pressure turbines can be 
achieved by adjustment of the secondary steam flow, if practicable. 

These adjustments may result in deviations of the output from the specified value greater 
than stated in 3.8. In these cases a re-calculation of the guarantee value according to 6.6.1 may 
be made by agreement of the parties. 

If large fluctuations in output or steam flow due to operating conditions are occurring, it is 
permitted to use a device Hmiting further opening of valves in order to keep optimum valve 
positions. The relative positions of the valves shall not differ throughout the test period. 

> 
In the event of variable pressure operation of a full arc admission turbine, tests shall be 
conducted with control valves wide open. The same applies to throttle control if the guarantee 
is based upon wide open control valves. 



3.6.2 Special settings 

No special adjustments shall be made to the turbine for test purposes that are inappropriate 
for commercial and continuous operation under any and all of the specified outputs and 
operating conditions. Exceptions are air bleed adjustments to control the vacuum, the use of 
load-limiting devices or other similar test control means, such as isolation of the cycle to 
prevent extraneous flows and/or internal by-pass flows of steam or water by closing certain 
drains or other valves. These shall be consistent with the terms of the guarantee and practicable 
with regard to operating safety and technique. 

The turbine shaft seals shall be adjusted to normal operating condition before a test and 
arrangements made to measure outward or inward flow that will influence test results. 



3.7 Preliminary tests 

Preliminary tests may be run for the purpose of 

a) determining whether the turbine is in a suitable condition for the conduct of an acceptance 
test, 

b) checking all instruments, 

c) training personnel in test procedures. 

After a preliminary test has been made, it may be considered, if mutually agreed, as an 
acceptance test. 



19 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

If the preliminary tests are unsatisfactory, the causes shall be investigated and, if necessary, 
the turbine shall be placed at the disposal of the manufacturer so that the latter may examine it 
and ascertain whether it is in a suitable condition for an acceptance test. 

3.8 Acceptance tests 

3.8.1 Constancy of test conditions 

All tests shall be preceded by a period of temperature and flow stabilization, the4uration of 
which shall be agreed upon by the parties interested in the test, since it will vary with the size of 
the turbine, the internal conditions and the amount of load change. 

Any condition, the variation of which may influence the results of the test, shall be caused to 
become as nearly constant as practicable before the test begins, and shall be so maintained 
throughout the test within the permissible variations according to 3.8.2. 

In order to maintain constancy of throtthng, the travel of the governing valve, in the opening 
direction only, should be limited at the chosen position and the governor should be sufficiently 
overwound to ensure that it does not respond to normal changes in system frequency. 



3.8.2 Maximum deviation and fluctuation in test conditions 

Except upon agreement to the contrary by the parties, the maximum permissil3le deviation of 
the average test condition for each variable from that specified and the maximum permissible 
fluctuation of the variable during any one test run shall not exceed the limit prescribed in 
Table L 

Should these requirements not be met, the measurement may serve as information only, 
unless special agreement relating to the influence of the deviating operating conditions is 
reached. 

3.8.3 Duration of test runs and frequency of reading 

The requisite test duration is dependent on the steadiness of operating conditions and the 
speed of acquisition of test data. Accurately measurable changes in level of water stored in the 
system may be a limiting factor. 

The recommended minimum test period (see 5.1) of an acceptance test is 1 h. This may be 
reduced by agreement or technical necessity, but should be not less than 30min. The duration 
of the capacity tests should be agreed between the parties, but should be not less than 15 min. 

Related test data recorded with indicating measuring equipment shall, if practicable, be read 
at the same time. Since the values measured are not constant, random errors cannot be avoided 
when taking readings at regular time intervals. The intervals shall be sufficiently short to ensure 
that these errors do not substantially affect the measuring uncertainty of the whole. This is of 
vital importance for readings of differential pressure for mass flow measurement and electrical 
output. For tests of one hour's duration readings at dne-minute intervals will satisfactorily fulfil 
requirements for maximum deviations allowed in Table I. Pressures and temperatures for the 
determination of thermodynamic properties may be read at longer intervals, that is, from 3 min 
to 5 min according to amount and type of fluctuations. 



If the adoption of longer intervals between readings is necessary a correspondingly longer 
duration of the test may be required. 



20 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

The time of the reading should be indicated to the observers through signals from a main 
clock. It may alternatively be taken from the observers' watches, which shall be synchronized 
with each other prior to each test. 

Table I 
Maximum deviations and fluctuations^^ in operating conditions 



Variable 


Maximum permissible deviation of average of test from 
that specified 


Initial steam pressure 
Initial steam temperature 
Dryness fraction 


±5%^> 
±0.005 


Extraction pressure (regulated) 

Exhaust pressure: 

- for feed heating 

- for back pressure turbines 

- for condensing turbines 
Extraction flow rate 


±5%2> 

See ^> 

±5%'> 

±25% if condenser is not included in guarantee 

±10% 


Reheat temperature 
Isentropic enthalpy drop 
Output or initial steam flow 


±15 K 

±7% 

±5% after correction for specified con'clitions 


Cooling water flow 

Cooling water inlet temperature 

Final feed water temperature 

Speed 


Ic i-'' r if condenser is included in guarantee 
± J K. J 

±10K 



^^ The maximum fluctuation of the variable permitted during each test shall not be greater than half the permissible 
deviation given in Table I except for the output which may vary by ±3%. 

^^ All these items may not lead to a deviation of enthalpy drop of more than ±7% . 

^^ If permitted by the technical guarantee of the turbine. 

"^^ Reasonably small deviations in the extraction pressures as compared with the design values normally have a 
negligible effect on the overall performance. Should there be disproportionately large deviations in the extraction 
steam flows suggesting malfunctioning of the heaters, the effect on the overall performance may be serious, and 
agreement shall then be reached on the course to be followed. 

3.8.4 Reading of integrating measuring instruments 

The mean values of the electrical output and the mass flow can also be determined by 
integrating measuring instruments by (dividing the difference in the readings at the beginning 
and at the end of a test by the corresponding time interval. 

All integrating measurement instruments should be read simultaneously. Related indicating 
measurement instruments should be read at or nearly at the same time. 

It is advisable to take simultaneous readings of all integrating instruments at regular intervals 
during the test. This will enable checks for consistency to be made and permits the period for 
evaluation to be adjusted, if required, after the conclusion of the test. 

All observations should begin somewhat before and stop somewhat after the intended test 
period provided all operating conditions remain constant. 

3.8.5 Alternative methods 

Alternative methods are presented in these rules for conducting certain details of the test. 
The test report shall state which alternative has been employed. 



21 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
TEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

3.8.6 Recording of tests 

Each observer shall record his actual observations. All records shall be made with carbon 
copies, at least in duplicate, or by mutual agreement be photo-copied immediately after each 
test-run. Immediately after the test each interested party shall receive a complete set of 
records. 

3.8.7 Additional measurement 

Should a deficiency be found during a test, which is rectified within a relatively short time, 
the test may be continued. In this event supplementary measurements shall be taken, if 
necessary, provided always that the correction involved can be calculated sufficiently 
accurately (e. g., small variations in the terminal temperature difference of the condenser, a 
heater cut-out or deficiencies of measuring instruments). 

Should a control valve which ought to be closed at test load open because of fluctuations in 
load, or should inadmissibly large fluctuations in test conditions arise during a limited period, 
this period of the test may subsequently be omitted by mutual agreement of the parties to the 
test, provided the remaining period fulfils the requirements of 3.8.3. Otherwise the test has to 
be repeated. 

It is recommended that one or more stage pressures and temperatures be observed during 
the tests, since these may serve as a means of disclosing reasons for any inconsistencies. 



3.8.8 Preliminary calculations 

Preliminary calculations of corrections and test results shall be conducted immediately after 
the test in order to confirm the validity of the data taken. 

3.8.9 Consistency of tests 

Should serious inconsistencies arise, either during a test or during the computation of results 
from a series of tests, the test or tests shall be rejected, in whole or in part, unless otherwise 
agreed. 

3 . 9 Repetition of acceptance tests 

Should the acceptance test result be unsatisfactory, the supplier shall be given an opportunity 
to make modifications and to repeat the test at his own expense. A repetition may also be 
requested by one of the parties to the contract if justified by doubts about the results. 

If the supplier, for reasons which are his responsibility, has made modifications following the 
acceptance test which make it probable that guarantee values will qo longer be met within a 
reasonable margin, the acceptance tests may be repeated at the request of the purchaser. 



4. Measuring techniques and measuring instruments 

4.1 General 

4.1.1 Measuring instruments 

Instruments conforming to any one or more of the following categories are permitted for 
acceptance tests: 

a) Measuring instruments calibrated by an official authority. 

b) Measuring instruments, which have been calibrated by comparison with officially cali- 
brated measuring instruments by an official authority. 



22 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

c) Standardized measuring instruments with known accuracy. 

d) Other approved measuring instruments with known accuracy, the use of which has been 
agreed upon between the parties to the contract. 

Table II indicates the available types of instrumentation for acceptance tests. 

Typical arrangements in a plant are illustrated in Figures 2 and 3. 

If transducers are used, they shall have a suitable range and a demonstrable accuracy 
equivalent to usual instrumentation. 

Measuring instruments and transducers may be equipped with devices to enable them to 
record on a data logging system. 

Data logging systems for automatic correction and recording of measured values may be 
used. They may also be used for subsequent processing of these values. Their dependabihty 
and correctness of operation has to be checked or proven in advance. 



4.1.2 Measuring uncertainty 

The measurement of each quantity entering into the computation of the test result is liable to 
some degree of error. The test result is subject to a degree of uncertainty depending on the 
combined effect of all these errors of measurement. 

The measuring uncertainty of the instruments and procedures has to be clearly verified by 
sufficient general information or, if necessary, by special determination. This particularly 
applies to remote measuring systems and automatic data-collecting systems. 

The uncertainty level for each individual measurement shall be chosen in reasonable 
relationship with the influence of the reading on the test result. 

Data are given in Tabic II for the measuring uncertainty that can be expected for the 
individual measured variables according to general experience. 

The m.easuring uncertainty of the test results can be calculated from, the uncertainties of the 
individual measurements according to Clause 7. 

4.1.3 Calibration of instruments 

Instruments requiring calibration shall be calibrated before the test. Certificates shall be 
available to the parties before the test. Any recalibration after the test shall be a matter for 
agreement between the parties. 

4.1.4 Alternative instrumentation 

By mutual agreement of the parties to the test, advanced instrument systems such as those 
using electronic devices or mass-flow techniques, may be used as alternatives to the mandatory 
instrument requirements, provided that the application of such systems has demonstrated 
accuracy equivalent to that required by these rules. 

4.1.5 Mercury in instrumentation 

Mercury and compounds of mercury react with component materials and cause environmen- 
tal problems. The very low vapour pressure of mercury presents a serious health hazard if 
spillage occurs. The greatest care and strict adherence to all applicable regulations concerning 
mercury is necessary. If mercury is used the following precautions should be taken: 



a) Keep instrument valves closed except during test runs. 



23 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



Table II 

Acceptable instrumentation for acceptance tests 
and resulting average uncertainties 



Re- 
fer- 
ence 


Measured 
Variable 


Measuring Instrument 


Accuracy 

Class 


Range 


Average 
Measuring 
Uncertainty 


Remarks 


I 


Pressure 


Deadweight gauge 




P>2bar 


±0.3% 




2 


Transducer calibrated for test 




For all 
pressures 


±0.3%-0.5% 




3 


Bourdon gauge calibrated for test 


0.3% 


P>2bar 


±0.3%-0.6% 




4 


Bourdon gauge calibrated 


0.6% 


P>2bar 


±1% 




5 
6 


Mercury manometer 




P<2bar 


±1 mm 


On length of 

liquid 

column 


Liquid manometer 




P<2bar 


±1 mm 


7 


Differential 
pressure 


Liquid manometer 




h> 100mm 


±1 mm 


8 


Differential pressure transducer calibrated for 

test 




For all 

differential 

pressures 


±0.3%-0.5% 




9 


Temperature 


Thermocouples calibrated 




t^mvc 


±1K 




r>300^C 


±0.5% 


10 


Resistance thermometer calibrated 




0<r^l00X 


" ±0.2 K 




r>100'^C 


±0.5% 


11 


Mercury-in-glass-thermometer graduated 

0. recalibrated 


O.IOX 


t< lOOX 


±0.1 K 




12 


Primary flow 


Standardized differential pressure devices 






0.75-1.5* 


ISO 5167 


13 


Calibrated differential pressure devices 










14 


Cooling 
water 
flow 


Vane type flow meter 




D> KXX) 




1EC41 


15 


Electrical 
output 


Two-wattmeter method 

Instrument transformers calibrated for test 

Instruments calibrated for test at test load 


0.2% 
0.2% 




0.1%-0.2% 




16 


Three-wattmeter method 

Instrument transformers calibrated for test 

Instruments calibrated for test 


0.2% 
0.2% 




0.1%--0.2% 




17 


Current 


Ammeter 


0.2% 






1EC41 


18 


Voltage 


Voltmeter 


0.2% 






iEC4l 


19 


Mechanical 
output 


Torsion dynamometer or thermodynamic 
method for pump 






approximately 

±2% 




20 


Speed 


Manual tachometer 




Range of calibration 


±1.0% 




21 


Manual revolution meter 




Range of calibration 


±0.5% 




22 


Electronic revolution meter 




Range of calibration 


±0.1% 




23 


Ambient 
pressure 


Precision barometer 






±0.2mbar 





* The accuracy of the primary flow measurement is decisive for the measuring uncertainty of the test result according to Table 3 and the pressure 
differential device shall be chosen accordingly. 



24 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

b) Install quick closing solenoid valves in instrument pressure sensing lines to close 
automatically on system upsets. 

c) Employ double mercury traps. 

d) Locate the primary flow element in the low temperature part of the feed water cycle of 
nuclear plants where it is remote from the steam supply system. 



4.2 Measurement of power 

4.2.1 Determination of mechanical turbine output 

The mechanical output of the steam turbine can be determined by one of the following four 
techniques: 

a) By measuring the output at the generator terminals (see 4.2.4) and adding the generator 
losses. ' 

b) By measuring torque and speed. 

Absorption or torsion dynamometers are permissible, provided precautions are taken in 
their construction and use to ensure accuracy. This includes electric or eddy-current 
generators, the input of which is measured by the reaction of the stator. 

If auxiliary power services of the turbine, such as governor and lubricating oil pumps, are 
driven from an external energy supply, their power requirements shall be deducted from 
the turbine output at the coupling in order to determine the net output at the turbine 

coupling. , 

c) By establishing an energy balance of the steam turbine. 

The output is derived from the algebraic sum of all energy flows passing through the energy 
balance envelope established around the steam turbine ^\ 

d) By establishing an energy balance of a driven machine (e.g. compressor, pump). 

The output is derived from the algebraic sum of all energy flows passing through the energy 
balance envelope around the driven machine ^\ 

4.2.2 Measurement of boiler feed pump power 

For a complete evaluation and for correction of the test results according to the guarantee 
definition, it is normally necessary to measure the power consumed by boiler feed pumps. It 
corresponds to the increase in the enthalpy of the water'^\ and possibly the power consumed by 
the hydraulic couplings and speed changers if the pumps are driven directly from the mainshaft, 
or by an auxiliary steam turbine driven by a bleed from the main turbine. 



If the boikt feed pump is driven by an auxiliary turbini, diliverid und^r the responsibility of 
the mmuimiurm of the ttiain turbine, and fed by steam from the main turbine, or is driven 
direet (torn th^ main ^haft, it is, ieeofding to the guarantee values, normally neeessary to 
ffleasure iM power consumed by the pump, Gorrespondlng to the inerease of the enthalpy of the 
water and the meihanieal losses, and possibly the power eonsumed by the hydraulie gouplinp 
And §peed Gh&npfs. 






¥t 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC I'ub 953-2 : 1990 

If the use of a dynamometer (see 4.2.1) is not practicable, the pump power is best determined 
from the rise in specific enthalpy across the pump multipHed by the mass flow. 

Since the temperature rise across the pump is small, a high degree of precision is needed in 
the temperature measurement (e. g. multiple thermocouples connected in series or resistance 
thermometers in differential connection). In the absence of precise measurements, values of 
pump efficiency supplied by the manufacturer may be used in conjunction with the measured 
flow and pressure rise, but unless they are based on tests over the full range of load, they may be 
open to question. 

Sealing water flow and/or injection water flow has to be duly considered in the determina- 
tion of the mass flow. 

The power losses in the pump bearings, the hydraulic coupling and the gear drive are 
equivalent to the heat picked up in the oil cooling water. Radiation losses are generally 
negligible. 

If more than one pump is in service, it may not be practicable to measure the water flow or 
the mechanical losses in the bearings, couplings and gear drives individually. However, the 
total power consumed by the boiler feed pumps in service is all that is needed for an acceptance 
test. 

The power consumed by a pump driven by a rotating electrical machine can be determined 
from the power consumed by the motor, having regard to the efficiency of the latter according 
to information supplied by the manufacturer, and from the measurement of the power 
consumed by the bearings, the hydraulic coupling and the gear drive. 

If the auxiliary turbine driving the pump is outside the responsibility of the supplier of the 
main turbine, it may be sufficient to measure the flow rate and the condition of the bled steam.. 



4.2.3 Determination of electrical power of a turbine generator 

The net power of a turbine generator is defined by the following formula: 

P^-P^~ P. (9) 

Where an auxiliary of the turbo-generator is driven by an electric motor, the power Pa is the 
power delivered to the motor. This applies whether the power is derived from the generator 
terminals downstream of the point where Pb is measured or from a separately generated 
supply.* 

Where an auxiliary of the turbo-generator is driven by other means, for example, a pump or 
exciter driven by a prime mover, the power Py is the power input to the coupling. 

Where excitation is derived from the generator terminals at a point downstream of the point 
where the power P^ is measured or from some other source, Py is the power input to the 
excitation equipment. 

When the turbine generator, condensing and feed water heating plant are guaranteed as a 
combined unit, the power requirements of the condenser and feed water heating auxiliaries 
shall be treated in accordance with the terms of the contract. 



* This does not refer to I EC 34-2. 



28 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

4.2.4 Measurement of electrical power 

For a three-phase generator with the neutral directly earthed (grounded) or with the four- 
line system, the unit power shall be measured by the three-wattmeter method. 

For a three-phase generator with neutral earthed (grounded) through resistance, reactance, 
or transformer with resistance , the unit power may be measured by the two-wattmeter method , 
but preferably by the three-wattmeter method. In all instances, watthour meters may be used in 
place of wattmeters. 

A double measurement of the electrical power, if practicable, including the duplication of 
voltage and current transformers, has advantages for improvement of accuracy. 

4.2.5 Electrical instrument connections 

The instrument transformers shall be connected into the lines from the generator as near to 
the generator terminals as practicable and on the generator side of any external connections by 
which power can enter or leave the generator circuit. 

The leads to the meters shall be arranged in such a manner that they will not influence the 
meter readings by reason of inductance or any other such cause. Inductance may be eliminated 
by braiding the wires of each pair of conductors for at least 1 m from the position where the 
instruments are located. It is desirable to check the whole arrangement of meterS for stray 
fields, not only from the instrument leads but also from any other source; 

The calibration of the transformers shall be made wherever practicable with the same 
instruments and wiring impedance as in the tests. 

The wiring influence of the voltage circuit shall not cause a significant error in measurement 
of the power output which will be compared with the guarantee. The choice of cross-sectional 
arjea of the wiring shall take into accoimt the length of the wire, the influence of the voltage 
transformers and the resistance of safety fuses in the circuit. The errors due to wiring resistance 
(including fuses) shall always be taken into account. 



4.2.6 Electrical instruments 

Singlephase or polyphase portable precision wattmeters, or singlephase or polyphase 
portable precision watthourmeters shall be used with appropriate voltage and current 
transformers for measuring electrical output. Any error in each wattmeter or watthourmeter 
shall not exceed 0.2% of the reading. 

Portable ammeters, voltmeters and wattmeters shall be included in the measuring circuits to 
establish that the generator load conforms to rated conditions during the tests and to measure 
the current, voltage and power factor 

For the environmental conditions of the instrumentation see 3.2 point e) (second para- 
graph). 

The recording time of watthourmeters shall be measured in a manner such that any 
inaccuracy will not exceed 0.03% . Watthourmeter readings shall be recorded during the test at 
regular intervals (at least every 5 min). 

4.2.7 Instrument transformers 

Instrument current and potential transformers of appropriate rating and accuracy charac- 
teristics, specially intended for test purposes, should be used. Values of ratio and phase-angle 
corrections for the conditions of loading equivalent to the test instruments and leads used 



29 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

during the test shall be obtained by a recognized calibration procedure to cover the range of test 
values of current and voltage. Instrument transformers shall be used which havetio burden 
other than that of the test instruments and leads. Otherwise, it has to be confirmed that the 
permissible burden is not exceeded. 



4.3 Flow measurement 

4.3.1 Determination of flows to be measured 

In an acceptance test the flows to be measured can be divided into two categories: 

Primary flows: Flows which are in direct relation to the power output and which must 

be measured with a corresponding degree of precision (see 7.4). 

To verify the accuracy of measurement of the primary flows, it is 
recommended that they be measured simultaneously in at least two 
different locations, and the readings compared. 

Secondary flows: Flows which are necessary for the operation of the plant and which shall 

be taken into account in the adjustment of the measured "values of the 
primary flows in order lo determine the turbine initial steam and reheat 
steam flows. > 



4.3.2 Measurement of primary water flow 

The measurement of primary flow may be made: 

a) by means of standardized or calibrated orifices or nozzles; 

b) by direct weighing using tanks and suitable scales; 

c) by means of calibrated volumetric measuring tanks. 

It is seldom practicable or economical to employ weigh tanks or volumetric tanks for the 
testing of the large units installed in modern power stations. The usual method of determining 
flows is by means of differential pressure devices. 



4.3.2.1 Differential pressure devices for measuring primary water or steam flow 

Standardized or calibrated differential pressure devices may be used to measure flow. 

A choice can be made from among the following recommended devices; 

a) Sharp-edged orifice plate (see ISO 5167). 

b) Wall tip nozzle (see ISO 5167). 

t) Elliptleal throat tap nozzle. This deviee Is not eovered by ISO 5167 but as it has now 
b§mm§ istablishid as m instfument of pridslon; full details afi %Wm in Appendix i: 

The di&fflitif ratios of the differential pressure deviees shall be selected with due 
eonsiderations of the resulting ffleasuring uneertainty: 

Bufing the passage of the water through the orifiees and noi^les either the pressure shall 
remain not less than %§Q kPa above the saturation pressure whieh eorresponds to the measured 
temperature or the temperature of the flow shall remain not less than il M below the saturation 
temperature gorresponding to the lowest absolute pressure in the measuring devlee: 



IS 1419S(Part2):1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

4.3.2.2 Calibration of differential pressure devices for water flow 

If a differential pressure device has to be calibrated, this should preferably be done with flow 
conditions corresponding to the same range of Reynolds numbers that will prevail in the 
turbine tests. However, the laboratory facilities at present available are not capable of 
achieving values of Reynolds numbers as great as those associated with test flow conditions for 
modern large steam turbines. The necessary extrapolation of the discharge coefficient and the 
resulting difference of the measured and extrapolated value shall be considered in the 
determination of the measuring uncertainty. 

Calibration is to be conducted with the upstream and downstream piping comprising the flow 
section to be used in the test, including the flow straightener if used. 

It should be demonstrated during calibration that a pressure difference device is capable of 
repeating selected cahbration points with sufficient accuracy. 

4.3.2.3 Inspection of differential pressure devices 

It is recommended that shortly before or after the test all differential pressure devices and 
their pipe sections used for measurement of primary mass flow be inspected for condition (e.g. 
roughness), size (e.g. sharpness of edge for orifice plates), and general conformity with the 
standard required. The outcome of this inspection shall be recorded. If differential pressure 
devices are not inspected, this shall be duly considered in the evaluation of the test according to 
5.2.3.1. 

These differential pressure devices shall not be installed prior to the cleaning period before 
commissioning of the plant. They shall either be fitted after cleaning or theyshall be bypassed. 

In the case of condensing turbines, it is mandatory that practical arrangements for inspection 
be provided for at least one differential pressure device for a primary mass flow, preferably the 
condensate mass flow upstream of the deaerator. At least one differential pressure device has 
to be inspected after the test if this is required by one party, 

4.3.3 Installation and location of differential pressure devices 

The minimum requisite lengths of straight piping upstream and downstream of the orifice or 
nozzle are influenced by the configuration of the piping before and after the straight sections; 
for particulars see the ISO standard quoted. 

In special cirx;umstances where rotational flow can be expected or when the required straight 
lengths are not available, application of flow straighteners shall be considered. The incorrect 
use of flow straighteners may lead to errors. If a flow straightener is used and straight pipe 
length is not sufficient, the measuring element shall be calibrated with the complete straight 
piping section upstream and downstream, the flow straightener included. 

It is advisable that one of the flow-measuring devices be located in the system at a point 
where the temperature is less than 150 °C to minimize temperature effects, that is, thermal 
expansion c^orrection and any distortion of the primary element. 

In order to reduce the possibility of thermal distortion of the flow-measuring device, it is 
desirable that the pipe and the flanges of the flow section be made of corrosion-resi tant 
material having the same coefficient of expansion as the primary element. 

When a flow-measuring device for water flow is installed in a vertical run of pipe , a correction 
may be necessary to account for differences in altitude between the two pressure-tapping points 
and differences in density between the water flowing through the flow-measuring device and 
the water in the pressure-tap lines. 



31 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

To minimize the difficulty of obtaining steady flow, the flow-measuring device should not be 
located at a pump discharge. Advantage should be taken of the damping effect of any existing 
heat exchangers and long lengths of pipe in the cycle . The location of the flow-measuring device 
should also be such that the effects of recirculating and bypassing flows are eliminated. If this is 
not practicable, extraneous flows shall be measured with sufficient accuracy. 



Jf the feedwater heating cycle includes a deaerator, it is recommended that the condensate 
flow entering it be measured. This eliminates any possibility of heater leakage recirculating 
through the flow-measuring device. If the cycle has no deaerator, it is recommended that the 
flow be measured after it has passed through the low-pressure heaters and before it enters the 
boiler feed pump. If the drains from the high-pressure heaters join the main condensate flow 
upstream of the flow-measuring device, it will be necessary to measure the total drain flow from 
the high-pressure heaters and calculate the extraction steam by heat balance around the heaters 
to determine the high-pressure heater leakage. 

For turbines using wet steam and heaters with pumped-ahead drains, a suitable double flow 
measurement may be required to determine if any of the heaters leak. The location of the low 
pressure flow measurement will depend on the cycle arrangement. Heater leakage can also be 
measured by using the tracer method. 



4.3.4 Differential pressure measurements 

The measurement of the differential pressure necessitates particular care. Manometer 
systems shall be installed with the precautions listed below. 

Measuring accuracy for primary flows can be increased by the use of two independent 
manometer systems. 

a) Connecting piping used between the pressure taps and the manometers shall be not less 
than 6 mm inside diameter tubing of material which will minimize resistance damping 
inside the piping. This tubing should run horizontally for Im from the flow-measuring 
device and then slope down continuously without loops to the manometers. The 
connecting piping shall be shown to be tight by a pressure test. 

b) The length of piping between the flow-measuring device and manometers should not 
exceed 7.5 m if practicable. It shall also be uninsulated. 

c) Precautions shall be taken when running the manometer piping to ensure that any 
temperature difference between the fluid in the two lines connecting the primary element 
and each manometer remains negligible. It is recommendedthat thepiping be bundled and 
run in such a manner as to minimize heat transfer to these pipes from an external source. 

d) The manometer piping shall be well cleaned, preferably by flushing, before the manometer 
is connected. The manometer connections shall include the necessary means for shutting 
off manometer piping or venting at any time during the test. Sufficient time should be 
allowed for the water legs in the connecting piping to reach temperature equilibrium. 

e) Zero-displacement solenoid-operated valves may be installed in each tube close to the 
primary element to eliminate mercury column movement during reading. These valves are 
to be closed for reading at prescribed intervals without regard to position of the mercury 
column. Other means of obtaining instantaneous readings may be employed if they do not 



32 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

introduce errors in the reading. Solenoid valves should not be used with transducers. 

f) The manometers should be located at a lower elevation than the primary-flow element. 
However, when this is impracticable, special precautions shall be taken to ensure proper 
venting of the system. Suitable venting pots shall be installed above the manometers with 
valves for venting. Also, a temperature seal (loop in piping) shall be installed between the 
primary element and the manometers. 

g) The manometers should be precision-type and should be read with the aid of antiparallax 
readers or other suitable means. The mercury shall be instrument-grade having less than 
one part per million of non-volatile residue. The manometer shall be scrupulously clean 
before the mercury is introduced. 

h) When pressure transducers are used, they shall be cahbrated before the tests. Each 
calibration shall be done with rising and falling pressure. The long-term stability of the 
transducers shall be carefully recorded. The tests are to be calculated with the mean 
calibrated values. 

i) For the measurement of steam flow, venting pots should be installed at the same elevation 
as the primary element pressure taps, and at a suitable distance to ensure proper 
condensation. The water levels shall be at the same elevation, otherwise differences are to 
be determined. The connecting piping to the water pots should have a sufficiently large 
diameter to avoid the formation of water plugs. 

The connecting lines to the manometer shall be installed with a continuous downward 
slope. After venting, time should be allowed for the water legs to form and cool. Special 
attention has to be paid to the proper formation of water legs at sub-atmospheric pressure. 



4.3.5 Water flow fluctuation 

Flow measurements shall not be attempted unless the flow is steady or varies only slightly 
with time. Variations in the flow shall be suppressed before the beginning of a test by very 
careful adjustment of flow and level controls or by introducing a combination of capacitance 
(such as bypassing flow around the pump) and resistance (such as throttling the pump 
discharge) in the hne between the pulsation sources and the flow-measuring device. Damping 
devices on the manometers do not eliminate errors due to pulsations and, therefore, shall not 
be used. Jf the pulsations remain excessive after every effort has been made to suppress them, 
mutual agreement is required before the test can be started. Electrical locking of a digital 
reading is also advisable. 



4,3,6 Secondary flow measurements 

In addition to the primary flow measurements (see above), many secondary flow measure- 
ments are required. Because of differences in plant layout and the alternative positions of flow- 
measuring devices, it is not possible to specify the accuracy required in each separate 
measurement. The parties to the test should decide what secondary flow measurements shall be 
made for the type of turbine installation concerned and then arrange for each measuring device 
to have an accuracy such that the combined effect of all errors in the secondary flow 
measurements is in appropriate proportion to the error in the test result. Consequently, if 
standardized measuring devices are used, calibration may not be necessary. 



33 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

If the secondary flow-measurement is of steam, the steam shall remain superheated in 
passing through the flow-measuring device. Measurement shall not be attempted if the amount 
of superheat is less than 15 K at the smallest cross-section of the nozzle or orifice. 

4.3.6.1 Extraction steam flows to feed heaters 

If the extraction steam is superheated the extraction flow can be determined by heat balance 
calculation. The accuracy of the result falls off as the temperature rise across the heater 
diminishes. 

A direct measurement by suitable pressure differential devices is possible, if the necessary 
measuring accuracy can be achieved. 

Wet steam extraction flows can be determined from heater drain flow measurements. This 
can be accomplished by using a standardized or, if necessary, a calibrated flow measuring 
device with suitable installation conditions. 

The heater drain flows can be measured using differential pressure devices except for the 
lowest pressure heaters with cascaded drains where very little pressure drop is available. In 
these cases, Venturi tubes or other low head loss primary elements of the required accuracy 
should be used. The differential pressure should preferably be measured with a transducer. 
The connecting piping between the transducer and the differential pressure device should be as 
short as practicable to minimize damping errors due to unsteady flow and care shall be taken to 
eliminate air bubbles in this piping. ^ 



If, for these reasons, transducers are mounted in areas not accessible during operation of the 
plant, suitable means for a remote operated cahbration are required. The calibrating reference 
should be a secondary standard. 

Heater drain flows are often very unsteady; therefore, the transducer output should be 
observed every 20 s. 

In sizing the primary elements to avoid cavitation, the best compromise between Reynolds 
number, pressure loss, diameter ratio, and deflection should be made without reducing the 
critical cavitation coefficient "K'' below 0.2, where: 



P __ p 

' throat ^ sat /^n\ 

K = (10) 



throat 

I 

The cavitation problem may be reduced by providing a loop seal or increasing the length of 
the loop seal to put more head on the meter so that the critical cavitation coefficient will be 
greater than 0.2. 

If the heater drain flow is subcooled the cavitation problem is also reduced. The extraction 
wet steam flow can be determined by a heat balance calculation, if the enthalpy of the 
extraction steam has been determined by the tracer method (see 4.7.2). 



4.3.6.2 HP heater drains 

When the main flow meters are at the deaerator outlet, the flow from the HP heater drains 
shall be metered by a device capable of sufficient accuracy, unless the HP heaters have been 
checked for leakage. 



34 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

4.3,6.3 Moisture separator and reheater drains 

It may not be possible to install a flow-measuring device because the available head is less 
than that required to avoid cavitation and also for reasons of plant design or operation. In these 
circumstances, the tracer technique can be used to measure the flow with a sufficient accuracy. 
In case of measurement with a pressure difference device the recommendation of 4.3.6.1 shall 
be followed. 



4.3.6,4 Boiler feed pump turbine steam supply 

Steam consumption of a boiler feed pump turbine is preferably to be measured as condensate 
if a separate condenser is installed. 

In a reheat cycle having a boiler feed pump driven by a turbine supplied with steam from the 
main turbine at a point up-stream of the reheater, the steam supplied shall be measured to 
enable the flow through the reheater to be determined. 



4.3.6.5 Turbine gland leakages 

The gland leakage flows of reheating condensing turbines which do not pass through the 
reheater but are returned to the system beyond the reheater, have to be determined separately, 
preferably by measurement, as these flows shall be considered when determining the heat 
supplied by the reheater. 

If any glands are provided with leak-offs to atmosphere or to a point that is extraneous to the 
turbine system, this flow should be measured unless agreed to be negligible. 



4.3.6.6 Desuperheating spray water flow 

When spray water from the feed-heating system is used for regulating the reheat steam 
temperature, the rate of flow of such water shall be measured. Also, if the initial steam 
temperature is similarly regulated, the rate of flow of spray water to the superheater shall be 
measured, unless the water is drawn from a position downstream of the final feed heater and 
the last feed water flow measuring device. 

4.3.6.7 Boiler feed pump gland sealing and balance water flow 

The amounts of water supplied to thefeed pump glanA for seaUng and /or cooling purposes 
and the amounts of leak-off water returning to various parts of the system are liable to be 
considerable, which may be direct additions to, or subtractions from, the main flow 
measurement. The number of boiler feed pump water flows to be measured will depend on the 
location of the main metering device. Calibrated or standardized measuring devices are 
required and it should be ascertained at the time of the test that they are in good condition. 

4.3.6.8 Stored water changes 

Changes in stored water quantities within the test cycle shall be taken into account in the 
assessment of the condensate /feedwater flows through the system. 

Such stored water quantity changes will include those in condenser hot-wells, boiler drums, 
deaerator storage tanks, feed heater bodies and any storage or drain tanks that cannot be 
isolated from the system. 



35 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

Water level changes in all storage vessels should be measured by temporary scales rigidly 
fixed close to the sight glasses of the permanently installed level gauges, or, alternatively, by 
transducers used in conjunction with test data-logging equipment. 

If the temperature ot the water in a vessel is appreciably different from the ambient 
temperature and an external gauge glass is employed, for example, as in the case of a deaerator 
storage tank, the density of water in the gauge glass should be used in the conversion of water 
level change to mass change in the vessel. 

Gauge glasses which are connected to vessels containing hot water should not be blown down 
within a period of approximately half an hour before taking a reading in order to avoid a false 
level indication due to a change of temperature in the water column. 

Since time is a critical factor in the measurement of the water level changes, the test readings 
shall be closely synchronized with the signals for commencement and termination of a test. 



4.3.6.9 Leakage determination 

It will be necessary to use calculated values for internal pump leakages, shaft packing, valve 
stem leakages, internal turbine leakages and other leakages when it is not practicable to 
measure these flows. > 

4.3.7 Occasional secondary flows 

Further secondary flows, which occur relatively rarely, or need not be measured, include the 
following: 

4.3.7.1 Ejector steam 

Steam-jet air ejector steam flow can be calculated from the measured pressure and 
temperature of the steam supply and the known cross-sectional area of the jets. When the 
steam supply is wet, it may be preferable to use the design flow rates given by the manufacturer. 

The amount of steam removed from the condenser by the air removal means is generally 
negUgible. Should it be measured, the method of measurement shall be agreed upon by the 
parties to the test. 

4.3.7.2 Make-up flow 

Make-up flow to the system, if it cannot be avoided, shall be determined. 



4.3.7.3 Water seals 

Sealing water is used in connection with hydraulic glands or atmospheric exhaust valves, 
condensate pump glands, etc. As the seals have to be maintained, the flow of water used shall 
be measured or estimated and an appropriate allowance made, if it influences the result of the 
test. It shall be ensured that there is no variable storage in the sealing system and no possibility 
of leakage of sealing water other than into the condensate system. If external leakage of 
condensate water from seals cannot be avoided, its flow shall be determined and added to the 
condensate flow. 



36 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEG Pub 953-2 : 1990 

4.3.7.4 Auxiliary exhaust steam 

Any auxiliary exhaust steam that normally enters the condenser shall either be diverted 
elsewhere during the period of the test, or measured. In deciding upon the best position to 
install the measuring device, particular attention should be paid to the net head loss and the 
possibility of flashing in the throat. 

4.3.8 Density of water and steam 

The density of water which is required for calculation of mass flow rate is calculated from an 
accurately measured temperature and reasonably approximate pressure. The temperature 
shall be m.easured with a precision-calibrated instrum.ent. If an extra instrum.ent is used, it 
should be located at least 10 pipe diameters downstream of the primary element. Forprimary 
water flow, it is also permissible to use the average of the discharge tem.perature of the 
upstream heater and the inlet temperature of the downstream heater, providing no extraneous 
flow enters between them, and the tem.perature is taken at least 10 diam.eters dov/nstream. from, 
the heater outlet to ensure adequate mixing. 

The density of steam which is required for calculation of mass flow rate is calculated from 
measurements of pressures, using a precision gauge, and temperature using a precision 
instrument or resistance thermometer. The reference planes for the density determination are 
to be taken according to the cahbration procedure or the standard of the flow measuring 
device. „ 

4.3.9 Determination of cooling water flow of condenser 

This flow is normally only required if condenser performance is included in the turbine 
generator performance guarantee. 

In many cases a direct measurement is not possible or practicable because of technical 
difficulties. In these instances, the cooling water flow can be determxined conveniently by a heat 
balance calculation. 

The quantity of the condenser cooUng may be calculated. If measurement is feasible, one of 
the following methods may be used: 

a) standardized nozzles or orifices in the pipe line; 

b) Venturi tubes, or their equivalent in the pipe hne; 

c) current meters; 

d) Pitot tubes, provided it is agreed that the differential head is sufficient to give the necessary 
accuracy; 

e) weir-notch method. 

Further measuring miethods necessitating less installation effort are available and miay be 
used with sufficient knowledge and care: 

f) dilution methods using chemical or radioactive tracers; 

g) ultrasonic techniques. 

4,4 Pressure measurement (excluding condensing turbine exhaust pressure) 

4.4.1 Pressures to be measured 

The initial pressure of steam supplied shall be measured in the steam line on the steam- 
generator side of, and as close as practicable to, the turbine stop valve and upstream of the 
strainer if this has been furnished by the manufacturer under the turbine contract. The initial 
steam pressure shall be measured in the pipe downstream from the parts which have not been fur- 
nished under the turbine contract, unless the turbine contract or specification states otherwise. 



37 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The steam strainer shall be known to be dean. If there is a doubt about its cleanliness on the 
part of either of the parties to the test, it shall be examined prior to the test and cleaned if 
necessary. 

Pressures should also be measured at the inlets to the HP, IP and LP cyUnders of the mam 
turbine, at the inlet and outlet of the boiler feed pump turbine (if integrated with the feed- 
heating system) and at both ends of bled steam lines; also at the suction and discharge of all 
pumps in the condensate and feed system. 

Wherever practicable, pressure tappings shall be situated in straight runs of piping, remote 
from any flow disturbances. 

The pressures measured during steam turbine tests shall be static pressures. 



4.4.2 Instruments 

Deadweight gauges, Bourdon tube type test gauges or mercury manometers shall be used. 
AH of these instruments can be replaced by transducers of suitable measuring range and 
equivalent accuracy (see 4.4.2.5). 

Pulsations of pressure shown shall not be damped by throttling on the gauge valve or by the 
use of commercial gauge dampers. A volume chamber may be employed. 

4.4.2.1 Measurement of pressure above 250 kPa (2,5 bar) " 

Bourdon gauges or preferably deadweight gauges shall be used for measuring the pressures 
above 250 kPa. These gauges shall be mounted in locations as free as practicable from 
vibration, dirt and excessive variations in ambient temperatures. 

For the measurement of pressures where the highest degree of accuracy is not essential, 
calibrated test Bourdon gauges may be used. 

4.4.2.2 Measurements of pressure below 250 kPa (2,5 bar)^ but above atmospheric pressure 

Where the level of pressure permits their use, liquid manometers are recommended. 

For single-leg manometers the bore should be uniform and preferably not less than 9 mm to 
avoid excessive capillary effects. 

4.4.2.3 Measurement of pressures below atmospheric pressure 

Mercury manometers (see 4.1.5) shall be used for measuring pressures below atmospheric. 

The tubing for mercury manometers shall be high-grade lead-free glass, preferably not less 
than 10 mm bore in the region where readings will be taken. 

Where small pressure differences must require to be measured with high accuracy, sHicone 
oil may advantageously be used as the manometer fluid in place of mercury. 

4.4.2.4 Liquids for manometers 

The liquid used shall be suitable for the application and of known density. 

4.4.2.5 Transducers 

Accurate pressure measurements are possible with transducers, provided that their use and 
care are well understood and that they are properly maintained and installed. Regardless of the 
appHcation, each transducer should be calibrated before the tests. 



38 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

Each transducer should be located in a position which is free from vibration and dirt, and 
where there are not likely to be large changes in ambient temperature such as may be caused by 
an outside door. 

If a transducer is sensitive to changes in environment, such as temperature, the system 
should be given sufficient time (e.g. 2 h for a quartz Bourdon type transducer) to stabilize 
before readings are taken. A zero reading shall be taken before and after each test run. 



4.4.3 Pressure tapping holes and connecting lines 

Tapping holes should be at ri^t angles to the inner surface of the pipe. The inner rim of the 
hole should be free from burrs, having its edge sharp and square. For a length of at least twice 
its diameter, the hole should be straight and of uniform bore. The bore of the tapping holes 
should be, from 6 mm for higher pressure to 12 mm for lower pressures. 



To prevent errors due to an unknown head of water accumulating in the line connecting the 
tapping hole to the pressure measuring device, the installation should always be arranged to 
have the connection hues either completely full of water or completely empty. 



4.4.3.1 For pressures above 250 kPa (2.5 bar) 

For higher pressures in the range above that of liquid manometers, it shall be ensured that 
the connecting lines are full of water. The gauge can be above, or preferably below, the tapping 
point. The tapping hole should preferably have a 6mm diameter. 



4.4.3.2 For pressures below 250 kPa (2,5 bar), but above atmospheric pressure 

The gauge should be situated below the tapping. Although small bore connecting lines may 
be considered, they are prone to becoming blocked, so connecting lines not less than 12 mm in 
diameter are recommended. 

For pressures above atmospheric but low enough to be measured with hquid manometers, 
the connecting lines may be arranged to be either full or empty. The chances of incurring an 
error due to unknown heads of water in the connecting lines are high in this pressure range and 
a condensing vessel between the tapping and the pressure measuring device should be 
provided. 



4.4,3.3 For pressures bdow atmosphirlc presmn 

Fof priiiures below itmospharie the QQnmeting \lm% should b§ (tm tmm water. The 
tippiflg holi ihould pfiferibly bi 12 mffl in diamitif, thi pfi§§uf i ffleasur ing deviee should be 
above the tapping and there should be a continuous slope bmk to the tapping. 

If the tapplflf hole is only imffl in diametef, then the eonnegting line (or the greatef part of 
it) should be thiek=willed, non=ffletallig tubing to miniffliie §ondin§ation and lessen the 
possibility of water golleeting in the line: The eonneetini lines should preferably be ilmm in 
dipmeter: if small bore eonneeting lines are used then some form of air purging between 
readings should be provided: 



m 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

4.4.4 Shut-off valves 

A suitable shut-off valve should be installed at each pressure tapping point, and for high 
pressures there should be a second valve at the gauge end of the connecting line. 



4.4.5 Calibration of pressure measuring devices 

The calibration accuracy of test pressure measuring devices should be within ±0.2% of the 
pressure being measured, except that for measurements which are not of primary importance 
this accuracy should be within ±0.5% . The parties to the acceptance test should agree, at a pre- 
test meeting, which pressures, if any, may be measured to the lower standard of accuracy. 

All the test pressure gauges and transducers (but not liquid manometers) should be 
calibrated against a dead-weight tester or standard manometer before the acceptance tests. 
Bourdon tube type instruments should also be calibrated immediately after the tests. If there is 
no reason for preferring one calibration to the other a mean of the two calibrations should be 
used. 

When transducers with data loggers are used the calibration should be made by comparing 
the true pressure as shown by the dead-weight tester against the typed print-out of the data 
logger. If the data logger also has a tape output for feeding into a completer it should be 
demonstrated that the typed output and the tape output are identical. 

If differential pressure Bourdon gauges or transducers are used for measuring reheat 
pressure drops or bled steam line pressure drops, two dead-weight testers should be used to 
apply the working pressures to the differential pressure gauge for caHbration. 

Liquid manometers need not be calibrated if the parties using them produce evidence to 
establish the accuracy of the manometer scales and the purity or density of the manometer 
fluid. In the case of single leg manometers, evidence of the uniformity of the bore of the tube 
and the cross-sectional areas of the tube and reservoir should also be available. 

If a test manometer equipped to record on a data logger is capable of being used manually, it 
should be ascertained that the typed print-out agrees with the manual observations. If a test 
manometer used in conjunction with a data logger cannot be read manually then it should be 
treated as a transducer and calibrated against a manometer of proven accuracy. 

A transmitter may also be calibrated by applying a measured column of low density fluid 
directly to the low pressure side of the sensitive element and applying simultaneously a high 
density fluid to the high pressure side of the sensitive element. These two columns then provide 
the differential pressure. The required working pressure from a pressure source is now 
simultaneously applied to both columns taking the precaution of ensuring that the pressure 
medium used does not mix with either the low density or high density fluid. The lengths of the 
columns are observed and read off by means of high pressure sight glasses. 

4.4.6 Atmospheric pressure 

The- atmospheric pressure to which liquid manometers or columns are referred shall, 
wherever practicable, be determined by means of a precision barometer. The barometer shall 
be of the mercury-in-glass type, certified by a recognized national authority, with the bore of 
the glass tube not less than 6 mm, Alternatively, an aneroid or other type of barometer may be 
used, provided that its accuracy and suitability are certified by a recognized .authority. 



40 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The barometer should be located in the same room as that of the manometer and as near as 
practicable at the same height. 

If a barometer is not available, the atmospheric pressure shall be determined by the reading 
taken at the time of the test from a local recognized weather bureau corrected for the difference 
of elevation between the weather bureau and the turbine. 

4.4.7 Correction of readings 

The readings should be averaged over the test period and then corrected as follows: 

All pressure-measuring devices with a head of water in the connecting line should be 
corrected by adding the pressure equivalent of the head of water when the gauge is above the 
tapping and subtracting it when the gauge is below the tapping. 

A calibration correction shall be applied to those pressure-measuring devices which have 
been cahbrated. 

The absolute pressures measured by means of liquid manometers and mercury-in-glass 
barometers shall be calculated in accordance with ISO 31/111 taking into account: 

a) the average of readings; 

b) the correction of the length of the scale on account of temperature; 

c) capillarity corrections for single leg manometers, unless they have tubes of not less than 
12 mm diameter; 

d) density of the liquid (taking into account the liquid in the opposite leg); 

e) local acceleration due to gravity; 

f) for liquid manometers only, the ambient pressure duly corrected; 

g) difference in elevation and gravity, of tapping point and instrument, with density of the 
fluid. 

4AJ.1 Corrections for the water head 

To obtain the correct pressure at the tapping point, thepicssure equivalent of the head of water 
between the steam pipe tapping and the gauge centre line shall be added (when the gauge is above 
the tapping) or subtracted (when the gauge is below the tapping) from the gauge reading: 

^P - Hgg (11) 

where: 

H = vertical distance between the tapping point and the centre of the pressure gauges 

p - density of water at the annbient temperature 

g - local acceleration due to gravity 

4.4.7.2 Barometer reading corrections 

Mercury-in-glass barometers shall first be corrected ai 273 K with appropriate allowance for 
the reference temperature of the scale. The reference temperature for the scale in metric 
countries is usually 273 K. 

Barometers shall secondly need to be corrected for capillary depression of the mercury. The 
scale of a mercury-in-glass barometer may have been set to correct for this, in which case no 
further capillarity correction shall be applied. 



41 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

Barometers are thirdly to be corrected for difference in elevation, if any, between a 
barometer and any of the mercury pressure reading devices that are referred to it. 

A fourth correction shall be made for gravity at the location of the test. Values of the various 
correction factors may be found in several recognized tables of standards such ^s those of 
the World Meteorological Organization, the Tables of the National Weather Bureau, the 
Smithsonian Tables, etc. 



4.5 Condensing turbine exhaust pressure measurement 

4.5.1 General 

The test instrumentation should give the mean static pressure at the exhaust from each 
individual LP casing. It should normally consist of separate sets of pressure sensing holes, 
preferably connected individually or consecutively by use of suitable switching devices. 



The following rules are intended to apply to all condenser arrangements. It is realised, 
however, that it may be easier to comply with them in respect of underslung condensers than in 
the case of side-mounted condensers, particularly of the integral type. Should it be found 
virtually impossible to comply with the sub-clauses below, then the parties concerned should 
mutually agree on some alternative means of making the measurements, being guided as far as 
possible by the concepts herein. 



4.5.2 Plane of measurement 

Unless specified otherwise in the contract documents, the condenser inlet shall be taken as 
the measuring plane for both turbine and condenser purposes. Modern condensers are of four 
general types: transverse underslung, axial underslung, separate side-mounted, integral side- 
mounted. For the first type, the condenser inlet generally is identified with the turbine exhaust 
flange. For the other three types of condenser it is more difficult to identify the condenser inlet. 
In such cases the condenser inlet should be placed in one or more planes as close as practicable 
to the condenser tube nests. 



4.5.3 Pressure taps 

Considerable variations in static pressure usually exist across the exhaust so that it is 
necessary to make provision for measuring the mean at the condenser inlet by providing 
numerous pressure sensing holes. Special locations of demonstrable accuracy may be used 
when agreed upon by the parties to the test, but in no mm shall there be fewer than 2 per 
ixhaust annulu^, When test results are not available to locate sensing holes one deviee should 
bg employed for eaeh L5 m^, 

For small iMhau§l conduits riquifittf not mofi than four %m§m whif§ th§ walb afg straight 
ifl thi dif§§tion of th^ flow mC whir§ thi flow i§ likely to b§ uniform, flush wall tappings may be 

Tha position of m^h wall tapping should b§ §hosin so tf^at it is, as far as pfa§ti§abl§, not 
iRflu§ng§d by binds, billows pig§§s, splitt§fs, gussit plates, staybars or similar distufban§^fc» to 

flOW: 



41 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The holes should be normally 10 mm in diameter and never less than 8 mm in diameter. They 
should be drilled normal to the wall, all burrs shall be removed and a wide area round the hole 
should be dressed clean. 

Gauge connections through the walls of the exhaust conduit or through ribs traversing the 
steam space shall be normal to and flush with the surface of the wall. The hole at the open end 
should be 12mm in diameter and uniformly rounded to a radius not exceeding 0.8 mm. 

If the configuration of the exhaust is such that wall measurements are unrepresentative, 
internal devices, including special pressure taps with guide plates, baskets or equivalent 
devices, should be used and they may also be used if a wall is inaccessible. 

Any internal device shall have been shown to be insensitive to steam incidence, and be 
mutually acceptable to the parties concerned. 

4.5.4 Manifolds 

Pressure averaging manifolds should not be used. 



4.5.5 Connecting lines > 

Special precautions shall be taken in making the connections to the exhaust conduit. Each 
mercury manometer or column shall be mounted as near as practicable to the corresponding 
pressure connection in the exhaust conduit or casing*, but in a position where it will be free from 
excessive vibration and where the observer can take readings with convenience and accuracy. 

The test gauges should be at a higher level than the sensing holes, so that the measuring 
system can be self-draining back to the condenser. Alternatively, special arrangements for 
adequate draining may be made. If it should prove difficult to devise a self-draining system, 
then the parties interested in the tests should mutually agree on a means of adequately draining 
or purging the system by air or nitrogen flushing. Other requirements for low-pressure 
connecting lines appear in 4.4.3. 



4.5.6 Instruments 

Any reliable instrument for measuring tl;ie exhaust pressure may be used, including open- 
ended liquid manometers and a barometer, closed liquid manometers (absolute pressure 
gauges) or pressure transducers. The reading accuracy should be 35 Pa. 

An accurate determination of site barometric pressure is required (see 4.4.6). 

4.5.7 Tightness of measuring system 

The tightness of the measuring system should be checked. When the valves adjacent to the 
sensing holes are closed under specified vacuum, the column reading, if mercury is being used, 
should not fall at a rate greater than 6mm in 5 min. Rubber diaphragm type valves are more 
effective than cocks in keeping the system tight, 

4.5.8 Calibration 

In accordance with the requirements of the fifth paragraph of 4.4.5, liquid column vacuum 
gauges need not be calibrated if the parties using them produce evidence to establish the 



4^ 



IS 14198 a^art2): 1994 
TEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

accuracy of the manometric scales and can show that the purity or density of the Uquid is 
satisfactory. Corrections for meniscus and capillarity are unnecessary if mercury manometers 
have 12.0 mm bore tubes or larger. 

If pressure transducers are used they should be calibrated before and after the test against a 
liquid manometer or vacuum dead weight tester. 

If a liquid column gauge is equipped to record on a data logger and can also be read manually 
as a Hquid column, then the requirements of the sixth paragraph of 4.4.5 apply. 

4.5.9 Correction of readings 

The readings should be averaged over the test period and then corrected in accordance with 

4.4.7. 

Liquid column readings should be corrected in accordance with 4.4.7. 

4.6 Temperature measurement 

4.6.1 Points of temperature measurement 

Temperature measurements shall be made at points as close as practicable to the points at 
which the corresponding pressures are measured for enthalpy determinations. Temperatures, 
the values of which influence the results of the test, shall be taken at two different points close 
together and the mean of the two readings shall be taken as the temperature of the fluid. 

Should it be suspected that there are distributions of flow having different temperatures 
within a pipe, and the weighted average temperature influences the results of the test, the pipe 
is to be explored across its diameter by temperature measurement means and an average 
determined by a means to be agreed by the parties to the test. 



4.6.2 Instruments 

The preferred instruments for measuring relatively high temperatures are: 

a) calibrated electrical resistance thermometer with calibrated precision bridge or digital 
voltmeter; 

b) calibrated high-grade thermocouple and precision bridge or digital voltmeter. Continuous 
leads to the cold junction are recommended for high measuring accuracy. 

The thermocouples and resistance thermometers, and their potentiometers, bridges and 
galvanometers or digital voltmeters should be calibrated before the test or at regular intervals 
where sufficient stability has been shown. Otherwise the increased uncertainty of measurement 
has to be taken into account in accordance with 7.2.2. 

Recalibration after the tests will generally not be necessary if individual temperature 
measurements are sufficiently cross-checked. 

All this equipment shall be carefully handled and maintained. Its condition shall be 
examined periodically. 

Additional mercury-in-glass thermometers are recommended for use when the temperature 
to be measured is less than 373 K and the locations are such that readings may be taken without 
difficulty. 

Mercury-in-glass thermometers used to measure temperatures which influence the results of 
the test shall be of the solid-stem precision type with etched scale plate graduated with scales 
suitable for the measurements to be made. Commercial or industrial metal-encased ther- 
mometers shall not be used. 



44 



IS 14198 a'art 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

4.6.3 Main temperature measurements 

The main temperatures are those which have a direct influence on the acceptance test resuU, 
such as initial steam, hot and cold reheat steam, final feed water temperature, and coohng 
water temperatures. 

Other temperatures, such as feed water pump inlet temperatures and discharge and 
deaerator condensate inlet temperatures, may also be main temperatures according to the 
guarantee formulation, and to the method of determining the primary flow. 

If the fluid flows associated with the main temperature measurements are conveyed in 
multiple pipes, each main temperature should be taken as the arithmetic mean of the individual 
temperatures unless the parties interested in the test agree that some other flow weighting is 
appropriate. 

Two thermometer wells should be provided in each pipe to permit the temperature 
measurement to be independently duplicated. The temperature in each pipe should be taken as 
the arithmetic average of the two measurements unless the parties to the test agree otherwise. 

The final feed temperature measurements should be taken after the junctions of any heater 
by -passes, and sufficiently far downstream to ensure that adequate mixing has occurred. 



4.6.4 Feed train temperature measurements (including bled steam) ^ 

These temperatures are normally only required when the feed water heating plant (if 
installed) is not provided by the turbine contractor, although it may be of advantage to measure 
some or all of them. 

With the exception of main temperature measurements, the feed train temperature 
measurements need not be duplicated. Sufficient inlet and outlet temperatures on each heater 
should be measured to enable a heat balance to be calculated. 

In many instances, the inlet feed temperature of one heater would be the same as the outlet 
feed temperature of the preceding heater* and, in these instances, one temperature measure- 
ment to serve both heaters would be sufficient. If both the feed inlet temperature and the 
preceding feed outlet temperature are measured, then the mean of the two should be taken to 
obviate discrepancies in the heat balance. Where a return connection exists between the two 
points, measurements should be made upstream and downstream of the junction. 

Steam temperatures should be measured at each end of the bled steam pipes: near the 
turbine connection upstream of the non-return valve and near the feedwater inlet connection. 

If mixing occurs in a bled steam pipfe, the temperature of the mixture should be taken 
sufficiently far downstream of the junction to ensure that adequate mixing has occurred. 

Thermowells should be located in areas which assure good mixing and have minimum 
possibility of stratification. 

4.6.5 Condenser cooling water temperature measurement 

These temperatures are normally only required if condenser performance is included in the 
turbine generator performance guarantee. 

a) Inlet temperature 

Inlet temperature is generally constant across the section of the pipe, and unless there is 
reason to suspect that stratification is occurring, one temperature measurement in each 



* The temperature is taken at least 10 diameters downstream from the heater outlet to ensure adequate mixing. 



45 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

inlet pipe will suffice. Thermometer pockets may be used or, alternatively, a continuous 
flow of sample water may be drawn off through a chamber into which is inserted a direct 
contact thermometer If either party suspects stratification, the measurement shall be by 
one or both of the methods used for outlet temperature as described in the following 
paragraph. 
b) Outlet temperature 

Temperature stratification occurs in the cooling water discharge boxes. To permit mixing 
to occur, the measuring positions should be several diameters downstream. Temperature 
samphng probes should be used at each condenser outlet, on at least two diameters. The 
probes may be either perforated sampling tubes through which water can be drawn off to a 
mixing chamber or they may be thermopiles to obtain a mean temperature in situ. There 
shall be not less than one sampling hole or thermocouple for each 0.2 m^ of pipe area and 
they should be situated at centres of equal areas. There should be not less than four 
sampling holes or thermocouples for each outlet pipe and they should be situated in such a 
way that they are representative for the cross-section of the pipe. If practicable, the 
temperature can be measured after mixing in the outlet water channel with due 
consideration for temperature loss. 



4.6.6 Accuracy of temperature measuring equipment * 

The temperature measuring equipment shall be of such accuracy that the individual 
inaximum errors do not prevent the desired level of test accuracy from being achieved. 

4.6.7 Thermometer wells 

The material of a thermometer well shall be' suitable for the temperature to be measured. 
Tubes and wells shall be as thin as practicable, consistent with safe stress, the inner diameters 
being as small as practicable. It is important that the wells be clean and free from corrosion or 
oxide. Wells for high or main temperature measurements may be provided with external fins 
for good heat absorption. With high pressures and high temperatures, it is advisable to weld the 
thermometer wells to the pipe. 

Thermometer wells shall preferably be dry, especially for the higher temperature measure- 
ments but shall be carefully covered and sealed with material to reduce air circulation or loss of 
heat. 

If temperature rise across the feed pump has to be measured, the thermometer pockets at 
inlet and discharge shall be of duplicate type and material. The pocket in the discharge piping 
shall be located sufficiently downstream of the pump to permit a good mixing of the flow. 



4.6.8 Precautions to be observed in the measurement of temperature 

The following precautions shall be observed in the measurement of the temperature: 

a) Heat that is transmitted by conduction or radiation to or from the temperature measuring 
means other than from the medium being measured shall be reduced to a minimum. 

b) The immediate vicinity of the point of insertion and the projecting parts of the well and its 
support shall be thermally insulated. 

c) In pipes of less than 75 mm internal diameter, the thermometer shall be arranged axialiy in 
the pipe by inserting it in an elbow or tee. At any location where an elbow or tee is not 
available, the piping shall be modified accordingly. 



46 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

In pipes having an internal diameter greater than or equal to 75 mm, the sensitive element 
shall be located between the centre and a point 25 mm radially beyond, except that in the 
case of very large pipes and special multi-point measuring devices, no well need exceed a 
length of 150mm inside a pipe. 

d) In measuring the temperature of fluids the heat-receiving part of the apparatus shall not be 
in a dead space. 

e) In taking readings, a mercury-in-glass thermometer shall not be raised in the thermometer 
well further than is necessary to render visible the top of the mercury thread. Other types of 
instrument shall not be moved while readings are being taken. 

/) Each complete temperature measuring installation shall be set up in place in full working 
condition at the temperature conditions that will prevail ouring the test, for not less than 
2 h before a test is commenced. 

4.7 Steam quality measurement 

4.7.1 General 

In power stations employing certain types of nuclear reactor, the steam supplied to the 
turbines is at saturation temperature and may contain a small percentage of moisture. It is 
therefore necessary to ascertain the moisture content in order to determine the enthalpy of the 
initial steam. * 

It may also be required to determine the moisture content of the steam after partial 
expansion in the turbine, for example, at a point where extracted steam is taken to a feedwater 
heater or a water-separator or reheater. Where it is practicable to condense the extracted steam 
and measure the condensate, the enthalpy of the steam can be determined by a heat balance 
calculation. 

The usual methods of determining the moisture content of steam are by means of 

- a throttling calorimeter, 

— an electrical heating calorimeter. 

The former is only applicable when the quality and the pressure of the steam are sufficient to 
produce a measurable degree of superheat in the calorimeter. The latter is not subject to these 
limitations. Both methods, however, are liable to give misleading results because of the 
probable lack of homogeneity and the difficulty of obtaining a correct sample of the local 
steam-water mixture. Consequently, there is uncertainty as to whether the steam passing to the 
calorimeter is representative of the main steam flow. 

Recently, more precise methods employing radioactiv£or non-radioactive tracers have been 
introduced and established. 

4.7.2 Tracer technique 

The tracer technique employing Ihe dilution method is an accurate method for determining 
either the water phase or the moisture fraction of a two-phase vapour-water flow. The dilution 
method is based on the measurement of a tracer concentration in a water sample. Dilution can 
be accomplished rn either of two ways, applicable to determining both throttle and extraction 
enthalpy. 

Condensing method: It is assumed that the tracer concentration in the moisture carried by 
the steam is the same as that in the water in the boiler. After condensation of the vapour and 
measurement of the mass flow and of the tracer concentration in the boiler and in the 
condensate, a mass balance calculation enables the amount of water transported in the steam 
from the boiler to be determined. 



47 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

Constant rate injection method: A solution of tracer of known strength is injected at a known 
rate into the steam flow. After mixing, a sample of the water is drawn off and the tracer 
concentration measured. A balance calculation enables the moisture content of the steam 
upstream of the injection point to be determined. Precautions shall be taken to^nsure that the 
mixture is homogeneous and that no steam is withdrawn with the water. 

Methods other than these may be used upon agreement. 

4.7.3 Condensing method 

An appropriate tracer, dissolved in the water phase of wet steam at a concentration C^at will 
be diluted by condensation of vapour. After the steam is totally condensed, the tracer 
concentration in the condensate will be Qond- The concentrations are related by the balance: 



Cwat * f^ ~ ^cond * '^cond (12) 

where: 

m = mass flow rate of water in wet steam flow 

m cond - mass flow rate of condensate from wet steam 

With the tracer concentrations known from test measurements, before and after condensa- 
tion, steam wetness fraction (moisture) is represented by the ratio: 

l-x=- = _^ (13) 

and the steam quality is determined by: 

x=\-—- (14) 

^wat 

Throttle quaUty can be calculated from the quahty and pressure of steam leaving the steam 
generator, and throttle pressure. 

The moisture in the steam leaving the steam generator is the result of water carry-over. Thus, 
a tracer present in the steam generator water will also be found in the steam. 

In non-reheat cycles, the tracer will finally be diluted in the total flow going back to the steam 
generator. By the apphcation of t^e condensingmethod, steam generator exit moisture can be 
evaluated using equation (14) above. 

In the case of reheat cycles, the error in the throttle moisture determination caused by plating 
out of the tracer in the re heaters is negligible, provided that the external moisture separator 
effectiveness is approximately 100%. However, there is the possibility of measuring the 
moisture carry-over of the steam generator during special tests with the reheaters out of service 
if agreed between the parties concerned. 

When the tracer concentration is measured at the bottom of the steam generator, the factor 
R (see Figures 4 and 5) has to be taken into account in the determination of the concentration 
Cwat which serves for the determination of the steam quahty. Consequently, this procedure is 
less precise than the direct measurement of C^^at- 



48 



m IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 

^' IieC Pub 953-2: 1990 

Determination of the concentration in the total flow, Ccond depends on the arrangement of 
the feed water heaters. On cycles with cascading heaters, total flow usually exists at the 
discharge of the condensate pumps. On other cycles, if the demineralizers are bypassed during 
the test, Ccond will be the tracer concentration in the final feedwater. Another possibility is to 
calculate Ccond from a tracer flow balance. However, this calculation requires several flow and 
concentration measurements. In all cases, effects such as external tracer sources feeding into 
the cycle or losses of tracer (demineralizers) shall be taken into account. 



The condensation method may also be used to determine wet extraction steam enthalpy. 
This method is particularly attractive if a suitable tracer is already present in the steam path. 
However, error analysis shows that accurate results can only be obtained on heaters without 
cascading drains. 

With this method, extraction enthalpy is evaluated from an energy balance and a tracer 
balance around the heaters. 

For the tracer balance, the concentration of the tracer in all flows to and from each heater 
shell side are needed. Sampling the heater drains for concentration measurement of the tracer 
is fairly easy, a^ this is only single phase flow. Sampling water out of the extraction line requires 
the same precautions as in the case of the injection method. 



49 



IS 14198 (Part2): 1994 
lEC rub 953-2 : 1990 




Main steam flow (m,^ = m^) 



^cor« ~ '"f ' ^wat (concentration at 

water steam interface) 



Feedwater (mp , Cp) 



Cj^ (measure) 



where: 






mcore 



Cwat (^core ~" ^f) + mp Cp = ^Mcore Cl 

_ ^core Cl - mp Cp 

^wat \ ; 

'^core ~ ^p 

Cp < Cl and mp < mcore 

^core Cl 



Cl~ 



'Wcore — ^F I ^ /i 



(15) 
(16) 



(17) 



Fig. 4. — Throttle steam quality calculations for boiling water reactor. 



50 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



•^"*^ '"m 



nan 



'"R' ^w«t 



'/;= 



►m- 



O 



Cwat * tracer concentration at water steam interface 

Cb * blowdown tracer concentration 

We ■■ 'wr + ^M 

mM . wm 

^ «• ™_ or mE - — 



Og (moasure) 



ma - We - mM = wm * (1 - i?)-^ 



(18) 



Cb We 



Cb 






Cb 






^wat 



Cb 
1 - R 



(19) 



(20) 



Fig. 5. — Throttle steam quality calculations for pressurized water reactor. 



51 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

4.7.4 Constant rate injection method 

A water-soluble tracer of concentration Qnj is injected at a constant rate mjnj into the 
vapour-water flow where moisture is to be measured. The concentration Cwat is measured in 
the water phase downstream of the injection point after adequate mixing has taken place. For 
this condition the following material balance can be written: 



or 



Co • m + minj ' Cinj = (w + minj + Am) • Cwat (21) 

'^inj ' (Cinj ~ Cwat) ~" Am • Cwat .*^. 

m = K^^) 

where: 

m = mass flow rate of water in vapour-water mixture at the sampling point 

Co = initial concentration in the water phase at the sampling point, before injection starts, due to natural amounts 
of tracer (background concentration) 

Am = change in water flow, (condensation of vapour due to injection of the cold tracer solution) 

Normally Cwat < Qnj, Co < Cwat and Am < m, so that the above equation is reduced to: 

m = minj • — ^ (23) 

^wat 

4.7.5 Extraction enthalpy determined by constant rate injection method 

If the flow rate of the water phase in the extraction line to a feedwater heater is known, wet 
steam enthalpy can be calculated by energy balance around the heater. 

The water flow rate can be measured with the constant rate injection method. Measuring 
flow rate and concentration of the tracer solution and maintaining a constant injection rate is 
comparatively simple. However, the tracer concentration in the phase downstream of the 
point of injection can be accurately determined only if the tracer is well mixed and a sample 
of the liquid phase can be obtained. 

4.7.5. 1 Injection points 

For the sample to be truly representative, the tracer shall be uniformly distributed in the 
water phase. The injection point should, therefore, be located immediately downstream of the 
extraction flange of the turbine, and the sampling point should be close to the heater. A long 
run of pipe with several elbows will promote mixing. Use of a spray for injecting would be 
beneficial, but it may not be necessary. 

4.7.5.2 Sampling points 

Since any condensed vapour in the sample will falsify the result, care shall be taken in 
selecting the location of the sampling tap. At the conditions and velocities normally found in 
extraction lines, the water is not uniformly distributed over the cross-section, but agglom- 
erated towards the pipe wall. This is favourable for water sampling, so that a simple wall tap 
should prove satisfactory. However, advantage should be taken of gravitational or centrifugal 
forces by locating the tap on the bottom of the pipe or on the outside at the exit of an elbow. 
Figure 6 shows a typical installation of injection and sampling points. In cases where the 
extraction line is very short, siich as heaters installed in condenser necks, problems may be 
encountered in obtaining water samples. In such cases, these rules recommend that the water 
sample be taken from the heater drain. 



52 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

In cycles with pumped ahead drains, the above method yields accuracy equal to the 
injection method without any additional instrumentation. In cycles with drains cascading to 
the condenser, the upstream drains shall be diverted directly to the condenser so as to yield 
comparable results. Such diversion necessitates designing such drain piping to the condenser 
to accommodate total cascade flow at full load. The diversion method' should be employed 
prior to the heat rate test. 



Injection 




Sampling 



Fig. 6. — Typical installation of injection and sampling points. 



4.7.5.3 Sampling flow rates 

The sampling flow rate shall be adjusted so that entrainment and subsequent condensation 
of vapour is prevented. The maximum allowable sampling rate can be determined, for 
example, by analyzing the sampling stream for dissolved oxygen. Oxygen (20 to 30ppni) is 
naturally present in the steam from boiling water reactors as a result of radiolysis. The 
sampling flow rate shall be determined prior to the heat rate test. The oxygen content shall be 
measured for various sample flow rates and plotted as shown in Figure 7. The flow rate at 
which steam starts to entrain in the sampling is evidenced by a sharp rise in oxygen content. 
The validity of using oxygen or other suitable tracer as a means of tracing the vapour fraction 
is based on the distribution of oxygen between the liquid and vapour phases. At pressures less 
than 35 bar, oxygen is almost entirely in the vapour phase. 

In other types of plants, a suitable tracer, such as xenon- 133, could be added. 



53 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 




100 150 200 250 300 350 



Sample flow rate (ml/min) 

496/90 



Fig. 7. — Oxygen content of sample stream. 



4.7.6 Tracers and their use 

For condensing and constant-rate injection methods to give accurate results, tracers shall 
meet the following criteria: 

a) No hazard to operating personnel. 

b) No harmful effects on materials employed. 

c) Soluble in water, but essentially insoluble in steam (concentration in the steam phase of 
1 0"^ can be attained with suitable tracer compounds). 

d) Non-volatile. 

e) Stable at the conditions existing in the turbine cycle, and not absorbed on internal surfaces 
(provided that the water is not evaporated completely). 

f) Mixed completely and uniformly with all the water available at any instant. 

Light water reactors of the present generation are designed for pressure and temperature 
levels which permit a number of tracers to meet these criteria. At higher pressure levels this 
m.ay be more difficult. Furthermore, the problem of chemical contamination, which is tied 
together with the sensitivity and accuracy of the analytical methods available, has to be 
considered. Methods such as measurement of conductivity or the gravimetric methods may be 
too insensitive to produce the required accuracy at the concentration levels which can be 
tolerated in some nuclear system. Care shall be taken to prevent environmental contami- 
nation when tracers are used. 

4.7.6.1 Radioactive tracers 

Radioactive tracers are particularly attractive for application in nuclear power plants, 
where licensing required for possession and handling of radioactive materials presents no 
particular problem.. Tracer concentrations of less than I in 10^ can be accurately m.easured 
using gamma counting techniques. For steam cycles with very low radioactive background, 
the tracer activity concentration required for accurate testing is very small; hovr'ever, the tracer 
should be a short-lived isotope to eliminate long-term contamination problems. Since it is not 
practicable to measure the concentration of recovered samples simultaneously it will be 
necessary to apply a correction to the measured concentration of each sample to account for 



54 



IS 14198 (Part2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

isotope decay. One of the tracers which meets these criteria is 15-h sodium-24. If the tracer 
technique is used to determine throttle and extraction steam quality and heater leakage, there 
is some advantage in using three different radioactive tracers. 



4.7.6.2 Non-radioactive tracer 

A number of tracers are available. The sodium tracer technique is based on accurate and 
direct determination of the mass concentration of sodium in water samples. Sodium may be 
present in PWR cycles due to the use of sodium phosphates for secondary loop water 
chemistry control. The sodium tracer technique also preserves the non-radioactive status of 
the secondary loop in PWR cycles. 

a) Flame photometry method 

Sodium analysis may be performed with a flame spectrophotometer. Care shall be taken to 
prevent environmental sodium from contaminating a sample. Multiple determinations of 
sodium concentrations shall be made for each sampling point. Sodium concentration may 
also be determined from a continuously flowing sample. 

b) Sodium ion electrode method ^ 

The sodium analyzer may be used for continuous monitoring of a flowing sample, as well 
as for analyzing separate samples. 

The application of non-radioactive tracer techniques shall be consistent with regulations 
concerning the metallurgical safety of the reactor system and all other related equipment. 
Lithium salts may also be used in preference to sodium. 

4.8 Time measurement 

The time of test periods and observations may be determined by: 

a) signals from a master clock or timekeeper; 

b) observations of watches, which are to be synchronized before the test, by the individual 
observers. 

A time measurement of high accuracy is necessary for each measurement employing an 
integrating meter. Individual stop watches or electric time measuring devices shall be 
employed. Special care shall be given to the accurate synchronization of the readings of the 
integrating meter and the time measuring devices. 

4.9 Speed measurement 

Speed can be measured by means of a counting mechanism and clock, a stroboscope, a 
frequency measuring instrument (mechanical or electrical) or a speed measuring instrument. 
Signal transducers and signal transformers are also accepted. 

5. Evaluation of tests 

5.1 Preparation of evaluation 

From the instrument readings taken during the test, the test results according to 2.4 are 
calculated. 

Prior to evaluating the measurements, a time interval which shall constitute the official test 
period shall be selected from the overall period during which readings for a test have been 
taken. This interval shall be equal to at least the period laid down in 3.8.3. During this period 
the provisions of 3.8. 1 and 3.8.2 relating to the deviations of the operating conditions from the 
guarantee conditions and relating to the fluctuations in the operating conditions shall be 
satisfied. 



55 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

Readings of all instruments, including integrating instruments, and corresponding time 
measurements shall be available for the start and the end of the selected test period (see 5.2.1). 

In the event of disturbances encountered during a test, all instrument readings made during 
the disturbed period may by mutual agreement be eliminated according to 4.4.7. Evidence 
shall be furnished that the same steady-state conditions had existed before and after the 
disturbance. The total length of the remaining test periods shall comply with 3.83. 

In the event of a temporary failure of a measuring instrument during the test, the missing 
readings may by agreement and where appropriate be deduced from other suitable instrument 
reaoings. 

5.2 Computation of results 

5.2.1 Calculation of average values of instrument readings 

For further evaluation, the average value of the readings taken during the test period 
defined according to 5.1 is calculated for each measuring instrument. 

For variables which influence the evaluation in a Irnear manner, the average value is the 
arithmetic mean value. The theoretically correct procedure for averaging the readings of a 
pressure difference across a flow-measuring device is to calculate the arithm*etic mean value of 
the square roots of the readings. However, if the amplitude of readings is less than 10%, the 
maximum possible erroi introduced by not calculating the square root of the arithmetic mean 
of the readings is less than O.l %. 

If data from integrating instruments are compared with averaged readings of indicating 
instruments, it is important to ensure that they have been determined for the same time 
period. The first and last readings of the indicating instruments should then carry only half 
the weight in the averaging procedure. 

5.2.2 Correction and conversion of averaged readings 

The averaged readings are corxected to take care of all influences resulting from the 
instrumentation and converted to the necessary units considering: 

a) instrument constants and zero corrections; 

b) calibration corrections; 

c) reference values of instrument readings (e.g., barometric pressure, ambient temperature); 

d) any additional influences (e.g. water legs). 

5.2.3 Checking of measured data 

5.2.3.1 Compatibility 

After computation of the measured data, such as pressures, temperatures, flow rates, etc., a 
thorough examination shall be made for serious errors, inconsistencies with the laws of 
physics, and general compatibility. If major discrepancies are detected, the cause and extent 
of which are unknown, the test run shall be repeated completely or to the necessary extent. 
Appropriate additional measurements shall be made for clarification. Instrument readings 
which are obviously incorrect shall be eliminated. Subject to mutual agreement of the parties 
interested in the test, such readings may be replaced By other instrument readings or by 
appropriate calculated or estimated values. 



56 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

5.2.3*2 Evaluation of multiple measurements 

Where results from several independent instruments are available for the same variable, an 
average value of these shall be calculated in a suitable manner, which considers the relative 
reliability of the individual measured values Xj by applying weighting factors /j. 

The most probable figure for the average value of several results Xj is the weighted mean 
value X 

x-^^^ (24) 

Each \yeighting factor is calculated from the confidence limit V^^ of the result Xj (see 
clause 7) 



73-— (25) 



In order to check the mutual compatibility of several measured values for the same variable 
with consideration of their calculated or estimated measuring uncertainty and for the justifi- 
cation of the averaging as indicated above, the application of a statistical method can be 
helpful; this is described in detail in Appendix C. 

5.2.3.3 Mass flow balances 

When several mass flow measurements are made in the main steam-water circuit during a 
test, several values can be calculated for a certain mass flow in the main circuit (e.g., the initial 
steam flow) by setting up mass flow balances. 

For the establishment of these balance equations, it is further necessary to measure certain 
secondary mass flows as well as level changes in locations where water storage can occur. 

The setting up of mass flow balances and the computation of the results is treated in detail 
in Appendix D. 

5.2.3.4 Leakages 

Leakages shall, as far as is practicable, be identified and eliminated before the test. If any 
identified leakages cannot be eliminated, their flow rjtes shall be measured or estimated. 
These estimates shall be included in the main or secondary flow rate calculations. Unidentified 
leakages, which result in a loss of working fluid;^hall also have their flow rate(s) and 
positions(s) estimated arid included, if considered necessary, in the main or secondary flow 
rate calculations. 

The total unaccounted leakage during the test expressed in percent of full load initial steam 
flow shall not exceed 0.4 times the relative measuring uncertainty of the test result expressed 
as a percentage, otherwise the test can be accepted only by mutual agreement of the parties to 
the test. 

5.2.4 Thermodynamic properties of steam and water 

The steam and water tables and charts upon which the guarantees are based shall be used 
for the calculation of the test results. The name and edition of the tables and charts employed 
shall be stated in the report of the tests. The tables used shall be consistent with the Inter- 
national Skeleton Tables established at the Sixth International Conference on the Properties 



57 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 

lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 \ 

of Steam (ICPS) in 1963, and preferably be based on the 1967 IFC Formulation for Industrial 
Use that was approved at the Seventh ICPS in 1968, or the latest edition. 

5.2.5 Calculation of test results 

The thermal and/or thermodynamic efficiency, the initial steam flow capacity and the 
output have to be calculated in accordance with the definition of the guarantee values 
(see 2.4). 

In accordance with 5.1 and 5.2, a definite value shall be established for each variable which 
shall be used exclusively in further evaluation. 

For the determination of measuring uncertainty, see clause 7. 

6. Correction of test results and comparison with guarantee 

6. 1 Guarantee values and guarantee conditions 

The guarantee values with which the thermal acceptance test results shall be compared 
indicate the level of the turbine performance. Their definitions are given in 2.4. These values 
are dependent upon steam cycle terminal conditions, and upon the parameters of the feed- 
water heating system, so each of these shall be defined completely and clearly in the contract 
document to constitute the specified guarantee conditions. In many cases it is recommended 
that these data be given in the form of a heat-balance diagram containing all necessary 
information. 

The test results are equally dependent on these same conditions and parameters, so any 
observed departure from the value upon which the guarantee is given becomes subject to a 
correction after the test (see 6.4). 

If extraction or addition of steam and/or water is already included in the guarantee cycle, it 
is an additional specified guarantee condition. 

6.2 Correction of initial steam flow capacity 

For correction of the initial steam flow capacity to guarantee conditions, the following 
equation is applied: 






where: 

wi.max.m "" initial steam flow capacity measured during test with valves wide open 

If the ratio of exhaust pressure to inlet pressure of the turbine is not sufTicientlysmall, the 
use of the complete equation may be necessary: 



'Wi^max.c ~ Wli 




Ml, max, m -V T / ; TT (27) 

PUm \ Pl,g' Vi^g 1/ P2M 



The exponents 2 of the pressure ratios are approximations of the exact value 



I + k 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953»2 : 1990 

6.3 Correction of maximum output 

In the correction of the maximum output Pmax to guarantee condition all the operating 
conditions influencing the initial steam flow, the enthalpy drop and its distribution in the 
different parts of the turbine and the efficiency values in the different parts of the turbine 
should be taken into account 

Corrections for all these parameters (particularly live steam condition, reheat temperature 
and condenser pressure) can be made with appropriate correction curves. 

A complete correction can be made by appropriate recalculation of the thermal cycle. 

An approximate correction formula assuming similar distribution of enthalpy drop and 
efficiency is: 

P P ^Umax,c ^max, c .^o\ 

'^l,max,m ^max,m 

For the determination of wi^max, c see 6.2. The efficiency to be used shall be according to the 
formulation of the guarantees, the thermal efficiency rjt or the thermodynamic efficiency rjtd. 

6.4 Correction of thermal and thermodynamic efficiency 

If any operating conditions according to 6.1 differ during the test from the guarantee 
conditions, the thermal or thermodynamic efficiency, or heat rate or steam rate^ have to be 
corrected before they can be compared with the guarantee values. In order to keep the 
correction small, the operating conditions during the test shall be as close ^s practicable to the 
specified guarantee conditions. The maximum permissible deviations for the most important 
operating parameters are stated in 3.8.2. 

The correction for deviations f^ffi specified guarantee conditions can be divided into three 
categories. 

Category I comprises corrections for deviations of the terminal operating conditions of the 
turbine itself from specified guarantee conditions, such as (see also 6.7): 

a) initial steam pressure, 

b) initial steam temperature, 

c) reheat steam temperature, 

d) intitial steam quality, 

e) reheater pressure drop, 

f) turbine-exhaust pressure or condenser cooling water temperature and flow, 

g) moisture-separator effectiveness, if not supplied with the turbine, 

h) speed. 

Category 2 comprises variables which primarily affect the feed-heating system. This 
category includes corrections, such as the following (see also 6.7): 

a) feed-heater terminal differences, 

b) extraction-line pressure drops, 

c) system water-storage changes and make-up flow, 

d) enthalpy rise through condensate and feed-pumps, 

e) condensate undercooling in condenser, 

f) spray-attemperator flows for boiler. 



59 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

g) different configuration of feed-heating system (for example, heater out of service). 

Category 3 corrections concern the generator operating conditions. They are independent 
of the remainder of the plant and simple to determine. If, however, the heat equivalent of the 
generator losses is transferred into the feed-water, they are of greater consequence and most 
conveniently treated in Category 2: 

a) generator power factor, 

b) voltage, 

c) hydrogen pressure. 

6.5 Definition and application of correction values 

For correction purposes, it is normally assumed that the influences of the various operating 
parameters on the test result are mutually independent of each other. Therefore the correction 
values are determined individually according to the deviations of the individual operating 
parameters and are then combined to form a total correction. 

Correction values are factors defined as follows: 

F=— (29) 

where: 

rjc == corrected efficiency based on specified guaranteed conditions 

7?m == measured efficiency 

The individual correction factors Fj, F2, F3... are then combined to give a total correction 
factor Ftot. 

Ftot =* Fi • f 2 • F3 • . 
The corrected efficiency value is then: 

ric=rim' ftot (30) 

For all parameters, where the correction is load dependent, correction factors have to be 
determined for each guarantee load point. 

The correction of the test resuh to specified guarantee conditions can also be effected by a 
complete recalculation of the turbine and its thermal cycle usually by means of a computer 
program with due consideration of the characteristics of the turbine and plant components 
and the operating conditions during the test. This method yields a complete correction 
directly, without the use of individual correction factors and also takes into account to a 
large extent the interdependence of the different variables. 

It may also be convenient to make only the corrections of category 2 by recalculation, since 
correction curves for these variables may not be readily available. The category 1 corrections 
are then made by means of correction curves. 

6.6 Correction methods 

The determination of the correction method and of the necessary values and curves 
depends on the method to be applied for the guarantee comparison (see 6.8). 
a) If the guarantee comparison is made for constant initial steam flow, for each variable its 

influence on the thermal or thermodynamic efficiency has to be considered for the 

correction. 



60 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC rub 953-2 : 1990 

b) If the guarantee comparison is made for constant valve position of the turbine, the 
influence on both efficiency and output of each variable has to be determined. 

The correction and comparison procedure to be applied should be agreed upon by the 
parties interested in the test sufficiently early before the test .to allow the necessary 
preparatory work to be completed. The manufacturer's correction curves should be supplied 
within an agreed period, usually three months before the test, unless agreement to the 
contrary has been made in the contract. 

The correction method described in 6.6.1 is recommended, in particular, for turbines with 
complicated cycles (turbines with steam extraction or bleeding for other purposes, with 
secondary steam, etc., or with complex feed-water heating cycles) and for turbines with many 
cycle corrections. If suitable means of calculation are applied, this method gives corrections 
which are more exact, complete and useful than corrections according to the method 
described in 6.6.2. Other suitable correction methods may also be applied by agreement. 



6,6. 1 Correction by heat balance calculation 

The correction may be made by calculating a heat balance to correct the test cycle and the 
test operating conditions to the guarantee cycle and guarantee operating conditions. That is, 
the turbine test efficiencies may be corrected according to the specified conditions (for the 
influence of operating conditions, if necessary). These corrected test efficiencies rtiay be used 
to calculate a "corrected test" cycle which can be compared with the guarantee cycle. 

Alternatively, the correction may be made by calculating a heat balance to correct the 
guarantee cycle and the guarantee operating conditions to the test cycle and test operating 
conditions. The turbine guarantee efficiency maybe corrected according to the test conditions 
(for the influence of operating conditions, if necessary). This corrected test efficiency may be 
used to calculate a "corrected guarantee" cycle which can be compared with the test cycle. 

For turbines using superheated steam, the first method is usually applied, whereas for 
turbines using wet steam the second n^iethod may be easier to perform correctly. 

For the correction by recalculation of a complete heat balance under test conditions, a 
calculating method (program) is necessary. This correctly takes into account the influence of 
the test conditions on the performance of the turbine and the plant components. 

If the program which had been used for the calculation of the contract guarantee cycle 
cannot be used, the following method can be applied: 

First a thermal efficiency value at guarantee conditions 77' g is determined with the available 
program, which may deviate slightly from the guaranteed efficiency ijg because of minor 
differences between the programs and data used for the determination of the guarantee values 
and for the recalculation. Then a thermal efficiency 77' m under test conditions is calculated 
with the same program and the same performance characteristics of turbine and plant 
components. 

The measured thermal efficiency corrected for test conditions r]c is then: 



r/n,^ (31) 



61 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

The correction by calculation may be limited to the variables of Category 2. The corrections 
for variables of Categories 1 and 3 are made by use of correction curves. If the recalculation of 
the cycle for Category 2 corrections results in changes in the values of any parameters in 
categories 1 or 3, then these changed values shall be used when applying corrections for them 
from correction curves. 

Both principles described in 6.6 may be applied for correction by heat balance calculation. 
The method of guarantee comparison is to be chosen accordingly (see 6.8). 

All necessary data and calculation methods shall be made available to the parties to the test 
sufficiently early before the acceptance test, 

6.6.2 Correction by use of correction curves prepared by the manufacturer 

For case 6.6.ajthe correction curves give values of the correction factor Fr^ for the efficiency 
as a function of the different variables. For case 6.6b) curves for the correction factors P,; for 
the efficiency - different from those for case 6,6a) - and for the correction factors P'p for the 
output as a function of the different variables are necessary. 

If a correction factor depends also on initial steam flow (case 6.6a)), or output (case 6.6b)), 
several correction curves for different loads, preferably for the guarantee loads, are necessary. 

It shall be clearly indicated on the correction curves the method described in 6.6 for which 
they have been prepared and have to be applied. 




Variable 




497/90 



Fig. 8a. - Correction according to 6.6aA Fig. 8b. - Correction according to 6.6b| 

Fig. 8. — Typical correction curves. 



62 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

6.6.3 Tests to determine correction values 

It is possible that the calculation of the correction factors referred to in 6.6.2 may not 
achieve a satisfactory standard of accuracy. In this event, and especially in relation to the 
exhaust pressure, it is recommended that special tests be carried out to determine the 
correction factors. 

All tests of the same series in which one quantity is varied in a controlled way (e.g., the 
exhaust pressure by admitting air to the condenser) shall be run on the same day, by the same 
personnel and with the same apparatus. A sufficient interval of time shall be allowed between 
tests of the same series for stable conditions to be established. 

6.6.4 Correction by use of generalized correction curves 

The typical generalized correction curves in Appendix E may be used by agreement for the 
correction of thermal efficiency test results of a wide range of condensing turbines for the 
more important variables with sufficient accuracy, if no other means are available. They can 
be used for the procedure according to 6.6a^ only. 

6.7 Variables to be considered in the correction 

Corrections of the test results may be made only for deviations from the guarantee con- 
ditions at the inlets to and/or outlets from the system, used as a basis for the definition of the 
guarantee, or for deviations inside this system, which are beyond the responsibility of the 
turbine supplier. In an individual case ''system" can mean: > 

a) turbine only; 

b) turbine and feed-water cycle with or without pumps; 

c) turbine, feed-water cycle, condenser; 

d) turbine, feed-water cycle, condenser and/or driven machine. 
6.7. 1 Turbines with regenerative feed-water heating 

When applying corrections to the results of thermal efficiency or heat rate tests on turbines 
with regenerative feed-water heating, deviations of the following from the guarantee con- 
ditions have to be considered: 

Category I: 

a) initial steam pressure,') 

b) initial steam temperature, 

c) reheat steam temperature, 

d) pressure drop in the reheater, 

e) exhaust pressure or condenser cooling water inlet temperature and flow rate, 

f) final feed-water temperature, if required,^) 

g) speed. 

Additional variables for turbines using wet steam: 
h) initial steam quality. 



'* Deviations of initial steam pressure from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the steam flow capacity 
of variable pressure turbines from the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be 
considered in the correction. 

2) Deviations of final feed-water temperature from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the top heater 
terminal difference or steam extraction pipe pressure drop from the specified value within the limits stipulated in 
the contract, shall be considered in the correction. 



63 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
TEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

i) steam quality at the outlet of the moisture separator,*) 
j) terminal difference of reheater,*) 
k) pressure drop in moisture separator and reheater.*) 
Category 2: 

a) inlet temperature of condensate into feed-heating system (undercooling of condensate in 
condenser, influence of hydrogen cooler, oil cooler and ejector-steam condenser), 

b) water flow for spray attemperation in the superheater and the reheater unless this water is 
collected at the outlet of feed-heating system, 

c) terminal difference of feed-heaters, condensate coolers and desuperheaters,^) 

d) pressure drop in extraction lines,^) 

e) enthalpy rise of feed-water in the feed-pump, 

J) modifications of the configuration of the feed-heating system (e.g. total or partial by-pass 
of heaters), 

g) make-up water, 

h) level in feed-water reservoirs, 

i) steam-ejector steam flow, 

j) steam supply and steam inlet conditions of boiler feed-pump turbine, 

k) any other heat additions or extractions (see also 6.4), 
I) initial steam fiow,^) 

m) pressure drop in regulating valve(s) in throttling position^), 
n) any further deviations from guarantee conditions. 

Category 3: 

a) generator power factor, 

b) voltage, 

c) generator cooling gas pressure and, purity. 

6.7.2 Turbines which have no provision for the addition or extraction of steam after partial expansion 

When applying corrections to the results of thermal efficiency or steam rate tests on 
turbines which have no provision for the addition or extraction of steam after partial 
expansion, deviations of the following variables from the guarantee conditions have to be 
considered: 

Category I: a) initial steam pressure, 

b) initial steam temperature, 



'> Only if this equipment does not form part of the scope of the contract. 

2' Deviations of final feed-water temperature from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the top heater 
terminal difference or steam extraction pipe pressure drop from the specified value within the limits stipulated in 
the contract, shall be considered in the correction, 

3^ Deviations of initial steam pressure from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of the steam fiow capacity 
of variable pressure turbines from the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be 
considered in the correction. 



64 



IS 14198 (Tart 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953.2: 1990 

c) exhaust pressure or condenser cooling water inlet temperature and flow rate, 

d) speed. 
Category 2: a) initial steam flowj) 

b) pressure drop in regulating valve(s) in throttling position,^) 

Category 3: a) generator power factor, 

b) voltage, 

c) generator cooling gas pressure and purity. 

6.7.3 Turbines with steam extraction for purposes other than feed-water heating (extraction turbines) 

When applying corrections to the results of thermal efficiency or steam rate tests, devi- 
ations of the following variables from the guarantee conditions have to be considered in 
addition to those indicated in 6.7.2. 

— Extraction pressure. 
— Extraction flow.^* 

— Pressure drop in the extraction regulating valve(s) in throttling position."*^ * 

— Any other deviations from guarantee conditions. 

If a feed-heating system is connected to the turbine, relevant corrections in accordance with 
6.8.1 shall also be made. 

6.7.4 Other types of turbine 

This category includes all types of single or multiple extraction turbines, and turbines with 
secondary initial steam, etc., not classified in the previous sub-clauses 

Because of the great number of possible variables for correction, an exhaustive list cannot 
be given. Many of the important variables, however, are listed in 6.8.1 to 6.8.3. Further 
relevant variables may have to be determined for each case. 



^* A correction for differing initial steam flow is necessary only if correction and guarantee comparison are made to a 
guarantee point, not to a locus curve (see 6.8. 1 ). 

^\ The guarantee values are specified normally for valve points (see 3.6.1) and tests are conducted at valve points also 
with due consideration for the limits of deviations from guarantee conditions specified in Table 1. A correction is 
not then necessary. If a throttle point is guaranteed (e.g. full arc admission turbine with throttle Regulation at part 
load) the test shall be made with the throttling pressure drop specified in the guarantee conditions, or a correction 
hastobemade^ 

'* Deviations of initial steam pressure from the specified value, resulting from a deviation of Ihe steam flow caj. icity 
of vari^rble pressure turbines from the specified value within the limits stipulated in the contract, shall be 
considered in the correction. 

^* A correction for differing extraction steam flow is necessary only if correction and guarantee comparison are made 
to a guarantee point, not to a locus curve (see 6.8). 



65 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

6.8 Guarantee comparison 

The comparison of corrected test results with the guarantee values specified in the contract 
shall be made in conformity with the correction method chosen (see 6.6). 

Taking into account the measuring uncertainty of the test result, the guarantee is considered 
fulfilled if: 

unless otherwise stated in the contract (see also 7,5). 

When n guarantee points are given, the guarantee is considered fulfilled if: 

Lfim-^Ty^i* 77mi-77gi)>0 (33) 



unless otherwise stated in the contract. 

If the different guarantee points are weighted in the contract, the weighting factors shall be 
applied correspondingly in the guarantee comparison. 

6.8.1 Guarantee comparison with locus curve 

If several guarantee points with identical definition (normally "valve points") are given, a 
locus curve of the guarantee values can be established. 

If the test results have been corrected according to 6.6a j, the locus curve shall be established 
as a function of initial steam flow mi-and the corrected test result rjc compared with the value 
?7g of the guarantee curve at the measured initial steam flow mi,m (see Figure 9a), 

If the test results have been corrected according to 6.6b), the locus curve shall be established 
as a function of output P and the corrected test result rjc compared with the value % of the 
guarantee curve at the guaranteed output Pg (see Figure 9b). 



66 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 





^ ^A 


• ^ 


►"t i 


AT 1 

1 1 '"l.m 


> 1 1 

1 
1 
1 
I 
1 
1 1 

1 1 

1 
1 
1 




m. 



499/90 



Fig. 9a- — Locus curve of initial steam flow. 



Fig. 9b, — Locus curve as function of output. 



i Guaranteed points 

O Measured points 

€ Corrected points 

• Guaranteed point on locus curve 

Fig. 9. — Guarantee comparison on locus curve. 



6.8.2 Guarantee comparison with guarantee point 

For comparison with a single guarantee value, a test result corrected according to 6.6a) has 
to be corrected further for the influence of the difference between measured initial steam flow 
and guaranteed steam flow. 

If the test result has been corrected according to 6,6b), only the difference between the 
corrected output and the guarantee output shall be considered for the further correction. 

6.8.3 Guarantee comparison for turbines with throttle governing 

If guarantees at partial loads are given for turbines with throttle governing, the amount of 
throttling in the control valves shall alsd be stated. The test result then has to be corrected also 
for the difference in throttling between guarantee condition and test conditions in a way 
which is in accordance with the method chosen in 6.6. Then the guarantee comparison can be 
made according to 6.8.1 or 6.8.2. 

Alternatively, the corrected test value can be compared with the value of the guarantee 
locus curve at the same percentage value of initial v^team flow capacity or jof corrected 
maximum output with valves wide open. The necessary value of the initial steam flow 
capacity or maximum output of the tested turbine can most conveniently be determined by a 
test with valves wide open. 

6.8.4 Guarantee comparison for extraction turbines 

If an extraction diagram is guaranteed or can be established from the guarantee values for 
an extraction turbine, the method according to 6.6. a^ can be applied. The extraction line for 



67 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

the measured extraction steam flow is determined by interpolation and used as the guarantee 
locus curve. Correction and guarantee comparison are then made with constant initial and 
extraction steam flow. 

6.9 Deterioration of turbine performance (ageing) 

The test shall be conducted as soon as practicable after initial start up (see 3.3.1) or after an 
inspection provided any deficiency in the unit affecting performance has been corrected. If 
these conditions cannot be met and comparison measurements for determination of the 
condition of the steam turbine according to 3.5 have not been made, the actual overall 
deterioration cannot be determined. 

If there is reasonable assurance that the unit is free of partial damage and deposits, an 
average value of the deterioration by ageing (see 3.4.2) may be agreed by the parties to the test 
and taken into account in the comparison of the test results with guarantee. If no special 
agreement exists, the following rule, which represents average deterioration for fossil fuel 
fired units, is given for guidance on the action to be taken: 

Allowance for average deterioration by ageing: 



Turbine rating P 


Time between first synchronization and test^^ 


2 to 12 months 


1 2 to 24 months 




<150MW 
>150MW 


0.1 

. /150'). 


0.06 

0.06 y ^ 


% per month 
% per month 



•> Pin MW. 

^' Periods during which the turbine casings are open will not be considered. 



7. Measuring uncertainty 

7.1 General 

The measurement of each quantity entering into the computation of the test result is liable 
to some degree of error which depends on the quality of the measuring instruments and the 
conditions of the measurement. The test result is subject to a degree of uncertainty depending 
. on the cotpbined effect of all the errors of measurement. 

A short statistical definition of measuring uncertainty and a justification for the application 
of statistical methods under the special circumstances of thermal acceptance tests are given in 
Appendix F. 

According to Appendix F, the measuring uncertainty of a variable is established as a 
confidence limit of the total measuring error for a statistical probability of P - 95%, These 
confidence limits for individual measurements cannot be determined from the readings of an 
acceptance test. 

Confidence limits can be determined as follows: 

a) from the measuring recommendations and standards; 

b) from the accuracy classes (error limit) indicated by the instrument manufacturer (e.g. 
Bourdon gauges, wattmeters); 



68 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

c) from the calibration accuracy of a measuring instrument (e.g. signal transducer) as stated 
in the calibration certificate; 

d) from the influence of an unavoidable installation error; 

e) from general measuring experience (e.g. differential pressure measurement by U-tube 
manometer). 

Measurements with calibrated instruments, where the average of the readings is corrected 
for instrument deviations as determined by the calibration, may still be influenced by errors 
due to different conditions during the measurement and calibration. These errors are also 
related to the accuracy class of each instrument. Allowance — * if necessary — should be made 
for these errors by taking into account a part between and 100% of the accuracy class for the 
determination of the total uncertainty according to the general error propagation laws. 

In the case of multiple measurement (see 5.2.3.2), the measuring uncertainty V^ of the 
weighted average value x of several independent measurements Xj of the same variable x will 
be approximately: 

Kx - ± , ^ ^ (34) 

The methods for the determination of uncertainties for individual variables ai\d results are 
given in the following sub-clauses. 

Data on measuring uncertainties according to general experience are provided in clause 4, 
Table IL 

7.2 Determination of measuring uncertainty of steam and water properties 

7.2.1 Pressure 

In pressure measurement with deadweight gauges. Bourdon tube type gauges and trans- 
ducers, the measuring uncertainty is determined by the accuracy class of the instruments and 
the error limits of the calibration. In pressure measurements with liquid manometers the 
measuring uncertainty depends, inter alia, on the fluctuations of the column, the shape of the 
meniscus and the quality of the means for reading the liquid level. 

Measuring accuracy is also influenced by the design and location of the pressure tapping, 
the ambient temperature and vibrations. 

7.2.2 Temperature ^ 

In temperature measurements with liquid-in-glass thermometers, the error limit of cali- 
bration shall be deemed to be the measuring uncertainty of the sensing element. In 
temperature measurements with thermocouples or resistance thermometers, the measuring 
uncertainty is established from the error limit of the emf. curve or the error limits of the 
measuring resistance (both of which can be limited by calibration) and from the accuracy 
classes of the measuring instruments (potentiometer, digital voltmeter, etc.). . 

The measuring uncertainty of temperature measurements is liable to be considerably 
increased by inappropriate installation of sensing elements, uncertainty of the temperature 
correction of the column of a liquid-in-glass thermometer, inaccurate cold junction 
temperature, differing terminal temperature, errors due to non-uniform temperature distri- 
bution or to flow disturbances. 



69 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

7.2.3 Enthalpy and enthalpy difference 

The enthalpy is usually determined from the instrument readings for pressure and 
temperature. The uncertainties of these quantities are therefore included in the uncertainty of 
the enthalpy. Further allowance shall be made for the tolerance /^h of steam table values for 
the enthalpy. The uncertainty of an enthalpy value is: 

a) Superheated steam 



--^'(F/f(f>-r-^ 



h) Wet steam 



Kh = ± 



,Sh' 8h" 

(1 - xyz — + X 



Spsdt 5/Jsat. 

Psat can be replaced by /sat- 



K2 +{h" - h'). V^ + Rl, + Rl„ 



Psat 



(35) 



(36) 



In establishing the uncertainty of enthalpy differences, the steam table tolerance cannot 
always be applied in full. Three cases shall be distinguished: 

a) Isobaric heat addition with change of phase, for example in a steam generator between the 
enthalpy values hi and Aij 



KAh = ±vn + n 



hj 



(37) 



where Vt^ and V^. are calculated according to equation (35). 
b) Isobaric heat addition without change of phase (e.g. in reheating) between the enthalpy 



values hi and h 



KAh-±vn.+ n.+ 






ik - k) 



(38) 



where ,Rhi and i^hj represent the steam, table tolerance of h\ and hy 

The uncertainty values Vhj and V\^- are established in this case without the steam table 
tolerance, i.e. using Kh ^ in equation (35). 

c) Isentropic expansion in a steam turbine (enthalpy drop) 



^Ah - ± v V\ + V\ + (/ii " /!i)2 A^ (s) 



K 



(39) 



The uncertainty values Khj and Kh. shall be established as in case b) with /^h = from equation 
(35). To determine Kh: use Kr = 0. The factor Au\ is given as a function of the entropy s in 
Figure 10. 



70 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



0,003 



2 0.002 



o 

LL 



0,001 



V 


\^ 


1 








V 


\ 
































^ 













6 6.5 7 7.5 8 

Entropy ($) kJ/kgK 1^ 

Fig. 10. — Correction factor for Steam table tolerance. 



7.3 Calculation of measuring uncertainty of output 

7.3.1 Electrical measurement 

According to the law of error propagation, the uncertainty of the measurement of the 
electrical power is in general calculated as the geometric summation of the individual 
measurement uncertainties of the transformers, the wattmeters, the series resistors, etc. 

When curves or tables of the detectable systematic errors are available (from calibration of 
any part of the measuring equipment), these shall be used to correct the electrical power that 
has been measured (see 4.2.6, 4.2.7). The individual uncertainty limits as indicated in the 
certificates of the calibrations shall be decisive in establishing the measurement uncertainty of 
the electrical power (see also 7.1). 

Where no details of detectable systematic errors are available, the calculation of the 
uncertainty of the total power shall be based on the accuracies class of the individual items of 
the measuring equipment. 

In such cases, it is important to note the dependency of the accuracy class of the trans- 
formers on the values of current and voltage. 

The accuracy class of a wattmeter shall be related to the actual scale value of the reading. 

Practical experience has shown that the transforming ratio errors, as well as the phase-angle 
errors of equal transformers in parallel phases, are not fully independent. This also applies to 
the calibration of transformers. Therefore, in polyphase measurements (two-wattmeter or 
three-wattmeter method) the summation of errors is partially arithmetical. 

In Appendix G, the separation of geometric and arithmetical errors and their summation is 
given in detail. It includes a number of formulae to calculate the measurement uncertainty of 
electrical power for two- and three-phase measurements, with wattmeters and watthour- 
meters, respectively. 

7.3.2 Mechanical measurement 

According to the law of error propagation, the measuring uncertainty is determined from 
the measuring uncertainties for speed and torque. The measuring uncertainty of the torque 
shall be established on the basis of the measuring procedure and the error limits of 
calibration. 



71 



IS 14198 (Tart 2) : 1994 
/ lEC rub 953-2 : 1990 

7.3.3 Additional uncertainty allowance because of unsteady load conditions 

If, during the test period, the output fluctuations above and below the mean value exceed 
±5% (see 3.8), rejection of the test may be avoided by agreeing on an additional uncertainty 
allowance to compensate for the additional measurement errors. It depends on the magnitude 
of the fluctuations and can therefore be determined as follows: 

the absolute values of the deviations of the individual output readings from the mean value 
are averaged. 

2 (mean absolute deviation) - 1 ^^^ ^^^^ 

TAP - ^ ; (%) (40) 



Tap is to be added arithmetically to the total uncertainty of the output measurement. The 
allowance tap is applicable only if the mean absolute deviation is greater than 0.5%. 

7.4 Determination of measuring uncertainty of mass flow 

7.4. 1 Measuring uncertainty of mass flow measurements 

The measuring uncertainty depends on the fluctuations of the readi*^?, the shape of the 
meniscus and the quality of the cursor or other device which assists readhig of the mercury 
level. 

Non-detectable systematic errors can occur if the column cannot be observed directly (due 
to dirt in the sealing liquid, clinging of droplets or the influence of extraneous fields on a 
magnetic instrument). 

Due to changes in liquid levels in storage volumes during tests, the reading of differential 
pressure measuring instruments may be subject to slow but considerable fluctuations. Such 
slow fluctuations shall not be taken into account in establishing the uncertainty of a differ- 
ential pressure measurement. 

The uncertainty of mass flow measurement is then determined for sharp-edged orifice 
plates or wall tap nozzles according to ISO 5167. If the differential pressure device has been 
calibrated, the uncertainty of the expansion coefficient may be estimated from the calibration 
conditions. 

7.4.2 Measuring uncertainty of multiple measurements of primary flow 

If primary flow has been determined by multiple measurements or by application of mass 
flow balances (see 5.2.3.3), their, mutual compatibility has to be checked (see 5.2.3.1). In the 
case of incompatibility, all pressure difference devices which can be inspected (see 4.3.2.3) 
shall be checked for condition and size. A weighted average value is calculated from the 
measured values of all pressure difference devices which have been found in good order, and 
the measured values of all pressure difference devices without possibility of inspection are 
checked for compatibility with this average value (see 5.2.3.1). 

An incompatible value should either be eliminated from further evaluation or its uncer- 
tainty value increased until compatibility is achieved. The decision has to be made with due 
consideration to the possibilities of imperfect cycle conditions and/or imperfections of the 
differential pressure device. 

The possibility of errors at several uninspected differential pressure devices due to the same 
basic reason (unsharpness of edges or orifices due to wear, damage due to blowing out of 
pipeline, or chemical cleaning, etc.) should be duly considered in the evaluation. 



72 



IS 14198 (Part 2); 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2: 1990 

If measured values of inspected differential pressure devices which have been found in 
good condition are not compatible and their uncertainty values have been determined correc- 
tly, an evaluation as -multiple measurement according to 5.2.3.2 is not possible. The reasons 
for incompatibility are to be investigated further. 

The value of the primary flow is calculated from the remaining compatible measured values 
according to 5.2.3.2. Its uncertainty value is determined according to 7,1. 

7.4.3 Uncertainty allowance for cycle imperfections 

To allow for imperfect conditions of the water-steam-cycle (unknown secondary flows, 
imperfect isolation, etc.), an additional uncertainty allowance equal to 50% of the part of the 
total unaccounted-for leakages, which enters into the further evaluation of the initial steam 
flow (see 5.2.3.4), is added arithmetically to the measuring uncertainty of the primary flow or 
the average uncertainty of the average primary flow (see 7.4.2). 

7-5 Calculation of measuring uncertainty of results 

7.5.1 General 

The measuring uncertainty of the results is calculated by application of the law of error 
propagation from the uncertainties of the measured values according to Appendix F with due 
consideration of eventual interdependences of the variables and their uncertainties. 

7.5.2 Measuring uncertainty of thermal efficiency 

For a non-reheat condensing turbine plant, the thermal efficiency 77t is defined in 2.4. 

Its relative measuring uncertainty is: 



T„=±VT^^. + Tihu,, + ^P (41) 

For a single-reheat condensing turbine plant, the thermal efficiency is defined in 2.4. 

Normally, the reheater mass flow m is not measured independently, but calculated with 
the aid of secondary mass flows from the corrected initial steam mass flow. In the present case 
this relationship shall be introduced in the equation for the thermal efficiency before the 
measuring uncertainty is calculated. * 

In the example given in appendix D, the reheater mass flow is established from the 
equation: 

ma = w 1 - wa5 - tiipi - rhp2 - 0.5 mv3 (^+2) 

* m 1 - I mi 

which, inserted in equation (2), gives the thermal efficiency: 



r;j ^ -^ (43) 

mi(Ah\ij + A^2,3)- A/i2,3l^mj 



73 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

If, according to 5.2.3.3, the remaining dependences are ignored to simplify the evaluation, 
the relative measuring uncertainty of the thermal efficiency is: 



T^ = ± {ATBTC+r\ (44) 

with: 

\ Got. i^^-^^^h,,,) 

\ g.ot. /^ ■"' ^""^ 



C=Ej 






Qtoi. being the total heat flow and mj being the secondary mass flow according to equation 

(42). 

7.5.3 Measuring uncertainty of thermodynamic efficiency 

The thermodynamic efficiisncy r/td of a turbine is defined in 2.4. For the most simple case, 
the relative measuring uncertainty is: * 



V = ±V''*, + ^ih.+ ^P (45) 

7.5.4 Uncertainty of corrections 

For the determination of the measuring uncertainty of results which have to be corrected, 
the correction curves of the manufacturer shall be recognized as correct in the tolerable range 
of correction. 

If a correction is necessary beyond the acceptable range specified in 3.8.2 and 6.4, an 
additional allowance (e.g. one-third of the additional correction value which results from the 
excess of the variable beyond the acceptable correction range) may be agreed by the parties to 
avoid rejection of the test, or the correction value may be recalculated for the specific cycle. 

The uncertainty of the correction variables (pressure, temperature, etc.) causes an uncer- 
tainty of the correction which in many cases is small enough to be neglected for the determina- 
tion of the uncertainty of the resjult. 

7.5.5 Guiding values for the measuring uncertainty of results 

Establishing the measuring uncertainty of results for large and complicated installations 
generally calls for a considerable amount of calculating work which, in most cases, can only 
be carried out on the basis of simplified assumptions. 

It is permissible to omit detailed calculation of the uncertainty value of the test result, if the 
parties to the test so agree and if it is clear from the results that the contract requirements have 
been fulfilled. This latter condition is satisfied if the test result, after allowing for a reliable 
estimate of the uncertainty value, still meets the guarantee. 

Guiding values for the uncertainty of test results are given in Table III. 

These guiding values, according to general experience, are an indication of the magnitude 
of measuring uncertainties for correct acceptance tests made in accordance with the require- 
ments of Table III. 



74 



Table III 
Guiding values for the uncertainty of test results 



Reference 
line 


Type of turbine 


Result 


For variables Instrumentation 


Relative measuring uncertainty 
for the result* 


A 


Back pressure turbine 


y/td 


Pi' t] ' P4 As references 1, 2, 3, 5 ^ 

Piy As references 15, 16 V Table II 

mi As references 12, 13 J 


A/is>400kJ/kg 
±1.5-2.0 


B 


Back pressure extraction turbine 


^td 


As reference A in this table. Howewer, Pe as reference 2, 3 in Table II and rhz 
as reference 12, in Table II 


A;is>400kJ/kg 

±1.7-2.5 


C 


Condensing turbine 


%d 


As reference A in this table. However, m from rhs, t^i and two as references 
10 and 11 in Table II 


± 1.0-1.7 


D 


Condensing extraction turbine 


rjtd 


As references B and C in this table 


±1.3-2.0 


E 


Condensing turbine with reheating 


Vi 


Pu P3. P4 As references 1, 2, 3 and 5, 6 ^ 

t\, h, rii, ^5 As references 9, 10 and 11 1 j^ y^ble II 

twi, two etc. As references 10, 11 f 

P^ As references 15, 16 J 

mi, m3 Calculated from measurements with checked pressure 
difference devices (preferably in water part of the 
circuit) as reference 12 in Table H 


±0.9-1.2 


F 


Condensing turbine with saturated 
steam as initial steam 


% 


Pi As references 1, 2, 3 in Table II 

hi Enthalpy according to special method 

P^ As references 15, 16 in Table II 

All other measuring values as reference E in this table 


±1.1-1.6 



I . I 1 . ; *— 

These values can be reduced mainly by increasing the accuracy of the determination of the primary flows. 






IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

APPENDIX A 

FEEDWATER HEATER LEAKAGE AND CONDENSER LEAKAGE TESTS 

(see 3.4.5) 
AL Feedwater heater leakage tests 

Heaters may be checked for leaks, with the turbine out of service, by using the condensate 
or boiler feed pumps to maintain pressure on the water side of the heaters. Leakage is 
indicated by the accumulation of water in the hot well or shell of the heater and, if normal 
operating water pressure is maintained, the rate of leakage may be estimated. It should be 
realized, however, that the rate of leakage may vary with the heater temperature. The 
measured rate of leakage should be regarded only as an indication of the relative tightness of 
the heater and should not be used as the basis for correction of the primary flow measurement. 

In some installations, it may be possible to check for heater leakage with the turbine in 
service if a tight shut-off of bled steam can be obtained and if there is no cascading of heater 
drains into the heater being checked. 

If leakage is suspected, a useful method to check for heater leakage in actual service, is to 
inject a small quantity of a water treatment chemical into the condensate line before the feed 
heater. A check of the conductivity of the heater drain condensate from any suspected heater 
will show, in the case of a leak, a sudden rise in conductivity as the chemical passes through. 

A2. Condenser leakage tests 

Pxior to and directly after the turbine tests, a hydraulic test should be made on the 
condenser by filling the steam space with water up to at least 20 cm above the top row of tubes 
and noting the leakage of water, if any, into the water boxes at inlet and outlet. 

An alternative method of condenser test before and after the turbine tests is to place the 
condenser and turbine into full vacuum by closing off all access of air and steam, and 
delivering normal water supply to the condenser tubes with the cooling water pumps. 
Weighed leakage into the hot well is a measure of condenser leakage. The tightness of the 
condenser, immediately before and during turbine tests, should be checked by an electrical 
conductivity test of a sample of condensate from the condenser's hot well and a sample of the 
cooling water after it has been diluted by a known amount of distilled water. 

Alternatively, the leakage can be checked by a chemical method ot by a fluorescence 
method. 



76 



IS 14198 (Part2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



APPENDIX B 



THROAT TAP NOZZLE 

(see 4.3.2.1) 

Bl. Design and manufacture 

Because of the high degree of accuracy necessary, the following requirements are given 
regarding the design and manufacture of throat-tap nozzles for primary-flow measurement. 
Figure Bl is an example of a long-radius, low-ratio, nozzle shape with throat taps that 
satisfies these requirements. 

a) The entrance shall be designed to give a favourable pressure gradient so that the boundary 
layer will be very thin in the throat section and there will be no flow separation. Also, the 
entrance shall be designed to give a uniform flow approaching the throat section. The 
cylindrical section of the nozzle shall have parallel walls and be concentric with the pipe 
(see B2b)y Any divergence may cause a peculiarly shaped coefficient of discharge versus 
the Reynolds number curve. However, slight convergence is acceptable, but no more than 
one thousandth of a mm per mm of throat length. The area in the plane of the throat taps 
shall be used in the coefficient calculation. Referring to Figure Bl, the throat of the nozzle 
shall be round within the limits of ± 0.0002 d as determined by measurements on at least 
four diameters in the plane of the throat taps. The nozzle shall be made from a corrosion- 
resistant material with known thermal-expansion coefficient and its surface shcJuld have a 
10""^ mm finish or better, and shall be free, from all burrs, scratches, imperfections, or 
ripples. 

b) The pressure taps shall be at least two pressure-tap diameters deep. They shall be machined 
perpendicular to the bore surface, shall have sharp corners, and be free from burrs. The 
downstream pressure taps shall be machined in the throat of the nozzle in order to decrease 
the effect of downstream disturbances on this pressure measurement. The upstream taps 
shall be carefully made and shall be located one pipe diameter upstream from the nozzle 
entrance. 

c) The final determination of the compliance with the above requirements is the shape of the 
coefficient of discharge versus the Reynolds number curve (see Figure B2) which should be 
determined for each set of taps to be used. The nozzle shall be used only in the range where 
the co-efficient of discharge is nearly constant. 

d) In order to obtain maximum reading accuracy, the nozzle-throat diameter shall be selected 
to give the maximum deflection practicable, considering both the available pumping head 
and the manometer range. The manometer range should be selected to allow for 
fluctuations and for maximum flow which may be encountered. The nozzle shall not be 
used to measure flows which give manometer deflections of less than 1000 times the 
reading error or 150mm of mercury, whichever is larger. When it is necessary to measure 
flow over a larger range^than can be obtained by complying with this requirement, it is 
permissible to use additional nozzles with different throat diameters. These nozzles shall 
be sized so that one of the test points can be measured with either nozzle. 



77 



IS 14198 O'art 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 




Notes. 
L - 



Prttftsure taps drill a roam 

to sixe 6.35 mm max., 3.175 mm mm. 

True ellipse (tolerance ±0.025 mm) 

$01/90 

d =* pressure tap diameter 



2. - 



Pressure tap holes to have square and sharp 
corners and to be free of burrs. The pressure 
tap hol65 are to be drilled and reamed before 
the final boring and polishing of the throat. A 
plug with a press fit is then inserted in the hole. 
The final boring and polishing operation 
should be done after the insertion of the plug. 
The plug should be made with provision for 
pulling it out of the hole after the polishing 
and machitiing is completed. After removal of 
this plug» any slight burr which might be left 
on the edge of the hole may be removed by 
taking a tapered piece of maple and rolling it 
around the pressure tap. 

The throat of the nozzle may converge as 
much as 0.00 1 mm per mm. No divergence is 
acceptable. 

Material to be corrosion resistant. 



Fig. Bl. — Throat-tap flow nozzle. 



<D I 4 f\i\ . 


























1 




; 1 


S»i ^0^ 








r^ 










! 1 




,— -r— T ^ ' 








- — 


- - 


^__ 




-■■■ f-- 


; j 1 


"B 

^ 0.99 H 




l^ 


^ 












; 1 


/ 


1 




















I i ■ ■ . 
1 1 


- 

X A on ■ 


^ 




























O U,9D 1 

o 1 


^o^ i 


2 ; 


3 ^ 


i 


5 < 


3 i 


i 1 


o« : 


> 


3 - 


4 1 


5 

Th 


8 8 1 
roat R< 


0^ ; 

»ynolds n 


I 3 ^ 
umber W^ 

502 


i 

\ 

/90 



Throat 


C 


Reynolds 






No. X 10-*^ ' 


/J = 0.43 


0.1 


0.9834 


0.2 


0.9909 


0.3 


0.9939 


0.4 


0.9953 


0.5 


0.9961 


0.6 


0.9966 


0.8 


0.9970 


1.0 


0.9972 


2.0- 


0.9970 


3.0 


0.9970 


4.0 


0.9972 


5.0 


0.9974 


6.0 


0.9978 


8.0 


0.9980 


10.0 


0.9983 


20.0 


0.9991 


30.0 


0.9994 


40.0 


0.9998 



Fig. B2. — Typical nozzle calibration curve for ^= 0.43. 

For other values of )8 within the range 0.25-0.50: 
C=^Qi^~ 0.43) + 0.01 1 339 p - 0.0049. 



B2. Flow section 

a) The flow nozzle shall be installed in a flow section as shown in Figure B3. This flow section 
shall contain a flow straightener which divides the pipe cross section into at least 50 
approximately equal spaces or a perforated multiplate flow straightener having approxi- 
mately 200 holes per plate and there should be 20 diameters of straight run pipe upstream 
of the flow nozzle to ensure a sufficiently uniform velocity profile in the approaching 
stream. The requirement of at least 10 pipe diameters of straight pipe on the discharge side 
of the flow nozzle, of the same nominal size as the upstream pipe, ensures a reliable 
throat-pressure measurement. 



78 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

b) The flow nozzle shall be centred in the pipe within 0.8 mm of the pipe axis. The pipe on 
either side of the flow nozzle shall be smooth, free from rust, scale and blisters, and the 
inside diameter measured at four points at any cross section shall not differ by more than 
i %, The upstream pipe section shall be bored as shown in Figure B4 or for the entire length 
ofthe inlet section. 

c) The pipe joints at the flow nozzle shall have the inner bores square with the faces of the 
flanges. The compressed thickness ofthe gaskets shall not exctied 1. 6 mm and the gaskets 
shall not extend within the pipe, 

d) In order to reduce the possibility of thermal distortion ofthe nozzle, it is desirable that the 
pipe and the flanges of the flow section be made of a corrosion-resistant material having 
the same coefficient of expansion as the nozzle* 



Flow 



Va;lv«<;) v«nt 



Compressed gasked thickness 
/ not to exceed 1 .6 mm 




f^jG, b3. — i^low section. 



Note. — No obstruction, such as thermoeouple, wells, backing rings, etc. 



Z/JZ/U; 



//J^^-///////'///A/ 



#ZZ 




Flow-. 



Oi 






Machine with taper 
not exceeding d.S"" 



4 D 



Machine cylindrical within ±0.25 mm 
with minimum removal of metal 



FiG. B4. — poring in uow section upstream cf nozzle. 



79 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

B3. Calibration 

a) Experience shows that the flow coefficient cannot be predicted within 0. 1 % and, therefore, 
it is necessary to calibrate the flow sections (see Figure B3). This calibration shall be 
undertaken only by recognized authorities under conditions similar to those in the actual 
installation. It is desirable that the physical construction of the piping in the calibrating 
set-up should be similar to that in the test setup from the standpoint of pipe configuration, 
immediately upstream and downstream of the fiow-measuring section. Also, the Reynolds 
number, water temperature and other fiow conditions should be as close to the test 
conditions as possible. If the calibration of the flow section does not comply with B3fej, the 
nozzle shall be carefully inspected to conform to the requirement of Blaj, corrected, if 
necessary, and the flow section recalibrated. If the recalibration still does not comply with 
B3b), the flow section should be calibrated using different facilities, if available. 



b) Calibration shall be conducted on at least two sets of pressure taps 1 80° apart. For each set 
of taps, the calibration curve (not necessarily each individual point) shall be within 0.25% 
of the reference curve and shall have the same slope (see reference curve Figure B2). When 
it is not practicable to calibrate at the test Reynolds number, the calibration Reynolds 
number should be obtained in accordance with B3c). The extrapolation to higher Reynolds 
numbers will then be parallel to the reference curve. The end point of the extrapolation 
should not differ by more than 0.25% from the calibration curve coefficient at the highest 
Reynolds number attained during calibration. 

The location of the primary-fiow section in the cycle, its configuration, and the technique 
which is employed to obtain the flow measurements are critical and are discussed in 
subsequent paragraphs. 

c) Belowa throat Reynolds number of 2 x 10^, there is a transition from laminar to turbulent 
boundary layer. This transition region should be established during calibration and shall 
be avoided during the test. It is permissible to extrapolate the calibration curve when the 
nozzle is used beyond the range of the calibrating facility provided the level of the 
coefficient is established at Reynolds numbers higher than the transition region. This 
extrapolation should be parallel to the curve shown in Figure B2 and subject to the 
restrictions of B3fc/ 

d) It is preferable to install fiow sections immediately before the test. A slight iron-oxide film 
on the nozzle surface will usually collect during the test. If this film is very thin (less than 
0.025 mm) and uniformly deposited, its effect on the accuracy of the fiow measurement 
will be negligible. If the thickness of the deposit exceeds this value, or if the nature of the 
deposit is not uniform and the surface appears rough, either of two procedures may be 
followed: 

— the nozzle may be cleaned, reinstalled, and the test repeated; or 

— the flow-measuring section may be recalibrated. 

Care has to be taken not to disturb the deposit before recalibration. If this calibration is 
significantly different from the calibration prior to the test, it is necessary that another set of 
runs be made under deposit-free conditions. The test results cannot be adjusted, since it is 
usually impossible to determine when the deposit formed on the nozzle. 



80 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

APPENDIX C 

EVALUATION OF MULTIPLE MEASUREMENTS, COMPATIBILITY 

(see 5.2.3.2) 

If several individual values for the same variable have been measured or determined (see 5.2.3.3) 
and their uncertainties have been evaluated, there is a good method for checking whether each of 
these several values is compatible with the weighted average value (see 5.2.3.2) and its uncertainty 
(see 7.1). It assumes that the uncertainties of the individual values have been determined correctly 
and that the individual values differ only randomly from the true value. 

With 

Xi = individual value 
Kxi =?= uncertainty of Xi 

X = weighted average value of all individual values (see 5.2.3.2) 
V% = uncertainty of x (see 7.1) 
the compatibility criterion 



V,-f", 



is calculated for each individual value x\. 

If£t<0, 

the individual value Xj in question differs, possibly because of a systematic error in an unacceptable 
manner from the true value. This is a warning signal to investigate the value Xi and its uncertainty 
value Fxj for undetected systematic errors. 

The lower the value £i, the higher the probability of such an error. 

If in the case of an incompatible value a physical inspection of the measuring installation is not 
practicable or evidence of a systematic error exists, this value should be eliminated from further 
computation. 

If for all individual values 

£i >0 
the statistical compatibility of the measured values x\ and their uncertainty Vx, can be assumed. 



81 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



APPENDIX D 



MASS FLOW BALANCES 

(see 5.2.3.3) 
In case^ where several primary mass flow measurements are carried out in the main flow of the 
cycle, a particular primary mass flow of the cycle (e.g. the initial ste^m flow) can be determined with 
the aid of mass flows balances by several largely independent measurements. Mass flow balances 
are not altogether independent when common mass flows occur in such balances. This can be taken 
into account for the determination of the average value and its uncertainty. 

To set up the equations for mass flow balances, it is further necessary to measure certain 
secondary mass flows as well as the level changes of tanks and other storage vessels in the cycle. 

The unaccounted-for cycle loss is determined from: 

— the changes A/ of all storage volumes, divided by the duration z of the test, 

— the measured losses and 

— the make-up water flow (if any). 

This loss is distributed to the different parts of the plant according to general convention and 
special observations and is considered accordingly m the mass flow balances. 

Level changes which are not attributable to losses shall be added as mass flows to the respective 
mass flow values. 

Figure Dl illustrates the cycle diagram of a single-reheat steam turbine plant. Four primary mass 
flow measurements are made while four secondary mass flows and the changes in the contents of 
two tanks are measured. 

The initial steam flow can be calculated from the balances in the following four ways: 

a) mi\ ~ m\ — mv2 

b) mm = wk ± mAiDA + wh5 + niuA + rh^^ - mv2 - wvi 

c) rhim = mio - mv2 - rh\\ 

d) mijv = mil + mis - rh\2 ~ rhw 

with distribution on m\\ to mv3 according to convention and X '"Vi "■ — a duration time z of the 
acceptance test run. ' ^ 



82 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 




Fig. D 1 . — Diagram of cycle for plant with steam turbine with single reheating and five stages of 
regenerative feedwater heating extraction. 



The various values m, established from the mass flow balances with their measuring uncertainty 
Vrfij shall be checked for compatibility (see 5.2.3.2). 

The weighted average value rh\ according to equation (24) is determined from the compatible 
values. 

Individual mass flows (e.g. rha or ma) required for further evaluation shall be calculated with the 
aid of the measured or calculated secondary flows from the averaged initial steam flow m\. 

If a mass flow equation which is to be used for that calculation has led to an incompatible initial 
steam flow value in the mass flow balance evaluation, the measured mass flow contained in it 
should be checked. 

For each mass flow balance a difference rhn can be calculated: 

rhn^ m\- rhin 
If the uncertainty of the mass flow balance value mi,n is Vn and the uncertainty of the mass flow 
rhj is V^si mass flow balance correction 



'WBJ,n ■■ 



can be calculated. 
The corrected mass flow is then: 



l^n 



Wj.corr = mj ± mBJ,n 



The mass flow balance corrections /wbj for several balance equations will deviate but very slightly 
and can be averaged arithmetically. 



83 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



APPENDIX E 



TYPICAL GENERALIZED CORRECTION CURVES FOR CORRECTION OF 
TEST RESULTS ACCORDING TO GUARANTEE CONDITIONS 

(see 6.6.4) 

General 

The curves El to E17 may be used to correct the measured value of thermal efficiency for the 
influence of deviations of the operating parameters from the specified values during the test. They 
give correction factors E according to the definition in 6.5 and can be used for the correction 
procedure according to 6.6a^ only. 

The curves are prepared for single point guarantees and they therefore also include data for 
computation of deviations of measured main steam flov^ from guaranteed flow (El to E3). In case 
of guarantees and parameters given as functions of variable main steam flow (efficiency or heat rate 
curves), the measured main steam flow will be considered as guaranteed and the correction curves 
for main steam flow (El to E3) may therefore be ignored. 

The application of certain curves is in some cases dependent on whether or not the parameters 
concerned are the subject of guarantee. 

The curves may be used to correct for deviations of operating parameters etc., within the limits 
defined in 3.8.2 (Table I) and shall not be extrapolated. 

The data are valid for condensing turbines of ratings higher than 30MW and parameters which 
are commonly used in conventional and nuclear power stations. 

The uncertainties of the corrections for the various parameters refer to probability P = 0.95 and 
are independent of each other and the resulting uncertainty may be calculated accordingly. 

Mathematical formulations representing the curves in El to E17 are given in Table EI for 
programming purposes. 



84 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 




^•c 



F = 1 -^ Ki^^ 



7v - absolute temperature at exhaust pressure (K) 

A/is = isentropic enthalpy drop, main steam/exhaust pressure (kJ/kg) 

— main steam flow as measured 

niA = — : 

main steam flow as guaranteed » 

K ^ ^' for reheat and/or external moisture separation 

K = 0.83 K' without reheat and without external moisture separation 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, superheated or wet main steam with or without reheat, 

main steam enthalpy constant, output >0.2 maximum output. 
Uncertainty of computation: AF- ±0.15 | F- 1 |. 



Fig. El. — Correction curve for main flow influence on bowl pressure. 



85 



IS 14198 Part 2): 1994 
lEC Tub V53-2 : 1990 



• c « ^ . in • /^ 










m^ = exhaust flows of main turbine (kg/s) 

ms »= exhaust flow of BFP- auxiliary turbine(kg/s) 

— main steam as measured 

^A ^ — : 

main steam as guaranteed 

M^yxi! =* axial outlet velocity as guaranteed (m/s) 

w = peripheral speed of last stage wheel (pilch diameter) (m/s) 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, with or without reheat, 

exhaust pressure < 0.3 bar, u - 200 to 450 m/s, output >0,2 maximum output. 

Uncertainty of computation: AF« ±0.2 \ F~ \ |. 

Fig. E2. — Correction curve for main steam flow influence on exhaust losses. 



86 



IS 14198 (Fart 2): 1994 
lEC rub 953*2 : 1990 



-0-01 




0.05- 



0.04- 



0.03 



0,02- 



0.01 



m\ 



main steam flow as measured 



main steam flaw as guaranteed 
p ^ generator output as guaranteed 

max. generator output 
5max *= max. apparent generator output (kVA) 

Valid for: Two-pole and four-pole generators, cooling systems adequate to Sm.., S,n;,x ^30 000 kVA. 
Uncertainty of computation: Af - ±(| 0.3 K | + 0.003) - \'rh,\~ \ \. 



Fig. E3. - Correction curve for main steam now influence on mechanical efficiency and generator 
efficiency. 



87 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 







cos (p = load factor 

S = apparent generator output (kVA) 

5max = max. apparent generator output (kVA) 

^max/g 

Valid for: Smax > 30 M VA, cos (p = 0.7 to 1 .0, active output = constant. 
Uncertainty of computation: AF= ±0.4 | F- 1 1. 



Fig. E4. — Correction curve for load factor. 



88 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



rhA 




Tv - absolute saturation temperature at 
exhaust pressure (K) 

Ahs - isentropic enthalpy drop main steam/ 
exhaust pressure (kJ/kg) 

main steam pressure as measured 

Pa * — : : 

main steam pressure as guaranteed 



main steam flow as measured 



main steam flow as guaranteed 
Sliding main steam pressure: 

K ^ K' reheat and/or external moisture separation 
K « 0.83 K' all others -0.06 ^ 

Constant main steam pressure: 

' steam/steam reheat 
I others 



Throttle control 



J x^o.iia:' 

I K - all ot 



Nozzle control 



X - 0.11 + 0.89 K(v) steam/steam reheat 

K ^ 0.83 K (v) without reheat and without external moisture separation 

X- a: (V) all others 



V - Vn^ 



^ - 



18 (^Ag- 1925) 



one-row governing stage 



PR - wheel chamber pressure (bar) 
Ha - main steam enthalpy (kJ/kg) 



\PaU 



8(/iAg- 1925) 
fi " two-row governmg stage 

Pa =* main steam pressure (bar) 

u - control stage peripherical speed pitch diameter (m/s) 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, with or without reheat, 
main steam enthalpy constant, v • mA /pA < 0.91, load >0.2 maximum load. 



Uncertainty of computation: AF- ± 0.15 | F-i | + 0.002 



rfiA 



Fig. E5. — Correction curve for main steam pressure. 

This correction allows for deviation inflow capacity at agreed valve position (for deviation inflow, see F 1 ). 

89 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



1925 



hg-'\925 
h «= specific enthalpy (kJ/kg) 



-0.04- 



F « 1 + K 




Curve A: Main steam of conventional turbines without reheat. 

Curve B: Saturated (or nearly saturated) main steam of turbines with external moisture separation, without reheat. 

Curve C: Main steam and reheat steam of conventional turbines with single reheat. 

Saturated (or nearly saturated) main steam of turbines with external moisture separator and reheat. 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, output >0.2 maximum output. 
Uncertainty of computation: AF- ±(0.15 | F-1 | +0.002 iJ-l | ). 



Fig. E6. — Correction curve for steam enthalpies. 

F « 1 + a: 

K~ 0.21(xg-x„,) 

X - quality, i.e., dryness fraction of wet steam by weight Jbeyond moisture separator 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative heating system, wet (or nearly wet) main steam, with or without following 
reheat. 



Uncertainty of computation: AF« ±0.2 | F-1 |. 



Fig. E7. — Correction for final moisture of external separator. 

90 



IS 141<)8 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



-0.010 



F - 1 + a:+ a:'+ K" 




Pl% ' pAm 

/?2 - saturation pressure at ^ (bar) 

* - reheat temperature (X:) * 

Pa ^ main steam pressure (bar) 

•p ^ generator output as guaranteed 

max. generator output 

W^axg -= last stage axial outlet velocity as guaranteed (m/s) 

Valid for: Condensing turbine uj, ^generative feedwater heating, wet or slightly superheated main steam, final reheat by 
main steam, output >0.2 maximum output. 

Uncertainty of computation: AF- ±0.7 ^JWTW^~VY^. 



Fig. E8. — Correction curve for reheater terminal difference. 

Main steam/steam reheater stage only, pressure losses on the main steam side are included in this correction 
see definition of /?. 



91 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

If the condenser is included in the guarantee, p will not be computed on the basis of the measured exhaust pressure, but by 
means of the expected exhaust pressure for measured cooling Water flow and cooling water temperatures (see ElO). 



f = 



rfi-m* f 



1 - K 



m(0.185 + sini3) 



s\n p 



niA 



\mv + rihU 1^000 

exhaust flow of main turbine 

(kg/s) 

exhaust flow of BFP-auxiliary 
turbine (kg/s) 

peripheral speed of last stage 
wheel (pitch diameter) (m/s) 

last stage bucket throat area 
last stage bucket annulus area 

main steam flow as measured 
main steam flow as guaranteed 




exhaust pressure as guaranteed 
W^axj; = last stage axial outlet velocity output as guaranteed (m/s) 



Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, with or without reheat, superheated or wet main steam, 
exhaust pressure 0.3 bar, u = 200 m/s to 450 m/s, output ^0.2 maximum output. 

Uncenainty of computation: AF= ±(0.15 | F-1 | + 0.002 | ^ - I | )• 



Fig. E9. — Correction c^rve for exhaust pressure. 

92 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

If the condenser is included in the guarantee, p (see E9) will not be computed on the basis of the measured exhaust 
pressure, but by means of the following equation. 

P% 



1.4- 
1.4- 



1 

17 



\rhml _ 17 \^g-^j / 



i9ig + 20 ■ 

S ~ expected exhaust temperature (*C) 
p = expected exhaust pressure (saturation pressure at S) (bar) 
S2 = cooling water exit temperature (XI) 
S] = cooling water inlet temperature (X) 
e ^ natural number (=" 2.718) 
In= napierian logarithm 
rh = cooling water flow (kg/s) 

Valid for: Surface condenser of conventional design, cooling water velocity in tubes > 0.8 m/s. 
Uncertainty of computation: Ap = ±0.1 (p - 1). 



Fig. ElO. — Correction for condenser cooling water flow and inlet temperature. 



93 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 






0.0004 



0.0003 - 



0.0002 



0.0001 - 



-0.0001 




"9 



p^ = exhaust pressure (bar) 

S^ - saturation temperature at exhaust pressure C'C) 

X = condensate temperature before lowest heater (°C) 

p\ = pressure of lowest bleeding (bar) 

V^axg = last stage annulus velocity as guaranteed (m/s) 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative heating system, wet or superheated main steam, with or without reheat, 

exhaust pressure < 0.3 bar, output > 0.2 maximum output. 
Uncertainty of computation: Af = ± 0,00004 • | (^ - ^)m " (^ " ^)g I- 



Fig. Ell. — Correction curve for main condensate subcooling. 



94 



IS 14198 a*art 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



F - 1 " KAS 



AS 



5'Ag - i9wg 



0.10 



0:05 




5e = Tmal feedwater temperature (°C) 

^'a = saturation temperature for main steam pressure C'C), for Pi >22.1 b^r\istS\ ^ 374 "C 

Sw " condenser discharge temperature (°C) 

Z = number offeed water heaters (^) ^ 

Remarks: Deviating terminal difference and extraction line pressure loss are to be corrected in addition, also for the highest 
heater. 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heatingj% > I70°C, Z >2), wet or superheated main steam, 

with or without reheat, output >0.2 maximum output, | AS\ <0.Q5, 
Uncertainty of computation: Af- ± 0.1 (/C + 0.1) AS, 



Fig. EI 2. — Correction curv^ for final feedwater temperature. 



95 



IS 14198 (rart2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



0.30- 



K 



0.25- 



^t • c == r?t • m • ^ 

F « 1 +(K + AK) (mm-'^g) 



0.20- 



0.15- 



0.10- 




p = p for sliding main steam pressure 

p = p [1 "(P- 1)^ + 0.12(P- 1)] for constant main steam pressure, nozzle control 
p *« p • P for constant main steam pressure throttle control 
main steam pressure 



p 



P « 



HP exhaust pressure 
generator output as guaranteed 



max. generator output 

AK == for water extraction at feedpump 

AK = 0.02 for water extraction behind highest heater 

— desuperheating water flow 

m « 

main steam flow 

W^axg = last stage axial outlet velocity as guaranteed (m/s) 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating and single reheat, main steam and reheat temperatures 

> 470 "C, output > 0.2 maximum output reheat pressure sliding or constant. 

Uncertainty of computation: AF= ± 0.15 | P- 1 | . 



Fig. El 3. — Correction curve for reheater desuperheating water. 



96 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 




\Ahh 

T\r = absolute saturation temperature of exhaust 
pressure (K) 

A/is- isentropic enthalpy drop main steam/ 
exhaust pressure (kJ/kg) 

- ^ Pig ' Plm 

P2g • P\m 

p\ = pressure, high pressure side (bar) 
P2 - pressure, low pressure side (bar) 

— steam flow concerned 
m = — — ■- — — ~- — — 

main steam flow 

V^lid for; Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated mainsteam, with or without reheat, 
output > 0.2 maximum output 

Uncertainty of computation: AF= ± 0.15 | F-- 1 ] , 



Fig. El 4. — Correction curve for pressure losses. 

Steam in piping, moisture separators, reheaters, bleedings, etc. For main steam side of main steam / steam 
reheaters, see E8. 



97 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



^.c - T/t-m • F 



F - 1 
TV - 



-(^.■^ 



Pi 




absolute saturation temperature of ex 
haust pressure (K) 

isentropic enthalpy drop main steam/ex 
haust pressure (kJ/kg) 

Pig ' P2m 
P2g • Pim 

heating steam pressure (bar) 
saturation pressure at ^2 (bar) 
heated flow, outlet temperature (*C) 
heating steam flow 
main steam flow 



Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, with or without reheat, 
output >0.2 maximum output. 

Uncertainty of computation: AF« ± 0.2 | F- 1 | . 



Fig. El 5. — Correction curve for terminal differences. 
Heaters and bled steam / steam reheater stages. 



98 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 




t. 



0.5 



The " 

F - 1 

Qa - 

niA - 

hA - 

P - 

A^ - 

m - 

h - 



P 
sa 



mA.AA(kW) 

main steam flow exciuding main 
steam flow to steam/steam re- 
heaters if necessary (kg/s) 

main steam enthalpy (kJ/kg) 

generator output (kW) 



XWA/m XmA/g 



steam subflow (kg/s) 

/ (p> *A)g locus of subflow/main 
flow linkage, expressed as main 
flow isentropic enthalpy (kJ/kg) 

local pressure (bar) 

main steam entropy (kJ/kg K) 



\ 






\ 
















Pv 

K 



W^ax 



/(pv,:sA)(kJ/kg) 

exhaust pressure (bar) 

1.15 K' for reheat turbines in the 
expansion region behind reheat 
only 

K' all others 

last stage axial outlet velocity as 
guaranteed (m/s) 



1.0 



0.5 



Definition: Subflows are mass flows, which are passing the shaded control area (see figure), but are not directly supplied to 
or from a primary energy source (boiler, reactor). Therefore mA, me, mc, mo, rrtE are not subflows. These 
subflows are particularly leakage flows, extraction flows for non-cycle supply or pump drive, as long as its 
output is not included in R 

Remarks: Mass flows are inserted in equation (>0) when entering the shaded control area and <0 when leaving it. In case 
of reheat by main steam, the heat flow to the hp turbine is Qa, the main steam heat flow to the reheater is 
(Gb+Sc). 

Valid for Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating system, main steam wet or superheated, with or without 
reheat, output >0.2 maximum output, me + mc + mo - 0. 

Uncertainty of computation: AF- ± 0,2 | F- 1 | . 



Fig. E16. — Correction curve for steam subflows. 
99 



IS 14198 (rart 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



5. 



I. 



'// /U/z/r^ /. 



*B ^^ 




97777/7777;^ /777777777-77777A 



The = Th 

F - 1 + 



{^■t 



I (K . Am) 



Qe = mE*/»E(kW) 

rfiE = feedwaterflow(<0)(kg/s) 

He ~ final feedwater enthalpy (kJ/kg) 
P = generator output (kW) 



Am 



- (-) -(-) 

\mA/m \mA/g 



1.0- 


V-— ^*^ 










'\0.9 
-^ N ^^ 












^^^N 












0^7„«_-l 


^^^^^zzz. 












"<^ 




^ 






- 








'^^.^ — ~-— c: 






:::=====^S 




O.b- 












0- 


/ / ^x 











m = water subflow (kg/s) 

mA = main steam flow, excluding main 
steam flow to steam/steam re- 
heaters if necessary (kg/s) 

locus of subflow/main flow link- 
age, expressed as main flow tempe- 
rature cx:) 

locus of subflow origin, expressed 
as local main flow temperature CX^) 



^ 



^ 



-9 .(1^) 

\Se - Sw/g 



^ 



^ 



condensate temperature after con- 
denser C^) 

final feedwater temperature i^) 






1.0 



0.5 



Definition: Subflows are defined in figpre El 6. These subflows are particularly leakage flows, flows for non-cycle supply, 
make-up water and changes in water level. 

Remarks: Mass flows are inserted in equations >0 when entering the shaded control ar^a and <0 when leaving it. 
Complete or partial bypassing of heaters will be simulated by two equal subflows of same subflow 
temperature, but different direction and different mainflow temperature. Correction for enthalpy rise in 
feedpump will be simulated by feedflow as subflows leaving the system and entering again with different Sbut 
same B, 

Valid for: Condensing turbines with regenerative feedwater heating, wet or superheated main steam, with or without 
reheat, output >0.2 maximum output. 

Uncertainty of computation: AF- ± 0.2 | F- 1 | . 



Fig. El 7. — Correction curve for water subflows and enthalpy rise in feedpump. 

100 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



£7: K'- 



Table EI 
Mathematical formulations representing curves El to El 7 
-0.455 In f^A 



E2: K - 0.0235 



£3: K 



E4: K - 



_ I Smax / 0.0 

y2 0000oo*\p.i 



0.0186.^ In ^^^ 

COS(Pm 



+ 0.0075 p 



f^\ 0.012 

M + - rr- 

/ P ' intA 



- 0.003 p ' iriiA 



E5: K - 0.3888 



rriA 

\PA 



1 + 



1 



426-444 



WJA 



V 426 - 444 V 



Pa 



K'~ 0.455. In :§^ 



E6: A: K- - 0.348 In; 
B: K'-OAli\nj 
C: K--0A44lnj 

E7: See Figure E7 



E8: K - Omei^j (p-l); . /C' - 0.0035 In p • In 
E9: K ^ |>l]^-|>2]^-0.031np 



W, 



axg , 



150 



^"-0.0061nplnP 



y\' -In 



380 Y 

/«A Waxg/ 
XrilA W'axg/ 



>'i ->'i' for>'i'>0;;vi -Oforyi' <0 
)^ - >^' for ;>^' >0 ; >^ - for >^' < 



£iO; See figure ElO 



E11:K - 0.0001 In fc ^^° 



1:72; K = 0.30 



iPv "ax/g 



Z+ 1 _ 

1 (5 + 0.5 AS + 0.03) 



101 



IS 14198 (Tart 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

W 
E13: K = 0.02 + 0. 1 In p + 0.067 In —^ 

150 

E14: K 0.455 Inp 

El 5: K = -0.455 Inp 



E16: K'= -0.16+ 1.16/1 + 0.32 (^-1)2 -1 0.058 In -^1(1.5 -0.5 ft) 

E17: K = (1 - (1 - ^0-95) (1 _ 0.38 (1 - S)^-^) + (1 - ^O-^s [(1 - S)0^5 _ 0.5 (i - ff^i-S] 
0.0001 0.000 



(^-5)2 + 0.01 1.01 



- .(ftO.3 



(1-^' 



102 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



APPENDIX F 



SHORT-STATISTICAL DEFINITION OF MEASURING UNCERTAINTY 

AND ERROR PROPAGATION IN ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

(see 7. land 7.5.1) 

The measurement of a physical quantity can be carried out with limited accuracy only, because of 
the inevitable measuring error 

error « measured value — true value 

In practice, the relative error is used very often, where 



, . error error 

relative error ^ 



true value measured value 

If the errors are randomly distributed, the accuracy of the determination of a constant quantity 
(length, weight) can be increased by repeating the measurement and calculating the arithmetic 
mean value. The deviations of the individual measured values from the mean will follow the 
Gaussian Law (no systematic error present). From the standard deviation of the resulting Gauss 
curve, the confidence limits Fx, of the error of an individual measurement xi can be calculated. 

The statement 

Kx.= ±25for P-95% 

means that the measured yalue xi is situated with a statistical probability of 95% in the range 

x±2d 

where x is the true value, 

Kx, are the confidence limits of the error for the value Xi. 

The error of the measured value Xi with respect to the unknown true value x is not greater than 
± Fx, with a probability of 95%, 

The confidence limits V^ for a statistical probability of 95% are called measuring uncertainty in 
the following. The relative measuring uncertainty is defined by 

tx = 

X Xi 

For a direct application of the statistical theory of uncertainty of measurements, a great number 
of measurements of a constant physical quantity with randomly distributed statistically inde- 
pendent errors is necessary, as indicated above. This condition is not fulfilled for a thermal 
acceptance test. 

In order to allow statements of the probable uncertainty of values measured during thermal 
acceptance tests and to permit the application of the laws of error propagation for the determination 
of the uncertainty of the results calculated from these values, the following generalizations of the 
definitions are introduced. 

In thermal acceptance tests the quantities to be measured are not constant in time. A series of 
readings is taken at regular intervals during the test period and the arithmetic mean value is formed. 
This mean value contains three different types of independent errors: 



103 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 

a) Random reading error with confidence limit V\^\ 

b) Integration error with confidence limit Vi. 

c) Non-detectable systematic error^) of the measuring equipment with confidence limit ¥$ or 
accuracy class G^\ 

The confidence limit (measuring uncertainty) of the averaged reading value x is: 



In normal acceptance test practice, the number of readings is sufficiently large to render Ka and 
V\ negligible, so that Vs or G is significant for the measuring uncertainty. 

The average value x with its confidence limits of the error Vx can be interpreted as an individual 
measurement according to statistical theory. 

The confidence limits Fs cannot be established from a series of measurements of a time- 
fluctuating variable with one and the same instrumentation by statistical methods and have to be 
determined by different means for the different kinds of measured values. They shall always be 
referred to a statistical probability P^95%. 

The results (e.g. mass flow, thermal efficiency, etc.) are calculated from measured variables as 
well as from physical properties and coefficients. Generally the result y is derived from: 

rix measured variables Xj and from 
/lb physical properties b\ and 
«c coefficients Cm: 

y= F(xj, bx. Cm) 

Kb and Vc are the confidence limits of the errors of the physical properties and coefficients due to 
non-detectable systematic errors for P«*95%. 

If all measured values, physical property values and coefficients and their confidence limits of 
the error (measuring uncertainty) are independent of each other and determined for the same 
probability P (e.g., 95%), they can be added according to the law of error propagation (square root 
rule) and the measuring uncertainty Vy of the result determined in this manner will have the same 
probability. It is: 



Sv V "' Idy V t h 



Vy-±\1{^VJ^ iRKbJ -f I P^Kc 



^=l\8xj / /-l\c)bl / m-l\3 



^Cn 



where V^ is the measuring uncertainty of an individual variable x\. 

The calculation methods applied in this appendix, derived from the probability theory, are based 
on the assumption that all the values used in the calculation are statistically absolutely independent 
of each other. 



' * A systematic reading error is equivalent to a non-detectable or non-detected systematic error of the measuring equipment 
and is to be treated accordingly under^l 

2* The non-detectable systematic error is largely constant in one and the same acceptance test measurement, but are assumed 
to be randomly distributed in several tests using the same measuring equipment. As a result, the equations of probability 
theory may be used. 

^^ For several types of instruments, the manufacturer indicates the accuracy class G, which is a confidence limit of the error 
with a probability P = 100%. For application, the reference value of G, mostly the scale end value, and limitations of 
operating conditions ha>e to be closely observed. 

^* Confidence limits (measuring uncertainty) which are independent gf each other and are defined for the same probability 
P can be added according to the law of error propagation (square root rule). 



104 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

In most cases, however, physical properties and coefficients depend on the measured variables. 
In such cases the natural relationship between measured variables and physical properties and 
coefficients: 

^ - Fb (Xj) 

shall be introduced into the equation for y prior to application of the error propagation law. 

In many cases, the measuring uncertainties of measured values are not independent of these 
values themselves, or the uncertainties of values measured in parallel or with the same instru- 
mentation are mutually interdependent. The error propagation law as shown above is then not 
applicable or has to be applied differently. 

Indications for the treatment of the more common cases of interdependence are given in the 
following. 

In view of the many influencing factors involved, the measuring uncertainty of all pressure 
difference devices for mass flows, as well as all thermometers or thermocouples, shall be considered 
to be independent. Measurements with instruments which have been calibrated on the same test bed 
(e.g., orifices and nozzles calibrated together with the test section as well as thermometers and 
thermocouples) shall be considered to be dependent on each other in view of the calibration error. 



Pressure difference devices of the same dimensions working under practically the same con- 
ditions (e.g. measurement of initial steam flow in several parallel flows) shall all be considered to be 
entirely dependent on each other. 

For the dependence of the measuring uncertainty of instrument transformers, see 7.3.1. For the 
evaluation of the test, it is recommended that deviations from the assumption of independence of 
the variables should not be considered if a considerable simplification of the evaluation can be 
achieved without any appreciable effect on the results, particularly on the measuring uncertainty. 

The interdependence due to instruments being calibrated on common test beds is generally 
negligible if the error limits of calibration are small compared with the other measuring uncertainty 
of the measurement. This also applies to the use of one precision potentiometer for all temperature 
measurements. 

To allow correctly for all the interdependences in calculating the measuring uncertainty of the 
results generally involves a highly sophisticated calculation process and is im.practicable in most 
cases. It is recommended to accept deviations from the principle of independence of measured 
values and their uncertainties, if a considerable simplification of the computation can thus be 
achieved without appreciable modification of the results and their uncertainties. 



105 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Tub 953-2 : 1990 



APPENDIX G 



CALCULATION OF MEASURING UNCERTAINTY OF OUTPUT - 
ELECTRICAL MEASUREMENT (see 7.3.1) 

GL Introduction 

In general the law of error propagation with geometrical summation of the individual 
measurement uncertainties is also applied for polyphase measurements (two-wattmeter or 
three-wattmeter method). Practical experiments have shown that the transforming ratio 
errors, as well as the phase-angle errors of the transformers in the various phases, are not fully 
independent. This also applies to the calibration of transformers. 

Therefore, the summation of errors has to be separated into a geometrical part and an 
arithmetical part. 

In the calculation of the measurement uncertainty of the total power as the sum of the 
power in the individual phases, the following measurement uncertainties have to be taken into 
account. 

a) Wattmeter and watthour meter 

The summation of the measurement uncertainty due to the wattmeters or watthour meters 
in the various phases is geometrical. 

b) Transforming errors of voltage transformers 

The summation of the measurement uncertainties due to the transforming errors of voltage 
transformers between the various phases is arithmetical. 

c) Phase-angle errors of voltage transformers 

The summation of the measurenient uncertainties due to the phase-angle errors of voltage 
transformers is arithmetical. 

d) Transforming errors of current transformers 

The summation of the measurement uncertainty due to the transforming errors of current 
transformers in the various phases is arithmetical. 

e) Phase-angle errors of current transformers 

The summation of the measurement uncertainty due to the phase-angle errors of current 
transformers is arithmetical. 

f) Total error 

The uncertainty in total power is calculated by geometrical summation of the uncertainties 
mentioned under a), b), c), d) and ej. 

f^otes L - The summation mentioned under c) or e) is sometimes made geometrically. This is not correct in the 
philosophy of this appendix, as the statement in the first paragraph applies to the phase angle errors as 
well. 
2. — In the formulae an uncertainty for the temperature influence on wattmeters or watthour meters is 
introduced. The temperature factor should be indicated by the manufacturer of the wattmeters/watthour 
meters. 

If the influence of the temperature on the wattmeter reading is exactly known as a function of the 
temperature and this has been applied as a correction in the evaluation of the measured power, this 
influence on the measurement uncertainty can be eliminated in the formula for measurement uncertainty. 

G2. Formulae 

Formulae are presented for the application of wattmeters, single-phase watthour meters 
and three-phase watthour meters for the following cases, both for three-phase four wire 
circuits (three-wattmeter method) and for three-phase three-wire circuits (two-wattmeter 
method or Aron arrangement): 



106 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 

a) calibrated transformers and wattmeters/watthour meters; 

b) calibrated transformers and non-calibrated wattmeter/watthour meter(s) with specified 
accuracy class; 

c) non-calibrated transformers with specified accuracy class and calibrated wattmeters/ 
watthour meter(s); 

d) non-calibrated transformers and wattmeters/watthour meter(s) each with specified 
accuracy class. 

In the formulae below the terms with r^ and rwh can be ignored, and the following symbols 

are used: 

Cu = calibration inaccuracy in the ratio error of the voltage transformers (%) 

q =- calibration inaccuracy in the ratio error of the current transformers (%) 

5(pu * calibration inaccuracy in the phase angle of the voltage transformers in mrad 

S^\ - calibration inaccuracy in the phase angle of the current transformers in mrad 

Cw = calibration inaccuracy of the wattmeters in scale divisions 

Cwh ^ calibration inaccuracy of the watthour meters (%) 

Tw ~ reading inaccuracy of the wattmeters in scale divisions 

Twh * readinginaccuracy of the watthour meters (%) 

Gu *- accuracy class ofthe voltage transformers (%) 

G, = accuracy class ofthe current transformers (%) 

(jw =«= accuracy class ofthe wattmeters in % of full scale 

Gwh * accuracy class of the watthour meters (%) 

Dfpa « class accuracy for phase angle ofthe voltage transformers in mrad 

D(f,i « class accuracy for phase angle ofthe current transformers in mrad 

oe *" fullscaleof the wattmeters 

ai , ^2 " actual wattmeter/watthour meter reading (two-wattmeter/ watthourmeter method) 

a « mean value of the wattmeter readings (three-wattmeter method) 

t *= temperature in degrees Celsius 

A * temperature coefficient of wattmeter /watthourmeter in % accuracy//C 

Kp - confidence limit ofthe measuring uncertainty 

ai + 02 

I — Three-phase four-wire circuit 

Case a: 

a,\ Single-phase wattmeters 

|.iooJ' + i 
VI = (c,)2 + (cu)2 + — 1::: '- + 1/3 . {Xit - 23)y 



|.,oof 



+ {(5<pi)2 + (5,pu)2> . 10-2tan2<p 
a. 2 Single-phase walthourmeters 

K - (C.)2 + (c„)2 + ('^'-h)^ + (rwh)^ + 1/3 ^2 (, _ 23)2 + ^(5^.)2 + (5^^)2). . 10-2 ^^^1 ^ 

a3 Three*phase watthourmeters 

KJ - (ci)2 + {Cu)2 + (Cwh)2 + (rwh)2 + A2 (r - 23)2 + <(5<pi)2 + (6^^)'} • lO'^ tan^ <p 



107 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



b. I Single-phase wattmeters 



n - (Cl)2 + (Cu)2 + — ~ — 

6.2 Single-phase watthour meters 

b3 Three-phase watthour meters 

VI = (c^r + (cu)2 + (GwhP + A2 (f ~ 23)2 + (rwh)2 + {{5^0' + (^cpu)^} • 10'^ tan^ <p 

In general, the calibration uncertainty figure^x and 5* of the transformers and the 
uncertainties in reading rw and rwh of the wattmeters/watthour meters can be 
ignored as compared with the accuracy class of the wattmeters/watthour meters. 
The formulae may then be simplified to: 

— for single-phase wattmeters: Vl^-^ 0^1-^] +?i^{t-23y> 



— for single-phase watthour meters: V^ - - ^ 



for three-phase watthour meters: V\ - G^n + A^ (f - 23)^ 



Casec: 

c. 1 Single-phase wattmeters 

\a 






lOOl +(^- 100 



3 

+ 1/3 A2 (t - 23) + <(D,pi)2 + (Dpu)2> • 10-2 tan2 (p 

C.2 Single-phase watthour metres 

K^p-(Gi)2 + (Gu)2 + ^'"''^'''^''"''^' 

+ 1 /3 A2 ( f - 23)2 + <( £,^i)2 + ( D^^)2y . 1 0-2 tan^ (p 

C.3 Three-phase watthour metres 

VI - (C?i)2 + (Gu)2 + (cwh)2 + (rwh)2 + A2 (f - 23)2 + <(D^i)2 + (D,pu)2> • IO-2 tan^ (p 



For usual power factors. 



108 



TS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
iEC Pub 953-2: 1990 

The use of the value of the class accuracy of the transformers per phase in the accuracy 
formulas for total power is in fact based upon the arithmetical addition of absolute 
uncertainties. 

(Gi - Gil - G,2 "■ Gi3; the same applies to Gu, A and /)«) 

Ignoring the calibration and reading inaccuracies c and r of the wattmeter leads to the 
simplified formulae valid for cases c 1, c.2 and c.3, respectively: 

— for single-phase wattmeters: 

I^p « (^ + G2 + <(D^i)^ + (i><pu)^> • 10-2 tan2 (p + yXHt- 23)2 

— for single-phase watthour wattmeters: 

^^ =» G? -^ G5 + i{D^i)^ + (^(pu)2> • 10-2 tan2 (p^L }} (t - 23)2 

— for three-phase wattnour wattmeters: 

'^1 - Gf + C^ + <(D^>i)2 + (Dcpu)2> * iO-2 tan2 ip + av - 23)2 

Cased: 

dA Single-phase wattm.eters 

n - («= . (c.)' + —^ — ^— ^ 

+ {(Di)2 + (Du)2>. 10-2tan2<p 

d.2 Single-phase watthour meters (one phase) 

V^p - {G.)2 + (Gu)2 + (Gwh)^ + A^(r-23)^ + (rwhP ^ ^^^^,^ ^ ^^^^^, _ ^q.,^^^, ^^ 

d,3 Three-phase watthour meters (three phase) 

K2 - (G.)2 + (Gu)2 + (Gwh)^ + A2(r - 23)2 + (;.^^)2 + ^(£)^.)2 + (^^j2 . 10^2 tan2 (p> 

In the formulae, the reading uncertainties rw and Twh may be ignored as compared with 
the class accuracies. 



1 1 — Three-phase three-wire circuit 

It is assumed that the voltage transformers are connected in open-V. 

The formulae valid for the cases dA, d2 and d.3, respectively, are also available in the 
case of a Y connection, a DZo connection or a Dyll connection of the voltage 
transformers if they have the same accuracy class, when they are not calibrated or when 
the voltage transformers are calibrated by means of the same standard voltage 
transformer and calibration bridge; in the opposite case the errors to be applied in the 
formulae for a three-phase three-wire circuit should be calculated by means of the 
following formulae in the case of a Y conneqtion. 



lOS) 



IS 14198 (Part 2) : 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2 : 1990 



1) In the case of calibrated voltage transformers 

. (cu)rs-^{(cu)r + (cu)s> + 2.9 . 10-2{(Mr - (^u)s> 

{5(pu)rs^-{(5^u)r + (5(pu)s> - 2.9{(cu)r - (cu)s> 
and 

(eu)TS-^{(Cu)T + (Cu)s> ~ 2.9 < iO-H(5^u)T - (MS> 

{5.pu)ts - ^ {(5cpu)t + (5^u)s> + 2.9 {(c,)t - (cu)s> 

2) In the case of non-calibrated voltage transformers 
(Gu)rs-^{(Gu)r + (Gu)s> + 2.9 . 10-2{(D,pu)R - (D^u)s> 

(D^u)rs-^{(Apu)r + (Dcpu)s> - 2.9{(Gu)r - (Gu)s> 

and 

(Gu)ts-^{(Gu)t + (Gu)s> - 2.9 . 10-2{(^<pu)t - (Apu)s> 

(/><pu)ts-^{(/)<,u)t + (Dcpu)s> + 2.9{(Gu)t - (Gu)s> 

Attention has to be paid to the symmetry of the voltages over the transformers 

Case a : 

aA Single-phase wattmeters 

VI = (c,)2 + (cu)2 + 11 1 . lOoj' + ll . 10oJ'|(l - K)2 

+ |(~. 10oj%(-- 10ortr- + A2(f-23)2{(l-/^)'+'K2> 

+ 3 . 10-2(1 - 2 Kfi(5^;y + (5<pu)2> with/C = —^^^ 

Gi + a2 

a.2 Single-phase watthour meters 

VI = (af + (cu)2 + {(cwh)2 + (/■wh)2 + A2 (t - 23)2} 

X{(1 - K)2 + X2> + 3 . 10-2(1-2 K)2<(5^i)2 + {5.pu)'> 

a.3 Three-phase watthour meters 

VI = (c,)2 + (Cu)2 + (cwh)2 + {rwh)2 + A2 (f - 23)2 + 3 • 10-2 ( 1 - 2 K)2 ^(^,^.)2 + ^^;^^,2^ 



110 



IS 14198 (Tart 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



Caseb: 
bA Single-phase wattmeters 



ai^j +kHt-23)y 



+ K'liG^f + (— f + A2(r- 23)4 + 1^ . 100? (1 - K)^ 
+ (- . lOoj /C^ + 3 • 10-2 (1 - 2 /C)2 ^(5^.)2 + (5^j2-^ 

b.2 Single-phase watthour meters 

VI = {q)2 + (cuf + {(GwhP + X^t - 23)2} .{{\-KY+ K2> 

+ (rwh)2 <( 1 - K)2 + A:2> + 3 • 1 0-2 ( 1 - 2 K)2 <(5^i)2 + (5^uF> 

b.3 Three-phase watthour meters 

VI = (a)2 + (c.)2 + (Gwh)^ + A2 (r - 23)2 + (rwh)^ 
+ 3. 10-2(1 -2A:)2<(5<pi)' + (M'> 

In general, the calibration uncertainty figures c and 6* of the transformers and the 
uncertainties in reading r^ and r^h of the wattmeters/watthour meters can be ignored as 
compared with the accuracy class of the wattmeters/watthour meters. 

The formulae valid for cases b. 1 , b,2 and fc.3, respectively, may then be simplified to: 



— for single-phase wattmeters: 

VI - G-:|(l - K)4^J + f^'[~J\ + {(\-Ky-+ K2>A2(/- 23)2 

— for single-phase watthour meters : 

VI - |( Gwh)2 + A2 (f - 23)2| . <( 1 - Kf + K2> 

— for three-phase watthour meters : 

K2-(GwhP + A2(/-23)2 
Casec: 
c. 1 Single-phase wattmeters 



n - G? + G^u + |(^ • 100)'.+ (^ . lOoft . (1 - X)2 



''* lOof I + (— • lOO) r- + A2{f- 23)2 . ^(1 _ 1^)2 + iciy 



\«2 / J \a2 / 
.+ 3 . 10-2(1 -2 K)2<(D^i)2 + (D^u)2> 



* For usual power factors. 



Ill 



IS 14198 (Part 2): 1994 
lEC Pub 953-2: 1990 



c2 Single-phase watthour meters 

K^ - (? •+ GS + (cwh)2 + (rwh)2 + A2 {t -23)2 . {(i - 1^)2 + f^iy 
+ 3 . 10-2 (^.- 2Kf <(D<pi)2 + {D^ufy . 10-2 tan2 <p 

C.3 Three-phase watthour meters 

VI » (Gi)' + (Gu)2 + (cwh)2 + (rwh)2 + A2 (r - 23)2 

+ 3 . 10-2(1 - 2 X)2{(D^i)' + (^cpu)^} 

Ignoring the calibration and reading inaccuracies of the wattmeters/watthour meters, 
the apropriate formulae for cases c.l, c2 and c.3 can simplified to: 

— for wattmeters: 

l^= G?+ (?2 + A2(f-23)2.<(l- A:)2+iC2). 

+ 3. 10-2(1- 2^)2 {(Z)<pi)2 + (D<pu)2> 

— for single-phase watthour meters: 

F2 = G? + (^ + <A2(f - 23)>2<(1 - Kf + iGy 

+ 3. 10-2(1 -2/C)2{(^.piP + (£><pu)^> 

— for three-phase watthour meters: 

^p - C^ + C?u + A2(r- 23)2 + 3 . 10-2(1 - 2K)2<(D<pi)2 + (D^,)2> 

Case d: 

d.l Single-phase wattmeters 



2 



!r \2 Ir \2 



+ A2(f- 23)2^ + 1-. 100 (1-/^)2 + 1-. 100) a:2 
+ 3.10-2(l-2/^)2<(D^i)2 + (D,pu)2} 



d.l Single-phase watthour meters 

Vl'(^+Gi + <(Gwh)2 + A2 (r - 23)2> - <(1 - A:)^ + K^} + (rwhP <(1 - ^)2 + K^} 
+ 3 • 10-2(1 - 2 /i:)2 <(D<,i)2 + (D,pu)'> 

cf.3 Three-phase watthour meters 

F^ = (^ + C^ + (Gwh)^ + A2(f -23)2 + (;.^^)2+ 3 . 10-2(1 _ 2K)2{{D^i)^ + (D^u)^} 

In these formulae the terms with r^, and rwh can be ignored. 



112 



