**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11743 (1986) : Guide on Human Safety in Design, 
Manufacture, Use and Maintenance of Electronic Equipment 
[LITD 2: Reliability of Electronic and Electrical 
Components and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISM174^-198C ' 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE ON HUMAN SAFETY IN DESIGN, 

MANUFACTURE, USE AND MAINTENANCE 

OF ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 



UDG 621-33035 : fi58'382'3 : 62L-3-783 (026) 




, C Cspyrighl 1^7 

INDJAIH) STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK UliAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAB.G 

NIW DEUU HQOQj 

Gy 5 FtBma^y 1987 



15:11743.1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE ON HUMAN SAFETY IN DESIGN, 

MANUFACTURE, USE AND MAINTENANCE 

OF ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 

Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment 
Sectional Committee, LTDG 3 

Chairman Representing 

Pbof S. Sampatii Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 

Members 

AdditionatjDikkotor, Standards Railway Board (Department of Railways), 
( S «& T ), RDSO Ministry of Transport 

Joint Dihectoi:, Standards 
( S & T )-III, RDSO {Alternate ) 
ShrI V, G. Bhandaki Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

Shri I. S. SuLAKU ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. p. Bhatikar All India Radio, New Delhi 

SliRi J. S. SooD ( Alternate ) 
Dr P, K. D|[TTA Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shiu S. p. CnoicKALiKGAM ( Alternate) 
Siiui P. K.Jain Electronics Components Standardization Organi- 

zation. Ministry of Defence 
Shkt G. S. Pax ( Alternate ) 
Shiu R. K. Jayadev Overseas Communication Services, Bombay 

Shui Daljit SiNQiL ( Alternate ) 
Skri M. S. K.AMATH Indian Electricals Manufacturers' Associatiun, 

Bombay 
Shri T. C. Gosai^ia ( Alternate ) 
Shki C. KuiBHNA MuK'L^HY Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. Dhansekhakan ( Alternate ) 
Shui S. P. Kulkahni Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' 

Association, Bombay 
Shri S. M. KituitsALK ( Alternate ) 
Shri Lakshminarayana Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. Muthaiah ( Alternate ) 
Shki K. M. Mankad Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
SiiRi B» Bhaskak Rao ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 11743 - 1986 

( Coniihiied from page 1 ) 

Mem bers Represen t ing 

Brig R. K. Mehra Ministry of Defnece ( DGI ) 

LT"Col S. p. MuRGAi ( Alternate ) 
SiiRi D. G. Mehta Directorate General of Civil Aviation^ 

New Delhi 
Shri R. V. IsRANi ( Alternate ) 
Dli K. B. Misha In Personal Capacity ( Department of Electrical 

Engineerings Indian Institute of Technology^ 
KharagpUT ) 
Sdri B» C, Mukherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Mukhbrjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Anandakumaran Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras 
Nair 

Shri G. RanGanathan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. V. Petkab Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay 

Shri A. K, Babar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Ramoopat. ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAG ), Bangalore 

Shki Siharan Dk ( Alternate ) 
SsRi P. K. Shukla Centre for Aeronautical Systems Studies and 

Analysis ( GASSA ), Ministry of Defence 
Shri Gh Aran jit Singh Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Madras 

Shri H. ParthasarATHY ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. Somasundaram Directorate of Technical Development and Pro- 

duction ( Air ), Ministry of Defence 
Shri R. S, Yadav ( Alternate) 

Shri H. G. Tewari Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Shri D. P. Sikha ( Alternate) 
Sjiri T. S. Vasitdevan Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi 

Shri A. V. Koundinya ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. p. Wadhwa Department of Eledtronics, New Delhi 

Saul K. G, Naoabajan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) ( Secretary ) 



Panel for Safety of Electronic Equipment Subcommittee) LTDG 3/P2 

Convener Representing 

Shri R. Somasundakam Directorate of Technical Development and 

Production ( Air), Ministry of Defence 

Members 
Lt-Col S. S. Ahlxjwalia Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Bangalore 

Ma J J. K. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. K, Dutta Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. K.Jain Ministry of Defence (R&D), Bangalore 

Shbi G. S. Pai ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. B. Pradhan All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri P. S. K. Prasad Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 



IS : 11743 . 1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE ON HUMAN SAFETY IN DESIGN, 

MANUFACTURE, USE AND MAINTENANCE 

OF ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 

0. FOREWORD 

O.l This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 10 July 1986, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Elec- 
tronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Electronic and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0»2 This standard has been prepared with a view to highlighting essential 
areas of hazards to human safety requirements for consideration by the 
designers, manufacturers;, users and maintenance authorities. Some ot these 
safety measures may be incorporated in detail in the relevant product 
specifications. In such cases, the provisions of this standard may be taken 
as additional guidance related to use and maintenance. Elementary 
guidelines to aviod mishaps and for first-aid are given in Appendix A. 



1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard identifies essential areas of hazards to human safety in 
design, manufacture, use and maintenance of electronic items. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions 
shall apply. 

2.1.1 Safety — Safety means freedom from those conditions that may 
cause death, injury or occupational illness to human beings. 

2.1.2 Hazard — An existing potential condition that may result in a 
misharp. 

2.1.3 Mishap — An unplanned event or series of events that may 
endanger human safety. 

2.1.4 Fail-Safe — The design feature of a part^ unit or equipment 
which causes the itcta to fail in a non-hazardous mode. 



IS : 11743 - 1986 



3. GENERAL 



3.1 The design and development of all electronic equipment shall provide 
fail-safe features for safety of personnel during installation, operation, 
maintenance and repair or replacement of a complete equipment, assembly 
or component parts thereof. The equipment design for personnel safety 
shall meet the requirements as specified in the relevant Indian Standards. 

3.2 Human engineering factors affecting safety should also be considered 
when establishing general or detailed design criteria. Rigorous detailed 
operational or maintenance procedures are not acceptable substitutes for 
an inherently safe design. Specific human safety requirements which are to 
be observed during the manufacturing and operational phases of an equip- 
ment shall also be considered at the design stage. 

3.3 The quantitative values indicated for voltages, currents, noise level, 
etc, are only recommended features. In practice, they have to be tailored 
for an equipment, based on technology and other factors applicable to the 
equipment. 

4. SAFETY FROM ELECTRICAL HAZARDS 

4.1 Safety Through Design — The design shall incorporate methods to 
protect personnel from accidental contact with voltage in excess of 30 volts 
rms or dc during normal operation of an equipment. Means shall be pro- 
vided so that povvt^r may be cut-off while installing or repairing the equip- 
ment. Personnel shall be protected from capacitor discharges while replac- 
ing fuses or any other component. The main power switch on the equip- 
ment should be clearly marked with ON-OFF position and should be 
capable of disconnecting power to all parts of the equipment. 

4.2 Hazardous Factors — Current rather than voltage is the most im- 
portant variable in establishing safety of the personnel. The following 
factors cause severity of an electric shock and, therefore, should be 
controlled: 

a) Qiiantity of current flowing through the body; 

b) Path of current through the body; 

c) Duration of current flowing through the body; 

d) Nature of current, ac or dc; and 

e) Area of contact. 

The voltage necessary to produce the fatal current is dependent 
upon the resistance of the body, contact conditions and the path through 
the body. Table 1 enlists probable affects of shock. 



IS : 11743 . 1986 



TABLE 1 PROBABLE EFFECTS OF SHOCK 

( Clauses 4.2 and 4.5 ) 



GaRUENT Values, 


mA 




Effects 


flc(50Hz-l kHz) 




dc 






(i) 




(2) 




(3) 


0-1 




0-4 




Perception 


1-4 




4-15 




Surprise 


4-21 




15-80 




Reflexe action 


21-40 




80-160 




Muscular inhibition 


40-10,-) 




160-300 




Respiratory 


Over 100 




Over 300 




Usually fatal 


Note — For tropical 


environment, like in 


India, 


the safe current limit is 


300 jxA. 











4,2.1 Suflicient current passing through any part of the body will cause 
severe burns and haemorrhages. However, relatively small currents can be 
lethal if the path includes a vital part of the body, such as heart or lungs. 
Electrical burns arc usually of two types, those produced by heat of the 
arc which occur when the body touches a high voltage circuit, and those 
caused by passage of electrical current through the skin and tissue. There 
arc various methods of incorporating adequate safeguards for personnel, 
many of these methods being imphcit in routine design procedures. While 
current is the primary factor which determines shock severity, protection 
requirements of this standard are based upon the voltage involved to 
simplify their application. All voltages expressed in this standard apply to 
dc value or the rms value for ac. 

4.3 Protective Measures — Most of the electrical hazards can be avio- 
ded by proper design and fabrication of the equipment. This includes 
grounding, shielding, terminations, connections, etc, and are discussed 
below. 

4.3.1 Ground Potential — The design and construction of the equipment 
shall ensure that all external parts, surfaces and shields exclusive of ante- 
nna and transmission line terminals remain at ground potential at all times 
during operation. The design shall include consideration of ground faults. 
The voltage limits shall be on the basis of hazardous location. Plugs and 
outlets for use with metal case portable tools and equipment, shall have 
provisions for automatically grounding the metal frame or case of tools and 
equipment when the plug is mated with receptable and the ground pin 
shall make first and break last. 



IS : 11743 - 1986 

4.3.2 Grounding — Ground connection to shields, hinges and other 
mechanical parts shall not be nnade to complete electrical circuits. A point 
on the electrically conductive chassis or equipment frame shall serve as the 
common tie point for the static ground, power ground and when applica- 
ble, return leads in mobile and air-borne systems. All ground points in 
an equipment shall be connected individually to main ground connection 
of chassis. The path from the tie point to ground shall: 

a) be continuous and permanent; 

b) have ample current carrying capacity to conduct safely any fault 
currents that may be imposed upon it; 

c) have impedance sufficiently low to limit the potential above 
ground and to facilitate the operation of over current devices in 
circuits; 

d) have sufficient mechanical strength to minimize the possibility of 
disconnection; and 

e) be protected against corrosion. 

Resistance between ground terminal and exposed metal parts 
should be low. This value should be specified in the equipment 
specification and in any case should not be more than 0*2 ohms 
when measured with a current of 10 amperes. 

4,3.2.1 Unused wires installed in lincj within conduits or cables, 
shall be grounded to allow for stray or static electricity discharge. Panels 
and doors shall be attached or hinged in such a manner that they main- 
tain the same ground potential as the associated equipment in both closed 
and open position. A Hexible ground strap may be used for this purpose. 

4.3.2-2 Ground connection to an electrically conductive chassis or 
frame, shall be mechanically secured by soldering to a welded terminal lug 
or to a portion of chassis or frame that has been formed into a soldering 
lugj or by use of a terminal on the ground wire and then securing the ter- 
minal by a screw, nut and a lock washer/nut. The grounding terminal and 
metal around that should be made corrosion resistant. 

4.3*2.3 Shielding on wires or cables shall be grounded to the chassis 
in above manner. The shielding shall be secured to prevent contact with 
exposed parts and chassis at any point other than the ground termination. 
The shielding shall end at a sufficient distance from exposed conductor to 
prevent shorting or arcing between conductors and shield. 

4.3.3 Guards and Barriers — All contacts, terminals and like devices hav- 
ing voltages between 70 and 500 volts rms or dc with respect to ground 
shall be guarded from accidental contact by personnel, if such points are 



IS: 11743-1986 

exposed during operation or maintenance. Open terminals should be ade- 
quately recessed to prevent accidental contacts. Test probe holes may be 
provided in the barriers or guards where maintenance testing is required. 
The assemblies operating at potential above 500 volts dc or rms shall be 
completely enclosed from rest of the parts and interlocked in accordance 
with 4.3,4. Terminations and connections which are permanent may be 
protected by permanent insulation provided they are not required to be 
exposed during normal maintenance. 

4.3»4 Interlocks — - Equipment sub-assemblies operating in excess of 
500 V shall be considered guarded against accidental contact only if they 
are completely enclosed from remainder of the equipment and are separa- 
tely protected by non-bypassable interlocks. An example of equipment 
where such compartmentalization is desirable is a display unit which utili- 
zes a high voltage power supply for a cathode ray tube. Modularized or 
sealed high voltage assemblies which are not required to be opened during 
use, maintenance or equipment repair, may be exempt from interlocks. 
When a unit is provided with access doors, covers and plates these access 
points shall be interlocked as follows: 

a) No interlocking is required if all the parts operating above 70 V 
are protected by guards and barriers to prevent accidental cont- 
act in all conditions of use and maintenance; 

b) By passable locks are required if parts operating between 70 and 
500 V become exposed when access doors, or covers, or panels 
arc opened. Such internal points are allowed to be unguarded 
when they arc not accessible during operation and routine 
maintenance, 

c) Non-bypassable interlocks are required if parts operating above 
500 V become exposed to accidental contact at any time. 

4*1. 5 Shorting Rods — Shorting rods shall be provided with all transmit- 
ting equipment operating at voltages in excess of 70 V rms or dc. 

Whenever size permits, shorting rods shall be stored within the tran- 
smitting equipment, and be permanently attached and readily accessible 
to maintenance personnel. The permanently attached rod shall be conne- 
cted through a flexible stranded copper wire ( covered with a transparent 
sleeving ) to the stud provided at the transmitter main frame. 

A grounding stud shall be provided in all other transmitting equip- 
ment to permit attachment of a portable shorting rod. The connection to 
the stud shall be such that accidental loosening or high resistance to the 
ground shall be prevented. The location of storing the sliorting rod can 
also be interlocked with the main system as a precautionary measure. 



IS J 11743 - 1986 

4.3.6 Discharging Devices — Discharging devices shall be provided to 
discharge high voltage circuits and capacitors unless they themselves get 
discharged to 30 V or less within 2 seconds. These protective devices shall 
be positive acting, highly reliable, and shall actuate automatically when 
the case or rack is opened. Shorting bars should be actuated either by a 
mechanical release or an electrical solenoid when the door or cover is 
open. When resistive bleeder networks are used to discharge capacitors, 
the bleeder network shall consist of at least two equal valued resistors in 
parallel, each capable of discharging the capacitor to 30 V or less with 
2 records. 

4.3.7 High Voltage Test Point Protection — When the operation or maint- 
enance of equipment employing potentials in excess of 300 volts peak could 
require that these voltages be measured, the equipment shall be provided 
with test points so that these voltages can be measured at relatively low 
potential level, but in no case shall the potf-ntial exceed 300 volts peak rel- 
ative to ground. This may be accomplished through the application of 
voltage dividers or other techniques such as the use of safety-type panel 
meters and multipliers. Test points with voltages above 30 volts shall have 
the conducting material recessed a distance no less than the diameter of 
the probe hole and a minimum of 2'0 mm* If a voltage divider is used, the 
voltage divider resistance between the test point and ground shall consist 
of at least two equal valued resistors in parallel. Full details should be 
given in instruction book or maintenance manual as to the method used in 
the equipment to obtain the voltage at the test points. 

4.3.8 High Current Protection — Power sources capable of supplying high 
current can be hazardous, regardless of the voltage at which they operate 
because of arcing and the heat generated if accidentally short circuited. All 
power buses supplying 25 amperes or over shall be protected against acci- 
dental short circuiting by tools, jewellery or removable conductive assem- 
blies. This may be accomplished by one or more of the following: 

a) Use of guards and barriers, 

b) Sufficient space separation to prevent short circuits, and 

c) Caution warning signs. 

4*3»9 Connections for External Power — • Application of power to externally 
powered test equipment or portable electronic equipment shall meet the 
following requirements: 

a) Power shall be controlled by a power ON«OFF switch located on 
the front pannel. An indicator lamp shall be provided to indicate 
^power on' to the test set, except for low- power battery operated 
equipment. 



IS : 11743 - 1*186 

b) Neither side of the supply voltage shall be directly connected to 
the chassis. 

c) A conductor intended for use as a grounding conductor shall have 
a continuous identifying marker readily distinguishing it from the 
other conductor or conductors. It shall either be green coloured 
or green coloured with one or more yellow stripes. 

4.3.10 Electrical Connectors — Connectors used to provide separation of or 
connection to multiple electric circuits shall be selected so that it will be 
impossible to insert the wrong plug in a receptacle or other mating unit. 
Where design considerations require plug and receptacles of similar confi- 
guration in close proximity, the mating plugs and receptacles shall be suit- 
ably coded or marked to clearly indicate ( polarized ) the mating connec- 
tions. The design of the connector shall be such that the operator is not 
exposed to electrical shock or burns when normal disconnection methods 
are used. Exposed pin contacts shall not be energized ( hot ) after V)eing 
disconnected. In any case, connectors associated with ac/dc power supply 
should not be used for any other purpose. 

4.3,11 Insulation of Controls — All control shaft and bushings thereof 
shall be grounded, whenever practicable. Alternatively, the control knobs 
or levers and all attachment screws that can be contacted during use shall 
be electrically insulated from the shaft. 

4.4 Bonding in Hazardous Areas — Electronic equipment to be instal- 
led in areas where explosive or fire hazards exist, shall be bonded as per 
the requirements indicated by the corresponding agencies. 

4.5 Applicable Protective Measures — The protective measures requi- 
red for different voltage ranges are suggested as follows: 

a) 0-70 V Although no specific requirements exist, the de- 

sign shall be reviewed for possible hazards in 
accordance with Table 1. 

b) 70-500 V i) Guards and barriers 

ii) Caution markings 

iii) Bypassable interlocks 

iv) Automatic discharge devices 

v) Shorting rods 

c) 500 and above i) Enclosures 

ii) Danger markings 
iii) Non-bypassablc interlocks 
iv) Automatic discharge devices 
v) Shorting rods 



IS : 11743 - 1986 

5. RADIATION PROTECTION 

5.1 Ultrasonic and Sonar Equipment — The hazards due to uhrasonic 
equipment are similar to hazards due to noise which have been covered 
later. The uhrasonic equipment is not hazardous, if used as directed. 
However, ultrasonics are known to disintegrate human cells and enzymes. 
Some workers using ultrasonic cleaners and drills may complain of head- 
ache and nausea. Persons with hearing problems or nerve disorders shall 
not be employed around ultrasonic equipment. 



TABLE 2 ACCEPTABLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS FOR 
ULTRASONIC CLEANERS 


a) Frequency range 175 to 5 600 Hz 




Octave Band Centre 
Frequeney, Hz 


Octave Band Sound 
Pressure Level, dB 


250 


94 


500 


88 


1 000 


85 


2 000 


84 


4 000 


84 


b) Frequency range 5 600 to 18 000 Hz 




Centre Frequency of the 
One-Third Octave Band, Hz 


One-Third Octave Band 
Sound Pressure Level, dB 


6 300 


80 


8 000 


80 


10 000 


80 


12 500 


80 


16 000 


80 


c) Frequency range 18 000 to 45 000 Hz 




Centre Frequency of the 
On^-Third Octave Band, Hz 


One~Third Octave Band 
Sound Pressure Level, dB 


20 000 


105 


25 000 


110 


31 500 


115 


40 000 


115 


Note — AH sound pressure levels are 
O'OOO 2 dynes per square centimetre ( O'OOO 2 


expressed in decibels ( dB ) reference 
microbar ). 



These are the maximum acceptable octave band levels, when meas- 
ured at the head position ( ears ) of the operator, at the normal opera- 
tor's position by the ultrasonic cleaner, and when the cleaner is the source 
of the sound. The sound pressure level of each octave band shall be at 
least 10 dB lower when measured at any position about the cleaner loca- 
ted within a radius length of 4*5 metre from the position of the centre of 
the operator's head. 



10 



is : 11743 - 1986 

5.2 rf Radiation ( High Frequency Range ) — The radiation hazards 
in the HF and VHF range equipment are not well estabJished compared 
to those in the microwave region. However, with the use of high power 
broadcast and UHF stations, the hazards will be limited to areas very 
near to the source of radiation. The permissible maximum allowable full 
time exposure can be taken between 10 W/m to 20 W/m. 

5.3 Microwave, Radio Frequency ( rf ), X-Ray Laser Radiation 
Limits 

5.3.1 Microwave and rf Radiation — Microwave and rf radiation eiiher 
due to direct exposure or by leakages should be limited so as not to affect 
the human body in view of the biological effects. 

5.3*1.1 Biological hazards to personnel due to whole-body radiation 
are measuicd by incident power density or energy fiux, respectively in 
milliwatts or millijoulcs per square centimetre. Biological damage to living 
tissue is known to be caused by the heating effect on the tissue. ( Some 
other reveisiblc effects are known or suspected, but are not considered 
here ). Skin burns, eye cataract and overheating of delicate body organs 
can be caused by radio frequency (rf) radiation. Organs with limited cir- 
culation to dissipate heat, such as lungs, testicles, and liver, may be dama- 
ged by rf radiation. At present, the generally accepted threshold level is a 
time-averaged power density ol' 100 milliwatts per square centimetre 
( 100 mW/cm® ), for a limited duration of 6 minutes during any hour 
period, over the frequency range from 10 MHz to 100 GHz. 

NoTis 1 — Personnel with implanted prosthetics are exposed to additional 
hazards, indirectly from ri emissions interfering with their operation and, therefore, 
they should not be allowed to expose themselves to intense rf radiation. 

Note 2 — In Certain countries, the limits for exposure arc as low as lO f^ W/cm® 
and 1 jU'W/cm», 

5.3.1.2 The following safety precautions are only indicative, and not 
exhaustive: 

a) Do not enter denied occupancy areas unless the transmitters have 
been and remain switched ofT; 

b) Do not look into or inspect any device, feedhorn;, open wave- 
guide, reflectors, radiatiors, etc, while operating; 

c) Use fencing or other structure to keep non-operating and test 
personnel out of danger; and 

d) Erect rf screens or shields to protect personnel who must appro- 
ach high power installation with suilablc radiation warning signs 
at such locations. 

11 



IS : 11743 - 19(t6 

5.3.2 X'Radiation — All electronic and electrical devices capable of 
producing X-radiation shall be so designed, fabricated, shielded and oper- 
ated as to keep personnel exposure as low as reasonably achievable. For 
equipment and installation design, shielding requirements shall be maint- 
ained at all times which limit the radiation levels is not greater than 2 
milliroentgens ( mr ) in any one hour and 100 mr in any 7 consecutive 
days at the operator position or within 5 cm from the equipment ( which- 
ever is closer ) in any unrestricted area accessible to personnel. 

5.3.3 Laser Radiation — In view of the fact that laser radiation is speci- 
ally coherent, human hazard is more prone for biological effects to the 
eyes as well as to the skin. In addition, the following hazards are also 
likely: 

a) Electrical shock from system producing laser, and 

b) Toxic chemicals utilized with the laser work or exploding com- 
ponents such as flash tubes or optics, cryogens for cooling and 
noise or bright flash levels with laser, which may startle person- 
nel working in the area and thereby cause an accident. The 
hazards are different for different types of lasers. 

5.3.3.1 The following precautions, in addition to the protective 
devices of the equipment are to be used for personnel safety: 

a) Avoid looking into the primary beam at all times; 

b) Do wot aim the laser with the eye; direct reflection could cause 

eye damage; 

c) Do not look at reflection of the beam; 
these too could cause retinal burns; 

d) Avoid looking at the pump source at all times; 

e) Clear all personnel from the anticipated path of the beam; 

f) Do not depend on sunglasses to protect the eyes. If laser safety 
goggles are used, be certain that they are designed to be used 
with the laser being used. Inspect safety goggles before each use. 
Determine failure point of goggles either from the manufacturer or 
test them at their highest intended power before using, ( It is best 
to completely enclose the laser, the beam and the target and not 
having to use the safety goggles ). 

g) Report any afterimage to a physician, preferably an ophthalmologist 
who has had experience with retinal burns, as damage may have 
occurred; 

h) Be very cautious around laseis that operate at invisible light 
frequencies; and 

12 



IS : 11743- 1986 

j) Before operation, warm all personnel and visitors of the potential 
hazard. Remind them that they have only one set of eyes. 

6. MECHANICAL HAZARDS 

6.1 Mechanical Hazards — The design of the equipment shall be such 
as to provide maximum access and safety to personnel while installing, 
operating and maintaining the equipment. Suitable protection shall be 
provided to prevent contact with moving mechanical parts such as gears, 
fans and belts when the equipment is complete and operating. Sharp pro- 
jections on cabinets, doors and similar parts shall be avoided. Doors or 
hinged covers shall be rounded at the corners. Doors, hinged covers and 
rack mounted equipment shall be provided with stops to hold them in each 
operating and maintenance configuration. Equipment design shall include 
provisions to prevent accidental pulling out of drawers or rack mounted 
equipment components which could cause equipment damage and injury to 
personnel. Equipment power switches shall be so designed and located that 
accidental contact by personnel will not place equipment in operation. 

6.2 Mechanical Interconnection — The design shall provide means to 
prevent the inadvertent reversing on mismating the fittings, couplings, 
mechanical linkages, instrument lids and electrical connections, specially 
for items involving explosives and emergencies for safety critical systems. 
Where mismating by design consideration is not feasible, coding and mar- 
king shall be employed. 

6.3 Cathode Ray Tubes ™ Provision in accordance with IS 6568-1972* 

shall be incorporated to protect personnel from injury due to implosion of 
cathode ray tubes, 

6-4 Glass Fibres -^ Glass fibre materials shall not be used as outer cove- 
ring on cables, wires or other items where they may cause skin irritation 
to operating or maintenance personnel or where there is any evidence of 
glass protruding from the surface. 

6*5 Thermal Hazards — Where people are involved and under any 
condition of operation, exposed parts including the enclosure of the equip- 
ment, shall not achieve a temperature in excess of SO^'C at an ambient 
temperature of 25°C. The temperature of front panels and operating 
controls shall not exceed 49''G at the same ambient temperature. 

7. SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS AGAINST LIGHTNING 

7.1 Since India is situated in tropical zone with thunderstorms, there is a 
possibility of lightning hazards at exposed installations of electronic equip- 
ment. Proper protective measures are to be adopted for the safety of the 
operating personnel. 

*Tmplosion protection for TV picture tubes. 

13 



IS : 11743 - 1986 

7.2 Lightning Protection for Exposed Installations — Ail exposed 
installations which are liable for lightning hazards should be properly 
grounded and provided with necessary alternate arrangements as specified 
by relevant Indian Standard guidance specifications on the subject. These 
protective devices should also be maintained during their life to ensure 
that the protection is not vitiated. These apply to antennas, supported 
structures, high raised buildings and high tension electrical towers. 

7.3 Lightning Protection to Personnel Operating Electronic 
Systems — There are certain situations where the hazard due to lightning 
may be transferred to the operating personnel who, even though externally 
protected, are susceptible to such hazards. Such personnel include operat- 
ing personnel in the telephone exchange, power supply systems and elect- 
rical communication systems. To protect the operating personnel, protec- 
tive devices like lightning arrestors/fusable links are to be installed in the 
system, so that in addition to protect the equipment from damage, the 
personnel working on such systems are not exposed to sudden high volta- 
ges due to lightning. 

8, HAZARDOUS AND RESTRICTIVE SUBSTANCES 

8.1 Certain chemical substances used in electronic industry are hazardous 
to the operating personnel. When such chemicals are to be used, care 
should be taken for adequate protection to personnel coming into contact 
with them. 

8.2 Certain chemical fumes likely to be generated in electronic industry 
are hazardous. Wherever such fumes are likely to occur, suitable exhaust 
systems should be provided. Care should also be taken by wearing protec- 
tive masks and goggles while working in such environments. 

8.3 The following materials are representative samples, used during the 
manufacture/maintenance of electronic equipment: 

a) Cadmium used in electroplating and soldering and also in alka- 
line batteries; 

b) Mercury used in switching/operating and other temperature indi- 
cating devices; 

c) Trichloroethylene, used as cleaning and de-greasing liquid, is 
hazardous when the vapours are inhaled: 

d) Freon or sulphur hexafloride used in pressurizing wave guides of 
high power equipment; 

e) Nematic liquid, used in liquid crystal devices, is hazardous to the 
skin; 

f ) Lithium batteries used in watches; 

14 



IS : 11743 - 1986 

g) Radioactive materials — Use of radioactive materials shall con- 
form to the codes approved by the Atomic Energy Commission. 
( Radiation Protection Rules, 1971 issued under the Gazette of 
India, May 18, 1982 ); 

h) Asbestos — Special care is to be taken when handling items utiliz- 
ing asbestos since asbestos fibres are carcinogens ( cancer produ- 
cing substance ); 

j ) Lead in any form, either in batteries or in soldering; and 

k) Beryllium oxide, used in rf transistors and certain heat sink 
washersj is harmful in the form of dust. 

9. HAZARDS DUE TO STATIC ELECTRICITY 

9.1 In electronic equipment industry, static electricity has got hazardous 
effects, both on personnel as well as the product. Generally, in industry, 
accumulation of static charges within the human body does not cause 
adverse effects during manufacture/operation, but in hazardous environ- 
ment, static discharge in the form of arcing may cause fire and explosion. 
These are more relevant for persons working in the storage of explosive 
materials or electro-explosive gadgets. In the manufacture of electronic 
equipment, MOSFET devices are susceptible to static electricity build up. 
Precautions shall be taken in accordance with IS : 10087-1981*. 

9.2 Protecting personnel or product against electrostatic discharge by 
personnel is only one part of the overall concept. For complete protection 
of both equipment as well as personnelj the following may be taken into 
consideration: 

a) Conductive work surface, 

b) Conductive floor mats, 

c) Wrist straps of conductive material, 

d) Conductive seats and tools for operation^ 

e) Conductive tool boxes, 

f ) Conductive foam, 

g) Conductive bags ^or shipment of static sensitive devices, 
h) Special soldering irons and solder suckers, 

j ) Mask used while soldering, and 

k) Production of ionized air which will discourage build up of static 
electricity by blowing air across the area. 



*Gode of practice for handling of electrostatic sensitive devices. 

15 



IS ! 117 1 3 - 1986 



10. SAFETY AGAINST NOISE AND HAZARDS DUE TO NOISE 

10.1 At any intensity, noise can be irritating and adversely affecting the 
human health and output. This is more so where the environment has high 
intensity noise developed. Protection against acoustic noise hazards is there- 
fore, required in testing areas of electronic equipment and also in factories 
during fabrication stages. Protection against noise hazard can be classified 
as under: 

a) Suppression of noise at the source by having noise mufflers and 
acoustic treatment, and 

b) Suppression of noise input to the human beings by providing ear 

muffs. 

10.2 The permissible noise exposure values are given below: 

Duration Per Day^ h Sound Level 

Slow Response^ dBA 

8 90 

6 92 

4 95 

3 97 

2 100 

1 102 

I 105 

1/2 110 

1/4 115 

Note — When tlie daily noise exposure is composed of two or more periods of 
noise exposure of different levels, their combined effect should be considered rather 
than the individual effect of each. If the sum.of various fractions : Cj/Ti + C2ITZ+ 
...Cn/Tn exceeds unity, then the mixed exposure should be considered to exceed the 
limit value; Cn indicates the total time of exposure at a specified noise level and 
Tn indicates the total time of exposure permitted at that level; dBA is the weighted 
noise level to *A* category of equivalent noise level of 40 phones. 

11. HAZARDS DUE TO UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS 
11.1 Hazards to operating personnel may happen when electronic equip- 
ment is installed in mines as well as in underground installations. The 
following areas are likely to be hazardous for personnel with regard to 
underground installations: 

a) Accidental ignition of gas due to electric sparks or relay contacts 
in explosive atmosphere in a mine. Care is, therefore, 10 be taken 
.that such equipment used in mines should have safety precautions 
■ as indicated by the relevant agencies. 

16 



b) Hazards may also happen when cables are laid for electronic sys- 
tems while digging up earth and on accidental contact with other 
installations like gas pipes, electrical cables or telephone installa- 
tions. 

c) There are some situations where persons working with electronic 
system have to carry out underground installations in ducts 
Avhich can accumulate toxic fumes under natural or man-made 
conditions. 

11.2 The above are indicative of such situations due to underground 
installations which can be avoided by taking precautionary measures 
which will not aggravate situation, in consultation with the appropriate 
agencies. 

12. MARKING, SIGNS, TAGS AND SYMBOLS 

12.1 Marking — Doors, gates, barriers, covers and panels shall be mark- 
ed to indicate the hazards which may be open on removal of such devices. 
When feasible, marking shall be located in such a way that it is not remo- 
ved when the doors are being removed. It is preferable to adopt a colour 
code to indicate physical hazards. The marking shall be so placed as to be 
visible to the operator or maintenance personnel even when the units are 
opened for repair or replacement. 

12.2 Signs — In accordance with the existing regulations, suitable s'lgrm^ 
for danger, caution, etc, shall be used to warn against physical hazards and 
other hazardous parameters such as voltages, current, thermal, etc. The mar- 
king of such signs shall remain permanent for the normal life expected of 
equiment to which they are fixed. Specific marking for special a*pplications 
are to be used where necessary and the areas where such special markings 
are called for, are as below: 

a) High power microwave or radio frequency source, 

b) Laser hazard signs, 
e) Nuclear source signs, 

d) Radiation source signs, and 

e) Use of luminous paints for safety during power failure. 



17 



IS : 11743 - 1986 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.2 ) 

PRECAUTIONS TO AVOID MISHAPS AND FJRST-AID 

GUIDANCE 

A-1. The operating personnel may observe following precautions to avoid 
mishaps in operating areas: 

a) While working on energized circuit, precuations should be taken 
to ensure that body does not become conductive. 

b) Do not depend on switches to de-energize the circuit. Pull the 
plug from the outlet. 

c) If working in high voltage circuit or in the field, have a second 
person as standby to ht:lp in case of shock or any other accident. 
The helper should at least know how to de-energize the circuit 
and the fundamentals of first aid. 

d) Do not wear loose clothings, metallic frame on eye glasses, rings, 
watch or other jewellary which are likely to get entangled with 
the operation. 

e) When mentally and physically fatigued, avoid working on electri- 
cal circuits. 

f ) Never assume that the circuit is dead, check first before working. 

g) Care should be taken to discharge static charges by suitable 
means before removing protective dielectric covers from range 
surfaces. 

A-2. The following are the fundamental first-aid actions in brief: 

a) Cardiac pulmonary resuscitation ( GPR ) ( artificial respiration ) 
is necessary when a person is unconscious after the shock hazard 
and this is to be done immediately after removing the person 
from the scene of accident; 

b) If foreign matter is visible in the mouth, wipe it out quickly with 
fingers, wrapped in a cloth, if possible. 

c) Tih the victim's head backwards so that his chin is pointing up- 
wards. This is accomplished by placing one hand under the 
victim's neck and lifting it and the other hand on his forehead 
and prc^sslng it. Tliis procedure should provide an open airway by 
moving the tongue away from the back of the throat. 

18 



IS : 11743 * 1986 

d) Maintain the backward head-tilt position and to prevent leakage 
of air, pinch the victim's nostrils with the fingers of the hand 
that is pressing on the forehead; 

e) Open your rnouth wide; take a deep breath and seal your mouth 
tightly around the victim's mouth with a wide open circle and 
blow into his mouth. If the airway is clear, only moderate resis- 
tance to the blowing effort will be felt; 

f) If you are not getting air exchange, check to see if there is a 
foreign body in theback of the mouth obstructing the air passage. 
Reposition the head and resume the blowing effort; 

g) Watch the victim's chest and when you see it rise, stop inflation, 
raise your mouth, turn your head to the side and listen for exha- 
lation. Watch the chest to see that it falls; and 

h) When his exhalation is finished, repeat the blowing cycle for a 
total of six breaths* Volume is important. Start at a high 
rate and then provide at least one breath every five seconds for an 
adult. 



19 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (Si UNITS) 



Base Units 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 






Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 

temperature 
Luminous intensity 
Amount of substance 


metre 

kilogram 
second 
ampere 
Kelvin 

candela 
mole 


m 
kg 

8 

A 

K 

cd 
mo! 






Supplementary Units 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symboi 






Plane angle 
Solid angle 


radian 
steradian 


rad 
sr 






Derived Unit« 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Detinition 


Force 

Energy 


newton 
loule 


N 
J 




N «= 1 kg.m/ss 
J = 1 N.m 


Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 


watt 

weber 

tesia 

hertz 

Siemens 

volt 

pascal 


W 
Wb 

T 
Hz 

S 

V 
Pa 




W == 1 J/s 
Wb == 1 V.s 
T - 1 Wb/m2 

Hz = 1 c/s (s-i) 
S - 1 A/V 
V = 1 W/A 

Pa « 1 N/m2 



