**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^i^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13878 : 1993 
ISO 8638 : 1989 



r^ ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

EXTRACORPOREAL BLOOD CIRCUIT FOR 

HAEMODIALYSERS, HAEMOFILTERS AND 

HAEMOCONCENTRATORS — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 61547 : 615-38 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1993 Price Group 5 



Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee, MHD 6 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8638 : 1989 'Extracorporeal blood circuit for 
haemodialysers, haemofllters and haemoconcentrators', issued by the International Organization 
for Standardization, was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of 
the Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee and approval of the 
IViedical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council, 

This Indian Standard covers the requirements for extracorporeal circuit intended for single use 
in conjunction with haemodialysers, haemofllters and haemoconcentrators with a view to ensure 
safety and satisfactory function of the device. 

It has not been found practicable to specify materials of construction nor to give test methods 
for biocompatibility, validation of sterility, non-pyrogenicity and certain performance charac- 
teristics of the extra-corporeal circuit. This standard, therefore only requires that the material 
has been tested and that the methods and the results are made available upon request. 

The specification for physical characteristics have been limited to those deemed necessary for 
safe and effective function of the device. A design standard is required for connectors to the 
blood ports of the haemodialysers, haemofilter and haemoconcentrator and to the blood access 
device to ensure the compatibility of the circuit and the corresponding device. These design 
and dimensions specifications have been selected to minimise the risk of leakage of blood and 
the ingress of air. Connectors with either fixed or loose locking shells are permitted. 

The text of the above mentioned ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as 
Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current 
practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

The Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provision of the following international standard appearing in the normative reference of this 
standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 

ISO 472 : 1979 Plastics — Vocabulary ( revised in 1988 ). 

ISO 594-2 Conical fittings with a 6 percent ( Luer ) taper for syringes, needles and certain other 
medical equipment — Part 2 : Lock fittings ( published in 1992 )- 

ISO 8637: 1989 Haemodialysers, haemofllters and haemoconcentrators. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



IS 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



Indian Standard 

EXTRACORPOREAL BLOOD CIRCUIT FOR 

HAEMODIALYSERS, HAEMOFILTERS AND 

HAEMOCONCENTRATORS — SPECIFICATION 



1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies requirements for the 
extracorporeal blood circuit for single use which is to be used in 
conjunction with haemodiaiysers, haemofilters and haemo- 
concentrators. 

Materials of construction and test methods for biocompati 
bility, validation of sterility, non-pyrogenicity and some per- 
formance characteristics are not specified; the rationale for 
these omissions is given in the Introduction. 

This International Standard applies to the blood tubing and in- 
tegral accessory tubing, including fluid and infusion tubings 
and tubing for attaching the extracorporeal blood circuit to 
pressure monitors. 

This International Standard does not apply to haemodiaiysers, 
haemofilters, haemoconcentrators, vascular access devices', 
blood pumps, pressure monitors of the extracorporeal blood 
circuit, air detection devices, haemodialysis systems to 
prepare, maintain and monitor the dialysing fluid, and hardware 
used to perform haemofiltration or haemoconcentration. 

NOTE — Requirements for haemodiaiysers. haemofilters and haemo- 
concentrators are specified in ISO 8637. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, through 
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International 
Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below. Members of lEC 
and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International 
Standards. 

ISO 472; 1979, Plastics - Vocabulary. 

ISO 594 2 ", Conical finings with a 6 % (Luerl taper for 
syringes, needles and certain other medical equipment — 
Part 2: Lock fittings. 

ISO 8637 : 1989, Haemodiaiysers, haemofilturs ^nd haemo- 
concentrators. 



3 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard the following 
definitions apply, 

3.1 arterial blood circuit: Portion of the extracorporeal 
blood pathway from the vascular access device of the patient to 
the blood inlet of the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemo 
concentrator. 

3.2 non-pyrogenic : Free of pyrogenic materials within the 
limit of error of test methods for such determinations, as de- 
fined by the national regulatory agency of the country in which 
the device is to be marketed or, where available, an Inter 
national Standard, and maintained In that state by suitable 
protection. 

3.3 pump segment: Portion of the extracorporeal blood 
circuit that is acted upon by the blood pump. 

3.4 sterile : Free from all living organisms within the limits of 
validation tests for sterility and maintained in that state by 
suitable protection. 

3.5 venous blood circuit ; Extracorporeal blood circuit from 
the outlet of the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemo- 
concentrator, returning blood to the vascular access device of 
the patient. 



4 Requirements 

4.1 Good manufacturing practice 

The extracorporeal circuit shall be manufactured in a clean 
environment and the fluid pathways shall be free of visible 
foreign material. 

NOTE - Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether codes for 
good manufacturing practice exist in the country in which the device Is 
produced and. it applicable, in the countries in which the device is to 

be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.1- 

4.2 Toxicology and biological compatibility 

Samples of the device shall be tested for freedom from toxicity 
using, if available, the method specified in the relevant national 
standard and the results of such tests shall indicate freedom 
from biological hazard. If requested, details of the test method 



1) To be published. 



IS 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



and the results shall be made available by the manufacturer of 
the device. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing toxicology and biocom- 
patibility testing exist in the country in which the device is produced 
and, if applicable, in the countries in which the device is to be 
marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.2. 

4.3 Sterility 

The fluid pathways of the device shall be supplied sterile. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing sterility testing exist in the 
country in which the device is produced and, if applicable, in the 
countries in which the device is to be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.3. 

4.4 Pyrogenicity 

The blood pathwayls) of the device shall be non pyrogenic. If 
requested, details of the test methodfsl and the results shall be 
made available by the manufacturer of the device. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations Or national standards governing pyrogen testing exist in the 
country In which the device is produced and, if applicable, in the coun- 
tries in which the device is to be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.4. 

4.5 Residues from sterilization 

After sterilization by the procedure recommended by the 
manufacturer, the device shall be tested for freedom from toxic 
residues that have adverse chemical, physical or biological ef 
iwcts on tiiw uiOOu or tnst result in reicsse Oi CiiniCany siyniii- 
cant amounts of potentially toxic substances into the blood. If 
requested, details of the test methods and the results shall be 
made available by the manufacturer of the device. 

NOTE — Aiiention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing testing for residues from 
sterilization exist in the country in which the device is produced and, if 
applicable, in the countries in which the device is to be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.5. 

4.6 Mechanical characteristics 

4.6.1 Structural integrity 

Samples of the extracorporeal circuit shall be capable of 
withstanding 

a) a pressure above atmospheric pressure at sea level that 
is 1,5 times the manufacturer's specified maximum 
pressure, and 

b) a pressure 200 nnmHg below atmospheric pressure 
(at sea level). 

The pump segment shall be capable of withstanding a 
minimum of 24 h of use under wors*-case conditions. 



4.6.2 Connectors to haemodialyser, haemofilter or 
haemoconcentrator 

The dimensions of the fitting for connection to the haemo 
dialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator shall be as given in 
figures 1 to 3. 

The dimensions shall be checked in accordance with 5 6.2. 

4.6.3 Connector to vascular access device 

The fitting for connecting the extracorporeal circuit to a 
vascular access device shall be a male 6 % (Luer) taper lock fit- 
ting; this fitting shall be in accordance with ISO 594 2. 

The fitting shall be checked in accordance with 5-6.3. 



4.6.4 Connectors to ancillary components 

All parts of the extracorporeal circuit intended for use with an- 
cillary components, such as heparin lines and pressure 
transducer lines, shall terminate in a female 6 % (Luer) taper 
lock fitting; this fitting shall be in accordance with ISO 594-2 

The fittings shall be checked in accordance with 5.6.4. 

4.6.5 Access ports 

Where injection ports are incorporated into the extracorporeal 
circuit, they shall be capable of withstanding, without leakage, 
puncture by needle having at least an internal diameter of 
0,8 mm (21 gauge). The injection ports shall be designed so as to 
minimize the risk of the needle piercing the tube completely and 
causing injury. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5,6.5. 

4.6.6 Colour coding 

If the arterial extracorporeal blood circuit differs from the 
venous extracorporeal blood circuit, the arterial circuit shall be 
colour-coded red and the venous circuit shall be colour-coded 
blue. The coding shall be prominently displayed within 100 mm 
of the end of the tubing. 

The colour coding shall be checked in accordance with 5.6.6. 
4.7 Physical characteristics 

4.7.1 Volume 

The volume of the blood pathway ol the venous and artenai 
extriicorpoieal circuits shall be equal to the manufacturor's 
stated vali-ieK ,' 20 '\>. 

Testing shall bo in accordance with 5. 7.1. 

4.7.2 Pump segment 

Tin; lengtii and interfiyl diiiinoler Ot She pi.:'!'!) SOnmf.'iit ;;lu)ii t<f 
equal to the niauufactuiBt's staled vnlut-is ' B "w 



Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.6.1. 



I he rlimon.sions shall bt.' ctlr-ckt-d in .iuc:'.;t'iaiic;i,' witti U./.J. 



!S 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



Dimensions in nrtillimetres 



2*0,1 






.,„„,_..„,...— ,._^^^^^^^^ 



Dimensions in millimetre^3 



Inner cone 



Outer cone 




E>- 0,06:1 



f,,„re 2 - Un,* o. en,.g.^.n, o. ™a„ ,nd .,m.,. con.s o, b,„od in,« and ou.,.. conneco,, 

3 



IS 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



Dimensions in millimetres 



05.925-g.oo5 , 




05.85*5-°°5 



05,827-§,oo5 

-• ■ — 





Figure 3 — Details of 6 % taper test fitting for connector to haemodialyser. haemofilter 

or haemoconcentrator blood port 



IS 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



5 Test methods 

5.1 Good manufacturing practice 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4. 1 shall be deter- 
mined by Inspection. 

5.2 Toxicology and biological compatibility 

The toxicology and biological compatibility of materials (of a 
device) which will come into contact with biological fluids shall 
be determined on samples of each new type of device prior to its 
marketing or after any change in the materials of construction of 
that type of device or after any change in the method of steriliza- 
tion. 

NOTE — Testing should be carried out using the method(s) specified in 
appropriate national regulations or national standards. 

5.3 Sterility 

The sterilization process shall be validated on samples of the 
finished device prior to marketing a new type of device, and, 
thereafter, the sterilization process shall be monitored for each 
• batch. 

5.4 Pyrogenlcity 

Testing for pyrogens shall be carried out on samples of each 
new type of device prior to marketing, and, thereafter, the 
manufacturer shall perform pyrogen testing at intervals shown 
to ensure non-pyrogenicity of the device. 



5.6.1.2.2 Distilled water, freshly boiled, for the subatmos- 
pheric test. 

5.6.1.3 Apparatus 

5.6.1.3.1 Blood pump, as recommended by the manufac- 
turer, or, if the manufacturer does not recommend a blood 
pump, an adjustable double roller blood pump as com- 
monly used for clinical haemodialysis, haemofiltraton or 
haemoconcentration. The rollers shall be just occlusive at the 
test pressure. Each roller shall be occlusive at the beginning, 
the middle and the end of the stroke. 

5.6.1.3.2 Stainless steel or plastic vessel for the perfusate. 



5.6.1.3.3 Heating device, capable of maintaining the per 
fusate at 37 °C i 1 "C. 



5.6.1.3.4 Jig. for puncturing the access port at the same 
location. 

5.6.1.3.5 Needle, having the largest internal diameter recom- 
mended by the manufacturer or having an internal diameter of 
0,8 mm (21 gauge), whichever is the larger. 

5.6.1.3.6 Open or occluded steel reference connectors, 

as appropriate <the connectors for the blood access and an- 
cillary tubing), which comply with the requirements specified in 
ISO 594-2. See figure 3. 



5.5 Residues from sterilization 

Samples of the finished device shall be tested for potentially 
toxic residues by recognized toxicological methods prior to 
marketing a new type of device, and, thereafter, the manufac- 
turer shall test for toxic residues at intervals shown to ensure 
the safety of the device and after any change of materials of 
construction. 

5-6 Mechanical characteristics 

5.6.1 Structural integrity and access port leakage 

The test described shall be carried out prior to marketing a new 
type of device; it is not intended to be a quality control test. 

5.6.1.1 Principle 

Subjection of the extracorporeal circuit to simulated use during 
which the access port is punctured. Subjection of the extracor- 
poreal circuit to the specified pressures (see 4.6. 1 ) above and 
below atmospheric pressure at sea level. Observation for leaks. 

5.6.1.2 Reagents 

5.6. 1 .2.1 Anticoagulated bovine or human plasma, with a 
irotein mass concentration of 60 g/1 i 5 g/l for the perfusate 

Juring simulated use. 



5.6.1.3.7 Blood port, complying with the requirements 
specified in clause 4.6.3 of ISO 8637 : 1989. 

5.6.1.3.8 Tubing, to be attached to the blood port (unless it 
is occluded), and to the connectors to the blood access con- 
nector and to the ancillary tubing connector (5.6. 1 .3.6) that can 
withstand the test conditions. 

5.6.1 .3.9 Pressurized air source, capable of maintaining the 
extracorporeal circuit at the specified pressure above at- 
mospheric pressure. 

5.6.1.3.10 Suction device, capable of maintaining the 
specified pressure below atmospheric pressure. 

5.6.1.3.11 Pressure gauges, accurate to ± 10 mmHg. 

5.6.1.3.12 Vessel, filled with water, that will accommodate 
the extracorporeal circuit during the subatmosphehc pressure 
test. 

5.6.1.4 Sampling and preparation of test samples 

A statistically significant sample of extracorporeal circuits 
drawn at random from the manufacturer's production which 
have passed all safety and quality control measures, where ap 
plicable, shall be used. 



IS 13878: 1993 
JSO 8638: 1989 



5.6.1.5 Procedure 

5.6.1.5.1 Perform .simulated diafysis by recirculating the 
plasma (5.6.1.2.1) at 37 '^C ± 1 °C through the extracorporeal 
circuit at the manufacturer's recommended maximum pressure 
and flow rate. 

After 15 min of perfusion, puncture the access ports, if any, six 
times in the same location with the needle (5.6.1.3.5). 

Continue the perfusion for a total of 24 h. 

5.6.1.5.2 Attach the connections of the extracorporeal circuit 
to appropriate fittings as shown in figure 4 and pressurize the 
extracorporeal circuit to a pressure 1,5 times the maximum 
operating pressure recommended by the manufacturer. Im 
merse the extracorporeal circuit in water at 37 °C ± 1 °C for 
1 min, while maintaining the pressure inside the extracorporeal 
circuit constant. 

After 30 s examine the circuit and the union of the connectors 
for the blood port, vascular access device and ancillary com- 
ponents for leakage of air indicated by a steady stream of 
bubbles. 



5.6.1.5.4 At the conclusion of the test, check that the pump 
segment is undamaged. 

5.6.1.6 Expression of results 

5.6.1.6.1 Test above atmospheric pressure (1,5 times maxi- 
mum pressure) 

An unsatisfactory test is shown if a steady stream of bubbles is 
seen after 30 s. See 56. 1.5.2. 

The results shall be recorded as "Pass" or "Fail". 

5.6.1.6.2 Test at subatmospheric pressure 

An unsatisfactory test is shown by the appearance of bubbles 
in the fluid pathway of the blood tubing. 

The results shall be recorded as "Pass" or "Fail". 



5.6.1.6.3 If the pump segment was damaged, (see 5.6.1 5.4), 
the result shall be recorded as "Fail". 



5.6.1.5.3 Fill that part of the circuit and its connectors that 
may be exposed to a subatmospheric pressure with distilled 
water (5.6.1.2.2) and subject it to a pressure 200 mmHg below 
atmospheric pressure at sea level. 

Examine the circuit for leakage of air as indicated by a steady 
stream of bubbles. 



5.6.1.7 Test report 

The test shall be recorded as satisfactory if all samples pass and 
unsatisfactory if any sample fails. 

The size of the sample and the rationale for its statistical 
significance shall be given. 



4. > 



Connector to 
haemodialyser, 
. haemoflitar Or 
haemoconcentrator 
(see 4.6.21 




Blood port connector (5.6.1.3.7) 
of haemodialyser, haemofilter or 
haemoconcentrator 



Male anciltarY tubing 
connector (5.6.1.3.6) 



Female ancillary tubing connector Isee 4.6.4) 




Female connector 15. 61 3.6) 



Pressure gauge 





Male connector (5.6.1.3.6) 
to blood access device 



To source of 
pressurized gas 



NOTE - Dotted lines represent tubing other than the extracorporeal bl'-. d circuit tubing used 

"X" across the tubing indicates that it is clamped (an occluded connector to the extracorporeal blood connector may also be used) 

The break between two ends of the extracorporeal blood circuit reoresenis other elements, such as a blood pump segment or a dnp chamber 



Figure 4 — Diagram for testing structural integrity of extracorporeal circuit 

6 



IS 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



5.6.2 Connectors to haen>odialy8er, haemofiiter or 
haemoconcentrator 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.2 shall be 
determined by inspection. 



S.6.3 Connsctor to vascular access device 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 46.3 shall be 
determined by inspection. 



5.6.4 Connectors to ancillary components 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.4 shall be 
determined by inspection. 



6.6.5 Access ports 

The integrity of the access port after it has been punctured by 
the needle (see 5.6.1.5.1) shall be tested in accordance with the 
method specified in 5.6. 1 . 

Compliance with the requirements on disinfection and protec- 
tion of the operator from being priclcdd by the needle shall be 
determined by inspection. 



5.6.6 Colour coding 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.6 shall be 
determined by inspection. 



5.7 Physical characteristics 



5.7.1 Volume 

The test described is a referee test. Other tests may be used 
provided that the results are within ± 5 % of the referee test. 
This test shall be carried out prior to marketing a new type of 
device; it is not intended to be a quality control test. 



5.7.1.1 Principle 

Volumetric measurement of the volume of water filling the 
blood pathway of the extracorporeal circuit. 



5.7.1.2 Reagent 
Tap water. 

5.7.1.3 Apparatus 



5.7.1.3.1 Graduated cylinder, capable of measuring the 
volume of the blood pathway to within ±2 %. 



5.7.1.3.2 Clamps or occluded connectors to close off the 
ancillary tubings. 



5.7.1.4 Sampling 

A statistically significant sample of extracorporeal circuits 
drawn at random from the manufacturer's production wNch 
have passed all safety and quality control measures, where ap- 
plicable, shall be used. 

5.7.1.5 Procedure 

Occlude ancillary tubings and fill the blood pathway with water. 
Draiti the fluid as completely as possible into the graduated 
cylinder. Record the volume collected in the cylinder. 

5.7.1.6 Expression of results 

Calculate the volume collected, expressed in millilitres, as a 
percentoge of the manufacturer's stated volume. 

5.7.1.7 Test report 

The test shall be reported as satisfactory if the result for each 
sample does not differ by more than 20 % from the manufac- 
turer's stated volume. 

5.7.2 Pump segment 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.7.2 shall be 
determined for each batch by inspecting a significant sample of 
pump segments from finished extracorporeal circuits that have 
passed all safety and quality control measures. 



6 Packaging, marking and accompanying 
documentation 

6.1 Packaging and marking 

6.1.1 Unit contairMrs 

At least the following information shall be visible on or through 
the unit container ; 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the product name; 

c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) the lot number which will allow the manufacturing 
history of the device to be traced; 

e) a statement of sterility and non-pyrogenicity, and 
whether the entire contents of the container or the fluid 
pathways only are sterile; 

f) the month and year of sterilization, accurate to within 
30 days of the actual date of sterilization; 

g) a statement of single use; 



NOTE - Symbol 1051 from ISO 7000 ; 1989, i.e 

used. 



may also be 

h) the statement "Read the instructions before use"; 



IS 13878: 1993 
fSO 8638: 1989 



i) a prominent instruction to prepare the extracorporeal 
circuit for use as directed; 

j) instructions and warnings regarding storage and 
liandiing. 

6.1.2 Outer containers 

At least the following information shall appear on the outer 
container : 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the name and address of the distributor, if different 
from the information given under a); 

c) the product name, description of contents and number 
of devices contained In the outer container; 

d) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

e) the lot number which will allow the manufacturing 
history of the device to be traced; 

f) a statement of sterility and non-pyrogenicity; 

g) the month and year of sterilization, accurate to within 
30 days of the actual date of sterilization; 

h) instructions and warnings regarding handling and 
storage. 

6.2 Documentation 

6.2.1 Accompanying documents 

At least the following information shall be supplied with each 
outer container : 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the product name; 

c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) a statement of sterility and non-pyrogenicity and 
method of sterilization; 

e) a statement of single use; 

NOTE - Symbol 1051 from ISO 7000 : 1989, i.e. ® , may also be 
used. 

f ) cautions and warnings, including, but not limited to, the 
following : 

1) pressure and blood flow rate limitations, 

2) a statement that the user ensures that the extracor 
poreai circuit is compatible with the device with which it 
is used, such as the air detector, the venous clamp, the 
blood pump and the pressure monitors, with particular 
emphasis on compatibility of the air detector, 

3) a statement that if the extracorporeal circuit is at- 
tached to a blood gas exchanger circuit, it should be 



noted that the blood gas exchanger inlet line is to be 
colour-coded blue and the blood gas exchanger outlet 
line is to be colour-coded red; 

g) instructions on how to prepare the extracorporeal 
circuit before use; 

h) an explanation of the colour coding that is used to iden- 
tify the arterial and venous lines; 

i) instructions to read the reference documents before 
use, if they contain additional information. 



6.2.2 Reference documents 

At least the following information shall be provided to the user 
if it does not appear in the accompanying documents (see 
6.2.1): 

a) details of ancillary equipment required; 

b) the total volume, in millilitres, of the blood pathway, 
assuming that the bubble traps are full; 

c) the length and internal diameter of the blood pump seg 
ment; 

d) a general description of the extracorporeal circuit; 

e) details of the orientation of the connectors to the 
haemodialyser in relation to the dialysing fluid lines; 

f) if monitor lines are included, an instruction that devices 
to prevent contamination of monitors by blood should be 
used unless these devices are part of the extracorporeal 
circuit; 

g) a list of disinfectants for external application (e.g. when 
blood sampling) that are compatible with the components 
of the extracorporeal circuit and a warning that the com- 
patibility of other disinfectants with the components of the 
extracorporeal circuit should be determined prior to clinical 
use; 

h) the pressure at the inflow of the venous drip chamber 
when the venous extracorporeal circuit is perfused at 
400 ml/min and 37 °C + 1 °C with a 32 % ( V/ V) solution 
of glycerol and water respectively and with a pressure of 
50 mmHg at the outflow of the venous extracorporeal cir 
cuit; 

i) the direction of blood flow, if applicable; 

j) the positioning of tubing connectors; 

k) the recommended procedure for terminating the opera 
tional procedure, if applicable; 

I) typical fluid circuit diagrams; 

m) a statement that the following information is available 
to the user on request ; 

1 ) details of the test methods used to obtain the values 
used in disclosure of the physical characteristics //: vitro 
and to establish biocompatibility (If applicable), 



IS 13878: 1993 
ISO 8638: 1989 



2) the generic names of materials of construction, in 
accordance with ISO 472 (if applicable ; see 5.2, 5.7.1 
and 5.7.2), 

3) the number and size range of particulate matter and 
fibres in the effluent from the extracorporeal circuit 
when prepared as recommended by the manufacturer 
for clinical use, and details of the test method used to 
make this mteasurement, 



4) the results of spallation tests and the details of the 
test method(s) used, 

5) the number and size range of particles released by 
needle puncture of the access port(s) and details of the 
test methods used to make this measurement (see 
5.6.5). 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
produceres may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmoious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 

indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. MHD 6 ( 2561 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Dale of Issue Text Affected 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional OlTices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg [331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 |331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 |37 86 26, 37 86 62 

r53 38 43, 53 16 40 
Northern ; SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 ^ 



^53 23 84 

r235 02 16 235 04 4"^ 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 i 

1.235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western ; Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 |632 78 9l! 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR COIMBATORC 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. 



'tinted at Printwell Printers, AJigarh, India 



