**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12126 (1987) : Hand Held Metal Detectors (Frisking) for 
Use in Weapon Detection [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18:12120' 19B7 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

HAND HELD METAL DETECTORS 

( FRISKING ) FOR USE IN WEAPON DETECTION 



UDC 6233682 



® Gop^ighi 1908 

aUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAV.\N. 9 UAIIADUR SHAH ZAfAR MARG 

F^EW DELHI 110002 

Gr 3 fif*f«fl7 I9fl« 



IS : 12126 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

HAND HELD METAL DETECTORS 

( FRISKING ) FOR USE IN WEAPON DETECTION 

Electronic Measuring Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 21 

Chairman Representing 

Shri H. C. Vebma Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt 

Ltd, New Delhi 

M§mber$ 

Shbi N. Ganeson ( Alternate to 
Shri H. C. Verma ) 
Shri A. N. Agarwal Central Scientific Instrument Organization, 

Chandigarh 
Shri R. V. Amarnath Electronic Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr a. K. Bant3kjee Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri S. B. Virma ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. N. Raju ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Gakg Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shri R. V. Narayanax ( Alternate ) 
Dr Gulshan Rai Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shri B. S. Bedi ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Electronics Test & Development Centre, Madras 

SupERiNTEN*DENT ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Kela All India Instrument Manufacturers & Dealers 

Association. Bombay 
Shri K. K. Khanna Hindustan Instruments Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Ashish Dey ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Mishra Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi 

Shri R. K. Angrish ( Alternate ) 
Shri V, Mohan Rao Inspectorate of Electronics, Ministry of Defence 

Shri N. Narayana Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri Mylar Rao Electronics Trade & Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Manoj Chawla ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. L. Nagar Toshniwal Bros Ltd, Ajmer 

Shri Ravinder Kumar ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) ^nd 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:12126-1987 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri M. a. Narasimhak Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Km K. R. Jaya ( Alternate) 
Shri M. G. Pansare Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Muehopabhyay ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. M. Pathabkar Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. K. Prabhu OfBce of the Development Commissioner (Small 

Scale Industries ), Ministry of Industry 

Shbi M. RamakrishNan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. Ramasubramantam Motwane Manufacturing Co Ltd, Nasik 

Shri R. Ramaraj ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. V. Rao Doordarshan, New Delhi 

Shri C. D. BaNerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Rustogi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri S. Sambakdau Electronic & Business Machines Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri V. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. Sannabhatti Applied Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. B. Kaila ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sasi Kumar Kerala State Electronics Development Corporation, 

Trivandrum 

Shri C RaJu Ka^^nu ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Sen All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri W. V. B._Ramai.ingam ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Sl^resh Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. V. Narayak ( Alternate ) 
Shri Hakcharan Singh, Director General, BIS ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Head ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri Y. S. Arya 
Joint Director ( Electronics ) 



Panel for Metal Detectors, LTDG 21/P7 

Convener 
Shki R. K. NioAM Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Members 
Shri M, P. BalaNi Air India, Bombay 

Shbi C Basxt Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shbi N. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Birmani Sivananda Electronics, Nasik 

Lt-Col B. L. Birmani { Alternate ) 
Shbi G. K. Kabba Detective Devices Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri Sattsh Kabra ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Risal Singh Civil Aviation Department, New Delhi 

Shbi S. M. Talapatua Technical Laboratories ( IB ), New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 



IS : 12126 . 1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

HAND HELD METAL DETECTOTiS 

( FRISKING ) FOR USE IN WEAPON DETECTION 



0. FOREWORD 

-0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on 16 July 1987, after the draft finahzed by the Electronic 
Measuring Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 The object of this standard is to establish performance requirements 
and methods of test for hand held metal detectors used for determining 
the location of metal weapons carried on a person and in a small package. 

0.3 This standard is a technical document consisting of performance and 
other requirements together v^'ith a description of test methods. 

0.4 Purchasers can use the test methods described in this standard to 
determine first hand whether a particular equipment item meets the 
requirements of the standard. 

0.5 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from 
NILECJ — STD — C602-00 ( 1974 ) 'Hand-held metal detectors for use 
in weapons detection", issued by the National Institute of Law Enforce- 
ment and Criminal Justice, United States Department of Justice, USA. 

0»6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1^60*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standaid. 



♦Rules for rounding ofT numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 12126 - 1987 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the methods of test and performance require- 
ments of hand held metal detectors used for determining the location of 
metal weapons carried on a person and in a small package. 

1.2 It does not cover metal detectors used for detecting the following: 

a) Wiring of explosives, and 

b) Buried metals and metals in trenches, 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Detection — A positive audio alarm indication caused by a test 
object or a weapon. 

2.2 Positive Alarm Indication — The change in sound level which 
is considered to indicate the presence of metal. 

2.3 Separation Distance — The separation distance is the shortest 
distance between the metal sensing area of the detector and a test object. 
If the metal sensing element has an open loop geometry, the surface of 
an imaginary membrane stretched over the metal sensing element shall 
be considered to be part of the sensing area. 

3. CLASSIFICATION 

3.1 Security Applications — A detector shall meet all the require- 
ments of security applications as defined below. 

3.1.1 Application 1 — Open Search for Metal Weapons — Open scanning 
of persons for guns and large knives constructed of either ferromagnetic 
or non-ferromagnetic metal including 4M and 4N. 

3.1.2 Application 2 — Open Search for Small Metal Weapons — Open 
scanning for either ferromagnetic or non-ferromagnetic metal weapons 
as small as test objects 2N, 3M and 3N on persons who have supposedly 
removed all metal items. 

3.1.3 Application 3 — Open scanning for either ferromagnetic or non- 
ferromagnetic metal weapons as small as test objects 2N, 3M and 3N in 
concealed packages. 

3.2 Alarm Indication Class 

3.2.1 Alarm Indication — Alarm indication having only two states, one 
for the absence and the other for the presence of significant metal. 

3.3 Detector Type 

3.3.1 Active Detector — One which generates an external magnetic 
field. It usually responds to any metal. 

4 



IS : 12126 - 1987 

4. HEQjUIREMENTS 

4.1 Ambient Temperature — Detectors shall meet the requirements 
of this standard over the following ambient temperature range: 

a) — 10 to + 50°C — For normal application, and 

b) — 25 to -1- So^'C — For applications in severe environmental 
conditions. 

4.2 Controls — The manufacturer shall specify the settings or a 
calibration procedure. The setting procedure shall not require more 
than ten seconds by a trained operator. 

4.3 Alarm Indication 

4.3.1 Pilot Indication — Any pilot indication which is on, whenever the 
detector power is applied must be separate and distinct ( not varying in 
degree only ) from the alarm indication for metal detection. 

4.3.2 Audible Alarm Indicators 

a) Any audible indicator other than an earphone shall produce 
an alarm-state sound pressure level at the ear of the operator 
of at least 60 decibels, measured in accordance with 5.2.2, 
The manufacturer shall meet the specific requirements of 
audio frequency and sound level requirements of user, arising 
out of its application. 

b) An audible indication in absence of met^l shall give continuous 
alarm indicating unhealthy condition of battery as specified 
by the manufacturer. 

4.3.3 Visible Alarm Indicators — There shall be visible indication for 
healthy battery condition and power on. 

4.4 Detection Performance — The detector shall meet the detection 
performance requirements for all security application in which it is 
required to operate. When tested in accordance with 5.3, each test 
object listed in Table 1 under required detection for that security 
application shall be detected- Metal detector should have response such 
that large metal pieces should be detected from greater distances and 
small metal pieces are detected from lesser distances. This guides the 
operator to get an idea regarding the size of metal pieces being detected 
by the metal detector. Large size metal objects shall be detected by 
metal detector at small distance also. 

4.5 Search Loop Area — The search loop of the metal detector shall 
have a search area of 125 sq cm, Min^ 

4.6 Weight of Metal Detectors — The weight of the metal detectors 
shall not be more than 0'7 kg, including the batteries. 



IS : 12126 - 1987 



TABLE 1 DETECTION PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

{ Clause ^A) 

Securitv AppLiCATioisr Required Detectiok 

1 Objects IM, IN, 4M and 4N 

2 Objects IM, IN, 2N, 3M and 4N 

3 Objects IM, IN, 2N, 3M and 3N 

Note — The test objects listed are given in Fig. 1, 2, 3 and 4, 

4.7 Time Varying Generated Magnetic Field — The carrier 
frequency of any magnetic field generated by the detector shall be 
below 30 kHz. 

4.8 Operation Near Metal Walls — The detector shall not produce 
a positive alarm indication, when tested in accordance with 5.4. 

4.9 Batteries 

4.9.1 Minimum Battery Life — Minimum battery life shall be 400 mAh 
and it should preferably be of rechargeable type and should be 
compatible for use with dry batteries without any modification. 

4.9.2 The battery consumption shall be 20 mA, Max in non-alarm 
state and 40 mA, Max in alarm state. 

4.10 Reset Time — The reset time for the detector, after positive 
detection of metal, shall be less than two seconds, 

4.11 Safety 

4.11.1 Electrical Safety — If the potential difference between any two 
parts of the detector exceeds 42*4 volts ( peak ), the detector shall 
comply with 9 of IS : 9858-1971*. 

4.1L2 General Safety — The metal detectors should not be used for 
frisking persons having implanted pacemakers. 

4.12 Stability of Settings — The sensitivity shall remain stable for 
1 h for 75 percent of the specified distance when adjusted to detect IM 
and IN test objects ( temperature variation remaining within ± 2 per- 
cent ) when checked at intervals of 10 minutes. 

Note — For the purpose of checking this requirement, the sensitivity should be 
other than the critical. 

4.13 Construction Requirement — The coil shall make an angle of 
about 15° with the plane of the body of the metal detector. The dimen- 
sions of the body of the metal detector shall be such that it facilitates 
gripping by the operator, 

♦Safety requirements for electronic measuring apparatus. 

6 



IS : 12126 - 19B7 

4.14 Data Supplied by the Manufacturer 

4.14.1 An operator's manual shall be supplied by the manufacturer 
or distributor with each detector. This manual shall clearly state the 
instructions for operation and maintenance of the device and shall 
include the following information; 

a) Security application ( as described in 3.1 ), 

b) Overall dimensions of detector, 

c) Dimensions of detector in the region normally gripped by hand , 

d) Weight of detector, 

e) Battery type and quantity, 

f) Operating ambient temperature range, and 

g) A circuit diagram with brief explanation along with fault ^nding 
procedures and test signallevel/voltage. 

Note — The manufacturer shall supply technical manual and the information 
given in (g) above when required by the user, 

4.15 Marking 

4.15.1 The following information shall be marjced on the metal 
detector indelibly and shall be externally^ vi^sible: 

a) Serial number and model designation, 

b) Name and trade-mark of the manufacturer, and 

c) Country of manufacture. 

4.15.2 Certification Marking — The paetal detector may glso be marked 
with the Standard Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made theireunder. The 
Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance 
that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard 
under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which'is devised 
and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products 
are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard 
Mark mav be granted to manufacturers or porcessors may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

5. TEST METHODS 

5.1 General Test Conditions 

5J.1 Test Location — The distance between any metal object other 
than a test object and the closest part of the detector shall be greater 
than 0'90 metre. 



IS« 12126 - 1987 

5*1.2 Environment — At the time of the tests, the ambient temperature 
shall be between 5 and 40''C and the relative humidity shall be between 
10 and 90 percent. 

5.1.3 Preparation — New batteries of the type listed in the operator's 
manual shall be installed at the beginning of the tests and as instructed 
in any test method. Any set up or calibration adjustments specified in 
the operator's manual shall be performed, if required. 

5.1.4 Classification of Tests 

5.1.4.1 Routine tests — The following shall consist of routine tests: 

a) I^attery consumption test { 4.9.2 ), and 

b) Detection performance ( 5.3 ). 

5.1.4.2 Acceptance tests — The following shall consist of acceptance 
tests: 

a) Weight (4,6), 

b) Battery consumption test ( 4,9.2 )y and 

c) Detection performance ( 5.3 ). 

5.1.4.3 Type festrs — The following shall consist of type tests: 

a) Weight (4.6), 

b) Battery consumption test ( 4.9.2 ), 

c) Alarm indication tests ( 5.2 ), 

d) Detection performance ( 5,3 ), 

e) Operation near metal wall ( 5.4 ), 

f) Stability of settings test ( 5.5 ), 

g) Vibration test ( 5.6 ), 
h) Shock test ( 5.7 ), and 
j) Drop test (5,8 ). 

5.2 Alarm Indication Tests 

5.2.1 Equipment 

5,2.1.1 Sound level meter — The sound pressure level meter shall be 
Type 3 A weighting, reference pressure 20 micropascals according 
to IS: 9779-1981*. 

5.2.2 Sound Pressure Level Test — Perform the test in an anechoic 
chamber or at an outdoor location, at least 6 m from any large object, 
where the ambient sound pressure level at the time of the test is not 

♦Specification for sound level meters. 



IS : 12126 - 1987 

more than 53 decibels.. Hold the detector in the normal manner in the 
right hand at waist level with that arm extended in front of the body. 
Direct the metal sensing area of the detector to the left, with the detec- 
tor's major axis horizontal. Position the sound pressure level meter 
microphone 0*80 m from the centre of the palm of the hand holding the 
detector. Place the microphone adjacent to the right ear of the tester 
approximately 15 cm from the head. Measure the sound pressure level 
with the detector power applied and the alarm indicator in the non- 
alarm state. ;Then position test object IM, described in Fig. 2 at a 
separation distance of 5 cm to produce an alarm, and again measure the 
sound pressure; level. 

5.3 Detection Performance Tests — The detection performance 
shall be evaluated by bringing a test object to the detector, each at a 
test separation distance specified in Table 2. The detector and any 
nearby metal shall be kept stationary to ensure that the change in the 
detector's response is due to a change in the test signal or the position 
of a test object. 

TABLE 2 TEST SEPARATION DISTANCES 

( Clauses 5.3 and 5,3.2 ) 

Minimum Separation Distance for 
All, Orientations 

cm 
Test object IM 10 

Test object IN 10 

Test object 2N 4 

Test object 3M and 3N 2 

Test object 4M and 4N 2 and 10 

5.3.1 Equipment 

5.3.1.1 Tfst objects — Test objects IM, IN, 2N, 3M, 3N, 4M and 4N 
shall be of the sizes and materials shown in Fig. 1, 2, 3 and 4 respec* 
tively. 

5.3.1.2 Detector, test object supports — The detector and test object 
shall be firmly supported by non-metallic materials such that the test 
separation distance between them is positively established. The position 
and orientation of the test object shall be adjustable for maximum detec- 
tor response at the specified test separation distances. The test object 
shall be removable without changing the position of the detector. 

5.3.2 Procedure — Set up the detector and the test object supports at 
the test location and adjust them for the appropriate test separation 
distance listed in Table 2, 



IS J 12126 • 1987 



102 mm 



38mm 



Material 

IM — Sheet carbon steel, cold finished. 1-6 mm thick as per 15:2004-1978 

'Specification for carbon steel forgings for general engineering purposes ( second 

revision )'. 

Tolerance on all dimensions except material thickness i 1 mm. 

IN — Leaded brass sheet, copper alloy, half hard, 1*6 mm thick as per IS : 531-1981 
'Specification for loaded brass strip for instrument parts ( second revision )' 

Fig. 1 Test Objects IM and IN Simulating 0'25 Semi-automatic Pistol 




Material — Non-magnetic stainless steel, 1'6 mm, Grade 04 Cr 19 Ni 9 as per IS : 6911- 
1972 ^Specification for stainless steel plate sheei and strip'. 

Fig. 2 Test Object 2N 



10 



IS : 12126 - M87 



20 mm 



rt\ 



KU 



3 M ^^ MS as per IS : 2255-1977 'Specification for mild steel wire rods for the manu- 
facture of machine screws ( by cold heading process ) ( second revision )*. 

3 N — Brass as per IS : 4170-1967 'Specification for brass rods for general engineering 

purposes. 

Fig. 3 Test Objects 3M and 3N 




4M — MS as per 15:2255-1977 'Specification for mild steel wire rods for the 
manufacture of machine screws ( by cold heading process ) ( second revision )\ 

4N — Brass as per IS : 4170-1967 'Specification for brass rods for general engineer- 
ing purposes'. 

Fig. 4 Test Objects 4M and 4N 

Remove the test object. Turn on the detector, permit it to warm 
up, and adjust its controls as specified in the operator's manual. An 
alarm indicator should be in the non-alarm state. 

Position and orient the test object for maximum detector response, 
or an alarm, at the test separation distance. Occasionally, remove the 
test object and readjust the detector setting while positioning the test 
object. After the position of maximum detector response has been 
located, remove the test object without moving the detector. Turn off 
the detector for one minute. Then turn on the detector and readjust any 
controls ( without moving the detector ) within 10 seconds. Do not 
make further adjustments to any control. Reposition the test object for 
maximum detector response or an alarm, 45s after the detector is turned 
on, note the alarm indicator response and then remove the test object. 
Immediately note the new alarm indicator response. The test object 
shall be considered to have been detected only if the alarm indicator 
with the test object removed is in the non-alarm state and the change in 
alarm indicator response corresponds to a positive alarm indication. 



11 



IS : 12126 - 1987 

5.4 Test for Operation Near a Metal Wall 

5AA Metal Test Panel — The metal test panel shall be cold-finished 
sheet of carbon steel in accordance with IS : 2004-1978*, 1 m^ and 
0'75 ± 0*13 mm thick. The panel shall be mounted or supported in a 
manner which keeps the panel flat, 

5.4.2 Procedure — Position the detector with its sensor plane parallel to, 
centered with respect to, 0*90 m from the plane of the test panel. Turn 
on the detector and adjust its controls as specified in the operator's 
manual. Note the alarm indicator response. Then rapidly ( within Is ), 
change the separation distance to 0*60 m and immediately note the new 
alarm indicator response. 

5.5 Stability of Settings Test — This shall be carried out as per 5.S 

for objects IM and IN and detection shall be done at interval of 10 
minutes. During 1 hour period, the sensitivity shall not be altered. 

5.6 Vibration Test 

5.6.1 The metal detector shall be mounted and tested in accordance 
with IS : 9000 ( Part 8 )-198lt and an equal number of samples shall be 
subjected to vibration test in each of the three principal axes. The vib- 
ration severity should be 10 to 55 Hz within a duration of 6 hours. 

5.6.2 After this test, the metal detectors shall be visually examined and 
there shall not be any damage or deterioration. The performance of 
metal detector shall be checked and it shall meet the requirement of 4.4. 

5.7 Shock Test 

5.7.1 The metal detector shall be mounted and tested in accordance 
with IS: 9000 ( Part 7/Sec 1 )-1979t at an acceleration of 1 000 m/s^ 
and for 6 ms. 

5.7.2 After this test, the metal detectors shall b>e visually examined and 
there shall not be any damage or deterioration. The performace of metal 
detector shall be checked and it shall meet the requirement of 4.4. 

5.8 Drop and Topple 

5.8.1 The metal detector shall be subjected to this test according to 
IS : 9000 ( Part 7/Sec 3 )-1979§. The height of fall shall be 1 000 mm. 

5.8.2 After this test, the metal detectors shall be visually examined 
and there shall not be any damage or deterioration. The performance of 
metal detectors shall be checked and it shall meet the requirement of 4.4. 

♦Specification for carbon steel for forgings for general engineering purposes ( second 
revision ). 

fBasic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical irems: Part S 
Vibration ( sinusoidal ) test. 

XBasic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 7 
Impact test. Section 1 Shock. 

§Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items.: Part 7 
Impact test, Section 3 Drop and topple. 

12 



