•••••••••••••••• 



• 



is^ 



ITH^ * 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 12393 (1988): Electroplated coatings of nickel [MTD 7: 
Light Metals and their Alloys] 



<st-^ii# 



^ 



ic 



y&^^Si^i f jija^>Nb.3^^^isAA^irt^a>g5 



2?as» V u>s5>5!fi^>a«^ 



^^^i^VCd^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 669-2487 I5 . ^2393 - 1988 



(Reaffirmed 2001) 
Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
ELECTROPLATED COATINGS OF NICKEL 



1. Scope — Covers nickel electrodeposited coatings that are applied to iron or steel, zinc alloys, 
copper or copper alloys, and aluminium and aluminium alloys to provide an attractive appearance and 
corrosion resistance. Several classes of coatings are provided that differ in thickness. The selection 
of coating class depends upon the service grade to which the coated product may be exposed. 

1.2 The minimum thickness requirements apply to those portions of the significant surface that can be 
touched by a ball 20 mm in diameter. All other requirements must be satisfied on the whole of the 
significant surface defined in 2. 

1.3 This standard does not cover coatings applied: 

a) for purposes other than protective and decorative; **jRsferenr^ n 

b) to machine screw threads; '-'^^~- 2 if -^^^ Infcr^^ '^cc- oTl}: 

c) to surface condition that the basis metal is to have prior to the coating process; and -'^ 

d) to mill products like sheet, strip or wire in the unfabricated form or coil springs. 

2. Significant Surface —For the purpose of this standard, significant surface is defined as the part 
of the article covered or to be covered by the coating and for which the coating is essential for 
serviceability and/or appearance, by a specified thickness of nickel. 

2.1 When necessary, the significant surface shall be the subject of agreement and shall be indicated on 
drawings or by the provision of suitably marked sample. 

3. Information to be Given with an Enquiry and Order— Information to be supplied while 
ordering plating of articles in accordance with this standard, purchaser should furnish the informations 
given in Appendix A. 

4. Classification for Coatings 

4.1 Service Grade Number — The service grade number is used by the purchaser to specify the degree of 
protection required, as related to the severity of the conditions to which a product is to be subjected, in 
accordance with the following scale: 

a) 3 — Severe, 

b) 2 — Moderate, 

c) 1 — Mild, and 

d) — Exceptionally mild. 

4.2 Coating Classification Number — The coating classification number comprises the following: 

a) The chemical symbol for the basis metal ( or for the principal metal or an alloy ) followed by 
a slash as follows: 

1) Fe/f or iron or steel, 

2) Zn/for zinc or zinc alloys, 

3) Cu/for copper or copper alloys, and 

4) Al/for aluminium or aluminium alloys; 

b) The chemical symbol for copper (Cu), if copper or brass containing greater than 50 percent 
copper is used as an intermediate coating; 

c) A number indicating the minimum thickness of the copper coatings, in micrometres; 



Wj 



Adopted 25 April 1988 



O January 1989, BtS 



Gr 4 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12393 - 1988 

d) The chemical symbol for nickel (Ni); 

e) A number indicating the minimum thickness of the nickel coating, in micrometres; and 

f ) A letter designating the type of nickel coating ( see 6.2.2.2). 

4.2.1 Example of a complete classification number — fi^ coating on steel comprising 20 |i.m copper 
( minimum ) plus 30 [^m bright nickel ( minimum ) has the classification number: 

Fe/Cu20 Ni 30 b 

4.3 Coatings Appropriate to Each Service Grade Number — Tables 1 to 4 show, for the various basis 
metals, the coating classification numbers appropriate for each service grade number. 

TABLE 1 NICKEL COATINGS ON STEEL (OR IRON) 

( Clauses 4.3, 6.2 and 6.2.1 ) 

Service Grade Classification 

Number Number* 

3 Fe/Ni30b 

2 Fe/Ni20b 

1 Fe/NilOb 

Fe/Ni 5b 

Note — A copper undercoat may be used. If the minimum thickness of copper is 20 i^m, then for service 
grade number 3, the minimum thicitness of nickel may be reduced by 5 [xm below the value stated in the table. 
When a copper underlayer is used for service grade numbers 0, 1 and 2, on reduction in minimum nickel thickness 
shall be made. 

^s-nlckel may be substituted for A-nickel In each classification number, p- or i/-nickel may be substituted for 
6-nlckel in service grade numbers 3, 2 and 1. 



TABLE 2 NICKEL COATINGS ON ZINC ALLOYS 

( Clauses 4.3, 6.2 and 6.2.1 ) 

Service Grade Classification 

Number Number* 

3 Zn/Cu NI35b 

2 Zn/Cu NilSb 

1 Zn/Cu Ni 7b 

Zn/Cu NI 5b 

Note — All the nickel coatings shall be applied over an undercoat of copper or brass (with at least 
SO percent copper ) deposited from a cyanide electrolyte having a minimum thickness of 8 v-m. If the minimum 
thickness of copper is increased to 15 [xm by subsequent deposition from a bright acid copper bath, then for service 
grade number 3, the minimum thickness of nickel may be reduced by 5 y-m below the value stated in the table. 
No reduction in the minimum thickness of nickel shall be made for other service grade when additional copper is 
used. 

*j'nickel may be substituted for b-r\\cke\ in each classification number, p- or o^-nickel may be substituted for 
i>-nickel in service grade numbers 3 and 2. 



TABLE 3 NICKEL COATINGS ON COPPFR AND COPPER ALLOY 

( Clauses 4.3, 6.2 and 6.2.1 ) 

Service Grade Classification 

Number Number* 

3 Cu/Ni20b 

2 Cu/NilOb 

1 Cu/Ni 5b 

Cu/Ni 5b 

♦ 

*s-nickel may be substituted for ib-nickel for each service grade, p- or (/-nickel may be substituted for A-nickel in 
service grade numbers 3 and 2. 



IS : 12393 - 1988 



TABLE 4 NICKEL COATINGS ON ALUMINIUM AND ALUMINIUM ALLOYS 

( Clauses 4.3, 6.2 and 6.2.1 ) 

Service Grade Classification 

Number Number* 

3 A1/Ni30b 

2 A1/Ni20b 

1 AI/NiiOb 

Note — A copper undercoat may be used, but the minimum thicl<ness of nickel shall be that stated in the 
table. 

*P', d- or s-nlckel may be substituted forib-nickei for each service grade number. 

5. Heat Treatment of Steel — When required by the purchaser, heat treatment as described below 
shall be performed on certain steels to reduce the risk of damage by hydrogen embrlttlement. 

5.1 Stress Relief Before Electroplating 

5.1.1 Severely cold-worked steel parts — Severely cold-worked steel parts, or parts made from steel 
of tensile strength 1000 MPa (or corresponding hardness*) or greater, that have been ground or 
subjected to severe machining after tempering, shall normally be stress-relieved. As a guide, the parts 
may be maintained for 30 minutes, preferably at the hignest temperature which may be applied without 
adversely affecting their strengths. For example, for heat treated steels, at temperatures not exceeding 
the tempering temperatures. For parts made from certain types of steel, a temperature of 190 to 210°C 
for not less than 1 h may be adequate. 

5.1.2 Heat treated steels — Some steels that have been carburized, flamehardened or induction- 
hardened and subsequently ground would be impaired by the treatment given in 5.1.1, and shall instead 
be stress relieved at a lower temperature and for a longer period of time, for example, at l70°Cfor 
greater than 1 h. 

5.2 Heat Treatmerit After Electroplating 

5.2.1 Components subject to stress or made from higher tensile strength — Components that are 
subject to fatigue or sustained loading stresses in service and made from severly cold-worked steels or 
from steels of tensile strength 1 000 MPa ( or corresponding hardness ) or greater, shall be heat treated 
after the coating Is applied. Guidance is given in Table 5- 

TABLE 5 GUIDANCE ON HEAT TREATMENT OF STEEL PARTS AFTER PLATING 

Tensile Strength 
MPa 

1000 to 1150 



1 150 to 1 400 



Maximum Sectional 
Thicltness of Part 
mm 


Minimum Period at 

190 to 210°C 

hours 


Less than 12 
12 to 25 
Over 25 


2 

4 
8 


Less than 12 
12 to 25 
25 to 40 


4 

12 

24 
Heating to commence 
within 16 h of plating 


Over 40 


Requires experimental 
determination 



5.2.2 Surface hardened components — Where the heat treatment temperatures would be harmful, as 
for example, to certain surface- hardened articles, it may be necessary to apply a lower temperature for a 
longer time. 

6. Coating Requirements 

6.1 Finish and Appearance — Over the significant surface, the coating shall be free from clearly visible 
plating defects, such as blisters, pits, roughness, cracks unplated areas, stains and discolou^ations. The 



*30 HRC, 295 HV, 280 HB (approximate values). 



ISi 12393 -1988 

extent to which defects may occur on non-significant surfaces shall be specified by the purchaser. 
Where racl< marks are unavoidable, their position on the surface shall be specified by the purchaser. 

6.2 Thickness and Type of Coatings — The thickness and type of coatings shall correspond to the 
classification numbers given in Tables 1 to 4 for the specified service grade number. The minimum 
allowable thickness for the metal coating shall be required on any points on the significant surface that 
can be touched by a ball 20 mm in diameter, unless the purchaser specifies that other points shall also 
meet those thickness requirements. For tests prescribed to determine coating thickness, see 8.1. 

6.2.1 Ttilckness of copper coating — In copper plus nickel coatings, the minimum thickness for copper 
is indicated in the notes in Tables 1 to 4- 

6.2.2 Tfiickness and type of nickel coatings 

6.2.2.1 Tfiickness of nickel coatings — The total minimum thickness of nickel coatings shall be that 
designated by the classification number ( see 4.2 }. 

6.2.2.2 Type of nickel coatings — The type of nickel shall be designated by the following symbols: 

a) b for nickel deposited in the fully bright condition; 

b) p for dull or semi-bright nickel which has been polished; 

c) s for dull, satin or semi-bright nickel which shall not have been mechanically polished; and 

d) cf for double or triple layer coatings which shall have the properties given in Table 6, and 
passed the ductility test given in Appendix B. 

TABLE 6 PROPERTIES OF DOUBLE AND TRIPLE LAYER NICKEL COATINGS 

( Cfauses 6.2.2.2 and 8.4 ) 



Layer 
( Type of Nickel ) 


Specific 

Elongation, 

Percent 


Sulphur 
Content 
Percentj 


Thickness Percent Relative to 
Total Nickel Thickness 




Double Layer 




Triple Layer 


Bottom 
(s) 


>8 


< 0-005 


>Q0 




>50 


Middle 
(high sulphur b ) 


—"■ 


Greater than 
0*15 mass 
percent 







^OMax 


Top 
(6) 


— 


> 004 and 
<0-15 


<40 




<40 


Test Method 


See Appe 


ndix B and Note 1 









Note 1 — The sulphur contents are specified In order to indicate the type of nicltei plating solution that Is to be 
used. No simple method exists for determining the sulphur content of a nickel deposit on a coated article. An 
accurate determination is possible on a specially prepared test specimen by the methods given in draft Indian 
Standard for the method of determination of sulphur in electrodeposited nicite! ( under preparation ). 

Note Z — It will usually be possible to Identify the type and thickness of nickel layers by microscopical 
examination of a polished and etched section of an article prepared according to IS : 3203-1982 'Methods of testing 
local thickness of electroplated coatings ( first revision)'. 

6.3 Adhesion —The coating shall be sufficiently adherent to the basis metal, and the separate layers 
of a multilayer coating shall be sufficiently adherent to each other, to pass the test prescribed in 8.2, 

6.4 Corrosion Resistance — Coated articles shall be sufficiently corrosion resistant and pore free to pass 
the test prescribed in 8.3 for the individual service condition number. The performance rating shall be 
determined according to IS : 6009-1970 'Method for evaluation of results of accelerated corrosion 
tests'. The minimum acceptance rating shall be 8 after the test described in 8.3. 

7. Sampling — Out of each lot of similar parts, a number of samples shall be selected at random. 
The size of the lot and the number of samples to be selected shall be agreed upon by the manufacturer 
and the purchaser. All the samples selected shall be visually examined for any defects referred to 
in 6.1. 

8. Methods of Test 

8.1 Thickness — The thickness of a coating and its various layers shall be measured at any point 
on the significant surface that can be touched by a ball 20 mm in diameter. The microscopical 



IS : 12393 - 1988 

method described in IS : 3203-1982 'Method of testing local thickness of electroplated coatings {first 
revision )' may be used to measure the thickness of each nickel layer when it is 10 [^m or more, and 
of a copper undercoat. 

8.1.1 The magnetic method described in IS : 3203-1982 may be used to measure the total thickness 
of b, d, $, or p nickel on zinc alloys and copper alloys, if an appropriate calibration can be made. 

8.1.2 Other methods may be used if it can be demonstrated that the uncertainty of the measurement 
is less than 10 percent. 

8.2 Adhesion — Adhesion of the coating shall be tested by either the file test of the quenching methods 
given in Appendices C and D, There shall not be any detachment of the coating from the substrate or 
any separation between layers of the coating. 

8.3 Corrosion Resistance — Nickel coating without chromium top coats are not widely used and, as a 
result, there is limited information about their performance In accelerated tests and in actual service. 

8.3.1 Coated articles shall be subjected to one of the corrosion tests given in Table 7 for the 
particular service grade number. The particular test to be specified by the purchaser. The duration of 
each corrosion test has not been established experimentally and the times suggested in Table 7 are 
provided as guidance. In order to assure that the coatings render a useful service, the duration of the 
corrosion test shall be approved by the purchaser taking into account the requirements of the particular 
application and its intended service. 



TABLE 7 GUIDANCE ON CORROSION TESTING ON NICKEL COATINGS 

Basis Metal Service Condition Duration (in Hours) of 

Number Corrosion Test* 



CASS Acetic Salt 

(See IS : 5528-1985} {See IS : 6910-1985) 

Steel ( or Iron ) 3 16 96 

Zinc and zinc alloys 2 8 24 

Copper and copper alloys 14 8 

Aluminium and aluminium alloys t t 

•The duration of each corrosion test has not been established experimentally and the times indicated are 
provided as a guidance only. 

tTo be specified by the purchaser. 

8.3.2 The corrosion tests described in IS : 5528-1985 'Method of testing corrosion resistance of 
electroplated and anodized aluminium coatings by copper-accelerated acetic acid salt spray ( CASS ) test 
{first revision)' and 18:6910-1985 'Methods of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and 
anodic aluminium coatings by acetic acid saltspray test {first revision)' are useful in controlling the 
continuity and quality of the coating, but the duration bears little relationship to the service life of the 
finished article, especially in connection with the nickel coating covered in this standard. 

8.3.3 After the articles have been subjected to the appropriate corrosion test, they shall be examined 
and rated according to IS : 6009-1970 'Method for evaluation of results of accelerated corrosion tests' 
(see 6.4). 

8.4 Ducf/7/fy — The ductility shall be such that the elongation will not be less than stated in Table 6 
for nickel when tested by the method given in Appendix B. Greater elongation may be requested, 
but shall be subject to agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

9. Marking — The marking related to the coating shall include service grade and classification 
numbers as specified in this standard and the name or trade-mark of the manufacturer. 

9.1 Certification Marking— Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



APPENDIX A 

(C/ause3) 

INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN WITH AN ENQUIRY OR ORDER 

A-1. Mandatory Information 

A-1.1 When ordering articles to be electroplated in accordance with this standard, the purchaser shall 
provide the following information: ^ 

a) The number of this standard. 



IS : 12393 - 1988 



b) The basis metal and the service grade number denoting the severity of the conditions it is 
required to withstand ( see 4.1 ). 

or 

The classification number of the particular coating required (see 4.2). If the basis 
metal and the service grade number are quoted and not the classification number, the 
electroplater is free to supply any of the classes of coating corresponding to the service 
grade number, but he shall inform the purchaser of the classification number of the coating, 
when requested. 

c) The appearance required, for example, bright, dull, or satin. Alternatively, samples showing 
the required finish or range of finish shall be supplied or approved by the purchaser. 

d) The corrosion test to be used, if any, shall be specified by the purchaser. 

e) The adhesion test to be used, if any, shall be specified by the purchaser. 

f) The extent to which defects shall be tolerated on non-significant surfaces shall be specified 
by the purchaser. 

g) The significant surfaces shall be specified by the purchaser and indicated on drawings of the 
parts or by the provision of suitably marked specimens. 

h) When it is impossible to avoid rack or contact marks on significant surfaces, the position of 
those marks shall be approved by the purchaser. 

i) Sampling methods and acceptance levels shall be specified by the purchaser. 

A-2, Additional Information 

A-2.1 The following additional information may be provided by the purchaser, when appropriate: 

a) The tensile strength of the steel and the need for heat-treatment, either before or after 
electroplating. 

b) In those cases, where thickness coatings than are covered by this standard are required, the 
particular thickness desired shall be specified by the purchaser. 

c) The purchaser may specify thickness requirements on those points that cannot be touched 
by a ball 20 mm in diameter. 

APPENDIX B 

[ Clause 6.2.2.2(d) ] 

DUCTILITY TEST 

B-1. Preparation of Test Piece 

B-1.1 Prepare a coated test strip 150 mm long, 10 mm wide and 1 ± O'l mm thick by the following 
method: 

Polish a sheet of the appropriate basis metal, similar to that of the articles being coated except 
that the sheet may be of soft brass if the basis metal is zinc alloy. Use a sheet that is sufficiently 
large to allow the test strip to be cut from it after trimming off a border at least 25 mm wide all round. 
Electroplate the polished side of the sheet with nickel to a thickness of 25 m under the same conditions 
and in the same bath as used with the corresponding articles. 

Cut the test strip from the coated sheet with a guillotine or flat shear. Round or chamfer the 
longer edges of the test strip at least on the plated size by careful filing or grinding. 

B-2. Procedure — Bend the test strip with the coated side in tension, by steadily applied pressure, 
through 180° over a mandrel of diameter 11 "5 ± 01 mm, until the two ends of the test strip are parallel. 
Ensure that contact between the test strip and the mandrel is maintained during bending. 

B-3. Assessment 

B-3.1 The coating Is deemed to comply with the minimum requirement of an elongation of 8 percent 
provided that, after testing, there are no cracks passing completely across the convex surface. Small 
cracks at the edges do not signify failure. t 

B-3.2 This test is used to check that the type of nickel deposit complies with the coating requirements 
given in 6.2.2,2 (see also 8.4). 

6 



IS : 12393 - 1988 

APPENDIX C 

( Clause 8 2 ) 

FILE TEST FOR ADHESION 

C-1. Procedure — Cut a piece of plated article, hold it in a vice and apply a coarse file to the cut 
edge In such a manner as to try to raise the deposit. File in the direction from the basis metal to 
the coating at an angle of approximately 45° to the coated surface. There shall be no separation 
between the coating and the basis metal. 



APPENDIX D 

{ Clause 8.2 ) 

QUENCHING TEST FOR ADHESION 

D-1. Procedure — Heat plated article for 1 h in an oven at a temperature of 250X with a tolerance 
of ± 10°C, Then quench In room temperature water. The appearance of blisters or peeling shall give 
evidence of inadequate adesion. 

Caution — This test may have an adverse effect on the mechanical properties of the article tested. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The nickel coatings without chromium top coats that are covered by this standard are suitable 
for applications in which tarnishing is prevented by rubbing or handling in service or by the use of top 
coats other than chromium. They are also suitable for those applications where tarnishing is of no 
Importance. Similar coatings that provide an attractive appearance and corrosion resistance, and that 
do not tarnish in service are covered by IS : 1068-1985 ' Specification for electroplated coatings of 
nickel and chromium on iron and steel ( first revision )'. IS : 4827-1983 ' Specification for electro- 
plated coatings of nickel and chromium on copper and copper alloys ' and IS : 4828-1983 'Specification 
for electroplated coatings on nickel and chromium on zinc and zinc alloys'. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been taken from ISO/OIS 1458 
'Metallic coatings ~ eiectrodeposited coatings of nickel', issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



