**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13195 (1991) : Preliminary design, operation and 
maintenance of protection works downstream of spillways - 
Guidelines. [WRD 9: Dams and Spillways] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13195: 1991 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



Zrc<##fl Standard 

PRELIMINARY DESIGN, OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE OF PROTECTION WORKS 

DOWNSTREAM OF SPILLWAYS - GUIDELINES 



UDC 627831064-2 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1991 Price Group 5 



Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee, RVD 10 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee had been approved by River 
Valley Division Council. 

Protection works are necessary on downstream side of spillway so as to guard against expected or 
observed scour occurring in the immediate downstream vicinity of the spillway. 

At present specific methods are not available and such works are being done based on experience. 
As such works have been adopted in many projects therefore an attempt has been made to 
formulate these guidelines based on these projects. Nine case studies* have been given in this 
standard ( see Annexes A to J ) which are for general guidance and information only. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing, the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



*Greater details supported by figure for any of the case study be obtained from Central Water and Power 
Research Station, Pune. 



Indian Standard 



IS 13195 : 1991 



PRELIMINARY DESIGN, OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE OF PROTECTION WORKS 

DOWNSTREAM OF SPILLWAYS — GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down guidelines for 
preliminary design, operation and maintenance 
of protection works downstream of spillways. 



2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards 
adjuncts to this standard: 



are necessary 



IS No. 

4410 ( Part 9 ) 
1982 



7365 : 1985 
12720 : 1989 



Title 

Glossary of terms relating 
to river valley projects : 
Part 9 Spillways and syphons 
{first revision ) 

Criteria for hydraulic design 
of bucket type energy 
dissipators ( first revision ) 

Criteria for structural design 
of spillway training walls 
and divide walls 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4410 ( Part 9 ) : 1982 shall apply. 

4 TYPES OF PROTECTION WORKS 
DOWNSTREAM OF SPILLWAYS 

4.0 The following types of protection works 
downstream of the spillways have been covered. 

4.1 Training Walls at the Flanks of the 
Spillways 

Training walls extended beyond the endsill of 
the stilling basins or buckets generally serve to 
guide the flow into the river channel, protect 
the wrap-rounds of the adjacent earth dams, 
river banks or power house bays and tail race 
channels. To this extent, the training walls are 
considered to be downstream protection works. 

4.2 Protective Aprons Downstream of Backet 
Lips or Endstills of Stilling Basins 

Protective aprons of concrete laid on fresh rock 
or acceptable strata immediately downstream of 
bucket lips or endsill of stilling basin, protect 
the energy dissipator against undermining due 
to excessive scour during or after construction 
of the spillways. A suitable concrete key is 
normally provided, at the downstream end of 
the apron. Where the normal river bed level is 
higher than the endsill and a recovery slope is 
provided, it sometimes becomes necessary to lay 



a concrete apron on such a recovery slope also 
for protection. 

4.3 Concrete Blocks or Concrete Filling on 
River Bed Downstream of Energy Dissipator 

Concrete blocks or concrete fillings are 
sometimes provided on the river bed downstream 
of energy dissipators to safeguard against 
excessive scour and prevent further scour. 

4.4 Protective Pitchings on Natural or Artificial 
Banks Downstream of Spillways 

Protective pitchings of stone rip rap, masonry or 
concrete blocks are provided on natural river 
banks or artificially constructed embankments 
of diversion channels, power house tail race 
channels or guide banks, for protecting them 
against high velocity flows or waves. 

4.5 Figure 1 shows different types of protection 
works downstream of a typical spillway project. 
( also refer IS 7365 : 1985), - 

5 PRELIMINARY DESIGN 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR PROTECTION 
WORKS 

5.1 No definite and fast criterion can be fixed 
for the design of protection works such as those 
mentioned in 4.1 to 4.4 above. The recent 
design practices are based on past experience 
from the structures constructed and in opera- 
tion. In view of this, only broad guidelines are 
given for general design. 

5.2 Training Walls 

5.2.1 The design of a training wall ( also refer 
IS 12720 : 1989 ) involves determination of : 

a) alignment, 

b) length, 

c) top level, 

d) pressure distribution, and 

e) foundation level. 

5*2.1.1 The alignment and length are governed 

by the purpose for which the training walls is 
to be provided. For instance, a training wall 
intended to protect the earth dam wrap-round 
on the flank of a spillway direct or return may 
be alleged as to cover the portion exposed to 
the high velocity flow. Similarly, the alignment 
of a training wall for protecting the power 
house bay or power house tail race channel may 
be governed by the configuration of the bay or 
tail race channel alignment. In the case of 
spillways with ski-jump bucket, when the 



1 



IS 13195 : 1991 




f/ 



PROTECTION WITH CONCRETE BLOCK 
FILLING OR OTHER TREATMENT 



RIGHT TR. WALL 
PROTECTIVE APRON 



BUCKET LIP 



SPILLWAY 




SECTION 2 2 



MASONRY BLOCK PROTECTION 



KEY 



Fig. 1 Different Types of Protection Works Downstream of a Typical Spillway Project 

training walls are extended beyond the bucket 
lip, recession or flaring away from the flow 
could be advantageous as their heights could be 
reduced because of isolation from the ski-jump 
umbrella- This arrangement also facilitates 
better aeration of the ski-jump jet. 

5.2.1.2 Since the training walls are seldom 
designed to be submersible, their top levels have 
to be above the highest water level expected 
after allowing for the adequate free board 
considering the air entrainment and bulking of 



5.2*1.3 The foundation levels of the training 
walls should be based on the scour profiles 
obtained from the hydraulic model studies. 
Whether the foundation levels should extend 
up to the full depths indicated by the scour 



profile or some portion of it, could be decided 
after considering such factors as the nature of 
rock forming the foundation, frequency and 
duration of floods, initial cost of construction 
and future maintenance cost, etc. When model 
studies have not been carried out the anticipated 
ultimate scour can be predicted as given in 
IS 7365 : 1985. 

5.3 Protective Aprons 

5.3*1 Protective aprons of concrete laid on fresh 
rock immediately downstream of the bucket 
lips or endsills of the stilling basins serve two 
purposes, namely : 

a) During construction stages of the 
spillways, flows of large discharge 
intensity and lower heads pass down the 



IS 13195 : 1991 



spillways resulting in cascading action 
over the bucket lip or endsill. This 
situation causes deep scour at the toe of 
the lip or endsill and undermines their 
foundations. Concrete apron laid just 
downstream of the lip or endsill prevents 
such scour and protects the foundation, 
and 

b) Even after the completion of the spillway, 
in the case where the bucket lip or end 
sill of the stilling basin is substantially 
higher than the general channel bed level, 
and the channel bed is erodible, low initial 
flows may have a tendency to cascade 
over the lips or endsills. As such, pro- 
vision of concrete aprons guards against 
deep scour just at the toe. Even in long 
run, when scour has stabilized in the 
downstream region, the concrete apron 
continues to protect the toe foundations. 
It also serves as. a signal to indicate the 
state of scour in the immediate down- 
stream vicinity of a structure and allows 
necessary remedial measures to be taken. 

5.3.2 While no definite criteria for the design 
of such aprons are available at present, the 
following guidelines should be followed: 

5.3.2.1 The apron should be laid on fresh rock 
or acceptable strata. 

5.3.2.2 It should be about 15 to 20 metres long 
and be laid continuously from one end of the 
spillway up to the other end. Its thickness is 
generally of the order of 0'6 to V 5 metres. In 
case where model studies have done, the apron 
lengths and depth can be arrived at based upon 
the results emerging from the model studies, 
particularly for the parametric studies conducted 
on the model from different out flow* and 
combination of operations where two or more 
types of energy dissipators arrangements 
coexist. 

5.3.2.3 The apron should be properly anchored 
into the base rock and should be provided with 
a key at the end, which should be suitably keyed 
into the base rock. 

5.3.2.4 When the fresh rock level or acceptable 
strata varies in elevation from one end to the 
other end of the spillway, the apron level could 
also vary accordingly. However, in such cases, 
the apron be placed at least 1 to 1*5 metres 
below the bucket lip or endsill top, and not 
higher than this limit ( also refer IS 7365 : 
1985), 

5.4 Concrete Blocks or Concrete Filling 

5.4.1 When excessive scour on the downstream 
of energy dissipator has already taken place and 
there is a risk of such scour progressing towards 
upstream endangering the safety of the structure, 
filling the rock joints and cavities in the scour 
hole with concrete; providing grouted anchors 



to prevent further scouring, has been attempted 
in some cases. The details of such protection 
including size of blocks, method of dumping, 
filter requirement, etc, have to be decided on 
the merits of the individual case. 

5.5 Protective Pitchings 

5.5.1 Natural river banks or artificially con- 
structed slopes of the embankments, guide 
banks, etc, subjected to flow velocities and waves 
require some form of protection to retain their 
shape and prevent their erosion or dislodgement. 
Such protection is usually in the form of pitch- 
ing, which can be either flat stone or needle rip 
rap, masonry lining or concrete lining. The type 
of the pitching to be provided and other details 
would depend on several factors such as magni- 
tude of velocities or wave height to be with- 
stood, slope of the bank, properties of the 
material such as angle of repose, chemical com- 
position, etc, and the extent of surface to be 
protected. The type of the pitching to be 
provided may also be governed by the availabi- 
lity of pitching material. A.s for example, 
concrete lining might be preferred to stone 
masonry pitching because of non-availability of 
large size stones, in a particular situation. "The 
stone pitching can be with wire net caging also* 
depending on the site requirements. The design 
velocity or wave height should be determined 
from hydraulic model studies. 

5.5.2 The following guidelines may be followed 
while designing the protective pitching. 

5.5.2.1 The bank or the surface to be protected 
should have, as far as possible, straight align- 
ment or smoothest possible curves as against 
highly curved or tortous alignment. This would 
ensure batter performance of the pitching, 

5.5.2.2 The slope of the bank to be pitched 
should be flatter than the angle of repose of the 
material forming the bank, otherwise the 
material retained at a steeper slope would exert 
outward force on the pitching to disrupt it. 
For very large heights, intermediate berms may 
also be provided. 

5.5.2.3 When the pitching is in the form of 
layers of hand placed or dumped dry stones, the 
weight and size of individual stone should be 
determined from the following relationships, 
due to Isbash. 

ft V 9 yw* y P ^ 



W w - 



6C*(2g)*(Y* - yw)a 
and 



*-[^-r 



(2) 



where 

W& — weight of the stone in kg, with 

50 percent material containing stones 

of weight W&o or less 
V = velocity of flow, m/s 
yw = specific weight of water, 1 000 kg/m 3 



IS 13195 : 1991 



yp = specific weight of pitching material, 
kg/m 3 

C = 0*86 for high turbulence level flows 
( stilling basins, etc ) 
= 1'2 for low turbulence level flows 
( river closures, etc ) 

I>&o = equivalent spherical diameter of stone 
having the same weight as W 5 o 

5.5.2.4 If the embankment is subjected to waves 
in addition to flow velocity, the weight of the 
stone should also be checked from the following 
relationship due to Iribarren. 

K H* hv (3) 



W = 



( p cos a — sin a ) 3 



(fc-0 



where 

K = constant whose value is 0'43 
ft = constant with a value of 2'38 
dp =sa density of pitching material 
H = wave height 

ot = angle of slope of embankment 
Sw = density of water 

5.5.2.5 The larger of the two values of W as 
calculated from equations (1) and (3) should be 
adopted. 

5.5.2.6 For high velocities, when the weight 
required of the individual stone is too large, wire 
net tied crates of several stones, of the required 
weight and size could be used. In such a case, 
the least dimension of the smallest stone used 
should be about two times the opening in the 
wire net. 

5.5.2.7 When the weight required is extremely 
large, so that it could not be met with from 
stones or stone-crates, continuous lining of the 
surface by masonry or concrete could be resort- 
ed to. For such linings, there are two important 
factors to be decided, the size of the individual 
panel ( to be cast as a monolith ) and the 
thickness of the lining. The following procedure 
should be adopted: 

a) Using the appropriate relationships 
( see 5.5.2.3 and 5.5.2.4 ) decide the 
weight of the panel required against the 
velocity of the flow. 

b) Using appropriate value of the specific 
weight of the pitching material rp, ( stone 
masonry or concrete ), calculate volume 
of the panel. 

c) Calculate the thickness of the lining using 
the formulae 



/1+JL 
V S 



a = . -r— ' 

rv 2g 

where 

d --= thickness of the lining 
rw = specific weight of water 



(4) 



rp — specific weight of the pitching 
material 



V = velocity of flow 
g = gravitational constant 
S = slope of the bank expressed as S 
( Horizontal ) : 1 Vertical 

d) Knowing the volume of the panel and 
thickness of the lining, the linear dimen- 
sions (i.e. size) of the panel could be 
worked out. This size may be proportion- 
ed to the overall size of the area to be 
pitched. 

5.5*2.8 The toe of the pitching should be keyed 
down firmly into the bed rock. The depth of 
keying would depend upon the quality of bed 
rock and the overburden. Where bed rock is 
not available at all or available at very large 
depth, the pitching should continue into the 
ground, along the same slope, adequately below 
the expected depth of scour, which should be 
determined from the model studies. 

5.5.2.9 For all types of pitching, adequate 
drainage to relieve the uplift pressure below the 
pitching, by way of weep holes, filters, etc, 
should be provided, as per the relevant Indian 
Standards Specifications. 

5.6 In several cases, the spillways are located in 
saddles away from the main river channels. 
The flow passed down the spillway is then led 
to the main river through an excavated channel 
called the tail channel. For reason of economy, 
the tail channels are excavated only for their 
part width under the assumption that it will form 
its required section by erosion in due course of 
time. For this reason, permanent protection 
measures are deferred initially until the prototype 
behaviour of the tail channel is known during 
subsequent periods. While in most cases, this 
approach is successful, in some cases, the tail 
channels have behaved unexpectedly leading to 
unforeseen damages. 

6 ASPECTS OF OPERATION AND 
MAINTENANCE 

6.1 The spillway or outlets should not be 
operated in contravention to the assumptions 
made in the design of various protection works. 

6.2 The performance of the protection works 
should be observed during floods for the general 
flow conditions. Important parameters such as 
water levels, velocities, wave wash, erosion, etc, 
should be measured at all relevant locations and 
the records maintained. 

6.3 All the maintenance procedures as applicable 
to the civil engineering hydraulic construction 
works also apply to the protection works 
described above and should be followed. 

6.4 The behaviour of the protection works 
normally remaining under water should be 
watched by special dewatering operations, at- 
least once after three spill years and repairs 
required, if any, should be executed well in 
time. 



IS 13195 : 1991 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON THE BEHAVIOUR OF THE RIGHT TRAINING WALLS DOWNSTREAM 
OF SKI-JUMP BUCKETS, OF UKAI AND GANDHISAGAR DAM SPILLWAYS 



A 1 While the results of model studies can be 
directly applied to finalize the design of training 
walls on the flanks of the spillways, in respect of 
alignment, length, top levels, etc, decision in 
respect of foundation levels often pose a pro- 
blem. Model studies generally indicates deep 
scour along the training walls and because of the 
impracticability of taking foundation to such 
depths, the training walls are usually founded 
on fresh and hard rock, keying or anchoring 
adequately into the rock. A possibility of 
undermining, in due course of time, is not 
altogether ruled out, but a judicious operation 
of spillway especially not operating the spans/ 
sluices adjacent to the training walls often 
delays it. 

A-2 The right training wall at Gandhisagar 
Spillway separates the spillway and the power- 
house. The wall constructed in masonry was 
founded on hard and fresh rock at a uniform 
level of el. 339*85 m, although the deepest scour 
indicated by the model was at el. 326*1 m. 



A-3 In the case of right training wall of Ukai 
dam spillway, the foundation levels were based 
on the assumption by the project authorities^that 
the depth of scour in the prototype may reach, 
at the most, up to about 50 percent of the 
depth indicated by the model. While the main 
foundation levels were taken to the hard and 
fresh rock levels, continuous concrete key wall 
below the main foundation was taken down to 
50 percent scour profile. It is striking to note 
that undermining occurred only in this reach, 
endangering the stability of the inherently weak 
part of the wall. The damaged portion has since 
been filled by a concrete pedestal. 

A-4 The problem of determining the foundation 
levels of training wall, thus appears to be of 
taking a calculated risk. The decision often 
reduces either in providing foundation against 
an anticipated depth of scour ( and thus high 
initial cost ) or keeping it to the available rock 
level and remedial measures as and when 
required in future ( thus recurring maintenance 
expenditure ). 



ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON THE PROTECTIVE APRONS DOWNSTREAM OF THE SKI-JUMP 
BUCKETS OF UKAI, SALAL AND SRISAILAM DAM SPILLWAYS 



B-l Since the ski-jump buckets are intended to 
deflect the high velocity jet away from the 
structure and restrict the scour to the zone of 
impact of the jet, possibility of scour working 
back upwards is remote. However, for the 
partly completed spillways with low heads the 
throw of the trajectory would be relatively 
shorter and scour may occur very near the 
bucket lip. Even for the fully completed spill- 
ways, operation of a few spans or undersluices 
in isolation would cause the flow to be spread 
laterally with the impingement near the bucket 
lip. Such a condition caused deep scour and 
undermining at the bucket lip of Hirakud spill- 
way. Deep scour near the bucket lip also 
occurred on the Gandhisagar spillway. In the 
case of Ukai dam spillway, the possibility of 
deeper scour near the bucket lip was visualized 
during the model studies and was taken care of 
in the prototype by provision of a 15 metre long 
concrete apron laid on fresh rock parallel to the 
bucket lip. The apron has remained intact and 
served its purpose. 

B-2 When such aprons are not laid on fresh 
rock or are not provided along the entire length 



of the spillway ( leaving some portion without 
concrete capping ), the damage is two folds; 
deep scour occurs on the unprotected portion 
endangering the foundation of the main struc- 
ture and the apron already laid also gets dis- 
lodged due to such scour. The cases ofSalal 
and Srisailam dam spillways serve as ideal 
examples. 

B-3 In 1982 construction stage of Salal dam 
spillway, the height of fall from the lowest 
block of the spillway up to the downstream rock 
level was about 17 metres. The effective head 
was 25 metres. During the construction season, 
concrete apron was proposed to be provided 
over the jointed dolomite rock for the entire 
length of the spillway. However, due to in- 
sufficient time, only part central length could be 
fully covered, where as at other place, the apron 
concrete had begun to be laid from its down- 
stream end and left uncompleted. 

B-4 During the floods of 1982, the maximum 
intensity of discharge over the partially com- 
pleted spillway was around 47 cumecs/metre. 
The zones where the bsd rock was covered with 



IS 13195 : 1991 



concrete apron duly anchored to the bed rock, 
no scour took place. Scour occurred only at 
places, where the rock could not be covered with 
concrete apron. At certain places, the unrein- 
forced concrete apron remained overhanging 
up to about 3 metres over the undercut. 

B-5 Srisailam dam spillway across river Krishna, 
was constructed during 1977-83. It is a 137 m 
high concrete dam, with 12 spans of 183 m X 
16*8 m. The river bed is composed of quartzites 
and shales. In the immediate downstream 
vicinity of the spillway, there were horizontal 
shear zones 0*2 m to 0*9 m thick, where the 
quartzites are crushed and sheared. 

B-6 During the monsoons of 1977 to 1980, the 
construction stage flood passed over the partially 
constructed spillway bays, spilling over 7 bays 
which were at different levels having a maximum 
difference of level of 23 m. The difference in 
level between the tip of the ski-jump bucket and 
downstream rock was about 44 m. 

B-7 Shorter throw of the water spilling over the 
bucket lip, as a cascading flow caused deep 
scour in the immediate vicinity of the bucket 
lip. During subsequent floods, the scour holes 
were concreted and leveled as protective aprons 
in some part of the spillway. Such aprons were 
however, subjected to repeated damage and 



undermining. By April 1985, depth of scour 
below blocks 11 to 13 reached from 9 m to 
22 m below the protective apron. Cavities of 
undermining below the apron were also present 
at a depth of 6 to 9 m. 

B-8 The protection work consisted of providing 
an underwater massive concrete block touching 
the apron and filling the eroded cavities below 
the apron. The water level at downstream toe 
varied from the top of existing apron to about 
1*5 m below it. 

B-9 The scheme involved forming 4 cells with 
steel cylinder walls and filling concrete in each 
cell followed by concrete capping. Heavy 
concrete blocks ( approximate 1 metre cube ) 
were placed downstream of the cylinder walls 
to further protect the rock from the water jump 
damage. 

B-10 Since the construction of the above 
protection works, the spillway was completed to 
final levels and crest gates have also been instal- 
led. Hydraulic model studies were conducted 
to evolve an operation of the spillway in such 
a way that the throw of the trajectory fall 
further away from the toe of the dam. This 
together with the protective measures already 
implemented is expected to prevent further 
erosion at the toe of the dam. 



ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF MANDIRA DAM SPILLWAY 

WITH CONCRETE CUBES 



C-l The Mandira dam spillway consists of 
11 spans, 15*24 m wide X 6*1 m high separated 
by 274 m thick piers, across river Sankh in 
Orissa State. The spillway is designed to pass 
a maximum discharge of 8 495 m 3 /s. To lead 
the discharge to the main river, a tail channel of 
about 183 m length was excavated. Due to 
peculiar nature of foundation conditions (highly 
jointed carbonaceous phylites ) and the schedule 
of construction programme, the spillway profile 
adopted for construction was in two steps, 
incorporating a short slopping apron 12*2 m 
lower than the crest followed by a weir with 
uniform radius ski-jump bucket at the toe. 

C-2 During the year 1958 to 1962, discharge 
varying from 680 m 3 /s to 4 700 m 3 /s passed down 
the spillway. The tail channel development 
took place with considerable scour in the bed 
immediately downstream of the spillway. The 
deepest scour level reached was el. 184 7 m at 
15'2 m from the bucket. The sheet piles below 
the endsill of the bucket were also exposed. To 
protect the bucket foundation ( approximate el. 
187'5 m ) and the exposed sheet piles, a concrete 
sloping ramp was placed adjacent to the sheet 
piles. In addition, concrete cubical blocks of 
YfS m size constructed in situ were placed along 



the entire length of -the spillway and extending 
to about 33 m beyond the bucket. These blocks 
were meant to form a flexible protection to 
the bed. 

C-3 It was observed during the subsequent 
floods, that the protection was not fully effective 
as due to action of flow, -issuing from the ski- 
jump bucket, the bed material between the 
blocks was removed leading to uneven settlement 
of blocks to depths varying from 1 to 5 metres. 
This measure of protection had been adopted as 
an urgent measure without model studies. 

C-4 Later, the model studies were undertaken to 
suggest the best form of protection. The 
recommendations made on the basis of the 
model studies including placing of a concrete 
mat, of 0*46 m thickness, enclosing the concrete 
cubes to a length of about 15 metres and 
grouting the interstices between the blocks. The 
surface of such mat was to slope gently away 
from the bucket. The blocks already placed 
bsyond the concrete mat were allowed to 
remain. The question of extending the concrete 
mat further downstream was kept open till 
further prototype experience became available. 



IS 13195 : 1991 



ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF UKAI DAM SPILLWAY 



D-l The Ukai dam spillway, across river Tapi, 
consists of 22 spans, 15*55 m X 14*71 m each, 
separated by 3*96 m thick piers. The crest is at 
el. 9ri3 m, the FRL being el. 105*16 m. 
The energy dissipator comprises a ski-jump 
bucket at a uniform level of el. 51*82 m and lip 
level of el. 58*22 m. The 15 m wide protective 
apron downstream of the bucket lip has been 
provided at different levels to cover the rock 
profile. The bed rock downstream of' the 
bucket comprise massive basalts, porphyritic 
trap and amygdaloidal trap, 

D-2 The hydraulic model studies indicated for 
the design flow, deep scour holes reaching el. 
27 m in the trajectory impact area, about 100 m 
from the bucket lip. It was recommended that 
all the spillway gates may be operated equally 
and simultaneously, as far as possible. 

D-3 During 1973 to 1979, discharge varying 
from 220 m 3 /s to 7 533 m 3 /s passed down the 
spillway. The gates were however operated in 
a manner which was contrary to the require- 
ment of equal and simultaneous operation of all 
gates, with the result that discharge much lower 
than the design discharge resulted in very high 
intensity of discharge with very low tail water 
levels. This condition, in addition to causing 
deep scour in the impact zone, also induced 
return flows which caused damage to the found- 
ations of training walls and concrete aprons. 

D-4 The entire downstream area was dewatered 
in 1981 for inspections and repairs. It was 
seen that the deepest scour level had gone below 
the level indicated from the model studies using 
fully erodible bed material. There were at least 
five areas in the downstream region, which 



needed immediate protection. 

D-5 The protection provided before the 
monsoon of 1981 consisted of: 

i) Filling the crevices up to 75 mm width 
with rich cement mortar 1 : 3 after 
cleaning- Grouting and compaction of 
cement mortar was done as deep as 
possible. 

ii) Sealing the big hollows and cavities in 
the exposed rock surfaces with masonry 
and with rich cement mortar 1 : 3. 

iii) Guaniting treatment to the exposed rock 
joints in the ski-jump area. 

iv) Extension of apron near the right side 
training wall to cover the scoured area. 

v) Covering with mass concrete 1 : 1*5 : 3 
with anchor bars 25 mm to 28 mm 
diameter over the right side gullies I and 
II, which were considered to be the most 
vulnerable points, where the scour was 
seen approaching towards the spillway. 

vi) Concrete filling with anchor rods in other 
areas of deep scours. 

D-6 The above measures are expected to arrest 
further scour in the downstream area. In addi- 
tion, a revised pattern of operation of crest 
gates was evolved whereby return flows could 
be minimized. This pattern involves equal and 
simultaneous opening of 17 central gates with 
gates 1 and 2 on left, 10 in the centre and 21 
and 22 on the right side to be opened slighlty 
so as to arrest the return flow. 



ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF KADANA DAM SPILLWAY 



E-l The Kadana dam spillway, across river 
Mahi, consists of 21 spans, 15*55 m wide 
X 14*03 each, separated by 3'96 m thick piers. 
The energy dissipator at the toe is in the form 
of solid roller bucket. The three central spans 
9-10-11, have the roller bucket with the invert 
higher by 305 m than the adjacent spans due 
to foundation problems. These spans have been 
separated by two intermediate low height divide 
walls. A protective concrete apron of approx 
15 m width was provided throughout the 
length of the spillway* The highly folded and 



metamorphosed rocks comprise phyllites, mica 
schists and quartzites. 

E-2 The spillway was completed in 1977 and 
experienced floods of magnitude varying from 
4 045 m 3 /s to 17 730 m 3 /s up to 1982. The 
discharge of 17 730 m 3 /s, in 1981 was passed 
through 10 spans which resulted in specific 
discharge of 114 m 2 /s as against design value 
of 120 m 2 /s. On the other hand, tail water depth 
of 22*6 m as against design value of 26*9 m 
was available, which resulted in imperfect 



IS 13195 : 1991 



energy dissipation and excessive scour. When 
the downstream scour pool was dewatered for 
inspection in 1984, a deep scour hole, of about 
15 m depth, was found at a distance of 
about 30 m from the bucket lip, in front of 
span No. 19. In addition, some scour holes 
were observed near the end of the low divide 
wall and downstream of the aprons of sapan 12 
to 16. The apron key in front of span 39 was 



exposed by about 
the apron end. 



1 m due to undermining at 



E-3 The small scour pits were filled with M-20 
concrete with 20 percent plum including 
necessary anchoring with 25 mm dia bars at 
1'5 m centres. The damaged portion of the 
apron front of span 19 was filled up similarly 
with concrete and the apron was extended by 
about 11 '3 m. 



ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION DOWNSTREAM OF DHAROI DAM SPILLWAY 



F-l The Dharoi dam spillway, across river 
Sabarmati, consists of 12 spans, 14*9 m wide 
X 1067 m each, separated by 3*66 m thick 
piers. The spillway is designed to pass a 
maximum outflow of 15 439 m 3 /s, at FRL el. 
18959 m. The spillway crest is at el. 178'96 m. 
The energy dissipation arrangements at the toe 
consists of solid roller bucket at invert el. 
149'05 m for the three left spans and at el. 
147*52 m for the remaining nine spans. The 
average ground level el. 158'5 m downstream of 
the spillway being substantially higher than the 
bucket level, a 15 m wide excavated ( unprotec- 
ted ) plateform at el. 150'0 m was provided just 
downstream of the bucket lip and was jointed 
to the ground level by a recovery slope 3:1. 

F-2 The spillway was completed in 1976 and 
the radial gates were installed in 1978. Various 
floods with discharges varying from 990 m 3 /s 
to 1 470 m 8 /s passed down the spillway 
between 1976 and 1980- The gates were 
operated for the first time in 1980. For the low 
outflows, 6 central gates were opened for 0'3 m 
opening. For higher discharges, all the gates 
were opened to full height (9m), one by one 
for testing purposes. Such a operation resulted 
in unsatisfactory flow conditions leading to 
flow concentration at some place and return 
flows at the other. 

F-3 The downstream portion was dewatered for 
the first time in 1982 for inspection. It was 



observed that the bueket surface was eroded 
to depths varying from 2 mm to 260 mm. 
There was erosion near the bucket lip of spans 
1-2 and all along the left training wall. The 
launching apron at the end of the left training 
wall had been washed out, endangering the 
safety of the earth dam behind it. Higher rock 
out crops along the right flank of the spillway 
also appeared to cause unsatisfactory flow 
conditions. 

F-4 The following protective measures were 
provided : 

i) The eroded bucket surfaces was repaired 
with epoxy coat and epoxy mortar 1 : 7. 

ii) Seventy four drainage holes provided in 
the bucket were air cleaned. 

iii) Higher rock out crop on the left flank, 
at levels varying from el. 155 m to el. 
164 m was dressed down to a uniform 
level of el. 155 m, 

iv) The portion downstream of the bucket lip 
of spans 1-2 and along the left training 
wall was provided with a 10 m wide 
concrete apron ( 1 : 1*5 : 3 ) founded on 
hard rock at el. 1500m. 

v) The left training wall was extended by 
27 m to cover the earth dam toe. 



ANNEX G 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTECTION OF THE LEFT BANK DOWNSTREAM OF 
MAHI BAJAJ SAGAR DAM SPILLWAY 



G-l The Mahi Bajaj Sagar Dam Spillway, 
across river Mahi in Rajasthan consists of 16 
spans, 15 m X 12*5 m each separated by 3'5 m, 
each separated by 3'5 m and 5'5 m thick piers- 
The crest level is at el 268'5 m, with FRL el. 



280*75 m and MWL el. 28T50 m. A ski-jump 
bucket with a radius of 15 m and 40° lip angle 
has been provided at the toe with its invert at el. 
227*0 m. The design maximum discharge is 
24 000m 3 /s. 



8 



IS 13195 : 1991 



G-2 The river bank on the right side is formed 
of exposed rock. However, on the left side, 
a road leading to the earth dam has been 
provided at el. 247'5 m and therefore, an 
artificial embankment has been constructed to 
slopes varying from 1*75 : 1 to 2:1. This 
embankment has been connected to the low 
level submersible bridge located about 350 m 
downstream of the axis. 

G-3 Hydraulic model studies for different dis- 
charges indicated that the left bank would be 
subjected to velocities of the order of 7 m/s. 
The deepest scour level reached el. 220 m over 
an initial length of about 80 m protection to the 
left bank. 



G-4 Various alternative methods of protective 
pitching were considered. Provision of con- 
crete lining was adopted in view of high 
velocity as well as non-availability of large size 
stones at the dam site. The size of the indi- 
vidual concrete panel was worked out as 
3*5 m X 3*5 m X 1 m thick, laid on suitable 
filter and provided with weep holes for drainage. 
The toe of the pitching was taken at el. 
225*0 m, except for the initial 80 metre length 
where the scour levels indicated from the model 
studies were as deep as el. 220 m. In this 
reach, a 4' 5 m wide concrete apron was pro- 
vided at el. 225'0 m with its cut-off taken down 
to el. 220*0 m. 



ANNEX H 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTOTYPE BEHAVIOUR OF TAIL CHANNEL 
DOWNSTREAM OF ANER DAM SPILLWAY 



H-l The Aner dam spillway consists of 10 
spans, 120 m X 6"5 m each separated by 2*75 m 
thick piers, on a saddle, across river Aner in 
Mahar&stra. The Spillway crest is at el. 209*8 m 
with the FRL at el. 216"4 m and HFL at el. 
218*4 m- The energy dissipation arrangement 
consists of 44 metre long hydraulic jump type 
stilling basin at el. 199*0 m. The spillway has 
been designed for maximum outflow of 4 318 
m'/s. 

H-2 The spillway has been constructed in 
saddle away from the main river. The flow 
passing down the spillway is led to the main 
river through a 1 260 metre long excavated tail 
channel. The width of the tail channel of 14475 
metre at the end of the stilling basin is gradually 
reduced to 60 metres at its confluence with the 
main river. The bed level of the tail channel 
drops from el. 204 m to el. 182 m. The design 
bed slopes are 1 in 75 and 1 in 30. It was 
assumed in the design that with the above 
configurations of the tail channel the maximum 
tail water level at the stilling basin exit would 
be el. 20990 m. Accordingly, both the guide 
walls of the spillway were kept at el. 210*5 m. 
The design also provided for the construction 
of flood embankments in continuation of the 
guide walls, to avoid flooding on the low lying 
areas on both the sides of the tail channel and 
particularly the left bank canal. 

H-3 During actual construction, the flood 
embankments were, however, not constructed. 
Also the required levels and gradients of the tail 
channel by excavating the rock out crops were 
not provided under the assumption that there 



would be natural erosion of the tail channel bed 
and banks during floods. The bed levels were 
approximately higher by 2 metres than the 
design bed levels. This was done mainly to 
save cost of excavation ( believed to be Rs 45 
lakhs or so ) which hopefully was to be done by 
the nature itself. 

H-4 During the floods of 1981, a maximum 
discharge of 3 777 m 3 /s ( about 87% of design 
discharge ) passed down the spillway. The 
expected erosion of the tail channel did not 
take place and as a result, the tail water levels 
actually obtained were found to be higher by 
about 2 metres. The higher tail water levels 
coupled with the non-existence of flood em- 
bankments and inadequate heights of the guide 
walls led to flooding on both the sides of the 
tail channel and breach of the left bank main 
canal. 

H-5 The following remedial 'measures were 
taken up by the project authorities : 

i) Construction of the left side flood em- 
bankment, leaving adequate free board 
over the expected tail water levels. The 
material required for the construction of 
this embankment is quarried from the 
excavation of the tail channel as far as 
possible, 

ii) Raising of the left side guide wall by 
1*5 m, and 

lii) Rate of erosion to be watched carefully 
every season. 



IS 13195 : 1991 



ANNEX J 
( Foreword ) 

CASE STUDY ON PROTOTYPE BEHAVIOUR OF TAIL CHANNEL 
DOWNSTREAM OF WATRAK DAM SPILLWAY 



J-l The Watrak dam spillway consists of 96 . 
spans, ;12*5 m X 8*25 each, separated by 2*75 m 
thick piers, on a saddle, across river Watrak in 
Gujarat. The Spillway crest is at el. 128*0 m 
with the FRL at el. 136*25 m and HFL at el. 
139*69 m. The energy dissipation arrangement 
consists of 64 metre long hydraulic jump type 
stilling basin at el. 115*85 m. The spillway has 
been designed for a maximum outflow of 5 667 
m 8 /s. 

J-2 The spillway has been constructed in saddle 
on the right of the river, due to poor founda- 
tion conditions in the main river. The flow 
from, the spillway is led to the main river 
through 1 260 metre long excavated tail channel. 
The width of the tail channel of 88*7 metre at 
the end of the stilling basin is reduced to 45 
metres at 1 its confluence with the main river. 
The bed level : of the channel drops from el. 
120;8 m^ at the beginning to el. 108*3 m at the 
confluence. The tail channel runs along the 
rock formation containing alternate bands of 
quartzite aud phylite. 

J-3 The spillway and the tail channel were 
subjected to flow, first time during the monsoon 
on 1933, for a maximjim. discharge of about 
368 m s /s, as against design, discharge of 5 667 
m 3 /s. Heavy efosion took place in the tail 
Channel t from .ch. 370 downstream, with the 
depth of erosion reaching about 7 metres in the 



vicinity of ch. 570. Since such large scale 
erosion had occurred even, fort as small a dis- 
charge as 6% of the design discharge, it was 
decided to provide protection to the bed of the 
tail channel so as to prevent the erosion travell- 
ing upwards the spillway. Accordingly I metre 
thick apron of M-20 concrete with two keys, 
one at the upstream and one at the downstream 
was designed to be provided between ch. 416 
and ch. 449. The profile of the apron was fixed 
according to the scour profile. 

J-4 This work could be started only in July 
1984. When part of the work was in progress, 
another flood of about 736 m* passed down •, the 
spillway in August 1984. i During this flood, 
further erosion of tail channel had taken place 
and the erosion . apeared to move upstream. 
Due to this, it became infeasiable to construct 
the protective apron at its originally planned 
location ( ch. 416 to ch- 449). The revised 
location was decided to be between ch, 370 and . 
ch. 402, according to the scour profile existing 
there. The upstream key at el. 100 m and the 
downstream key would be at el. 100 m. 

J-5 In addition to the above protective 
apron, a key below the end sill of the stilling 
basin, going down up to el. 97.0 m has also been 
provided to guard against any scour occurring 
in the immediate downstream vicinity of the 
spillway. 



10 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer, Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Irdian Standards. 



