**************** 






w^^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 13553 (1993) : User Documentation and Cover Information 
for Consumer Software Packages for Information Processing 
Systems [LITD 14: Software and System Engineering] 



g^ vi jii^^.j>^^^f i/ui^vA^^g^ Ts:>&^rn¥3egg 



i^Ssl * I nS¥!S>5«!5S'>3«^^ 



■:^:^^<VVV:^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
'Invent a New India Using Knowledge" 



^^,^ 






tiojf^'-fjj))^ 



■jum 



^*<4 



^% 



^*«i 



.^o^ 






Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



'^ir^ 



**************** 



BLANK PAGE 




^<ii££ 




p,»> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13553 :1993 
ISO 9127 :1988 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

^^^T Wm^ ^^ % f^ ^T^>^m" ^"t^t^'T q-4i^<^*4) 

Indian Standard 

USER DOCUMENTATION AND COVER 
INFORMATION FOR CONSUMER SOFTWARE 
PACKAGES FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING 

SYSTEMS 



UDC esrs'oe 



©BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1993 Price Group 4 



Information Systems and Software Sectional Committee, LTD 33 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 9127 ; 1988 'Information processing 
systems — User documentation and cover information for consumer software packages' issued 
by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of 
Indian Standards on the recommendations of Information Systems and Software Sectional 
Committee ( LTD 33 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to 
those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to ths following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

In this Indian Standard, the following international standard is referred to. Read in its 
place the following: 

International Standard Indian Standard 

ISO 6592 Information processing — Guidelines 15 13394:1992 Guidelines for the docu- 
for the documentation of computer-based mentation of computer-based application 

application systems systems for information processing 

( Identical ) 



IS 13553 : 1993 
ISO 9127 : 1988 



Indian Standard 

USER DOCUMENTATION AND COVER 
INFORMATION FOR CONSUMER SOFTWARE 
PACKAGES FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING 

SYSTEMS 



Introduction 

Consumer software packages are ready-made packages sold 
off the-shelf to the consumer. Typically the software is sold 
pre-wrapped with its user documentation. 

The information provided in the user dot u mentation on the 
cover of the package is often the only means whereby the 
manufacturer or marketing organization can communicate with 
the consumer and user. It is therefore vitally important that suf- 
ficient information is given to enable the consumer to use the 
software successfully. 



1 Scope and field of application 

This international Standard describes the user documentation 
and cover information supplied with consumer software 
packages : 

- User documentation 

This documentation provides users with all the information 
they need to install and run the software. Typically this 
documentation takes the form of one or more manuals 
included with the software inside the wrapping. As a result, 
users are not able to consult the manual(s) until they have 
bought the package. 

User documentation is described in section one of this Inter- 
national Standard. 

Cover information 

This is information given on the external wrapping of the 
package. Its purpose is to enable prospective purchasers to 
decide on the applicability of the software to their re- 
quirements, 

Cover information is described in section two of this Inter 
national Standard. 

This International Standard does not cover 

— Marketing literature. 

The brochures and leaflets whose purpose is to pro 
mote the package. 

— Tschnical descriptions of the software 

All ttie system, program nwi data documentation required 
to maintain and enhance the software, i.e. the documen- 



tation which describes the content of the software as 
opposed to its use. Manufacturers produce this documen- 
tation in order to be able to adequately support the soft- 
ware, but in order to protect their proprietary interests, they 
will not normally release it to the consumer. 

This International Standard does not give guidance on how the 
information should be presented, nor does the ordering given 
to information in this International Standard imply a prescribed 
order for the information content of the documentation of an 
individual package. 

This International Standard is applicable to software packages 
sold off-the-shelf to consumers for business, scientific, edu- 
cational and home use. 



2 References 

ISO 6592, Information processing — Guidelines for the 
documentation of computer based application systems. 

ISO 7185, Programming languages — PASCAL. 



3 Definitions 

For the purpose of this International Standard the following 
definitions apply: 

3.2.1 consumer software package: A software product 
designed and sold to carry out identified functions; the soft- 
ware and its associated documentation are packaged for sale as 
a unit. 



3.2.2 consumer: The organization or person who buys the 
software package. 



3.2.3 end user ; The person who uses the software package. 

3.2.4 manufacturer: The organization which develops the 
software package. 



3.2,5 marketing organieation; The organization which 
markets the software package. 



IS 13553 : 1993 
180 9127:1988 



3.2.6 supplier: The organization which sells the software 
package to the consumer. 



3.2.7 software support: The act of maintaining the soft- 
ware and its associated documentation in a functional state. 



NOTE — Software support may be given by the manufacturer, 
marketing organization, supplier or other organization. In special 
contractually-agreed cases, consumers may be permitted to maintain 
or enhance the software themselves. 



3.2.8 environment: The configuration(s) of hardware and 
software tn which the software operates. 

For example, the type(s) of computer, operating system, other 
software and peripherals for which the software is designed. 



4 Categories of information 

Throughout this International Standard three categories of 
information have been identified : 

a) Essential 

Information supplied with every package; 

b) Conditional 

Information supplied with every package to which it is 
relevant; 

c) Optional 

Information supplied at the discretion of the manufac- 
turer or marketing organization. 

Annotations (ESS), (CON) and (OPT) identify essential, con- 
ditional and optional information respectively. 



1813553:1993 
ISO 9127:1988 



Section one: User documentation (ESS) 



5 Purpose 

The purpose of user documentation is to provide the end user 
with sufficient information for a clear understanding of 

a) the purpose, functions and characteristics of the soft- 
ware; 

b) how to install and use the software; 

c) contractual rights and responsibilities. 

The documentation shall include reference documentation, for 
day-to-day use with the software. Optionally it may include 
teaching documentation, designed to teach users how to use 
the software. It may also include cards, booklets or screen 
' based information giving a summary of the operating instruc 
tions and commands. 

Where necessary, supplements to the documentation may be 
issued; for example : 

documentation errata; 

— lists of identified but not covered errors in the software 
product, with descriptions of known consequences. 

Documentation may be supplied as hard copy or on an elec- 
tronic or other medium. 



6 Reference documentation (ESS) 

Reference documentation shall give a sufficiently clear and 
comprehensive account to permit the end user to set up, install 
and use the software successfully. 

Where relevant, examples and Illustrations shall be given and 
any abbreviations and symbols used in the documentation shall 
be defined. 

Instructions shall also be included on how to use the reference 
documentation. 

6.1 identification of the package (ESS) 

6.1.1 Package name and code (ESS) 

The title or name which identifies the package and subtitle 
which indicates its functions shall be given. The product code 
or reference number of the package shall also be given. 

6.1.2 Variant (CON) 

Additional identification for any package having two or more 
current variants (for example for different equipment or 
operating system) shall be given. 

6.1.3 Version (CON) 

The version identification of the software, where applicable, 
together with an explanation of the version numbering system 
shall be given. 



6.1.4 Dates (ESS) 

The release date of the original and current versions shall be 
given. 

6.1.5 Manufacturer or marketing organization (ESS) 

The name and address of the manufacturer or the organization 
which markets the software package shall be given. 

NOTE - It is recommended that Identification items 6.1.1 to 6.1.5 be 
displayed to the user whenever the software is loaded. Identification 
information displayed on the screen must be consistent with the identi 
fication information given in the reference documentation. 

6.1.6 Key words (OPT) 

Key words or descriptors which characterize the package and 
which could be used for indexing or retrieval purposes shall be 
given. For example; "word processing", "spreadsheet", "data- 
base management", "simulation game". 

8.1.7 Language (OPT) 

The language used for the software user interface and for the 
user documentation shall be identified (for example Japanese, 
French, English). 

6.2 Components of the package (ESS) 

6.2.1 Items supplied (ESS) 

All physical items supplied in the package (for example disks, 
cassettes, manuals, etc.) shall be listed and identified by name 
and quantity. 

Where relevant, the contents of the physical items (for example 
the programs supplied on the disks or cassettes, the docu- 
ments included in the manuals, etc.) shall be identified. 



6.2.2 Associated items (CON) 

Any associated software, hardware or documentation which 
may be relevant but which is not included with the package 
shall be briefly described. The supplier details and order 
number of any such item shall also be given. 



6.3 Functional description of the Software (ESS) 

6.3.1 Purpose and field of application (ESS) 

The purpose of the software and the functions it performs shall 
be described. The extent of its functions shall be clarified, and, 
if necessary, any related functions that it does not perform shall 
be identified. Where the software consists of more than one 
program, the purpose and function(s) of each component pro- 
gram shall be described. 



1813553:1993 
ISO 9127 : 1988 



Examples of the field of appiiuation of the software shall be 
given. 

If necessary, the special and distinguishing features of the soft- 
ware, planned future revisions, etc. shall be described. 



6.3.2 Environment (ESS) 

a) Hardware requirements (ESS) 

The hardware configuration(s) needed to run the soft- 
ware, including memory requirements, shall be speci- 
fied. If appropriate, reference shall be made to cor- 
responding documentation. 

b) Software requirements (CON) 

The names, variants, versions and dates of any other 
software needed to run the software, with reference to 
the corresponding documentation, shall be given. 

c) Communications requirements (CON) 

The communications interface to other systems shall be 
described. 

The protocol used shall be identified and any necessary 



The character set or communications code used shall 
be identified and any exceptions or special codes listed. 

d) Other requirements (CON) 

Any other environmental requirements shall be de- 
scribed. 



6.3.3 Characteristics (CON) 

a) Performance characteristics (CON) 

Quantitative information for typical examples, such as 
performance data and level of accuracy, shall be given. 

b) Program size (OPT) 

The total program size in commonly used units shall be 
stated (for example bytes, lines of source code). 

c) Processing speed (OPT) 

Information on processing speed (for example speed of 
compilation, sorting time, communications speed, 
retrieval time, response time) shall be provided. 



Any security facilities provided to permit the user to protect the 
software or its component programs and data from unauthor- 
ized access shall be described. 

Any audit features and data backup facilities shall also be 
described. 



6.4 Installing the software (ESS) 

6.4.1 Installation (ESS) 

Any necessary information for the installation of the software 
by the end user, describing all actions necessary to introduce 
the software into its operating environment, for example con- 
necting a printer, entering a printer specification, entering 
master file data, running test software, etc., shall be given. 



6.4.2 Creating backup copies (CON) 

A description shall be provided on how to create backup copies 
of the software, if backup copies are permitted. 



6.4.3 Software modification (CON) 

If the user has to modify the software for particular 
environments or usages, the necessary information for this to 
be done shall be given. 



6.5 Using the software (ESS) 

Complete information for the use of the software, covering 

a) preparation for use; 

b) input commands and data; 

c) software functions; 

d) the resulting output; 

e) fault and error messages, and remedial and recovery 
actions; 

shall be given. 

Preparation, input, processing, output and errors may be 
described function by function or collectively, as appropriate, 

Typical examples to help the user understand the operation of 
the software, including sample listings and displays of data and 
results shall be given. 



6.3.4 Restrictions (CON) 

Any restrictions on the use of the software or its components 
programs shall be specified. 

It shall be stated whether the software is copy protected. 



6.5.1 Loading the software (ESS) 

Instructions for loading the software into the computer shall be 
given. Where preliminary actions are required, such as loading 
an operating system, instructions shall be provided or reference 
made lo associated documentation. 



IS 13553 
ISO 9127 



1993 
:1988 



6.S.2 Control instructions, commands or language rules 
(ESS) 

a) Control instructions and commands (ESS) 

The format and function of all control instructions or 
commands shall be clearly specified. Any restrictions on 
their use, such as mode of operation, input conditions 
and input sequences, shall also be specified. 

b) Output messages (ESS) 

The messages displayed in response to control 
instructions or commands shall be listed. If the 
messages are not self-explanatory, their meaning shall 
be described. Any actions to be talcen by the user in 
response to the messages shall also be described. 

c) Programming language rules (CON) 

For compilers the rules of the language shall be de 
scribed by reference to associated documentation (for 
example ISO 7185 for PASCAL). 



6.5.3 Data (ESS) 

a) Input data (CON) 

The content, logical structure and format of the input 
data, including the meaning of each element, shall be 
described. Any dependence of the data on particular 
properties of the data medium shall also be described. 

If other equipment or software is required to prepare 
input data for the software, for example for the creation 
of files, the requirements shall be fully specified. 

b) Auxiliary data (CON) 

Any auxiliary data required for the operation of the soft- 
ware, for example a dictionary for word processing 
software, shall be described. 

c) Output data (ESS) 

The content and format of displays, printouts and any 
other form of output data shall be described. Illus- 
trations of sample output shall be given. 

d) Intermediate data (CON) 

The content and format of any Intermediate data shall 
be described, when necessary, for the user's under- 
standing of the operation of the software. 

e) Restrictions on data (CON) 

Any restrictions on data, for example limit on number 
size, shall be described. 

f) Data storage (CON) 

File and record formats shall be described if necessary, 
for the user's understanding of the operation of the 
software. It shall be stated whether the formatting per- 
mits use of the files and records by other software. 



Any restrictions, for example maximum number of 
records per file, maximum number o* files per disk, shall 
be described. 

6.5.4 Processing (CON) 

A brief description of functions carried out by the software in 
response to input commands, instructions and data shall be 
given, if necessary, for the user's understanding of the oper- 
ation of the software. 

6.B.5 Errors and faults (ESS) 

All errors and fault conditions, and associated messages shall 
be described. All remedial actions for all errors and faults shall 
also be given. 

6.6 Software technical information (CON) 

For some types of packages, for example scientific software, it 
may be necessary to give technical information relating to the 
software, for example language used, software structure, algo- 
rithms used, etc. 

6.6.1 Language (CON) 

If the user needs this information, for example to combine the 
product with other software, the programming language shall 
be specified preferably by reference to the appropriate stan- 
dard. Additionally, the name, variant, version and supplier of 
the compiler or interpreter shall be given. 

It shall be stated whether any exceptions to the language stan 
dard have been adopted. 

6.6.2 Problem solution principles and algorithms (OPT) 

The theoretical principles, methods of solution and algorithms 
used in connection with the specified functions and with the 
structural organization of the program{s) shall be described. 
Relevant literature references shall also be given. 

Details of any special interpretation of characters or combi- 
nation of characters applicable to the solution of the problem, 
especially concerning prefixes, suffixes, signs, accuracy, 
rounding, coordinate systems and value ranges shall be given. 

6.6.3 Software structure (OPT) 

The organization of the software units (for example program, 
modules, segments, common storage areas) shall be de- 
scribed. 

The presentation may be made graphically, for example by a 
tree structure diagram, or by an appropriately structured 
textual description, and may contain the unit names, their entry 
points and interfaces, as well as their inter-relationships. 

6.7 Testing (OPT) 

Any methods used to test the software package functions, with 
sample inputs and expected outputs, shall be described. 



18 13553:1993 
ISO 9127:1988 



6.8 Contractual information (ESS) 

6.8.1 Warranty or guarantee (ESS) 

Copyright conditions and the terms of the warranty or 
guarantee shall be stated. The guarantor shall be named. 



6.11 End users' comments (OPT) 

A means whereby end users may comment on the accuracy 
and usefulness of the documentation shall be included. This 
may take the form of a preprinted, prepaid card to be retuf^ed 
to the manufacturer or marketing organization. 



6.8.2 Legal rights and responsibilities (ESS) 

The manufacturer's legal responsibilities and the consumer's 
rights, including 

a) training and related assistance; 

b) software support (correction of faults, etc.); 

c) quality assurance (product testing, etc.); 

d) availability of source code; 
shall be described. 

The address{es) of the organizationls) or person(s) responsible 
for the above shall also be given. 

6.8.3 Standards and laws (OPT) 

Any applicable standards followed, for example ISO 6592, shall 
be referenced. If not in full conformity, the degree or level to 
which the standard is followed shall be stated. 



7 Training documentation (OPT) 

The purpose of training documentation is to give a step by step 
introduction to the use of the package for new or inexperienced 
users. 

For the simpler types of software, the contents of the reference 
documentation may be sufficiently simple to meet this require- 
ment. However, for software with a more complex user inter- 
face, special training documentation may be advisable. 

As the purpose of training documentation is to introduce users 
to the software, it is not necessary to describe the user inter 
face in complete detail. Sufficient guidance should be provided 
to give users practice and confidence in using the software, 
and to bring them to the point where they are able to use the 
reference documentation successfully. 

As an alternative to, or in addition to, printed documentation, 
training may be provided in an on-line form (for example as 
software and sample data supplied on and loaded from disk). 
The manufacturer, marketing organization or supplier may also 
offer personal training. 



6.9 Glossary (CON) 

A glossary of technical or other specialist terminology with 
which the user is unlikely to be familiar shall be included. 

6.10 Index (CON) 

An index of the contents of the reference documentation shall 
be given. 



8 Quick reference documentation (OPT) 

Summaries of operating instructions (commands, error 
messages, etc.) printed on cards or in small booklets are 
valuable to the experienced user, as a supplement to the 
reference documentation. 

The provision of on-screen menus and "help" facilities is also 
recommended. 



18 13553 : 1993 
ISO 9127: 1988 



Section two : Cover information (ESS) 



9 Purpose 

Cover information is information attached externally to the 
package and readable by the consumer before purchase. Its 
purpose is to permit potential purchasers to assess the ap- 
plicability of the package to their requirements. 



10 Content 

10.1 Package identification (ESS) 

The title or name which identifies the package and a subtitle 
which indicates its function shall be given. The date of release 
shall also be provided. 

Variant and version information if required shall be provided 
and the name of the organization which manufactures or 
markets the package shall also be given. 

Key words or descriptors shall be listed. 

Where applicable, the language in which the software user 
interface and the documentation are written shall be identified. 



10.2 Purpose and field of application (ESS) 

The purpose and functions of the package shall be briefly 
described in a way that enables the consumer to decide 
whether, and within what limits, the package can be used. 



10.3 Environment (ESS) 

10.3.1 Hardware requirements (ESS) 

The hardware configuration needed to run the software shall be 
specified and memory requirements indicated. 

10.3.2 Software requirements (CON) 

The name, versions, dates and variants of other software 
needed to run the package shall be given. 

10.3.3 Communications requirements (CON) 

Any necessary communications hardware and software shall be 
indicated as well as protocol characteristics and constraints. 

10.3.4 Other requirements (CON) 

Any other environmental requirements shall be indicated. 

10.4 Input (OPT) 

The input device or medium, for example keyboard, file, 
joystick, mouse, shall be defined or illustrated. 



10.5 Output (OPT) 

The output device(s), for example laser printer, and format(s), 
for example display formats, shall be defined or illustrated. 

10.6 Restriction on data or files (CON) 

Any restrictions on data or files, for example maximum 10,000 
records per file shall be indicated. 

10.7 instructions for use (OPT) 

A brief description shall be given on how to use the package. 

10.8 Supplementary information (OPT) 

The derivation, methods, special and distinguishing features of 
the software, planned revisions, etc., shall be indicated. 

10.9 Contractual information (CON) 

Contractual information, as applicable, shall be specified, 
including : 

— copyright; 

— licencing terms and conditions of use; 

— warranty or guarantee terms. 

10.10 Customer service address (OPT) 

The name, address and telephone number of the organization 
or persons responsible for package support shall be given. 

10.11 Items supplied (ESS) 

The physical items which constitute the package shall be listed, 
for example flexible disk cartridge, manual, keyboard template. 

10.12 Standards and laws (OPT) 

Any applicable standards followed shall be referenced as well 
as any laws or statutes conformed with. 

10.13 Independent certification (OPT) 

Any quality certification awarded to the package shall be stated 
naming the awarding body. 

10.14 Product code (ESS) 

Any item number or product code which identifies the package 
or its component items shall be given, for example Universal 
Product Code, supplier part number. Standard Computer Soft 
ware Number (SCSN). 

10.15 Price (OPT) 

The recommended price shall be stated. 



RcprogrHijliy Unit. BIS, New Dcliii. Indiii 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
ill the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also revit Aed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *B1S Handbook and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the followiug 
reference: 

Doc : No LTD 33 ( 1544 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafur Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 33 i 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all OflBccs ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r33J 01 33 

NEW DELHI 110002 J33I 13 75 

Eastern : I/I4 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, Maniktola C37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 (37 86 26. 37 86 62 

53 38 43. 53 16 40 



235 04 42 
235 23 15 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 J ^ ^^ ^^ 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 P^^ ^^ j^' 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 Mi DC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 1 632 78 9 1 , 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR, 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed &t PriotwcU Printers, Aligarh, India 



