**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14998 (2001) : Positve List of Constituents of 
Melamine-Formaldehyde Resins in Contact with Foodstuffs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Drinking Water [PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14998:2001 

^R eft ^Ebd cRJsff eft ftf^T ^it 

Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS 

OF MELAMINE-FORMALDEHYDE RESINS 

IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



ICS 67.250;83.080.10 



©BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 2001 Price Group 3 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Use of Plastics, and resins in the form of cured moulded articles, in packaging of foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water has now become a universally accepted method In so far as there is any cause for concern 
in the use of plastics/resins in intimate contact with foodstuffs, etc, it arises from the migration of the constituents 
of the plastics composition or residues thereof in their original or an altered form. Where direct contact occurs 
between the packed commodity and the plastics, the high molecular mass polymer itself does not pose toxic 
hazards being inert and essentially insoluble in food. There is, however, a likelihood that some transfer may 
occur of polymer additives, adventitious impurities such as monomers, catalyst remnants and residual 
polymerization solvents and of low molecular mass polymer fractions from the plastics into the packaged 
material with consequent hazard to the consumers. The occurrence of acute toxicity due to plastics material in 
contact with food is most unlikely, since only trace quantities of potentially toxic materials are likely to migrate. 
However, the accumulation of these toxic materials with time may lead to hazards which may be serious. 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins commonly known as MF resins are produced by reacting one mole of melamine 
with not more than three moles of formaldehyde. Part of the melamine fraction may be replaced by urea or by 
benzoguanamine. The moulding materials of the resin are produced by mixing the resin with refined wood pulp 
(cellulose) or with untreated wood reduced to particulate form. This mixture may also contain other 
ingredients/optional adjuvant substances like lubricants and flow promoters, catalysts, polymerization control 
agents, pigments and colourants. 

MF resins has the hardest surface of all plastics materials, the trade-off being its brittleness. They are transparent, 
but when sufficient filler is added (to overcome the extreme brittleness of the unfilled resin), they become 
translucent and excellent diffusers of light; the colour possibilities being unlimited. They are having very high 
resistance to abrasion, acids and alkalis and repeated exposure to liquids. The basic property of its ability to 
accept a moulded-in-decoration in addition to its having high resistance to direct heat has made it very popular 
for use in dinnerware, cutlery handles, large serving utensils and bowls, etc, and various other food-contact 
applications. MF resins can be moulded in flash, semi-positive and positive shut-off compression moulds and 
can also readily be moulded in transfer and injection moulds. 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins in the form of cured moulded articles can be safely used as the food contact 
surface of moulded articles intended for use is producing, manufacturing, packing, processing, preparing, 
treating, packaging, transporting or holding foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water in accordance with 
the code of federal Regulations, FDA(USA) (21 CFR 177.1460). 

This standard is intended to be used with the series of Indian Standards on plastics for food contact applications 
which are given in Annex A. 

It is emphasized that these standards need to be used in combination to provide a system of control to the resins 
manufacturers as well as the fabricators to derive maximum benefits. Besides, it may also serve as basis for 
official agencies to frame suitable legislations to ensure effective safeguards for the safety and health of 
consumer where plastics in general for food contact applications are concerned. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 

The list of additives prescribed in this positive list are based on the information available through published 
literature like The British Plastics Federation, UK; FDA Regulations, USA; and Synoptic Document (No. 5) 
on Plastics Materials and Articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs issued by Commission of the 
European Communities. 



IS 14998 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS 

OF MELAMINE-FORMALDEHYDE RESINS 

IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers positive list of constituents 
of melamine-formaldehyde(MF) resins, namely, 
manufacturing residues and necessary additives which 
may be regarded as safe for use, when properly 
processed, in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water and when present only in the 
prescribed limits of concentration. 

1.2 It does not purport to establish the suitability of 
the ingredient singly in a particular foodstuff from 
other than toxicological consideration. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standard contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

9833 : 1981 List of pigments and colourants for 
use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Melamine-Formaldehyde Resin 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins are those produced 
when one mole of melamine is made to react with not 
more than three moles of formaldehyde in water 
solution. Part of the melamine fraction may be 
replaced by urea or benzoguanamine. 



flow promoters, catalysts, polymerization control 
agents. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Basic Resin — As defined in 3.1. 

4.2 Moulding Materials — As defined in 3.2. 
43 Manufacturing Residue 

4.3.1 Residual Monomers 

Moulded articles made from melamine-formaldehyde 
moulding materials shall, when subjected to the 
following tests, not yield more than 3 g formaldehyde 
per 100 mm 2 of exposed surface in each test. 

Moulded or representative mouldings shall be filled 
with or immersed in a) distilled water, b) 3 percent 
(W/W) aqueous acetic acid, c) 10 percent (V/V) 
aqueous ethanol, each at 80°C and allowed to cool at 
ambient temperature for 30 minutes. The ratio of 
extractant volume to surface area of the moulding in 
contact with extractant shall be 1 ml to 100 mm 2 . 

The formaldehyde content of the extractant is then 
measured and the amount extracted per unit surface 
area obtained by calculation. 

4 .3.2 Catalyst 

The residues of the following products used as catalyst 
may be present in the basic resin: 

a) Phthalic anhydride; and 

b) Tetrachlorophthalic anhydride. 

433 Polymerization Control Agents 

The residues of the following products may be present 
in the basic resin: 

a) Hexamethylene tetramine; and 

b) Magnesium carbonate. 



3.2 Melamine-Formaldehyde Moulding Materials 4.4 Polymerization Ingredients 



Melamine-formaldehyde resins mixed with refined 
wood pulp (cellulose) or with untreated wood reduced 
to particulate form. This mixture may also contain 
other optional adjuvant substances like lubricants and 



Polymerization ingredients may be present provided 
that the manufacturer has obtained the specific 
approval of concerned authority within any limitations 
imposed by the authority. 



IS 14998 : 2001 



4.5 Auxiliary Items for Working 

4.5.1 Lubricants and Flow Promoters 

The total lubricants and flow promoters shall be not 
more than 3 percent of the finished resin except in 
those cases wherein it is specifically prescribed. 

4.5.1.1 The following lubricants and flow promoters 



may be present in MF resins: 

a) Stearic acid; 

b) Zinc stearate;and 

c) Dioctyl phthalate 

4.6 Pigments and Colourants 

The pigments and colourants used shall comply with 
the list and limits prescribed in IS 9833. 



ANNEX A 

(Foreword) 

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON PLASTICS SUITABLE FOR USE IN CONTACT WITH 
FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



IS No, Title 

9833 : 1981 List of pigments and colourants for 
use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

9845 : 1998 Determination of overall migration 
of intended to come into contact with 
foodstuffs — Method of analysis 
(second revision) 

10141:2001 Positive list of constituents of 
polyethylene in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 

10142 : 1999 Polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 

10146 : 1982 Polyethylene for its safe use in con- 
tact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water 

10148 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

10149 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of poly- 
styrene (crystal and high impact) in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuti- 
cals and drinking water (Amendment 

No. 1) 

10151 : 1982 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

10171 : 1999 Guide on suitability of plastics for 
food packaging (second revision) 

10909 : 1984 Positive list of constituents of 
polypropylene and its copolymers in 



IS No. Title 

contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuti- 
cals and drinking water (first 
revision) 

10910 : 1984 Polypropylene and its copolymers for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

11434 : 1985 Ionomers resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuti- 
cals and drinking water 

11435 : 1985 Positive list of constituents of 
ionomer resins for its safe use in con- 
tact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water 

1 1704 : 1986 Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

11705: 1986 Positive list of constituents of 
Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) 
copolymers for their safe use in con- 
tact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water 

12229:1987 Positive list of constituents of 
polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

12247 : 1988 Nylon-6 polymer for its safe use in 

contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuti- 
cals and drinking water 

12248 : 1988 Positive list of constituents of Nylon- 

6 polymer for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

12252 : 1987 Polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 



IS 14998 : 2001 



IS No. Title 

13449 : 1992 Positive list of constituents of ethylene 
vinyl acetate (EVA) copolymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuti- 
cals and drinking water 

13576 : 1992 Ethylene methacrylic and (EMAA) 
copolymers and terpolymers for their 
safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

13577:1992 Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene methacrylic (EMAA) 
copolymers and terpolymers in con- 
tact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water 

13601 : 1993 Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 



IS No. Title 

14971 : 2001 Polycarbonate resins for its safe use 
in contact with foodstuffs, phar- 
maceuticals and drinking water 

14972:2001 Positive list of constituents of 
polycarbonate resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

14996:2001 Positive list of constituents of 
modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

14997 : 2001 Modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) resins for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

14999 : 2001 Melamine-formaldehyde resins for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 



IS 14998 : 2001 



ANNEX B 

{Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



Organization 
Internet Exchange Next.com Limited, Mumbai 
Amines and Plasticizers Ltd, Mumbai 

Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, Chennai 

Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 

Gas Authority of India Ltd, Noida 

Gharda Chemcials Ltd, Thane 

GE Plastics India Limited, Gurgaon 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Polymers Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Centre for Plastics in Environment, Mumbai 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Plastics Institute, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd, Jalgaon 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), Kanpur 

Ministry of Defence, RDSO, Lucknow 

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, DGHS, New Delhi 

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 

National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuchem Ltd, Faridabad 
Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Saint-Gobain Vetrotex India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Parwanoo, H,P. 
Shriram Fertilizers & Chemcials, Kota 
Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 



Representative(s) 
Shri Sarup Chowdhary (Chairman) 

SHRI V. V. KULKARNI 

Dr R. V. Utekar (Alternate) 
Dr C S. Narasimhan 

Dr M. Balakrishnan (Alternate) 
ShriJ. Sengupta 
Dr Vijai Kumar 

Dr K. Palanivelu (Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Kumar 

Shri Baldev Raj (Alternate) 
Shri Shivaji Basu 

Shri V. K. Singh (Alternate I) 

Shri Manish Khandelwal (Alternate II) 
Dr B. K. Desai 

Dr U. M. Vakil (Alternate) 
General Manager 

Dr Rashmi Bhardwaj (Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. P. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Shankar Banerjee 

Shri Amitava Sanyal (Alternate) 
Shri S. V. Parveen 

Shri N. C. Dhocendranath (Alternate) 
Dr A. N. Bhat 
ShriJ. B.Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis (Alternate) 
Shri D. R. Patel 

Shri R. K. Aggarwal (Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Narayanan 

Dr N. G. Mokashi (Alternate) 
DrV.P.Sharma 
Dr H. C. Mruthyunjaya 

Shri S. B. Joshi (Alternate I) 

Shri A. P. Choudhari (Alternate II) 
Shri V. Mohan 

Shri R. Suba Rao (Alternate) 
Shri M. N. Saraf 

Dr L. D. Khandpal (Alternate) 
Joint Director (Rubber) 

Director (SS) (Alternate) 
Addl Director General (PFA) 

Shri Sundar Lal (Alternate) 
Shri O. P. Gera 
Dr S. S. Mahaian 

Dr S. S. Kulkarni (Alternate) 
Dr R. S. Lathana 

Shri S. K. Khandelwal (Alternate) 
Shri V. K. Sharma 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria (Alternate) 
Dr R. M. Mehta 
ShriC.CSakarda 

Shri S. K. Kodesia (Alternate) 
DrY. B. Vasudeo 

Dr K. S. Jadhav (Alternate) 
Shri S. Sundaram 

Shri S. K. Ghosh (Alternate I) 

Dr B. J. C. Basu (Alternate II) 
Shri Arun Anand 

Shri Yog Raj Kapur (Alternate) 
ShriM.S.Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta (Alternate) 
Dr R. C. Sood 



(Continued on page 5) 



IS 14998 : 2001 



(Continued from page 4) 

Organization 
Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

The All India Plastics Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

The Plastics & Linoleums Export Promotion Council, Mumbai 
VIP Industries, Mumbai 

XPRO India Ltd, Faridabad 

BIS Directorate General 



Representatives) 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Aooarwal 

Shri K. B. Easwaran (Alternate) 
Shri U. K. Nath 

Smt A. D, Sathe (Alternate) 
Shri R. P. Kalyanpur 
Shri Siddhartha Roy 

Shri A. S. D alve (Alternate) 
Shri C. Bhaskar 

Shri Manmohan Krishan (Alternate) 
Shri Anjan Kar, Director & Head (PCD) 

[Representing Director General (Ex-officio Member)] 



Member-Secretary 

Shri T. Kalaivanan 

Joint Director (PCD), BIS 

Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries Subcommittee, PCD 12:12 



Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 
All India Plastic Industries Association, Delhi 
AS & T India Limited, New Delhi 
Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Mumbai 

Britannia Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Centre for Processed Food, Bangalore 

Central Committee for Food Standards 

(Directorate General of Health Services), New Delhi 
Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata 

Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Drugs Controller (India), New Delhi 

GE Plastics India Limited, Distt Vadodara 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 

Hitkari Potteries Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
National Dairy Development Board, Anand 
National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Rollantainers Ltd, Faridabad 
Shriram Fertilizers & Chemicals, Kota 

Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

XPRO India Ltd, Faridabad 



Shri K. R. Kumar (Convener) 
Shri Ravi Kumar 
Shri G. D. Agrawal 
DR C Sankar 

Shri S. N. Murthy (Alternate) 
ShriG. S.Aurora 

Shri M. R. Sundar (Alternate) 
ShriR. Prakash 

Shri Chetan L. Hanchate (Alternate) 
The Asstt Director General (PFA) 

Dr K. C. Guha 

Dr S. Vanchinathan (Alternate) 
Shri Anil Agarwal 

Shri A. N. Srivastava (Alternate) 
Dr P. Das Gupta 
Dr G. Mukhopadhaya 

Dr Rashmi Bharbwaj (Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. P. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Amitava Sanyal 

Shri Raj Datta (Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Lahiri 

Shri P. S. Lakshmanan (Alternate) 
Shri Miljnd Bhole 
Ms M. C Dordi 

Shri N. C. Saha (Alternate) 
ShriJ. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis (Alternate) 
Dr P. K. Seth 
Sr Executive 
Shri J. K. Vadodaria 

Shri V. K. Sharma (Alternate) 
Dr K. S. Jadhav 

Dr R. Rangaprasad (Alternate) 
Shri Sanjaya Varma 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta (Alternate) 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
Shri Pankaj Mithel 

Shri Vineet Gupta (Alternate) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to'the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indi- 
cates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for 
revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amend- 
ments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 12 ( 1331 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31 , 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 
Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

f 323 76 17 
\ 323 38 41 

f337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 91 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



T254 12 16, 25414 42 
\254 25 19,25413 15 

J 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
\ 832 78 91 , 832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT.THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



