**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12133 (1987) : Glossary of terms and definitions for 
dredgers [TED 18: Inland^ Harbour Crafts and Fishing 
Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 001-4: 627-748: 621 -879 18:12133-1987 



Indian Standard < Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND 
DEFINITIONS FOR DREDGERS 



1. Scope — Specifies the terms and definitions relating to dredging fleet. 

2. General Concepts Pertaining to Dredgers 

2.1 Dredger Dredge — A vessel or water craft for dredging. 

22 Dredging — ChdingrnqXhe d\rx\er[S\Qx\s of basins by extracting or shifting the soil in the 

interests of navigation. 

2.3 Dredging Caravan — A dredge and its service vessels ensuring extracting, transportation and 
Storage of the soil. 

2.4 Dredging Facility — A facility for loosening, separating from the bottom and lifting the soil. 

2.5 Dredging Fleet — A totality of dredgers, dredging means and their service vessels. 

2.6 Gantry — A rigid structure for accomodating the elements of the ladder elevator. 

2.7 /.ac/^yer — A structure carrying the dredging facility of suction dredgers and muitibucket 
dredgers. 

2.B Ladder E/evator — A device for changing the position of the dredging facility ladder and 
fixing it in a determined position. 

2.9 Non-Self-Propelled Dredger 

2.10 Pile Facility — A facility comprising work pile and mechanisms for their moving and fixing. 

2.11 Self-Propelled Dredger — A dredger having propelling devices for an independent 
movement. 

2.12 Soil Disctiarging Facility — A facility for discharging the extracted soil. 

2AZ Swell Compensator — A facility and system ensuring a dredger's operation with certain 
waves at a section of dredging, 

2.14 Tecfinological Equipment — A complex of devices and systems of a dredger for the accomp- 
lishment of dredging. 

3. Basic Parameters of Dredgers 

3.1 Contract Output — The output of dredger under certain conditions of operation stipulated in 
the contract between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

3.2 Dipper Dredger Bucket Sweep '^ The maximum distance from the bucket cutting edge to the 
axis of rotation of the platform with the dredging facility. 

3.3 Dipper Dredger Bucket Sweep from Side 

3.4 Dredger Output; Output — The amount of soil in a natural bed state extracted in a time 
unit. 

3.5 Frequency of Bucket Emptying — The number of buckets emptying of a multi-bucket dredger 
in a time unit. 

3.6 Grab Sweep — The maximum distance from the axis cf the grab suspension to the axis of 
rotation of the platform with the dredging facility. 

3.7 Grab Sweep from Side 

3.8 Hopper Capacity - The amount of coil in the hold of a barge or hopper dredger at a normal 
filling level. 

3.9 Lengtti of Floating Pipeline 



Adopted 3 June 1987 



March 1988, BIS Gr 3 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 12133- 1987 

3.10 Length of Pressure Pipel'me 

3.11 Maximum Depth of Dredging 

3.12 I\/laximum Height of Soii Raising — The maximum elevation of the point of raising of the 
soil ( hydrauiip mixture ) above the water level. 

3.1 3 IVIinimum Depth of Dredging 

3.14 Nominai Depth of Dredging — Ihe depth of dredging serving as a base at a bucket arrange- 
ment calculation end ensuring the work of a dradger with a design output 

3.15 Range of Soil— The distance from the place of raising the soii to the place of storage at the 
given position of the dredger. 

Note — The term is inapplicable with a discharge of soil by barges and with hopper dredgers. 

4. Bucket Arrangement 

4.1 Bucket — A working member designed to cut and raise the soil. 

4.2 Bucket Arrangement — An arrangement for raising the soil and transporting it to the place of 
discharge of bucket (s). 

4.3 Bucket Capacity — The total volume of liquid in the bucket filled up to cutting edges of the 
bucket. 

4.4 Bucket Chain — A chain consisting of buckets and connecting parts. 

4.5 Bucket Chain Loop — A portion of the sagging chain at the lower bucket drum where the 
buckets participate in the cutting of the soil. 

4.6 Bucket Chain Pitch — The distance between the centres of identical mounting holes of 
adjacent buckets. 

4.7 Bucket Chain Tightening Device — A device with a drive to alter the length of the sagging 
portion of the bucket chain. 

4.8 Bucket Drive — The complex of the bucket motor and the power transmission to the upper 
bucket drum. 

4.9 Bucket l\/lotor— The motor ensuring the rotation of the upper bucket drum. 

4.10 Bucket Roller — A roller supporting the bucket chain on the frame or on the upper frame. 

4.11 Bucket Tower— A metal structure for accommodation of bucket elements and the soil 
discharge facility of a dredger. 

4.12 Lower Tumbler — The drum designed to support and guide the bucket chain. 

4.13 Monkey Frame — ku additional frame installed between the upper bucket drum and the 
axis of suspension of the dredging facility frame. 

4.14 Top Tumbler — The drum designed to support and drive the bucket chain. 

5. Controls and Monitoring, and Measuring Instruments 

5.1 Automated Control System of Dredging — \x\s\xuvc\ex\Xs of the automated control and 
monitoring for the dredger's orientation, soil extraction and monitoring the auxiliary operations, 
aggregated into a control computer. 

5.2 Bucket Coanfer — An instrument indicating the number of buckets which have passed the 
upper bucket drum of a multi-bucket dredger in a time unit. 

5.3 Dredging Depth Indicator — An instrument indicating the distance from the lower edge of 
the dredging member to the water surface. 

5.4 Orientation System — A complex of technical means ensuring the determination of the 
location of a dredger and its orientation on the dredged section. 

5.5 Output Indicator — An instrument indicating the output and the amount of the dredged soil. 

5.6 Rope Meter — An instrument indicating the length of the work rope heaved or paid out. 

5.7 Soii Meter — An instrument indicating the soil content in the hydraulic mixture. 

2 



IS: 12133 - 1987 

6. Dredging Pump Unit and the Loosening Facilities 

6.1 Agitator — A device designed for loosening the soil from its natural bed state before extracting 
it with a dredger. 

6.2 Concentration of Hydraulic Mixture — Ratio of the volume of soil versus the volume of 
hydraulic mixture. 

6.3 Cutter Agitator — A mechanical agitator having a cutter for cutting member. 

6.4 Dredging Pump — The pump to transport the hydraulic mixture, 

6.5 Hydraulic Agitator — An agitator using the energy of water jets, 

6.6 Hydraulic Mixture; Pulp — A mixture of soil with water or with water and air. 

6.7 in-Hull Pressure Pipeline — A portion of the pressure pipeline located behind the dredging 
pump inside the hull of the dredger. 

6,% In-Hull Suction Pipeline — A portion oi the suction pipeline located inside the hull of the 
dredger. 

6.9 Mechanical Agitator ^ An agitator having a mechanical cutting member. 

6.10 Pipeline Swivel Joint — A hinged or fiexibie joint of separate elements of the pipeline. 

6.1 1 Pressure Pipeline — The pipeline through which the hydraulic mixture moves from the pump. 

6.12 Rotor Agitator — A n\ec\\ar\\ca\ agitator having a cutting member in the form of buckets 
fixed rigidly on a rotor. 

BAZ Soil Receiver) Suction End — A ren\oyeab\e end portion of the suction pipe designed for 
suction of the dredged soiL 

BAA Submersible Dredging Pump — A dredging pump located outside the hull of the vessel, 
below the water level. 

6.15 Suction Pipe — The movable portion of the suction pipeline. 

6.16 Suction Pipeline — The pipeline through which the hydraulic mixture approaches the 
dredging pump. 

7. Methods and Facilities for Operative Movements 

7.1 Anchor Dredger — A dredger whose operative movements are perform.ed by pulling to the 
work anchors by means of winches. 

7.2 >4/7C/?orr7a/7o//V7sr —- A self-propelled vessel designed basically for placing and repositioning 
the work anchors. 

7.3 Anchor Handling Derrick — A derrick on a dredger for placing and repositioning the work 
anchors. 

7.4 Bow Positioning Winch — A winch for moving a dredger along the dredged section with the 
dredging facility forward. 

7.5 Longitudinal Method of Operative Movements — A method of operative movement when a 
dredger moves along the section being dredged. 

7.6 Operative Movements — The movements of a dredger in the operational area. 

7.7 Operative Movements by Means of Propellers 

7.8 Pl/e and Anchor Dredger — A dredger whose operative movements are performed by means 
of piles and work anchors. 

7.9 Pile Dredger — A dredger whose operative movements are performed by means of piles only. 

7 AO Stern Positioning M///7c/7"- A winch for moving a dredger along the dredged section with 
the dredging facility aft. 

7.11 Transverse Method of Operative Movements ~ A method of operative mdvements when a 
dredger or dredging facility moves across the section being dredged. 

7.12 Travelling Winch; Side Winch — A winch for moving a dredger across the dredged section. 

3 



IS: 12133- 1987 

7.13 Work Anchor — An anchor used for operative movement of a dredger. 

7.14 Work Pile — A pile used for operative movements and fixation of a dredger. 

8. Methods and Facilities for the Removal of Soil 

8.1 Bottom Discharge Opening — Ports for the soil discharge through the soil hold bottom 
closed with a cioor or a valve. 

8.2 Chute — A tray for the disposal of the soil by gravity. 

8.3 Direct Discharge of Soil — A disposal of the soil by means of the dredging facility of a 
dredge ( without special means of removal ) or by means of the flow in the basin. 

8.4 Discharge Pipeline — The pipline through which the pulp is transported 

8.5 Disposal of Soil by Barges — Transportation of the soil, extracted in dredging, by barges, 

8.6 Disposal of Soil by Chutes ^ Transponat\on of the soil, extracted in dredging, through a 
chute ( s ) to the place of storage. 

8.7 Disposal of Soil with Conveyors — Transportation of the soil, extracted in dredging, with the 
soil removal conveyor( s ) to the place of storage. 

8.8 Door-Lifting Device — A device for lifting, lowering and fixing the doors closing bottom 
discharge ports. 

8.9 Floating Discharge Pipeline 

8.10 Ground Pipeline 

8.11 Hopper 

8.12 Hopper Barge — A vessel for the transportation of the soil extracted in dredging, 

8A3 Hopper Dredger — A self-propelled dredger carrying the soil in the hold(s) to the place 
of storage. 

8.14 Pendant Pipeline — An overhanging part of the pressure pipeline. 

8.15 Soil-Discharging Nozzle — A tapered nozzle located at the end of the pressure pipeline. 

8.16 Soil Removal Conveyor — A conveyor for the disposal of the soil extracted in dredging. 

8.17 So/7 Valve •— A device for altering the direction of soil movement from the soil well. 

8.18 Sump — A well inside the bucket tower or in the hull of a multi-bucket dredger for storage 
of the extracted soil. 

9. Type of Dredgers Depending on the Power Unit 

9.1 Diesel Dredger — A dredger having a diesel engine for the main one. 

9.2 Diesel-Electric Dredger — A dredger having an electric power transmission from the main 
engine. 

B.3 Diesel-Hydraulic Dredger ~ A di\ese\ dredger having a hydraulic power transmission from 
the ma n engine. 

9.4 Dredger Main Engine; Main Engine — The engine producing the power for dredging and 
discharging of the soil. 

Mote — The main engine may also supply power to other users. 

9.5 Electric Dredger — A dredger having an electric motor fed from the shore main, for the main 
engine. 

9.6 Electric-Hydraulic Dredger — An electric dredger having a hydraulic power transmission from 
the main engine. 

9 7 Gas Turbine Dredger — A dredge having a gas turbine for the main engine. 

9,8 Steam Dredger — A dredger having a steam turbine or a steam piston engine for the main 
or}e. 



18:12133-1987 

10. Types of Dredgers Depending on the Methods of Soil Extraction or Treatment 

10.1 Air-Uft Dredger — A dredger extracting the soil with an air-hft or gas lift. 

10.2 Bed W ash-Out Dredger — A water craft ensuring dredging by loosening the soil with water 
jets. 

10.3 Bucket Dredger — A dredger extracting the soil with buckets forming a bucket chain. 

10.4 Grab Dredger — A dredger extracting the soil with a grab. 

10.5 Jet Dredger — A dredger extracting the soil with a jet pump. 

10.6 Rock-Crushing Dredger — A water craft for crushing rocks under the water. 

10.7 Rock-Crushing Dredger with a Forced /Wof/o/7 — A rock-crushing dredger with a chisel as 
an operating unit loosening the soil through a forced motion actuated by a power source. 

10.8 Rock-Crushing Dredger with a Freely Falling Chisel ^ A rock-crushing dredger with a 
chisel as an operating unit falling on loosened rock under gravity only. 

10.9 Rock-Drilling Dredger — A water craft for drilling rocky soil under water. 

10.10 Single-Bucket Dipper Dredger — A dredger extracting the soil with a bucket on a boom. 

10.1 1 Suction Dredger — A dredger extracting the soil by suction with an impeller dredging pump. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The basic aim of this standard is to give clear enough definitions for every term to be equally 
understood by all. The application of those synonymous of the standardized terms, which are 
not included in the standard shall be prohibited. Certain standardized terms in the standard are 
provided with their abridged versions which may be used in the cases eliminating a possibility of 
their misinterpretation. 

If the essential features of a notion are contained in the literal meaning of the term, its 
definition is not stated. 

Combinations of the terms stated in the standard are allowed for application. The terms 
may contain additional elements reflecting the field of application and the purpose of the vessels 
of dredging fleet. 



Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India 



