**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11465 (1985) : Technical supply conditions for 
reciprocating air compressors for power upto 25 kW for 
general purpose and industrial applications [MED 22: 
Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iimmK-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nvF^f 



:2^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-51 : 658-711 -3: 006-87 IS : 11465 -1985 




( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITIONS 
FOR RECIPROCATING AIR COMPRESSOR FOR 
POWER UP TO 25 kW FOR GENERAL PURPOSE 

AND INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS 



1. Scope — This standard applies to single acting trunk type piston reciprocating air compressors 
for the general purpose industrial applications having horse power up to 25 kW meant for inter- 
mittent duty (2 000 operating hours per year) applications. 

2. TerminoFogy — For the purpose of this standard, the definitions, given in 18:5727-1981 
'Glossary of terms relating to compressors and exhausters {first revision)' shall apply, 

3. Enquiry and Proposal 

3.1 The purchaser shall complete the data as given in Appendix A to the extent possible and appli- 
cable, and also specify known abnormal conditions of working. In addition, purchaser may also 
specify any of his additional requirements; 

3.2 /'/'opo^^/— In reply to the enquiry by the purchaser, the supplier shall supply a list of all the 
components along with any othe details required by the purchaser. 

3.2.1 The proposal shall include either a specific statement that all equipment are in strict 
compliance with the purchaser's specifications, or a specific list of deviations therefrom shall be 
furnished. 

3.2.2 If required by the purchaser, the charges for deputing suppliers representative for super- 
vision of erection shall be furnished. 

3.2.3 The supplier shall furnish any special tools required for installation and maintenance work. 

3.3 Guarantee 

3.3.1 Performance guarantee — The compressors shall be guaranteed for satisfactory performance 
at the specified operating conditions. These include a guarantee for capacity and powers at the 
time of performance test. The tolerances to be allowed on the capacity and power consumption 
shall be in accordance with IS : 5456 - 1985 'Code of practice for testing of positive displacement 
type air compressors and exhausters ( first revision)'. 

3.3.2 Workmanship guarantee — AW equipment components and spare parts shall be guaranteed 
by the supplier against defects which despite proper use appear therein and arise from faulty design, 
defective or improper materials or poor and faulty workmanship. This guarantee shall be applicable 
for a period mutually agreed by the supplier and the user. 

4. General Requirements 

4,1 Parts subjected to air pressure shall have sufficient strength. 

4.1.1 Design shall be such that no part of the compressor shall easily cause mechanical failure. 

4.1.2 If electrical prime mover is used, proper earthing shall be ensured. 

4.1.3 Every part shall have the interchangeability and shall be so constructed as not to cause any 
change in the performance by changing a part. 

4.1.4 Parts shall be manufactured to 'fits and tolerances' as per IS : 919 ( Part 1) - 1963 
'Recommendations for limits and fits for engineering: Part 1 General engineermg {first revision)'. 



Adopted 3 October 1985 



© May 1986, ISI 



Gr4 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NeWDEL.H111Q002 



16:11465-1985 

4.2 Cylinder and Cylinder Head 

4.2.1 Cylinder wall and cylinder head which are directly subjected to the pressure shall have 
adequate wall thickness; and uniformity which is generally acceptable per practice. 

4.2.2 Maximum allowable working pressure shall exceed rated discharge pressure by at least 
15 percent or one bar whichever is greater but must not be lower than safety valve net pressure. 

4.2.3 Cylinders shall be spaced and arranged to permit access to all openings, valves and controls. 

4.2.4 Cylinder shall have cooling provision as required by service conditions. 

4.3 Piston and Connecting Rod 

4.3.1 Piston shall be carried by connecting rod small end by piston pin of adequate design. 

4.3.2 Piston shall have suitable material to withstand design pressure taking into account the 
optimum case of operation. 

4.3.3 Piston shall have sufficient number of piston rings and grooves for piston rings shall be 
accurately finished. 

4.3.4 Piston pin shall have adequate hardness and surface finish depending upon the compressor 
design (whether lubricated or oilless type). 

4.3.5 Connecting red shall have suitable material with adequate strength for design operating 
condition. 

4.3.6 Small end and big end bearings shall be in accordance with the connecting rod material 
selected. Depending upon the connecting rod material and whether lubricated or oilless type 
compressor, the bearing type may be selected. 

4.4 Crankshaft and Bearings 

4.4.1 Crankshaft shall be suitably designed and shall have suitable material with adequate 
strength for design operating condition, 

4.4.2 Crankshaft shall be adequately supported by bearings suitably selected to meet the design 
operating condition. 

4.4.3 Bearing shall be of plain, ball or roller type and shall be capable to withstand the shaft 
load for prolonged usage. 

4.5 Valve and Filters 

4.5.1 Double stage compressors shall be provided with a safety valve at the suction side of the 
second stage cylinder to prevent abnormal pressure rising and to ensure the safety of the unit, 

4.5.2 Suitably designed suction and delivery valves shall be used, so that they operate smoothly, 
free from counter flows of the air, failures and resting. 

4.5.3 The valve and valve part design shall be such that no inlet valve shall be fitted instead of a 
discharge valve and vice-versa, 

4.5.4 Safety valve shall be free from rusting, disorder, etc, even when they had not been in use 
for a long period. 

4.5.5 Suction filters shall be selected such that they offer minimum resistance to suction and 
shall be effective for dust prevention. 

4.6 /A7?ercoo/er5"- Double or multi-stage compressors shall be so constructed that heat generated 
in the first stage cylinder shall be discharged and the compressed air temperature shall be reduced, 
by installing an intercooler between successive stages. 

4.7 Frame — Shall be designed such that it offers maximum sturdiness, hence low level of vibration. 
In the case of lubricated frame, the frame shall have adequate size of oil sump capacity to meet the 
need of maximum design condition, which also offers good surface area for cooling of sump oil. |n 



18:11465-1985 

the case of totally oilless compressor the crankcase need not have the oil sump in frame but shall be 
sturdy enough for keeping compressor vibration level to minimum and offer better air cooling. 

4.8 Lubrication System — Shall be provided such that it satisfies the need for compressors maximum 
design condition and lubricates adequately the crankshaft, journals, bearings, cylinder walls, etc. 
The method of lubrication may be by a splash or by a positive pressure. 

4.8.1 Lubricating oi/s or greases — ShaW be selected depending upon the compressor design needs, 
which, as far as possible, shall be readily available. 

4^9 Piston Rings and OH Wiper Rings ( for Lubricated Cy finder Compressors ) 

4.9.1 Piston rings — ShaW be provided such that they compress the air effectively and offer 
minimum of rubbing resistance, 

4.9.2 0/7 wiper rings — Shall be provided such that they adequately wipe oil from cylinder walls 
and allow minimal of oil carryover with the discharge air. 

4.10 Piston Rings and Wear Bands ( for Oiiless Cylinder Compressors) 

4.10.1 Piston rings of adequate size and design shall be provided so that they compress the air 
effectively. Also, since it is for an oilless application, the material shall be suitably selected to 
meet this special requirement. The filler material for piston rings shall be suitably selected to give 
longer period of compressor running and better heat dissipation. 

4.10.2 Wear bands-- Of adequate size and design shall be provided on piston to ensure its proper 
running within cylinder and avoid metai-to-metal contact. Its material shall be suitably selected to 
meet the special need for air to be oilless and along with this the filler material shall also be suitably 
selected to give better life and heat dissipation. 

5. Prime Mover and Drive Equipment 

5.1 The supplier shall specify in the enquiry the type of prime mover required, for example, electric 
motors, diesel engine, etc. 

5.2 The drive may be through gear box, belt or directly connected as appropriate. 

5.3 Prime Mover— In case the prime mover is required to be supplied along with the compressor, 
the purchaser shall specify in his enquiry the technical data required for the prime mover design 
(type of motor, electrical supply characteristics, type of engine, etc) and also the standard or 
code to which the prime mover shall conform. 

5.4 The rated power of the prime mover shall be higher by at least 10 percent under any operating 
conditions ( maximum power includes shaft power or brake power plus all transmission losses). 

Note — This clause includes any required tolerance on capacity and power consumption as per IS : 5456. 

5.5 The prime mover shall be capable of taking an overload of 5 percent above normal rating as 
specified in 5.4. This is to allow for any incidental running up to safety valve set pressure. 

5.6 The prime mover shall have sufficient starting torque so as to be capable of starting the 
compressor from a stopped condition and running, it up to full speed taking into account the view 
that the compressor commences discharging against the rated discharge pressure from start up. 

5.7 When the prime mover is to be procured by the purchaser, the supplier shall furnish the following 
data: 

a) Compressor and transmission starting torque characteristics, 

b) Inertia valve (GD2), and 

c) Mounting or coupling details or both. 

5.8 In case of engine drives, they shall be provided with an over-speed shut down device capable 
of being manually tripped and re-set. The over-speed trip shall be such as to pervent for running at 
a speed greater than the maximum allowable speed. 



ISj 11465 -198S 

6. Auxiliary Equipment and Safety Devices 

6.1 Receivers 

6.1.1 Maximum working pressure of air receiver shall be higher than tiie rated pressure of the 

compressors. 

6=1.2 Air receiver sha!! be of circular shape and the end plates shall be of dished end, with 
sufficient strength. Air receivers shall be as per 13:7938-1976 'Air receivers for compressed air 
installations' or to any other related standard. 

6.1 .3 Air receivers upon which equipment such as compressors are mounted shall be capable to 
withstand the stresses due to weight, starting and stopping of the machine. 

6.2 CGuplings, Reduction Gears and Guards 

6.2.1 Coi/p///?5r5-— Where a coupling is provided, it shall be suitable for the power transmitted. 
The coupling shall conform to IS: 2693-1980 'Bush type flexible coupling for power transmission 
(first revision)'. Any coupling other than that covered by IS : 2693-1980 shall also be acceptable, 
as mutually agreed by the supplier and the purchaser. 

6.2.2 Replacement of wearing parts of the coupling shall be possible without disturbing driver 
shaft or other main drive component from the system, 

6.2.3 Coupling shall be suitable for expansion and any other movement of the shaft. 

6.3 Reduction Gears 

6.3.1 Reduction gear shall be suitable for povv'er transm.ission on continuous operation basis for 
maximum shaft power of the compressor, 

6.3.2 Gears shall be of suitable design and make. 

6.4 Guards 

6.4.1 Guards shall be of removable type provided on all movable parts which is considered to be 
hazardous to operating personnel. 

6.4.2 If guards are not easily removable type, opening, if necessary with covers or suitable 
mechanism shall be provided to have access for any part requiring attention. 

6.4.3 When V - belt driven compressor Is considered, the V - belts shall be selected to transmit 
maximum shaft power of the compressor. The V - belt drive design shall also be suitable for same, 
and appropriately be provided with the guard. The slide rails used under motor for taking up belt 
slackness (after some running of unit) shall be selected such that it provides enough room for 
tightening, 

6.5 Piping 

6.5.1 The pipe work required with the compressor when given as package (with receiver or with 
base plate) consists of: 

a) Air piping for interstage and final discharge, 

b) Auxiliary pipe work — Lubricating (depending upon compressor design) cooling water, 
drain and vent and instrument air piping. 

6.5.2 The scope of supply of pipework by the supplier shall be properly defined with terminal 
points clearly fixed. The supplier shall supply all pipe work to inter-connected items of his supply 
reducing the number of terminal points for the purchasers connection, to a m.inimum when the scope 
of supply shall be as mutually agreed upon. 



6.5.3 Auxiliary pipework, that is, lubricating oil, cooling water, drain and vent and instrument air 
shall be suitably fixed on the package. 

6.5.4 Unless otherwise specified the supplier shall supply the pipe work as mutually agreed. 

4 



16:11465-1985 



6.6 Safety Devices 



6.6.1 Compressor shall have mechanical unloading device (centrifugal unloaders) or any other 
suitably designed device so that at starting of the compressor starts on no-load condition. When 
the motor picks up its full speed only then the compressor begins to develop set pressure, 

6.6.2 Pressure switches shall be so fitted as to be operated against the static pressure of the air 
receiver. The operations shall be accurate, their contact points shall not be easily damaged. 
Generally this is given when automatic start/stop is required. 

6.6.3 Automatic governor for unloaders shall be so fitted as to be operated against the static 
pressure of the air receiver and accurately operated when reached to the operating pressure. Also 
the pressure in the air receiver shall not rise when the air inlet valve is closed. Their operations 
shall be accurately restorted when reached to the recharging pressure. Generally this is given when 
constant speed control is required. 

6. 6 A Safety valve — Shall be provided on interstage manifold for multistage compressor. In 
case when more than two stages, each interstage shall have suitable safety valve. When the air 
receiver is provided it shall be fitted with a suitable safety valve. 

6.6,5 For compressor crankcase oil level, a low oil level switch may be provided, if customer 
desires. 

7. Controls and Instrumentation 

7.1 Controls 

a) Automatic start/stop mode of operations; Makes or breaks electric contact to the motor at 
pre-determined pressures. This type of regulation is used when the demand of air is small 
or intermittent, but where pressure shall be continuously maintained. 

b) Constant speed mode of operations; Unloads the compressor at a pre-determined pressure 
while the motor continues to operate. This type of regulation is used when the demand 
for air shall be practically constant at the capacity of the compressor. 

c) Dual control permits a manual selection between constant speed control and automatic 
start and stop control, depending upon the air requirements, 

7.2 Instrumentation 

7.2.1 For multistage compressor, pressure gauges shall be provided on each inerstages manifold 
and for final air discharge pressure in the case where the compressor is air receiver mounted, 

8. Name Plate and Rotation Mark 

8.1 Name Plate — Shall be securely attached at an easily accessible point on the compressor and to 
any other major auxiliary equipment. 

8.2 Rotation Mar/: — Shall be cast in or attached to major item of rotating equipment. 

9. Tests on Compressors 

9.1 The tests other than hydrostatic and pressure tests shall be in accordance with IS ; 5456 unless 
otherwise specified. 

9.2 Air-receivers and coolers, shall be subjected to the hydrostatic test pressure ofl"5 times the 
design pressure or in accordance with the specified code. 

10. Preparation for Despatch 

10.1 After test and inspection are completed all exposed machined surfaces shall be coated with 
suitable rust preventive, 

10.2 Unmachined external surfaces shall be cleaned thoroughly and painted with suitable paint. 

10.3 All openings shall be provided with wooden, plastic or metal closure. 

5 



13:11465-1985 

11. Documentation 

11.1 The following data and drawings shall be furnished by the supplier, in addition, any other 
documentation mutually agreed between the purchaser and the supplier before placement of the order 
shall be furnished. 

11.1.1 Manufacturer shall provide data as required by data sheet given in 3.1, Appendix A along 
with deviations and exception etc. 

11 .1 .2 Overall arrangement drawing of the compressor, prime mover and other accessories. This 
drawing shall also show the following: 

a) All principal dimensions, including those required for purchasers foundation and main- 
tenance and withdrawal space. 

b) Direction of rotation of drive shaft. 

c) Position of foundation bolts. 

11.1.3 If the prime mover is not included in the supply, the relevant data for the prime mover 
shall be supplied. 

11.1 .4 Schematic drawing of control system when required and not covered in the maintenance 
and operating instruction book, cooling system and outline dimensional drawing for accessories 
such as after coolers, instrument panel, etc. Make, type, size, etc, shall be indicated for all these 
accessories. 

11.1.5 Maintenance and operating instructions --These instructions shall be such that they 
include cross sectional or assembly type drawings, showing all parts, torques for tightening 
fasteners, lubricating oil data and other instructions and guidances given for satisfactory operation 
of the compressor, accessories, etc. 

11.1.6 Certificates of pressure vessels as per relevant code to which these are designed and 
manufactured shall be provided. 

11.1.7 Materials certificate for material used in manufacture of compressor and all test reports 
for mechanical, performance tests and any other tests shall be provided. 

11.1.8 Required data for ordering spare parts shall be provided. 

11.1.9 The number of copies for drawings and documents shall be mutually agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 



APPENDIX A 

{Ciauses3.A a/7rf11.1.1 ) 

DATA SHEET CONTAINING PURCHASER'S SPECIFICATIONS 

A-1. General 

a) Number of units — Running/standby 

b) Site — 

c) Service — Continuous/Intermittent 

d) Installation — Indoor/Outdoor with roof/Outdoor without roof 

e) Type of driver — Electric motor/Diesel engine/Petrol engine 

f) Prime mover furnished by purchaser/supplier 

6 



18:11465-1985 

A-2. Required Operating Condition 

a) Site data 

i) Barometric pressure 

ii) Relative humidity — Maximum 

Minimum 

iii) Ambient temperature — Maximum 

Minimum 

Iv) Environmental condition — Clean/Very dusty/In any unusual corrosive atmosphere 

v) Any special electrical equipment required because of hazard 

Class Grade Division 

vi) Cooling water supply for coolers — Type of water, pressure and temperature of supply 
and return 

b) Electrical supply characteristics (required if prime mover is a motor which has to be 
included ) 

c) Capacity required { each machine) 

d) Discharge pressure, and 

e) Discharge temperature required ( specify only if after-cooler is required ). 

A-3. Capacity Control 

a) For maintaining air receiver pressure at , bars 

This shall be done by; 

i) Suction valve unloader 
ii) . start/stop. 

b) Any other requirements, 

A-4. Special Requirements 

a) Oilless construction 

b) Maximum allowable speed (RPM ) 

c) Special materials 

d) Type of filter for air 

e) Design code for air receiver and heat exchanger 

f) Standard to which prime mover shall conform, and 

g) Transmission — 

V-Belt 
Flat belt 
Gear Box 
Direct drive 
h) Any special type of couplings. 

A-5. Scope of Supply 

Prime mover. 

Additional instrumentation. 
Additional safety devices, 
Aftercooler, 



18:11465-1985 

Air receiver. 

Safety valves — interstage manifold, air-receiver. 

Air filter. 

Cooling water piping for aftercoolers. 

Instrument panel. 

Special tools. 

Spare parts, and 

Foundation plan. 



A-6. Inspection and Tests 

Shop Inspection required 
Test to be witnessed: 



Hydrostatic test. 

Mechanical run test. 

Performance test. 

Strip test. 

Run test of the prime mover. 

(At suppliers end). 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Alternative design may be offered provided that covers a construction which is equivalent to or 
otherwise in accordance with the requirements given in this standard. The proposal shall include 
either a specific statement that all equipment is in accordance with this standard or a specific list 
with explanation of any and all deviations therefrom. 



8 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, Indig 



