**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  14736-2  (1999) :  Vibration  and  Shock  -  Experimental 
Determination  of  Mechanical  Mobility,  Part  2 :  Measurements 
Using  Single-point  Translation  Excitation  with  an  Attached 
Vibration  Exciter  [MED  28:  Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&Vi  ilW^K-^i^^^  T^bi^nVF^f 


:2^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14736  (Part  2)  :  1999 
^  ISO  7626-2  :  1990 

"HNCtPT  *1M<P  (  Reaffirmed  2004 ) 

^»TFT  2  ^i\d[^  -^P^^^  vJT^uicb  ^  ^cfJeT  f^l^  >iom'd>di'l 


Indian  Standard 

VIBRATION  AND  SHOCK  —  EXPERIMENTAL 
DETERMINATION  OF  MECHANICAL  MOBILITY 

PART  2  MEASUREMENTS  USING  SINGLE-POINT  TRANSLATION 
EXCITATION  WITH  AN    ATTACHED  VIBRATION  EXCITER 

ICS  17.160 


©  BIS  1999 

BUREAU      OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

October  1999  Price  Group  9 


Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock  Sectional  Committee,  LM  04 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO  7626-2:1990  'Vibration  and  shock  —  Experimental 
determination  of  mechanical  mobility  —  Part  2  ;  Measurements  using  single-point  translation  excitation 
with  an  attached^vibration  exciter' jssued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  was 
adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock 
Sectional  Committee  and  approval  of  the  Light  Mechanical  Engineering  Division  Council. 

The  text  of  ISO  Standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without 
deviations.  In  the  adopted  standard  certain  conventions  are  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian 
Standards.  Attention  is  especially  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words  International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be  read 
as  Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  current  practice  is 
to  use  a  full  point  (.)  as  the  decimal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  certain  International  Standards  for  which  Indian  Standards 
also  exist.  The  corresponding  Indian  Standards  which  are  to  be  substituted  in  their  place-are  listed  below 
along  with  their  degree  of  equivalence  for  the  editions  indicated: 

International  Corresponding  Indian  Standard  Degree  of 

Standard  Equivalence 

ISO  2041 :1975^>  IS  11717:1999  Vocabulary  on  vibration  and  shock  Identical 

(first  revision) 

ISO  5344:1988  IS/ISO  5344:1980  Electrodynamic  test  equipment  for  do 

generating  vibration  —  Methods  of  describing 
equipment  characteristics 

ISO  7626-1:1986  IS  14736  (Part  1)  :  1999''  Vibration  and  shock  —  do 

Experimental  determination  of  mechanical  mobility  : 
Part  1  Basic  definitions  and  transducers 

The  concerned  technical  committee  has  reviewed  the  provisions  of  ISO  4865  'Vibration  and  shock  — 
Methods  for  analysis  and  presentation  of  data'  referred  in  this  adopted  standard  and  has  decided  that  it 
is  acceptable  for  use  in  conjunction  with  this  standard. 


^^  ISO  2041:1975  has  since  been  revised  in  1997. 
2>  To  be  published  as  Indian  Standard. 


IS     14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


Indian  Standard 


VIBRATION  AND  SHOCK  —  EXPERIMENTAL 
DETERMINATION  OF  MECHANICAL  MOBILITY 

PART  2  MEASUREMENTS  USING  SINGLE-POINT  TRANSLATION 
EXCITATION  WITH  AN     ATTACHED  VIBRATION  EXCITER 


1     Scope 

This  part  of  ISO  7626  specifies  procedures  for  measuring 
mechanical  mobility  and  other  frequency-response  functions  of 
structures,  such  as  buildings,  machines  and  vehicles,  using  a 
single  translational  vibration  exciter  attached  to  the  structure 
under  test  for  the  duration  of  the  measurement. 

It  is  applicable  to  measurements  of  mobility,  accelerance,  or 
dynamic  compliance,  either  as  a  driving-point  measurement  or 
as  a  transfer  measurement.  It  also  applies  to  the  determination 
of  the  arithmetic  reciprocals  of  those  ratios  such  as  free  effec- 
tive mass.  Although  excitation  is  applied  at  a  single  point,  there 
is  no  limit  on  the  number  of  points  at  which  simultaneous 
measurements  of  the  motion  response  may  be  made.  Multiple- 
response  measurements  are  required,  for  example,  for  modal 
analyses. 


of  the  standards  indicated  below.  Members  of  lEC  and  ISO 
maintain  registers  of  currently  valid  International  Standards. 

ISO  2041 :  1975,  Vibration  and  shock  —  Vocabulary. 


ISO  4865:  ~^\  Vibration  and  shock  —  IVIethods  for  analysis 
and  presentation  of  data. 


ISO  5344: 1980,  Electrodynamic  test  equipment  for  generating 
vibration  —  Method  of  describing  equipment  characteristics. 


ISO  7626-1 :  1986,  Vibration  and  shock  -  Experimental  deter- 
mination of  mechanical  mobility  ~  Part  1:  Basic  definitions 
and  transducers. 


2    Normative  references 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions  which,  through 
reference  in  this  text,  cpnstitute  proyisions  of  this  part  of 
ISO  7626.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  editions  indicated 
were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to 
agreements  based  on  this  part  of  ISO  7626  are  encouraged  to 
investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions 


3     Definitions 


For  the  purposes  of  this  part  of  ISO  7626,  thexiefinitions  given 
in  ISO  7626-1  and  ISO  2041  apply;  certain  terms  pertaining  to 
digital  data  analysis  are  defined  in  ISO  4865.  For  convenience, 
the  most  important  definitions  used  in  this  part  of  ISO  7626  are 
given  in  3.1  to  3.5. 


1)     To  be  published. 


IS     14736  {Part2):  1999 
ISO    7626-2  :  1990 


3.1  frequency-response  function:  The  frequency- 
dependent  ratio  of  the  nnoti on- response  phasor  to  the  phasor 
of  the  excitation  force. 

NOTES 

1  Frequency-response  functions  are  properties  of  linear  dynamic 
systems  which  do  not  depend  on  the  type  of  excitation  function.  Ex- 
citation can  be  harmonic  {i.e.  sinusoidal),  random  or  transient  func- 
tions of  time.  The  test  results  obtained  with  one  type  of  excitation  can 
thus  be  used  for  predicting  the  response  of  the  system  to  any  other 
type  of  excitation.  Phasors  and  their  equivalents  for  random  and  tran- 
sient excitation  are  discussed  in  annex  B  of  ISO  7626-1 ;  1986. 

2  Linearity  of  the  system  is  a  condition  which,  in  practice,  will  be 
met  only  approximately,  depending  on  the  type  of  system  and  on 
magnitude  of  the  input.  Care  has  to  be  taken  to  avoid  non-linear 
effects. 

3  Motion  response  may  be  expressed  In  terms  of  either  velocity,  ac- 
celeration, or  displacement;  the  corresponding  frequency-response 
function  designations  are  mobility,  accelerance,  and  dynamic  x;om- 
pliance,  respectively. 

4  This  definition  has  been  taken  from  ISO  7626-1 :  1986, 


3.2  mobility  :  The  frequency-response  function  formed  by 
the  ratio  of  the  velocity-response  phasor  to  the  excitation-force 
phasor  or,  in  other  words,  the  ratio  of  the  velocity-response 
spectrum  to  the  excitation-force  spectrum. 

The  required  boundary  conditions  are  that  no  forces  are  applied 
to  any  point  on  the  structure  other  than  the  exciting  force  at  the 
driving  point. 


3.3  driving-point  mobility,  Yjj  :  The  frequency-response 
function  formed  by  the  ratio,  in  metres  per  newton  second,  of 
the  velocity-response  phasor  at  point  j  to  the  excitation  force 
phasor  applied  at  the  same  point  with  all  other  measurement 
points  on  the  structure  allowed  to  respond  freely  without  any 


constraints  other  than  those  constraints  which  represent  the 
normal  support  of  the  structure  in  its  intended  application. 

NOTES 

1  The  term  "point"  designates  a  location  and  a  direction.  The  term 
"coordinate"  has  also  been  used  with  the  same  meaning  as  "point". 

2  This  definition  has  been  taken  from  ISO  2041 :  1975. 


3.4  transfer  mobility,  Yy  :  The  frequency-response  func- 
tion formed  by  the  ratio,  in  metres  per  newton  second,  of  the 
velocity-response  phasor  at  point  /  to  the  excitation  force 
phasor  applied  at  pointy  with  all  points  on  the  structure,  other 
than  7,  allowed  to  respond  freely  without  any  constraints  other 
than  those  constraints  which  represent  the  normal  support  of 
the  structure  in  its  intended  application. 

NOTE  ~  This  definition  has  been  taken  from  ISO  2041 :  1975. 


3.5  frequency  range  of  interest:  Span,  in  hertz,  from  the 
lowest  frequency  to  the  highest  frequency  at  which  mobility 
data  are  to  be  obtained  in  a  given  test  series. 

NOTE  ~  This  definition  has  been  taken  from  ISO  7626-1 :  1986. 


4    Overall  configuration  of  the  measurement 
system 

Individual  components  of  the  system  used  for  mobility 
measurements  carried  out  in  accordance  with  this  part  of 
ISO  7626  shall  be  selected  to  suit  each  particular  application. 

However,  all  such  systems  should  include  certain  basic  com- 
ponents arranged  as  shown  in  figure  1.  Requirements  for  the 
characteristics  and  usage  of  those  components  are  given  in  the 
relevant  clauses. 


Amplitude 
control 


I 


Signal 
gsnerator 


Plotter 
or  other 
output 
device 


Power 
amplifier 


Vibration 
exciter 


I 1 

I  ^-^1 

I    I 


-J-^ 


Monitoring 
oscilloscope 


-  brlve  rod 


_      Force 
* 1       [  transducer 


Structure 
under  test 


response 
transducer(s) 


Signal 
conditioners 


—  Basic  feature 

-  =  Optional  feature 


Figure  1  —  Block  diagram  of  mobility  measurehient  system 


en  w 
O 

.a 

..   TJ 

(O  7^ 


CO 


<o 


IS     14736  (Part 2) 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


1999 


5    Support  of  the  structure  under  test 


6    Excitation 


5.1     General 


6.1     General 


Mobility  measurements  are  performed  on  structures  either  in  an 
ungrounded  condition  (freely  suspended)  or  in  a  grounded  con- 
dition (attached  to  one  or  more  supports),  depending  on  the 
purpose  of  the  test.  The  constraints  on  the  structure  induced 
by  the  application  of  the  vibration  exciter  are  dealt  with  in  6.4. 


5.2     Grounded  measurements 

The  support  of  the  test  structure  shall  be  represeritative  of  its 
support  in  typical  applications  unless  it  has  been  specified 
otherwise.  A  description  of  the  support  should  be  included  in 
the  test  report. 


5.3     Ungrounded  measurements 

A  compliant  suspension  of  the  test  structure  shall  be  used.  The 
magnitudes  of  all  relevant  elements  of  the  driving-point  mo- 
bility matrix  of  the  suspension,  at  its  point(s)  of  attachment  to 
the  structure  under  test,  should  be  at  least  ten  times  greater 
than  the  magnitudes  of  the  corresponding  elements  of  the 
mobility  matrix  of  the  structure  at  the  same  attachment 
point(s}.  Details  of  the  suspension  system  used  shall  be  in- 
cluded in  the  test  report. 

In  the  absence  of  quantitative  information,  design  of  the 
suspension  is  largely  a  matter  of  judgment.  As  a  minimum  re- 
quirement, all  resonance  frequencies  of  the  rigid-body  modes 
of  the  suspended  structure  shall  be  less  than  half  the  lowest  fre- 
quency of  interest. 

Items  commonly  used  to  provide  compliant  suspension  include 
shock  cords  and  resilient  pads  of  material  such  as  foam  and 
rubber.  Since  some  suspension  systems  have  mass  but  tittle 
damping,  care  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  frequencies 
of  the  suspension  resonances  are  well  away  from  the  modal 
frequencies  of  the  test  structure  itself.  The  masses  of  any 
suspension  components,  such  as  hooks  and  turnbuckles, 
located  close  to  the  structure  under  test  shall  also  be  less  than 
one-tenth  of  the  free  effective  mass  of  the  structure  at  each  fre- 
quency of  interest. 

Preliminary  testing  should  be  performed  to  identify  locations 
for  the  attachment  of  the  suspension  with  the  minimum  poss- 
ible effect  on  the  intended  measurements.  Suspension  near 
nodal  points  of  the  structure  under  test  will  minimize  the  inter- 
action of  the  suspension  system  with  the  structure.  Suspension 
cables  should  run  normal  to  the  direction  of  excitation,  if  prac- 
tical, and  even  in  this  case,  transverse  string  vibrations  of 
suspension  cables  can  affect  the  data. 


NOTE  —  Attention  should  also  be  paid  to  any  added  damping  of  the 
structure  due  to  the  suspension  systenn. 


Any  excitation  waveform,  the  spectrum  of  which  covers  the 
frequency  range  of  interest,  can  be  used  provided  that  the  ex- 
citation and  response  signals  are  processed  properly. 


Early  investigators  used  sinusoidal  excitation  signals;  under 
ideal  conditions,  the  steady-state  response  then  is  also  a 
sinusoidal  signal.  The  ratio  of  the  amplitudes  of  the  sinusoidal 
response  and  the  excitation  signals  yields  the  modulus  of  the 
mobility  at  that  particular  frequency  and  the  phase  difference  is 
the  argument. 


This  technique  works  because  the  amplitude  of  a  sinusoidal 
signal  is  the  modulus  of  the  Fourier  transform  of  that  signal,  so 
that  excitation  in  itself  accomplishes  the  same  end  as  Fourier 
transformation  of  more  complex  signals.  However,  it  is 
necessary  to  dwell  at  each  excitation  frequency  long  enough  to 
reach  the  steady-state  response.  This  is  not  necessary  if  the 
Fourier  transforms  of  the  excitation  signal  and  of  the  response 
velocity  are  determined.  A  short  duration  sine  burst  can  then  be 
used  and  the  ratio  of  the  response  and  force  spectra  gives  a 
correct  mobility  value  over  a  limited  frequency  range. 


The  same  will  hold  in  case  of  swept-sine  excitation  :  if  Fourier 
transforms  are  applied,  the  sweep  rate  limitations  mentioned  in 
9.2.3  are  no  longer  relevant  and  the  slowly  swept-sine  signal 
can  be  replaced  by  a  fast  swept-sine  signal. 


When  applying  digital  Fourier  transforms  it  is  rather  easy  to  use 
periodic  excitation  signals,  for  example  periodic  chirp  or 
periodic  random.  The  advantage  is  that  time-domain  leakage 
can  be  prevented  easily. 


6.2     Excitation  waveforms 


6.2.1     General 


Applicable  excitation  waveforms  include,  but  are  not  limited  to, 
those  described  in  6.2.2  to  6.2.5.  This  part  of  ISO  7626  reflects 
technology  in  wide  use  during  its  drafting  and  no  attempt  was 
made  to  include  emerging  or  research-oriented  measurement 
methods.  Comparative  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the 
different  types  of  waveforms  are  discussed  in  [1]. 


6.2.2     Discretely  stepped  sinusoidal  excitation 


The  excitation  for  a  given  measurement  consists  of  a  set  of  in- 
dividual discrete-frequency  sinusoidal  signals,  applied  sequen- 
tially. The  frequencies  of  the  signals  are  incrementally  spaced 
over  the  frequency  range  of  interest;  requirement  for  selecting 


IS     14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


the  frequency  increment  are  given  in  3.2.2.  At  each  frequency, 
the  excitation  is  applied  over  a  small  interval  of  time.  The  length 
of  the  time  interval  shall  be  sufficiently  long  to  achieve  steady- 
state  response  of  those  natural  vibration  modes  of  the  structure 
that  are  excited  at  the  particular  frequency  and  to  achieve 
proper  processing  of  the  signal. 


6.2.3     Slowly  swept  sinusoidal  excitation 

The  excitation  for  a  given  measurement  is  a  sinusoidal  signal 
continuously  swept  in  frequency  from  the  lower  to  the  upper 
limit  of  the  frequency  range  of  interest.  The  rate  at  which  the 
frequency  is  swept  shall  be  slow  enough  to  achieve  quasi- 
steady-state  response  of  the  structure;  requirements  for  select- 
ing the  sweep  rate  are  given  in  9.2.3.  Over  a  small  interval  of 
time,  the  energy  of  excitation  is  concentrated  in  the  small  fre- 
quency band  swept  during  that  interval. 


6.2.4     Stationary  random  excitation 

The  waveform  of  stationary  random  excitation  has  no  explicit 
mathematical  representation,  but  does  have  certain  statistical 
properties.  The  spectrum  of  the  excitation  signal  shall  be 
specified  by  the  spectral  density  of  the  exciting  force.  Rec- 
ommendations for  shaping  the  spectral  density  to  concentrate 
the  excitation  in  the  frequency  range  of  interest  are  given  in 
9.4.3.  All  vibration  modes  haying  frequencies  within  this  fre- 
quency range  are  excited  simultaneously. 


6.2.5     Other  excitation  waveforms 

Additional  types  of  waveforms,  described  in  6.2.5.1  to  8.2.5.4, 
also  simultaneously  excite  all  vibration  modes  within  a  fre- 
quency band  of  interest.  The  methods  of  signal  processing  and 
excitation  control  used  in  conjunction  with  these  waveforms 
are  similar  to  those  used  with  stationary-random  excitation. 
These  waveforms  are  repetitive  and  are  recommended  when 
synchronous  time-domain  averaging  of  the  response  waveform 
is  necessar/  to  measure  properly  the  motion  response  of  the 
structure. 


6.2-5.1     Pseudo-random  excitation 

The  excitation  signal  is  synthesized  digitally  in  the  frequency 
domain  to  attain  a  desired  spectrum  shape.  An  inverse  Fourier 
transformation  of  the  spectrum  may  be  performed  to  generate 
repetitive  digital  signals  which  are  then  converted  to  analogue 
electrical  signals  to  drive  the  vibration  exciter. 


6.2.5.2     Periodic-chirp  excitation 

A  periodic  chirp  is  a  rapid  repetitive  sweep  of  a  sinusoidal  signal 
in  which  the  frequency  is  swept  up  or  down  between  selected 


frequency  limits.  The  signal  may  be  generated  either  digitally  or 
by  a  sweep  oscillator  and  should  be  synchronized"with  the 
signal  processor  for  waveform  averaging  to  improve  the  signal- 
to-noise  ratio. 


6.2.5.3     Periodicimpulse  excitation 

A  suitably  shaped  impulse  function,  usually  generated  digitally, 
is  periodicalty  repeated.  The  signal  processor  should  be 
synchronized  with  the  signal  generator.  The  impulse  function 
shape  (typically  half-sine  or  decaying  step  functions!  shall  be 
chosen  to  meet  the  excitation  frequency  requirements. 


6.2.5.4     Periodic-random  excitation 

A  periodic-random  excitation  combines  the  features  of  pure 
random  and  pseudo-random  excitation  in  that  it  satisfies  the 
conditions  for  a  periodic  signal  yet  changes  with  time  so  that  it 
excites  the  structure  in  a  purely  random  manner;  this  is  done  by 
using  different  pseudo-random  excitation  for  each  average. 


6!.3    Vibration  exciters 

Devices  commonly  attached  to  the  structure  under  test  to  apply 
input  forces  having  desired  waveforms  include  electrodynamic, 
electrohydraulic,  and  piezoelectric  vibration  exciters  (see 
ISO  5344).  The  frequency  ranges  of  general  applicability  for 
each  type  of  exciter  are  shown  in  figure  2. 

The  basic  requirement  of  a  vibration  exciter  is  that  it  shall  pro- 
vide a  sufficient  force  and  displacement  capability  so  that 
mobility  measurements  may  be  made  over  the  entire  frequency 
range  of  interest  with  an  adequate  signal-to-noise  ratio.  A 
larger  vibration  exciter  may  be  required  to  apply  adequate 
broad-band  random  excitation  to  a  given  structure  than  is 
needed  for  sinusoidal  excitation.  Smaller  exciters  may  be  used 
if  a  band  limiting  of  the  random  noise  is  selected  or  if  time- 
domain  averaging  of  the  excitation  and  response  signal  wave- 
forms is  used  (see  6.2.5). 


NOTE  —  The  coherence  function  may  be  used  as  a  measure  of  the 
adequacy  of  the  vibration  exciter  in  relation  to  background  and  elec- 
tronic noise. 


The  excitation-force  input  to  a  structure  gives  rise  to  a  reaction 
force  which  is  provided  either  by  the  exciter  support  or  by  the 
inertia  of  the  exciter  itself;  these  approaches  are  illustrated  in 
figures  3a)  and  b).  If  necessary,  an  additional  mass  should  be 
attached  to  the  exciter.  An  incorrect  set-up  which  would  allow 
transmission  of  exciter  reaction  forces  to  the  structure  via  a 
path  other  than  through  the  force  transducer,  i.e.  through  a 
common  base  on  which  both  the  exciter  and  the  structure  are 
mounted,  is  illustrated  in  figure  3c). 


at 


(/)  Ui 
O 


at 
to 


o> 


M' 


"I  I       I    I     I    I  II 


J_L± 


10 


1     r 


TT 


I     I   I  I  1 1 II 


z 


7  /  / 

Piezoelectric  , 

/  /  / 


J 1    I  I  I  II  I 


il 


100 

Frequency,  Hz 


1000 


<0 


J L_L 


i± 


10000 


Figure  2  —  Frequency  ranges  of  general  applicability  for  vibration  exciters 


IS     14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


Structure 
suspension 


ES=^ 


Exciter  support  - 


Structure  suspension 


Exciter  suspension 


a)     Reaction  by  external  support 


b)     Reaction  by  exciter  inertia 


c)     Example  of  an  incorrect  arrangement 


Figure  3  —  Exciter  reaction  forces 


IS     14736  {Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2  :  1990 


6.4    Avoidance  of  spurious  forces  and  moments 


6.4.1     General 

A  basic  requirement  for  mobility  measurements  Is  that  the  ex- 
citation force  be  applied  in  a  single  direction  at  a  single  point  on 
a  structure. 

Any  spurious  moments  or  forces  {other  that  the  intended  ex- 
citation force  along  the  intended  direction)  will  cause  errors  in 
the  resulting  mobility  data.  The  driving  point  and  all  other 
measurement  points  on  the  structure  shall  be  free  to  respond 
by  moving  in  any  direction  without  restraint.  Dynamic  inter- 
actions between  the  structure,  the  motion,  and  the  force 
transducers  as  well  as  between  the  structure  and  the  exciter 
shall  be  avoided.  In  order  to  ensure  that  spurious  forces  and 
moments  are  avoided  the  factors  dealt  with  in  6.4.2  to  6.4.4 
shall  be  taken  Into  consideration. 


6.4.2     Transducer  mass  loading 

Spurious  forces  are  generated  at  each  transducer  attachment 
point  as  a  result  of  the  acceleration  of  the  transducer  mass. 
Measurement  errors  caused  by  mass  loading  shall  be  minimized 
by  selecting  transducers  having  the  smallest  mass  consistent 
with  sensitivity  requirements.  When  measuring  driving-point 
mobility,  such  loading  by  a  force  transducer  can  be  elec- 
tronically compensated  to  a  certain  extent  (see  7.3). 


6.4.3     Transducer  rotational  inertia  loading 

Spurious  moments  are  generated  at  each  transducer  attach- 
ment point  as  a  result  of  the  rotational  acceleration  of  the 
transducer,  especially  impedance  heads  which  may  have  a 
large  rotational  inertia.  Such  spurious  moments  shall  be 
minimized  by  selecting  transducers  having  low  moments  of 
inertia  about  their  mounting  points. 


6.4.4     Exciter  attachment  restraints 

Spurious  moments  and  cross-axis  forces  are  generated  at  the 
exciter  attachment  point  by  restraints  Imposed  on  the  rotational 
and  lateral  driving-point  responses  of  the  structure  under  test. 
For  example,  clamping  constraints  introduced  by  the  exciter/ 
impedance  head  assembly  could  adversely  effect  the  measure- 
ment of  low-order  modes  in  test  structures.  The  use  of  area- 
reducing  cones  may  be  required  to  approximate  more  closely  a 
point  driving  force. 

NOTE  1  —  Area-reducing  cones  can  further  increase  the  likelihood  of 
introducing  a  spurious  moment  if  careful  consideration  is  not  given  to 
their  use. 

Avoidance  of  exciter  attachment  restraints  is  often  the  most 
difficult  problem  encountered  when  using  fixed  vibration  ex- 
citers to  measure  the  mobility  of  lightweight  structures. 


Tt)  avoid  measurement  errors  caused  by  attachment  restraints, 
the  magnitudes  of  the  lateral  and  rotational,,  driving-point 
mobilities  of  the  exciter  attachment,  when  the  exciter  and  at- 
tachment hardware  are  disconnected  from  the  structure,  shall 
be  at  least  ten  times  larger,  at  all  frequencies  of  interest,  than 
those  of  the  corresponding  elements  of  the  driving-point 
mobility  matrix  of  the  structure  itself. 


In  the  absence  of  quantitative  data  for  either  lateral  or  rotational 
driving-point  mobility,  determination  of  whether  a  particular 
test  set-up  avoids  measurement  errors  caused  by  significant  at- 
tachment restraints  is  often  a  matter  of  judgment;  the  following 
items  shall  be  taken  into  consideration: 


a)  the  use  of  a  free-floating  voice-coil  exciter  as  described 
in  [2]; 

b)  the  design  of  the  support  system  for  an  inertia- 
controlled  exciter  such  that  the  reaction  to  the  force  applied 
to  the  structure  under  test  will  not  result  in  any  rotatiorral 
motion  of  the  exciter  nor  in  any  motion  transverse  to  the 
a^is  of  the  force  transducers; 

c)  the  installation  of  a  drive  rod  connecting  the  exciter  to 
the  force  transducers. 


The  drive  rod  shall  be  designed  131  to  provide la  high  stiffness 
In  the  axial  direction  and  sufficient  flexibility  in  all  other 
direc;tions.  Slender  short  rods  are  frequently  used  for  this 
purpose;  however,  thick  rods  with  thin  flexible  sections  near 
each  end  may  give  better  results.  Care  shall  be  taken  to  en- 
sure that  the  exciter  and  drive  rod  are  aligned  with  the  force 
transducer  axis. 


If  flexible  drive  rods  are  used,  the  accelerometer  shall  be 
attached  directly  to  the  structure  in  all  cases.  The  ac- 
celerometer shall  not  be  connected  to  the  structure  via  in- 
termediate devices,  such  as  drive  rods,  the  axial  compliance 
of  which  would  render  motion-response  measurements  in- 
valid [see  figure  4a)].  The  force  transducer  shall  be  arranged 
so  that  it  always  measures  the  force  transmitted  from  the 
drive  rod  to  the  structure  [see  figure  4b)J.  Only  with  ex- 
treme caution  can  the  force  transducer  be  located  at  the 
exciter  end  of  the  rod  [see  figure  4c)].  If  the  arrangement 
illustrated  in  figure  4c)  is  unavoidable,  the  effect  of  the 
drive  rod  compliance  shall  be  checked  as  described  in 
ISO  7626-1  and  the  compensation  for  the  rod  mass  shall  be 
applied  using  the  procedure  specified  In  7.3. 


NOTE  2  —  Drive-rod  bending  modes  having  natural  frequencies 
within  the  frequency  range  of  interest  may  interfere  with  the  mo- 
bility test. 

Furthermore,  bending  vibrations  of  the  moving  systems  of  the  ex- 
citer may  introduce  moments  into  the  structure  which  are  not 
detected  by  the  force  transducer,  but  which  can  affect  the 
response  measurements. 


IS     14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


Exciter 


Impedance 
head 


Impedance-head  acceleration 
rm      measurements  invalid  due  to 
drive  rod  axial  compliance 


Large  mass  correction 
of  measured  force 
required  to  determine 
actual  excitation  force 


Figure  4a)  —  Connection  of  exciter  drive  rod  —  Incorrect  method 


Exciter 


'  Drive  rod 


.e^""^ 


Force 
transducer 


Structure  under  test 


dm^   8« 


Force  and  acceleration 
/pn      measurements  unaffected 
yyyy       \         by  drive  rod  compliance 


J_  L-J      Minor  mass  correction 
required  to  determine 
actual  excitation  force 


-  Accelerometer 


Figure  4b)  —  Connection  of  exciter  drive  rod  —  Best  method 


IS     14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2  :  1990 


Exciter 


Force 
transducer 


-  Drive  rod 


3^  -  ^s 


Structure  under  test 


T3— 


"  Accelerometer 


Large  mass  correction 
of  measured  force 
required  to  determine 
actual  excitation  force 


Figure  4cl  —  Connection  of  exciter  drive  rod  —  Compromise  method  A 


-  Exciter 


-  Drive  rod 


Impedance 
head 


Structure  under  test 


Impedance-head  acceleration 
measurements  unaffected  by 
drive  rod  compliance 

Minor  mass  correction 
required  to  determine 
actual  excitation,  but  note 
that  rotational  inertia  of 
the  impedance  head  cannot 
be  cancelled  and  may 
significantly  affect  data 
if  flexing  of  the  structure 
is  significant 


Figure  4d)  —  Connection  of  exciter  drive  rod  —  Compromise  method  B 


10 


IS     14736  (Part  2) 
ISO     7626-2  :  1990 


1999 


7     Measurement  of  the  exciting  force  and 
resulting  motion  response 

7.1     General 

Basic  criteria  and  requirerr\Br\ts  for  the  selection  of  motion 
transducers,  force  transducers  and  impedance  heads,  and 
methods  for  determining  the  characteristics  of  those  trans- 
ducerjs  are  specified  in  iSO  7626-1.  Measurements  of  exciter 
current  or  voltage  shall  not  be  used  to  infer  excitation  force 
amplitudes;  excitation  forces  shall  always  be  measured  by  a 
suitable  transducer. 

The  types  of  transducers  most  commonly  used  in  structural 
frequency-response  measurements  are  piezoelectric  accelero- 
meters,  piezoelectric  force  transducers,  and  impedance  heads 
combining  those  devices  in  one  assembly.  Displacement  or 
velocity  transducers  may  be  used  in  lieu  of  accelerometers. 
Some  displacement  transducers  offer  the  advantage  of  a  non- 
contacting  design.  Piezo-resistive  accelerometers  have  certain 
advantages  when  impulsive  excitation  -vvaveforms  are  used. 
Care  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  frequency  response  and 
linear  range  of  any  candidate  transducer  are  sufficiently  broad. 

Any  of  the  three  types  of  motion  (displacement,  velocity  and 
acceleration)  can  be  determined  using  any  type  of  motion 
transducer  by  multiplying  the  measurement  result,  at  each  fre- 
quency/, using  the  following  factor  raised  to  the  appropriate 
positive  or  negative  integer  exponent: 

\2nf 

where 

/    is  the  frequency  concerned. 

7.2    Attachment  of  transducers 

Two  methods  commonly  used  to  attach  force  and  motion 
transducers  to  structures  are  threaded  studs  and  cement; 
detailed  guidance  on  transducer  attachment  methods  is  given 
in  ISO  5348  and  in  [4],  [5]  and  [6]. 

The  excitation  force  shall  be  transmitted  as  directly  as  possible 
through  the  force  transducer  or  impedance  head  to  the  struc- 
ture with  as  few  intervening  components  as  practical.  If  the 
surface  of  the  structure  is  not  flat  at  the  transducer  attachment 
points,  apprjopriately  shaped  metallic  mounting  pads  shall  be 
used.  A  thin  film  of  a  viscous  fluid  (such  as  heavy  oil  or  grease) 
between  the  transducer  and,the  mounting  surface  may  improve 
the  attachment  coupling  at  high  frequencies.  The  effects  of  at- 
tachment compliance  should  be  checked  as  described  in 
ISO  7626-1.  Force  transducers  moilnted  on  studs  shall  be 
tightened  to  the  torjque  recommended  by  the  transducer 
manufacturer. 


hardware  at  the  driving  point  of  the  structure.  Electronic 
compensation  for  this  mass  shall  be  considered  when  the 
magnitude  of  the  driving-point  mobility  of  the  structure  being 
tested  is  greater  than  0,01 7/'??^  at  all  frequencies,  /,  in  hertz, 
within  the  frequency  range  of  interest;  the  mass,  m^,  in 
kilograms,  is  the  sum  of  the  mass  of  the  hardware  used  to  at- 
tach the  force  transducer  to  the  structure  being  tested  and  the 
effective  end  mass  of  the  force  transducer  or  impedance  head 
as  defined  in  ISO  7626-1. 

If  the  above  criterion  cannot  be  met,  the  following  compen- 
sation procedure,  commonly  known  as  "mass  cancellation'', 
can  be  considered.  The  acceleration  signal  at  the  point  of  ex- 
citation is  obtained  and  multiplied,  either  in  an  analogue  circuit 
or  digitally,  by  the  total  effective  mass  to  be  compensated.  The 
product  represents  that  part  of  the  exciter  output  force  which  is 
required  to  accelerate  the  effective  mass  added  to  the  structure 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  test.  This  force  signal  is  sub- 
tracted, either  in  an  analogue  circuit  or  digitally,  from  the  force 
transducer  signal  to  obtain  the  net  axciting  force  acting  on  the 
structure  under  test. 

NOTES 

1  If  a  separate  driving-point  accelerometer  is  used  below  the  force 
transducer  [see  figures  4b)  and  c)],  the  mass  of  the  accelerometer  shall 
also  be  included  in  the  determination  of  the  total  effective  mass,  m^. 

2  During  driving-point  mobility  measurements,  the  accelerometer 
used  for  measuring  the  response  of  the  structure  also  provides  the 
signal  for  determining  the  force  required  to  accelerate  the  effective 
mass.  During  transfer-mobility  measurements,  however,  a  separate  ac- 
celerometer at  the  driving  point  of  the  structure  is  required  In  order  to 
obtain  the  signal  to  be  used  for  mass  cancellation. 

3  Electronic  mass  cancellation  cannot  compensate  for  rotational  iner- 
tia loadings;  it  can  only  compensate  for  translational  inertia  loadings  at 
the  driving  point  and  in  the  direction  of  the  excitation.  All  other 
spurious  forces  can  only  be  minimized  by  choosing  transducers  of  low 
inertia.  Measurement  errors  caused  by  uncompensated  inertia  loadings 
of  the  structure  include  shifts  in  the  frequencies  of  the  response  peaks. 

4  it  is  strongly  recommended  that  reconsideration  of  the  transducer 
selection  and  redesigning  of  the  attachmenX  hardware  be  given  higher 
priority  than  the  use  of  mass  cancellation.  In  addition,  to  avoid  large 
measurement  errors,  mass  cancellation  should  only  be  used  in  the 
range  where  the  ratio  of  the  effective  mass  of  the  attachment  hardware 
and  transducers  to  the  free  effective  mass  of  the  test  structure  at  the 
driving  point  is  greater  than  0,06  and  less  than  0,5. 

7.4    Signal  amplifiers 

Piezoelectric  force  and  motion  transducers  require  charge 
amplifiers  or  high-impedance  voltage  amplifiers. 

NOTES 

1  Some  piezoelectric  transducers  are  equipped  with  built-in  elec- 
tronic circuitry,  requiring  amplifiers  which  are  compatible  with  this  cir- 
cuitry. 

2  The  sensitivity  of  a  voltage  amplifier  tends  to  be  affected  by  the  im- 
pedance of  the  transducer  cable.  Voltage  amplifiers  have  more  severe 
low  frequency  response  limitations  than  charge  amplifiers. 


7.3     Mass  loading  and  mass  cancellation 

As  outlined  in  6.4.2,  the  amount  of  mass  added  to  a  structure 
for  test  purposes  shall  be  minimized.  When  testing  lightweight 
structures,  it  may  be  desirable  to  compensate  electronically  for 
the  total  effective  mass,  m*,  of  the  transducers  and  attachment 


7.5     Calibrations 

7.5.1     General 

Requirements  for   basic   and   supplementary   transducer   cali- 
brations are  given  in  ISO  7626-1;  both  are  essential  for  determin- 


11 


IS     14736  (Part  2)  :  1999 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


ing  the  suitability  of  piezoelectric  transducers  for  mobility 
measurements.  The  basic  calibrations  of  each  transducer 
should  be  performed  once  a  year. 

The  actual  overall  measurement  system  shall  be  calibrated  at 
the  beginning  of  each  day's  test  series  by  performing  the  oper- 
ational calibration  described  in  7.5.2.  The  operatipnal  cali- 
bration shall  also  be  checked  at  the  end  of  each  test  series. 
Additional  calibrations  may  be  performed  during  the  test,  as  re- 
quired. 

7.5.2    Operational  calibration 

Operational  calibrations  shall  be  performed  by  measuring  either 
the  mobility  or  the  accelerance  of  a  freely  suspended  rigid 
calibration  block  of  known  mass.  All  components  of  the 
measurement  system  shall  be  connected  in  the  same  manner  as 
they  will  be  in  the  test  series.  The  measured  frequency 
response  for  the  calibration  block  shall  agree  within  ±  5  %  of 
its  known  correct  value,  for  example  with  the  magnitude  of  the 
accelerance  Mm  or  with  the  magnitude  of  the  mobility 
1/(2  7r/m),  where  m  is  the  known  mass  of  the  calibration 
block.  The  same  attachment  hardware  that  is  to  be  used  in  the 
measurement  series  shall  be  used  for  the  operational  calibration 
so  that  any  errors  caused  by  the  attachment  compliance  may 
be  detected  {see  ISO  7626-1 ).  The  mass  of  the  calibration  block 
shall  be  selected  so  that  its  mobility  is  representative  of  the 
range  of  mobilities  involved  in  the  measuremeat  series.  If 
necessary,  several  operational  calibrations  shall  be  performed 
with  appropriate  calibration  blocks  to  cover  the  range  of 
mobilities  involved. 


8     Processing  of  the  transducer  signals 

8.1     Determination  of  the  frequency-response 
function 

8.1.1  General 

The  motion  and  force  signals  shall  be  processed  by  an  analyser 
which  filters  the  signals  (and  performs  mass  cancellation,  if  re- 
quired) and  determines  the  ratio  of  their  magnitudes  as  well  as 
the  phase  angle  between  the  signals,  both  as  functions  of  fre- 
quency. The  analyser  should  also  perform  the  mathematical 
operations  which  may  be  required  for  converting  the  measured 
frequency-response  function  to  another  type  (for  example 
converting  accelerance  to  mobility)  (see  7.1).  Processing 
requirements  pertaining  to  the  various  excitation  waveforms 
described  in  6.2  are  specified  in  8.1.2  and  8.1.3. 

8.1.2  Sinusoidal  excitation 

The  magnitude  of  the  freguency-response  function  shall  be 
determined  by  analogue  or  digital  means  as  the  ratio  of  the 
phasor  amplitudes  of  the  two  sinusoidal  signals.  The  phase  of 
the  frequency-response  function  shall  be  determined  by 
measuring  the  difference  between  the  phase  angles  of  the  two 
signals. 

NOTE  —  If  discretely  stepped  sinusoidal  excitation  is  used,  several 
frequency-response  functions  may  be  obtained  during  a  given 
measurement  run  by  switching  a  single  response  channel  from  one 
response  transducer  to  the  next.  If  slowly  swept  sinusoidal  excitation  is 
used,  only  a  single  frequency-response  function  per  response  channel 
can  be  measured  in  a  given  run. 


8.1.3     Random  excitation 

Transducer  signals  generated  with  random,  periodic  random, 
pseudo-random,  periodic  chirp  or  impulse  excitation  should 
be  processed  using  digital  Fourier  transform  analysers.  As 
described  in  ISO  7626-1,  the  frequency-response  function  may 
be  obtained  by  suitable  computations  such  as  the  ratio  of  the 
cross-spectral  density  between  the  motion  response  and  the 
excitation  force  divided  by  the  auto-spectral  density  of  the  ex- 
citation force.  Estimates  of  those  spectra  shall  be  computed  by 
discrete  Fourier  transformation  of  the  properly  time-domain 
weighted  excitation  and  response  signals  (see  8.4.3).  A  suf- 
ficient number  of  spectra  shall  be  averaged  to  achieve  at  least 
90  %  confidence  that,  at  each  resonance  frequency,  the  ran- 
dom error  in  the  computed  driviag-point  mobility  is  less  than 
5  %  (see  annex  A).  At  least  the  same  number  of  spectra  shall 
be  averaged  when  computing  the  corresponding  transfer 
mobilities. 

NOTES 

1  When  measuring  transfer  mobilities,  it  may  not  be  possible  to 
achieve  the  level  of  confidence  specified  above,  especially  when  the 
response  is  measured  at  a  point  and  in  a  direction  where  the  transfer 
mobility  has  a  small  magnitude.  Little  is  gained  in  such  cases  by  in- 
creasing the  number  of  spectra  that  are  averaged,  beyond  those  re- 
quired to  meet  the  above  criterion  for  the  corresponding  driving-point 
mobility  test. 

_2  Two-channel  Fourier  analysers  can  obtain  only  a  single  frequency- 
response  function  in  a  given  measurement  run.  Analysers  with  ad- 
ditional response  channels  may  be  used  if  simultaneous  measurement 
of  several  frequency-response  functions  is  desired. 

8.2  Filtering 

8.2.1  Sinusoidal  excitation 

The  frequency-response  function  shall  be  computed  using  only 
those  components  of  the  response  and  excitation  signals 
corresponding  to  the  excitation  frequency.  Suitable  filters  or 
synchronous  digital  sampling  shall  be  used  for  minimizing 
noise  and  harmonics  without  altering  the  phase  between  the 
excitation  and  response  signals. 

NOTE  —  Tracking  filters  are  traditionally  used  for  this  purpose.  Track- 
ing filters  are  phase-matched,  narrow  passband  analogue  devices 
which  use  a  heterodyne  process  to  adjust  automatically  to  the  exci- 
tation frequency.  Alternatively,  digital  signal  processing  devices  may 
be  used  to  synchronize  the  data  sampling  function  with  the'  frequency 
of  excitation  signal. 

8.2.2  Random  excitation 

Filtering  to  remove  noise  and  harmonics  from  the  excitation 
and  response  signals  is  not  feasible  when  random  excitation  is 
used.  The  signal-to-noise  ratio  can  be  enhanced  by  using  band 
limiting  techniques,  however.  Suitable  filters  should  be  used  to 
limit  the  excitation  bandwidth  as  described  in  9.4.3.  Phase- 
matched,  anti-aliasing  filters  having  sharp  high-frequency  roll- 
off  rates  are  always  required  when  using  digital  analysers  to 
avoid  errors  caused  by  signal  components  having  frequencies 
above  the  highest  frequency  of  the  analysis  range. 

8.3  Avoidance  of  saturation 

Systematic  checks  on  gain  settings  to  avoid  saturation  of  the 
signal  amplifiers  are  vitally  important  to  ensure  the  validity  of 


12 


IS     14736  (Part  2) 
ISO     7626-2:1990 


1999 


the  measurement.  The  overload  indicator  of  an  analyser 
responds  only  to  saturation  which  occurs  within,  but  not  prior  to, 
the  analyser.  As  shown  in  figure  1,  an  oscilloscope  should  be 
used  to  monitor  the  signals  at  suitable  stages  prior  to  the  analyser 
unless  the  preamplifiers  are  equipped  with  overload  indicators. 

MOTE  —  Saturation  can  be  detected  visually  by  the  clipped  ap- 
pearance of  the  waveform  as  it  appears  on  the  oscilloscope. 

8.4     Frequency  resolution 

8.4.1  General 

The  resolution  shall  be  fine  enough  to  resolve  all  the  eigenfre- 
quencies  of  the  test  structure  within  the  frequency  range  of  the 
interest  and  to  evaluate  adequately  the  modal  damping. 

8.4.2  Sinusoidal  excitation 

For  slowly  swept  and  discretely  stepped  sinusoidal  excitations 
adequate  resolution  of  resonance  frequencies  requires  that  the 
time  rate  of  change  of  the  excitation  frequency  be  sufficiently 
slow  (see  9.2). 

8.4.3  Random  excitation 

For  the  excitation  waveforms  described  in  6.2.4  and  6.2.5, 
adequate  frequency  resolution  requires  sufficiently  small  fre- 
quency increments  in  the  discrete-frequency  Fourier  transform 
analysis.  The  frequency  increments  {line  spacing),  in  hertz, 
shall  be  determined  from  consideration  of  the  modal  density 
and  modal  damping  of  the  structure  under  test.  Furthermore, 
time-domain  weighting  of  the  signals  using  the  Manning  or 
other  suitable  time-weighting  function  should  be  used  to  maxi- 
mize frequency  resolution  (see  [71). 

NOTES 

1  For  structures  that  have  light  mechanical  damping,  the  required 
number  of  samples  of  digitized  data  (i.e.  the  sample  "block  size")  is 
large  if  the  spectra  of  the  excitation  and  response  signals  are  computed 
for  the  entire  frequency  range  of  interest  (i.e.  by  a  "baseband"  Fourier 
analysis).  Alternatively,  a  Fourier  analysis  limited  to  a  selected  fre- 
quency band  (zoom),  or  a  combination  of  both,  may  be  used.  In  either 
case,  the  total  time  (record  length)  required,  in  seconds,  will  be  the 
reciprocal  of  the  required  frequency  increment  (resolution},  in  hertz. 

2  Random  excitation  can  be  considered  as  a  time  series  of  impulse 
functions  (Duhamel's  approach),  tt  is  easily  understood  that  the 
response  at  the  start  of  the  sampling  of  a  block  of  data  is  mainly  the 
result  Qf  earlier  excitation;  the  response  is  thus  not  corresponding 
(coherent)  to  the  excitation.  Near  the  end  of  the  datablock  there  is  still 
excitation,  but  the  response  is  truncated,  depending  on  the  ratio  of  the 
decay  time  and  the  total  time  for  sampling  the  datablock  and  the  place  ^ 
of  the  "excitation  impulse"  in  the  block;  this  again  produces  a  bad 
coherence.  The  better  part  of -the  coherent  excitation  and  response 
data  is  found  in  the  middle  of  the  datablocks.  The  application  of 
Manning  windows  is  sometimes  recommended  to  improve  the 
coherence  of  mobility  data;'  however,  it  rerfiains  a  compromise  inherent 
to  random  excitation  for  mobility  measurements. 

8.4.4     Periodic  excitation 

Periodic  random,  chirp  and  impulse  excitations  do  not  suffer 
from  the  problems  described  in  8.4.3.  Since  periodic  excitation 
produces  a  head-to-tail  connection  of  the  subsequent  data- 
blocks,  the  starting  transients  shift  over  to  the  next  block  and, 
after  a  certain  time,  each  datablock  includes  all  the  response 


data.  In  principle,  noaveraging  is  necessary.  In  some  cases,  the 
coherence  function  may  be  used  to  provide  an  estimate  of  the 
extraneous  noise  and,  thus,  provide  guidance  in  selecting  the 
appropriate  signal-averaging  parameters  (see  annex  A), 

S    Control  of  the  excitation 

9.1  General 

Control  ofthe  excitation  time  is  necessary  to  achieve  adequate 
frequency  resolution;  control  of  the  excitation  amplitude  is 
usually  necessary  to  achieve  an  adequate  dynamic  range. 

9.2  Time  required  for  sinusoidal  excitation 

9.2.1  General 

With  either  swept-  or  stepped-frequency  sinusoidal  excitation, 
the  rate  of  change  of  the  excitation  frequency  (or  the  step  size 
and  rate)  shall  be  controlled  to  achieve  the  frequency  resolution 
required.  Fine  resolution  is  required  in  .  the  vicinity  of 
resonances  (response  peaks)  and  anti-resonances  (response 
dips)  of  the  structure  in  order  to  determine  accurately  the 
magnitude  and  phase  and  to  obtain  accurate  information  for 
calculating  natural  frequencies  and  structural -damping. 

9.2.2  Discretely  stepped  sinusoidal  excitation 

When  making  use  of  stepped  sinusoidal  excitation,  the  exci- 
tation frequency  nearest  to  each  resonance  frequency  of  the 
structure  wit!  differ  from  the  true  resonance  frequency  by  as 
much  as  one-half  of  the  frequency  stepping  increment.  Thus, 
the  maximum  error  in  the  determination  of  a  resonance  fre- 
quency is  half  the  frequency  increment.  In  addition,  the 
measured  magnitude  of  the  peak  response  of  the  structure  will 
likely  be  less  than  the  true  resonance  peak.  Upper  bounds  on 
the  error  are  given  in  table  1 .  Errors  in  the  measurements  of  the 
true  magnitude  of  the  response  peaks  of  a  structure  lead  to  ex- 
cessive estimates  of  the  damping  of  the  structural  modes. 

The  frequency  increment  in  the  frequency  range  of  ±  10  %  of 
a  resonance  frequency  shall  be  chosen  so  that  the  measured 
peak  response  amplitude  and  the  modal  damping  ratio  are 
within  5  %  of  their  true  values. 

Table  1  —  Maximum  error  in  measurements  of  the 

magnitude  of  the  motion  response  of  a  structure  at 

resonance  when  using  discretely  stepped  sinusoidal 

excitation 


Ratio  of  stepped 

Maximum  error  in  the 

frequency  increment 

measurement  of  the  magnitude 

to  true  half-power 

of  the  response  peak 

bandwidth  of  a 

structural  mode 

% 

dB 

Greater  than  1 

More  than  29,3 

More  than  3 

1 

29,3 

3 

1/2 

10,6 

1 

1/3 

5,1                !                0.5 

1/4 

3                  !                0,3 

1/5 

1,9              i               0,2 

1/6 

1,4               1                0,1 

1/7 

1                   i                0,1 

1/8 

0,7               !                0.1 

NOTE  -'  The  errors  given 

in  the  table  were  calculated  by  rnean^- 

of  an  equation  published 

n  181;  however,  additional  terms  were 

carried  in  the  cornputatio 

ns  to  improve  the  accuracy 

13 


iS     14736  (Part  2) 
ISO    7626-2:1990 


1999 


Equations  for  determining  the  maximum  frequency  increment 
meeting  this  requirement  are  given  in  annex  B  as  a  function  of 
resonance  frequency  and  modal  damping  coefficient.  The 
minimum  time  duration  for  excitation  at  each  frequency  (dwell 
time)  is  also  given  in  annex  B.  For  frequencies  outside  the 
range  of  +  10  %  of  a  resonance  or  anti-resonance  frequency, 
larger  frequency  increments  and  shorter  dwejl  times  may  be 
used. 

9.2.3     Slowly  swept  sinusoidal  excitation 

if  slowly  swept  sinusoidal  excitation  is  used,  the  frequency  shall 
be  varied  either  as  a  linear  or  logarithmic  function  of  time.  The 
sweep  rate  shall  always  be  chosen  so  that,  in  the  frequency 
range  within  ±  10  %  of  a  resonance  frequency,  the  measured 
magnitude  of  the  motion  response  of  the  structure  is  within 
5  %  of  the  true  value. 

For    linearly   swept   excitation,    the    maximum    sweep    rate, 


(d//d/) 


in  hertz  per  minute,  shall  be  as  follows: 


(d//d/)^3,  <  54  0g2/n2 

For  logarithmically  swept  excitation,  the  maximum  sweep  rate, 
{af/di)^Q^,  in  octaves  per  minute,  shall  be  as  follows: 

{d//d/)^3,  <  77,6/,/e2 

In  these  two  relationships, 

/r,     is  the  estimated  resonance  frequency; 

Q  is  the  estimated  dynamic  amplification  (quality)  factor 
of  the  structural  mode  of  concern  at  the  resonance  fre- 
quency. 

NOTE  ~  The  two  relationships  given  above  are  taken  from  [81,  and  are 
intended  to  ensure  that  essentially  steady-state  measurements  are 
obtained. 

9.3  Time  required  for  random  excitation 

The  excitation  shall  be  applied  and  the  motion  response 
measured  for  a  duration  long  enough  to  permit  averaging  the 
number  of  spectra  specified  in  8.1.3. 

The  number  of  spectra  to  be  averaged  is  a  function  of  the 
signal-to-noise  ratio  of  the  measurement  system.  The 
coherence  function  between  the  excitation  force  signal  and  the 
motion-response  signal  shall  be  used  to  determine  the 
minim,um  number  of  spectra  that  have  to  be  averaged  to  ensure 
that  the  random  error  is  less  than  6  %  within  90  %  confidence 
limits  (see  clause  A.I). 

The  excitation  time,  in  seconds,  required  for  obtaining  each 
spectrum  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  frequency  increment,  in  hertz, 
of  the  discrete  Fourier  transform  (see  notes  to  8.4.3). 

9.4  Dynamic  range 

9.4.1     General 

The  mobility  of  lightly  damped  structures  typically  covers  a 
magnitude  range  of  more  than  10^  :  1  (100  dB)  over  the 
frequency  range  of  interest.  Each  data  channel,  in  addition  to 
having  a  maximum  working  voltage  above  which  saturation 
occurs,  has  a  minimum  voltage  below  which  electronic  noise 
and,  for  digital  systems,  noise  associated  with  the  digitizing 


process  becomes  significant  in  comparison  with  the  signal.  For 
accurate  measurements,  the  control  of  the  excitation'  shall  be 
such  that  the  voltages  in  both  channels  remain  within  those 
bounds.  Guidelines  for  excitation  amplitude  control  to  achieve 
adequate  dynamic  range  for  mobility  measurements  using 
the  various  types  of  excitation  waveform  are  given  in  9.4.2 
and  9.4.3. 

9.4.2     Sinusoidal  excitation 

With  a  constant  excitation  force  amplitude,  the  maximum 
dynamic  range  that  can  be  achieved  for  a  mobility  measure- 
ment is  the  dynamic  range  of  the  response  signal  channel  of  the 
measurement  system  (typically  approximately  300  : 1  or  50  dB). 
In  order  to  increase  the  attainable  range,  the  excitation 
amplitude  should  be  reduced  in  the  vicinity  of  each  resonance 
frequency  (response  peak)  and  increased  in  the  vicinity  of  each 
anti-resonance  frequency  (response  dip).  The  limitation  of  at- 
tainable dynamic  range  as  a  result  of  ihe  use  of  constant- 
amplitude  excitation  is  illustrated  in  figure  5a).  With  constant- 
amplitude  excitation,  the  maximum  measured  motion-response 
magnitude  is  less  than  the  true  maximum  motion  response 
because  of  amplifier  saturation.  Likewise,  the  measurement  of 
the  true  motion  response  at  structural  anti-resonances  is  limited 
by  electronic  noise.  The  improvement  in  dynamic  range  ob- 
tainable by  proper  control  of  the  amplitude  of  the  exciting  force 
is  illustrated  in  figure  5b). 

9-4.3     Random  excitation 

The  concept  of  excitation  control  described  in  9.4.2  and  il- 
lustrated in  figure  5b)  should  also  be  used  when  the  excitation 
force  has  one  of  the  random  waveforms  described  in  6.2.4  or 
6.2.5.  As  a  minimum,  the  excitation  spectrum  shall  be  trun- 
cated sharply  at  the  maximum  frequency  of  interest  to  eliminate 
excitation  and  response  signals  above  the  maximum  frequency 
of  interest.  If  band-limited  analysis  is  used  to  increase  the  fre- 
quency resolution  of  the  measurements,  the  excitation  shall  be 
limited  by  bandpass  (or  by  high-  and  low-pass)  filters  to  the  fre- 
quency band  selected  for  the  high-resolution  measurements 
(see  8.4.3). 

10  Tests  for  valid  data 

When  mobility  data  are  measured  with  random  excitation  of 
the  vibration  exciter,  the  procedure  described  in  clause  A.  1  may 
be  used  to  estimate  the  minimum  number  of  spectra  that  need 
to  be  averaged  to  achieve  a  specified  level  of  confidence  In  the 
results.  Additional  tests,  applicable  to  all  types  of  excitation, 
are  described  in  clauses  A. 2  to  A. 4.  The  additional  tests  provide 
useful  information  on  linearity,  reciprocity,  and  the  general 
validity  of  the  test  results. 

If  the  data  are  plotted  on  pre  printed  mobility  graph  paper  (see 
ISO  7626-1 ),  proper  alignment  of  the  graph  paper  with  the  plot- 
ter should  be  verified,  using  a  procedure  appropriate  for  the 
plotter  being  used, 

11  Modal  parameter  identification 

The  purpose  of  many  mobility  tests  is  to  identify  the  modal 
parameters  of  the  structure  under  test.  Interpretation  of  mobil- 
ity data  for  that  purpose  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  part 
of  ISO  7626;  general  principles  are  discussed,  however,  in 
annex  C. 


14 


IS    14736  (Part 2)  :  1999 
ISO    7626-2:  1990 


True  force 
amplitude  or 
autO'Spectral 
density 


Maximum 
-  working  — 
level 


-h--1 +--• 


'  Noise  floor- 


Frequency 


Frequency 


True  motion 
amplitude  or 
autO'Spectrai 
density 


Measured 
frequency 
response 
magnitude 


Maximum 

working 

level 


Noise  floor 


Attainable 

dynamic 

range 


Frequency 
a)     Constant-amplitude  excitatron 


Frequency 
b)     Variable-amplitude  excitation 


Figure  5  —  IMustratlon  of  increase  in  attainable  dynamic  range  through  use  of  variabteamplltude  excitation 

rather  than  constant-amplitude  excitation 


15 


IS    14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2  :  1990 


Annex  A 

(normative) 

Tests  for  validity  of  measurement  results 


A.1     Coherence 

When  non-sinusoidal  excitation  (see  6.2.4  and  6.2.5)  is  used, 
the  coherence  function,  y^if),  between  the  force  signal  and  the 
response  signal  should  always  be  computed  as  a  check  on  cer- 
tain potential  errors  in  the  connputed  frequency-response  func- 
tion. At  least  two  ensembles  shall  be  averaged  to  obtain  a 
usable  estimate  of  the  coherence  function. 


Mathematically,  the  coherence  function,  y^(/),  is  defined  as 
the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  magnitude  of  the  cross-power 
spectrum  between  the  excitation  force  (input)  and  the  motion 
response  of  the  structure  (output),  divided  by  the  product  of 
the  input  power  spectrum  times  the  output  power  spectrum,  as 
given  in  the  following  formula: 


y^{f) 


G,(f)  G,{f) 


By  definition,  the  value  of  the  coherence  function  is 
0  <  y^(/)  <  1.  A  typical  coherence  function  plot  is  illustrated 
in  figure  A.I. 


Substantially  lower  values  of  the  coherence  function  are  indi- 
cations of  the  following  problems  : 

a)  Notches  in  the  coherence  function  at  the  resonance  and 
anti-resonance  frequencies  of  the  structure  under  test  are 
an  indication  that  either 

1)  the  frequency  resolution  is  inadequate  (i.e.  the 
analysis  bandwidth  is  excessive,  as  discussed  in  [911;  or 

NOTE  —  Inadequate  frequency  resolution  wiil  cause  bias  errors 
in  the  connputed  frequency-response  func|ion.  The  guidance 
given  in  8.4.3  shauld  be  considered  for  methods  of  improving 
the  frequency  resolution. 

2)  inadequate  time-domain  weighting  is  used  in  the 
analyser  (see  8.4.3);  or 

-3)  the  structure  under  test  has  non-linearities  (see 
clause  A. 2)  or  the  signal  amplifiers  are  saturating  (see 
8.3);  or 

4)  there  are  multiple  input  forces;  or 

5)  there  is  contamination  by  noise  associated  with  the 
digitizing  process  or  by  electronic  noise,  possibly 
resulting  from  inadequate  force  input  by  the  vibration  ex- 
citer. 


i    05 


o 
u 


/~\^ 

" 

1 

1 

> 

/ 

"T 

- 

- 

^> 

f 

\ 

- 

\ 

' 

1 

30 


100 


1000 


10  000 


Frequency,  Hz 


Figure  A.I  —  Typical  coherence  function  plot 


16 


IS     14736  (Part  2) 
ISO    7626-2  :  1990 


1999 


b)  Notches  in  the  coherence  function  at  resonance  fre- 
quencies can  also  be  an  indication  that,  at  that  frequency, 
the  exciting  force  supplied  by  the  vibration  exciter  drops 
because  of  an  inherent  limitation  of  the  exciter.  If  the  force 
signal  drops  below  the  noise  floor,  the  calculated  magnitude 
of  the  frequency-resportse  function  will  be  too  low  if  the 
calcuiation  is  based  on  the  ratio  of  the  cross-spectral  density 
between  the  motion  response  and  the  excitation  force  div- 
ided by  the  auto-spectral  density  of  the  excitation  force  (see 
8.1.3),  Possible  remedies  are  discussed  in  [10]. 

c)  Low  coherence  over  a  broad  range  of  frequencies  is  an 
indication  of  a  poor  signal -to- noise  ratio.  This  is  often  due  to 
inadequate  dynamic  range  and  can  be  alleviated  by  suitable 
shaping  of  the  excitation  spectrum  (see  9.4).  If  the  exci- 
tation waveforms  described  in  6.2.5  are  used,  the  signal-to- 
noise  ratio  can  also  be  enhanced  by  synchronous  time- 
domain  averaging  of  the  waveforms  (see  [1]). 

d)  Non-linearities  within  the  structure  can  result  In  low 
coherence  any  place  in  the  frequency  range.  These  effects 
depend  upon  the  type  of  structural  non-linearity  en- 
countered. 

Poor  signal-tonoise  ratios  lead  to  random  errors  in  the  com- 
puted frequency-response  function.  For  a  given  signal-to-noise 
ratio  (i.e.  for  a  given  value  of  the  coherence  function),  the 
magnitude  of  the  expected  error  can  be  reduced  by  frequency- 
domain  averaging. 

The  minimum  number  of  spectra  to  be  averaged,  for  a  90  % 
confidence  that  the  random  error  is  below  any  specified  value, 
may  be  read  from  figure  A. 2  as  a  function  of  the  measured 
value  of  the  coherence  function.  For  example,  if  the  measured 
coherence  is  0,8,  then  at  least  178  spectra  shall  be  averaged  to 
be  90  %  confident  that  the  random  error  of  the  computed 
magnitude  of  the  frequency-response  function  is  less  than 
±  5  %. 


responses.  In  order  to  detect  non-linear  effects,  the  check  pro- 
cedure described  in  A. 2. 2  should  be  made  in  the  course  of  each 
test  series. 

A. 2.2    Check  procedure 

First  measure  the  frequency-response  function  using  a  given 
schedule  of  excitation  amplitude  versus  frequency.  Then  repeat 
the  measurement  with  the  excitation  amplitude  significantly  In- 
creased or  decreased,  (f  the  results  of  the  two  tests  agree,  both 
adequate  dynamic  range  in  the  measurement  equipment  and 
freedom  from  non-linear  effects  have  been  established.  If  the 
results  do  not  agree,  the  cause  should  be  determined  and 
eliminated. 


A. 3     Reciprocity 

The  principle  of  dynamic  reciprocity  requires  equality  between 
corresponding  pairs  of  transfer  mobilities  for  linear  elastic  struc- 
tures. Let  a  measurement  Yijif)  be  performed,  establishing  the 
complex  ratio  of  velocity  response  at  a  point  /  on  a  structure  to 
the  force  applied  at  point  j  at  frequency  /.  The  principle  of 
dynamic  reciprocity  states  that  y,y(/)  =  y^yt/),  where  the  new 
measurement  Yjiif)  denotes  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  response 
measured  at  pointy,  in  the  direction  of  the  previous  excitation, 
to  a  force  applied  at  point  /  in  the  direction  of  the  previous 
response.  Agreement  between  such  pairs  of  measure- 
ments for  a  given  linear  structure  confirms  that  proper  test 
equipment  and  procedures  are  being  used. 

Although  the  transfer  mobility  of  most  structures  exhibits 
dynamic  reciprocity,  some  system  elements,  ^uch  as  hydro- 
dynamic  bearings,  do  not  behave  reciprocally.  When  a  non- 
reciprocal  element  is  located  between  the  driving  point  and  the 
response  point,  Y^jfJ]  will  not  be-equal  to  ));{/]. 


NOTES 

1  The  curves  shown  in  figure  A. 2  were  derived  from  an  analysis 

in  111], 

2  The  coherence  function  cannot  be  calculated  properly  from  single 
samples  of  the  excitation  and  response  signals  since  this  always  results 
in  a  fictitious  value  of  unity. 

3  A  high  value  of  the  coherence  function  does  not  always  prove 
validity  of  the  data;  it  could  be  an  indication  of  cross-talk  between  the 
force  and  response  channels. 


A. 2     Linearity 

A. 2.1     General 

The  presence  of  bolted  joints,  supp6rt  clearances  and  other 
features  of  practical  structures  may  cause  non-linear  motion 


A. 4     Driving-point  nrieasurements  versus 
transfer  measurements 

Any  driving-point  frequency-response  function  should  exhibit 
an  anti-resonance  between  each  pair  of  resonances.  There  is, 
however,  not  always  an  anti-resonance  between  adjacent 
resonances  in  a  transfer  measurement.  If  any  of  the  anti- 
resonances  between  adjacent  resonances  is  missing  in  a 
driving-point  measurement,  this  is  an  indication  of  an  imperfec- 
tion in  the  test  set-up  (such  as  a  small  offset  between  the  force 
and  motion  transducers)  which  should  be  corrected. 

Another  check  on  the  validity  of  driving-point  mobility  measure- 
ments is  that  the  phase  angles  should  always  fall  between 
-   90°  and   -f  90^.  Transfer  mobility  phase  angles,  however, 
may  fall  into  any  one  of  the  four  quadrants. 


17 


00 


W(0 

O 

^ 

•Nl 

o> 

IS) 

ro 

-** 

.. 

■0 

^ 

fi> 

(O 

;:i 

§ 

w 

^^ 

_!. 

<o 

to 

<o 

2         3  5  10 

NOTE  —  The  values  on  the  curves  are  the  measured  values  of  the  coherence  values  of  the  coherence  function  y^ 


20       30  50  100         178        300         500 

Nunnber  of  spectra  averaged 


1000 


Figure  A.2  —  Number  of  spectral  measurements  that  need  to  be  averaged  to  provide  90  %  confidence  that  random  error 
in  the  magnitude  of  mobility  data  does  not  exceed  a  specified  value,  for  example  5  % 


IS     14736  (Part2):1999 
ISO    7626-2:  1990 


Annex  B 

(normative) 

Requirements  for  excitation  frequency  increments  and  duration 


B.1     Frequency  increments 

In  order  to  determine  the  response  magnitude  of  the  structure 
under  test  accurately,  at  any  of  Its  resonance  frequencies,  it 
is  necessary  to  measure  the  response  at  a  sufficient  number 
of  frequencies  in  the  vicinity  of  that  resonance  frequency.  The 
error  caused  by  the  use  of  a  finite  number  of  equally  spaced 
measurement  frequencies  will  fall  between  zero  and  the  values 
shown  in  table  1  (see  9.2.2),  depending  on  whether  the 
resonance  frequency  coincides  with  one  of  the  measurement 
frequencies  (zero  error)  or  falls  midway  between  two  adjacent 
frequencies  (maximum  error). 

In  order  to  make  use  of  table  1  to  determine  the  maximum 
allowable  frequency  Increment  in  the  vicinity  of  a  resonance 
frequency,  /p,  the  true  half-power  bandwidth,  B,  has  to  be 
known.  This  half-power  bandwidth,  B,  in  hertz,  is  related  to  the 
resonance  frequency  and  the  estimated  amplification  factor,  Q, 
of  the  structure  as  given  in  the  following  relationship  : 

B  -  fJQ 

From  a  maximum  error  of  5  %  in  the  magnitude  of  the 
frequenay-response  function  at  resonance,  the  maximum  fre- 
quency increments,  A/mg^,  within  ±  10  %  of  a  structural 
resonance  frequency,  should  be  less  than  0,32  B. 

NOTE  —  Although  table  1  was  derived  for  discretely  stepped  sinus- 
oidal excitation,  it  also  gives  an  indication  of  the  resolution  required  in 
the  Fourier  transform  analyser  when  using  other  excitation  waveforms. 


B.2     Duration  of  the  excitation 

After  each  step  change  in  excitation  frequency,  the  motion 
response  of  the  structure  consists  of  a  transient  superimposed 
on  the  steady  response.  The  amplitude  of  the  transient,  x[t), 
will  decay  according  to  the  following  formula  : 


where 

A^j     is  the  initial  amplitude; 

B     is  the  half-power  bandwidth; 

r     is  the  duration  of  amplitude  decay. 

The  initial  amplitude  of  the  transient  may  be  assumed  to  be 
typically  less  than  10  %  of  the  steady-state  amplitude,  A^^. 

With  that  assumption,  the  time  required  for  the  amplitude  of 
the  transient  to  decay  to  less  than  5  %  of  the  steady  value, 
Too5/  "T^ciy  be  estimated  from  the  following  formula: 


-  nBTn  nR   — 


I  -y(^o,o5) 

0,05  X^ 

-  0,5 
which  results  in 
In  0,5 


^0,05 


\x{t)\ 


X:e 


-kBt 


-kB 

__  0,221 
B 

The  excitation  shall  therefore  be  applied  for  at  least  (0,221  IB)  s 
before  measuring  the  motion  response  at  any  of  the  discretely 
stepped  frequencies.  At  each  frequency,  the  total  duration  for 
application  of  the  exciting  force  is  the  sum  of  Tq  05  srid  the  time 
required  for  the  instruments  to  measure  the  force-  and  motion- 
response  signals. 


19 


IS     14736  (Part  2)  :  1999 
ISO     7626-2:1990 


Annex  C 

(informative) 

Modal  parameter  identification 


C.I     Requirements  for  modal  parameter 
identification 

Techniques  for  extracting  modal  damping  and  natural  fre- 
quency values  from  frequency-response  measurements  require 
adequate  dynamic  range  and  sufficiently  fine  resolution  of  both 
magnitude  and  phase  data  in  the  vicinity  of  each  resonance  of 
the  structure  to  obtain  the  necessary  definition  of  the  fre- 
quency response  function,  including  the  peak  amplitude.  The 
effect  of  errors  in  the  measurement  of  the  true  amplitude  and 
phase  at  the  resonance  peaks  may  be  minimized  by  using  ad- 
vanced data  reduction  procedures  such  as  jcircle  fitting 
(see  [12]). 


C.2     Methods  for  determining  mode  shapes 

Using  mobility  measurements  or  measurement  equipment, 
vibration  mode  shapes  may  be  obtained  by  one  of  the  pro- 
cedures outlined  In  C.2.1  lo  C.2. 3. 


0.2. 1  With  a  common  exciter  location,  make  transfer- 
mobility  measurements  for  all  response  locations  and  directions 
of  interest.  Use  the  measured  magnitude  and  phase  data  at 
each  resonance  frequency  to  determine  the  corresponding 
mode  shapes. 

NOTE  —  Because  of  dynamic  reciprocity,  the  same  result  should  be 
obtained  if  a  single  response  measurement  location  and  direction  were 


used  with  various  exciter  locations  and  directions  (see  clause  A. 3  for 
exceptions  to  dynamic  reciprocity). 


C.2. 2  First  determine  the  resonance  frequencies  of  the  struc- 
ture under  test  from  a  single  mobility  measurement.  Then 
excite  the  structure  at  each  resonance  frequency,  one  at  a  time. 
While  the  structure  is  being  excited  at  a  resonance  frequency, 
use  a  single  transducer  to  measure  the  magnitude  and  phase  of 
the  motion  response  at  each  location  of  interest,  one  at  a  time. 

NOTE  ~~  This  method  has  the  disadvantage  that  modes  may  be  missed 
if  one  of  their  nodes  happensto  coincide  with  either  the  location  of  the 
vibration  exciter  or  the  location  of  the  motion  response  transducer. 


C.2. 3  The  methods  described  in  C.2.1  and  C.2.2  may  be 
modified  by  using  a  separate  transducer  at  each  location  of  in- 
terest and  a  multi-channel  motion  response  analyser  or  similar 
signal  processor. 


0.3     Method  for  obtaining  rotational  motion 
responses 

A  method  for  obtaining  rotational  motion  responses  during 
mobility  tests  that  use  both  translational  excitations  and 
translation-response  measurements  is  described  in  [13]. 


20 


is     14736   (Part  2)  :  1999 
ISO     7626-2  :  1990 


Annex  D 

(informative) 

Bibliography 


[11  Brown,  D.,  Carbon,  G.  and  Ramsey,  K.  Survey  of 
Excitation  Techniques  Applicable  to  the  Testing  of 
Autonnotive  Structures,  Society  of  Automotive  Engineers 
Paper  No.  770029,  1977. 

[2]  BoucHE,  R.K.  Concepts  and  Transducers  Used  in 
Measuring  Dynamic  Mass,  in  Proceedings  of  Machinery 
Vibration  Monitoring  and  Analysis  Seminar,  Vibration 
institute,  Clarendon  Hills  IL,  1979. 

[31  Mitchell,  L.D.  and  Elliott,  K.B.  How  to  Design 
Stingers  for  Vibration  Testing  of  Structures,  Sound  and 
Vibration,  (18-4)  April  1984:  pp.  14-18. 

i4]  Brownjohn,  J.M.W.,  Steele,  G.H.,  Cawley,  P.  and 
Adams,  R.D.  Errors  in  Mechanical  Impedance  Data 
Obtained  with  Impedance  Heads,  J.  Sound  and  Vi- 
bration, 73,  1980:  pp.  461-468. 

[51  Remmers,  G.M.  and  Belsheim,R.O. Effects  of  Technique 
on  Reliability  of  Mechanical  Impedance  Measurements, 
Shock  and  Vibration  Bulletin,  34,  Part  3,  Dec.  1964: 
pp.  37-58. 

[61        EwiNS,  D.J.  Measurement  and  Application  of  Mechanical 

''     impedance  Data,  Parts  1,  2,  and  3,  J.   Sac.  Environ. 

Eng.,  Vol.  14.3,  15.1  and  15.2,  Dec.  1975  -  June  1976. 

[7]  Harris,  F.J.  On  the  Use  of  Windows  for  Harmonic 
Analysis  with  the  Discrete  Fourier  Transform,  Proc. 
IEEE,  66,  1978:  pp.  51-83. 


[8]  Bozich,  D.J.  Utilization  of  a  Digital  Computer  for  On- 
line Acquisition  and  Analysis  of  Acoustic  and  Vibration 
Data,  Shock  and  Vibration  Bulletin,  35,  Part  4,  Feb. 
1966:  pp.  151-180. 

[9]  Walker,  A.VA/.  The  Effect  of  Bandwidth  on  the 
Accuracy  of  Transfer  Function  Measurements  of  Single 
Degree  of  Freedom  System  Response  to  Random 
Excitation,  J.  Sound  and  Vibration,  74,  1981 : 
pp.  251-263. 

flOl  Mitchell,  L.D.  Improved  Methods  for  the  Fast  Fourier 
Transform  (FFT)  Calculation  of  the  Frequency  Response 
Function,  ASME  Transactions,  J.  of  Mech.  Design,  104, 
1982:  pp.  277-279. 

[11]  Bendat,  J.S.  and  Piersol,  A.G.  Random  Data  :  Analysis 
and  Measurement  Procedures,  Willey-lnterscience, 
New  York,  1971 :  pp. 199-202. 

[121  Peterson,  E.  and  Klosterman,  A.  Obtaining  Good 
Results  from  an  Experimental  Modal  Survey,  J.  Soc. 
Environ.  Eng.  (17-1),  Mar.  1978:  pp.  3-10. 

[13]  Sattinger,  S.S.  a  Method  for  Experimentatly  Deter- 
mining Rotational  Mobilities  of  Structures,  Shock  and 
Vibration  Bulletin,  50,  Part  2,  1980:  pp.  17-28. 

[141  150  5348:1987,  Mechanical  vibration  and  shock  ~ 
Mechanical  mounting  of  accelerometers. 


21 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS "Handbook'  and  ^Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  LM  04  (0248). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110  002  Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :_323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02  (Common  to  all  offices) 

Regional  Offices  :  Telephone 

Central        :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  J  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110  002  |  323  38  41 

Eastern        :  1/14  C.  L  T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi  f  337  84  99,  337  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700  054      '  \  337  86  26,  337  91  20 

Northern     :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022  /  60  38  43 

\  60  20  25 

Southern     :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113  J  235  02  16,  235  04  42 

I  235  15  19,235  23  15 

Western       :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  /   832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI 400  093  \  .832  78  91,  832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  :  Prabhat  Offset  Press,  New  Delhi-2 


