**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^viiT'jsiS'SfS^^i^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18:11889-1987 

UDC 725-83056: 651-926 ISQ 2603-1983 



I ,- n^ , , ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

BOOTHS FOR SIMULTANEOUS INTERPRETATION — 
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS AND EQUIPMENT 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 2603 'Booths for simultaneous interpreta- 
tion -- General characteristics and equipment', issued by the international Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on therecommendation 
of Acoustics Sectional Committee and approval of the Electrotechnicai Division Council, 

In this standard, certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those used in 
Indian Standards; attention is specially drawn to the following: 

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use point ( ' ) as the decimal marker. 

Cross Reference 

In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Please read 
in their respective place the following Indian Standards: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

ISO 140/4, Acoustics — Measurement of sound IS : 9901 (Part 4)-1981 Measurement of sound 
Insulation in buildings and of building msulation in buildings and of building 
elements — Part 4 Field measurements of elements: Part 4 Field measurements of air- 
airborne sound insulation between rooms borne sound insulation between rooms 

lEC Pub 268-8, Sound system equipment— IS : 9302 (Part 7 )-1987 Characteristics and 
Part 8 Automatic gain control devices methods of measurements for sound system 

equipment: Part 7 Automatic gain control 
devices 



Adopted 15 January 1987 



© February 1987, BIS I Or 5 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR WIARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS s 11889. 1987 
ISO 2603-1983 



Introduction 

ISO 2603 was first issued in 1974 and it has found general ap- 
plication. This revised edition is extended in scope to cover 
facilities for more than six languages and is based on facilities 
built since that date and evaluated by the Technical Committee 
of the International Association of Conference Interpreters 
(Alio. 

Interpreters' booths are designed to meet three requirements : 

a) acoustic separation between different languages 
spoken simultaneously; 

b) efficient two-way communication between the booths 
and the conference hall; 

c) a comfortable working environment allowing inter- 
preters to maintain the intense effort of concentration re- 
quired by their work. 

In addition to architects, project engineers, suppliers etc., it is 
essential to consult confererKe interpreters experienced in 
technical consultancy. 



The dim&isional requirements apply equally to semi-permanent 
booths, as defined in 3.3, for which all other requirements 
shouk) apply as far as is passible. 

In addition tc structural specifications, this International Stwi- 
dard specifies those components of typical conference facilities 
which form the interpreter's working environment.21 

An annex <xsnceming put>iic address and simultaneous inter- 
pretation systems is given for information only. 



2 References 

ISO 140/4, Acoustics — Measwement of sound insulation in 
buddings and of bulding elements — f^art4: Field 
measurements of airborne sound insulation between rooms. 



lEC Publication 268-8. Sound system equipment 
Automatic gain control dewces. 



3 Definitions 



Parts. 



1 Scope and field of application^' 

This International Standard lays down basic specifications to 
be considered when initial plans are prepared to provkle a new 
or existing building with built-in facilities for simultaneous in- 
terpretation. It is applicable to alt types of built-in booths with 
built-in or portable equipment. 

In designing new buildings, booths should be optimally in- 
tegrated into the structure so that the conference room and 
booths constitute a well-balanced unit. 



For the purposes of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply : 

3.1 booth with built-in equipment : A booth intended for 
simultaneous interpretatipn containing buih-in interpretation 
equipment. 



3.2 booth with portable equipment : A booth intended 
for simultaneous interpretation but not containing built-in inter- 
pretation equipment. 



The requirements of clauses 4 and 5 apply to booths with built- 
in equipment, as defined in 3.1, and booths with portable 
equipment, as defined in 3.2. 



3.3 semi-permanent booth : A Ixxith not structurally in- 
tegrated or which it is intended to move within the building. 



1) Mobile installations for simultaneous interpretation are specified in ISO 4043, Booths for simultaneous interpretation — Mobile booths — General 
characteristics and equipment. 

21 MtniiTHun requirentents for confeience systems for amultaneous interpretation will form the subject of a future lEC Publication. 



18:11889. 
ISO 2603 



1987 
1983 



4 Structural requirements for booths 

4.1 Siting in relation to tlie conference hall 

4.1.1 General 

Booths shall be located at the back of the hall, or down one 
side. However, in larger halls, the furthest distance to the 
rostrum shall not exceed 30 m (see 4.5). They shall be elevated 
to afford an overall view of the hall (windows across the full 
width of the booths). It is particularly important for the inter- 
preters and operator to be able to see clearly the speakers, 
chairman, and all visual aids (projection screens, maps, flip- 
charts, blackboard, etc). Visibility from the booths should not 
be impeded by persons standing. However, booths should not 
be elevated more than the minimum amount required to satisfy 
the above requirements. Steep angles should be avoided (see 
4.5). 

The booths shall be grouped to allow visual contact and to 
facilitate cabling between them (see 4.9). 

4.1.2 Sound control booth 

The sound control booth shall be placed close to the inter- 
preters' booths to facilitate communication and provide the 
operator with a good view of the hall. The operator shall have 
safe, quick and easy access both to the booths and to the hall. 

4.2 Doors 

Doors shall provide satisfactory acoustic insulation (see 4.7). 
They shall not interconnect booths through side-walls. An 
observation port-hole in the booth door is useful. 

Assigned languages and channels should be indicated on or ad- 
jacent to doors. 

Curtains or baffles shall not be used. 

4.3 Accessibility 

The booths shall have easy access through a separate entrance 
from outside the hall, to avoid the interpreters disturbing the 
meeting when coming and going. Stairs, if any, should be safe. 
Emergency exits shall be readily accessible, and escape routes 
clearly marked. There should be rapid access from the booths 
to the hall. 

4.4 Size of booths 
4.4.1 General 

Each booth shall accommodate the required number of inter- 
preters seated in comfort side by side (to cater for large teams 
with numerous language combinations requiring more than one 
outgoing language). 

Each booth shall be sufficiently wide to allow occupants to 
enter and leave without disturbing one another, and high and 
deep enough to provide adequate volume. 



4.4.2 Minimum dimensions (see figures 1 and 2) 

in facilities for up to 6 languages, the following minimum 
dimensions are required ; 

— width : 250 cm 

— height : 230 cm 

— depth : 240 cm 

In facilities for 6 to 12 languages, the first six booths shall be 
250 cm wide (3 interpreter positions per booth) and the remain- 
ing booths shall be 340 cm wide (4 interpreter positions per 
booth). 1) 

To avoid resonance effects, the three dimensions of the booth 
should be different from one another. 

For the sound control booth, it may be desirable to provide a 
larger width depending on equipment dimensions. 

4.5 Visibility 

A direct view of the entire conference room, including the pro- 
jection screen, is essential. For very large halls, television 
monitors may be used for visual support. Monitors shall permit 
convenient viewing with minimum eyestrain. Particular atten- 
tion shall be given to possible radiation hazards at close viewing 
distances. 

4.6 Windows (see figures 1 and 2) 

Front windows shall be across the full width of the booth. The 
height of the pane shall be 80 cm and its lower edge shall be 
flush with the top of the control panel/cionsole. 

Side windows shall be provided of the same height and shall 
extend from these for a length of 95 cm along the partition. 

To ensure maximum viewing angle, thick frames, mullion posts 
or bearing elements should be avoided in the area between 
front and side windows. 

Front and side windows shall consist of untinted glass satisfy- 
ing sound-insulation requirements (see ISO 140/4). If a single 
pane is used, it shall be of adequate thickness. The (inner) front 
pane should be inclined with its upper edge towards the hall to 
avoid acoustic reflexion and mirror effects. The panes should 
be flexibly mounted. 

In double-pane constructions, provision shall be made for con- 
venient opening to clean the inside surfaces and for 
maintenance. 

4.7 Acoustics 

For normal non-reinforced speech not exceeding an 
A-wetghted sound pressure level in the conference room of 
80 dB, the equivalent continuous A-weighted sound pressure 
level of the noise inside each booth shall be less than 35 dB.' 



1) Existing facilities for more than six languages, built in accordance with ISO 2603-1974 and in situations where it is not possible to enlarge booth 
dimensions, may continue to be operated using ISO 2603-1974 as a reference. 



15:11889-1987 
ISO 2603-1983 



Particular attention should be given to sound-proofing between 
booths and towards the control booth. 

The booths should open onto an area not normally used by 
delegates or members of the staff and should not be adjacent 
to any source of noise. Booths and corridor should in any case 
be carpeted. 

Reverberation time inside the booth shall not exceed 0,5 s for 
frequencies greater than 125 and up to 4 000 Hz. 

Reverberation and sound reflection shall be reduced by using 
suitable anti-static sound-absorbing materials. 

The A-weighted sound pressure level generated by the air- 
conditioning system (see 4.8), lighting (see 5.1) and other 
sound sources shall not exceed 35 dB. 



4.8 Air conditioning 

As booths are occupied throughout the day, adequate ventila- 
tion is required. 

Air renewal shall be seven times per hour and the carbon diox- 
ide concentration shall not exceed 0,10 %. The temperature 
shall be controllable between 18 and 22 °C by means of an in- 
dividual regulator in each booth. The relative humidity shall be 
between 45 and 65 %. 

The air velocity shall not exceed 0,2 m/s. Air inlets and outlets 
shall be placed in such a way that interpreters are not exposed 
to draughts. 

4.9 Cable ducts 

Ducts suitable for looping control cables and associated con- 
nectors from booth to booth shall be provided. After insertion 
of cables, the openings shall be made sound-proof. 

Access to ducts should be made easy and should not require 
the use of special tools. 



5 Booth interior 

5.1 Lighting 

The lighting in the booth shall be independent of that in the 
hall, as the latter may have to be darkened for the projection of 
films or slides. 

The main light source is that illuminating the working surface. 
Ceiling lights are required for background lighting or for clean- 
ing. 

The working surface available to each interpreter (0,4 m2) shall 
have Individual lighting to produce a uniform intensity of at 
least 3(X) Ix. The switch shall be within easy reach of the inter- 
preter; it should preferably give continuous intensity control 
over a range from 100 to 1 000 Ix, or alternatively give two 
levels : on^ in the range 100 to 200 Ix, and one better than 
300 Ix. .Dimmers should be free from radio-frequency or 
mechanical interference. 



The tilting range of the lamp reflector should be limited to avoid 
glare in adjacent working positions or into the hail. 

Overhead general lighting should be controlled by a dimmer 
located close to the door inside each booth and readily access- 
ible to the seated interpreter. Reflection of overhead lighting in 
panes should be avoided. 

Fluorescent tubes shall not be used unshielded. 



5.2 Colours 

The colour scheme in the booth should be suitable for the 
restricted working space. Matt finishes should be used for all 
surfaces and equipment in the booth. 



5.3 Working surface (see figures 1 and 2) 

The working surface should be sufficiently firm for use as a 
writing table and for perusing documents. 

It shall be horizontal and covered with shock-absorbing 
material to deaden noise which would otherwise be picked up 
by the microphones. The underneath surface should have a 
smooth finish. 

The characteristics of the working surface are as follows : 

— positioning : beneath the front window; 

— height : 73 + 1 cm from the floor level of the booth; 

— useful depth : from 35 to 50 cm in relation to the inter- 
preter's angle of vision into the hall; 

— leg room : minimum depth 50 cm, minimum height 
66 cm. 

Shelving or trays for documents should not be placed under the 
working surface but preferably above the window or on the rear 
walls. 

5.4 Seating 

For each interpreter and technician, there should be a com- 
fortable chair with the following features : 

— five legs; 

— adjustable height; 

— adjustable back-rest; 

— arm-rests; 

— noiseless casters; 

— upholstery of heat-dissipating material. 
Foot-rests may be required. 



IS s 11889 -1987 
ISO 2603-1^83 



Dimensions in centimetres 




Figure 1 — Schematic layout for a booth at elevation less than 100 cm 

(illustrating a free-standing console arrangement) 



18 (11889 • 
ISO 2603 



1987 
1983 



Dimensions in centimetres 




Figure 2 — Schematic layout for a booth at elevation higher than 100 cm 

(illustrating a flush-mounted control panel arrangement) 



IS : 11889 - 1987 
ISO 2603-1983 



6 Facilities for interpreters 

6.1 Toilets 

Separate toilets should be available within easy reach of the 
booths. 

6.2 Interpreters' room 

It is desirable to provide near the booths an interpreters' room 
which interpreters and operators may use when not on im- 
mediate duty. It shall have daylight and sha" be sufficiently 
large to accommodate at teast as many persons as there are 
working positions in the booths. It should have a private en- 
trance. 

It is preferaUe to divide this room into two areas serving the 
followir>g purposes : 

a) study of documents and posting of notices; 

b) relaxation and stand-by. 

The following equipment and furnishings are required : 

— easy chairs, chairs and tebies, 
~ cloakroom or coat-rack; 

~ telephone (inside and kxai outskle lines); 

— notice board (for posting assignments, etc.); 

— individual pigeon-holes. 

7 Sound equipment in the inteipreters' 
booths^' 

7.1 Frequency response 

The overall system (comprising microphone input at the 
speaker's position, amplifier stages, level controls, output ter- 
minals and interpreters' control panel for headset) shall correct- 
ly reproduce audio-frequencies between 125 and 12 500 Hz. A 
gradual roll-off at the lower end of the frequeTu:y response is 
recommended in order to improve speech intelligibJIity. 

7.2 Amplitude non-linearity 

The system shall be free of perceptible cfistortion. 

7.3 Noise and hum 

Noise and hum shall not noticeably affect speech intelligibility. 

7.4 Cross-talk between channels 

Cross-talk from other channels (at the terminais for the inter- 
preter's headphone) shall be avoided. Damping shall be 
> 66 dB at 1 kHz. 



7.5 Level control 

Level control of the floor channel should preferably be manual. 
When automatic level control is used, compressor-limiters shall 
conform to lEC Publication 268-8. 

Satisfactory operation of the conference/ interpretation equip- 
ment depends on observation of electrical and /or magnetic in- 
terference requirements. These will form the subject of a future 
lEC publication. 



8 Interpreters' control panel/console 

8.1 General 

A control panel/console containing individual controls for 
listening and speakir>g, together with corresponding indicators 
shall be provided for each interpreter. In the case of portable 
equipment, dual control panels are permissible. 

Control panels shall be mounted between the front window and 
the working surface (angle of inclination depending on booth 
elevation vis-d-vis the hall) so as to occupy a minimum area and 
shall not impede the available working area. Flush mounted 
control panels and free-standing consoles are equally accep- 
table. 

The maximum control panel dimensions (width x height x 
depth) shall be : 

— in the case of a single control panel : 
25 cm X 15 cm X 21 cm; 

— in the case of a dual control panel : 
40 cm X 15 cm X 21 cm. 

The surface of the control panel/console shall be matt and non- 
reDecting. 

Indicator lights shall be confined to active functions 
(microphone on, channel selected, channel occupied, etc.). 

8.2 Controls 

All selector controls should have positive action; their position 
shoukl clearly indicate status. 

On each control panel, controls shall be arranged according to 
ergorramic criteria into distinct areas as follows : 

a) the listening area, containing : 

— selector for irH:oming channels, 

— pre-selector for relay listening, 

— volume control, 

— tone control; 



1 ) For definitions and methods of measurement, ref ererKe should be made to lEC Publication 268, Sound system eqwpment, and for minimum re- 
quirements to the lEC Publication on minimum requirements for conference systems (in preparation). 



ISJ11889- 
ISO 2603 



1987 
1983 



b) the monitoring area, containing (optional) : 

— monitoring loudspeaker with volume control; 

c) the microphone area, containirrg : 

— activating device, 

— deactivating device whereby the channel is 
automatically returned to the floor channel, 

— muting device; 

d) the outgoing channel selection area, containing : 

— keys for selecting outgoing channels; 

e) the call facility area, containing : 

— call-channel key to chairman/ lecturer/control 
booth, 

— call-line key (messenger) (optional). 



9 Functions of controls 

9.1 Incoming channel selector 

Selectors shall operate smoothly and shall cause no mechanical 
or electrical noise. No short-circuiting shall occur between two 
channels when operating these controls. 



9.2 fncoming channel pre-selector 

In order to ensure safe and instantaneous changeover from 
floor to relay channel, a toggle (lever) switch shall be provided 
which normally supplies the original (floor) channel and, in its 
relay position, the channel set on the selector. 



9.3 Volume control 

For adjusting listening levels, potentiometers with logarithmic 
progression shall be used which are audibly effective 
throughout their full range. Potentiometers shall be of high 
quality. 

9.4 Tone controls 

A stepless bass control shall be provided to attenuate lower fre- 
quencies by at least - 12 dB at 125 Hz with respect to 1 kHz. A 
stepless treble control may also be provided to enhance higher 
frequencies by at least + 12 dB at 8 000 Hz with respect to 
1 kHz. 



9.5 Headphone/headset terminals 

For each interpreter, one headphone /headset connector socket 
is required, suitably placed under the working position in per- 
manent installations or on the interpreter's console in portable 
installations. 



9.6 Monitor loudspeaker(s) 

The function of the monitor loudspeaker! s) is to allow inter- 
preter{s) to remove their headphone temporarily and continue 
to follow the proceedings while the booth is silent. 

This loudspeaker shall reproduce the floor channel and shall be 
muted automatically as soon as one of the microphones in that 
booth is activated; it shall have its own volume control. 

9.7 Outgoing channel selector 

Each control panel shall have provision for selecting at least 
two outgoing channels. The status of the channel selector shall 
be dearly visible. Selector keys shall not be interlocked in the 
same booth, so as to allow quick take-over when the language 
spoken in the hall changes. 

tf the system is designed for selection of all language channels, 
interlocking between booths is recommended. 

Indicator lights or LEDs shall indicate on the other panels in the 
same and adjacent booths when a given channel is occupied 
(i.e. when a microphone is activated on this channel). 

A holder for inserting language symbols shall be provided close 
to the channel selector keys. 

9.8 Call channel (to chairman/lecturer/control 
booth) 

In the event of breakdown (for example a delegate starting to 
speak without a microphone or other emergency), interpreters 
shall be able to warn the chairman and/or lecturer discreetly via 
a special link terminating in a monitor loudspeaker. 

A special key shall activate this link regardless of the 
microphone switch position. 

It is desirable that this warning be transmitted also ro the sound 
control booth. 

9.9 Call-line key (messenger) 

Provision should be made for a key by which a light or bell may 
be activated to call for documents, etc., from the usher, 

9.10 Colour code for indicator lights 

The following colours shall be used for indicator lights or light- 
emitting diodes (LEDs) : 



Colour 

red 



Function 

microphone ON 



No luminant should be used for infiicating microphone OFF 
status. 



red 

green or yellow 



outgoing channel, occupa- 
tion 

if required, green or yellow 
may be used for other func- 
tions. 



IS: 11889 -1987 
ISO 2603-1983 



10 Interpreter's headphones 

One headphone per interpreter shall be provided. Headphones 
shall have the following characteristics : 

— two earphones, per set. Health requirements should be 
borne in mind when choosing the material and shape of 
iieaupnones (the stethoscopic type with earpieces inserted 
into the ears, or circumaural earphones are unacceptable); 

— frequency range : 125 — 12 500 Hz; 

— mass : < 150 g for headphone, < 250 g for headset, 
with the exception of the cable and connector; 

— contact pressure : < 2,5 N; 

— headband adjustable in width and length; 

— connection to the control set by a lead approximately 
1,50 m long and termination in a non-locking plug. 



11 Booth microphones 

11.1 General 

There should be one micronhone for each interpreter. The 
directional characteristics of microphones shall be such that the 



interpreter can speak into it at a convenient distance while in a 
comfortable position. Microphones mounted on a flexible arm 
are recommended for their mechanical vibration-insulating pro- 
perties. For portable equipment, headset combinations may be 
used. 



11.2 Microphone controls 

A control switch and a status light shall be provided. 

A self-releasing muting key to cut out the booth channel 
only, without switching back to the floor channel, shall be pro- 
vided to allow the interpreter to cough or to clear his throat. 
Pressing of this key shall extinguish the "microphone on" in- 
dicator light. 

Microphones in the same booth shall not be interlocked. 



NOTE — Where a common switch assembly activating two 
microphones is used on dual control panels, this requirement does not 
apply. 

Switching the microphone "ON" or "OFF" shall make no 
mechanical or electrical noise perceptible to the delegates. 

When the interpreter's microphone is "OFF", the floor channel 
shall be automatically linked to this channel. 



1Ss11t89-1M7 
ISO 2S03-19t3 



Annex 
Public address and simultaneous interpretation systems 

;^(This annex does not form part of the standard.) 

Acoustic feecHsadc and echoes in the hall may impair simultaneous interpretation and, in extreme cases, block the memory processes. 

Moreover, part of each audience depends on headset reception which may be drowned by loudspeakers when operated at tlieir nor- 
m^ level; therefore, public address systems shoukl not be operated in combination with sknultanefMis interpretation. 

When speech reinforcement canrwt be dispensed with (for example, maiority of participants listening to conference proceedings in 
one language), public address systems shoukl be operated at their towest level and every endeavour shouM be made to eliminate 
loudspeaker feedback into microphones placed in the hail. 

In order to provide for effective control in such situations, simuhanecMJS (mutti-channel) systems and publk: address (singie-channei} 
systans shoukl : 

— have separate volume controls alknwing indivkju^ level adjustment, independent of each other, wfiereby towering tfie public 
address level will not reduce the signal strength available to interpreters, 

— be fed from a single mk:rophone instaHatkm. 

Level controls of the two systems shoukl be located ck>se to each other to enable both levels to be monitored in the same room, 
preferably by the same operator. 



to Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



