***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



IS 12369 (1987) : Graphical Kernel System (GKS) for Computer 
Graphics [LITD 7: Audio, Video and Multimedia Systems and 
Equipment [ 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



>^XiVff7^^^b^ja^^ssa^^^^FSggg 



5?5?-m |7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 12361 -1it7 
liQ T94Z -1»II 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



GRAPHICAL KERNEL SYSTEM (GKS) 
FOR COMPUTER GRAPHICS 

[ ISO Title ■ infoms^tion Processing Systcrms — Computer 

Grapliics — Graphicai K^m\ Syiiep (GKS) 

Functional Description ) 



BUREAU OF IN D TAN STAKDAUDS 



UDC 681*3 06 6KS : 003'6 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 



Indian Standard 

GRAPHICAL KERNEL SYSTEM (GKS) 
FOR COMPUTER GRAPHICS 

[ ISO Title : Information Processing Systems — Computer 

Graphics — Graphical Kernel System (GKS) 

Functional Description ] 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with ISO 7942-1935 'Information processing 
systems — Computer graphics — 'Graphical Kernel System (GKS) functional description', issued by 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on the recommendation of the Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee 
and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those 
used in Indian Standards; attention is specially drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 



Cross References 

International Standard 

ISO 646-1983 Information processing.- 

information interchange 

ISO 2382/13-1984 Data processing — 
Vocabulary — Part 1 3 Computer 
graphics 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



IS : 10315-1982 7-Blt coded character set 

I VI I rii\yi iiiaiivfii iiiiduiiaii^c 

(Technically equivalent) 



IS : 1885 (Part 52/Sec 14) - 1983 

Section 14 Computer graphics and 
computer micrographics 



The Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee has reviewed the 
provisions of the following ISO Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in 
conjunction with this standard: 

ISO 2022-1986 Information processing — ISO 7-blt and 8-bit coded character sets — 
Code extension techniques 

ISO 6093-1985 Information processing— Representation of numerical values in character 
strings for information interchange 

ISO 8632 information processing systems ~- Computer graphics — Metafile for transfer 
and storage of picture description information 

Part 1 : Functional description 
Part 2 : Character encoding 
Part 3 : Binary encoding 
Part 4 : Clear text encoding 



Adopted 10 October 1987 



® August ISOi BIS 



Price : Rs 280.00 



BUREAU OF IMOrAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR Mi>kRe 

NEW DtLHI 110002 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



Contents Page 

Introduction » J 

1 Scope and field of application ^ 

2 References ''" ^ 

3 Definitions • ^ 

4 The Graphical Kernel System „..„ ^ 

4.1 About this standard —• ^ 

4.1.1 Specification •... ^ 

4.1.2 Registration ^ 

4.2 Introduction to GKS .,,......, ^^ 

4.3 Concepts -•.••.•••• *2 

4.4 Graphical output •• *** 

4.4.1 Output primitives ^^ 

4.4.2 Output primitive attributes ., 1* 

' 4.4.3 Polyline attributes ^8 

4.4.4 Polymarker attributes , ^^ 

4.4.5 Text attributes *^ 

4.4.6 Fill area attributes ., 28 

4.4.7 Cell array attributes 29 

4.4.8 Generalized Drawing Primitive attributes 29 

4.4.9 Colour , 29 

4.5 Workstations • ^^ 

4.5.1 Workstation characteristic^ 31 

4.5.2 Selecting a workstation....... 32 

4.5.3 Deferring picture changes....,, 33 

4.5.4 Clearing the display surface, 35 

4.5.5 Elimination of primitives outside segments 36 

4.5.6 Sending messages to a workstation 36 

4.6 Coordinate systems and transformations 37 

4.6.1 Normalization transformations 37 

4.6.2 Clipping 37 

4.6.3 Workstation transformations 38 

4.6.4 Transformation of locator input 40 

4.6.5 Transformation of stroke input 42 

4.7 Seements ■- 43 

4.7.1 Introduction to segments 43 

4.7.2 Segment attributes 44 



ill 



4.7.3 Segment transformations 44 

4.7.4 Clipping and WDSS 45 

4.7.5 Workstation Independent Segment Storage 45 

4.7.6 WISS functions and clipping 45 

4.8 Graphical input 47 

4.8.1 Introduction to logical input devices 47 

4.8.2 Logical input device model 48 

4.8.3 Operating modes of logical input devices 49 

4.8.4 Measures of each input class 51 

4.8.5 Input queue and current event report 52 

4.8.6 Initialisation of input devices 52 

4.9 GKS Metafile interface 54 

4.10 GKS levels 56 

4.10.1 Introduction to levels 56 

4.10.2 The level structure 56 

4.10.3 Level functionality 57 

4.11 States of GKS and inquiry functions 61 

4.11.1 Description of states 61 

4.11.2 Inquiry functions 62 

4.12 Error handling.; 63 

4.13 Special interfaces between GKS and the application program.. .65 
GKS functions 66 

5.1 Notational conventions 66 

5.2 Control functions 67 

5.3 Output functions ' 74 

5.4 Output attributes 80 

5.4.1 Workstation independent primitive attributes 80 

5.4.2 Workstation attributes (representations) 90 

5.5 Transformation functions 96 

5.5.1 Normalization transformation 96 

5.5.2 Workstation transformation 97 

5.6 Segment functions ^ 

5.6.1 Segment manipulation functions 99 

5.6.2 Segment attributes 103 

5.7 Input functions *06 

5.7.1 Initialisation of input devices 106 

5.7.2 Setting the mode of input devices H3 

5.7.3 Request input functions 116 

5.7.4 Sample input functions H^ 

5.7.5 Event input functions • •122 

5.8 Metafile functions 126 

5.9 Inquiry functions 128 

5.9.1 Introduction to inquiry functions .....128 

5.9.2 Inquiry function for operating state value 1 28 

5.9.3 Inquiry functions for GKS description table 128 

5.9.4 Inquiry functions for GKS state list 130 

5.9.5 Inquiry functions for workstation state list 135 

5.9.6 Inquiry functions for workstation description table .... 1 52 

5.9.7 Inquiry functions for segment state list 169 

5.9.8 Pixel inquiries I'^O 

5.9.9 Inquiry function for GKS error state list 172 

5.10 Utility functions 173 

5.11 Error handling 174 

GKS data structures 176 

6.1 Notation and data types , 176 

6.2 Operating state 178 

6.3 GKS description table ■179 



IV 



6.4 GKS state list 180 

6.5 Workstation state list 182 

6.6 Workstation description table 185 

6.7 Segment state list 189 

6.8 GKS error state list 190 

Annexes 

A Function lists 191 

A.1 Alphabetic 191 

A.2 Order of appearance 194 

A.3 Ordered by level 199 

A.3.1 Level Oa 199 

A.3,2 Level Ob .200 

A.3.3 Level Oc 201 

A.3.4 Level la 201 

A.3.5 Level lb 202 

A.3.6 Level Ic 202 

A.3.7 Level 2a .....202 

A.4 Ordered by state 202 

A.4.1 Functions allowed in state GKCL 202 

A.4.2 Functions allowed in state GKOP 203 

A.4.3 Functions not allowed in state WSOP 203 

A.4.4 Functions not allowed in state WSAC 204 

A.4.5 Functions not allowed in state SGOP 204 

A.5 Applicability to workstation groups 204 

B Error list .' 208 

B.l Implementation dependent 208 

B.2 States 208 

B.3 Workstations ...208 

B.4 Transformations 208 

B.5 Output attributes 209 

B.6 Output primitives 209 

B.7 Segments 209 

B.8 Input 210 

B.9 Metafiles 210 

B.10 Escape 210 

B.ll Miscellaneous 210 

B.12 System 210 

B.13 Reserved errors 210 

C Interfaces • 212 

C.l General 212 

C.2 Language binding 212 

C.3 Implementation 213 

D Allowable differences in GKS implementations 214 

D.l General 214 

D.2 Global differences 214 

D.3 Workstation dependent differences 215 

E Metafile structure 217 

E.1 Metafiles 217 

E.L1 General 217 

E.L2 ISO 8632 Metafile 217 

E.1.3 Metafile designed for GKS 217 

E.2 File format and data format 218 

E.3 Generation of metafiles 219 

E.4 Interpretation of metafiles .♦. ,...222 

E.4.1 General .-. 222 



E.4.2 Coatrol items 222 

E.4.3 Output primitives 222 

E.4.4 Output primitive attributes ^. 222 

E.4.5 Workstatio^i attributes 222 

E.4.6 Transformations * 222 

E.4.7 Segment manipulation 222 

E.4.8 Segment attributes 222 

E.5 Control items : 222 

E.6 Items for output primitives 225 

E.7 Items for output primitive attributes 226 

E.8 Items for workstation attributes 228 

E,9 Items for transformations. 230 

E.10 Items for segment manipulation 230 

E.11 Items for segment attributes 230 

E.12 User items 231 

F Sample programs 232 

G GKS functions summary 239 

G.l Control functions 239 

G.2 Output functions 239 

G.3 Output attributes 240 

G.3.1 Workstation independent primitive attributes ...140 

G.3.2 Workstation attributes (representations) 241 

G.4 Transformation functions 241 

G.4.1 Normalization transformation 241 

G.4.2 Workstation transformation 241 

G.5 Segment functions 242 

G.5.1 Segment manipulation functions 242 

G.5,2 Segment attributes 242 

G.6 Input functions 242 

G.6.1 Initialisation of input devices 242 

G.6.2 Setting mode of input devices ....243 

G,6.3 Request input functions 243 

G.6.4 Sample input functions 243 

G.6.5 Event input functions 244 

G.7 Metafile functions 244 

G.8 Inquiry functions 244 

G.9 Utility functions 245 

G.IO Error handling 245 



vi 



IS: 12369* 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Introduction 



The Graphical Kernel System (GKS) provides a set of functions for computer graphics programming. GKS is 
a basic graphics system that can be used by the majority of applications that produce computer generated 
pictures. 

The main reasons for standardizing basic computer graphics are: 

a) to allow application programs involving graphics to be easily portable between different installations; 

b) to aid the understanding and use of graphics methods by application programmers; 

c) to serve manufacturers of graphics equipment as a guideline in providing useful combinations of graph- 
ics capabilities in a device. 

In order to reach these main objectives, the GKS design was based on the following requirements: 

d) GKS should include all the capabilities that are essentia! for the whole spectrum of graphics, from sim- 
ple passive output to highly interactive applications. 

e) The whole range of graphics devices, including vector and raster devices, microfilm recorders, storage 
tube displays, refresh displays and colour displays should be controllable by GKS in a uniform way. 

f) GKS should provide all the capabilities required by a majority of applications without becoming unduly 
large. 

These requirements were used to formulate a number of principles that were used to judge specific design 
alternatives. Thus it was possible to contribute to the overall design goals while focussing on certain aspects. 
Five design aspects were identified, each having a group of principles 

g) Design goals: The following principles should not be violated by any technical design: 

1) consistency: the mandatory requirements of GKS should not be mutually contradictory; 

2) compatibility: other standards or conunonly accepted rules of practice should not be violated; 

3) orthogonality: the functions or modules of GKS should be independent of each other, or the depen- 
dency should be structured and well defined. 

h) Functional capabilities: The following principles were used to define the extent of GKS: 

1) completeness: all functions that a majority of applications want to use on a given level of func- 
tionality should be included; 

2) minimality: functions that are unnecessary for applications of a given level of functionality should 
not be provided; 

3) compactness: an application should be able to achieve a desired result by a set of functions and 
parameters that is as small as possible; 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Introduction 



4) richness: a rich set of functions offers an extensive range of facilities that stretches beyond the basic 
functions and includes higher order capabilities. 

It is obvious that there is a trade off between the principles in this group. Therefore, the functions of GKS 
are organized in nine levels. An implementation of GKS provides precisely the functions of one of these lev- 
els. While the lowest level contains only a minimal set of functions, higher levels are allowed to extend 
beyond the basic needs towards greater richness. 

i) User interface design: The following principles were used to define the user interface design: 

1) user friendliness: GKS should allow the design of a desirable user interface; 

2) clarity: the concepts and functional capabilities of GKS should be easily understandable, especially 
by the application programmer; 

3) error handling: failure of system functions or modules, caused by errors of the system itself or by 
the application program, should be treated in such a way that the error reaction is clearly understand- 
able and informative to the application programmer and that the impact on the system and the appli- 
cation program is as small as possible. 

Clarity and sound error handling are essential parts of user friendliness. Error handling is an integral part 
of GKS. To aid clarity, the system and its state can be presented to the user in an easily comprehensible 
manner. 

Clarity appUes not only to the system design but also to the system description. To this end, the GKS 
specification is divided into a general description, a description of the underlying logical data structures 
representing the state of the system, and a description of the functions and their effects on these data 
structures. 

j) Graphics devices: The following principles are associated with the range of graphics devices that can be 
addressed by GKS: 

1 ) device independence: GKS functions should be designed to allow an appUcation program, using 
these functions, to address facilities of quite different graphics output and input devices without 
modification of the program structure; 

2) device richness: the full capabilities of a wide range of different graphics output and input devices 
should be accessible from the functions of GKS. 

These principles led to a fundamental concept underlying the GKS architecture: the concept of multiple 
independent graphical workstations connected to and driven by GKS. The application program can 
inquire the capabilities of every workstation. The GKS design includes escape functions that are easily 
identifiable within an application program and can be used to access special facilities of a particular dev- 
ice. 
k) Implementation: The last group of principles is related to the implementation of GKS: 

1) implementability: it should be possible to support the GKS functions in most host languages, on 
most operating systems and with most graphics devices; 

2) language independence: it should be possible to access the standard facilities of GKS from all ISO 
standard programming languages; 

3) efficiency: GKS should be capable of being implemented without time consuming algorithms; 

4) robustness: the operator and application programmer should be protected in the best possible way 
from hardware or software failure of the system. 

The five groups of principles are interconnected. For example, design goals and functional capabilities both 
contribute to user friendliness. Efficiency is also important when considering response time in an interactive 
environment. Some principles may be conflicting, such as richness versus minimality, comprehensive error 
handling versus efficiency, and compactness versus device richness. Compromises needed to be made to 
achieve the overall design objective; GKS should have an easily comprehensible structure and a set of func- 
tions that enables a vast majority of computer graphics users to design portable, device independent applica- 
tion programs addressing the whole range of computer graphics equipment. 



18:12369-1987 
iSO 7942 -1985 



1 Scope and field of application 



This Internaticnai Standard specifies a set of functions for computer graphics programming, tlie Graphical 
Kerne! System (GKS), GKS is a Iwisc graphics system for applications that produce computer generated two 
dimensional pictures on line graphics or raster graphics output devices. It supports operator input and 
interaction by supplying basic functions for graphical input and picture segmentation. It allows storage and 
dynamic modification of pictures. A fundamental concept in GKS is the workstation, consisting of a number 
of input devices and a single output device. Several workstations can be used simultaneously. The application 
program is allowed to adapt its behavioui at a workstation to make best use of workstation capabilities. This 
Iniernational Standard includes functions for storage on and retrieval from an external graphics file. Last but 
Got least, the functions are organized in upward compatible levei-« with increasing capabiUties. 

NOTE - For certain parameters of the functions, GKS defines value ranges a.s beiiig itserved tar registration (see 4 1.2). The meanings 
of these values witl be defined using the esiabiished procedures. 

GKS defines a language independent nucleus of a graphics system. For integration into a programming 
language, GKS is embedded in a language dependent layer obeying the particular conventions of that 
language. 

Annexes C to G are given for information; they do not form part of the specification. 



IS 1 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 - 1986 



2 References 



ISO 646, Information processing - ISO 7-bit coded character set for information interchange. 

ISO 2022, Information processing - ISO 7-bit and 8-bit coded character sets - Code extension techniques. 

ISO 2382/13, Data processing - Vocabulary - Part 13: Computer graphics. 

ISO 6093, Information processing - Representation of numerical values in character strings for information inter- 
change.^^ 

ISO 8632, Information processing systems - Computer Graphics - Metafile for transfer and storage of picture 
description information 

- Part 1 : Functional description.^^ 

- Part 2 : Character encoding. ^^ 

- Part 3 : Binary encoding}^ 

- Part 4 : Clear text encoding. '^ 



t) Al present at the stage of draft. 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



3 Definitions 



This clause gives the definition of the important terms of the Graphical Kernel Systpm (GKS). 

NOTE - As far as possible, commonly accepted graphics terminology is used. 

3.1 acknowledgement: Output to the operator of a logical input device indicating that a trigger has fired. 

3.2 aspect ratio: A ratio of x to y used to describe the shape of a rectangle in a particular coordinate system 
(for example, of a workstation window or a workstation viewport). 

3.3 aspects of primitives: Ways in which the appearance of a primitive can vary. Some aspects are controlled 
directly by primitive attributes, some are controlled indirectly through a bundle table. Primitives inside seg- 
ments have an aspect controlled through the segment containing them, for example highlighting; primitives 
outside segments do not. 

3.4 attribute: A particular property that applies to a display element (output primitive) or a segment. Exam- 
ples: highlighting, character height. In GKS, some properties of workstations are called workstation attri- 
butes. 

3.5 baseline: A horizontal line within a character body (see figure 3) which, for many character definitions, 
has the appearance of being a lower limit of the character shape. A descender passes below this line. All 
baselines in a font are in the same position in the character bodies. 

3.6 bundle index: An index into a bundle table for a particular output primitive. It defines the workstation 
dependent aspects of the primitive. 

3.7 bundle table: A workstation dependent table associated with a particular output primitive. Entries in the 
table specify all the workstation dependent aspects of a primitive. In GKS, bundle tables exist for the follow- 
ing output primitives: polyline, polymarker, text and fill area. 

3.8 capline: A horizontal line within a character body (see figure 3) which, for many character definitions, has 
the appearance of being the upper limit of the character shape. An ascender may pass above this line and in 
some languages an additional mark (for example an accent) over the character may be defined above this line. 
All caplines in a font are in the same position in the character bodies. 

3.9 ceil array: A GKS output primitive consisting of a rectangular grid of equal size rectangular cells, each 
having a single colour. 

NOTE - These cells do not necessarily map one-to-one with pixels. 

3.10 centreline: A vertical line bisecting the character body (see figure 3). 

3.11 character body: A rectangle used by a font designer to define a character shape (see figure 3). All charac- 
ter bodies in a font have the same height. 

3.12 choice device: A GKS logical input device providing a non-negative integer defining one of a set of alter- 
natives. 

3.13 clipping: Removing parts of display elements that lie outside a given boundary, usually a window or 
viewport. 

3.14 colour table: A workstation dependent table, in which the entries specify the values of the red, green and 
blue intensities defining a particular colour. 

3.15 coordinate graphics; line graphics: Computer graphics in which display images are generated from display 
commands and coordinate data. 

3.16 device coordinate (DC): A coordinate expressed in a coordinate system that is device dependent. In 
GKS, DC units are metres on a device capable of producing a precisely scaled image and appropriate works- 
tation dependent units otherwise. 

3.17 device driver: The device dependent part of a GKS implementation intended to support a graphics dev- 
ice. The device driver generates device dependent output and handles device dependent interaction. 

3.18 device space: The space defined by the addressable points of a display device. * 

3.19 display device; graphics device: A device (for example refresh display, storage tube display, plotter) on 
which display iraages^can be represented. 



IS; 12369 - 1987 
ISO 7942 - 1 985 



Definitions 



3.20 display image; picture: A collection of output primitives or segments tiiat are represented together at any 
one time on a display surface. 

3.21 display space: (1) That portion of the device space corresponding to the area available for displaying 

images. (2) The working space of an input device such as a digitiser. 

3.22 display surface; view surface: In a display device, that medium on which display images may appear. 

3.23 echo: The immediate notiiication of the current value provided by an input device to the operator at the 
display console. 

3.24 escape: A function in GKS used to access implementation or device dependent features, other than for 
the generation of graphical output, that are not otherwise addressed by GKS. 

3.25 feedback: Output indicating to the operator the application program's interpretation of a logical input 

value. 

3.26 fill area: A GKS output primitive consisting of a polygon (closed boundary) which may be hollow or 
may be filled with a uniform colour, a pattern, or a hatch style. 

3.27 fill area bundle table: A table associating specific values for all workstation dependent aspects of a fill 
area primitive with a fill area bundle index. In GKS, this table contains entries consisting of interior style, 
style index, and colour index. 

3.28 Generalized Drawing Primitive (GDP): An output primitive used to address special geometrical worksta- 
tion capabilities such as curve drawing. 

3.29 GKS level: Two values in the range to 2 and a to c which together define a set of functional capabili- 
ties of GKS. An implementation of GKS provides precisely the functions of one level. 

3.30 GKS Metafile (GKSM): A sequential file that can be written or read by GKS and is used for long-term 
storage (and for transmittal and transferral) of graphical information. 

3.31 halfline: A horizontal line between the capline and the baseline within the character body (see figure 3), 
about which a horizontal string of characters in a font would appear centrally placed in the vertical direction. 
Al! halflines in a font are in the same position in the character bodies. 

3.32 hatch: One possible method of filling the interior of a polygon specified by a fill area primitive. The inte- 
rior is filled with an arrangement of one or more sets of parallel lines. 

3.33 highlighting: A device independent way of emphasizing a segment by modifying its visual attributes. For 

example, blinking. 

3.34 implementation mandatory: Implementation mandatory describes a property that is required to be real- 
ized identically on all workstations of all implementations of GKS. 

3.35 input class: A set of input devices that are logically equivalent vvith respect to their function. In GKS, 
the input classes are: LOCATOR. STROKE. VALUATOR, CHOICE, PICK and STRING. 

3.36 inquiry function: A GKS function whose purpose is to return values depending on the current state of 
GKS or on some fixed property of the GKS implementation. There is no effect on the state of GKS or on 
the display image. 

3.37 locator device: A GKS logical input device providing a position in world coordinates and a normaliza- 
tion transformation number. 

3.38 logical input device: A logical input device is an abstraction of one or more physical devices that dehvers 
logical input values to the program. Logical input devices in GKS can be of type LOCATOR, STROKE, 
VALUATOR, CHOICE, PICK and STRING. 

3.39 logical input value: A value delivered by a logical input device. 

3.40 marker: A glyph with a specified appearance which is used to identify a particular location. 

3.41 measure: A value (associated with a logical input device), which is determined by one or more physical 
input devices and a mapping from the values delivered by the physical devices. The logical input value 
delivered by a logical input device is the current value of the measure. 

3.42 MI: An abbreviation for GKS metafile input, a category of workstation. 

3.43 MO: An abbreviation for GKS metafile output, a category of workstation. 

3.44 normali^atieon transformation; viewing transformation; window-to-viewport transformation: A transforma- 
tion that maps the boundary and interior of a window to the boundary and interior of a viewport. In GKS, 



iS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Definitions 



this transformation maps positions in world coordinates to normalized device coordinates. 

3.45 normatized device coordinates (NDC): A coordinate specified in a device independent intermediate coordi- 
nate system, normalized to some range, typically to I. In GKS, during an intermediate state the coordi- 
nates may lie outside the defined range, but associated clipping information ensures that the output does not 
exceed the coordinate range [0, 1] x [0.1]. 

3.46 operator: Person manipulating physical input devices so as to change the measures of logical input dev- 
ices and cause their triggers to fire, 

3.47 output primitive; graphic primitive; display element: A basic graphic element that can be used to construct 
a display image. Output primitives in GKS are polyline, polymarker, text, fill area, cell array, and general- 
ized drawing primitive. 

3.48 pick device: A GKS logical input device providing the pick identifier attached to an output primitive and 
the associated segment name. 

3.49 pick identifier: A name, attached to individual output primitives within a segment, and returned by the 
pick device. The same pick identifier can be assigned to different output primitives. 

3.50 pixel; picture element: The smallest element of a display surface that can be independently assigned a 
colour or intensity. 

3.51 polyline: A GKS output primitive consisting of a set of connected lijies. 

3.52 polyline bundle table: A table associating specific values for all workstation dependent aspects of a poly- 
line primitive with a polyliiie bundle index. In GKS, this table contains entries consisting of linetype, 
linewidth, scale factor, and colour index. 

3.53 polymarker: A GKS output primitive consisting of a set of locations, each to be indicated by a marker. 

3.54 polymarker bundle table: A table associating specific values for all workstation dependent aspects of a 
polymarker primitive with a polymarker bundle index, In GKS. this table contains entries consisting of 
marker type, marker size scale factor, and colour index. 

3.55 primitive attribute: Primitive attribute values (for output primitives) are selected by the application in a 
workstation independent manner, but can have workstation dependent effects. 

3.56 prompt: Output to the operator indicating that a specific logical input device is available. 

3.57 raster graphics: Computer graphics in which a display image is composed of an array of pixels arranged 
in rows and columns. 

3.58 rotation: Turning all or part of a display image about an axis. In GKS, this capability is restricted to 
segments. 

3.59 scaling; zooming: Enlarging o.r scvJu^i*^.^' all or part of a display image by multiplying the coordinates of 
display elements by a constant value. In GKS, this capabihty is restricted to segments. 

NOTE - For diflTerent scaling in iwo orthogonal directions two constant values are required. 

3.60 segment: A collection of display elements that can be manipulated as a unit. 

3.61 segment attributes: Attributes that apply only to segments. In GKS, segment attributes are visibility, 
highlighting, detectability, segment priority, and segment transformation. 

3.62 segment priority: A segment attribute used to determine which of several overlapping segments takes pre- 
cedence for graphic output and input. 

3.63 segment transformation: A transformation that causes the display elements defined by a segment to 
appear with varying position (translation), size (scale), and/or orientation (rotation) on the display surface. 

3.64 string device: A GKS logical input device providing a character string as its result. 

3.65 stroke device: A GKS logical input device providing a sequence of points in world coordinates, and a 
normalization transformation number. 

3.66 text: A GKS output primitive consisting of a character string. 

3.67 text bundle table: A table associating specific values for all workstation dependtv. :.>pccts of a text prim- 
itive with a text bundle index. In GKS. this table contains entries consisting of text font and "JDrecision, char- 
acter expansion factor, character spacing and colour index. 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Definitions 



3.68 text font and precision: An aspect of text in GKS, having two components, font and precision, which 
together determine the shape of the characters being output, on a particular workstation. In addition, the 
precision describes the fidelity with which the other text aspects match those requested by an application pro- 
gram. In order of increasing fidelity, the precisions are: STRING, CHAR and STROKE. 

3.69 translation; shift: The application of a constant displacement to the position of all or part of a display 
image. In GKS, this capability is restricted to segments. 

3.70 trigger: A physical input device or set of devices that an operator can use to indicate significant moments 
in time. 

3.71 valuator device: A GKS logical input device providing a real number. 

3.72 viewport: An application program specified part of normalized device coordinate space. In GKS, this 
definition is restricted to a rectangular region of normalized device coordinate space used in the definition of 
the normalization transformation. 

3.73 window: A predefined part of a virtual space. In GKS, this definition is restricted to a rectangular region 
of the world coordinate space used for the definition of the normalization transformation. 

3.74 workstation: GKS is based on the concept of abstract graphical workstations, which provide. the logical 
interface through which the application program controls physi'cal devices. 

3.75 Workstation Dependent Segment Storage (WDSS): Segment storage on a workstation that is used for 
graphical output. Segments cannot be transferred from WDSS to another workstation. 

3.76 Workstation Independent Segment Storage (WISS): A special workstation type, where segments can be 
stored and later transferred to other workstations. 

3.77 workstation mandatory: Workstation mandatory describes a property that is required to be realized ident- 
ically on all workstations of a GKS implementation. 

3.78 workstation transformation: A transformation that maps *he "boundary and interior of a workstation win- 
dow into the boundary and interior of a workstation viewport (part of display space), preserving aspect ratio. 
In GKS, this transformation maps positions in normalized <k /ice coordinates to device coordinates. The 
effect of preserving aspect ratio is that the interior of the work •; tjon window may not map to the whole of 
the workstation viewport. 

3.79 worl^tation viewport: A portion of display space currently sc, ; fed for output of graphics. 

3.80 workstation window: A rectangular region within the normair/ed device coordinate system which is 
represented on a display space, 

3.81 world coordinate (WC): A device independent Cartesian ccordinute system used by the application pro- 
gram for specifying graphical input and output. 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



4 The Graphical Kernel System 



4. 1 About this standard 

4.1.1 Specification 

The set of functions known as the Graphical Kernel System shall be as described in clauses 4, 5 and 6 and 
annexes A and B. These functions are organized in nine upward compatible levels with increasing capabilities 
as described in 4.10. An implementation of GKS shall implement precisely the functions of one level. A 
GKS implementation shall be invalid if it lies between two defined levels or outside the defined levels. In an 
implementation, all graphical capabilities that can be addressed by GKS functions shall be used only via 
GKS. 

4.1.2 Registration ' 

For certain parameters of the functions, GKS defines value ranges as being reserved for registration. The 
meanings of these values will be defined using the established procedures. These procedures do not apply to 
values and value ranges defined as being workstation or implementation dependent; these values and ranges 
are not standardized. 



I) Information concerning ihe Registration Authority and its procedures may be obtained on request to the 
Secretary General. ISO Central Secretariat, case postale 56. CH-12U Gendve, Switzerland, quoting the number 
of this International Standard. 



IS : 12369 - 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

introduction to GKS The Graphical Kernel System 

4.2 Introduction to GKS 

The Graphical Kernel System (GKS) provides a functional interface between an application program and a 
conrigLiration of graphical input and output devices. The functional interface contains all basic functions for 
interactive and non-interactive graphics on a wide variety of graphics equipment. 

The interface is at such a level of abstraction that hardware peculiarities are shielded from the application 
program. As a result a simplified interface presenting uniform output primitives (POLYLINE, POLY- 
MARKER, TEXT, FILL AREA, CELL ARRAY, GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE), and uni- 
form input classes (LOCATOR, STROKE, VALUATOR, CHOICE, PICK, STRING) is obtained. 

In 4.3 the concepts of basic output, input and the organization of input and output sequences are outlined. 
A central concept both for structuring GKS and for realizing device independence is introduced, called the 
workstation. 

The facilities for picture manipulation and change are introduced via the segment facilities, the dynamic attri- 
butes and the transformations. The integral control over all these methods for change is further explained in 
4.5.3 on workstations. 

The concept of multiple workstations allows simultaneous output to and input from various display systems. 
Facilities for internal and external storage are provided by special workstations together with the possibility 
of transferring graphical entities directly from the special workstation for internal storage to other worksta- 
tions. 

Not every GKS implementation needs to support the full set of functions. Nine levels are defined to meet the 
different requirements of graphics systems. Each GKS implementation precisely provides the functions of one 
level. The levels are upward compatible. 

GKS defines only a language independent nucleus of a graphics system. For integration into a language, 
GKS is embedded in a language dependent layer containing the language conventions, for example, parame- 
ter and name assignment. 

The layer model represented in figure 1 illustrates the role of GKS in a graphics system. Each layer may call 
the functions of the adjoining k>wer layers. In general the application program uses the application oriented 
layer, the language dependent layer, other application dependent layers, and operating system resources. All 
workstation capabilities that can be addressed by GKS functions are used only via GKS. 



10 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



The Graphical Kernel System 



Introduction to GKS 



Application Program 








Application Oriented Layer 






Language Dependent Layer 




Graphical Kernel System 


OPERATING 


SYSTEM 


Other Resources 


Graphical Resources 



Figure 1 - Layer model of GKS 



11 



15:12389 -1987 
IS0 7^^-198S 

Concepts The Graphical Kernel Syston 

4.3 Coaceiilfi 

The graphical output that is generated by GKS is built up from two groups of basic elements called output 
primitives and primitive attributes. The output primitives are abstractions of basic actions a device can per- 
form, such as drawing lines, and printing character strings. The attributes control the aspects of the output 
primitives on a device, such as linestyle, colour, character height and pick identifier. Non-geometric aspects, 
such as colour but not character height, can be controlled for each workstation individually, to make best 
use of its capabilities. 

The graphical information that is input from a device, as a result of operator actions, is mapped by GKS 
onto six classes of input each represented by a data type referred to as a logical input value. An instance of 
such a device representation is called a logical input device. The effect of input actions on the display sur- 
face, such as prompts and echoes, is controlled by GKS for each logical input device individually. 

The two abstract concepts (abstract output and abstract input) are the building blocks of a so-called abstract 
workstation. A workstation of GKS represents a unit consisting of zero or one display surfaces and zero or 
more input devices, such as keyboard, tablet and lightpen. The workstation presents these ,devices to the 
application program as a configuration of abstract devices thereby shielding the hardware peculiarities. 

The geometrical information (coordinates) contained in output primitives, attributes and logical input values 
(locators and strokes) can be subjected to transformations. These transformations perform mappings between 
three coordinate systems, namely: 

a) World Coordinates (WC), used by the application programmer; 

b) Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC), used to define a uniform coordinate system for all worksta- 
tions; 

c) Device Coordinates (DC), one coordinate system per workstation, representing its display space coordi- 
nates. 

Output primitives and attributes are mapped from WC to NDC by normalization transformations, from 
NDC to NDC by segment transformiations (see next paragraph), and from NDC to DC by workstation 
transformations. Locator input is mapped by an inverse workstation transformation from DC to NDC and 
by one of the inverse normalization transformations from NE)C to WC. 

Output primitives and primitive attributes may be grouped together in a segment. Segments are the units for 
manipulation and change. Manipulation includes creation, deletion, and renaming. Change includes 
transforming a segment, making a segment visible or invisible, and highlighting a segment. Segments also 
form the basis for workstation independent storage of pictures at run time. Via this storage, which is set up 
as a special workstation called workstation independent segment storage, segments can be inserted and 
transferred to other workstations. 

The attributes which control the appearance of parts of the picture (output primitives, segments, prompt and 
echo types of input devices) on the display surface are organized in a uniform manner. Two groups of attri- 
butes apply to the appearance of each output primitive: primitive attributes (that are workstation indepen- 
dent) and workstation attributes. Primitive attributes are specified modally and are bound to a primitive 
when it is created. The primitive attributes include all geometric aspects of primitives, such as character 
height for text and pattern size for fill area. In addition, the non-geometric aspects of primitives are con- 
trolled by the primitive attributes in one of two ways. Either a single attribute is used to specify all the non- 
geometric aspects of the primitive by an index which points to a workstation dependent representation (set of 
values) or one attribute is used to specify each of the non-geometric aspects of the primitive in a workstation 
independent way. The former is referred to as bundled specification and the latter is referred to as individual 
specification. 

Workstation attributes include the actual representations on a workstation pointed to by indices used in bun- 
dled specification of non-geometric aspects. For example, the representations (or bundles) for polyline each 
contain values of linetype, linewidth scale factor and colour index. Workstation attributes also specify the 
colour and pattern tables and the control over deferral of picture change. Workstation attributes can be reset 
dynamically. 



12 



IS:12^d-iai7 
ISO 7942* 19^ 

The Graiihical Kernel System Coae^pt» 

The appearance of segments is controlled by segment attributes, which are segment transformation, visibility, 
highlighting, segment priority, and detectability. These may be reset dynamically. Segment attributes can be 
a basis for feedback during manipulations (for example, highlighting). 

The attributes which control the operation of logical input devices can be specified either upon initialisation 
or as part of input device setting, depending upon the attributes. Through initialisation, an initial value, a 
prompt and echo technique, and an area on the screen for echoing can be specified. A data record may 
further provide device specific attributes. Through input device setting, the operating mode may be selected 
and the echo may be switched on or off. The operating modes of logical input devices specify who (operator 
or application program) has the initiative; SAMPLE input is acquired directly by the application program; 
REQUEST input is produced by the operator in direct response to the application program; EVENT input is 
generated asynchronously by the operator and is collected in a queue for the application program. 

At run time GKS can be in one of five different operating states. Associated with each state are the set of 
GKS functions allowed in this state, and a set of state variables. The operating state concept and the state 
variables allow for proper specification of initialisations (for example, at OPEN WORKSTATION) and the 
effect of various functions, especially with respect to the maintenance of device independence. One special set 
of functions called inquiry functions is allowed in all states. They give read-only access to the state lists. In 
this way useful information can be provided when errors occur. Other inquiry- functions allow read-only 
access to the workstation descriptions, to allow the application program to adapt to particular workstation 
capabilities. Inquiry functions never cause errors. Instead they return information specifying whether a valid 
inquiry was made. 

GKS provides an interface to a system for filing graphical information for the purpose of external long term 
storage and exchange. The interface consists of a GKS Metafile output workstation, which writes to a so- 
called graphics metafile (which is sequential), and a GKS Metafile input workstation, which reads from the 
metafile. In addition to the normal functions for output to workstations, a GKS Metafile output workstation 
may accept items containing non-graphical information. Input from a metafile is controlled by read and 
interpret functions which have the same effect as invoking the corresponding functions directly from the 
application program. 



13 



IS .12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output The Graphical Kernel System 

4.4 Graphical output 

4.4.1 Output primitives 

The graphical information that is generated by GKS and routed to all active workstations is built up of 
basic pieces called..output primitives. GKS provides six output primitives: 

a) POLYLINE: GKS generates a set of connected lines defined by a point 

sequence. 

b) POLYMARKER: GKS generates symbols of one type centred at given positions. 

c) TEXT: GKS generates a character string at a given position. 

d) FILL AREA: GKS generates a polygonal area which may be hollow or filled 

with a uniform colour, a pattern, or a hatch style. 

e) CELL ARRAY: GKS generates an array of pixels with individual colours. 

f) GENERALIZED DRAW- GKS addresses special geometrical output capabilities of a 
ING PRIMITIVE(GDP): workstation such as the drawing of spline curves, circular 

arcs, and elliptic arcs. The objects are characterized by an 
identifier, a set of points and additional data. GKS applies all 
transformations to the points but leaves the interpretation to 
the workstation. 

4.4.2 Output primitive attributes 

Each output primitive potentially has three types of attribute (geometric, non-geometric and identification). 
The first two attribute types determine the exact appearance of the output primitive while the third attribute 
type is used in connection with input. The values of these attributes are set modally and are recorded in the 
GKS state list. A separate GKS function is provided for each primitive attribute (except the ASFs: see later 
in this sub-clause), to allow the application program to specify the value of an attribute without unnecessarily 
specifying the values of other attributes. During creation of an output primitive (that is, when one of the 
GKS output primitive functions is invoked) these values are bound to the primitive and cannot be changed 
afterwards. 

Attributes of the first type control the geometric aspects of primitives; these are aspects which affect the shape 
or size of the whole primitive (for example, CHARACTER HEIGHT for TEXT). Hence, they are sometimes 
referred to as geometric attributes. Attributes of this type are workstation independent and, if they represent 
coordinate data (points or displacements), are expressed in world coordinates (for example, CHARACTER 
HEIGHT is expressed in world coordinates but TEXT PATH takes one of a set of enumerated values). They 
are defined separately for each primitive and a primitive may have zero, one or many geometric attributes. 

Current values of (workstation independent) geometric attributes, which are expressed in world coordinates, 
are stored in world coordinates. When they are bound to their respective primitives, the values are subject to 
the same transformations as the geometric data contained in the definition of the primitive. Hence, current 
values are unaffected by changes in the normalization transformation and the workstation transformation. 

Attributes of the second type control the non-geometric aspects of primitives; these are aspects which merely 
affect a primitive's appearance (for example, linetype for POLYLINE, or colour index for all primitives 
except CELL ARRAY) or the shape or size of the component parts of the primitive (for example, marker 
size scale factor for POLYMARKER). Non-geometric aspects do not represent coordinate data. The non- 
geometric aspects of a primitive may be specified in one of two ways, namely via a bundle or individually. 

For specification of aspects via a bundle, there is one attribute per primitive, called the 
< primitive > INDEX. This attribQte is an index into a bundle table, each entry of which contains all the 

14 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphical output 

non-geometric aspects of the primitive.. There is a separate bundle table for each primitive with the exception 
of GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE and CELL ARRAY (see later in this sub-clause). The non- 
geometric aspects are workstation dependent in this method of specification and each workstation has its own 
set of bundle tables (stored in the workstation state list). The values in a particular bundle (or entry in the 
bundle table) may be different for different workstations. 

For individual specification of aspects, there is a separate attribute for each non-geometric aspect. As with 
the attributes controlling the geometric aspects, these attributes are workstation independent and are stored in 
the GKS state list. Since each non-geometric aspect only occurs in one primitive bundle type, each of these 
attributes applies to only one prijjiitive type. 

For a given non-geometric aspect, the values that can be assigned to the appropriate bundle component are 
the same as the values that can be assigned to the corresponding attribute for individual specification. Since 
the bundles are set separately for each workstation, the values of their components are restricted to the valid 
values for that workstation. In the case of individual attribute specification, such restrictions are not 
imposed. Default actions for the display of a primitive are defined to occur if it is created with a value of an 
individually specified attribute that is invalid on a particular workstation. 

As indicated above, GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) and CELL ARRAY do not have 
associated bundle tables nor corresponding individually specified attributes. The GDP may use the most 
appropriate bundle tables or sets of individually specified attributes for each GDP function. For example, if 
one GDP function is essentially a FILL AREA, then the fill area bundle table or the set of individually 
specified fill area attributes would be used. CELL ARRAY contains colour index information as part of its 
definition but has no other non-geometric aspects and so does not use a bundle table nor does it have a set of 
individually specified attributes. 

The method of specification of the non-geometric aspects of a primitive may be chosen separately for each 
aspect. A further group of primitive attributes, called ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS (ASFs), take the values 
INDIVIDUAL and BUNDLED to specify the choice. As with the other primitive attributes, these attributes 
are workstation independent and are stored in the GKS state list. There is one ASF for each non-geometric 
aspect of each primitive. The initial values of all the ASFs are the same; this may be either BUNDLED or 
INDIVIDUAL, the choice being implementation dependent. If the initial values are not altered, the system 
will operate 

a) as if individual specification of non-geometric aspects were not a system feature, if the initial values of 
all the ASFs are BUNDLED; 

b) as if specification of non-geometric aspects via a bundle were not a system feature, if the initial values 
of all the ASFs are INDIVIDUAL. 

The flags may be set at any time when GKS is open by the function SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS. This 
enables some non-geometric aspects of a primitive to be specified individually and others via a bundle. 

When a primitive is displayed, the values of the non-geometric aspects with which it is displayed are deter- 
mined as follows. 

c) If the ASF for an aspect is INDIVIDUAL, the value used on all workstations is the value of the 
corresponding individually specified attribute of that primitive. 

d) If the ASF for an aspect is BUNDLED, the value used on a workstation is obtained via the bundle 
table for that primitive on the workstation; the corresponding component of the bundle, pointed to by the 
bundle, index, is used. 

If colour is a non-geometric aspect of a primitive, then it is specified as an index into a separate colour table. 
There is only one colour table per workstation into which all the colour indices point. Similarly, other entries 
in a bundle, or corresponding individually specified attributes, may be indices either into another workstation 
table (for example, style index when interior style PATTERN is used) or into a fixed list (for example, line- 
types for polyline). 

There is precisely one attribute of the third type per primitive, namely PICK IDENTIFIER. This is used for 
identifying a primitive, or a group of primitives, in a segment when that segment is picked. 

IS 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output 



The Graphical Kernel System 



The attributes which apply to each output primitive (attributes controlling non-geometric aspects, geometric 
attributes and PICK IDENTIFIER) are: 



e) 



POLYLINE: 



POLYLINE INDEX 

LINETYPE 

LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 

POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 

LINETYPE ASF 

LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR ASF 

POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX'ASF 

PICK IDENTIFIER 







POLYMARKER: 



POLYMARKER INDEX 
MARKER TYPE 

MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 
POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 
MARKER TYPE ASF 
MARKER SIZE FACTOR ASF 
POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX ASF 
PICK IDENTIFIER 



g) 



TEXT: 



TEXT INDEX 

TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 

CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 

CHARACTER SPACING 

TEXT COLOUR INDEX 

TEXT FONT AND PRECISION ASF 

CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR ASF 

CHARACTER SPACING ASF 

TEXT COLOUR INDEX ASF 

CHARACTER HEIGHT 

CHARACTER UP VECTOR 

TEXT PATH 

TEXT ALIGNMENT 

PICK IDENTIFIER 



h) 



FILL AREA: 



FILL AREA INDEX 

FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 

FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 

FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 

FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE ASF 

FILL AREA STYLE INDEX ASF 

FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX ASF 

PATTERN SIZE 

PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 

PICK IDENTIFIER 



i) CELL ARRAY: 

j) GENERALIZED DRAW- 

ING PRIMITIVE: 



PICK IDENTIFIER 

Zero or more of the sets e) to i) except that PICK IDENTIFIER is 
always an attribute 



Figure 2 shows the binding of the attributes. 



16 



The Graphical Kernel System 



IS: 12369 > 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output 



GKS 
FUNCTIONS 


GKS 
STATE LIST 


SEGMENT 
STATE LIST 


WORKSTATION 
STATE LIST 


PICTURE 

1 













SET 
INQUIRE 



POLYUNE 
POLYMARKER 
TEXT 
FILL AREA 
CELL ARRAY 
G.D.P. 



PRDimVE 
ATTRIBUTES 



POLYLINE ^ 

ATTRIBUTES 

POLYMARKER 
ATTRIBUTES * 

TEXT 
ATTRIBUTES 

FILL AREA 
ATTRIBUTES 



SEGMENT 
ATTRIBUTES 



SEGMENT 
TRANSFORMATION 

VISIBIUTY 

HIGHUGHTING 

SEGMENT 
PRIORnr 

DETECTABIUTY 



tail 



WORKSTATION 
ATTRIBUTES 



POLYLINE REPR. 

POLYMARKER REPR. 

TEXT REPR 

nLLAREA REPR. 

PATTERN REPR 

COLOUR REPR. 

DEFERRAL STATE 

WORKSTATION 
TRANSFORMATION 




^^WORKSTATION 



PICK ipSNTlFlER is separated from the other attributes 
for a primitive only in this figure. 
See 4.4.2 for a full Ust. 



Figure 2 - Binding of attributes 



17 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

Graphical output The Graphical Kernel System 

The attributes for each primitive, other than PICK IDENTIFIER, are described in 4.4.3 to 4.4.8. PICK 
IDENTIFIER is described in more detail in 4.7.1. In the descriptions, attributes appear in upper case (for 
example, the attributes CHARACTER HEIGHT and PICK IDENTIFIER); aspects appear in both upper 
and lower case, according to their context. Geometric aspects are always controlled by geometric attributes 
and so appear in upper case (for example, the aspect CHARACTER HEIGHT). Non-geometric aspects may 
be controlled via a < primitive > INDEX or by individually specified attributes. Non-geometric aspects 
appear in lower case unless the corresponding individually specified attributes are being used which appear in 
upper case (for example, the aspect linetype but the individually specified attribute LINETYPE). 

The entries in the bundle, pattern, and colour tables may be set separately for each workstation. Some stan- 
dard definitions for table entries are contained in the workstation description table and are used as initial 
values. The application program may select a standard definition or may define the values of a specific entry 
explicitly. Only the most commonly used (or anticipated) combinations of values need be predefined for each 
output type workstation. At least those predefined entries with indices up to the minimum number of 
predefined entries at a given level (see 4.10.3) are distingishable from each other. Other combinations of 
values can be specified by the SET < primitive ! PATTERN i COLOUR > REPRESENTATION function, 
possibly after inquiring the workstation capabilities. The tables, which are on every workstation of category 
OUTPUT, OUTIN or MO (i.e. they are workstation attributes), are: 

polyline bundle table 
polymarker bundle table 
text bundle table 
fill area bundle table 
pattern table 
colour table 

The values in these tables may be (dynamically) changed. In fact, the only way of changing the aspects of a 
primitive which are stored in a bundle table is by changing that table. However, note that a change in a bun- 
dle table entry can only be reflected in a displayed primitive if the values of the corresponding ASFs (of that 
primitive) for the aspects in the bundle table are BUNDLED. The entry 'dynamic modification accepted' in 
the workstation description table indicates which changes 

k) lead to an implicit regeneration (may be deferred) (IRG); 

I) can be performed immediately (IMM). 
The deferral state is explained in more detail in 4.5.3. If changes can be performed immediately, those 
changes may affect primitives outside segments in addition to those inside segments. 

4.4.3 Polyline attributes 

Polyline has no geometric attributes. The representation of polyline on the workstation is controlled by the 
POLYLINE INDEX, or the set of individually specified polyline attributes (LINETYPE, LINEWIDTH 
SCALE FACTOR, and POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX) or some combination of the two, depending upon 
the values of the ASFs for linetype, linewidth scale factor and polyline colour index. The POLYLINE 
INDEX is a pointer into the polyline bundle table, each entry of which contains values for linetype, linewidth 
scale factor and polyline colour index. 

Ljnetypes 1 to 4 are solid, dashed, dotted and dashed-dptted. Every workstation of category OUTPUT or 
OUTIN realizes linetypes 1 to 4 with recognizable styles. Linetypes greater than 4 are reserved for registra- 
tion (see 4.1.2). Linetypes less than may be available but their styles are implementation dependent. The 
linetype specifies a sequence of line segments and gaps which are repeated to draw a polyline. It is worksta- 
tion dependent whether this sequence is restarted or continued at the start of the polyline, at the start of a 
clipped piece of a polyline, and at each vertex of a polyline. 

The linewidth is calculated as a nominal hnewidth multipUed by the linewidth scale factor. This value is 
mapped by the workstation to the nearest available linewidth. 



18 



IS; 12369 > 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphic^ oatpat 

4.4.4 Polymarker attributes 

Polymarker has no geometric attributes. The representation of polymarker at the workstation is controlled 
by the POLYMARKER INDEX, or the set of individually specified polymarker attributes (MARKER 
TYPE, MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR, and POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX) or some combination 
of the two, depending upon the values of the ASFs for marker type, marker size scale factor, and polymarker 
colour index. The POLYMARKER INDEX is a pointer into the polymarker bundle table, each entry of 
which contains values for marker type, marker size scale factor and polymarker colour index. 

Marker types 1 to 5 are dot, plus sign, asterisk, circle, and diagonal cross each centred on the positions they 
are identifying. Every workstation of category OUTPUT or OUTIN realizes marker types 1 to 5 with recog- 
nizable shapes at the given positions. Marker types greater than 5 are reserved for registration (see 4.1.2). 
Marker types less than may be available but their forms are implementation dependent. 

The marker size is calculated as a nominal size multiplied by the marker size scale factor. This size is 
mapped by the workstation to the nearest available size. Marker type 1 is always displayed as the smallest 
displayable dot. 

The marker is visible if, and only if, the marker position is within the cUpping rectangle. The clipping of par- 
tially visible markers is workstation dependent. 

4.4.5 Text attributes 

Text has the geometric attributes CHARACTER HEIGHT, CHARACTER UP VECTOR, TEXT PATH, 
and TEXT ALIGNMENT which are specified and used as described in this sub-clause. 

Text also has two implicitly specified geometric attributes CHARACTER WIDTH and CHARACTER BASE 
VECTOR. These are implicitly specified by the functions SET CHARACTER HEIGHT and SET CHAR- 
ACTER UP VECTOR respectively. They otherwise behave like ordinary geometric attributes (their values 
are bound to TEXT primitives when the primitives are created and cannot be changed afterwards and these 
values are subject to the same transformations as the geometric data contained in the definition of the primi- 
tive). 

The representation of text at the workstation is controlled by the TEXT INDEX, or the set of individually 
specified text attributes (TEXT FONT AND PRECISION, CHARACTER EXPAIsfSION FACTOR, CHAR- 
ACTER SPACING, and TEXT COLOUR INDEX) or some combination of the two, depending upon the 
values of the ASFs for text font and precision, character expansion factor, character spacing and text colour 
index. The TEXT INDEX is a pointer into the text bundle table, each entry of which contains values for 
text font and precision, character expansion factor, character spacing and text colour index. 

Precise control of the appearance of TEXT on a workstation is provided by the following aspects: CHARAC- 
TER HEIGHT, CHARACTER WIDTH, character expansion factor, TEXT PATH, CHARACTER UP 
VECTOR, CHARACTER BASE VECTOR, character spacing and TEXT ALIGNMENT. However, the use 
of these values in displaying text is determined by the setting of the text font and precision aspect (font and 
precision are two components of the same aspect). The CHARACTER HEIGHT specifies the nominal 
height of a capital letter character. The CHARACTER WIDTH specifies the nominal width of a character; 
the actual width depends upon the width to height ratio of the character indicated by the font designer and 
may vary from character to character. The character expansion factor specifies the deviation of the width to 
height ratio of the character from the ratio indicated by the font designer. The CHARACTER UP VECTOR 
gives the up direction of a character. The CHARACTER BASE VECTOR gives the direction of the baseline 
of a character. Only the directions, not the lengths, of these vectors are relevant. TEXT PATH has the pos- 
sible values RIGHT, LEFT, UP and DOWN. It specifies the writing direction of the text string. For RIGHT, 
the text string is written along a basehne in the direction of the CHARACTER BASE VECTOR. For LEFT, 
the baseline direction is the opposite direction of the CHARACTER BASE VECTOR. For UP, the charac- 
ter path coincides with the direction of the CHARACTER UP VECTOR. For DOWN, it i« the opposite 
direction of the CHARACTER UP VECTOR. For the UP and DOWN text path directions the characters 
are arranged so that the centres of the character bodies are on a straight line in the direction of the CHAR- 
ACTER UP VECTOR. 






18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical outpot The Graplucal Kernel System 

The character spacing value specifies how much additional space is to be inserted between two adjacent char- 
acter bodies. If the value of character spacing is zero, the character bodies are arranged one after the other 
along the TEXT PATH, without any additional space between. A positive value of character spacing will 
insert additional space between character bodies. A negative value of character spacing will cause adjacent 
character bodies to overlap. Character spacing is specified as a fraction of the font nominal character height. 

The effect of the aspects CHARACTER HEIGHT, CHARACTER WIDTH, character expansion factor, 
TEXT PATH, character spacing and text font h to define an (imaginary) rectangle with its sides parallel to 
the X and y axes, enclosing the text. The bounds of this enclosing rectangle are as follows. For TEXT 
PATH = LEFT or RIGHT, the height of the rectangle is the height of the character body of the specified 
font; the left side of the rectangle is the left side of the character body of the leftmost character and the right 
side of the rectangle is the right side of the character body of the rightmost character. For TEXT 
PATH = UP or DOWN, the top of the rectangle is the top of the character body of the topmost character 
and similarly, the bottom of the rectangle is the bottom of the bottommost character; the width of the rectan- 
gle is the width of the widest character in the specified font. 

The effect of the CHARACTER UP VECTOR and CHARACTER BASE VECTOR attributes is to 
transform the enclosing rectangle, thus defining an enclosing parallelogram, the text extent parallelogram (the 
rectangle has been rotated and sheared). 

The TEXT ALIGNMENT attribute controls the positioning of this text extent parallelogram in relation to 
the text position. For simplicity the TEXT ALIGNMENT is described in terms of the default CHARAC- 
TER UP VECTOR and CHARACTER BASE VECTOR, when the text extent parallelogram is actually a 
rectangle. The horizontal component of TEXT ALIGNMENT has four values: LEFT, CENTRE, RIGHT 
and NORMAL. If the horizontal component is LEFT, the left side of the text extent parallelogram passes 
through the text position. Similarly, if the value is RIGHT, the right side of the text extent parallelogram 
passes through the text position. If the horizontal component is CENTRE, the text position lies midway 
between the left and right sides of the text extent parallelogram. Thus, if TEXT PATH = UP or DOWN, 
the straight line passing through the centrelines of the characters also passes through the text position. The 
vertical component of TEXT ALIGNMENT has six values: TOP, CAP, HALF, BASE, BOTTOM and 
NORMAL. These each correspond to one of the font specific horizontal lines in the definition of a character 
(see figure 3). A value of TOP causes the top of the text extent parallelogram to pass through the text posi- 
tion. A value of CAP causes the text position to lie on the capline of the whole string (TEXT 
PATH = LEFT or RIGHT) or on the capUne of the topmost character in the string (TEXT PATH = UP or 
DOWN). A value of HALF causes the text position to lie on the halfline of the whole string (TEXT 
PATH = LEFT or RIGHT) or on a line halfway between the halflines of the top and bottom characters 
(TEXT PATH = UP or DOWN). A value of BASE causes the text position to lie oii the baseUne pf the 
whole string (TEXT PATH = LEFT or RIGHT) or on the basehne of the bottom character in the string 
(TEXT PATH = UP or DOWN). A value of BOTTOM causes the bottom of the text extent parallelogram 
to pass through the text position. 

In the general case, the orientation referred to as horizontal is that of the CHARACTER BASE VECTOR 
with RIGHT representing direction of that vector and LEFT being opposite to it. Similarly the orientation 
referred to as vertical is that of the CHARACTER UP VECTOR with UP representing the direction of that 
vector and DOWN being opposite to it. 

Either component of TEXT ALIGNMENT can take the value NORMAL. For each value of TEXT PATH, 
the effect of a particular component bemg NORMAL is equivalent to one of the other values of that com- 
ponent. In each case, the equivalent alignment value is chosen to achieve a natural alignment for that TEXT 
PATH value. The complete list of equivalent values is: 

TtEXT PATH I NORM AL Horizontal and VerticarAJign ments 1 

!~RIGhT" (LEFT, BASE) ^ ': 

LEFT I (RIGHT, BASE) i 

UP \ (CENTRE. BASE) 

DOWN i (CENTRE, TOP) 



' 10 



The Graphical Kernel System 



is: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 '1985 

Graphical output 



. centre 
J> line 



cap 
line 



left 




kern 



. _^ . bottomline 

right 



Figure 3 - Font description coordinate system 



The initial values of the geometric text attributes are: 



CHARACTER HEIGHT 


WC 


0.01 (i.e. 1% of the height of the default 
window) 


CHARACTER UP VECTOR 


WC 


(0.1) 


TEXT PATH 




RIGHT 


TEXT ALIGNMENT 




(NORMAL, NORMAL) 



and the initial values of the implicitly specified geometric text attributes are: 



CHARACTER WIDTH 



CHARACTER BASE VECTOR 



WC 



WC 



0.01 (i.e. the same value as the initial 
value of CHARACTER HEIGHT) 
(1,0) 



Text font and precision together constitute one aspect. The text font value is used to select a particular font 
on the workstation. Every worlcstation supports at least one font that is able to generate a graphical represen- 
tation of the characters defined in ISO 646. This is font number 1. Font numbers greater than 1 are reserved 
for registration (see 4.1,2). Font numbers less than may be supported but are implementation dependent. 

The text precision value is used to select the 'closeness' of the text representation at the workstation in rela- 
tion to that defined by the workstation independent text attributes and the transformation and clipping 
currently applicable. The text precision value hcis the following possible values: 

a) STRING: The TEXT character string is generated in the requested text font and is positioned by 
aligning. the TEXT output primitive at the given text position. CHARACTER HEIGHT, 
CHARACTER WIDTH and character expansion factor are evaluated as closely as rea- 
sonable, given the capabilities of the workstation. CHARACTER UP VECTOR, CHAR- 
ACTER BASE VECTOR, TEXT PATH, TEXT ALIGNMENT and character spacing, 
need not be used. Clipping is done in an implementation and workstation dependent way. 



21 



1SM2369.1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output The Graphical Kernel System 

b) CHAR; , The TEXT character string is generated in the requested text font. For the representation 

of each individual character, the aspects CHARACTER HEIGHT, CHARACTER 
WIDTH, the up direction of the CHARACTER UP VECTOR, the baseHne direction of 
the CHARACTER BASE VECTOR, and character expansion factor are evaluated as 
closely as possible, in a workstation dependent way. The spacing used between character 
bodies is evaluated exactly; the character body, for this purpose, is an ideal character 
body, calculated precisely from the text aspects and the font dimensions. The position of 
the resulting text extent parallelogram is letermined by the TEXT ALIGNMENT and the 
text position. Clipping is performed at least on a character by character basis. 

c) STROKE: The text character string in the requested text font is displayed at the text position by 

applying all text aspects. The character string is clipped exactly at the clipping rectangle. 

STROKE precision does not necessarily mean vector strokes; as long as the representation adheres to the 
rules governing STROKE precision, the font may be realized in any form, for example by raster fonts. 

A GKS output level implementation supports text precisions STRING and CHAR. Above output level 0, 
all text precisions are supported as follows. A workstation may use a higher precision than the one requested 
for this purpose i.e. if STROKE precision is supported in a particular font, the implication is that both 
STRING and CHAR precision are available in that font. However it is not necessary for a workstation to 
support all precisions for a given font (i.e. for a given font, STROKE can be missing or both STROKE and 
CHAR can be missing). Text font and precision are workstation mandatory. That is, for any GKS level sup- 
porting a STROKE precision font, every workstation of a particular installation supports at least one 
STROKE precision text font. This is font number 1, containing the character set defined by ISO 646. This 
implies that, for STROKE precision text, some sort of software character generator is required for those 
implementations that have inadequate hardware. Not all workstations need to support all fonts, but for those 
that do, the same font number is used tp select that font on all workstations of a particular installation. 

Fonts are defined only within the GKS implementation. The font designer specifies the shape of the symbol 
representing each character in a local 2D cartesian font coordinate system. Fonts are either monospaced or 
proportionally spaced. Each character in a font coordinate system has an associated character body, a font 
baseline, a font halfline, a capline and a centrehne (see figure 3). For monospaced fonts, the character bodies 
of all characters have the same size. For proportionally spaced fonts, the width of the bodies may differ from 
character to character. The character body edges are parallel to the axes of the font coordinate system. The 
font baseline, the font halfline and the capUne are parallel to the x-axis of the font coordinate system, and 
within ihe vertical extent of the body. The position of the font halfline is defined by the font designer for use 
in aligning text strings. The centreline is parallel to the y-axis and bisects the body. Their exact positions are 
specified by the font designer. 

The height of a character in the font coordinate system is given by the height from the font baseUne to the 
capline. The width of a character is given by the width of the character body. The width of a character may 
include space on either side of the character and this space is generally evenly split between the left and right 
sides of the character. It is assumed that the characters lie within their body, except that kerned characters 
may exceed the side limits of the character body. 

In general, the top limits of the bodies for a font are identical with, or very close to, the typographical caphne 
or ascender line, and the bottom Hmit to the descender line. The space, if any, between the topline and the 
capline may be used for an additional mark over the character, for example an accent. However, these and 
other details are purely for the use of the font designer. The intention is only that characters placed with their 
bodies touching in the horizontal direction should give an appearance of good nonnal spacing, and characters 
touching in the vertical direction will avoid clashes between ascenders and descenders (typographically 'set 
sohd'). 

Since the values of CHARACTER HEIGHT, CHARACTER WIDTH, CHARACTER UP VECTOR and 
CHARACTER BASE VECTOR are given in world coordinate units, but the characters are genpated on the 
workstation in device coordinates, using the workstation dependent font and precision, the geometric attri- 
butes need to be transformed in such a way that the workstation can generate the characters in the way 
intended. 



\ 22 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



The Graphical Kernel System 



Graphical output 



m\ 


Wg£ 


C 



character height 



CHARACTER HEIGHT = 1, CHARACTER UP VECTOR = (0,1), 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT. TEXT ALIGNMENT = (NORMAL.NORIIAL) 



mms^ 



CHARACTER HEIGHT ^ 0.5 . CHARACTER UP VECTOR = (0.1) 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT. TEXT AUGNMENT « (NORMAL.NORMAL) 



tww 



CHARACTER HEIGHT « 1, CHARACTER VP VECTOR « (0.1), 
TEXT PATH » RIGHT. TEXT AUGNMENT * (RIGHT.TOP) 



CHARACTER HEIGHT - 1 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR 

(0.1) 




TEXT PATH »DOWN 
TEXT AUGNMENT = 

(NORMAL.NORMAL) 



CHARACTER HEIGHT «1 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR '=(-1.0) 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT 
TEXT AUGNMENT = (NORMAL.NORMAL) 

X text position 

__ baseline or centrehne 

text extent rectangle 

(indicated for PATH = DOWN) 




NOTES 

1 Examples are illustrated with STROKE precision, a character expansion factor of 1 and a zero character spacing. 

2 Capline = topline in these examples. 

3 Changed attributes are underlined. 

Figure 4 - Effects of changes in geometric text attributes 



23 



IS'. 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 ' 1985 

Graphical output 



The Graphical Kernel System 



w\ 


^ 


() 




W 


1 


2 


X 

1 


1 
1 


1 
1 


-•i-- 


.11 1. 


f 1 


1 



CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR = 1. CHARACTER SPACING = 



mm 



CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR = 0.75. CHARACTER SPACING ^ 



fflH 





CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR = 1, CHARACTER SPACING ^ 0.3 



NOTES 

1 Examples are illustrated with default values of the geometric text attributes and with STROKE precision. 

2 Changed aspects are underlined. 

Figure 5 - Effects of changes in non-geometric text aspects 



24 



The Graphical Kernel System 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical oatpat 




CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR = 1 
CHARACTER SPACING = 
CHARACTER HEIGHT =1.414 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR = (-1.1) 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT 
TEXT AUGNMENT =(NORIIAL.NORMAL) 



' lopr riTrnjy 



CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR = 1 
CHARACTER SPACING = -0.3 
CHARACTER HEIGHT = 1 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR =(0.1) 
TEXT PATH =LEFT 
TEXT AUGNMENT =(NORMAL.NORMAL) 



J 




CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR = 1 
CHARACTER SPACING = 
CHARACTER HEIGHT = 1 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR = (-1.0) 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT 
TEXT AUGNMENT « (CENTRE.TOP) 



J 



i. 



CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 
CHARACTER SPACING » 
CHARACTER HEIGHT = 1 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR «(0.1) 
TE XT PATH «DOWN 
TEXT AUGNMENT «(1JE3T.HALF) 



NOTES 

1 Changes from the top example of figures 4 and 5 are underlined. 

2 In the last example, halflines of all characters are shown. 

Figure 6 - Effects of combined changes in text aqiects 



= 1 



25 



»S: 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output 



The Graphical Kernel System 




CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR =2.667 
CHARACTER SPACING =-0.333 
CHARACTER HEIGHT =1.2 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR = (-4,3) 
TEXT PATH = UP 
TEXT AUGNMENT = (CENTRE.BOTTOM) 



NOTE - Changes from the top example of figures 4 and 5 are underlined. 

Figure 7 - Effects of several changes in text aspects 



26 



The Graphical Kernel System 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output 



After a normalization 
transformation which 
scales X and y equally. 



World coordinates 

CHARACTER UP VECTOR = (-1.1) 




After a normalization transformation 
which scales x by a factor of 
3 compared with y. 



Figure 8 - Effects of different normalizatioD transformatioiis on text In STROKE precision 



27 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Graphical output The Graphical Kernel System 

The effect to be achieved is now described. Together with the text coding, a height vector parallel to the 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR with length equal to CHARACTER HEIGHT, and a width vector parallel to 
the CHARACTER BASE VECTOR with length equal to CHARACTER WIDTH, are passed down the 
viewing pipeline. These vectors are transformed by the normalization transformation, by a segment transfor- 
mation if within a segment, and by the workstation transformation. They are also stored in segments. Then 
the vectors can be used by the workstation character generator. Thus, the shape of individual characters can 
be transformed by a normalization transformation that is unequal in x and y and by a segment transforma- 
tion. 

On the workstation, the height of a character is given by the length of the transformed height vector; the 
character up direction is given by the direction of the transformed height vector; the width of a character is 
given by the length of the transformed width vector multiplied by the font width to height ratio for the char- 
acter and by the character expansion factor; the character base direction is given by the direction of the 
transformed width vector. The characters are arranged together in a text extent parallelogram, depending on 
the values of TEXT PATH and character spacing. The text extent parallelogram is then positioned according 
to the value of TEXT ALIGNMENT and the text position, contained in the definition of the TEXT primi- 
tive. 

Figures 4 to 7 give examples of the effects of different values of text aspects. Figure 8 gives examples of the 
effect of different normalization transformations on the displayed form of the text. 

4.4.6 Fill area attributes 

Fill area has the geometric attribute PATTERN REFERENCE POINT. It also has two implicitly specified 
geometric attributes PATTERN WIDTH VECTOR and PATTERN HEIGHT VECTOR. These are imph- 
citly specified by the function SET PATTERN SIZE. Like ordinary geometric attributes, their values are 
bound to FILL AREA primitives when the primitives are created find cannot be changed afterwards and 
these values are subject to the same transformations as the geometric data contained in the definition of the 
primitive. The usage of the fill area geometric attributes is described later in this sub-clause. 

The representation of fill area at the workstation is controlled by the FILL AREA INDEX, or the set of indi- 
vidually specified fill area attributes (FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE;, FILL AREA STYLE INDEX, and 
FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX) or some combination of the two, depending upon the values of the ASFs 
for fill area interior style, fill area style index, and fill area colour index. The FILL AREA INDEX is a 
pointer into the fill area bundle table, each entry of which contains v alues for the fill area interior style, fill 
area style index and fill area colour index. 

The fill area interior style is used to determine in what style the area should be filled. 'It has the following 
values: 

a) HOLLOW: No filling, but draw the bounding polyline, usmg the fill area colour index currently 

selected (either via the fill area bundle or individ:ially,, depending upon the corresponding 
ASF). The hnetype and linewidth are implementation dependent. 

b) SOLID: Fill the interior of the polygon using the fill area colour index currently selected (either via 

the fill area bundle or iiidividually, depending upon the corresponding ASF). 

c) PATTERN: Fill the interior of the polygon using the fill area style iiadex currently selected (either via 

the fill area bundle or individually, depending upon the corresponding ASF) as an index 
into the pattern table. In this context, the fill area style index is sometimes referred to as 
the pattern index. 

d) HATCH: Fill the interior of the polygon using the fill area colour index and the fill area style index 

currently selected (either via the fill area bundle or individually, depending upon the 
corresponding ASFs). The fill area style index is used as a pointer into the list of hatch 
styles, in which case it ir* sometimes referred to as the hatch index. 

For interior ; t /fe PATTERN, the pattern is defined by the pattern representation, which specifies an array 
(DX X DY) o ■ ;olour indices, that are poinvers into the colour table. The size and position of the start of the 
pattern are de termmed by a patten box. The pattern box, which is a parallel ogram, is defined by the PAT- 
TERN WIDTH VECTOR and the PATTERN HEIGHT VECTOR located relative to the PATTERN 

28 



IS: 12369 > 1987 
ISO 7942 •1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphical output 

REFERENCE POINT. The pattern box is conceptually divided into a grid of DX x DY cells. The colour 
index array is associated with the cells as follows: the element (1,DY) is associated with the cell having the 
PATTERN REFERENCE POINT at one comer; elements with increasing first dimension are associated with 
successive cells in the direction of the PATTERN WIDTH VECTOR; elements with decreasing second 
dimension are associated with successive cells in the direction of the PATTERN HEIGHT VECTOR. The 
attributes defining the pattern box are subject to all the transformations producing a transformed pattern 
box. The pattern is mapped onto the polygon by conceptually replicating the transformed pattern box in 
directions parallel to its sides until the interior of the complete polygon is covered. 

Mapping the transformed pattern cells to the pixels of a raster display is performed by the following rules; 

e) If the centre of a pixel lies inside the parallelogram defined by the transformed cell, its colour is set; 

f) The pixel is assigned the colour of the cell corresponding to the pixel's centre. 

For a workstation which can implement patterns but not transformable patterns, a suitable action is to gen- 
erate non-transformed patterns to fill a polygon. 

For interior style HATCH, the hatch index selects among hatch styles: hatch styles greater than are 
reserved for registration (see 4.1.2); hatch styles less than are workstation dependent. Whether hatching is 
affected by transformations or not is workstation dependent. 

Interior style HOLLOW is available on every workstation of category OUTPUT or OUTIN. It is worksta- 
tion dependent which of the interior styles SOLID, PATTERN and HATCH are available. 

4.4.7 Cell array attributes 

Cell array has no attributes other than PICK IDENTIFIER. However, an array of colour indices, which are 
pointers into the colour table, is part of the definition of a cell array. 

4.4.8 Generalized Drawing Primitive attributes 

Generalized Drawing Primitive(GDP) has no exphcit geometric attributes. Such information may be specified 
in the GDP data record. The representation of the GDP at the workstation is controlled by zero or more of 
the sets of polyUne, polymarker, text and fill area attributes (see 4.4.2). Whether bundle indices or associated 
individually specified attributes are used depends upon the values of the appropriate ASFs. The sets of attri- 
butes most appropriate for the specified GDP function are selected for the GDP as part of the definition of 
the GDP and are recorded in the workstation description table. Similarly, if a GDP is essentially a cell array, 
then an array of colour indices would be specified in the GDP data record. 

4.4.9 Colour 

In GKS, colour is specified in a number of different situations. It may be an aspect of a primitive, in which 
case it is specified either in the bundle for that primitive or by the individual colour attribute for that primi- 
tive. It may be part of a pattern for FILL AREA, in which case an array of colours is specified, or it may be 
part of a primitive itself, namely CELL ARRAY, when an array of colours is also specified. In each case, 
the colour is specified as an index into a colour table on the workstation. On each workstation, there is one 
colour table into which all the colour indices point. 

The size of the colour table is workstation dependent but entries and 1 always exist. Entry corresponds 
to the background colour. The background colour is the colour of the display surface after it has been 
cleared. Entry 1 is the default foreground colour and entries higher than 1 correspond to alternative fore- 
ground colours. Entries in the table may be set by the function SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION which 
specifies the colour as a combination of red, green, and blue intensities. The specified colour is mapped to 
the nearest available by the workstation. On some workstations it may not be possible to change the back- 
ground colour, and in this case the mapping of a specific colour to the nearest available for the background 
colour may be different from the mapping of the same colour for the foreground colours. 

Some workstations are not capable of displaying colours (for example, workstations only capable of display- 
ing colours with equal red, green, and blue intensities or workstations only capable of displaying colours 
which are different intensities of the same colour); these are referred to as monochrome workstations. 

29 



tS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Grairfiical output The Graphical Kernel System 

Whether a workstation is capable of colour is recorded in the 'colour available' entry in the workstation 
description table. On monochrome workstations, the intensity is computed from the colour values in a 
workstation dependent way. 



30 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1^85 

The Graphical Kernel System Workstations 

4.5 Worlutations 

4.5.1 Workstation characteristics 

GKS is based on the concept of abstract graphical workstations. These provide the logical interface through 
which the application program controls physical devices. Certain special workstations provide facilities for 
the storage and exchange of graphical information. 

For every type of workstation present in a GKS implementation (except for the special workstations), there 
exists a workstation description table which describes the capabilities and characteristics of the workstation. 
The application program can inquire which capabilities are available and adapt its behaviour accordingly. If 
a capability is requested that a particular workstation does not provide, a standard error reaction is defined. 
Certain minimal capabilities of a workstation are detailed in 4.10. 

An abstract graphical workstation with maximum capabilities 

a) has one addressable display surface of fixed resolution; 

b) allows only rectangular display spaces (the display space does not consist of a number of separate 
parts); 

c) permits the specification and use of smaller display spaces than the maximum while guaranteeing that 
no display image is generated outside the specified display space; 

d) supports several linetypes, text fonts, character sizes, etc., to allow output primitives to be drawn with 
different aspects; 

e) has one or more logical input devices for each input class; 

f) permits REQUEST, SAMPLE and EVENT type input; 

g) allows logical input devices to be set in REQIJESJ", SAMPLE or EVENT mode independently of each 
other; 

h) stores segments and provides facilities for changing and manipulating them. 

In practice, the workstation is not necessarily equipped with all of these capabiUties. 

Each workstation has a type. Each workstation type falls into one of six categories: 



OUTPUT 


Output 


INPUT 


Input 


OUTIN 


Output and input 


WISS 


Workstation Independent Segment Storage(WISS) 


MO 


GKS Metafile (GKSM) output 


MI 


GKSM input 



A workstation of category OUTPUT has only output capabilities. It can display all output primitives, with 
the possible exception of the GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE which is optional. Minimal 
requirements for dispjaying TEXT and FILL AREA primitives are listed in 4.4, and for CELL ARRAY in 

5.3. \ 

GKS allows the appearance of output primitives to vary between workstations, thus allowing advantage to be 
taken of their differing capabilities. The facilities which allow this variation are: 

polyline representation (see 4.4) 

polymarker representation (see 4.4) 

text representation (see 4.4) 

fill area representation (see 4.4) 

pattern representation (see 4.4) 

colour representation (see 4.4) * 

deferral state (see 4.5.3) 

workstation transformation (see 4.6.3) 



31 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Workstations The Graphical Kernel System 

Figure 2 (see 4.4) illustrates the binding of the workstation attributes. 

A workstation of category INPUT has at least one logical input device, but no output capability. 

A workstation of category OUTIN has the characteristics of both an OUTPUT and INPUT workstation. In 

or1/1itir\n fVtsu »vicf»n/«0 /xf a ti//\r1retati/^n in tViic r*af^nr%r\i in a l^liTC iirmlATnAntsati/Mi Oiv^G riCA fr% arlHitirtnal 

requirements regarding logical input devices (see 4.8.1). 

The last three categories WISS, MO and MI are special GKS facilities that provide a means for temporarily 

but otherwise have quite different characteristics (see 4.7.5 and 4.9). 



r»i- r\armani*nt\xr cfnrirnt «Ti-!i»%Viir<a1 tnfnmnatirtn 'TVi^v arf trgotgjj ac WQrtgto^tiQJtg foF th** "UF'^OSSS Of C^Strol 



Clause A. 5 of annex A gives a complete listing of all GKS functions which apply directly or indirectly to each 
category of workstation. 

Actual workstations may provide more capabilities than those Usted in the workstation description table. 
These cannot be used by GKS. However, if the workstation itself provides sufficient intelligence,, the addi- 
tional capabilities may be accessed via the GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE or ESCAPE func- 
tions, or used locally by the workstation operator. As an example, if a workstation has two display surfaces, 
the operator may switch locally from one to the other without notifying GKS or the application program. 
More than one display surface can be controlled by GKS only by defining a separate workstation for each 
display surface. 

A K 7 ^iiAtwiina a mnrlisiaiinn 

The application program references a workstation by means of a workstation identifier. Connection to a par- 
ticular workstation is established by the function OPEN WORKSTATION, which associates the workstation 
identifier with a workstation type and a connection identifier (for example, a unit number in FORTRAN). 
The current state of each open workstation is kept in a workstation state list. Segment manipulation and 
input can be performed on all open workstations. Output primitives are sent to, and segments are stored on, 
all active workstations and no others; an open workstation is made active by the function ACTIVATE 
WORKSTATION. 

An active workstation is made inactive by the function DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION; an open worksta- 
tion is closed by the function CLOSE WORKSTATION. 

The following sequence of functions illustrates workstation selection: 

OPEN WORKSTATION (N I, conidl, workstation type A); 
OPEN WORKSTATION (N2,conid2, workstation type B); 
ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (Nl); 

Output functions; {generated only on Nl} 

Input functions; {possible on N1,N2} ^ 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (N2); 

Output functions; {generated on Nl,N2} 



32 



IS:1236d^1987 
180 7942^1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Workstations 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (Nl); 

Output functions; {generated only on N2} 
Input functions; {possible on N1,N2} 

CLOSE WORKSTATION (Nl); 
DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (N2); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (N2); 

4.5.3 Deferring picture changes 

It is desirable that the display of a workstation reflects, as far as possible, the actual state of the picture, as 
defined by the application program. However, to use the capabilities of a workstation efficiently, GKS allows 
a workstation to delay, for a certain period of time, the actions requested by the application program. Dur- 
ing this period, the state of the display may be undefined. 

The function SET DEFERRAL STATE allows the application program to choose that deferral state which 
takes into account the capabilities of the workstation and the rcsquirements of the application program. Two 
attributes are defined for this purpose. Deferral mode controls the time at which output functions have their 
visual effects. Implicit regeneration controls the time at which picture changes have their visual effects: pic- 
ture changes in general imply an alteration not just an addition to the picture. 

The concept of deferral refers only to visible effects of GKS functions. Effects on the segment storage or on 
the state of the workstation are (conceptually) not deferred. 

Deferral mode controls the possible delaying of output functions: for example, data sent to a device may be 
buffered to optimize data transfer. The values of deferral mode (in increasing order of delay) are: 

a) ASAP: The visual effect of each function will be achieved on the workstation As Soon As Possible 

(ASAP). GKS ensures that the actions necessary to achieve this visual effect are initiated 
before control is returned to the application program, but, owing to possible delays not under 
the influence of GKS, the actions are not necessarily completed before control is returned. 

b) BNIG: The visual effect of each function will be achieved on the workstation Before the Next 

Interaction Globally (BNIG), i.e. before the next interaction with a logical input device gets 
underway on any workstation (see 4.8.2). If an interaction on any workstation is already 
underway, the visual effect will be achieved as soon as possible. 

c) BNIL: The visual effect of each function will be achieved on the workstation Before the Next 

Interaction Locally (BNIL), i.e. before the next interaction with a logical input device gets 
underway on that workstation (see 4.8.2). If an interaction on that workstation is already 
underway, the visual effect will be achieved as soon as possible. 

d) ASTI: The visual effect of each function will be achieved on the workstation Af Some Time (ASTI). 
Deferral applies to the following functions that generate output: 

POLYLINE 

POLYMARKER 

TEXT 

FILL AREA 

CELL ARRAY 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 

INSERT SEGMENT 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 

INTERPRET ITEM 

For none of the possible values of deferral mode is it mandatory for an implementation to delay the visual 

33 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Workstations The Graphical Kernel System 

effect of output functions. If the application program requires a delay, it can achieve this using the segment 
storage facility and the visibility attribute. This restriction means that the buffer for deferred actions can be 
chosen in an implementation dependent nianner. 

Certain functions can be performed immediately on some workstations, but on other workstations imply a 
regeneration of the whole picture to achieve their effect. For example, an implicit regeneration is necessary 
when picture changes require new paper to be put on a plotter. The entries 'dynamic modification accepted' 
in the workstation description table indicate which changes 

e) lead to an implicit regeneration (IRG); 

f) can be performed immediately (IMM). 

If changes can be performed immediately, those changes may affect primitives outside segments in addition to 
those inside segments. If regeneration occurs, all primitives outside segments will be deleted from the display 
surface. 

An implicit regeneration is equivalent to an invocation of the function REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS. Its 
possible delay is controlled by the implicit regeneration mode, a single entry in the workstation state list. The 
values of implicit regeneration mode are 

g) SUPPRESSED: Implicit regeneration of the picture is suppressed, until it is explicitly requested: the 

entry 'new frame necessary at update' is set to YES. 

h) ALLOWED: Implicit regeneration of the picture is allowed. 

An implicit regeneration is made necessary, if any of the following occur: 

i) if the functions listed below have a visible effect on the display image of the respective workstation: 

1) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG (implicit 
regeneration necessary) for the specified representation: 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 
SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 
SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 
SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 
SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION 
SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION 

2) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for the 
workstation transformation: 

SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 
SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 

3) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for segment 
priority and this workstation supports segment priority: 

if primitives are added to open segment overlapping a segment of higher priority: 

POLYLINE 

POLYMARKER 

TEXT 

FILL AREA 

CELL ARRAY 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 

INSERT SEGMENT 

(since only segments have priority, primitives outside segments do not make an. implicit regenera- 
tion necessary.) 
if the complete execution of one of the following actions would be affected by segment f)riority: 



34 



IS 112369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Workstatioiis 

DELETE SEGMENT 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 

SET VISIBILITY 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 

4) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for segment 
transformation: 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 

5) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for 'visibil- 
ity (visible -* invisible)': 

SET VISIBILITY (INVISIBLE) 

6) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for 'visibil- 
ity (invisible -*• visible)'; 

SET VISIBILITY (VISIBLE) 

7) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for 
highhghting: 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 

8) if the 'dynamic modification accepted' entry in the workstation description table is IRG for delete 
segment: 

DELETE SEGMENT 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 

j) if any of the above situations occurs as a result of INTERPRET ITEM. 

An implicit regeneration has to be done (including deletion of primitives outside segments) only if one of the 
functions listed causes a visible effect on the display; for example, if an invisible segment is deleted, a regen- 
eration need not be done. However, an implementation is allowed to perform an impUcit regeneration in any 
of the cases listed above. 

Deferred actions can be made visible at any time by the use of the UPDATE WORKSTATION function or 
by an appropriate change of the deferral state. 

4.5.4 Clearing the display surface 

Two capabilities for clearing the display surface are recognized, namely: 

a) clear the display surface even if it is empty; 

b) ensure that the display surface is clear without clearing the display surface needlessly. 

The second capability means that the display surface is only cleared when needed: this would normally be 
when the display surface is not clear, (i.e. when the 'display surface empty' entry in the workstation state list 
is NOTEMPTY). The entry 'display surface empty' in the workstation state Ust is set to NOTEMPTY if out- 
put is sent to the device. It may be set to NOTEMPTY even if output does not appear on the display surface 
(for example, a GDP primitive which has been clipped at the device to non-existence). 

Both capabilities for clearing the display surface are available to the user through the function CLEAR 
WORKSTATION. The second capability is also used in UPDATE WORKSTATION and REDRAW ALL 
SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION. 



35 



IS (12369-1987 
180 7942-1986 

WorkatetfaNM The Gniphicftl Kerad SyslMi 

4J.5 EyniutkHi of |»ifliitives oataMe atgiwato 

Elimination of primitives outside segments occurs in the foHowtng Htuations: 

a) if the following GKS functions are invoked: 

CLEAR WORKSTATION 
3EDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 

-UPDATE WORKSTATION 

if the parameter update regeneration flag is PERFORM and if 'new frame action necessary at update' 
in the workstation state list is YES; 

SET DEFERRAL STATE 

if 'implicit regeneration mode' is ALLOWED and 'new frame action necessary at update' is YES; 

b) if an implicit regeneration is made necessary (see 4.S.3) and 'implicit regeneration mode' is 
ALLOWED; 

c) if any of the above situations occurs as a result of INTERPRET ITEM. 

4.5.6 Sending messages to a workstation 

The MESSAGE function allows a character string to be sent to a workstation. The a[^Iication program has 
no control over the position and appearance of the character string and an implementation is allowed to 
place the string on a device distinct from, but associated with, the workstation. The rules to be followed by 
an implementation are stated in 5.2. 



»80 7942-19BS 



■X 



The Graphical Keniel System CaoPdhMte aystsas m 

4.6 Coordinate systems and transfomiatfoaa 

4.6.1 Nonnalization tnmsfomuitioiis 

In GKS, the application programmer can compose his graphical picture from separate parU each of which, 
conceptually, is defined with its own world coordinate system (WC). Tlie relative positioning of the separate 
parts is defined by having a single normalize device coordinate space (NE)C) onto which all the defined 
world coordinate systems are mapped. A set of normalization transformations define the mappings from the 
world coordinate systems onto the single normalized device coordinate space, which can be regarded as a 
workstation independent abstract viewing surface. This normalized picture can be stored and manipulated 
via the segment mechanism; it can also be stored on a metafile. 

For output, a single normalization transformation is current at any one tune and this is used to tran^orm 
world coordinates specified, for example in output primitives and geometric attributes, into normalized device 
coordinates. 

A. normalization transformation is specified by defining the limits of an area in the world coordina^ system 
(window) which is to be mapped onto a specified area of the nojmalized device coordinate space (Viewport). 
Window and viewport limits specify rectangles parallel to the coordinate axes in WC a^d NDC. The rectan- 
gles include their boundaries. The normalization transformation performs a mapi»ng from WC onto NDC 
that includes translation and differential scaling with positive scale factors for the two axes. 

Although NDC space conceptually extends to infinity, the part of NDC space in which the viewport needs to 
be located and that can be viewed at a workstation is the closed range fO,l] x [0,1]. In addition, an impl^nen- 
tation may support only a restricted range of NDCs. However, this range is always suflBciently greater than 
the [0,1] X [0,1] square that useful effects of INSERT SEGMENT can be achieved. In particular, NDCs in 
the range [-7,7] x [-7,7] are always handled. 

Each normalization transformation is identified by a transformation number which is an integer between 
and an implementation dependent value n which can be inquired from the GKS state list. The normalization 
transformation with transformation niunber is the unity transformation which maps [0,1] x [0,1] in world 
coordinates to [0,1] x [0,1] in normalized device coordinates. It cannot be changed. 

Initially, all other normalization transformations are set to a default transformation which is the same as 
transformation number 0. Different transformations can be specified at any time when GKS is open. Since 
GKS provides a number of different normalization transformations, it is possible for the application program 
to specify them prior to outputting the graphical picture. The separate parts of the picture are output by 
selecting a particular normalization transformation before outputting ihe associated graphical primitives. 
However, specifying a normalization transformation, while the graphical output is taking place, is allowed. 

A normalization transformation may be selected by SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION, 
and it will be used for all output until another is selected. By default, normalization transformation is 
selected. 

4.6.2 cupping 

The viewport of a particular normalization transformation is used to define a clipping rectangle, as well as, 
with the window, specifying the normalization n^nsformation. When the viewport of the current normaliza- 
tion transformation is set or when a normalization transformation is selected, the 'cUpping rectangle' entry in 
the GKS state list is set to the resulting viewport of the ciurent normalization transformation. Clipping to 
this clipping rectangle can either be enabled or disabled. There is a single global switch (the clipping indica- 
tor) which defines whether or not the clipping rectangle is to be used for cUpping. 

Clipping does not take place when the normalization transformation is performed but is delayed until the 
output primitives are to be displayed on the display surface of a workstation. Output primitives stored in 
segments have their coordinates transformed to NDC and the associated clipping rectangle is stored with the 
primitives. The INSERT SEGMENT function allows the clipping rectangle in the GKS state list to replace 
the clipping rectangle, stored with an output primitive when the segment was defined. 

37 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942-1985 

CoonUmte systems and transformatioiis The Gra^ical Kernel System 

Primitives sent to a workstation of category MO are not clipped. 

4.6.3 Workstation transformations 

The normalized device coordinate space can be regarded as a workstation independent abstract viewing sur- 
face. Each open workstation can select independently some part of the NDC space in the range [0,1] x [0,1] 
to be displayed somewhere on the workstation display surface. A particular workstation transformation is a 
mapping from NDC space onto the device coordinates (DC) for that workstation. 

The units of device coordinates are metres on a device capable of producing a precisely scaled image (for 
example, on most plotters) and appropriate workstation dependent units otherwise (for example, on a display 
unit with unknown monitor size). In either case the device coordinate system maps onto the display space in 
the following way: 

a) the DC origin is at the bottom left comer of the display space; 

b) the device coordinate units are related to the display space in such a way that a square in device coor- 
dinates appears as a square on the display surface (this is trivially true if device coordinate units are 
metres); 

c) X and y increase to the right and upwards respectively. 

On some devices, device coordinate units do not coincide with addressable units, for example if the address- 
able units do not satisfy the above conditions. 

The size of the display space in device coordinate units is recorded in the workstation description table. 

The workstation transformation is a uniform mapping from NDC onto DC and thus performs translation 
and equal scaling with a positive scale factor for the two axes. Thus picture composition can be achieved 
using the normalization transformations whereas the workstation transformation allows different aspects of 
the composed picture to be viewed on different workstations. For example, a drawing could be output to a 
plotter at the correct scale and simultaneously some part of the drawing could be displayed on the full display 
surface of an interactive terminal. 

The workstation transformation can be specified at any time after the workstation has been opened. How- 
ever, actually changing the workstation transformation may cause an implicit regeneration of the picture. 

A workstation transformation is specified by defining the limits of an area in the normalized device coordi- 
nate system within the range [0,1] x [0,1] (workstation window) which is to be mapped onto a specified area of 
the device coordinate space (workstation viewport). Workstation window and workstation viewport limits 
specify rectangles parallel to the coordinate axes in NDC and DC. The rectangles include their boundaries. 
To ensure that no output outside the workstation window is displayed, GKS clips at the workstation window 
boundaries, and this clipping cannot be disabled. As the workstation window is defined somewhere in the 
NDC range [0,1] x [0,1], this ensures that the only part of NDC space that can be viewed on any workstation 
lies in the range [0,1] x [0,1]. If the workstation window and workstation viewport have different aspect 
ratios, the scaling specified would be different on each axis if the workstation window was mapped onto the 
workstation viewport in its entirety. To ensure equal scaling on each axis, the workstation transformation 
maps the workstation window onto the largest rectangle that can fit within the workstation viewport such 
that: 

d) aspect ratio is preserved; 

f ) the lower left-hand comer of the workstation window is mapped to the lower left-hand comer of the 
workstation viewport. 

Thiis, space is left unused at the top or right side of the workstation viewport if the aspect ratios of the 
workstation window and workstation viewport are different. 

All workstation transformations are set by default to map NDC space [0,1] x [0,1] onto the whole of the 
workstation display space. If the display space is not square, the same rules as above apply to aohieve equal 
scaling on each axis. 



38 



The Graphical Kernel System 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

Coordinate systems and transformatiMis 



■*"Kp -^fn 




2: 
o 

< 



o 



sifaxi FisMo 



F'gure 9 - Data flow chart for graphical output in GKS 



39 



IS : 12369 - 1987 
150 7942-1985 

Coordinate systems and transfonnations The Graphical Kernel System 

Workstation transformations can be changed by SET WORKSTATION WINDOW or SET WORKSTA- 
TION VIEWPORT. As a specification of the workstation transformation may be deferred (see 4.5.3), these 
two functions only set the 'requested workstation window' and 'requested workstation viewport' entries in the 
workstation state list. The 'current workstation window' and 'current workstation viewport' entries continue 
to hold the previously set transformation parameters. When the display is updated, the current values are set 
to the requested values. 

A complete data flow chart for graphical output is given in figure 9. It should be noted that all three coordi- 
nate systems (WC, NDC and DC) are two dimensional Cartesian coordinate systems. 

4.6.4 Transformation of locator input 

The application programmer. requires LOCATOR input to define a position in the most appropriate world 
coordinate system currently defined by the set of normalization transformations. 

This is achieved by first transforming the input data from DC to NDC by the inverse workstation transfor- 
mation which is in effect when LOCATOR input is generated. LOCATOR input can only be obtained from 
positions within the part of the current workstation viewport into which the current workstation window is 
mapped (note that this is a subset of the workstation viewport whenever the aspect ratio of the workstation 
viewport and workstation window differ). Thus, LOCATOR input always defines a position in the NDC 
range [0,1] X [0,1]. 

To return to the application program a position in world coordinates, the position in NDC space needs to be 
transformed from NDC to WC by the inverse of one of the normalization transformations. Each normaliza- 
tion transformation has associated with it a viewport input priority which is only relevant to LOCATOR and 
STROKE input. Normalization transformations are ordered in a list defined by the viewport input priority. 
At GKS initialisation, an implementation defined nvunber of normalization transformations are initialised to 
have window and viewport set to the unit square and their viewport input priorities are set relative to the 
transformation number with transformation number given the highest priority, transformation number 1 
the next highest and so on. Changing the viewport input priority of any normahzation transformation is 
allowed at any time. 

The LOCATOR input position in NDC space is compared with the viewports of the normalization transfor- 
mations, to find the normalization transformation with the viewport which has the highest viewport input 
priority and contains the LOCATOR position. The LOCATOR position is transformed by the inverse of this 
normalization transformation to the associated WC. This LOCATOR position is returned to the application 
program in WC together with the number of the normalization transformation used. 

As transformation number is the unity transformation with viewport [0,1] x [0,1] and cannot be changed, 
this ensures that LOCATOR input is always within at least one viewport. A data flow chart for LOCATOR 
input is given in figure 10. 

As transformation number is given the highest viewport input priority initially, LOCATOR input is 
effectively returned in WC equivalent to NDC until a normalization transformation is defined with a viewport 
input priority greater than that of transformation number 0. If a normalization transformation is no longer 
required for mapping LOCATOR input back to WC, it can effectively be hidden by reassigning it a viewport 
input priority lower than transformation number 0. 

Changing the viewport input priority of transformation number is allowed. 

In an event report, generated by a LOCATOR device in EVENT mode, the DC position is transformed to 
the appropriate WC position before the event report is placed on the input queue. These transformations 
may be performed while the normalization and workstation transformations are being changed; thus, there is 
a race condition. The implementation has therefore to treat the transformations as resources to be allocated 
and deallocated between the competing processes. 



40 



Tiw Graphical Kernel System 



IS: 12369 -1937 
180 7942*1985 

Coordinate systems and transformations 



]r 







2: 



V. 



< 

I 



]^ 



Jl 



^ NOIXVIfHOdSNVHl 



o 



T 



1 



LNoiivjfaoiiSNmL 
NoiivznvlfaoN " 



T 



D 
9 



S3 



i 



i 



NOUVKHOdSNYHX 



i 



I 





Figure 10 - Data flow chart for locator input 



41 



IS : 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942 -198S 

Coordinate systems and transfonnatioms The Graphical Kernel System 

Between placing on the input queue and the execution of AWAIT EVENT which removes the LOCATOR 
position from the queue, it is possible for the normalization transformation and the workstation transforma- 
tion to be changed by the application program. To ensure that the DC position located is equivalent to the 
WC position retrieved from the input queue, it is advisable for the application program not to change a 
transformation while a LOCATOR is in EVENT mode. 

4.6.5 Transfonaadan of stroke input 

Similar considerations apply to transformation of STROKt: input as apply to LOCATOR input, with the 
complication that more than one point is involved. 

When each point of a stroke is generated, the coordinates of the point are transformed from DC to NDC by 
the inverse workstation transformation then in effect, STROKE input can only be obtained from positions 
within the part of the current workstation viewport into which the current workstation window is mapped 
(analogous to LOCATOR input). Thus STROKE input always consists of points in the NDC range 
[0,llxtO,ll. 

To return to the application program points in world coordinates, the points in NDC space need to be 
transformed from NDC to WC by the inverse of one of the normalization transformations. The STROKE 
points in NDC space are compared with the viewports of the normalization transformations, to find the nor- 
malization transformation with the viewport which has the highest viewport input priority and contains all of 
the points. The STROKE points are then transformed by the inverse of this normalization transformation 
and returned to the application program in WC together with the number of the normalization transforma- 
tion used. ' 

If the STROKE device is in SAMPLE mode, the normalization transformation used may vary between suc- 
cessive samples. 

In EVENT mode, there is a similar race condition to that applying to LOCATOR input. Between placing an 
event report on the input queue and the execution of AWAIT EVENT which removes the STROKE event 
from the queue, it is possible for the normalization transformation and the workstation transformation to be 
changed by the application program. To ensure that the DC points input by the operator are equivalent to 
the WC points retrieved from the input queue, it is advisable for the application program not to change 
transformations while a STROKE device is in EVENT mode. 



42 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Segments 

4.7 Segments 

4.7.1 Introduction to segments 

In GKS, graphical output primitives may be grouped in segments as well as being created outside segments. 
Each segment is identified by a unique, application specified segment name. Segments may be 

a) transformed; 

b) made visible or invisible; 

c) highlighted; 

d) ordered front to back, which impacts overlapping primitives; 

e) made detectable or undetectable; 

f) deleted; 

g) renamed; 

h) inserted into the open segment or into the stream of primitives outside segments (see 4.7.6). 

Only primitives contained inside segments are affected by these operations. The application program has no 
access to primitives outside segments once they have been created. 

Every primitive within a segment has an attribute PICK IDENTIFIER which establishes a second level of 
naming. The sole function of the PICK IDENTIFIER is the identification of primitives; it cannot be used for 
manipulations. This level ot naming is provided in GKS to reduce the segment overhead for applications 
where a great number of picture parts need to be distinguished for input but the need for manipulation is less 
important. 

Whereas segment names are unique, the same value for PICK IDENTIFIER can be assigned arbitrarily to 
single output primitives or groups of output primitives within segments, as illustrated in the following 
sequence of functions: 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER(4); 
CREATE SEGMENT (1); 

Output functions; {segment = I , PICK IDENTIFIER = 4} 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER (2); 

Output functions; {segment = 1 , PICK IDENTIFIER = 2) 

CLOSE SEGMENT; 

Output functions; {primitives not pickable} 

{PICK IDENTIFIER = 2} 
SET PICK IDENTIFIER (5); 

Output functions; {primitives not pickable} 

{PICK IDENTIFIER = 5} 
CREATE SEGMENT (2); 

Output functions; {segment = 2, PICK IDENTIFIER = 5} 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER (3); 

Output functions; {segment = 2,PICK IDENTIFIER = 3} 

CLOSE SEGMENT; 

After a segment is closed, primitives in it cannot be modified nor can primitives be added to or deleted from 
the segment. No function is provided to extend a segment after it has been closed. Clipping rectangles and 
primitive attributes (geometric attributes, attributes controlling non-geometric aspects, and PICK IDENTIF- 
IER) are stored along with primitives in segment storage. Geometrical transformations, changes of the seg- 
ment attributes and changes of the workstation specific bundle and colour tables referenced from within a 
segment are possible. All values describing the state of a segment (i.e. name, segment attributes, and works- 
tations active at creation time) are stored in a segment state list that GKS keeps during a segment's lifetime. 

Each segment is stored on all workstations active at the time the segment is created (CREATE SEGMENT). 
It can be deleted on all workstations by the DELETE SEGMENT function. It can be deleted on a specific 
workstation by the DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION function. All segments stored on a 

43 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Segments The Graphical Kernel System 

specific workstation can be deleted from it by the CLEAR WORKSTATION function. 

Segment storage on an OUTPUT or OUTIN workstation is referred to as Workstation Dependent Segment 
Storage (WDSS). GKS provides a second segment storage system for workstation independent storage of 
pictures at run time. Workstation Independent Segment Storage (WISS: see 4.7.5 and 4.7.6). Segments can- 
not be moved from WDSS to another workstation, but from WISS they can. 

Segments have a unique name across all segment storage. A GKS implementation provides a large number 
of available segment names (for example 32 000). 

4.7.2 Segment attributes 

Segment attributes affect all the primitives in a segment. The segment attributes are: 

a) SEGMENT TRANSFOR- 
MATION: (see 4.7.3); 

b) VISIBILITY: a segment is either displayed or not; 

c) HIGHLIGHTING: a visible segment is either highlighted or not; 

d) SEGMENT PRIORITY: if parts of segments (for example, FILL AREA, CELL 

ARRAY) overlap, the segment with the higher priority will be 
preferred, both when the segments are displayed and when they 
are picked; 

e) DETECT ABILITY: a segment can either be selected by a pick input device or it 

cannot. 

The segment attributes are unique for each segment and do not vary on different workstations. The default 
segment attributes (identity transfonnation, visible, not highlighted, priority 0, undetectable) are assigned to a 
segment when it is opened. The segment attributes of any segment in existence, including the open segment, 
may be changed. The binding of segment attributes is shown in figure 2 (see 4.4). 

Segment priority affects segments being displayed (i.e. performing segment and workstation transformations, 
including clipping, for each primitive of the segment). If parts of primitives overlap with others of a visible 
segment with higher priority, these parts may be invisible. Whether a Workstation supports this feature is 
indicated in the workstation description table. This feature is intended to address appropriate hardware 
capabilities only. It is not intended to mandate shielding on non-raster displays. When primitives within a 
segment overlap, the implementation determines the appearance of the overlapped parts. The actual effect is 
listed in the documentation accompanying an implementation. 

When primitive's of segments overlapping each other are picked, the segment with higher priority is selected. 
When primitives of the same segment or of segments with equal priority overlap, the results are implementa- 
tion dependent. 

4.7.3 S^ment transfonnatioiis 

Segment transformations are a mapping from NDC onto-NE>C. They perform translation, scaling and rota- 
tion. 

Segment transformations are characterized by: 

a) segment name; 

b) transformation matrix. 

The transformation matrix is a 2 x 3 matrix, consisting of a 2x2 scaling and rotation portion and a 2 x 1 
translation portion. UtiUty functions (EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX, ACCUMULATE 
TRANSFORMATION MATRIX) are available to the application program for setting up the transformation 
matrices. A fixed point for scaling and rotation, and a shift vector in either WC or NDC may be specified. In 
the former case, the WC values of the fixed point and shift vector are first transformed using tHe current nor- 
malization transformation. 

The segment transformation takes place after the normalization transformation, but before any clipping. 



44 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Segments 

A segment transformation, specified by the SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION function, is not actually 
performed in the segment storage but only saved in the segment state list. Every time the segment is redrawn 
this segment transformation is applied before clipping. Successive SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 
function calls for the same segment are not accumulated; each succeeding transformation matrix replaces its 
predecessor. By calling SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION with an identity transformation matrix, the 
original segment can be obtained without loss of information. 

Locator input data is not affected by any segment transformation. 

4.7.4 cupping and WDSS 

Clipping takes place after the normalization and segment transformations have been applied. Each primitive 
is clipped against the clipping rectangle associated with the primitive when it was put into the segment. If the 
'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list was CLIP when this occurred, the clipping rectangle associated 
with the primitive is the clipping rectangle in the GKS state list at that time, otherwise it is [0,1] x [0,1] in 
NDC. 

Clipping rectangles are not transformed by the segment transformation and thus clipping is always performed 
against a rectangle whose edges are parallel to the NDC space coordinate axes. 

4.7.5 Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

One Workstation Independent Segment Storage (WISS) is defined, where segments can be stored for use by 
the COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION, ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION, and 
INSERT SEGMENT functions, as described in 4.7.6. None of these functions modify the contents of the 
segments to which they are applied. Only one WISS is permitted in a GKS implementation. 

The ability to manipulate segments requires the storage of all segments so that they can be reused on what- 
ever workstations are active when they are created. By contrast, primitives outside segments cannot be 
reused. GKS does not define the manner and format of the storage of segments as long as all segment opera- 
tions can be perfopned and as long as the correct clipping is applied to each primitive. 

The point in the viewing pipeline at which primitives are recorded in the WISS immediately follows the point 
at which data are distributed to workstations, as shown in figure 9 (see 4,6). For this reason the WISS is 
treated like a workstation (of category WISS), as far as control functions are concerned. Primitives are 
transformed from world coordinates to NDC before they are distributed to workstations. 

Whether the WISS is realized within the GKS nucleus or by utilizing the capabilities of an appropriate physi- 
cal workstation or other input/output device is left to the implementor. 

4.7.6 WISS functions and clipping 

Just as in other workstations, a segment is stored in WISS if WISS is active when the segment is created and 
a cUpping rectangle is associated with each primitive. If the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is 
CLIP when this occurs, the clipping rectangle associated with the primitive is the clipping rectangle in the 
GKS state list; otherwise it is [0,1] x [0,1] in NDC. 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION copies primitives from a segment in WISS to be output on the 
specified workstation. The function takes a cop> of each primitive and its associated clipping rectangle from 
a segment in the WISS, transforms the primitives by the segment transformation and puts the clipping rectan- 
gles and the transformed primitives into the viewing pipeline at the place equivalent to the one where the 
information left (but it is sent only to the workstation specified in the invocation), as shown in figure 9 (see 
4.6). This function cannot be invoked when a segment is open. By coiitrast with ASSOCIATE SEGMENT 
WITH WORKSTATION, this function does not cause a segment to exist on the specified workstation, 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION copies the segment to the WDSS of the Specified works- 
tation in the same way as if the workstation were active when the segment was created. CUpping rectangles 
are copied unchanged. This function cannot be invoked when a segment is open. 



45 



IS;12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985' 

Segments The Graphical Kernel System 

INSERT SEGMENT allows previously stored primitives (in segments in WISS) to be transformed and again 
placed into the stream of output primitives. INSERT SEGMENT reads the primitives from a segment in the 
WISS, applies the segment transformation followed by the insert transformation and then inserts them into 
the viewing pipeline at the point before data are distributed to the workstations. All clipping rectangles in 
the inserted segment are ignored. Each primitive processed is assigned a new clipping rectangle, which is the 
clipping rectangle in the GKS state list if the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is CLIP and is 
[0,1] X [0,1] if the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is NOCLIP. In other words, inserted primi- 
tives are assigned clipping rectangles in the same manner as directly created primitives. Thus, all primitives 
processed by a single invocation of INSERT SEGMENT receive the same clipping rectangle. Inserted infor- 
mation may re-enter the WISS, if the WISS is active and a segment is open. 

An invocation of INSERT SEGMENT has no effect on output primitives passing through the pipeline before 
or after the invocation. The INSERT SEGMENT function can be used when a segment is open but the open 
segment cannot, itself, be inserted. 



46 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphical input 

4.8 Graphical input 

4.8.1 Introduction to logical input devices 

An application program obtains graphical input from an operator by controlling the activity of one or more 
logical input devices, which deliver logical input values to the program. 

A logical input device is identified by a workstation identifier, an input class and a device number. 

The workstation identifier identifies an open workstation, belonging to category INPUT or OUTIN, of which 
the logical input device is a part. The logical input device is implemented in terms of a physical input device 
or devices present on the workstation. 

The input class determines the type of logical input value that the logical input device deHvers. The six input 
classes and the logical input values they provide are: 

a) LOCATOR: a position in world coordinates and a normalization transfor- 

mation number. 

b) STROKE: a sequence of points in world coordinates and a normalization 

transformation number. 

c) VALUATOR: a real number. 

d) CHOICE: a CHOICE status and a non-negative integer which represents a 

selection from a number of choices. 

e) PICK: a PICK status, a segment name and a pick identifier. Primitives 

outside segments cannot be picked. 

STRING: a character string. 

The device number distinguishes different logical input devices of the same class on the same workstation. 

A workstation of category INPUT or OUTIN contains at least one logical input device. A GKS implementa- 
tion providing at least one OUTIN workstatton always provides an operator with at least one logical input 
device in each class defined at the level (see 4.10.3) of the implementation. 

Each logical input device can be operated in three modes, called operating modes. At any time a logical 
input device is in one, and only one, of the modes set by the invocation of a function in the group 
SET < input class > MODE. The three operating modes are REQUEST, SAMPLE and EVENT. Input from 
devices is obtained in different ways depending on the mode as follows. 

g) REQUEST: A specific invocation of REQUEST < input class > causes an 

attempt to read a logical input value from a specified logical 
input device. This can only occur when the logical input device 
is in REQUEST mode. GKS waits until the input is entered by 
the operator- or a break action is performed by the. operator. 
The break action is dependent on the logical input device and 
on the implementation. If a break occurs, the logical input 
value is not valid. 



47 



18:12369*1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Graphical input The Graphical Kernel System 

h) SAMPLE: A specific invocation of SAMPLE < input class > causes GKS, 

without waiting for an operator action, to return the current 
logical input value of a specified logical input device. This can 
only occur when the logical input device is in SAMPLE mode. 

i) EVENT: GKS maintains one input queue containing temporally ordered 

event reports. An event report contains the identification of a 
logical input device and a logical input value from that device. 
Event reports are generated asynchronously, by operator action 
only, from input devices in EVENT mode. 

The application program can remove the oldest event report 
from the queue and examine its contents. The application can 
also flush from the queue all event reports from a specified logi- 
cal input device. 

A specific logical input device is said to be taking part in an interaction during the whole time that it is in 
SAMPLE or EVENT mode, but, when it is in REQUEST mode, only during the execution of a 
REQUEST < input class > function for that device. Alternatively, an interaction with the device may be said 
to be underway during that time. Many devices on many workstations may be taking part in interactions 
simultaneously. 

4.8.2 Logical input device model 

To describe the precise actions of the logical input devices, it is first necessary to describe their relationship 
with physical input devices, using the concept of measures and triggers. 

A logical input device contains a measure, a trigger, an initial value, a prompt and echo type, an echo area 
and a data record containing details about the prompt and echo type. A logical input device's measure and 
trigger are parts of the implementation of the workstation containing the logical input device. Initial value, 
prompt and echo type, echo area, and data record can be supplied by the application program. 

The measure of a logical input device is a value determined by one or more physical input devices together 
with a 'measure mapping'. More than one measure can simultaneously be determined by a single physical 
device; a separate measure mapping applies for each mea.sure. A measure can be seen as the state of an 
independent, active process (a measure process). Each state corresponds exactly with a logical input value. 

The current state of the measure process (i.e. the device's measure) is available to GKS as a logical input 
value. Whenever the device is taking part in an interaction, the measure process is in existence. Under other 
conditions, this process does not exist. 

When a measure process comes into existence, the data in the workstation state list entry for the logical input 
device are examined. The initial value is checked for legality according to input class dependent rules 
explained in 4.8.4. If the check succeeds, the initial value is used as the current state of the process; otherwise 
a value dependent on the logical input device is used. Next, a prompt is output to indicate that the device is 
ready for use. (The prompt technique used by a device is determined by its prompt and echo type, which 
may be selected by calling the appropriate INITIALISE function.) Creation of the measure process is then 
complete. 

While the measure process is in existence, if echoing is required, output indicating the current state of the 
measure process is provided to the operator. 

The trigge. of a logical input device is a physical input device or a set of them together with a 'trigger map- 
ping". The operator can use a trigger to indicate significant moments in time. At these moments, the trigger 
is said to 'fire'. A single operator action (for example, pressing a button or a light pen tip s\^itch) causes the 
firing of not more than one trigger. Several logical input devices can refer to the same trigger. 



48 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1986 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphical input 

A trigger can be seen as an independent, active process (a trigger process) that sends a message to one or 
more recipients when it fires. A logical input device is a recipient of its trigger if there is a pending 
REQUEST for it or if it is in EVENT mode. Both of these conditions can be true simultaneously for 
different logical input devices. If there is at least one recipient for a trigger, the trigger process is in existence. 
Under other conditions this process does not exist. 

If a REQUEST for a logical input device is pending when the device's trigger fires, the measure of that device 
is used to satisfy the REQUEST. If one or more devices containing a given trigger are in EVENT mode 
when the trigger fires, the identifications of those devices and their measure values are passed to the input 
queue mechanism as separate event reports. The input queue mechanism is described in detail in 4.8.5. 

When a trigger firing succeeds in satisfying a REQUEST, or adding event records to the input queue, GKS 
provides to the operator an acknowledgement the form of which depends on the implementation of the logi- 
cal input device. The acknowledgement is not controllable by a GKS function. 

4X3 Operating modes of logical iiqiut devices 

The mode of a logical input device may be changed by invoking' the appropriate SET < input class > MODE 
function. 

After an invocation of SET < input class > MODE with the parameter REQUEST, no measure process exists 
for the specified device and the device's identifier is not on its trigger's Ust of recipients. After an invocation 
with the parameter EVENT, a newly initiated measure process is in existence for the specified device and the 
device's identifier is on its trigger's list of recipients. 

After an invocation with the parameter SAMPLE, a newly initiated measure process is in existence for the 
specified device, but the device's identifier is not on its trigger's list of recipients. 

Initially a logical input device is in REQUEST mode. 

While a device is in REQUEST mode, a logical input value may be obtained by invoking the appropriate 
REQUEST < device class > function. The effects of doing so are as follows. 

a) To create a measure process for the specified device and to set its value to the initial value from the 
workstation state list as described in 4.8.4. Echoing is performed by the measure process if echoing is on 
for the specified device. 

b) To add the device's identifier to its trigger's list of recipients. If the list was previously empty, the 
trigger process is started. 

c) To suspend GKS until the trigger of the specified device fires, or the operator invokes the break facility. 

d) If the trigger fired, to set the logical input value to the current state of the measure process. 

e) To destroy the measure process. 

f) To remove the device's identifier from its trigger's list of recipients. If this list becomes empty, the 
trigger process is destroyed. 

g) If the trigger fired, to return the logical input value and the status OK, otherwise to return the status 
NONE. 

While a logical input device is in SAMPLE mode, a logical input value may be obtained by invoking the 
appropriate SAMPLE < input class > function. The effect of doing so is to set the logical input value to the 
current state of the measure process without waiting for a trigger firing. 

While a logical input device is in EVENT mode, logical input values are added as event reports to the input 
queue, and may be obtained in sequence by invoking AWAIT EVENT, and then invoking the appropriate 
GET < device class > function. (More details of the input queue are given in 4.8.5.) , 

Figure 1 1 shows the effect of every operating mode on the measure and trigger of a logical input device. 



49 



IS : 1 2369 - 1 987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Graphical input 



The Graphical Kernel System 



REQUEST mode 



measure 




Single value returned to 
application program on trigger 
firing. Interaction lasts for 
single request. 



trigger 



SAMPLE mode 



SAMPLE 



i 



measure 




Trigger inoperative. Value 
returned for each call to SAMPLE. 
Multiple calls to SAMPLE in 
a single interaction. 



trigger 



EVENT mode 

AWAIT EVENT 




Value and device identification 
sent to single queue on trigger 

firing and removed by a call 
to AWAIT EVENT. 



QUEUE 



trigger 



^o^^* HHi^ thick arrows represent flow of input data 
^' thin arrows represent control 



Figure 11 - The relattonship between the measure and trigger for different operating modes, illustrated for a sin- 
gle logical input device 



50 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942*1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphical input 

4.8.4 Measures of each input class 

Details of the measures of logical input devices of different classes are as follows. 

A LOCATOR measure consists of a position in world coordinates and a normalization transformation 
number. Let P and N denote these values. 

Then P transformed to NDC by N lies within the workstation window. Also P lies within the window 
specified by N and, in addition, P transformed to NDC by N lies outside all viewports of higher priority than 

N. 

A STROKE measure consists of a sequence of points in world coordinates and a normalization transforma- 
tion number. Let P|....P^ be the points and N be the transformation number. 

Then P, (l<f<m) transformed to NDC by N he within the workstation window. Also P/ (l<i<w) lie 
within the window specified by N and, in addition, there is no viewport of higher priority than N containing 
all the points P/ transformed to NDC by N. Thus, N may change as points are added to the stroke. 

Any invocation of SET WINDOW, SET VIEWPORT or SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY can cause a 
change in P (any P, for STROKE) or N or both, but the above conditions hold for the new values. 

The rules imply that no normaUzation transformation having priority less than that of transformation can 
appear in the state of a LOCATOR or STROKE measure process (with the default settings of the viewport 
input pridrities, normalization transformation has the highest). 

A VALUATOR measure provides logical input values that are real numbers. Each value lies between (possi- 
bly including) minimum and maximum values, which are in the data record in the workstation state fist. 

A CHOICE measure provides logical input values whose components are OK or NOCHOICE and an integer 
in the range 1 to a device dependent maximum specified in the workstation description table. If the first com- 
ponent is OK, then the integer is valid. CHOICE input typically occurs when an operator presses a button 
(the numeric identifier of the button determines the measure) or combination of buttons (the measure is 
derived from the combination of buttons pressed). 

A PICK measure provides logical input values whose components are OK or NOPICK . segment name and a 
pick identifier. If the first component is OK, then the segment name and pick identifier obey the following 
rules: 

a) The segment exists and has VISIBILITY on and DETECTABILITY on. 

b) The segment is present on the workstation containing the PICK device. 

c) The pick identifier is the pick identifier attribute of at least one output primitive in the segment. This is 
tested using the clipping parameters in effect when the primitive arrived at the workstation. Part of the 
primitive lies within the workstation window and, if chpping was on, part also lies within the primitive's 
(normalization) clipping rectangle. Further, the primitive is not completely overlapped by primitives in a 
segment of higher priority. 

The PICK initial value is tested against the above rules whenever the PICK measure process is initiated. If 
the rules are not satisfied, the process state is set to NOPICK. 

For certain workstations, testing rule c) when the PICK measure process is initiated, may be very expensive. 
In such cases, only rules a) and b) need be tested. 

The PICK measure is defined using the properties of output primitives and segments. PICK devices exist 
only on workstations of category OUTIN. 

A STRING measure provides logical input values which are character strings up to a device dependent max- 
imum length specified by the bulTer size value in the data record in the workstation state Ust. 



51 



18:12369-1987 
rSO 7942 -1985 

Graphical input The Graphical Kernel System 

4.8.5 Input queue and current event report 

The input queue contains zero or more event reports. Event reports contain pairs of values (device identifier, 
logical input value) resulting from trigger firings. Event reports can be added to the input queue when logical 
input devices in EVENT mode are triggered by the operator. Events can be removed from the input queue by 
invocations of AWAIT EVENT, FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS and CLOSE WORKSTATION. 

When a trigger that is part of one or more logical input devices in EVENT mode fires, the resulting event 
reports are entered into the queue and marked as a group of simultaneous event reports. An event report for 
each device is added to the input queue, if and only if there is '■oom for the whole group of simultaneous 
event reports. 

The order of reports within a group of simultaneous event reports is undefined. 

If there is not room in the queue for all event reports when a trigger fires, input queue overflow has occurred. 
Input queue overflow is not reported to the application program immediately. It is reported via the error 
mechanism during the ne.xt invocation of any GKS function that can remove event reports from the input 
queue (AWAIT EVENT, FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS, and CLOSE WORKSTATION). The input queue has 
;0 be emptied before further event reports wil! be added. Between the detection of input queue overflow and 
the i.ext lime AWAIT EVENT is invoked with the input queue empty, no events are generated by trigger 
(irings and thus no ackxiowledgements are provided. (This permits the apphcation program to determine how 
many events were in the queue when overflow occurred by calling AWAIT EVENT with zero timeout.) 

When the input queue overflow' error is reported, the trigger causing the overflow is indicated by placing 
inlo the erroi state list the identification of any one of the logical input devices using that trigger which was 
in EVENT mode at the time the overflow was detected. 

AVv'.^IT EVENT, if the queue is not empty, removes the first event report after copying the logical input 
value into the current event report in the GKS state list. The workstation identifier, input class and device 
number are returned to the application program directly by AWAIT EVENT. If the queue is empty, 
AWAIT EVENT suspends execution until an event report is queued or until the specified timeout period has 
elapsed. 

The application program may obtain the contents of the current event report by calHng the appropriate GET 
< input class > function. 

If, after removing the event report there remain in the queue other reports in the same group of simultaneous 
events as the removed report, the 'more simultaneous events' entry in the GKS state list is set to MORE. 
Otherwise it is set to NOMORE. 

FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS removes all event reports for a specific device from the input queue. CLOSE 
WORKSTATION removes from the input queue all event reports for all logical input devices on that works- 
tation. 

If the 'more simultaneous events' entry has the value MORE, when either FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS or 
CLOSE WORKSTATION is invoked, and they remove all the remaining reports in the group of simultane- 
ous event reports at the head of the queue, then the entry is set to NOMORE. 

4.8.6 InJtialisatioR of input devices 

For each input class, there is an INITIALISE function which can only be called if the logical input device it 
specifies is ip REQUEST mode. These functions provide the following information to a device via the 
workstation state list (if the INITIALISE function is not called, then default values apply): 

a) An initial value appropriate to the class. If the initial value violates the rules, an error occurs and the 
workstation state list is unchanged. 



52 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Graphical input 

b) A prompt and echo type that selects the prompting technique and, if echoing is on, the echoing tech- 
nique for a logical input device. An implementation dependent prompt and echo type (type 1) is required 
for all logical input devices. Further prompt and echo types appropriate to each class are defined but not 
required. These further types are listed with the appropriate INITIALISE function. Prompt and echo 
types above those are reserved for registration (see 4.1.2). Prompt and echo types less than are device 
dependent. 

c) An echo area (xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax) in device coordinates. Input device implementations may use the 
echo area for certain prompt and echo types to display prompts or echoes. 

d) A data record. Some input classes have mandatory control values in the data record. Some prompt 
and echo types within an input class also have mandatory control values in the data record. These values 
occupy well defined places in the data record. In any data record used in initialising an input device, 
values mandatory to the input class, if any, appear first followed by values mandatory to the prompt and 
echo type if any. Depending on the device and prompt and echo type, the data record may contain other 
(additional) information. 

When a logical input device is REQUESTed, or when it is set to EVENT or SAMPLE mode, its measure is 
set to the initial value from the workstation state list, unless this is not a valid measure for the device. If it is 
not a valid measure for the device, the measure is set to a devioe dependent value, except for PICK devices, 
for which the measure is set to NOPICK. 

Prompt and echo types describe both the prompt, which informs the operator that the device is available, and 
the echo, which informs the operator of the state of the measure. The functions provided to control input 
device mode, SET < input class > MODE, also control whether echo is on or off. In addition, an implemen- 
tation dependent acknowledgement of successful trigger firings is provided. 

The items in data records mandatory for each class are: in a STROKE data record, input buffer size in 
number of points; in a VALUATOR data record, low value and high value; in a STRING data record, input 
buffer size and initial cursor position. Prompt and echo types which have mandatory values are types 2, 3, 4 
and 5 for CHOICE. 



53 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS Metafile interface The Graphical Kernel System 

4.9 GKS Metafile interface 

For the purpose of long-term filing of graphical information; GKS provides an interface to sequential files 
called GKS Metafiles (GKSMs). They can be used for: 

a) transporting graphical information between systems; 

b) transporting graphical information from one place to another (for example, by means of magnetic 
tapes); 

c) transporting graphical information from one GKS application to another; 

d) storing accompanying non-graphical information. 

The GKSMs behave like workstations. For output and input, several different workstations of the categories 
MO and MI can be used concurrently. However, some workstation control and inquiry functions are not 
applicable to these workstations (they are not meaningful). Clause A. 5 of annex A gives a complete listiiig of 
all GKS functions which affect workstations of category MO and MI. 

The application program may write data in a metafile using WRITE ITEM TO GKSM. After closing an 
MO workstation the metafile may be opened as an MI workstation. 

Three functions, GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM, READ ITEM FROM GKSM and INTERPRET ITEM 

are provided to read and interpret metafiles. These functions assume that a metafile consists of a sequence of 
items. Each item comprises an item type, an item data record length and an item data record. The item type 
indicates either that the item contains information that can be interpreted by GKS or that it contains infor- 
mation that was written by an application program (using WRITE ITEM TO GKSM). When an MI works- 
tation is opened, the first item in the metafile becomes the 'current item'. 

GET ITEM FROM GKSM delivers the item type and item data record length of the current item. 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM copies the contents of the item data record of the current item into a data area 
supplied by the application program and then makes the next item in the metafile the current item. 

INTERPRET ITEM takes the contents of a GKSM item data record supplied by the application program (as 
delivered by READ ITEM FROM GKSM) and causes appropriate changes in the set of GKS state variables 
and generates appropriate graphical output as determined by the metafile specification. The information in 
metafile item data records can be regarded as falling into classes corresponding to the classes of GKS func- 
tions. The interpretation of primitive attribute, clipping rectangle or clipping indicator information causes 
appropriate changes to entries in the GKS state list. The geometric primitive attribute information, which is 
expressed in NDC, is transformed by the inverse of the currently selected normalization transformation 
before being used to set the appropriate entries in the GKS state list. Information corresponding to GKS 
functions which control a single workstation, but where a workstation is not specified, may be interpreted on 
all active workstations. 

The specification of the format and content of a metafile is not part of this standard. Annex E describes a 
format which is sufficient for GKS purposes. 

In order to preserve consistency of the file contents, the GKSM may be written and read only under GKS 
control. Figure 12 shows the relationship between the application program, GKS, and the GKSM. 



54 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



The Graphical Kernel System 



GKS Metallic laterfMe 



Writing the GKSM 



Reading the GKSM 



APPUCATION PROGRAM 



graphical 

GKS 
functions 




items 
user to be griaiphical 

items interpretedL litems 





Figure 12 - Relatioiishfp between GKS and GKSM 



55 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS levels The Graphical Kernel System 

4.10 GKS levels 

4.10.1 Introduction to levels 

The GKS system is designed to be usable by a wide range of applications, from static plotting to dynamic 
motion and real time interaction. In addition, many display devices lack features (such as picking) that would 
require considerable implementation effort to simulate with software. It is therefore desirable to permit GKS 
implementations that do not include all of the functional capabilities defined in this International Standard. 

4.10.2 The level structure 

The functional capabilities of GKS can be grouped into the major areas: 

a) output (minimal performance, full performance); 

b) input (no mput, REQUEST input, full input); 

c) number of workstations (one workstation, multiple workstations); 

d) attributes (only predefined bundles and individual attribute specifications possible, full bundle concept); 

e) segmentation (none, basic segmentation (without Workstation Independent Segment Storage), full seg- 
mentation). 

(f an arbitrary combmation of capabilities were to be considered a valid GKS implementation, an almost 
unlimited number of different standard dialects would result and program portability, one of the major goals 
of this International Standard, would not be achieved. Therefore, nine valid levels of the GKS system are 
defined, in order to address the most common classes of equipment and applications. Each GKS implemen- 
tation provides precisely the functions of one level. A GKS implementation is invalid if it lies between two 
defined levels. 

The level structure has two independent axes: input and 'all the other functions', summarized as output. 

The output level axis has the three possibiUties: 

0: Minimal output; 

1 : Basic segmentation with full output; 

2: Workstation Independent Segment Storage. 
The input level axis has the three possibihties: 

a: No input; 

b: REQUEST input; 

c: Full input. 
In GKS, capabilities are expressed by functions and by ranges of parameters. 

There are three different types of capability at each level: 

An explicitly' defined and required capability. Every GKS implementation at a specific level supports 
the capability at that level. 

g) An explicitly defined and non-required capability. A GKS implementation may support the capability 
and, if it does, it is implemented according to the explicit function definitions. 

h) A conceptually defined and non-required capability. A GKS implementation may provide the capabil- 
ity. Its implementation follows general rules given by the GKS concepts and functional definitions. 

The set of explicitly defined and required capabilities includes: 

i) predefined bundle numbers up to the required minimum; 

j) linetypes 1 to 4; 

k) marker types I to 5; 

1) text precision STROKE (output levels 1 and 2); 



56 



IS : 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System GKS levels 

m) interior style HOLLOW; 

n) one input device for each input class defined at that level (input levels b and c); 

o) prompt and echo type 1 (input levels b and c). 

The set of explicitly defined and non-required capabilities includes: 
p) text precision STROKE (output level 0); 
q) interior style SOLID, PATTERN, HATCH; 
r) transformable patterns; 
s) segment priority (output levels 1 and 2); 
t) prompt and echo types above I that are defined (input levels b and c). 

The set of conceptually defined and non-required capabilities includes: 
u) linetypes above 4; 
v) marker types above 5; 
w) specific generalized drawing primitives; 

x) prompt and echo types above the defined set (input levels b and c); 
y) specific escape functions. 

ExpHcitly defined and non-required capabilities of a specific level can become explicitly defined and required 
capabilities in a higher level of GKS, through variations in the ranges of parameters, for example text preci- 
sion STROKE and metafile workstations. Each GKS level contains precisely those functions that are expli- 
citly defined and required in that level. However, ranges of parameters may contain additional explicitly 
defined and non-required capabihties and conceptually defined and non-required capabilities. 

4.10.3 Level functionality 

The facilities making up each of the components of a level are as follows: 

a) Output level 0; Minimal output 

1) basic control; 

2) all primitives available at least in minimal performance; 

3) use of predefined.bundles only (no modification to bundles); 

4) colour representation modification possible; 

5) only one workstation with output capabilities available at a time; 

6) metafile workstations not required; if provided, then both input and output are available; if not pro- 
vided, then metafile functions return appropriate errors; 

7) multiple normalization transformations (but a system with normahzation transformation and only 
one settable normalization transformation is allowable); 

8) suitable basic inquiries; 

9) pixel readback provided (non-pixel devices may report non-processing). 



57 



18:12369-1987 
180 7942 - 1985 

GKS kveb ^he Graphical Kernel System 

b) Output level 1 : Basic segmentation with full output 

1) all output level capabilities; 

2) full workstation control; 

3) full output features; 

4) full bundle concept; 

5) multiple workstation concept; 

6) metafile workstations required; 

7) multiple settable normalization transformations; 

8) basic segmentation (no Workstation Independent Segment Storage); 

9) suitable inquiries. 

c) Output level 2: Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

1) all output level 1 capabilities; 

2) Workstation Independent Segment Storage. 

d) Input level a; No input 

I ) no facilities. 

e) Input level b. REQUEST input 

1) input device initialisation and mode setting functions; 

2) REQUEST functions on all appropriate devices; 

3) appropriate logical input devices include PICK if and only if combined with output level 1 capabili- 
ties; 

4) function to set viewport input priority. 

Input level c: Full input 

1) all input level b capabilities; 

2) SAMPLE and EVENT mode input. 

Table I gives a summary of the functionality of each valid GKS level. Each box contains only those func- 
tions added to the previous boxes of the same row and column. 



511 



t&*,12369«19S7 
ISO 7942 -1985 



The Graphical Kernel System 



GKS levels 



Table 1 - GKS level concept 



Output 

Uvel 


Input Level 


a 


b 


c 





No input, minimal control, only 
predefined bundles, multiple nor- 
malization transformation facili- 
ties but minimum settable re- 
quired is 1, and all output func- 
tions; metafile workstations op- 
tional 


REQUEST input, mode setting 
and initialise functions for logical 
input devices, no PICK, and set 
viewport input priority 


SAMPLE and EVENT input, no 
PICK. 


1 


Full output including full bundle 
concept, multiple workstation 
concept, basic segmentation 
(everything except Workstation 
Independent Segment Storage); 
metafile workstations required 


REQUEST PICK, mode setting 
and initialise for PICK 


SAMPLE and EVENT input for 
PICK 


2 


Workstation Independent Seg- 
ment Storage. 







Embedded in the levels summarized above are variations in the number of possibilities required in the set of 
explicitly defined and required capabilities. Table 2 exactly identifies the minimum support which is always 
provided at each level. 



99 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



uks levels 






o 



TaUe 2 - Minimnm support required at each level 



CAPABILITY 



Foreground colours (intensity) 

Ltnetypes 

Ltnciwid^ 

Predefined polyline bundles 

Settable polyline bundles 

Marker types 

Marker sizes 

Predefined polymarker bundles 

Settable polymarker bundles 

Character heights (see note 1) 

Character expansion factors (see note 1) 

String precision fonts 

Character precision fonts 

Stroke precision fonts 

Predefined text bundles 

Settable text bundles 

Predefined patterns (see note 2) 

Settable patterns (see notes 2 and S) 

Hatch styles (see note 3) 

Predefined fill area bundles 

Settable fill area bundles 

Settable normalization transformations 

Segment priorities (see note 4) 

Input classes 

Prompt and echo types per device 

Length of input queue (see note S) 

Maximum string buffer size (characters) 

Maximum stroke buffer size (points) 

Workstations of category OUTPUT or OUTIN 

Workstations of category INPUT or OUTIN 

Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

MO workstations 

MI workstations 



Level 



Oa Ob 



Oc 



la 



lb 



Ic 



2a 2b 



- 


5 


5 


- 


1 


I 


. 


- 


20 


- 


72 


72 


- 


64 


64 


1 


I 


1 


- 


1 


1 





















1 

4 
1 
5 

20 
5 
1 
5 

20 
1 
1 
I 
I 
2 
6 

20 
1 

10 
3 
5 

10 

10 
2 



I 

4 
1 
5 

20 
5 
I 
5 

20 
1 
1 

•1 
1 
2 
6 

20 
1 

10 
3 
5 

10 

10 
2 
6 
I 

72 

64 

1 

1 

I 

1 



I 

4 

I 

5 

20 

5 

1 

5 

20 

1 

1 

I 

1 

2 

6 

20 

1 

10 

3 

5 

10 

10 

2 

6 

1 

20 

72 

64 

1 

1 

1 
1 



1 
4 
1 
5 

20 
5 
1 
5 

20 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 

20 
1 

10 
3 
5 

10 

10 
2 



1 
4 
1 
5 

20 
5 
I 
5 

20 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 

20 
1 

10 
3 
5 

10 

10 
2 
6 
I 

72 

64 

1 

1 

1 



2c 



1 

4 
1 
5 

20 
5 
! 
5 

20 
1 
1 
I 
1 
2 
6 

20 
I 

10 
3 
5 

10 

10 
2 
6 
1 

20 

72 

64 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I 



indicates explicitly defined and non-required at that level 
• indicates not defined at that level 

NOTES 

1 Relevant only for character and string precision text. 

2 Relevant otily for workstation supporting pattern interior style. 

3 Relevant only for workstation supporting hatch interior style. 



5 Since available resources are finite and entries have variable size, it may not always be possible to achieve the minimum values in a 
particular ai^Iication. 



Ml 



18112368-1987 
ISO 7842 -1986 



He Gffi^lilcal Kernel System 

4.11 States of GKS and inquiry fuBctlofis 



States of GKS and iminiry ftHietioas 



4.tl.l Descriiption of states 

GKS exists in one of five difTerent operating states (see figure 13): 

GKCL = GKS closed; 

GKOP = GKS open; 

WSOP = At least one workstation open; 

WSAC - At least one workstation active; 

SGOP = Segment open. 



GKS 
closed 



open 
GKS 



1 L 



close 
GKS 



GKS 

open 



open first 
workstation 




^ close last 
workstation 



activate first 
workstation 



At least one 

workstation 

open 



attribute setting 
input 



activate w.st. 
(deactivate w.st. 
\open w.st. 

close w.st. 



deactivate last 
workstation 



create 
segment 



At least one 

workstation 

active 

1 



primitive generation 
attribute getting 
input 




close 
segment 



primitive generation 
attribute setting 
input 



Figure 13 - Some iransitioiis between openitiiig states 



61 



18:12369-1987 
180 7942-1985 

States of GKS and inquiry functions Tiie Graphical Kernel System 

The operating state value is contained in a global static variable that is initialised, before the first invocation 
of GKS, to the value GKCL. The operating states diifer in so far as individual calls to GKS are allowed 
only in certain operating states, as indicated in the functional description in clause 5. 

The overall state of GKS is defined by a set of state variables having specific values. These state variables are 
characterized by the fact that they allow a complete description of the effects of the functions. The total set of 
GKS state variables contains the following subsets: 

a) operating state; 

b) GKS state list; 

c) segment state list for every existing segment; 

d) input queue; 

e) workstation state list for every open workstation; 

GKS error state list. 

Certain functions cause these state sub^ts to be allocated, made available and cancelled. When these state 
subsets are allocated, they are initialised with default values. When initialising a workstation state list, some 
of the default values are taken from the workstation description table for that workstation type. There is a 
workstation description table for each workstation type supported by the GKS implementation. The variables 
of the state subsets are modified and inquired by invocations of GKS functions. 

When an error condition is detected during execution of a GKS function, GKS calls the ERROR HAN- 
DLING procedure. During execution of the ERROR HANDLING procedure, GKS is in an error state. In 
this error state, GKS allows only inquiry functions, the ERROR LOGGING procedure and the EMER- 
GENCY CLOSE GKS procedure to be executed and no modifications to any of the state lists except the 
error state list. 

4.11.2 Inquiry functions 

Inquiry functions return values directly from or derived from the various state lists and workstation descrip- 
tion tables. The data types of the values and the default values of the entries are summarized in clause 6. 

The inquiry functions of GKS are designed in such a way that they do not cause any errors to be generated. 
Inquiry functions for values that may be logically unavailable have an output parameter, 'error indicator', 
that determines whether or not the other returned values are valid. The availability parameter is of type 
integer and, in the event of the other values not being available, returns an error number, which identifies the 
appropriate GKS error condition. The same error numbers are used as for non-inquiry functions and thus 
the standard list of error messages should be consulted. If GKS is not in the proper state, .then the error 
number appropriate to this condition is the one returned, even if there are other reasons for the values being 
unavailable. If the values are available, zero is returned in the error indicator parameter. 

For all values except zero the returned output values are implementation dependent. The description of each 
inquiry function list.&the error indicator values that the function can return. 

Some inquiry functions that retrieve values from ttw workstation state lists have an input parameter of type 
'enumeration' that can take the following values : 

a) SET: the values returned are those provided by the application program; 

b) REALIZED: the values returned are th<»e used by the workstation when the actual values are 

mapped to the available values in the workstation. 



62 



IS; 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

The Graphical Kernel System Error handlii^ 

4.12 Error handling 

For each GKS function, a finite number of error situations is specified, any of which will cause the ERROR 
HANDLING procedure to be called. Every GKS implementation supports this error checking. The ERROR 
HANDLING procedure provides an interface between GKS and the application program. The ERROR 
HANDLING procedure, if provided by the application program, may interpret the information about the 
error and may store data in a data area for subsequent interpretation by the application program after return 
from the GKS function that caused the error. 

The GKS error handling strategy is derived from the following classification of errors: 

I errors resulting in a precisely defined reaction; 

II errors resulting in an attempt to savfe the results of previous operations; 

III errors which cause unpredictable results including the loss of information. 
GKS recognizes three situations in which errors are detected: 

A error detected in GKS procedures; 

B erfor detected in procedures called from GKS (driver procedures, operating system procedures); 

C error detected in other areas of the application program. 

If errors are detected outside GKS (situation C), either the application program may regain control o\^er the 
execution or program execution will be terminated abnormally. In the latter case, results are unpredictable 
(class III), and in the worst situation, all graphical information produced so far in this job may be lost. If, 
however, the application program obtains control, it may attempt to close GKS properly or at least attempt 
an emergency closure by calling the EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS procedure. Similarly, if the error occurs in 
procedures called by GKS and control is not returned properly to GKS, the effects are unpredictable. 

The EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS procedure is an implementation dependent facility. Its purpose is to safve 
as much of the graphical information produced as possible. The effects of this procedure on the workstations 
are left undefined in this International Standard. The EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS procedure may be called 
directly frofti the application program. It is also called from GKS itself as a standard error reaction to class 
II errors. 

Finally, all errors that are listed explicitly as part of the definition of GKS functions belong to class I. Either 
they are detected within GKS itself (situation A) or a procedure called froni GKS has returned control, to the 
corresponding GKS procedure, with the appropriate error information (situation B). In all these class I 
cases, GKS calls the ERROR HANDLING procedure. If a GKS function is called with more than one error 
condition applicable, at least one error is reported. 

The applicalion program may either provide its own ERROR HANDLING procedure or may use that, pro- 
vided as part of GKS. Any ERROR HANDLING procedure accepts the following information from GKS: 

a) the identification of the error condition; 

b) the identification of the GKS function that called the ERROR HANDLING procedure; 

c) the error file. 

The ERROR HANDLING procedure provided by GKS just calls the ERROR LOGGING procedure, using 
the same set of parameters. The latter performs the following actions: 

d) prints an error message and GKS function identification on the error file; 

' e) returns to the calling procedure. 

This two-stage calling of the error procedures allows the application program to supply its own ERROR 
HANDLING procedure, while still having access to services provided by the ERROR LOGGING procedure, 
as shown in the following example of an application program supplied ERROR HANDLING procedure. 



63 



IS :123(^-1987 
ISO 7942* 1965 

Error liilMiig Tie GnqMcal Kernel SyMeM 



Example 

PROCEDURE ERRCm HANDLING (error mtmber, ideotiiaition of GKS function, error flk); 

lnter|M«t OKS fimction and error identificatton 

in order to tdect tfie foHowing eases: 
CASE 'special tteatment': 

[nterpret error parameters as passed from. CHCS; 

Siorc informaiion for application program in application supplied data area; 

Return to calling GKS procedure; 
CASE 'standard treatment': 

Call ERROR LOGGING procedure with all the above parameters; 

Return to calling GKS procedure; 
END. 

All GKS procedures perform the foUowing actifms after detecting an error condition: 

set error state to ON; 

' g) call ERROR HANDLING procedure with approfmate parameters; 

h) set error state to OFF; 

i) Perform built-in error reaction (normally, a function catising an error has no effect; to accomi^h tiiis 
in some cases requires clean-up operations^. 

All GKS procediues check on entry (in the foUowing orjier): 

j) that GKS is in the correct state; 

k) that the values of input parameters are valid.' 

At lea$| the first error detected is rep<Mted exc^t that, in the case of inquiry functions, the first error detected 
is returned via the error in^cator. 

The application program suF^died ERROR HANDLING {Mrocedure has access to the set of GKS state vari- 
ables. However, no modification <^ GKS state is possible during error handling, i.e. only GKS inquiry fimc- 
tions, the ERROR LOGGING procedure and the EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS procedure may be called by 
the application program su]q>lied ERROR HANDLING procedure. This is achieved by setting the error state 
to ON prior to caUing the ERROR HANDLING procedure from GKS and setting the error state to OFF 
afterwards. An inquiry function cannot generate an error. 



64 



IS; 12389 •1987 
150 7942-1986 

The Grsphical Kernel System Special iaterfKe* betweea GKS a^ the appHcstkMi propaai 

4.13 Sptcial interfaces between GKS aai. Hk a p pKcat kwi prafnui 

A uniform escape mechanism for allowing access to installation an4 hardware specific features (a 'standard 
way of being non-standard*) is provided by means of the ESCAPE function. Although the use of this 
mechanism reduces the portability of the application program, it does so in an easily identifiable manner. 

The ESCAPE function does not generate geometrical output; by conttast, the GENERALIZED DRAWING 
PRIMITIVE can generate geometrical output hot otherwise generated by GKS. 



^ 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



5 GKS functions 



5.1 Notational conventions 

The heading of each function specifies 

a) the function's name; 

b) the GKS states in which the function may be used except that, for inquiry functions (see 5,9), only 
those states in which the inquiry function can return valid values is specified; 

c) the GKS lowest level L at which the function is explicitly defined and required. 

More information about levels and states can be found in 4.10 and 4.11 respectively. Clauses A. 3 and A.4 of 
annex A contain lists of all functions according to levels and states respectively. The GKS functional capabili- 
ties are summarized in annex G. 
The parameter fists indicate for each entry 

d) whether the entry is an input (In) or output (Out) parameter; 

e) the name of the parameter; 

for coordinate data, the coordinate system (WC, NDC, DC) used in the function call (coordinate sys- 
tems are explained in 4.6); 

g) either, for enumeration type data, the permitted values, or, for real and integer data, any restriction on 
their value range (for example, ' >0'): the notation is explained in 6.1; 
h) the data type, which is either of simple form (I, R, S, P, N, E) representing: 



I 


integer 


R 


real 


S 


string 


P 


point 


N 


name 


E 


enumeration type 



or is a compound based on one or more of the simple forms (for example: n x P) or is a compound, the 
content and structure of which are not defined in this International Standard: 

D data record 

The data types are explained in 6.1. 



66 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Control functions 

5,2 Control functions 

OPEN GKS GKCL LOa 

Parameters: 

In error file N 

In amount of memory units for buffer area I 

Effect: GKS is set into the operating state GKOP = *GKS open'. The GKS state list is allocated and initial- 
ised as indicated in 6.4. The CjKS description table and the workstation description tables are made 
available. 

The entry 'error file' in the G1K.S error state list is set to the value specified by the first parameter. 
The permitted buffer area which can be used by GKi-S for internal purposes is limited. 

NOTE - Certain environments might not permi'C dynamic memory management. In this case, the buffer area may be limited in a static 
way to be described in the installation documentation. 

References: 

4.11 
4.12 

Errors: 

/ GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state GKCL 
200 Specified error file is invalid 



CLOSE GKS GKOP LOa 

Parameters: 

none 

Effect: GKS is set into the operating state GKCL =« 'GKS closed'. .The GKS description table, GKS state 
list and the workstadon description tables become unavailable. All GKS buffers are released and all 
GKS files are closed. 

NOTE - GKS can be reopened by invoking the Function OPEN GKS. 
References: 

4.11 
4.12 



Errors: 

2 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state GKOP 



OPEN WORKSTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In connection identifier N 

In workstation type N 

Effect: If GKS is in operating state GKOP, it is set into the state WSOP = 'at least one workstation open*. 
GKS requests the operating system to establish the speci fied connection for a workstation character- 
ized in the workstation description table by the 'worksta tion type'. The workstation state list is allo- 
cated and initialised ai* indicated in 6.5. The workstation identifier is added to the set of open works- 
tations in the GKS state list. 



67 



IS 12369-1987 
ISO 7942. 1985 

Control functioiw GKS functioiis 

OPEN WORKSTATION ensures that the display surface is clear, but does not clear the surface need- 
lessly. 

NOTE - The connection identifier is given in a form suitable for the application program language (for example, a 'unit number' in 
FORTRAN or a 'file identifier' in PL/I). 

An attempt to open a workstation, with the same connection identifier and workstation type as one already open, causes error 
26 to occur. 

References: 

4.5.2 
4.11 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

21 Specified connection identifier is invalid 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

24 Specified workstation is open 

26 Specified workstation cannot be opened 

28 Workstation Independent Segment Storage is already open 

42 Maximum number of simultaneously open workstations would be exceeded 



CLOSE WORKSTATION WSOP,WSAC»SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Effect: An implicit UPDATE WORKSTATION (with the parameter update regentration flag set to PER- 
FORM) is performed for the specified workstation. The workstation state list is deallocated. The 
workstation identifier is deleted from the set of open workstations in tltt GKS state list and from the 
set of associated workstations in the segment state list of every segment containing it. If the set of 
associated workstations of a segment becomes empty, the s^ment is deleted. The input queue is 
flushed of all events from all devices on the workstation bang closed. If the 'identification of one of 
the logical input devices that caused an input queue overflow' entry in the GKS error state list refers 
to this workstation identifier, thdn all the contents of that entry become undefined. 

The connection to the workstatioii is released. GKS is set into operating state GKOP if no worksta- 
tions remain open. The display surface need not be cleared when CLOSE WORKSTATION is 
invoked, but it may be cleared. 
References: 

4.5.2 
4.8.5 
4.11 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstatwn ident^er is invalid 
25 Specified workstntten is not open 
29 Specified workstation is active 
147 Input quern has overflowed 



68 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Control fanctions 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION WSOP,WSAC LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Effect: GKS is set into the operating state WSAC = 'At least one workstation active'. The specified worksta- 
tion is marked active in the workstation state list. The workstation identifier is added to the set of 
active ^^rkstations in the GKS state list. 

NOTE - Output primitives are sent to and segments are stored on all active workstations. 

References: 

4.5.2 
4.11 

Errors: 

6 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state IVSOP or in the state WSAC 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

29 Specified workstation is active 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

43 Maximum number of simultaneously active workstations would be exceeded 



DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION WSAC LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Effect: The specified workstation is marked inactive in the workstation state list. The workstation identifier is 
deleted from the set of active workstations in the GKS state list. GKS is set into the operating state 
WSOP = 'At least one workstation open' if no workstation remains active. 

NOTE - While a workstation is inactive, primitives are not sent to it nor does it store new segments. Segments already stored on this 
workstation are retained. 

References!: 

4.5.2 
4.11 

Errors: 

3 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state WSAC 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
30 Specified workstation is not active 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 
35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 



CLEAR WORKSTATION WSOP, WSAC LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In control flag (CONDITIONALLY, ALWAYS) E 

Effect: All of the following actions are executed in the given sequence: 

a) All deferred actions for the specified workstation are executed (without intermediate clearing of 
the display surface). 



69 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Control functions GKS functions 

b) The display surface is set to a clear state according to the control flag as follows: 

CONDITIONALLY; 

the display surface is cleared only if the 'display surface empty' entry in the worlcstation state 
list is NOTEMPTY. 

ALWAYS: 

the display surface is cleared. 

c) If the 'workstation transformation update state' entry in the workstation state list is PEND- 
ING, the 'current workstation window' and 'current workstation viewport' entries in the worksta- 
tion state list are assigned the values of the 'requested workstation window' and 'requested works- 
tation viewport' entries; the 'workstation transformation update state' entry is set to NOTPEND- 
ING. 

d) For all segments stored on the specified workstation, the workstation identifier is deleted from 
the 'set of associated workstations' in the segment state list. If the 'set of associated workstations' 
of a segment becomes 'empty', the segment is deleted. The 'set of stored segments for this works- 
tation' in the workstation state list is set to 'empty'. 

e) The 'new frame action necessary at update' entry in the workstation state list is set to NO. 
The 'display surface empty' entry in the workstation state list is set to EMPTY. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.5.4. 
4.5.5 
4.7.1 

Errors: 

6 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSOP or in the state WSAC 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 
35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 



REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Effect: All of the following actions are executed in the given sequence: 

a) AH deferred actions for the specified workstation are executed (without intermediate clearing of 
the display surface). 

b) The display surface is cleared only if the 'display surface empty' entry in the workstation state 
list is NOTEMPTY. The entry is set to EMPTY. 

c) If the 'workstation transformation update state' entry in the workstation state list is PEND- 
ING, the 'current workstation window' and 'current workstation viewport' entries in the worksta- 
tion state list are assigned the values of the 'requested workstation window' and 'requested works- 
tation viewport' entries; the 'workstation transformation update state' entry is set to NOTPEND- 
ING. 

d) All visible segments stored for this workstation (i.e. contained in the 'set of stored segments for 
this workstation' in the workstation state list) are redisplayed. This action typically causes the 
'display surface empty' entry tn the workstation state list to be set to NOTEMPTY. 

e) The 'new frame action necessary at update' entry in the workstation state list is set to NO. 



70 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Control fnnctjons 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.5.4 
4.5.5 
4.7 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

33 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



UPDATE WORKSTATION WSOP,WSAC3GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In update regeneration flag (PERFORM,POSTPONE) E 

Effect: All deferred actions for the specified workstation are executed (without intermediate clearing of the 
display surface). If the update regeneration flag is set to PERFORM and the 'new frame action 
necessary at update' entry in the workstation state list is YES, then the following actions are executed 
in the given sequence: 

a) The display surface is cleared only if the 'display surface empty' entry in the workstation state 
list is NOTEMPTY. The entry is set to EMPTY. 

b) If the 'workstation transformation update state' entry in the workstation state list is PEND- 
ING, the 'current workstation window' and 'current workstation viewport' entries in the worksta- 
tion state list are assigned the values of the 'requested workstation window' and 'requested works- 
tation viewport' entries; the 'workstation transformittion update state' entry is set to NOTPEND- 
ING. 

c) AH visible segments stored on this workstation (i.e. contained in the 'set of stored segments for 
this workstation' in the workstation state list) are redisplayed. This action typically causes the 
'display surface empty' entry in the workstation state list to be set to NOTEMPTY. 

d) The 'new frame actidn necessary at update' entry in the workstation state list is set to NO. 

NOTE - If the update regcneralion flag is PERFORM, UPDATE WORKSTATION suspends the eflect of SET DEFERRAL STATE. 
In thai case, it is equivalent to the following sequence of functions: 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION DEFERRAL AND UPDATE STATES; 

save deferral state; 

SET DEFERRAL STATE (ASAP.ALLOWED): 

^l deferral slate to saved value; 

If the value of the *new franne action necessary at update' entry is NO or the update regeneration flag is POSTPONE, 
UPDATE WORKSTATION merely initiates the transmission of blocked data. If the value of the entry 'new frame action 
necessary at update' is YES and the update regeneration flag is PERFORM, UPDATE WORKSTATION behaves as 
REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION. 

The *new frame action necessary at update' entry in a workstation stale list is set to YES during deferred action generation if 
both of the following are true (see 4.5); 

a) an action causing modification of the picture is actually deferred on that workstation; 

b) the workstation display surface does not allow modification of the image without redrawing the whole picture (for 
example, plotter, storage lul>e display). 



71 



18:12369 - 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Control functions GKS functions 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.5.4 
4.5.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category Ml 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



SET DEFERRAL STATE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In deferral mode (ASAP,BNIG,BNIL,ASTI) E 

In implicit regeneration mode (SUPPRESSED,ALLOWED) E 

Effect: The entries 'deferral mode' and 'implicit regeneration mode' for the specified workstation are set in 

the workstation state list. Depending on the new value of 'deferral mode', deferred output may be 

unblocked. If in the workstation state list, the new value of 'implicit regeneration mode' is 

ALLOWED and 'new frame action necessary at update' is YES, then an action equivalent to 

REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS is performed. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.5.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states W^OP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified' workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



MESSAGE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lin 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In message S 

Effect: The message function: 

a) may display a message at an implementation dependent location on the workstation viewport or 
on some separate device associated with the workstation. 

b) does not alter the GKS state list. 

c)may affect the workstation in a purely local way (for example, requesting the operator to 
change paper). Possible effects on the execution of the application program or on subsequent com- 
mands sent to the workstation by GKS are stated explicitly in the implementation dependencies 
manual. 



72 



18:12369^1987 
ISO 7942 ^1985 

GKS fmictioiis Control functioiis 

References: 
4.5.6 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



ESCAPE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC^GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In specific escape function identification N 

In escape input data record D 

Out escape output data record D 

Effect: The specified non-standani specific escape function is invoked. The form of the escape data records 
and which of them are used may vary for different functions. Also the GKS states allowing the invo- 
cation of a vpedSc escape fVinctton may be restricted. The following rules govern the definition of a 
new specific escape function: 

a) the GKS design concept (see clause 0) is not violated; 

b) tlM GKS state lists are not altered; 

c) the function does not generate geometrical output; 

d) any side effects are well documented. 

Specific escape functions may ai^ly to more than one workstation, for example all open workstations 
or all active workstations. The escape input data record can include a workstation identifier where 
this is i^uired. 

NOTE - Examples of specific escape functioni anticipated at present are: 

a) support of raster devices allowiBf die display of more than ohe frame buffer; 

b) use of rasterop hardware to manipulate data previously output by celt array. 

Where the specific escape function identification is bound to an integer in a programming language, specific escape function 
identifications greater than are reserved for registration and qwcific escape function identifications less than are implemen- 
tation dependent. 

Specific escape function identifications are registered in the ISO Internationa) Register of Graphical Items, which is mainuined 
by the Registration Authority (see 4.1.2). When a specific escape function has been approved by ISO, the specific escape func- 
tion identification will be asMgned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 
4.13 

prrors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
ISO Specified escape function is not supporte:i 

181 Specified escape function identification is invalid 

182 Contents of escape data record are invalid 



73 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

0«t|Hit functions CKS fimcCkMS 

5.3 Output functions 

POLYLINE WSACSGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In number of points (2..n) I 

In points WC nxP 

Effect: A sequence of connected straight lines is generated, stalling from tlw first point and ending at the last 

point. The current values of the polyline attributes, as given by the GKS state list (see 6.4), arc 

bound to the primitive. The polyline attributes are Usted in 4.4.2. 

If, after the workstation transformation, all points coincide, no error is generated and whether any- 
thing is drawn is workstation dependent. 

References: 

4:4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.3 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

5 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 
100 Number of points is invalid 



POLYMARKER WSAC,SGOP L0« 

Parameters: 

In number of points (l--n) ^ 

In points WC nxP 

Effect: A sequence of markers is generated to identify all the given positions. The current values of the poly- 
marker attributes, as given by the GKS state list (see 6.4), are bound to the primitive. The poly- 
marker attributes are listed in 4.4.2. 
NOTE - A marker is visible if and only if the marker position is within the clipping rectangle. The clipping of partially visible markers 

is workstation dependent. 
References: 

4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.4 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

3 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 
100 Number of points is invalid 



74 



18:12369*1987 
ISO 7942 ^1985 

GKS functions Omtfmt tmctiom 

TEXT WSAC^SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In text position WC P 

In character string S 

Effect: A character string is generated. The current values of the text attributes, as given by the GKS state 
list (see 6.4), are bound to the primitive. The text attributes are listed in 4.4.2. 

The text position is given in WC and transformed by the current nonnalization transformation. 

If, after the workstation transformation, the height or width of a character is zero, no error is gen- 
erated and whether anything is drawn is workstation dependent. 

If the character string contains a control character (for example, characters outside the range 2/0 to 
7/14 inclusive in ISO 646), the effect is workstation dependent. Either error 101 is generated or some 
visual effect may be generated or the character may be ignored. Even if error 101 occurs, the charac- 
ter string is displayed on all active workstations which do not generate error 101. 

NOTE - Text is clipped in a way that depends on the text precision as defined by the text font and precision currently selected (either 
via the text bundle or individually, depending upon the corresponding ASF). 

References: 

4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.5 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

5 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 
101 Invalid code in string 



FILL AREA WSAC^GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In nimiber of points (S-n) I 

In points WC nxP 

Effect: A FILL AREA primitive is generated. The current values of the fill area attributes, as given by the 
GKS state list (see 6.4), are bound to the primitive. The fill area attributes arc listed in 4.4.2. 

The polygon defined by the points is filled according to the fill area interior style currently selected 
(either via the fill area bundle or individually, depending upon the corresponding ASF). The boun- 
dary is drawn for interior style HOLLOW, whereas, for other interior styles, the amount of the boun- 
dary that is drawn ensures that two regions which share a common edge appear without an apparent 
gap or overlap at that edge, to the extent that can reasonably be achieved. 

If parts of the area arc clipped, the resulting new boundaries become part of the area boundaries. 
Multiple subareas may be generated (see figure 14). 

The interior of a polygon is defined in the following way (see figure 15). For a given point, create a 
straight line starting at that point and going to infinity. If the nimiber of intersections between the 
straight line and the polygon is odd, the point is within the polygon; otherwise it is outside. If the 
straight line passes a polygon vertex tangentially, the intersection count is not affected. If a point is 
within the polygon, it is included inthe area to be filled subject to the rule for boundaries. 

If, after the workstation transformation, all points coincide, no error is generated and whether any- 
thing is drawn is workstation dependent. If, after the workstation transformation, some or all lines in 
a bounding polygon have a line segment in common, no error is generated. Whether the resulting line 
segment is regarded as part of the boundary to be drawn or not is workstation dependent. 



75 



13:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output functions 



GKS functions 



For PICK input, a FILL AREA primitive displayed with interior style HOLLOW may be picked by 
pointing at any point on the bounding polygon. A FILL AREA primitive displayed with interior 
style SOLID or PATTERN may be picked by pointing at any point inside the polygon. Pointing at a 
hole in the area does not identify that area. A FILL AREA primitive displayed with interior style 
HATCH may be picked by pointing at any point on any hatch line. 




(^ — V \ 



WINDOW 



■^Hjl resulting AREAs after 
^^H cUpplng at the WINDOW 

^if points added to polygon 

Figure 14 - Examples of FILL AREA clipping 




Pj : points to be tested 
N: intersection count 



Figure 15 - Area inside a polygon 

References: 

4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.6 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

5 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 
J 00 Number of points is invalid 



% 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



GKS fanctioiis 

CELL ARRAY 

Parameters; 
In cell rectangle (P,Q) 



Output fnactioBS 
WSAC,SGOP LOa 



wc 



2xP 

In dimensions of colour index array DX,DY j^ (l-.n) 2x1 

In colour index array (0..n) n x n x I 

Effect: A CELL ARRAY primitive is generated using the cell rectangle comers, the dimensions of the colour 

index array and the colour index array. 

A rectangle, which is taken to be aligned with the world coordinate axes, is defined by the points P 
and Q. This rectangle is conceptually divided into a grid in DX x DY cells. Each cell has a width of 
IPX-QXI/DX and a height of |PY-QY|/DY, where (PX,PY) are the coordinates of the eomerpoint P 
and (QX,QY) are the coordinates of the eomerpoint Q. The colour index array is oriented with 
respect to the rectangle by associating the four corners as follows: the (1,1) element is associated with 
the cell having P ^t one comer; the (DX,DY) element with the cell having Q at one comer; the 
(1,DY) element with the cell having the point (PX,QY) at one comer; the (DX,1) element with the cell 
having the point (QX,PY) at one comer. The colour of each cell is specified by the index of the 
corresponding element of the colour index array. If an imdex is not present in the colour table on a 
workstation, a workstation dependent index is used on that workstation. 

The rectangular grid defined by P,Q,DX and DY is subject to all transformations, potentially 
transforming the rectangular cells into parallelograms. If part of a transformed cell is outside the win- 
dow, the transformed cell is partially clipped. 



p 


12 3 


• 


• 










DX 


1^ 


^ 




















z 






















3 






















, 






















, 














' 








DY 


^ 






^ 


_ . 


^ 


^ 


^_ 


^ 


-X 




CELL ARRAY 
DX X DY CELLS 



KXXXXKXXICXX 



TRANSFORMED PIXEL LOCATIONS 

CELL ARRAY ON DISPLAY SURFACE 



NOTE - Cells are mapped on display surface. Tf display location is within cell then cell colour is assigned to pixel. 

Figure 16 - Mapping of CELL ARRAYs 



Mapping the transformed cells onto the pix*.is of a raster display {see figure 16) is performed by the 
following rules: 

a) If the centrepoint of a pixel lies inside the parallelogram defined by the transformed rectangle, 

its colour is set. 



V 77 



IS 1 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Oatpvt fimctidas GKS fmcttons 

b) The pixel is assigned the colour of the cell which contains the pixel's centrepoint. Thus, the 
pixel colour is selected by point sampling the transformed rectangle at the pixel centrepoint, not 
by area sampling or filtering. 

The minimal simulation required is to draw the transformed boundaries of the cell rectangle, using 
implementation dependent colour, linewidth and linetype. 

If, after the workstation transformation, the four comer points are coincident or collinear, no error is 
generated and whether anything is drawn is workstation dependent. 

References: 

4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.7 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

5 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 
91 Dimensions of colour array are invalid 



GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters:, 

In number of points (0..n) I 

In points . WC n x P 

In GDP identifier N 

In GDP data record D 

Effect: A Generalized Drawing Primitive (GDP) of the type indicated by the GDP identifier is generated on 
the basis of the given points and the GDP data record. The ciurent values of the entries in the GKS 
state list (see 6.4) for the sets of polyline, polymarker, text or fill area attributes are bound to the 
primitive. These attributes are listed in 4.4.2. When the GDP generates output at the workstation, 
zero or more of the sets of attributes are used. These are the sets of attributes most appropriate for 
the specified GDP function and are selected for the GDP as part of the definition of the GDP. (They 
are defined in the workstation description table.) 

NOTE - The parameters are transmitted to the workstation and interpreted in a workstation dependent way. In this way special capa- 
biUties of the workstation can be addressed. Even if error 104 or error lOS occurs, the GDP is displayed on all active worksta- 
tions capable df doing so. For example, some of the primitives anticipated at present are: 

a) circle: points given are centre, peripheral point; 

b) circular arc: points given are centre, start point, end point to be connected anticlockwise in world coordinates; 

c) ellipse: points given are 2 focal points, peripheral point; 

d) elliptic arfi. points given are 2 focal points, start point, end point to be connected anticlockwise in world coordinates; 

e) interpolating curve (for example, spline): points given are interpolated. 

The recommended set of attributes to use for the above GDP examples would be the polyline attributes. 

It should be emphasized that the points, specified as parameters, are transformed by GKS after the interpretation of the points 
(as defining, say, a spline curve or circle) is performed by the active workstations. For example, a GDP, which defines a circle, 
would appear as an ellipse when the transformation has differential scaling for the two axes. Each specific GDP definition 
defines how the transformation is applied to both the points and the shape of the GDP. Though the points cannot be clipped, 
the resulting output of the GDP is clipped against the clipping rectangle, if the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS slate list is 
CLIP, and the workstation window. If a specific GDP is available on a workstation but is unable to be generated because the 
current transform'ations or clipping rectangle are such that the preceding conditions would be violated, error 105 occurs. 

The GDP data record attribute list may contain additional data for each point (for example, vertex order for splines) which 
remain untransformed. These have to be defined for a specific GDP. In defining a new GDP, the GKS design concepts (see 
clause 0) are not violated. The set of generalized drawing primitives implemented on a workstation may be empty. 



78 



IS .12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS fuDctioiKi Ontpvt finctioiis 

Where the GDP identifier is bound to an integer in a programming language, GDP identifiers greater than are reserved for 
registration and GDP identifiers less than are implementation dependent. 

GDP identifiers are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, wliicb is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a GDP has been approved by ISO, the GDP identifier will be assigned by the Registration 
Authority. 

References: 

4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.8 
4.5.3 
4.13 

Errors: 

5 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 
100 Number of points is invalid 

102 Generalized drawing primitive identifier is invalid 

103 Content of generalized drawing primitive data record is invalid 

104 At least one active workstation is not able to generate the specified generalized drawing primitive 

105 At least one active workstation is not able to generate the specified generalized drawing primitive under 
the current transformations and clipping rectangle 



79 



IS : 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output attributes GKS fimctioiis 

5,4 Output attributes 

5.4.1 Workstation independent primitive attributes 

SET POLYLINE INDEX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In polyline index (1-n) I 

Effect: The 'current polyline index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. 
This value is used when creating subsequent POLYLINE output primitives. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.3 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
60 Polyline index is invalid 



SETLINETYPE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In linetype (-n..-l,l..n) I 

Effect: The 'current linetype' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. This 
value is used for the display of subsequent POLYLINE output primitives, created when the 'current 
linetype ASF' entry in the GKS state fist is INDIVIDUAL. This value does not affect the display of 
subsequent POLYLINE output primitives, created when the 'current linetype ASF' entry in the GKS 
state list is BUNDLED. 

Linetype values produce linetypes as indicated: 

< implementation dependent 

1 sohd line 

2 dashed Une 

3 dotted line 

4 dashed-dotted line 

> 5 reserved for registration 

If the specified linetype is not available on a workstation, Hnetype 1 is used on that workstation. 

NOTE - Linetype vali^ps are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a linetype has been approved by ISO, the linetype value will be assigned by the Registration 

Authority. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.3 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
63 Linetype is equal to zero 



80 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

GKS functioBs Output attributes 

SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In linewidth scale factor >0 R 

Effect: The 'current linewidth scale factor' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent POLYLINE output primitives, created 
when the 'current linewidth scale factor ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This 
value does not affect the display of subsequent POLYLINE output primitives, created when the 
'current linewidth scale factor ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

The linewidth scale factor is appUed to the nominal linewidth on a workstation; the result is mapped 
by the workstation to the nearest available linewidth. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.3 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
65 Linewidth scale factor is less than zero 



SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In polyline colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: The 'current polyline colour index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent POLYLINE output primitives, created 
when the 'current polyline colour index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This 
value ^oes not affect the display of subsequent POLYLINE output primitives, created when the 
'current polyline colour index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

The colour index is a pointer into the colour tables of the workstations. If the specified colour index 
is not present in a workstation colour table, a workstation dependent colour index is used on that 
workstation. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.3 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
92 Colour index is less them zero 



SET POLYMARKER INDEX GKOP, WSOP, WSAC3GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In polymarker index (l..n) I 

Effect: The 'current polymarker index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parame- 
ter. This value is used when creating subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives. 

References: ' 

4.4.2 
4.4.4 



81 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output attributes GKS functioiis 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
66 Polymarker index is invalid 



SET MARKER TYPE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In marker type (-n..-l,l..n) I 

Effect: The 'current marker type' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. 
This value is used for the display of subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives, created when the 
'current marker type ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value does not affect 
the display of subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives, created when the 'current marker type 
ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

Marker type values produce centred symbols as indicated: 

< implementation dependent 
1 

2 + 

3 * 

4 

5 X 

S: 6 reserved for registration 

Marker type 1 is always displayed as the smallest displayable dot. If the specified marker type is not 
available on a workstation, marker type 3 (*) is used on that workstation. 

NOTE - Marker type values are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Itenns, which is mainuined by the Registra- 
tion Authority (see 4.1.2). When a marker type has been approved by ISO, the marker type value will be assigned by the 
Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.4 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
69 Marker type is equal to zero 



SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP L0« 

Parameters: 
In marker size scale factor ^0 R 

Effect: The 'current marker size scale factor' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives, 
created when the 'current marker size scale factor ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. 
This value does not affect the display of subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives, created when 
the 'current marker size scale lactor ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 
The marker size scale factor lis applied to the nominal marker size on a workstation; the result is 
mapped by the workstation to the nearest available marker size. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.4 



8Z 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Output attributes 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
71 Marker size scale factor is less than zero 



SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In polymarker colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: The 'current polymarker colour index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives, 
created when the 'current polymarker coloiu* index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVI- 
DUAL. This value does not affect the display of subsequent POLYMARKER output primitives, 
created when the 'current polymarker colour index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

The colour index is a pointer into the colour tables of the workstations. If the specified colour index 
is not present in a workstation colour table, a workstation dependent colour index is used on that 
workstation. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.4 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
92 Colour index is less than zero 



SET TEXT INDEX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In text index (l-fl) I 

Effect: The 'current text index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. This 
value is used when creating subsequent TEXT output primitives. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
72 Text index is invalid 



SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In text font and precision (-n..-l,l..n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) (I;E) 

Effect: The 'current text font and precision' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when 
the 'current text font and precision ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value 
does not affect the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when the 'ciyrent text font 
and precision ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 



83 



18:12369-1987 
180 7942-1985 

Output attributes GKS fanctiow 

Text font and precision is a single text aspect; a particular text font can be available at some, but not 
necessarily all, precisions. Text font 1 contains a graphical representation of the characters defined in 
ISO 646 (see 4.4.S). Text fonts greater than 1 are reserved for registration. Text fonts less than are 
implementation dependent. The text precision value determines the fideUty with which the other text 
aspects are used. The values of text precision, in onter of increasing fidelity, are STRING, CHAR 
and STROKE (see 4.4.5). 

If the specified text font and precision is not available on a workstation, the value (1;STRING) is 
used on that workstation. 

NOTE - Text font numbers are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, whidt is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a text font has been approved by ISO, the text font number will be assigned by the Registration 
Authority. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
75 Text font is equal to zero 



SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In character expansion factor >0 R 

Effect: The 'current character expansion factor' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when 
the 'current character expansion factor ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value 
does not affect the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when the 'current character 
expansion factor ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: ' 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
77 Character expansion factor is less than or equal to zero 



SET CHARACTER SPACING ' GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LChi 

Parameters: 

In character spacing R 

Effect: The 'current character spacing' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parame- 
ter. This value is used for the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when the 
'current character spacing ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value does not 
affect the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when the 'current character spacing 
ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 



84 



IS .'12369*1987 
180 7942-1985 

GKS fimctioiis Output attributes 

Errors:^ 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOF, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 



SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX GKOP,WSOP;wSAC,SGOP L0« 

Parameters: . 

In text colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: The 'current text colour index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parame- 
ter. This value is used for the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when the 
'current text colour index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value does not 
affect the display of subsequent TEXT output primitives, created when the 'current text colour index 
ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

The colour index is a pointer into the colour tables of the workstations. If the specified colour index 
is not present in a workstation colour table, a workstation dependent colour index is used on that 
workstation. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
92 Colour index is less than zero 



SET CHARACTER HEIGHT GKOP, WSOP, WSAC,SGOP ^^ 

Parameters: 

In character height WC >0 R 

Effect: The 'current character height' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value q)ecified by the parameter. 
The 'current character width' entry in the GKS state list is also set to Uie value specified by the 
parameter. These values are used when creating subsequent TEXT output primitives. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
78 Character height is less than or equal to zero 



SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In character up vector WC 2 x R 

Effect: The 'current character up vector' entry in the GKS state Ust is set to the value specified by the param- 
eter. The 'current character base vector' entry in the GKS state list is set to a vector, of arbitrary 
length, at right angles in the clockwise direction to the value specified by the parameter. These values 
are used when creating subsequent TEXT output primitives. * 



85 



IS: 12369 - 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output attributes GKS functions 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
79 Length of character up vector is zero 



SET TEXT PATH GKOP,WSOP,WSAC^GOP LOa 

Parameters: 
In text path (RIGHT,LEFT,UP,DOWN) E 

Effect: The 'current text path' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. This 
value is used when creating subsequent TEXT output primitives. 

NOTE - A change in the value of 'current text path' may make the value of 'he 'current text alignment' entry inappropriate. 
References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 



SET TEXT ALIGNMENT GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In text alignment 

(NORMAL,LEFT,CENTRE,RIGHT;NORMAL,TOP,CAP.HALF,BASE,BOTTOM) 2 x E 

Effect: The 'current text alignment' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. 
This value is used when creating subsequent TEXT output primitives. Text alignment has two com- 
ponents: horizontal and vertical. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.5 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 



SET FILL AREA INDEX GKOP.WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In fill area index (I-d) ^ 

Effect: The 'current fill area index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. 
This value is used when creating subsequent FILL AREA output primitives. 

References: 

4.4.2 * 

4.4.6 



86 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942. 1985 

GKS functions Output attrilMtes 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
80 Fill area index is invalid 



SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOt 

Parameters; 

In fill area interior style (HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN,HATCH) E 

Effect: The 'current fill area interior style' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. This value is used for the display of subsequent FILL AREA output primitives, created 
when the 'current fill area interior style ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This 
value does not affect the display of subsequent FILL AREA output primitives, created when the 
'current fill area interior style ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED, 

The fill area interior style is used to determine in what style the area is filled and the possible values 
are: HOLLOW, SOLID, PATTERN and HATCH (see 4.4.6). 

If the requested interior style is not available on a workstation, HOLLOW is used on that worksta- 
tion. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.6 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 



SET IllLL AREA STYLE INDEX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC3GOP L0« 

Parameters: 

In fill area style index (-n.,-l,l..n) I 

Effect: The 'current fill area style index' entiy in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the param- 
eter. This value is used for the display of subsequent FILL AREA output primitives, created when 
the 'current fill area style index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value does 
not affect the display of subsequent FILL AREA output primitives, created when the 'current fill area 
style index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

For interior styles HOLLOW and SOLID, the style index valiie is unused. For interior style PAT- 
TERN, the style index value is greater than and is a pointer into the pattern tables of the worksta- 
tions. For interior style HATCH, the style index value is non-zero and determines which of a number 
of hatch styles is used: hatch styles greater than are reserved for registration; hatch styles less than 
are workstation dependent. 

If the requested style index is not available on a particular workstation, style index I is used on that 
workstation. If style index 1 is not present on that workstation, the result is workstation dependent. 

NOTE - Hatch style values are registered in the ISO Interoational Register of Graphical Items, which is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a hatch style has been approved by ISO, the hatch style value will be assigned by the Registration 
Authority. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.6 



87 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output attributes GKS fimctioBB 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
84 Style (pattern or hatch) index is equal to zero 



SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP L0» 

Parameters; 

In fill area colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: The 'current fill area colour index' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value H»ecified by the 
paranieter. This value is used for the display of subsequent FILL AREA output primitives, created 
when the 'current fill area colour index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is INDIVIDUAL. This value 
does not affect the display of subsequent FILL AREA output primitives, created when thi 'current fill 
area colour index ASF' entry in the GKS state list is BUNDLED. 

The colour index is a pointer into the colour tables of the workstations. If the specified colour index 
is not present in a workstation colour table, a workstation dependent colour index is used on that 
workstation. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.6 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
92 Colour index is less than zero 



SET PATTERN SIZE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In pattern size WC SX,SY>0 2xR 

Effect: The 'current pattern width vector' entry in the GKS state list is set to the vector (SX,0). The 'current 
pattern height vector' entry in the GKS state list is set to the vector (0,SY). When the currently 
selected (either via the fill area bundle or individually, depending on the corresponding ASF) fill area 
interior 'Style is PATTERN, these values are used, where possible, in conjunction with the 'current 
pattern reference point' entry in the GKS state list for displaying the FILL AREA output primitives. 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.6 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
87 Pattern size value is not positive 



SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In reference point WC P 

Effect: The 'current pattern reference point' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value spfecified by the 
parameter. When the currently selected (either via the fill area bundle or individually, depending 
upon the corresponding ASF) fill area interior style is PATTERN, this value is used, where possible, 
in conjunction with the 'current pattern width vector' and 'current pattern height vector' entries in the 

\ 



18:12309-1987 
rSO 7942-1985 

GKS fimctiofls 0«tp«t attiilNites 

GKS state list for displaying the FILL AREA output primitives. 
References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.6 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 



SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In list of Aspect Source Flags (BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 13 xE 

Effect: The Aspect Source Flags (ASFs) in the GKS state list are set to the values indicated by the parame- 
ter. The elements of the list of ASFs are arranged in the following order: 

linetype ASF 

linewidth scale factor ASF 
polyline colour index ASF 
marker type ASF 
marker size scale factor ASF 
polymarker colour index ASF 
text font and precision ASF 
character expansion factor ASF 
character spacing ASF 
text colour index ASF 
fill area interior style ASF 
fill area style index ASF 
* fill area colour index ASF 

References: 

4.4.2 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 



SET PICK IDENTIFIER GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 

Parameters: 

In pick identifier , N 

Effect: The 'current pick identifier' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. 
References: 

4.4.2 
4.7.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
97 Pick identifier is invalid * 



89 



IS; 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output attributes GKS fimctions 

5.4.2 Workstation attributes (representations) 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parametets: 

in workstation identifier N 

In polyline index (1-n) I 

In Unetype (-n..-l,l..n) I 

In linewidth scale factor ^0 R 

In polyline colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: In the polyline bundle table of the workstation state list, the given polyline index is assodated with 
the specified parameters. 

Linetype: 

Unetype values produce Unetypes as indicated: 

< implementation dependent 

1 solid line 

2 dashed line 

3 dotted line 

4 dashed-dotted line 

^ 5 reserved for registration 

Linewidth scale factor: 

a scale factor applied to the nominal linewidth. The result is mapped by the workstation to the 
nearest available, linewidth. 

Polyline colour index: 

pointer into the colour table of the workstation. 

The polyline bundle table in the workstation state list has predefined entries taken from the worksta- 
tion description table; a number (see table 2, in 4.10) are predefined for every workstation of category 
OUTPUT and OUTIN. Any table entry (including the predefined entries) may be redefined with this 
function. 

When polylines are displayed, the polyline index refers to an entry in the polyline bundle table. If 
polylines are displayed >vith a polyline index that is not present in the polyline bundle table, polyline 
index 1 is used. Which of the aspects in the entry are used depends upon the setting of the 
corresponding ASFs (see 4.4.2). 
NOTE - Linetype values are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a linetype has been approved by ISO, the Unetype value will be assigned by the Registration 
Authority. 

References: 

4.4.3 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

? GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category [N PUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
60 Polyline index is invalid 

63 Linetype is equal to zero 

64 Specified linetype is not supported on this workstation 

65 Linewidth scale factor is less than zero * 
93 Colour index is invalid " , 



90 





N 


(l..n) 


I 


(-n..-l.l..n) 


I 


^0 


R 


(0..n) 


I 



IS -.12369 -1987 
ISO 7942*1985 

GKS functions Qntpat tttritates 

SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Ll« 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In polymarker index 

In marker type 

In marker size scale factor 

In polymarker colour index 

Effect: In the polymarker bundle table of the workstation state list, the given polymarker index is associated 
with the specified parameters. ^ 

Markertype: 

marker type values produce centred symbols as indicated: 

< implementation dependent 

1 . 

2 + 

3 * 

4 

5 X 

>: 6 "''reserved for registration 

Marker type 1 is always displayed as the smallest displayable dot. 

Marker scale factor: 

a scale factor applied to the nominal marker size. The result is mapped by the workstation to the 
nearest available marker size. 

Polymarker colour index: 

a pointer into the colour table of the workstation. 

The polymarker bundle table in the workstation state list has predefined entries taken from the works- 
tation description table; a number (see table 2, in 4.10) arc predefined for every workstation of 
category OUTPUT and OUTIN. Any table entry (including the predefined entries) may be redefined 
with this function. 

When polymarkers are displayed, the polymarker index refers to an entry in the polymarker bundle 
table. If polymarkers are displayed with a polymarker index that is not present in the polymarker 
bundle table, polymarker index 1 is used. Which of the aspects in the entry are used depends upon the 
setting of the corresponding ASFs (see 4.4.2). 

NOTE - Marker type values are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is nuintained by the Registra- 
tion Authority (see 4.1.2). When a marker type has been approved by ISO, the marker type value will be assigned by the 
Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.4.4 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

•25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
66 Polymarker index is invalid 

69 Marker type is equal to zero 

70 Specified marker type is not supported on this workstation 

71 Marker size scale factor is less them zero 
93 Colour index is invalid 



91 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Output attributes 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 

Parameters: 



GKS functions 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 



(l-.n) 
(-n..-l,l..n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) 

>0 

(0..n) 



N 
I 

(i;E) 

R 
R 

I 



In workstation identifier 

In text index 

In text font and precision 

In character expansion factor 

In character spacing 

In text colour index 

Effect: In the text bundle table of the workstation state list, the given text index is associated with the 
specified parameters. 

Text font and precision: 

a single text aspect; a particular text font can be available at some, but not necessarily all, preci- 
sions. The text font value is used to select a particular font on this workstation. Text font 1 con- 
tains a graphical representation of the characters defined in ISO 646 (see 4.4.5). Text fonts greater 
than i are reserved for registration. Text fonts less than are implementation dependent. The 
text precision value determines the fidelity with which the other text aspects are used. The values 
of text precision, in order of increasing fidelity, are STRING, CHAR and STROKE (see 4.4.5). 

Character expansion factor: 

specifies the deviation of the width to height ratio of the characters from the ratio indicated by the 
font designer. 

Character spacing: 

specifies how much additional space is to be inserted between two adjacent character bodies. 
Character spacing is specified as a fraction of the font-nominal character height. 

Text colour index: 

a pointer into the colour table of the workstation. 

The text bundle table in the workstation state Ust has predefined entries taken from the workstation 
description table; a nimibcr (see table 2 in 4.10) are predefined for every workstation of category 
OUTPUT and OUTIN. Any table entry (including the predefined entries) may be redefined with this 
function. 

When text is displayed, the text index refers to an entry in the text bundle table. If text is displayed 
with a text index that is not present in the text bundle table, text index 1 is used. Which of the aspects 
in the entry arc used depends upon the setting of the corresponding ASFs (sec 4.4.2). 

NOTE - Text font numbers are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a text font has been approved by ISO, the text font number will be assigned by the Registration 
Authority. 

References: 

4.4.5 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category Ml 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
72 Text index is invalid 

75 Text font is equal to zero 

76 Requested text font is not supported for the specified precision on this workstation 

77 Character expansion factor is less than or equal to zero 
93 Colour index is invalid 



92 



IS: 12369 -1987 
1^0 7942-1985 

GKS functions Output attrilmtes 

SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In fill area index (l-.n) I 

In fill area interior style (HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN,HATCH) E 

In fill area style index (-n..-I,l..n) I 

In fill area colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: In the fill area bundle table of the workstation state list, the given fill area index is associated with the 
specified parameters. 

Fill area interior style: 

is used to determine in what style the area is filled and the possible values are: HOLLOW, SOLID, 
PATTERN and HATCH (see 4.4.6). 

Fill area style index: 

For interior styles HOLLOW and SOLID, this value is unused. For interior style PATTERN, this 
value is greater than and is a pointer into the pattern table of the workstation. For interior style 
HATCH, this value is non-zero and determines which of a number of hatch styles is used: hatch 
styles greater than are reserved for, registration; hatch styles less than are workstation depen- 
dent. 

Fill area colour index: 

pointer into the colour table of the workstation. 

The fill area bundle table in the workstation state list has predefined entries taken from the worksta- 
tion description table; a number (see table 2 in 4.10) are predefined for every workstation of category 
OUTPUT and OUTIN. Any table entry (including the predefined entries) may be redefined with this 
function. 

When fill area is displayed, the current fill area index refers to an entry in the fill area bundle table. If 
fill areas are displayed with a fill area index that is not present in the fill area bundle table, fill area 
index 1 is used. Which of the aspects in the entry are used depends upon the setting of the 
corresponding ASFs (see 4.4.2). 

NOTE - Hatch style values are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When a hatch style has been approved by ISO, the hatch style value will be assigned by the Registration 
Authority. 

References: 

4.4.6 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP. 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
80 Fill area index is invalid 

83 Specified fill area interior style is not supt^urted on this workstation 

85 Specified pattern index is invalid 

86 Specified hatch style is not supported on this workstation 
93 Colour index is invalid 



93 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Ovtpat attrilMtes GKS functions 

SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In pattern index (1-n) I 

In dimensions of pattern array DX,DY (1 ••») 2x1 

In pattern array (0..n) n x n x I 

EfTect: In the pattern table of the workstation state list, the given pattern index is associated with the 
specified parameters. 

A grid of DX x DY cells is specified. The colour is given individually for each cell by a colour index, a 
pointer into the colour table of the workstation. The arrangement of cells is described in 4.4.6. 

If the workstation supports interior style PATTERN, the pattern table in the workstation state list 
has predefined entries taken from the workstation description table; a number (see table 2 in 4.10) are 
predefined for every workstation supporting interior style PATTERN. Any table entry (including the 
predefined entries) may be redefined with this function. 

When a fill area is displayed, if the currently selected (either via the fill area bundle or individually, 
depending upon the corresponding ASF) interior style is PATTERN, the currently selected style index 
refers to an entry in the pattern table. If fill areas are displayed with a pattern index that is not 
present in the pattern table, pattern index I will be used. If pattern index I is not present (i.e. interior 
style PATTERN is not supported for this workstation), the result is workstation dependent. 

References; 

4.4.6 
4.5.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
85 Specified pattern index is invalid 

90 Interior style PATTERN is not supported on this workstation 

91 Dimensions of colour array are invalid 
93 Colour index is invalid 



SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In colour index (0..n) I 

In colour (red,green,.blue intensities) [0,1] 3 x R 

Effect: In the colour table of the workstation state list, the given colour index is associated with the specified 

colour. The colour is mapped by the workstation to the nearest available. 

The colour table in the workstation state list has predefined entries taken from the workstation 
description table; at least indices and 1 are predefined for every workstation of category OUTPUT 
and OUTIN. Any table entry (including the predefined entries) may be redefined with this function. 

When output primitives are displayed, the colour index refers to an entry in the colour table. If out- 
put primitives are displayed with a colour index that is not present in the colour table, a workstation 
dependent colour index, derived from the colour index not present, will be used. TSie background 
colour is defined by colour index 0. 



94 



IS! 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1986 

GKS functions Output attrflmtcs 

NOTE - On monochrome workstations, the intensity is computed from the colour values in a workstation dependent way. 
References: 

4.4.2 
4.4.9 
4.5.3 

Errors- 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOF. V/SAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
93 Colour index is invalid 

96 Colour is outside range [0,1] 



95 



13:12369-1987 
180 7942-1986 

TransformaiioD fanctiom- GKS fimctioiis 

5.5 Transformation functions 

5.5.1 Normalization transformatioD 

SET WINDOW GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In transformation number (1-n) I 

In window limits XMIN<XMAX,YMIN<YMAX WC 4xR 

Effect: The window limits entry of the specified normalization transformation in the GKS state list is set to 
the value specified by the parameter. 

References: 

4.6.1 
4.8.4 

Enom 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOF, WSAC or SGOP 

50 Transformation number is invalid 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 



SET VIEWPORT GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In transformation ntmiber (1-n) I 

In viewport limits XMIN<XMAX,YMIN<YMAX NDC 4xR 

Effect: The viewport limits entry of the specified normalization transformation in the GKS state list is set to 
the value specified by the parameter. If the ^current normalization transformation number* entry in 
the GKS state list is the same as the specified transformation numt)er, the 'clipping rectangle' entry in 
the GKS state list is set to the specified viewport limits. 

References: 

4.6.1 

4.8.4 V 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

50 Transformation number is invalid 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

52 Viewport is not within the Normalized Device Coordinate tmit square 



SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In transformation number (0..n) I 

In reference transformation number (0..n) I 

In relative priority (HIGHERXOWER) E 

Effect: The viewport input priority of the specified normalization transformation in the GKS state list is set 
to the next higher or next lower priority relative to the reference transformation according to the 
specified relative priority. If the specified transformation nlmjber is the same as the reference 
transformation number, the function has no effect. 



% 



GKS functions 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942* 1985 

Transfomiation fonctions 



References: 

4.6.4 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
50 Transformation number is invalid 



SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC^GOP L0» 

Parameters: 

In transformation number (0..n) I 

Effect: The 'current normalization transformation number* entry in the GKS state list is set to the value 
specified by the parameter. The 'clipping rectangle' entry in the GKS state list is set to the viewport 
limits of the specified transformation number. 

References: 
4.6.1 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
50 Transformation number is invalid 



SET CLIPPING INDICATOR GKOP, WSOP, WSAC^GOP 

Parameters: 

In clipping indicator (CLIP,NOCLIP) 

Effect: The 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is set to the value specified by the parameter. 
References: 

4.6.2 
4.7.4 
4.7.6 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in jf roper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

5.5.2 Workstation transfomiation 



Lto 

E 



SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 

Parameters: 



WSOP,WSAC,SG aP LOi 



In workstation identifier N 

In workstation window limits XMIN<XMAX,YMIN<YM AX NDC 4xR 

Effect: The 'requested workstation window' entry in the workstation state list of the specified workstation is 
set to the value specified by the parameter. 

If the 'dynamic modification accepted for workstation transformation' entry in the, workstation 
description table is set to IMM, or if the 'display surface empty' entry in the workstatfon state list is 
set to EMPTY, then the 'current workstation window' entry in the workstation state lidt is set to the 
value specified by the parameter and the 'workstation transformation update state' carry is set to 
NOTPENDING. Otherwise the 'workstation transformation update state' entry in the workstation 



97 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Transformation functions GKS firactioiis 

state list is set to PENDING and the 'current workstation window' entry is not changed. 
References: 
4.6.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

53 Workstation window is not within the Normalized Device Coordinate tmit square^ 



SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT WSOP,WSAC^GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In workstation viewport limits XMIN<XMAX,YMIN<YMAX DC 4xR 

Effect: The 'requested workstation viewport' entry in the workstation state list of the specified workstation is 
set to the value specified by the parameter. 

If the 'dynamic modification accepted for workstation transformation' entry in the workstation 
description table is set to IMM, or if the 'display surface empty' entry in the workstation state list is 
set to EMPTY, then the 'current workstation viewport' entry in the workstation state list is set to the 
value specified by the parameter and the 'workstation transformation update state' entry is set to 
NOTPENDING. Otherwise the 'workstation transformation update state' entry in the workstation 
state list is set to PENDING and the 'current workstation viewport' entry is not changed. 

References: 

4,6.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

54 Workstation viewport is not within the di^lay space 



n 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942* 1985 

GKS functioiis Segment ftmcltoiMi 

5.6 Segment functions 

5.6.1 Segment manipulation functions 

CREATE SEGMENT WSAC Lli 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

Effect: GKS is set into the operating state SGOP - 'Segment open'. The segment state list is set up and ini- 
tialised as indicated in 6.7. The segment name is recorded as the 'name of the open segment* in the 
GKS state list (see 6.4). All subsequent output primitives until the next CLOSE SEGMENT will be 
coU<»;ted into this segment. The segment name is entered in the 'set of stored segments for this works- 
tation' in the workstation state list (see 6.5) for every active workstation. All active workstations are 
included in the 'set of associated workstations' of the segment state list of the newly opened segment. 
The segment name is entered into the 'set of segment names in use' in the GKS state list. Primitive 
attributes are not affected. 

References: 
4.7.1 

Errors: 

3 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state WSAC 

120 Specified segment name is invalid 

121 Specified segment name is already in use 



CLOSE SEGMENT SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

none 

Effect: GKS is put into the operating state WSAC = 'At least one workstation active'. Primitives may no 
longer be added to the previously open segment. The 'name of the open segment' in the GKS state list 
(see 6.4) becomes unavailable for inquiry. 

References: 
4.7.1 

Errors: 

4 QKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state SGOP 



RENAME SEGMENT WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In old segment name N 

In new segment name N 

Effect: Each occurrence of old segment name in the 'set of stored segments for this workstation' in a works- 
tation state list (see 6.5) and in the 'set of segment names in use' in the GKS state list is replaced by 
new segment name. If old segment name is the name of the open segment, the 'name of the open seg- 
ment' in the GKS state list is set to new segment name. 

NOTE - The old segment name may be reused by the application program. * 



99 



IS: 12369. 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Segnelit fkmctkHis GKS fuictioiis 

References: 
4.7.1 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

120 Specified segment name is invalid 

121 Specified segment name is already in use 

122 Specified segment does not exist 



DELETE SEGMENT WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

Effect: 'The segment is deleted. The segment name is removed from each 'set of stored segments for this 
workstation' (in the workstation state lists (see 6.S)) which contains it and from the *set of segment 
names in use* in the GKS state list. The segment's state list is cancelled. 

NOTE - The segment name may be reused by the application program. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.1 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in p.oper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
120 Spec^d segment name is invalid 
122 Specked sxgment does not exist 
125 Spec^d segment is open 



DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION WSOP,WSAC3GOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In segment name N 

Effect: The segment is deleted from the specified workstation. The segment name is removed from the 'set of 
stored segments for this workstation' in the workstation state Ust (see 6.5). The workstation identifier 
is removed from the 'set of associated workstations' in the segment state list (see 6.7). If the 'set of 
associated workstations' becomes empty, the segment is deleted, i.e. the DELETE SEGMENT func- 
tion is performed. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.1 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specked workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT » 

120 Specified segment name is invalid 

123 Specified segment does not exist on specified workstation 

125 Specified segment is open 



Iff 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Segment functions 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION WSOP, WSAC L2a 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In segment name N 

Effect: The segment is sent to the specified workstation in the same way as if the workstation were active 
when the segment was created. Clipping rectangles are copied unchanged. The segment name is 
added to the *set of stored segments for this workstation' in the workstation state list (see 6.5). The 
workstation identifier is included in the 'set of associated workstations' in the segment state list (see 
6.7). 

NOTE • If the specified segment is not present in the Workstation Independent Segment Storage, an error occurs. 

If the segment is already associated with the specified workstation, the function has no effect. 
References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.1 
4.7.6 

Errors: 

6 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSOP or in the state WSAC 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

27 Workstation Independent Segment Storage is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

120 Specified segment name is invalid 

124 Specified segment does not exist on Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION WSOP, WSAC L2a 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In segment name N 

Effect: The primitives in the segment are sent to the specified workstation after segment transformation and 
clipping at the clipping rectangle stored with each primitive. The primitives are not stored in a seg- 
ment. 

NOTE - If the specified segment is not present in the Workstation Independent Segment Storage, an error occurs. The specified works- 
tation cannot be the Workstation Independent Segment Storage. 

All primitives keep the values of the primitive attributes (for example, polyline index, character path, pick identifier), that were 
assigned to them when they were created, for their whole lifetime (see 4.7.1). In particular, when segments are copied, the 
values of the primitive attributes within the copied segments are unchanged. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.1 
4.7.6 



101 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Segment functioos GKS functions 

Errors: 

6 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSOP or in the state WSAC 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

27 Workstation Independent Segment Storage is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segf,n>nt Storage 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 

124 Specified segment does not exist on Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



INSERT SEGMENT WSAC,SGOP L2a 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

In transformation matrix 2 x 3 x R 

Effect: Having been transformed as described below, the primitives contained in the segment are copied 
either (in state SGOP) into the open segment or (in state WSAC) into the stream of primitives outside 
segments. 

In both cases the transformed primitives are sent to all active workstations. The coordinates of the 
primitives contained in the inserted segment are transformed, firstly, by the segment transformation of 
the inserted segment, and, secondly, by applying the following matrix multiplication to them: 



Mil M\2 Af|3 
Afai ^22 A/23 



The original coordinates are {x,y), the transformed coordinates are {x ,y), both in NDC. The values 
M 13 and M23 of the transformation matrix are NDC coordinates, the other values are unitless. For 
geometric attributes which are vectors (for example, CHARACTER UP VECTOR), the values M\^ 
and A/ 23 are ignored. 

The insert transformation (conceptually) takes place in NDC space. Other than the segment transform 
mation, attributes of the inserted segment are ignored. 

All clipping rectangles in the inserted segment are ignored. Each primitive processed is assigned a 
new clipping rectangle which is the clipping rectangle in the GKS state list if the 'clipping indicator' 
entry in the GKS state Hst is CLIP and is [0,1] x [0,1] if the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state 
list is NOCLIP. All primitives processed by a single invocation of INSERT SEGMENT receive the 
same clipping rectangle. 

NOTE - If the specified segment is not in the Workstation Independent Segment Storage or is the open segment, an error occurs. 

All primitives keep the values of the primitive atlributes {for example, POLYLINE INDEX, TEXT PATH, PICK IDENTIF- 
IER), that were assigned to them when they were created, for their whole lifetime (see 4.7.1). In particular, when segments are 
inserted, the values of the primitive attributes within the inserted segmenU are unchanged. The values of primitive attributes in 
the GKS state list, that are used in the creation of subsequent primitives within the segment into which the insertion takes 
place, are not changed by that insertion. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.6 



102 



GKS fttoctions 



IS; 12369.1987 
ISO 7942 - I9i^ 

Segnmit finctkns 



Errors: 

5 

27 

120 

124 

125 



GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 

Workstation Independent Segment Storage is not open 

Specified segment name is invalid 

Specified segment does not exist on Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

Specified segment is open 



5.6.2 Segment attributes 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LU 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

In transformation matrix 2 x 3 x R 

Effect: The ^segment transformation matrix* entry in the segment state list of the named segment is set to the 
value specified by the parameter. When a segment is displayed, the coordinates of its primitives are 
transformed by applying the following matrix multiplication to them: 



H- 



IMn Mn M\i 
A/21 M^i Ma 



The original coordinates arc (xj'), the transformed coordinates are {x,y\ both in NDC. The values 
A/ 13 and M^ of the transformation matrix an in NDC coordinates, the other values are unitless. 
For geometric attributes which are vectors (for example, CHARACTER UP VECTOR), the values 
Af 13 and Af 23 Arc ignored. 

This function can be used to transform a segment stored on a woiicstation. The transformation 
applies to all workstations where the specified sequent is stored even if they are not all active. 
The segment transformation (conceptually) takes place in NDC space. The segment transformation 
will be stored in the segment state list and will not affect the contents of the segment. The segment 
transformation is not cumiUative, i.e. it always applies to the segment as originally created. 

NOTE - Applying the same se^cnt traosformattoB twice to a segment gives identical results. The identity transformation shows the 
segment in its original geometrical appearance. 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 



SET VISIBILITY WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In segment name ^ 

In visibility (VISIBLE.INVISIBLE) E 

Effect: The 'visibility' entry in the segment state list of the named segment is set to the value specified by the 
parameter. * 



103 



IS : 12369 - 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Segment functions GKS functioiis 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.2 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 



SET HIGHLIGHTING WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lit 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

In highlighting (NORMAL,HIGHLIGHTED) E 

Effect: The 'highhghting' entry in the segment state list of the named segment is set to the value specified by 
the parameter. If the segment is marked as HIGHLIGHTED and VISIBLE, the primitives in it are 
highlighted in an implementation dependent manner. 

References: 

<*.D.J 

4.7.2 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 



SET SEGMENT PRIORITY WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

In segment priority [0,1] R 

Effect: The 'segment priority' entry in the segment state list of the named segment is set to the value specified 
by the parameter. Segment priority affects the display of segments and pick input if segments overlap, 
in which case GKS gives precedence to segments with higher priority. If segments with the same 
orioritv overlan, the result is imTilementation dependent. 

NOT !, - fie use of segment priority applies only to workstations where the entry 'number of segment priorities supported' in the 
woikstation description table is greater than 1 or equal to (indicating thai a continuous range of priorities is supported). 

If 'number of segment priorities supported" is greater than 1, the range [0,1] for segment priority is mapped onto the range 1 to 
number of segment priorities supported" for a specific workstation before being used by a device driver, [f 'number of seg- 
ment priorities supported' is equal to 0, the implementation allows alt values of segment priority to be differentiated. 

rhis feature is intended to address appropriate hardware capabilities only. It cannot be used to force software checking of 

iPtcrfcrencf between segments on non-raster displays. 

Ihe segment priority is also used for picking segments. When overlapping or intersecting segments are picked, the segment 
with higher priority is delivered as a result of the pick input primitive. All workstations having pick input provide this mechan- 
ism 



104 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 •1985 

GKS functions Segment functions 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.7.2 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 
126 Segment priority is outside tke range [0,1] 



SET DETECTABILITY WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

In dctectability (UNDETECTABLE,DETECTABLE) E 

Effect: The 'detectability' entry in the segment state list of the named segment is set to the value specified by 
the parameter. If the segment is marked as DETECTABLE and VISIBLE, the primitives in it are 
available for pick input, DETECTABLE but INVISIBLE segments cannot be picked. 

References: 

4.7.2 . 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 



105 







N 




(l..n) 


I 




(0..n) 


I 


wc 




P 


(-n., 


,-l,l..n) 


I 


DC 




4xR 
D 



18:123^-198? 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Input functkHis GKS fiuctioBS 

5.7 Input functioiis 

5.7.1 InitiaUsation of ii^t devices 

INITIALISE LOCATOR WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In locator device number 

In initial normalization transformation number 

In initial locator position 

In prompt and echo type 

In echo area XMIN < XMAX, YMIN < YMAX 

In locator data record 

Effect: The initial locator position, initial normalization transformation number, prompt and echo type, echo 
area and locator data record are stored in the workstation state list entry for the specified LOCATOR 
device. 

For some LOCATOR prompt and echo types, two positions are required. One of the positions, which 
remains fixed during the input operation, is the initial locator position. The other position is the 
current locator position that varies dynamically as the operator uses the LOCATOR. 

Prompt and echo types: 

<0 prompting and echoing is LOCATOR device dependent. 

1 designate the current posiltion of the LOCATOR using an implementation-defined tech- 
nique. 

2 crosshair, i.e. designate the current position of the LOCATOR using a vertical line and a 
horizontal line spanning pver the display surface or the workstation viewport intersecting 
at the current locator position. 

3 designate the current position of the LOCATOR using a tracking cross. 

4 designate the current position of the LOCATOR using a rubber band line connecting the 
initial locator position given by this function and the current locator position. 

5 designate the current position of the LOCATOR using a rectangle. The diagonal of the 
rectangle is the fine connecting the initial locator position given by this function and the 
current locator position. 

6 display a digital representation of the current position of the LOCATOR in LOCATOR 
device dependent coordinates within the echo area. 

S:7 reserved for registration. 
NOTE - tOCATOR prompt and echo type values are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is main- 
Uined by the Registration Authority (see 4.1.2). When a LOCATOR prompt and echo type has been approved by ISO, the 
LOCATOR prompt and echo type value will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.8.2 
4.8.6 



106 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Input functioiis 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. fVSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not supported on this workstation 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 
152 Initial value is invalid 



INITULISE STROKE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In stroke device number 

In initial normalization transformation number 

In number of points in initial stroke 

In points in initial stroke 

In prompt and echo type 

In echo area XMIN < XMAX, YMIN < YMAX 

In stroke data record 

Effect: The initial stroke, initial normalization transformation number, prompt and echo type, echo area and 
stroke data record are stored in the workstation state list entry for the specified STROKE device. 

For all prompt and echo types, the first entry in the stroke data record is the input buffer size which is 
an integer in the range (l..n). This is compared against an implementation defined 'maximmn input 
buffer size' for this device (contained in the workstation description table). If the requested buffer size 
is greater, the 'maximum input buffer size' is substituted in the stored data record. If the initial stroke 
is longer than the buffer size, an error is issued. 

When a STROKE measure process comes into existence, it obtains a buffer of the ciurrent input buffer 
size. The initial stroke is copied into the buffer, and the editing position is placed at the initial buffer 
editing position within it. Replacement of points begins at this initial position. If the initial buffer 
editing position cannot be specified in the stroke data record, the value 1 is used. 

Prompt and echo types: 

< prompting and echoing is STROKE device dejjendent. 

1 display the current stroke using an implementation defined technique. 

2 display a digital representation of the current stroke position within the echo area. 

3 display a marker at each point of the current stroke. 

4 display a line joining successive points df the current stroke. 

> 5 reserved for registration. 

XI tuc opcTaioT ciiters more points tnan tut current input uuuer size, tuc auuitionai points arc lOSi. 
The operator should be informed of this situation. 

Stroke data record entries for variables such as intervals in >C, Y and time may be provided to con- 
strain the number of points delivered. 

NOTE - For all prompt and echo types, the stroke data record may contain an initial buffer editing position, which may range from 1 
to length of initial stroke plus 1 . * 







N 




(l..n) 


I 




(0..n) 


I 




(0..n) 


I 


wc 




nxP 


(-n., 


.-l,l..n) 


I 


DC 




4xR 
D 



107 



IS : 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Input functions GKS fanctioBS 

STROKE prompt and echo type values are registered in the ISO Intemationai Register of Graphical Items, which is maip- 
tained by the Registration Authority (see 4.1.2). When a STROKE prompt and echo type has been approved by ISO, the 
STROKE prompt and echo type value will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.8.2 
4.8.6 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

5] Rectangle definition is invalid 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not supported on this workstation 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 

152 Initial value is invalid 

153 Number of points in the initial stroke is greater than the buffer size 



INITIALISE VALUATOR WSOP, WSAC, SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In valuator device number (1-n) I 

In initial value ^ 

In prompt and echo type (-n..-l,l..n) I 

In echo area XMIN<XMAX,YMIN<YMAX DC 4xR 

In valuator data record D 

Effect: The initial value, prompt and echo type, echo area and valuator data record are stored in the works- 
tation state list entry for the specified VALUATOR device. For all VALUATOR prompt and echo 
types, the valuator data record includes, in the first two positions, a low value and a high value, in 
that order, specifying the range. The values from the device will be scaled linearly to the specified 
range. 
Prompt and echo types: 

< prompting and echoing is VALUATOR device dependent. 

1 designate the current VALUATOR value using an implementation defined technique. 

2 display a graphical representation of the current VALUATOR value within the echo area 
(for example, a dial oj: a pointer). 

3 display a digital representation of the current^ VALUATOR value within the echo area. 
>;4 reserved for registratj.on. 

NOTE - VALUATOR prompt and echo type values are registered in the ISO International Register rjf Graphical Items, which is main- 
tained by the Registration Authority {ijet 4.1.2). When a VALUATOR prompt and echo type has been approved by ISO, the 
VALUATOR prompt and echo type Vialue will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.8.2 
4.8.6 



108 





N 


(l..n) 


I 


(OK,NOCHOICE) 


E 


(l..n) 


I 


(.n..-l,l..n) 


I 


DC 


4xR 




D 



18:12369-1987 
/ ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not supported on this workstation i 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 
152 Initial value is invalid 



INITIALISE CHOICE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In choice device number 

In initial status 

In initial choice number 

In prompt and echo type 

In echo area XMIN < XM AX,YMIN < YMAX 

In choice data record 

Effect: The initial status, initial choice number, prompt and echo type, echo area and choice data record are 
stored in the workstation state Ust entry for the specified CHOICE device. 

Prompt and echo types: 

< prompting and echoing is CHOICE device dependent. 

1 designate the current CHOICE number using an implementation defined technique. 

2 the physical input devices that are most commonly used to implement a CHOICE logical 
input device normally have a built-in prompting capability. This prompt and echo type 
allows the application program to invoke this prompting capabiUty. If the value of the i-th 
element of 'prompt array' in the choice data record is OFF, prompting of the i-th alterna- 
tive of the specified choice input device is turned off. An ON value indicates that prompt- 
ing for tha!t alternative is turned on. The first entry in the choice data record is the 
nimiber of choice alternatives. This is compared against an implementation defined 'max- 
imum nimiber of choice alternatives' for this device (contained in the workstation descrip- 
tion table). If the maximum value is exceeded, an error is issued. The second entry in the 
choice data record is the 'prompt array'. 

3 allow the operator to indicate a CHOICE number by selecting, using an appropriate tech- 
nique, one of a set of CHOICE strings. The CHOICE strings are contained in the choice 
data record and arc displayed within the echo area. The logical input value is the number 
of the string- selected. The first entry in the choice data record is the number of choice 
strings. This is compared iigainst an implementation defined 'maximum number of choice 
alternative^* for this device (contained in the workstation description table). If the max- 
imum value is exceeded, an error is issued. The second entry in the choice data record is 
the 'array of choice strings'. 

4 allow the operator to indicate a CHOICE number by selecting, via an alphanumeric key- 
board, one of a set of CHOICE strings. The CHOICE strings are contained in the choice 
data record and may be displayed in the echo area as a prompt. The strijig typed in by 
the operator is echoed in the echo area. The logical input value is the number of the 
string that has been typed in by the operator. The first entry in the choice data record is 
the number of choice strings. This is compared against an implementation defined 'max- 

» imum number of choice ^ alternatives' for this device (contained in the workstation 

^ 109 



18:12369-1987 
ISQ 7942 -1985 

Input functions GKS functions 

description table). If the maximum value is exceeded, an error is issued. The second entry 
in the choice data record is the 'array of choice strings'. 

5 the segment named by the choice data record is interpreted during execution of INITIAL- 

ISE CHOICE for later use as a prompt of the specified CHOICE device. It will be 
displayed within the echo area by mapping the unit square [0,1] x [0,1] of NDC space onto 
the echo area. The pick identifiers in the segment are mapped to CHOICE numbers in a 
CHOICE device dependent fashion. Picking these primitives selects the corresponding 
CHOICE value. After the inteipretation, i.o logical connection between the specified seg- 
ment and the specified CHOICE device exists. The first entry in the choice data record is 
the segment name. 

> 6 reserved for registration. 

NOTE - CHOICE prompt and echo type values are registered in the ISO International Register of Graphical Items, which is main- 
tained by the Registration Authority (see 4.1.2), When a CHOICE prompt and echo type has been approved by ISO, the 
CHOICE prompt and echo type value will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.8.2 
4.8.6 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not supported on this workstation 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 
152 Initial value is invalid 



INITIALISE PICK WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 
In pick device number 
In initial status 
In initial segment 
In initial pick identifier 
In prompt and echo type 
In echo area XMIN < XMAX, YMIN < YMAX 
In pick data record 

Effect: The initial status, initial segment, initial pick identifier, prompt and echo type, echo area and the pick 
data record are stored in the workstation state list entry for the specified PICK device. 

Prompt and echo types: 

< prompting aid echoing is PICK device dependent. 

1 use an implementation-defined technique that at least highlights the 'picked' primitive for 
a short period of time. 

2 echo the contiguous group of primitives within the segment with the same pick identifier as 
the 'picked' primitive, or all primitives of the segment with the same pick identifier as the 
'picked' primitive. 



110 





N 


(l..n) 


I 


(OK,NOPICK) 


E 




N 




N 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


I 


DC 


4xR 




D 



IS : 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 >1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

3 echo the whole segment containing the 'picked' primitive. 

>4 reserved for registration. 

NOTE - PICK prompt and echo type values are registered in the ISO Inlernational Register of Graphical Items, which is maintained by 
the Registration Authority (see 4.1.2). When a PICK prompt and echo type has been approved by ISO, the PICK prompt and 
echo type value will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.8.2 
4.8.6 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

37 Specified workstation is not of category OUTIN 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not supported on this workstation 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 
152 Initial value is invalid 



nsflTIALISE STRING WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In string device number (l-o) I 

In initial string S 

In prompt and echo type (-n..-l,l..n) I 

In echoareaXMIN<XMAX,YMIN<YMAX DC 4xR 

In string data record D 

Effect: The initial string, prompt and echo type, echo area and string data record are stored in the worksta- 
tion state list entry for the specified STRING device. 

For all prompt and echo types, the first entry of the string data record is the input buffer size, which 
is an integer in the range (l..n). This is compared against an implementation defined 'maximum input 
buffer size' for this device (contained in the workstation description table). If the requested buffer size 
is greater, the 'maximum input buffer size' is substituted in the stored record. If the initial string is 
longer than the buffer size, an error is issued. 

For all prompt and echo types, the second entry of the string data record is an initial cursor position, 
which may range from 1 to the length of the initial string plus 1 . 

When a STRING measure process comes into existence, it obtains a buffer of the current input buffer 
size. The initial string is copied into the buffer, and the cursor is placed at the initial cursor position 
within it. Replacement of characters begins at this cursor position. 

Prompt and echo types: 

< prompting and echoing is STRING device dependent. 
1 display the current STRING value within the echo area. 

>2 reserved for registration. 
NOTE - If the operator enters more characters than the current input buffer size, the additional characters are lost. ^ 



111 



IS: 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inpat functions GKS functiotts 

STRING prompt and echo type values arc registered in the ISO Internatioual Register of Graphical items, which is main- 
tained by the Registration Authority (see 4.1.2). When a STRING prompt and echo type has been approved by ISO, the 
STRING prompt and echo type value will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 

References: 

4.8.2 
4.8.6 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

51 Rectangle definition is invalid 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not. supported on this workstation 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 
152 Initial value is invalid 

154 Length of the initial string is greater than the buffer size 



112 



18:12309-1967 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Inprt ftuctHHis 

5.7.2 Setting the mode of input devices 

SET LOCATOR MODE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In locator device number (l..n) I 

In operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

In echo switch (ECHO.NOECHO) E 

Effect: The given LOGATOR device is set to the specified operating mode and its echoing state is set to 
ECHO or NOECHO. Depending on the specified operating mode, an interaction with the given dev- 
ice may begin or end. The input device state defined by 'operating mode' and 'echo switch' is stored 
in the workstation state list for the given LOCATOR device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in prpper state: GKS shall be in one of the states 1VS0P, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input devic^ is not present on workstation 

143 EVENT and SAMPf^E input mode are not available at this level of GKS 



SET STROKE MODE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In stroke device number (l-.o) I 

In operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

In echo switch (ECHO,NOECHO) E 

Effect: The given STROKE deyii(» is set to the specified operating mode and its echoing state is set to ECHO 
or NOECHO. Dependij^g on the specified operating mode, an interaction with the given device may 
begin or end. The input device state defined by 'operating mode' and 'echo switch' is stored in the 
workstation state list for the given STROKE device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

143 EVENT and SAMPLE input mode are not available at this level of GKS 



113 



IS : 1 2369 - 1 987 
180 7942-1985 

Input funcdons GKS functions 

SET VALUATOR MODE WSOP,WSAC»SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In valuator device number (l--n) I 

In operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

In echo switch (ECHO,NOECHO) E 

Effect: The given VALUATOR device is set to the specified operating mode and its echoing state is set to 
ECHO or NOECHO. Depending on the specified opciating mode, an interaction with the given dev- 
ice may begin or end. The input device state defined by 'operating mode' and 'echo switch' is stored 
in the workstation state list for the given VALUATOR device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

Errors: 

7 G^S not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

143 EVENT and SAMPLE input mode are not available at this level of GKS 



SET CHOICE MODE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In choice device number (1-n) I 

In operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

In echo switch (ECHO,NOECHO) E 

Effect: The given CHOICE device is set to the specified operating mode and its echoing state is set to ECHO 
or NOECHO. Depending on the specified operating mode, an interaction with the given device may 
begin or end. The input device state defined by 'operating mode' and 'echo switch' is stored in the 
workstation state list for the given CHOICE device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

143 EVENT and SAMPLE input mode are not available at this level of GKS 



114 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

SET PICK MODE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In pick device number (1-n) I 

In operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

In echo switch (ECHO,NOECHO) E 

Effect: The given PICK device is set to the specified operating mode and its echoing state is set to ECHO or 
NOECHO. Depending on the specified operating mode, an interaction with the given device may 
begin or end. The input device state defined by 'operating mode' and 'echo switch' is stored in the 
workstation state list for the given PICK device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

37 Specified workstation is not of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

143 EVENT and SAMPLE input mode are not available at this level of GKS 



SET STRING MODE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In string device number (1-n) I 

In operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

In echo switch (ECHO,NOECHO) E 

Effect: The given STRING device is set to the specified operating mode and its echoing state is set to ECHO 
or NOECHO. Depending on the specified operating mode, an interaction with the given device may 
begin or end. The input device state defined by 'operating mode' and 'echo switch' is stored in the 
workstation state list for the given STRING device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

143 EVENT and SAMPLE input mode are not available at this level of GKS 



115 





N 


(l..n) 


I 


(OK.NONE) 


E 


(0..n) 


I 


WC 


P 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Input functions GKS functions 

5.7.3 Request input functions 

REQUEST LOCATOR WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In locator device number 

Out status 

Out normalization transformation nimiber 

Out locator position 

EflTect: GKS performs a REQUEST on the specified LOCATOR device. If the break facility is invoked by 
the operator, the status NONE is returned; ot)ierwise OK is returned together with the logical input 
value which is the current measure of the LOCATOR device. This measure consists of a locator posi- 
tion in world coordinates and the normalization transformation number, which was used in the 
conversion to world coordinates. The locator position is within the window of the normalization 
transformation. 

References: 

4.6.4 
4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 . 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input, device is not in REQUEST mode 



REQUEST STROKE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters; 

In workstation identifier 

In stroke device number 

Out status 

Out normalization transformation number 

Out number of points 

Out points in stroke 

Effect: GKS performs a REQUEST on the specified STROKE device. If the break facility is invoked by the 
operator, the status NONE is returned; otherwise OK is returned together with the logical input value 
which is the current measure of the STROKE device. This consists of a sequence of not more than 
'input buffer size' (in the stroke data record) points in world coordinates, and the normalization 
transformation number, which was used in the conversion to world coordinates. The points in the 
stroke all lie within the window of the normalization transformation. 

NOTE - If an operator enters more points than the stroke input buffer size (in the workstation state list) allows, the additional points 
are lost. The operator should be informed of this situation. 





N 


(l..n) 


I 


(OK,NONE) 


E 


(0..n) 


I 


(0..n) 


I 


WC 


nxP 



116 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

References: 

4.6.5 
4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 



REQUEST VALUATOR WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In valuator device number (l-.n) I 

Out status (OK,NONE) E 

Out value R 

Effect: GKS performs a REQUEST on the specified VALUATOR device. If the break facility is invoked by 
the operator, the status NONE is returned; otherwise OK is returned together with the logical input 
value which is the current measure of the VALUATOR device. The value delivered is in the range 
specified in the workstation state list entry (for this device) in the data record. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 



REQUEST CHOICE WSOP,WSAC.SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In choice device number (l.n) I 

Out status (OK,NOCHOICE,NONE) F 

Out choice number (In) I 

Effect: GKS performs a REQUEST on the specified CHOICE device. If the break facility is invoked by the 
operator, the status NONE is returned; if the measure of the CHOICE device indicates no choit , 
status NOCHOICE is returned; otherwise OK is returned together with a choice number which is sci 
according to the current measure of the CHOICE device. 

117 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Input functions 



GKS functions 



References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 



Errors: 

7 

20 

25 

38 

140 

141 



GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the stuns WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

Specified workstation is not open 

Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

Specified input device is not present on workstation 

Input device is not in REQUEST mode 



REQUEST PICK 

Parameters: 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 



(l..n) 
(OK,NOPICK,NONE) 



N 
I 

E 

N 
N 



In workstation identifier 

In pick device niunber 

Out status 

Out segment name 

Out pick identifier 

Effect: GKS performs a REQUEST on the specified PICK device. If the break facility is invoked by the 
operator, the status NONE is returned; if the measure of the PICK device indicates no pick, status 
NOPICK is returned; otherwise OK is returned together with a segment name and a pick identifier 
which are set according to the current measure of the PICK device. The pick identifier is associated 
with the primitive, within the segment, that was picked. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 



Errors: 

7 

20 

25 

37 

140 

141 



GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

Specified workstation is not open 

Specified workstation is not of category OUTIN 

Specified input device is not present on workstation 

Input device is not in REQUEST mode 



REQUEST STRING 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In string device number 

Out status 

Out character string 



WSOP,WSAC,SGQP LOb 



(l..n) 
(OK,NONE) 



N 
I 
E 
S 



118 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

Effect: GKS performs a REQUEST on the specified STRING device. If the break facility is invoked by the 
operator, the status NONE is returned; otherwise OK is returned together with the logical input value 
which is the current measure of the STRING device. 

NOTE - The length of the returned string is less than or equal to the buffer size specified in the workstation sute list entry (for this dev- 
ice) in the data record. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

5.7.4 Sample input functions 

SAMPLE LOCATOR WSOP.WSAC^GOP LOc 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In locator device number (1-n) I 

Out normalization transformation mmiber (0..n) I 

Out locator position WC P 

Effect: The logical input value, which is the current measure of the specified LOCATOR device, is returned. 
The measure consists of a locator position in world coordinates and the nomuilization transformation 
number, which was used in the conversion to world coordinates. The locator position is within the 
window of the normalization transformation. 

References: 

4.6.4 
4.8.1 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

142 Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 



119 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Input functions 



SAMPLE STROKE 



GKS functions 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 





N 


(l..n) 


I 


(0..n) 


I 


(0..n) 


I 




nxP 



Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In stroke device number 

Out normalization transformation number 

Out number of points 

Out points in stroke WC 

Effect: The logical input value, which is the current measure of the specified STROKE device, is returned. 
The measure consists of a sequence of points in world coordinates, and the normalization transforma- 
tion number which was used in the conversion to world coordinates. The points in the stroke all he 
within the window of the normalization transformation. 

NOTE - If an operator enters more points than the stroke input buffer size (in the workstation state list) allows, the additional points 
are lost. It is anticipated that the operator would be informed of this situation. 

References: 

4.6.5 
4.8.1 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 



Errors: 

7 

20 

25 

38 

140 

142 



IGKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

Specified workstation is not open 

Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

Specified input device is not present on workstation 

Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 



SAMPLE VALUATOR 

Parameters: 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 



In valuator device number 
Out value 



(l..n) 



I 
R 



Effect: The logical input value, which is the current measure of the specified VAI^UATOR device, is 
retumod. The value delivered is in the range specified in the workstation state Ust entry (for this dev- 
ice) in the data record. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 

A fi <1 



Errors: 

7 

20 

25 

38 

140 

142 



GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

Specified workstation is not open 

Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

Specified input device is not present on workstation 

Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 



120 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

SAMPLE CHOICE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In choice device number (l..n) I 

Out status (OK.NOCHOICE) E 

Out choice number (1-n) I 

Effect: If the current measure of the specified CHOICE device is indicating no choice, status NOCHOICE is 
returned; otherwise OK is returned together with a choice number which is set according to the 
current measure of the CHOICE device. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

142 Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 



SAMPLE PICK WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lie 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In pick device number (I..n) I 

Out status (OK,NOPICK) E 

Out segment name N 

Out pick identifier N 

Effect: If the current measure of the specified PICK device is indicating no, pick, status NOPICK is returned; 
otherwise OK is returned together with a segment name and a pick identifier which are set according 
to the current measure of the PICK device. The pick identifier is associated with the primitive, within 
the segment, that was picked. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

37 Specified workstation is not of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

142 Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 



121 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

In|Nit functions GKS functions 

SAMPLE STRING WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

In worlcstation identifier N 

In string device number (l--n) I 

Out character string S 

Eff«;t: The logical input value, which is the current measure of the specified STRING device, is returned. 

NOTE - The length of the returned string is less than or equal to the buffer ,:v.t specified in the workstation state list entry (for this dev- 
ice) in the data record. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.3 
4.8.4 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

142 Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 

SJ£ Event input functions 

AWAIT EVENT WSOP,WSAC;SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

In timeout (seconds) R 

Out workstation identifier N 

Out input class (NONE,LOCATOR,STROKE,VALUATOR,CHOICE,PICK,STRING) E 

Out logical input device number (1-n) I 

Effect: If the input queue is empty, GKS is set into a wait state until an input event is written into the queue 
or the time specified in the timeout parameter has elapsed. If a timeout occurs and there is still no 
entry in the queue, a NONE value is returned for input class. If there is at least one entry in the 
queue, the oldest event report is moved from the event queue to the current event report in the GKS 
state list. The workstation identifier, the input class, and the logical input device number are returned 
and the corresponding values are made available for subsequent interrogation by the GET < input 
class > functions. 

NOTE - The operation is performed even if error 147 has occurred. 

A timeout of zero causes an immediate inspection of the queue, and a NONE value for mput class is returned if the queue is 

empty. 

Some operating systems may not provide a reliable timeout facility. In this case a timeout different from zero may never cause 

a timeout at all. 

References: 

4.8.1 
4.8.2 
4.8.3 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP » 

147 Input queue has overflowed 
151 Timeout is invalid 



122 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942. 1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In input class (LOCATOR,STROKE,VALUATOR,CHOICE,PICK,STRING) E 

In logical input device number (l-.n) I 

Effect: All entries in the input queue from the specified logical input device are removed. 
NOTE - The operation is performed even if error 147 has occurred. 
References: 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSj\^ or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

147 Input queue has overflowed 



GET LOCATOR WSOP,WSAC.SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

Out normalization transformation niunber (0..n) I 

Out locator position WC P 

Effect: The LOCATOR logical input value in the current event report is returned. This consists of a locator 
position in world coordinates and the normalization transformation number, which was used in the 
conversion to world coordinates. 

References: 

4.6.4 
4.8.4 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
150 No input value of the correct class is in the current event report 



GET STROKE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

Out normalization transformation number 

Out number of points 

Out points in stroke WC 

Effect: The STROKE logical input value from the current event report is returned. This consists of a 
sequence of points in world coordinates, and the normalization transformation number, which was 
used in the conversion to world coordinates. The points in the stroke all lie within the window of the 
normalization transformation. 

NOTE - The number of points in the stroke is less than or equal lo the stroke buffer size specified in the workstation slate list for this 
device. . 



(0..n) 


I 


(0..n) 


I 




nxP 



123 



is: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Input functions GKS functions 

References: 

4.6.5 
4.8.4 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
150 No input value of the correct class is in the current event report 



GET VALUATOR WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters: / 

Out value R 

Effect: The VALUATOR logical input value in the current event report is returned. The value delivered is 
in the range specified in the workstation state list entry (for the device) in the data record. 

References: 

4.8.4 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
150 No input value of the correct class is in the current event report 



GET CHOICE * WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters; 

Out status (OK,NOCHOICE) E 

Out choice number (l-n) I 

Effect: The CHOICE logical input value in the current event report is returned. This consists of a CHOICE 
status and a choice number. 

References: 

4.8.4 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
150 No input value of the correct class is in the current event report 



GET PICK WSOP,WSAC»SGOP Lie 

Parameters: "^ 

Out status (OK.NOPICK) E 

Out segment name N 

Out pick identifier N 

Effect: The PICK logical input value in the current event report is returned. This consists of a PICK status, 

a segment name and the pick identifier associated with the primitive within the segnaent -that was 
picked. 



124 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Input functions 

References: 

4.8.4 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
150 No input value of the correct class is in the current event report 



GET STRING WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOc 

Parameters: 

Out character string S 

Effect; The STRING logical input value in the current event report is returned. 

NOTE - The length of the returned string is less than or equal to the buffer size specified in the workstation state list entry (for this dev- 
ice) in the data record, at the time the event was queued. 

References: 

4.8.4 
4.8.5 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
ISO No input value of the correct ess is in the current event report 



125 



IS:12369-1987 
ISO 7942' 1985 



Metafile functions 



GKS functions 



5.8 Metafile functions 



WRITE ITEM TO GKSM WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters; 

In workstation identifier N 

In item type I 

In item data record length (0..n) I 

In item data record D 

Effect: An item containing non-graphical data provided by the application program is written to the GKSM. 

The parameters 'item data record' and 'item data record length' define the data to be output whilst 

'item type' specifies their type. 
NOTE - This function can only be used to transfer non-graphical information to GKSM. Graphical data are sent automatically after a 

workstation of category MO has been activated. 

References: 



4.9 



Errors: 
5 

20 

30 

32 

160 

161 



GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state fVSAC or in the state SGOP 

Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

Specified workstation is not active 

Specified workstation is not of category MO 

Item type is not allowed for user items 

Item length is invalid 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 



GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out item type I 

Out item data record length (0..n) I 

Effect: GKS inspects the type of the current item and the length of its data record in the GKSM and returns 
the type and length back to the application program. 

References; 



4.9 



Errors; 

7 

20 

25 

34 

162 

163 



GKS not in. proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

Specified workstation is not open 

Specified workstation is not of category MI 

No item is left in GKS Metafile input 

Metafile item is invalid 



READ ITEM FROM GKSM 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In maximum item data record length 

Out item data record 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 



(0..n) 



N 

I 

D 



126 



18:12369-^1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS fHnctioiis Metafile functions 

EflFect: GKS returns the current item on the GKSM back to the application program and then makes the 
next item in the metafile the current item. If the item data record length is greater than 'maximum 
item data record length', the excess parts of the item are lost. 

NOTE - By specifying 'maximum item data record length' = 0, the current item can be skipped. 

Any program which makes use of the access that this function provides to the content of GKSM items is using information 
that is not part of the standard, viz. the format and content of metafile items. 

References: 
4.9 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

34 Specified workstation is not of category MI 

162 No item is left in GKS Metafile input 

163 Metafile item is invalid 

165 Content of item data record is invalid for the specified item type 

166 Maximum item data record length is invalid 



INTERPRET ITEM GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In item type I 

In item data record length (0..n) I 

In item data record D 

Effect: The supplied item is interpreted. This causes appropriate changes in the set of GKS state variables 
(see 4.9) and the generation of appropriate graphical output, as determined by the metafile 
specification. 

NOTE - Apart from errors noted below, other GKS errors may occur as a result of interpreting the item. 

References: 

4.9 

Errors: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
161 Item length is invalid 

163 Metafile item is invalid 

164 Item type is not a valid GKS item 

165 Content of item data record is invalid for the specified item type 

167 User item cannot be interpreted 

168 Specified function is not supported in this level of GKS 



Q 



127 



IS : 1 2369 > 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry ftiiictions 

5.9 Inquiry functions 



GKS functions 



5.9.1 Introduction to inquiry functions 

Inquiry functions return values from the various state lists. The data types of the values and the default 
values of the state list entries are summarized in clause 6. Errors detected by inquiry functions are reported 
through an error indicator parameter, see 4.11.2. The error handling procedure is not called. The list of 
states in the function heading indicates those states in which the inquiry function can return valid values. 
Some inquiry functions that retrieve values from the workstation state lists have an input parameter of type 
'Enumeration' that can take the following values: 

a) SET: the values returned are those provided by the application program. 

b) REALIZED: the values returned are those used by the workstation when the actual values are 

mapped to the available values in the workstation. 

Inquiries for predefined representations in the workstation description table (see 5.9.6) have no such parame- 
ter unUke the corresponding inquiries for the representations in the workstation state list (see 5.9. S). The 
values of predefined representations are available on the workstation. Thus all values returned from a 
predefined representation are such that, if used by an application program to set a representation, a subse- 
quent inquiry for that representation in the workstation state list would return the same values whether SET 
or REALIZED was specified. 



5.9.2 Inquiry function for operating state value 

INQUIRE OPERATING STATE VALUE 

Parameters: 

Out operating state value 
Effect: The operating state of GKS is returned. 
References: 

4.ir.l 
4.11.2 



GKCL,GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 



(GKCL,GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP) 



Errors: 



none 



5.9.3 Inquiry functions for GKS description table 

INQUIRE LEVEL OF GKS GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out level of GKS (0a,0b,0c,la,lb,lc,2a,2b,2c) E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availabiUty: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.10 
4.U.2 



128 



is: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942* 1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE WORKSTATION TYPES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of available workstation types (l.n) I 

Out list of available workstation types n x N 

Effect; If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE WORKSTATION MAXIMUM NUMBERS GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out maximum number of simultaneously open workstations (1-n) I 

Out maximum number of simultaneously active workstations (1-n) I 

Out maximum number of workstations associated with segment (In) I 

EfTect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and the values are 
returned in the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.5 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



129 



IS .12369 -1987 
ISO 7942-1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out maximum normalization transformation number (1-n) I 

Effect; If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error nimiber to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
References: 

4.6.1 
4.U.2 

Errors: 

none 

5.9.4 Inquiry functions for GKS state list 

INQUIRE SET OF OPEN WORKSTATIONS GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of open workstations (0..n) I 

Out set of open workstations n x N 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 

the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
References: 

4.5.'2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE SET OF ACTIVE WORKSTATIONS GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator ' 

Out number of active workstations (0..n) I 

Out set of active workstations n x N 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 

the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 



130 



19:12369.1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functioiis Inquiry fmctioBS 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
References: 

4.5.2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE CURRENT PRIMITIVE ATTRIBUTE VALUES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator 

Out current polyline index 

Out current polymarker index 

Out current text index 

Out current character height 

Out current character up vector 

Out current character width 

Out current character base vector 

Out current text path 

Out ciurent text alignment 

(NORMALXEFT,CENTRE,RIGHt;NORMAL,TO 

Out current fill area index 

Out current pattern width vector 

Out current i>attera height vector 

Out current pattern reference point 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability; 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
References: 

4.4.2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE CURRENT PICK IDENTIFIER VALUE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out current pick identifier N 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters arc imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to Indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 



131 







I 




(l..n) 


T 




(l..n) 


I 




(l..n) 


I 


wc 


>0 


R 


wc 




2xR 


wc 


>0 


R 


wc 




2xR 


(RIGHT,LEFI ,UP,DOWN) 


E 


AP,HALF,BASE,B01 iOM) 


2xE 




(l..n) 


I 


WC 




2xR 


WC 




2xR 


WC 




P 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942*1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
References: 

4.4.2 
4.7.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE CURRENT INDIVIDUAL ATTRIBUTE VALUES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator 

Out current linctype 

Out current Unewidth scale factor 

Out current polyline colour index 

Out current marker type 

Out current marker size scale factor 

Out current polymarker colour index 

Out current text font and precision 

Out current character expansion factor 

Out current character spacing 

Out current text colour index 

Out current fill area interior style 

Out current fill area style index 

Out current fill area colour index 

Out current list of aspect source flags 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error niunber to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

B GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.4.2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE CURRENT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out current normalization transformation number (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 



(-n...l,l..n) 
>0 


I 

I 

R 


(0..n) 
(-n..-l,l..n) 

>o 


I 

I 

R 


(0..n) 
(-n..-l , 1 ..n;STRING,CHAR.STROKE) 

>o 


I 

a;E) 

R 




R 


(0..n) 
(HOLLOW,SOLID.PA IT ERN.HATCH) 

(-n..-l,l..n) 

(0..n) 

(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


I 

E 

I 

I 

13xE 



132 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1986 

GKS functions Inqwiry fnactioM 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters arc imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, fVSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.6.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LEST OF NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBERS 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out list of transformation numbers n x I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. The transformation numbers are returned in a list, which is ordered by 
viewport input priority, starting with the highest priority transformation number. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.6.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION GKOP, WSOP, WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In normalizai^on transformation number 

Out error indicator 

Out window limits 

Out viewport limits 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
50 Transformation number is invalid 

References: ♦ 

4.6.1 

4.11.2 



133 





(0..n) 


I 
I 


wc 




4xR 


NDC 




4xR 



(St 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942. 1986 



Inquiry functions 



GKS functions 



Errors: 



none 



GKOP,WSOP,WSAC3GOP LOa 



(clip,ncx:lip) 

NDC 



I 

E 
4xR 



INQUIRE CLIPPING 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator 
Out ctipping indicator 
Out ctipping rectangle 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shaU be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.6.2 
4.11.2 



Errors: 



none 



SGOP Lla 



I 

N 



INQUIRE NAME OF OPEN SEGMENT 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator 

Out name of open segment ,< 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is retiuned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not availaUe, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentatioii dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

4 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state SGOP 
References: 

4.7.1 
4.11.2 



Errors: 



none 



INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES IN USE 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator 

Out number of segment names 

Out set of segment names in use 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 



t0..n) 



I 
I 

n xN 



134 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 «198S 

GKS functions Inquiry functiotis 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, ths values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following error number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

References: 

4.7.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE MORE SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS WSOP.WSAC^GOP LOc 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out more simultaneous events (NOMORE,MORE) E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to the following eiror number to indicate the rea- 
son for non-availabihty; 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
References: 

4.8.5 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 

5.9.5 Inquiry functions for workstation state list 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CONNECTION AND TYPE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out connection identifier N 

Out workstation type N 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the erjor indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
• the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not opert * 



135 



18:12369-1987 
180 7942*1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

References: 

4.5.2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE WORKSTATION STATE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out workstation state (INACTIVE,ACTIVE) E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent' and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

References: 

4.5.2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE WORKSTATION DEFERRAL AND UPDATE STATES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out deferral mode (ASAP,BNIG,BNIL,ASTI) E 

Out implicit regeneration mode (SUPPRESSED,ALLOWED) E 

Out display surface empty (EMPTY,NOTEMPTY) E 

Out new frame action necessary at update (NO, YES) E 

Effect: if the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states- WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open * 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

136 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Inqniry functions 

References: 

4.5.3 
4.5.4 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF POLYLINE INDICES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Ll« 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of polyline bundle table entries (5..n) I 

Out list of defined polyline indices (l-.n) n x I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation Uientifier is invtUid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

References: 

4,4.3 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE POLYLINE REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Ll» 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In polyline index . (I..11) I 

In type of returned values (SET.REALIZED) E 

Out error indicator I 

Out linetype (-n.,-l,l..n) I 

Out linewidth scale factor StO R 

Out polyline colour index (0..a) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the specified polyline index is not present in the polyline bundle table on the workstation and the 
specified type of returned values is REALIZED, the representation for polyline index 1 is returned. 



137 



JS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

60 Polyline index is invalid 

61 A representation for the specified polyline index has not been defined on this workstation 

References: 

4.4.3 
4.11.2 

Errors; 

none 



INQUntE LIST OF POLYMARKER INDICES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of polymarker bundle table entries (5..n) I 

Out list of defined polymarker indices (L.n) nxl 

EflFect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-avaitebility: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

References: 

4.4.4 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



138 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942-1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Ll» 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In polymarker index (1-n) I 

In type of returned values (SET.REALIZED) E 

Out error indicator- I 

Out marker type (-n..-l,l..n) I 

Out marker size scale factor ^0 R 

Out polymarker colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the specified polym^ker index is not present in the polymarker bundle table on the workstation 
and the specified type of returned values is REALIZED, the representation for polymarker index 1 is 
returned. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
3.3 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

66 Polymarker index is invalid 

67 A representation for the specified polymarker index has not been defined on this workstation 

References: 

4.4.4 
4.n.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF TEXT INDICES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of text bundle table entries (6..n) I 

Out list of defined text indices (l..n) n x I 

Effect; If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT * 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



139 



IS*. 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS fniictioiis 

References: 

4.4.5 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE TEXT REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: , 

In workstation identifier N 

In text index (l-°) I 

In type of returned values (SET,REALIZED) E 

Out error indicator I 

Out text font and precision (.n..-l,l..n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) (I;E) 

Out character expansion factor > R 

Out character spacing R 

Qvti text colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values arc returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the specified text index is not present in the text bundle table on the workstation and the specified 
type of returned values is REALIZED, the representation for text index 1 is returned. 
If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

72 Text index is invalid 

73 A representation for the specified text index has not been defined on this workstation 

References: 

4.4.5 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



140 



wc 


p 




s 




I 


wc 


p 


wc 


4xP 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS fimctions Inquiry functions 

INQUIRE TEXT EXTENT WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identitier 

In text position 

In character string 

Out error indicator 

Out concatenation point 

Out text extent parallelogram 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

The extent of the specified character string is computed using the text font and precision, character 
expansion factor and character spacing currently selected (either via the bundle or individually, 
depending upon the corresponding ASFs) and the current text attributes (CHARACTER HEIGHT, 
CHARACTER WIDTH, CHARACTER UP VECTOR, CHARACTER BASE VECTOR, TEXT 
PATH, TEXT ALIGNMENT). If the current text index is not present in the text bundle Uble, text 
index 1 is used. 

At precisions STRING and CHAR, the text extent parallelogram is an approximation of that defined 
in 4.4.5, being the minimum which completely encloses the character bodies of the displayed string 
(see figure 17). For UP and DOWN text paths, the widest character body in the font is enclosed. 
The parallelogram is returned as four comer points in anticlockwise order. If, at STROKE precision, 
the CHARACTER WIDTH VECTOR and CHARACTER BASE VECTOR are perpendicular, the 
text extent parallelogram is a rectangle. 

The concatenation point can be used as the origin of a subsequent TEXT output primitive for the 
concatenation of character strings, where meaningful. For certain combinations of TEXT PATH and 
TEXT ALIGNMENT, concatenation is not meaningful and the returned concatenation point is the 
same as the text position. 

If TEXT PATH is RIGHT or LEFT, the concatenation point is displaced from the text position, in a 
direction determined by the horizontal component of TEXT ALIGNMENT. If this component is 
LEFT, the direction is to the right; if it is CENTRE, the displacement is zero; if it is RIGHT, the 
direction is to the left. Unless the horizontal component of TEXT ALIGNMENT is CENTRE, the 
magnitude of the displacement is the width of the text extent parallelogram plus one additional char- 
acter spacing. (The width of the text extent parallelogram is the length of the sides parallel to the 
CHARACTER BASE VECTOR.) 

If TEXT PATH is UP or DOWN, the concatenation point is displaced from the text position in a 
direction determined by the vertical component of TEXT ALIGNMENT. If this component is TOP 
or CAP, the direction is down; if it is HALF, the displacement is zero; if it is BASE or BOTTOM, the 
direction is up. Unless the vertical component of TEXT ALIGNMENT is HALF, the magnitude of 
the displacement is the height of the text extent parallelogram plus an additional character spacing. 
(The height of the text extent parallelogram is the length of the sides parallel to the CHARACTER 
UP VECTOR.) 

Control characters in the character string have a workstation dependent effect consistent with their 
treatment in the TEXT function (see 5.3). 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

101 Invalid code in string 



141 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functioBs 



GKS fonctioas 




E3 E4r 



CHARACTER SPACING =0 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR =(0.1) 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT 
TEXT AUGNMENT » (NORMAL.NORMAL) 





E2 E: 

CHARACTER SPACING = 

CHARACTER UP VECTOR «(0.1) 

TEXT PATH == LEFT 

TEXT AUGNMENT = 

(RIGHT.BASE) 

CHARACTER SPACING =0 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR =(-1,1) 
TEXT PATH = RIGHT 
TEXT AUGNMENT =(NORMAL,NORMAL) 
P 
E4^ 



CHARACTER SPACING =0.2 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR =(0.1) 
TEXT PATH =^DOWN 
TEXT AUGNMENT = (LEFT.TOP) 



CHARACTER SPACING =0 
CHARACTER UP VECTOR =(0,1) 
TEXT PATH =UP 
TEXT AUGNMENT = (CENTRE.BOTTOM) 




P: X 

C: ^ 

E1,E2, 

E3,E4: 



text position 

concatenation point 

corners of text extent rectangle, which 

for TEXT PATH = UP or DOWN encloses the 

widest character in the font 



Figure 17 - Examples of replies to INQU01E TEXT EXTENT with different text attributes 



142 



IS 112369-1987 

ISO 7942 -1985 

♦ 
GKS functions Inquiry functions 

References: 

4.4.5 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF FILL AREA INDICES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of fill area bundle table entries (5..n) I 

Out list of defined fill area indices (1-n) n>^I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

References: 

4.4.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE FELL AREA REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC3GOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In fill area index (1-n) I 

In type of returned values (SET,REALIZED) E 

Out error indicator I 

Out fill area interior style (HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN,HATCH) E 

Out fill area style index (-n. , - 1 , 1 . .n) I 

Out fill area colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the specified fill area index is not present in the fill area bundle table on the workstation arid the 
specified type of returned values is REALIZED, the representation for fill area index 1 is returned. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameter* are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 



143 



IS; 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

laqiiiry fmctioi» GKS finctiow 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is net open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
80 Fill area index is mvalid 

81. A representation for the specified fill area index has not been defined on this workstation 

References: 

4.4.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF PATTERN INDICES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of pattern table entries (0..n) I 

Out list of pattern indices (l..n) n x I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specked workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

References: 

4.4.6 
4.U.2 

Errors: 

none 



!44 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -19^ 

GKS fnnctioiis Iiqulry finctiods 

INQUIRE PATTERN REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In pattern index (1-n) ' 

In type of returned values (SET,REALIZED) E 

Out error indicator ' 

Out pattern array dimensions (1-n) 2x1 

Out pattern array (0..n) n x n x I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the specified pattern index is not present in the pattern table on the workstation and the specified 
type of returned values is REALIZED, the representation for pattern index 1 is returned (pattern 
index 1 is present if interior style PATTERN is supported on the workstation). 
If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters arc imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Speeded workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 
85 Specified pattern index is invalid 

88 A representation for the specified pattern indfx has not been defined on this workstation 
90 Interior style PATTERN is not supported on this workstation 

References: 

4.4.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF COLOUR INDICES WSOP.WSAC^GOP L«i 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of colour table entries (2,.n) I 

Out list of colour indices (0..n) n x I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT * 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 



145 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

References: 

4.4.9 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE COLOUR REPRESENTATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP L0« 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In colour index (0..n) I 

In type of returned values (SET,REALIZED) E 

Out error indicator I 

Out colour (red,green,blue intensities) [0,1] 3xR 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the specified colour index is not present in the colour table on the workstation and the specified 
type of returned values is REALIZED, the representation of the workstation dependent colour index, 
that would be used if output primitives were displayed with the specified colour index, is returned. 
If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 
' 35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

93 Colour index is invalid 

94 A representation for the specified colour index has not been defined on this workstation 

References: 

4.4.9 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



146 



GKS functions 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -198S 

Inquiry functions 





N 




I 


(NOTPENDINCPENDING) 


E 


NDC 


4xR 


NDC 


4xR 


DC 


4xR 


DC 


4xR 



INQUIRE WORKSTATION TRANSFORMATION WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

Out error indicator 

Out workstation transformation update state 

Out requested workstation window 

Out current workstation window 

Out requested workstation viewport 

Out current workstation viewport 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output pararricters. 

The workstation transformation update state is PENDING if a workstation transformation change 
has been requested but not yet provided. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason fbr non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

?n Snprifipd wnrkstatinn idpntifip.r ix invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

References: 

4.6.3 
4.11.2 



Errors: 



none 



INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES ON WORKSTATION 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 
Out error indicator 

Out niimlvr nf «^am<^nt nfim<>« 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 



f0..n) 



N 
I 
I 



Out set of stored segments for this workstation n x N 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numl)ers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 
35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

References: 

4.5.2 
4.7.1 
4.11.2 



147 



liO 1041-1 §85 

Inijirtfy hmtiom gks fiinctions 

mm 



INQUIRE LOCATOR DEVICE STATE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In locator device number (l-.H) J 

In type of returned values (SET,REAmi©| 1 

Out error indicator { 

Out operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE.EypNf ) i 

Out echo switch (ECHO,NOEepO) E 

Out initial norma.^zation tra^5fo,nn^^?(n numher (0.,n) I 

Out initial locatpjf pt^sition WC P 

Out prompt and echo type («p.,?l,l,.n) I 

Out echo area ©C 4xR 

Out locator data record D 

EfFecV. If the inquired information is available, the error incJi^lteif '!* ff turnei^ ftl and values arc returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not availably, the v^^Mes fetwrned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set \q pn© of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-sivailability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS sfy^H ke m m? a/ th^ states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is inv^Hd 
25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specifieii wQrii^t^tian is neither o/eat^gQry INPUT nor of category OUTIN 
140 Specked input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.8 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



148 



GKS functions 

INQUIRE STROKE DEVICE STATE 

Parameters: 



liti 8111 ^iidf 



In workstation identifier 




N 


In stroke device number 


(l..n) 


I 


In type of returned values 


(SteT,REALIZED) 


E 


Out error indicator 




I 


Out operating mode 


(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 


E 


Out echo switch 


(ECHO.NOECHO) 


E 


Out initial normahzation transformation number 


(0..n) 


I 


Out initial number of points 


(0..n) 


I 


Out initial points in stroke 


WC 


nxP 


Out prompt and echo type 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


I 


Out echo area 


DC 


4xR 


Out stroke data record 




D 



Effect: If the inqu* ed information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.8 
4.11.2 



Errore: 



none 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 



(l..n) 

(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 
(ECHO,NOECHO) 



INQUIRE VALUATOR DEVICE STATE 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier 

In valuator device number 

Out error indicator 

Out operating mode 

Out echo switch 

Out initial value 

Out prompt and echo type (-n..-l,l..n) 

Out echo area DC 

Out valuator data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

/ GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGQP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 



N 

I 

I 

E 

E 

R 

I 

4xR 

D 



149 



ISM2369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 
References: 

4.8 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE CHOICE DEVICE STATE WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In choice device number (1-n) I 

Out error indicator I 

Out operating mode (REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) E 

Out echo switch (ECHO,NOECHO) E 

Out initial status (OK,NOCHOICE) E 

Out initial choice number (J-n) I 

Out prompt and echo type (-n..-l,l..n) I 

Out echo area DC 4 x R 

Out choice data record D 

Effect: If the incjuired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability; 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.8 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



150 



GKS functions 

INQUIRE PICK DEVICE STATE 

Parameters: 



IS i 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Inquiry functions 
WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 



(l..n) 
(SET,REALIZED) 

(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 

(ECHO,NOECHO) 

(OK,NOPICK) 



(-n...I,l..n) 



N 

I 

E 

I 

E 

E 

E 

N 

N 

I 

4xR 

D 



la workstation identifier 

In pick device number 

In type of returned values 

Out error indicator 

Out operating mode 

Out echo switch 

Out initial status 

Out initial segment 

Out initial pick identifier 

Out prompt and echo type 

Out echo area DC 

Out pick data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
37 Specified workstation is not of category OVTIN 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.8 
4.11.2 



Errors: 



none 



INQUIRE STRING DEVICE STATE 

Parameters: 



WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 



(l..n) 

(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 
(ECHO,NOECHO) 



(.n..-l,l..n) 



DC 



N 
I 
I 
E 
E 
S 
I 
4xR 
D 



In workstation identifier 

In string device number 

Out error indicator 

Out operating mode 

Out echo switch 

Out initial string 

Out prompt and echo type 

Out echo area 

Out string data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall he in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP * 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OVTIN 



151 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 
References: 

4.8 
4.11.2 

Errors; 

none 

5.9.6 Inquiry functions for workstation description table 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CATEGORY GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: * 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out workstation category (OUTPUT,INPUT,OUTIN,WISS,MO,MI) E 

Efifect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE WORKSTATION CLASSIFICATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOn 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out vector, raster, or other type (VECTOR, RASTER,OTHER) E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availabiUty: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 



152 



18:12369*1937 
180 7942*1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE DISPLAY SPACE SIZE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out device coordinate units (METRES,OTHER) E 

Out display space size in device coordinate units DC > 2 x R 

Out display space size in raster units (l-n) 2x1 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 
31 Specified workstation is of category MO 
33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.U.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF WORKSTATION ATTRIBUTES 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

Out error indicator 

Out polyline bundle representation changeable 

Out polymarker bundle representation changeable 

Out text bundle representation changeable 

Out fill area bundle representation changeable 

Out pattern representation changeable 

Out colour representation changeable 

Out workstation transformation changeable 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

/IRG means that implicit regeneration is necessary; IMM means the action is performed immediately. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

153 





N 
I 


(IRCIMM) 


E 


(IRG.IMM) 


E 


(IRG.IMM) 


E 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


(IRG.IMM) 


E 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 



18:12369-1987 
IS0 7942-1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.5.3 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE DEFAULT DEFERRAL STATE VALUES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out default value for deferral mode (ASAP,BNIG,BNIL,ASTI) E 

Out default value for implicit regeneration mode (SUPPRESSED,ALLOWED) E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

S GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.5.3 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE POLYLINE FACILITIES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters; 

I 
In workstation type 

Out error indicator 

Out number of available linetypes 

Out list of available linetypes 

Out number of available linewidths 

Out nominal linewidth 

Out range of linewidths (minimum,maximum) 

Out number of predefined polyline indices 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the number of available linewidths is returned as 0, the workstation supports a continuous range of 
linewidths. 



154 







N 






I 




(4..n) 


I 


(-n. 


.-l,l..n) 


nxl 




(0..n) 


I 


DC 


>0 


R 


DC 


>0 


2xR 




(5..n) 


I 



IS s 12369* 1987 
, ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYLINE REPRESENTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC3GOP LOn 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In predefined polyline index (1-n) I 

Out error indicator I 

Out linetype (-n..-l,l..n) I 

Out linewidth scale factor R 

Out polyline colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are rettimed in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Spec^d workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

60 Polyline index is invalid 

62 A representation for the specified polyline index has not been predefined on this workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



155 





N 




I 


(5..n) 


I 


(.n...l,l..n) 


nxl 


(0..n) 


I 


>0 


R 


>0 


2xR 


(5..n) 


I 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

laqiiry taictioiM GKS fmictioiis 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER FACfLITIES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

Out error indicator 

Out number of available marker types 

Out list of available marker types 

Out number of available marker sizes 

Out nominal marker size 

Out range of marker sizes (minimum^aximiun) 

Out number of predefined polymarker indices 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the mmiber of available marker sizes is returned as 0, the workstation supports a continuous range 
of marker sizes. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In predefined polymarker index (l-n) I 

Out error indicator I 

Out marker type (-n..-l,l.,n) I 

Out marker size scale factor R 

Out polymarker colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as t) and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

66 Polymarker index is invalid 

68 A representation for the specified polymarker index has not been predefined on this workstation 



156 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE TEXT FAdLITIES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOn 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

Out error indicator 

Out number of text font and precision pairs 

Out list of text font and precision pairs (-n..-l,l. 

Out number of available character heights 

Out range of character heights (minimuni,maximum) 

Out number of available character expansion factors 

Out range of character expansion factors (minimum,maximum) 

Out number of predefined text indices 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are retiuned in 
the output parameters. 

If the number of available character heights is returned as 0, the worlcstation supports a continuous 
range of character heights. If the number of available character expansion factors is rettuned as 0, 
the workstation supports a continuous range of character expansion factors. If the available character 
heights and character expansion factors vary between fonts, the character heights and character 
expansion factors returned are for font 1. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.U.2 

Errors: 

none 







I 




(l..n) 


I 


n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) nxa;E) 




(0..n) 


I 


DC 


>0 


2xR 




(0..n) 


I 




>0 


2xR 




(2..n) 


I 



157 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED TEXT REPRESENTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP L0« 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In predefined text index (l-n) I 

Out error indicator I 

Out text font and precision (-n..-l,l..n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) (I;E) 

Out character expansion factor > R 

Out character spacing R 

Out text colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or §GOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

72 Text index is invalid 

74 A representation for the specified text index has not been predefined on this workstation 

References: . 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE FILL AREA FACILITIES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of available fill area interior styles (l-n) I 

Out list of available fill area interior styles (HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN,HATCH) n x E 

Out number of available hatch styles (0..n) I 

Out list of available hatch styles (-n..-l,l..n) nxl 

Out number of predefined fill area indices (5..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shaU be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 



158 



18:12369-1987 
tSO 7942-1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PREDEFINED FILL AREA REPRESENTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In predefined fill area index (l..n) I 

Out error indicator I 

Out fill area interior style (HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN,HATCH) E 

Out fill area style index (-n..-l,l..n) I 

Out fill area colour index (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is availably, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values retiumed in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGGP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

80 Fill area index is invalid 

82 A representation for the specified fill area index has not been predefined on this workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PATTERN FACILITIES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of predefined pattern indices (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 



159 





N 


(l.-n) 


I 




I 


(l..n) 


2x1 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PREDEFINED PATTERN REPRESENTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC^GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

In predefined pattern index 

Out error indicator 

Out pattern array dimensions 

Out pattern array (0..n)nxnxr 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values arc returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 
85 Specified pattern index is invalid 

89 A representation for the specified pattern index has not been predefined on this workstation 

90 Interior style PATTERN is not supported on this workstation 

References; 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE COLOUR FACILITIES GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of available colours or intensities (0,2..n) I 

Out colour available (COLOUR,MONOCHROME) E 

Out number of predefined colour indices (2..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the number of available colours or intensities is returned as 0, the workstation supports a continu- 
ous range of colours or intensities. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist * 
39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 



160 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PREDEFINED COLOUR REPRESENTATION GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOn 

Parameters: 

In worlcstation type N 

In predefined colour index (0..n) I 

Out error indicator I 

Out colour (red, green, blue intensities) [0,1] 3 x R 

Effect; If the inqmred information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

93 Colour index is invalid 

95 A representation for the specified colour index has not been predefined on this workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVES 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of available generalized drawing primitives (0..n) I 

Out list of GDP identifiers nxN 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid * 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 



161 



IS: 12369^1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In GDP identifier N 

Out error indicator 1 

Out number of sets of attributes used (0..4) I 

Out list of sets of attributes used (POLYLINE,POLYMARKER,TEXT,FILL AREA) n x E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

41 Specified workstation type is not able to generate the specified generalized drawing primitive 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE MAXIMUM LENGTH OF WORKSTATION STATE TABLES 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC^GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 
Out error indicator 

Out maximum number of polyline bundle table entries (5..n) 

Out maximum number of polymarker bundle table entries (5..n) 

Out maximum number of text bundle table entries (2..n) 

Out maximum number of fill area bundle table entries (5..n) 

Out maximum number of pattern indices {0..n) 

Out maximum number of colour indices (2..n) 
Effect: If ihe inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 



162 



is: 12369. 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS ilmctkHB Inquiry functioiis 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specked workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 

4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE NUMBER OF SEGMENT PRIORITIES SUPPORTED GKOP,WSOP,WSAC3GOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of segment priorities supported (0..n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the number of segment priorities supported is returned as 0, the workstation supports an infinite 
number of segment priorities. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.7.2 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



163 





N 
I 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


(IRCIMM) 


E 


(IRGJMM) 


E 


(IRGJMM) 


E 


flRGJMM) 


E 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 



tS; 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry fanctions GKS functions 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

Out error indicator 

Out segment transformation changeable 

Out visibility changeable from 'visible' to invisible' 

Out visibility changeable from 'invisible' to 'visible' 

Out highlighting changeable 

Out segment priority changeable 

Out adding primitives to the open segment 

Out segment deletion immediately visible 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 
IRG means that implicit regeneration is necessary; IMM means the action is performed immediately. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.5.3 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE LOGICAL INPUT DEVICES 

GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

Out error indicator 

Out number of locator devices (0..n) 

Out number of stroke devices (0..n) 

Out number of valuator devices (0..n) 

Out number of choice devices (0..n) 

Out number of pick devices (O-n) 

Out number of string devices (0..n) 

Effect; If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall he in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid * 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 



164 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE DEFAULT LOCATOR DEVICE DATA GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

In logical input device number 

Out error indicator 

Out default initial locator position 

Out number of available prompt and echo types 

Out list of available prompt and echo types 

Out default echo area 

Out default locator data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUT/N 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 







N 


wc 


(l..n) 


I 
I 
P 




(1-n) 


I 


(-n.. 


-l,l..n) 


nxl 


DC 




4xR 
D 



165 



(l..n) 




(64..n) 




(l..n) 




(-n..-l.l..n) 


nxl 


DC 


4xR 




D 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942* 1986 

Inqwry functions GKS fanctioas 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STROKE DEVICE DATA GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In logical input device number 

Out error indicator 

Out maximum input buflfer size 

Out number of available prompt and echo types 

Out list of available prompt and echo types 

Out default echo area 

Out default stroke data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values arc returned in 

the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE DEFAULT VALUATOR DEVICE DATA GKOP,WSOP,WSAC3GOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

In logical input device number 

Out error indicator 

Out default initial value 

Out number of available prompt and echo types 

Out list of available prompt and echo types 

Out default echo area 

Out default valuator data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availabihty: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAG or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid < 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN ' 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 



166 







N 




(l..n) 


I 

I 

R 




(l..n) 


I 


(-n. 


-l,l..n) 


nxl 


DC 




4xR 
D 



18:12369-1987 
180 7942-1^5 

GKS fonctions Inqiriry fiiMCtioas 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE DEFAULT CHOICE DEVICE DATA GKOP,WSOP,WSAC3GOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

In logical input device number 

Out error indicator 

Out maximum number of choice alternatives 

Out number of available prompt and echo types 

Out list of available prompt and echo types 

Out default echo area 

Out default choice data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified •workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 





N 


(l..n) 


I 




I 


(I..t») 


I 


(l..n) 


I 


(-n...l,l..n) 


ttXl 


DC 


4xR 




D 



167 







N 




(l..n) 


I 
I 




(l-.n) 


I 


(-n. 


-M..n) 


nxl 


DC 




4xR 
D 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

INQUIRE DEFAULT PICK DEVICE DATA GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lib 

Parameters: 

In workstation type 

In logical input device number 

Out error indicator 

Out number of available prompt and echo types 

Out list of available prompt and echo types 

Out default echo area 

Out default pick data record 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 
140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.6 
4.11.2 



Errors: 



none 



INQUIRE DEFAULT STRING DEVICE DATA GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOb 

Parameters: 

In workstation type N 

In logical input device number 

Out error indicator 

Out maximum string buffer size 

Out number of available prompt and echo types 

Out list of available prompt and echo types 

Out default echo area 

Out default string data record 

Effect: If the inquired infomriation is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availabiUty: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN , 

140 Specified input device is not present on workstation 



(l..n) 




(72..n) 




(l..n) 




(-n..-l,l..n) 


nxl 


DC 


4xR 




D 



168 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 '1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

References: 

4.5.1 
4.8.1 
4.8.6 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 

5.9.7 Inquiry functions for segment state list 

INQUIRE SET OF ASSOCIATED WORKSTATIONS WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Ll« 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

Out error indicator I 

Out number of associated workstations (i-n) I 

Out set of associated workstation identifiers n x N 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 

References: 

4.7 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In segment name N 

Out error indicator I 

Out segment transformation matrix 2 x 3 x R 

Out visibility (VISIBLE,INVISIBLE) E 

Out highlighting (NORMAL.HIGHLIGHTED) E 

Out segment priority [0,1] R 

Out detectability {UNDETECTABLE,DETECTABLE) E 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters, arc imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
120 Specified segment name is invalid 
122 Specified segment does not exist 



169 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942*1985 

Inqiriry functions GKS fnMtions 

References: 

4.7 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 

5.9.8 Pixel inquiries 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY DIMENSIONS WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In woritstation identifier N 

In 2 points P.Q WC 2xP 

Out error indicator I 

Out dimensions of pixel array (1-n) 2x1 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

The points P,Q define a rectangle. By transforming P and Q by the current normalization and works- 
tation transformations, the rectangle is mapped onto the display surface. The number of columns and 
the number of rows of pixels, whose positions lie within the rectangle, are returned. For this calcula- 
tion no clipping is applied. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 
39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

References: 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier N 

In point P WC P 

In dimensions of colour index array DX.DY (1 .n) 2x1 

Out error indicator I 

Out presence of invalid values (ABSENT,PRESENT) E 

Out colour index array (-l..n)nxnxl 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

By transforming P by the current normalization and workstation transformations, it is mapped onto a 
pixel of the display surface. The colour indices of the array of pixels, whose upper left comer is this 
pixel (associated with the (1,1) element), are returned in the colour index array. The orientation of 
the array is such that the first dimension increases as the X device coordinate increases and the second 
dimension increases as the Y device coordinate decreases. If the colour index corresponding to a par- 
ticular pixel cannot be ascertained (for example, the point P was transformed such that the position of 

170 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942. 1985 

GKS functions Inquiry functions 

the pixel is not on the display surface), the value -I (i.e. invalid) is assigned for that cell. 

If the inquired information is hot available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
thb reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, fVSAC or SGOP 
20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 
25 Specified workstation is not open 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUT/N 

40 Specified workstation has no pixel store readback capability 
91 Dimensions of colour array are invalid 

References: 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



INQUIRE PIXEL WSOP,WSAC3GOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In workstation identifier ' N 

In point P WC P 

Out error indicator I 

Out colour index (-l-n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

By transforming P by the current normalization and workstation transformations, it is mapped onto a 
pixel of the display surface. The colour index of this pixel is returned. If a colour index cannot be 
ascertained (for example, the point P was transformed such that the position of the pixel is not on the 
display surface), the value -1 (i.e. invalid) is returned: 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

40 Specified workstation has no pixel store readback capability 

References: 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



171 



IS 112369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Inquiry functions GKS functions 

5.9.9 Inquiry function for GKS error state list 

INQUIRE INPUT QUEUE OVERFLOW WSOP,WSAC,SGOP' LOc 

Parameters: 

Out error indicator I 

Out workstation identifier N 

Out input class (LOCATOR,STROKE,VALUATOR,CHOICE,PICK,STRING) E 

Out logical input device number (1-n) I 

Effect: If the inquired information is available, the error indicator is returned as and values are returned in 
the output parameters. 

If the input queue has overflowed since OPEN GKS or the last invocation of INQUIRE INPUT 
QUEUE OVERFLOW, the identification of the logical input device that caused the overflow is 
returned. The eptry is removed from the error state list. 

If the inquired information is not available, the values returned in the output parameters are imple- 
mentation dependent and the error indicator is set to one of the following error numbers to indicate 
the reason for non-availability: 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 

148 Input queue has not overflowed since GKS was opened or the last invocation of INQUIRE INPUT 
QUEUE OVERFLOW 

149 Input queue has overflowed, but associated workstation has been closed 

References: 

4.8.5 
4.11.2 

Errors: 

none 



172 



wc 


orNDC 


P 


wc 


orNDC 


2xR 

R 

2xR 




(WCNDC) 


E 




2 


x3xR 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS functions Utility functions 

5.10 Utility functions 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In fixed point 

In shift vector 

In rotation angle in radians (positive if anticlockwise) 

In scale factors 

In coordinate switch 

Out segment transformation matrix 

Effect: The transformation defined by fixed point, shift vector, rotation angle, and scale factors is evaluated 
and the result is put in the output segment transformation matrix (for use, for example, by INSERT 
SEGMENT and SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION). The coordinate switch determines 
whether the shift vector and fixed point arc given in WC coordinates or NDC coordinates. If WC 
coordinates are used, the shift vector and the fixed point are transformed by the current normalization 
transformation. The order of transformation is: scale, rotate (both relative to the specified fixed 
point), and shift. The elements A/ 13 and Af 23 of the resufting 2x3 transformation matrix are in NDC 
coordinates; the other elements are unitless. 

References: 

4.7,3 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP. WSOP, WSAC or SGOP 



ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX GKOP,WSOP,WSAC.SGOP Lla 

Parameters: 

In segment transformation matrix 

In fixed point 

In shift vector 

In rotation angle in radians (positive if anticlockwise) 

In scale factors 

In coordinate switch 

Out segment transformation matrix 2 x 3 x R 

Effect: The transformation defined by fixed point, shift vector, rotation angler, and scale factors is composed 
with the input segment transformation matrix and the result is returned in the output segment 
transformation matrix (for use, for example, by INSERT SEGMENT and SET SEGMENT 
TRANSFORMATION). The coordinate switch determines whether the shift vector and fixed point 
arc given in WC coordinates or NDC coordinates. If WC coordinates are used, the shift vector and 
the fixed point are transformed by the current normalization transformation. The order of transfor- 
mation is: specified input matrix, scale, rotate (both relative to the specified fijced point), and shift. 
The elements M 13 and Af 23 of the 2 x 3 input matrix and the resulting 2x3 transformation matrix are 
in NDC coordinates; the other elements are unitless. 

References: 
4.7.3 

Errors: 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 





2 


x3xR 


WC 


orNDC 


P 


wc 


orNDC 


2xR 

R 

2xR 




(WC.NDC) 


E 



173 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Error handling GKS ftinctkHM 

5.11 Error handling 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS GKCL,GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 
none 
EflFect: GKS is emergency closed (see 4.12). The following actions are performed (if possible): 

a) CLOSE SEGMENT (if open); 

b) UPDATE for all open workstations; 

c) DEACTIVATE all active workstations; 

d) CLOSE all open workstations; 

e) CLOSE GKS. 

This function may be called even if the error state is ON. If GKS is already closed (operating state 
GKCL), no action is taken. 

References: 
4.12 

Errors: 

none 



ERROR HANDLING GKCL,GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In error number as listed in annex B I 

In identification of the GKS procedure called by the N 

application program which caused the error detection 

In error file N 

NOTE - The last parameter has been defined in OPEN GKS. 

Effect: The ERROR HANDLING procedure is called by GKS in any of the error situations listed in annex 
B. The standard procedure just calls the ERROR LOGGING procedure with the same parameters. 

NOTE - The ERROR HANDLING procedure may be replaced by an application program supplied procedure to nUow specific reac- 
tion to some error situations. 

References: • 

4.12 

Errors: 

none 



ERROR LOGGING GKCL,GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP LOa 

Parameters: 

In error number as listed in annex B I 

In identification of the GKS procedure called by the N 

application program which caused the error detection 

In error file N 

* 

NOTE - The last parameter has been defined in OPEN GKS. 



174 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS imctions Error handHiig 

Effect: The ERROR LOGGING procedure: 

a) prints an error message and GKS function identification on the error file; 

b) returns to the calling procedure. 
References: 

4.12 

Errors: 

none 



175 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



6 GKS data structures 



6.1 Notation and data types 

In this clause, the contents of the GKS data structures are listed. 

The information for each entry includes 

a) the name of the entry; 

b) the coordinate system (if appropriate); 

c) the permitted values; 

d) the data type; 

e) the initial value (if appropriate). 

The notation used to express the data type, coordinate system and permitted values is also used to describe 
the parameters of the GKS functions in clause 5. 

The data type can be a simple type, which is one of the following: 

I integer whole number 

R real floating point number 

S string number of characters and character sequence 

P point 2 real values specifying the x- and y-coordinates of a location in WC, NDC or 

DC space 

N name identification (used for error file, workstation identifier, connection identifier, 

workstation type, specific escape function identification, GDP identifier, pick 
identifier, segment name and identification of a GKS function). In a program- 
ming language, not all these instances of the name data type need be bound to the 
same data type in the language. 

E enumeration type a data type comprising a set of values. The set is defined by enumerating the 
identifiers which denote the values. This type could be mapped, for example, onto 
scalar types in Pascal, or onto integers in FORTRAN. 

Alternatively, the data type can be a combination of simple types, thus 

f) a vector of values, for example, 2 x R 

g) a matrix of values, for example, 2 x 3 x R 

h) a list of values of one type: the type can be a simple type or a vector, for example, n x I and n x 4 x R 
i) an array of values of simple type, for example, n x n x I 
j) an ordered pair of different types, for example, (I;E) 
or it can be: 

D data record a compound data type, the content and structure of which 
are not defined in this International Standard. 

An occurrence of n merely indicates a variable integer value and does not necessarily relate to other 
occurrences of n. 

How these data types are represented in a given implementation is dependent on the features of the program- 
ming language and on the capabilities of the system. Each language dependent layer has to map the GKS 
data types onto the data types available in the programming language. 

♦ 
For coordinate data, the relevant coordinate system is indicated 



176 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

GKS data structures Notation and data types 

k) WC : world coordinate system; 

1) NDC : normalized device coordinate system; 

m) DC : device coordinate systems. 

See 4.3 for more information about coordinate systems in GKS. It should be pointed out that different coor- 
dinate systems may be used in a function call and in the state lists to describe the same entry. 

Permitted values can be specified by 

n) a condition, for example, >0 or [0,1]; the latter implies that the value lies between and 1 inclusively; 

o) a standard range of integer values, for example, (1..4); 

p) a range of integer values in which the maximum is determined by implementation or other constraints, 
for example (32.. n). An occurrence of n does not necessarily imply any relationship with other 
occurrences of n: n merely denotes a variable integer in this context; 

q) a list of values which constitute an enumeration type, for example, (SUPPRESSED,ALLOWED); 

r) an ordered list of any of the above. 

Initial values, if present, occur on the last column of the data structure Hsts. The following abbreviations 
occur: 

s) undef: undefined value; 

t) i.d: implementation dependent; 

u) w.d.t: initial value taken from workstation description table. 

If no initial value is given, the value is set by the relevant GKS function. 



177 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

Operating state 



GKS data stractnres 



6.2 Operating state 

Operating stale 
value (static variable) 



(GKCL,GKOP,WSOP,WSAC,SGOP) 



GKCL 



178 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



GKS data stnictures 



GKS descriptkm taMc 



6.3 GKS description table 

level of GKS 

number or available work&laiion lypes 

list of available workstation types 

maximum number or simultaneously open workstations 

maxinium number of simultaneously active workstations 

maximum number of workstations associated with a segment 

maximum normalization transformation number 



(0a,0b.0c.la.lb.lc.2a.2b,2c) 


E 


t.d 


(l..n> 


I 


id 




nXN 


i.d 


(l.n) 


1 


id 


(l.n) 


I 


i.d 


(l.n) 


1 


id 


(l.n) 


1 


i.d 



179 



IS $12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1986 



GKS state list 



GKS data structures 



6.4 GKS state list 

set of open workstalions 

set of active workstations 

current polyline index 

current linelype 

current linewidth scale factor 

current polyline colour index 

current linelype ASF 

current linewidth scale factor ASF 

current polyline colour index ASF 

current polymarker index 

current marker type 

current marker size scale factor 

current polymarker colour index 

current marker type ASF 

current marker size scale factor ASF 

current polymarker colour index ASF 

current text index 

current text font and precision 

current character expansion factor 

current character spacing 

current text colour index 

current text font and precision ASF 

current character expansion factor ASF 

current character spacing ASF 

current text colour index ASF 

current character height 

current character up vector 

current character width 

current character base vector 

current text path 

current text alignment (horizontal and vertical) 

(NORMAL,LEFT,CENTRE,RIGHT;> 

current fill area index 
current fill area interior style 
current fill area style index 
current fill area colour index 
current fill area interior style ASF 
current fill area style index ASF 
current fill area colour index ASF 
current pattern width vector 
current pattern height vector 
current pattern reference point 
current pick identifier 

current normalization transformaiion number 
list of normalization transformations ordered by 

viewport input priority (initially in numerical order with highest), 

for every entry: 
normialization transformation number 

window 

viewport 
clipping indicator 
clipping rectangle 
name of open segment 





nXN 


empty 




nXN 


empty 


(l..n) 


I 


I 


(-0.-1, l..n) 


I 


1 


^0 


R 


1.0 


(0..n) 


I 


I 


(BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(l.n) 


I 


I 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


I 


3 


^0 


R 


1.0 


(0..n) 


1 


1 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


sec the note 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


'see the note 


(l.n) 


I 


1 


(-n.-l,l .n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) 


(i;E) 


I;STRING 


>0 


R 


1.0 




R 


0.0 


(O.n) 


I 


1 


(BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


WC >0 


R 


0.01 


WC 


2XR 


0,1 


WC >0 


R 


0.01 


WC 


2XR 


1,0 


(RIGHT,LEFT,UP,DOWN) 


E 


RIGHT 


MAL.TOP.CAP,HALF,BASE.BOTTOM) 


2XE 






(NORMAL;NORMAL) 


(l..n) 


I 


1 


(HOLLOW.SOLID.PATTERN.HATCH) 


E 


HOLLOW 


(-n..-I,l..n) 


1 


1 


(0..n) 


I 


1 


(BUNDLEDJNDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


(BUNDLED.INDIVIDUAL) 


E 


see the note 


WC 


2XR 


LO 


WC 


2XR 


0,1 


WC 


P 

N 


(0,0) 


language binding dependent 


(O.n) 


1 






(0..n) 







entry 


number 


WC 


4^X R 




0.1.0.1 


NDC 


4X R 




0.1. 0.1 


(CLIP.NOCLIP) 


E 




CLIP 


NDC 


4XR 




0.1.0,1 




N 




undef 



180 



GKS data structures 

set of segment names in use 

scl of segment stale lists (one slate lisl for every segment: 
input queue (one enlry for each evenl report) 
for every entry: 
workstation identifier 
device number 
last of group of simultaneous events 

(a single evenl is indicated by LAST) 
input class (LOCATOR 

if LOCATOR 
normalization transformation number ^ 

position 
if STROKE 
normalization transformation number 
number of points 
points in stroke 
if VALUATOR 

value 
if CHOICE 
status 

choice number 
if PICK 
status . 
segment name 
pick identifier 
if STRING 
string 
current event report containing: 
input class (NONE,LOCATOR, 

if LOCATOR 
normalization transformation number 
position 
if STROKE 
normalization transformation number 
number of points 
points in stroke 
if VALUATOR 

value 
if CHOICE 
status 

choice number 
if PICK 
status 

segment name 
pick identifier 
if STRING 
string 
more simultaneous events 



6.7) 



18:12369 


-1987 


ISO 7942 • 


1985 


GKS state Ust 


nXN 


empty 




empty 




empty 


N 


undef 


(l.n) I 


undef 


(LAST.NOTLAST) E 


undef 



STROKE,VALUATOR,CHOICE,PICK.STRING) 



STROKE,VALUATOR,CHOICE.PICK,STRING) 

(0..n) 



WC 



wc 



(0..n) 
(On) 



I 
P 

I 
I 

nXP 

R 



undef 



(0..n) 


I 


undef 


WC 


P 


undef 


(0..n) 


I 


undef 


(0..n) 


I 


undef 


WC 


nXP 


undef 




R 


undef 


(OK,N0CH01CE) 


E 


undef 


(l..n) 


I 


undef 


(OK.NOPICK) 


E 


undef 




N 


undef 




N 


undef 



undef 

NONE 

undef 
undef 

undef 
undef 
undef 

undef 



(OK.NOCHOICE) 


E 


undef 


(l.n) 


I 


undef 


(OK.NOPICK) 


E 


undef 




N 


undef 




N 


undef 




S 


undef 


MOMORE.MORE) 


E 


NOMORE 



NOTE - All the initial ASF values are (he same. It is implementation dependent whether the initial ASF values are all BUNDLED or 
arc all INDIVIDUAL. 



181 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Work«tatkHi state list 



GKS data stnictHres 



6.5 Workstation state list 

One workstation state list exists for every open workstation. For workstations of category MO, the values 
marked w.d.t in the following list are actually implementation dependent because the workstation description 
table does not contain the corresponding entries. 



Entries in ihis group exist for all workstation categories 
workslalion identifier 
connection identifier 
workstation type 



N 
N 
N 



the above 3 entries are iniUalised by OPEN WORKSTATION 

Entries in this group do not exist for workstations of category INPUT and Ml 



workstation state 

set of stored segments for this workstation 

Entries in this group do not exist for workstations of categories INPUT, fVtSS and Ml 



(!NACTIVE,ACTIVE) 



E INACTIVE 
n X N empty 



deferral mode 

implicit regeneration mode 

display surface empty 

new frame action necessary at update 

number of polyline bundle ubie entries 
table of defined polyline bundles, 
for every entry: 

polyline index 

linetype 

linewidth scale factor 

polyline colour index 

number of polymarker bundle table entries 
table of defined polymarker bundles, 
for every entry: 

polymarker index 

marker type 

marker size scale factor 

polymarker colour index 

number of text bundle table entries 
table of defined text bundles, 
for every entry: 

text index 

text font and precision 

character expansion factor 

character spacing 

text colour index 

number of fill area bundle table entries 
table of defined fill area bundles, 
for every entry: 

fill area index 

fill area interior style 

fill area style index 

fill area colour index 



(ASAP.BNICBN I L,ASTI) 


E 


w.d.t 


(SU PPRESSED,ALLOWED) 


E 


w.d.t 


(EMPTY.NOTEMPTY) 


E 


EMPTY 


(NO,YES) 


E 


NO 



(5..n) 



(1-n) 
(-n..-I,l..n) 

(0..n) 

(5..n) 



(l.n) 

(-n.-l,l..n) 

SO 

(0..n) 

(2..n) 



(In) 
(-n..-l,l..n;STRING,CHAR,STROKE) 

>0 

(0..n) 

(5..n) 



(In) 

(HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN.HATCH) 

(-n..-l.l..n) 

(0..n> 



(I:E: 



w.d.t 



w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.t 

wd.t 



w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.t 

w.d.t 



w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.t 
w.d.i 

w.d.l 



w.d.i 
w.d.l 
w.d.l 
w.d.l 



182 



IS t 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -198S 



GKS data striKtiires 



Workstation state list 



number of pattern tabk entries 
table of pattern representations, 
for every entry: 

pallern index 

pattern array dimensions 

pattern array 



(0..n) 



w.d.l 



(t..n) 


1 


w.d.t 


(l-.n) 


2x1 


w.d.t 


(O.n) 


nXnXi 


w.d.t 



number of colour table entries 
table of colour representations, 
for every entry: 

colour index 

colour (red. green, blue intensities) 

workstation transformation update state 

requested workstation window 
current workstation window 
requested workstation viewport 
current workstation viewport 



(2..n) 



{0..n) 
lO.I] 



(NOTPENDING.PENDING) 

NDC 

NDC 
DC 
DC 



I 
3XR 



w.d.t 



w.d.t 
w.d.t 



NOTPENDING 
4XR 0.1.0,1 

4 X R 0,1,0,1 

4 X R 0,xd,0,yd 
4 X R 0,xd,0,yd 
where (xd.yd) is the display space size from the w.d.t 



Entries in this group do not exist for workstations of categories OUTPUT, IVISS, MO and MI 



for every logical input device of class LOCATOR: 
locator device number 
operating mode 
echo switch 

initial normalization transformation number 
initial locator position 
prompt and echo type 
echo area 
locator data record 

for every logical input device of class STROKE: 
stroke device number 
operating mode 
echo switch 

initial normalization transformation number 
initial number of points 
initial points in stroke 
prompt and echo type 
echo area 

stroke data record containing at least: 
input buffer size 

for every logical input device of class VALUATOR: 
valuator device number 
operating mode 
echo switch 
initial value 
prompt and echo type 
echo area 
valuator data record containing al least: 

low value 

high value 



(l..n) 


I 


w.d.t 


(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 


E 


REQUEST 


(ECHO.NOECHO) 


£ 


ECHO 


{0..n) 


I 





WC 


P 


w.d.t 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


1 


1 


DC 


4XR 


w.d.t 




D 


i.d 


(In) 


I 


w.d.t 


(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 


E 


REQUEST 


(ECHO.NOECHO) 


E 


ECHO 


(O.-n) 


I 


undef 


(0..n) 


I 





WC 


nxP 


empty 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


I 


1 


DC 


4XR 


w.d.t 




D 


i.d 


(l..n) 


1 


w.d.t 


(l.n) 


I 


w.d.l 


( REQU EST,S AM PLE.E VENT) 


E 


REQUEST 


(ECHO.NOECHO) 


E 


ECHO 


~~-- 


R 


w.d.t 


(-n..-l.l..n) 


1 


1 


DC 


4XR 


w.d.l 




D 


i.d 




A 


w.d.l 




R 


w.d.l 



183 



18:12369*1987 
ISO 7942-1985 



Workstation state list 



GKS data stractares 



Tor every logical input device of class CHOICE: 
choice device number 
operating mode 
echo switch 
initial status 
initial choice number 
prompt and echo type 
echo area 
choice data record 

for every logical input device of class PICK: 
pick device number 
operating mode 
echo switch 
initial status 
initial segment 
initial pick identilier 
prompt and echo type 
echo area 
pick data record 

tor every logical input device of class STRING: 
string device numbei' 
operating mode 
echo iiwitch 
initial siring 
prompt and echo type 
echo area 
string data record containing at least: 

input huifer size 
. initial cursor position 



(l-n) 


I 


w.d.i 


( REQU EST.SAMPLE,E VENT) 


E 


REQUEST 


(ECHO,NOECHO) 


E 


ECHO 


(OK,NOCHOICE) 


E 


NOCHOICE 


(l.n) 


I 


undef 


<-n..-l.l..n) 


I 


1 


DC 


4XR 


w.d.l 




D 


i.d 


(l.n) 


1 


w.d.l 


(REQUEST,SAMPLE,EVENT) 


E 


REQUEST 


(ECHCNOECHO) 


E 


ECHO 


(OK.NOPICK) 


E 


NOPICK 




N 


undef 




N 


undef 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


I 


1 


DC 


4XR 


w.d.t 




D 


i.d 


(l.n) 


1 


w.d.l 


(REQUEST.SAMPLE,EVENT) 


E 


REQUEST 


(ECHO.NOECHO) 


E 


ECHO 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


1 


I 


DC 


4X R 


w.d.t 




D 


i.d 


(l.n) 


1 


w.d.t 


<l.n) 


r 


w.d.l 



184 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

GKS data structures Workstation description table 

6.6 Workstation description table 

There are three special categories of GKS workstation: 

a) WISS (Workstation Independent Segment Storage); 

b) MO (GKSM Output); 

c) MI (GKSM Input). 

For levels and 1 there is no WISS; for level 2 there is exactly one WISS. 

There may be a number of different workstation types for MO and MI to accommodate different metafile for- 
mats. These special workstations have a restricted workstation description table. 

Further workstation types may be assigned and are implementation dependent, for example: 

d) storage tube type 1; 

e) flat bed plotter I. 

The workstation description tables cannot be changed by the application program. There is only one works- 
tation description table for each workstation type available in a given implementation. 

Entries in this group exist for ail workstation categories 

workslation type N i.d 

workstation category {OUTPUT,INPUT,OUTIN.WISS.MO.MI) E i.d 

Entries in this group do not exist for workstations of categories WISS. MO and MI 

device coordinate units (METRES.OTHER) E ><1 

display space size 

(visible area of the display surface or available area on tablet for workstations of category INPUT) 

in device coordinate units DC > 2 x R i.d 

in raster units (integer by integer) > 2xi i.d 
(for vector displays, for example, the raster units give the highest possible resolution; for raster displays, 
the number of columns and lines of the raster array) 

Entries in this group do not exist for workstations of categories INPUT, WISS, MO and Ml 

raster or vector display (VECTOR.RASTER.OTHER) E id 

(VECTOR = vector display, RASTER = raster device, 

OTHER = other device, for example, vector + raster) 
dynamic modification accepted for: 

polyline bundle representation 

polymarker bundle representation 

text bundle representation 

fill area bundle representation 

pattern representation 

colour representation 

workstation transformation 

where: 
I RG: implicit regeneration necessary (may be deferred) 
IMM; performed immediately 
default value for: 

deferral mode 

implicit regeneration mode 
number of available lineiypes 
list of available linetypes 
number of available linewidths 

(a value of indicates thai a continuous range of linewidths is supported) 
nominal tinewidlh DC >0 R i.d 

185 



(IRG.IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRCIMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRG.IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRGJMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRCIMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRC'MM) 


E 


i.d 



(ASAP.BNIG,BNIL,ASTI) 


E 


id 


UPPRESSED.ALLOWED) 


E 


i.d 


(4..n) 


. 1 


i.d 


(-n..-t.l..n) 


n XI 


i.d 


(0..n) 


I 


i.d 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Workstation description table 



GKS data stractures 



minimum linewidlh 
maximum linewidlh 

number of predefined polyline indices(bund]es) 
labie of predefined polyline bundles, 
for every entry: 

linelype 

linewidlh scale factor 

polyline colour index (within range of predefined colour indices) 
number of available marker types 
list of available marker types 
number of available marker sizes 

(a value of indicates that a continuous range of marker sizes is supported) 
nominal marker size 
minimum marker size 
maximum marker size 

number of predefined polymarker indices (bundles) 
table of predefined polymarker bundles, 
for every entry: 

marker type 

marker size scale factor 

polymarker colour index (within range of predefined colour indices) (i 

number of text font and precision pairs 

list of text font and precision pairs (-n,.-l,l..n;STRINO,Cl 

number of available character expansion factors 

(a value of indicates that a continuous range of character expansion factors is supported) 
minimum character expansion factor 
maximum character expansion factor 

(if the available character expansion factors vary between fonts, these values are for font 1) 
number of available character heights 

(a value of indicates that a continuous range of character heights is supported) 
minimum character height 
maximum character height 

(if the available character heights vary between fonts, these values are for font I ) 
number of predefined text indices(b undies) 
table of predefined text bundles, 
for every entry: 

text font and precision (-n..-l . 1 ..n;STRING.CHAR,STROKE) 

character expansion factor >0 

character spacing 

texi colour index (within range of predefined colour indices) (0..n) 

number of available fill area interior styles (1-4) 

list of available fill area interior styles (HOLLOW,SOLID,PATTERN.HATCH) 

number of available hatch styles (0..n) 

list of available hatch styles (-n..-M..n) 

number of predefined fill area indices(bundles) , (3..n) 

table of predefined fill area bundles, 
for every entry: 

fill area interior style (HOLLOW .SOLID.PATTERN.HATCH) 

fill area style index (-n..-l,l..n) 

(for interior style PATTERN is within range of predefined pattern indices) 

(for interior style HATCH is within range of available hatch styles) 

till area colour index (within range of predefined colour indices) (O.n) 

number of prede< ,ned pallern indices (representations) (0..n) 

table of predefined paltcrri represeniations, 
for every entry: 

pullern array diiiiensions (In) 

pallern arras (O.n) 



DC >0 


R 


id 


DC >Q 


R 


i.d 


(5..n) 


I 


i.d 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


1 


i.d 




R 


i.d 


(0..n) 


I 


i.d 


(5..n) 


I 


i.d 


(-n..-l.l.-n) 


nXl 


i.d 


(0..n) 


I 


id 


DC >0 


R 


i.d 


DC >0 


R 


id 


DC >0 


R 


i.d 


(5..n) 


I 


i.d 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


I 


i.d 




R 


i.d 


B..n) 1 


i.d 




(l..n) 


I 


i.d 


iAR,STROKE) 


n X (I;E) 


i.d 


(0..n) 


I 


i.d 


>0 


R 


i.d 


>0 


R 


i.d 



DC 
DC 



(0..n) 

>0 
>0 

(2..n) 



i.d 

i.d 
i.d 

i.d 



(i;E) 


i.d 


R 


id 


R 


i.d 


I 


i.d 


I 


i.d 


nXE 


i.d 


I 


i.d 


nXl 


id 


1 


i.d 


E 


id 


I 


id 


1 


id 


1 


id 


t 




2x1 


i.d 


X nx 1 


i.U 



186 



IS; 12369*1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



GKS data structures 



Workstation description table 



number or avuilable colours or intensities 

(a value oro indicates that a continuous range of colours is supported) 
colour available 

number of predetined colour indices( representations) 
table of predefined colour representations, 
for every entry: 
colour(red, green, blue intensities) 
number of available generalized drawing primitives 
list of available generalized drawing primitives (may be empty), 
for every GDP: 
GDP identifier 

number of sets of attributes used 

list of sets of attributes used (POLYLlNE,POL 

maximum number of polyline bundle table entries 
maximum number of polymarker bundle table entries 
maximum number of text bundle table entries 
maximum number of fill area bundle table entries 
maximum number of pattern indices 
maximum number of colour indices 
number of segment priorities supported 

(a value of indicates that a continuous range of priorities is supported) 
dynamic modification accepted for: 
segment transfprmation 
visibility (visible -» invisible) 
visibility (invisible -• visible) 
highlighting 
segment priority 
adding primitives to open segment overlapping segment 

of higher priority 
delete segment 
where: 
IRG: implicit regeneration necessary (may be deferred) 
IMM: performed immediately 



(0,2..n) 



i.d 



(COLOUR,MONOCHROME) 


E 


i.d 


(2..n) 


I 


i.d 


at least entries zero and 


one 


[0,1] 


3XR 


i.d 


(On) 


I 


i.d 




N 


i.d 


(0..4) 


I 


id 


iARKER,TEXT,FILL AREA) 


nXE 


i.d 


(5..n) 


I 


id 


(5..n) 


1 


i.d 


(2..n) 






(5..n) 


I 


id 


(O.n) 


I 


id 


(2..n) 


I 


i.d 


(O.n) 


I 


t.d 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(1RG,IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


id 


(IRG.IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


i.d 


(IRG,IMM) 


E 


i.d 



Entries in this group do not exist for workstations of categories OUTPUT. WISS. MO and Sfl 



for every logical input device of class LOCATOR: 
locator device number 
default initial locator position 
number of available prompt and echo types 
list of available prompt and echo types 
default echo area 
default locator data record 

for every logical input device of class STROKE: 
stroke device number 
maximum input buffer size 
number of available prompt and echo types 
list of available prompt and echo types 
default echo area 

default stroke data record containing at least: 
input bulTer size 



WC 



DC 



DC 



(l.n) 


I 


i.d 




P 


i.d 


(l.n) 


I 


i.d 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


nxl 


i.d 




4XR 


i.d 




D 


id 


(l..n) 


I 


i.d 


(64..n) 


I 


i.d 


(l.n) 


I 


i.6 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


n X I 


i.d 




4XR 


i.d 




D 


i.d 


(l.n) 


I 


i.d 



187 



18:12369-1987 
tSO 7942 -1985 



Workstation description taUe 



GKS data stnictvres 



for every logical input device of class VALUATOR: 
valuator device number 
default initial value 

number of available prompt and echo types 
list of available prompt and echo types 
default echo area 
default valuator data record containing at least; 

low value 

high value 

for every logical input device of class CHOICE: 
choice device number 
maximum number of choice alternatives 
number of available prompt and echo types 
list of available prompt and echo types 
default echo area 
default choice data record 

for every logical input device of class PICK: 
pick device number 

number of available prompt and echo tjrpes 
list of available prompt and echo types 
default echo area 
default pick data record 

for every logical input device of class STRING: 
siring device number 
maximum input buffer size 
number of available prompt and echo types 
list of available prompt and echo types 
defauh echo area 
default string data record containing at least: 

input butTer size 

initial cursor position 



DC 



DC 



DC 



DC 



(l..n) 


I 


i.d 




R 


id 


(l..n) 


1 


i.d 


(.n.,-l.l..n) 


nXl 


i.d 




4XR 


i.d 




D 


i.d 




R 


i.d 




R 


id 


(l..n) 


I 


i.d 


(l..n) 


1 


i.d 


(l.n) 


I 


i.d 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


nxl 


i.d 




4XR 


i.d 




D 


i.d 


(l..n) 


I 


id 


(l..n) 


I 


i.d 


(-n..-l,l..n) 


nxl 


i.d 




4XR 


id 




D 


i.d 


(l.n) 


I 


i.d 


(72..n) 


I 


id 


(l-n) 


I 


id 


(-n..-M..n) 


nXl 


id 




4XR 


i.d 




D 


i.d 


(l-n) 


I 


i.d 


(l.n) 


I 


1 



188 



GKS data stnictHres 

6.7 Segment state list 

One segment state list exists for the open segment and for each stored segment. 

segment name 

set of associated workstations 

segment transformation matrix 

(the elements M 13 and A/ 23 are 

in NDC coordinates and the other elements 

are unilless) 
visibility (VISIBLE,INVISIBLE) 

highlighting (NORMAL.HIGHLIGHTED) 

segment priority EO,l] 

detectability (UNDETECTABLE.DETECTABLE) 



IS:12369-1987 
ISO 7942*1986 

Segment state list 



N 
nXN 
active workstations at create segment 
2X3XR 1.0,0 

0,1,0 



E VISIBLE 
E NORMAL 
R 

E 
UNDETECTABLE 



189 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 



GKS error state list 



GKS data structures 



6.8 GKS error state list 

error siale (OFF.ON) E OFF 

error file N i.d 

identification of one of the logical input devices that caused an input queue overflow: 

workstation identifier N undef 

mpul class (LOCATOR,STROKE.VALUATOR.CH01CE,PICK,STRING) E undef 

logical input device number (l-n) I undef 



190 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex A 
Function lists 

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.) 

A.l Alphabetic 

Page 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 101 

AWAIT EVENT 122 

CELL ARRAY 77 

CLEAR WORKSTATION 69 

CLOSE GKS 67 

CLOSE SEGMENT 99 

CLOSE WORKSTATION 68 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 101 

CREATE SEGMENT 99 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

DELETE SEGMENT 100 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 100 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS 174 

ERROR HANDLING 174 

ERROR LOGGING 174 

ESCAPE 73 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 

FILL AREA 75 

FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS 123 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) 7S 

GET CHOICE 124 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM 126 

GET LOCATOR 123 

GET PICK 124 

GET STRING 125 

GET STROKE 123 

GET VALUATOR 124 

INITIALISE CHOICE 109 

INITIALISE LOCATOR 106 

INITIALISE PICK 110 

INITIALISE STRING 111 

INITIALISE STROKE 107 

INITIALISE VALUATOR 108 

INQUIRE CHOICE DEVICE STATE 150 

INQUIRE CLIPPING 134 

INQUIRE COLOUR FACILITIES 160 

INQUIRE COLOUR REPRESENTATION 146 

INQUIRE CURRENT INDIVIDUAL ATTRIBUTE VALUES 132 

INQUIRE CURRENT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 132 

INQUIRE CURRENT PICK IDENTIFIER VALUE 1 3 1 

INQUIRE CURRENT PRIMITIVE ATTRIBUTE VALUES 131 

INQUIRE DEFAULT CHOICE DEVICE DATA ♦ 167 

INQUIRE DEFAULT DEFERRAL STATE VALUES 154 

INQUIRE DEFAULT LOCATOR DEVICE DATA 165 

INQUIRE DEFAULT PICK DEVICE DATA 168 

191 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942. 1985 

Alphabetic Annex A 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STRING DEVICE DATA 168 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STROKE DEVICE DATA 166 

INQUIRE DEFAULT VALUATOR DEVICE DATA 166 

INQUIRE DISPLAY SPACE SIZE 153 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 164 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF WORKSTATION ATTRIBUTES 1 53 

INQUIRE FILL AREA FACILITIES 158 

INQUIRE FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 143 

INQUIRE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 162 

INQUIRE INPUT QUEUE OVERFLOW 172 

INQUIRE LEVEL OF GKS 128 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVES 161 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE WORKSTATION TYPES 129 

INQUIRE LIST OF COLOUR INDICES 145 

INQUIRE LIST OF FILL AREA INDICES 143 

INQUIRE LIST OF NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBERS 133 

INQUIRE LIST OF PATTERN INDICES 144 

INQUIRE LIST OF POLYLINE INDICES 137 

INQUIRE LIST OF POLYMARKER INDICES 138 

INQUIRE LIST OF TEXT INDICES 139 

INQUIRE LOCATOR DEVICE STATE 148 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM LENGTH OF WORKSTATION STATE TABLES 162 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 130 

INQUIRE MORE SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS 135 

INQUIRE NAME OF OPEN SEGMENT 1 34 

INQUIRE NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 133 

INQUIRE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE LOGICAL INPUT DEVICES 164 

INQUIRE NUMBER OF SEGMENT PRIORITIES SUPPORTED 163 

INQUIRE OPERATING STATE VALUE 128 

INQUIRE PATTERN FACILITIES 159 

INQUIRE PATTERN REPRESENTATION 145 

INQUIRE PICK DEVICE STATE 151 

INQUIRE PIXEL 171 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY 170 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY DIMENSIONS 170 

INQUIRE POLYLINE FACILITIES 154 

INQUIRE POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 137 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER FACILITIES 156 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 139 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED COLOUR REPRESENTATION 161 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 159 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED PATTERN REPRESENTATION 160 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 155 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 156 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED TEXT REPRESENTATION 158 

INQUIRE SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 169 

INQUIRE SET OF ACTIVE WORKSTATIONS 130 

INQUIRE SET OF ASSOCIATED WORKSTATIONS 169 

INQUIRE SET OF OPEN WORKSTATIONS 130 

INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES IN USE 134 

INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES ON WORKSTATION 147 

INQUIRE STRING DEVICE STATE 1 5 1 

INQUIRE STROKE DEVICE STATE 149 

INQUIRE TEXT EXTENT ' 141 

INQUIRE TEXT FACILITIES 157 

INQUIRE TEXT REPRESENTATION 140 

INQUIRE VALUATOR DEVICE STATE 149 

192 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex A Alphabetic 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CATEGORY 152 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CLASSIFICATION 1 52 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CONNECTION AND TYPE i35 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION DEFERRAL AND UPDATE STATES 136 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION MAXIMUM NUMBERS 129 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION STATE 136 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION TRANSFORMATION 147 

INSERT SEGMENT 102 

INTERPRET ITEM 127 

MESSAGE 72 

OPEN GKS 67 

OPEN WORKSTATION 67 

POLYLINE 74 

POLYMARKER 74 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM 126 

REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 70 

RENAME SEGMENT 99 

REQUEST CHOICE 117 

REQUEST LOCATOR 116 

REQUEST PICK 118 

REQUEST STRING 118 

REQUEST STROKE 116 

REQUEST VALUATOR 1 1 7 

SAMPLE CHOICE 121 

SAMPLE LOCATOR 119 

SAMPLE PICK 121 

SAMPLE STRING 122 

SAMPLE STROKE 120 

SAMPLE VALUATOR 120 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 97 

SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS 89 

SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 84 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 85 

SET CHARACTER SPACING 84 

SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 85 

SET CHOICE MODE 114 

SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 97 

SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION 94 

SET DEFERRAL STATE 72 

SET DETECTABILITY 105 

SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 88 

SET FILL AREA INDEX 86 

SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 87 

SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 93 

SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 87 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 104 

SET LINETYPE 80 

SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR ^ 81 

SET LOCATOR MODE 1 1 3 

SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 82 

SET MARKER TYPE 82 

SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 88 

SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION 94 

SET PATTERN SIZE ' 88 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER 89 

SET PICK MODE 115 

SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 81 

193 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Alphabetic Annex A 

SET POLYLINE INDEX 80 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 90 

SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 83 

SET POLYMARKER INDEX 81 

SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 91 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 104 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 103 

SET STRING MODE 115 

SET STROKE MODE 113 

SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 86 

SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 85 

SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 83 

SET TEXT INDEX 83 

SET TEXT PATH 86 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 92 

SET VALUATOR MODE 1 14 

SET VIEWPORT 96 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY 96 

SET VISIBILITY , 103 

SET WINDOW 96 

SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 98 

SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 97 

TEXT 75 

UPDATE WORKSTATION 71 

WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 1 26 

A.2 Order of appearance 

Control functions (5.2) 67 

OPEN GKS 67 

CLOSE GKS 67 

OPEN WORKSTATION 67 

CLOSE WORKSTATION 68 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

CLEAR WORKSTATION 69 

REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 70 

UPDATE WORKSTATION 71 

SET DEFERRAL STATE 72 

MESSAGE 72 

ESCAPE 73 

Output functions (5.3) 74 

POLYLINE 74 

POLYMARKER 74 

TEXT 75 

FILL AREA 75 

CELL ARRAY 77 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) 78 



194 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

AfiiKx A Order of appearance 

Output attributes (5.4) 80 

Workstation independent primitive attributes (5.4.1) 80 

SET POLYLINE INDEX 80 

SET LINETYPE 80 

SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 81 

SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 81 

SET POLYMARKER INDEX 81 

SET MARKER TYPE 82 

SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 82 

SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 83 

SET TEXT INDEX 83 

SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 83 

SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 84 

SET CHARACTER SPACING 84 

SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 85 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 85 

SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 85 

SET TEXT PATH 86 

SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 86 

SET FILL AREA INDEX 86 

SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 87 

SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 87 

SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 88 

SET PATTERN SIZE 88 

SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 88 

SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS ' 89 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER 89 

Workstation attributes (representations) (5.4.2) 90 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 90 

SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 91 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 92 

SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 93 

SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION 94 

SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION 94 

Transformation functions (5.5) 96 

Normalization transformation (5.5.1) 96 

SET WINDOW , 96 

SET VIEWPORT 96 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY 96 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 97 

SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 97 

Workstation transformation (5.5,2) 97 

SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 97 

SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 98 



195 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Order of appearance Annex A 

Segment functions (5.6) 99 

Segment manipulation functions (5.6.1) 99 

CREATE SEGMENT 99 

CLOSE SEGMENT 99 

RENAME SEGMENT 99 

DELETE SEGMENT 100 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 100 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 101 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 101 

INSERT SEGMENT 102 

Segment attributes (5.6.2) 103 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 103 

SET VISIBILITY 103 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 104 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 104 

SET DETECT ABILITY 105 

Input functions (5.7) 106 

Initialisation of input devices (5.7.1) 106 

INITIALISE LOCATOR 106 

INITIALISE STROKE 107 

INITIALISE VALUATOR 108 

INITIALISE CHOICE 109 

INITIALISE PICK . HO 

INITIALISE STRING HI 

Setting the mode of input devices (5.7.2) 113 

SET LOCATOR MODE 113 

SET STROKE MODE 113 

SET VALUATOR MODE 1 14 

SET CHOICE MODE 114 

SET PICK MODE 115 

SET STRING MODE 115 

Request input functions (5.7.3) 116 

REQUEST LOCATOR 116 

REQUEST STROKE 116 

REQUEST VALUATOR 117 

REQUEST CHOICE 1 1 7 

REQUEST PICK 118 

REQUEST STRING 118 

Sample input functions (5.7.4) 1 19 

SAMPLE LOCATOR 1 19 

SAMPLE stroke' 120 

SAMPLE VALUATOR 120 

SAMPLE CHOICE 121 

SA> PLE PICK * 121 

SAMPLE STRING '22 



196 



IS : 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 > 1985 

Annex A Order of appearance 

Event input functions (5.7.5) 122 

AWAIT EVENT 122 

FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS 123 

GET LOCATOR 123 

GET STROKE 123 

GET VALUATOR 124 

GET CHOICE 124 

GET PICK 124 

GET STRING 125 

Metaaie functions (5.8) " 126 

WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 126 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM / 126 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM 126 

INTERPRET ITEM 127 

Inquiry functions (5.9) 128 

Introduction to inquiry functions (5.9.1) 128 

Inquiry function for Operating State value (5.9.2) 128 

INQUIRE OPERATING STATE VALUE 128 

Inquiry functions for GKS description table (5.9.3) 128 

INQUIRE LEVEL OF GKS 128 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE WORKSTATION TYPES 129 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION MAXIMUM NUMBERS 129 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 130 

Inquiry functions for GKS state list (5.9.4) 130 

INQUIRE SET OF OPEN WORKSTATIONS 130 

INQUIRE SET OF ACTIVE WORKSTATIONS 130 

INQUIRE CURRENT PRIMITIVE ATTRIBUTE VALUES 131 

INQUIRE CURRENT PICK IDENTIFIER VALUE 131 

INQUIRE CURRENT INDIVIDUAL ATTRIBUTE VALUES 132 

INQUIRE CURRENT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 132 

INQUIRE LIST OF NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBERS 133 

INQUIRE NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 133 

INQUIRE CLIPPING 134 

INQUIRE NAME OF OPEN SEGMENT 1 34 

INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES IN USE 134 

INQUIRE MORE SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS 135 

Inquiry functions for workstation state list (5.9.5) 135 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CONNECTION AND TYPE 135 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION STATE 136 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION DEFERRAL AND UPDATE STATES 136 

INQUIRE LIST OF POLYLINE INDICES 137 

INQUIRE POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 137 

INQUIRE LIST OF POLYMARKER INDICES 138 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 139 

INQUIRE LIST OF TEXT INDICES ♦ 139 

INQUIRE TEXT REPRESENTATION 140 

INQUIRE TEXT EXTENT 141 

INQUIRE LIST OF FILL AREA INDICES 143 

197 



IS: 12369*1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

Order of appearance Amex A 

INQUIRE FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 143 

INQUIRE LIST OF PATTERN INDICES 144 

INQUIRE PATTERN REPRESENTATION 145 

INQUIRE LIST OF COLOUR INDICES 145 

INQUIRE COLOUR REPRESENTATION 146 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION TRANSFORMATION 147 

INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES ON WORKSTATION 147 

INQUIRE LOCATOR DEVICE STATE 148 

INQUIRE STROKE DEVICE STATE 149 

INQUIRE VALUATOR DEVICE STATE 149 

INQUIRE CHOICE DEVICE STATE 150 

INQUIRE PICK DEVICE STATE 151 

INQUIRE STRING DEVICE STATE 1 5 1 

Inquiry functions for workstation description table (5.9.6) 152 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CATEGORY 152 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CLASSIFICATION 152 

INQUIRE DISPLAY SPACE SIZE 1 53 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF WORKSTATION ATTRIBUTES 153 

INQUIRE DEFAULT DEFERRAL STATE VALUES 154 

INQUIRE POLYLINE FACILITIES 154 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 155 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER FACILITIES 156 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 156 

INQUIRE TEXT FACILITIES 157 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED TEXT REPRESENTATION 158 

INQUIRE FILL AREA FACILITIES 158 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED FILL AREA REPRESENTATION , 159 

INQUIRE PATTERN FACILITIES 159 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED PATTERN REPRESENTATION 160 

INQUIRE COLOUR FACILITIES 160 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED COLOUR REPRESENTATION 161 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVES 161 

INQUIRE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 162 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM LENGTH OF WORKSTATION STATE TABLES 162 

INQUIRE NUMBER OF SEGMENT PRIORITIES SUPPORTED 163 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 164 

INQUIRE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE LOGICAL INPUT DEVICES 164 

INQUIRE DEFAULT LOCATOR DEVICE DATA 165 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STROKE DEVICE DATA 166 

INQUIRE DEFAULT VALUATOR DEVICE DATA 166 

INQUIRE DEFAULT CHOICE DEVICE DATA 167 

INQUIRE DEFAULT PICK DEVICE DATA 168 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STRING DEVICE DATA 168 

Inquiry functions for segment state list (5.9.7) 169 

INQUIRE SET OF ASSOCIATED WORKSTATIONS 169 

INQUIRE SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 169 

Pixel inquiries (5.9.8) 170 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY DIMENSIONS 170 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY 170 

INQUIRE PIXEL 171 



198 



18:12369.1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Amicx A Order of appearance 

Inquiry function for GKS error state list (5.9.9) !72 

INQUIRE INPUT QUEUE OVERFLOW 172 

Utility functions (5.10) 173 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 

Error handling (5.11) 174 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS 1 74 

ERROR HANDLING 174 

ERROR LOGGING 174 

A.3 Ordered by level 

A.3.1 Level Oa 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

CELL ARRAY 77 

CLEAR WORKSTATION 69 

CLOSE GKS 67 

CLOSE WORKSTATION 68 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS 174 

ERROR HANDLING 174 

ERROR LOGGING 174 

ESCAPE 73 

FILL AREA 75 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) 78 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM 126 

INQUIRE CLIPPING 134 

INQUIRE COLOUR FACILITIES 160 

INQUIRE COLOUR REPRESENTATION 146 

INQUIRE CURRENT INDIVIDUAL ATTRIBUTE VALUES 132 

INQUIRE CURRENT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 132 

INQUIRE CURRENT PRIMITIVE ATTRIBUTE VALUES 1 3 1 

INQUIRE DISPLAY SPACE SIZE 153 

INQUIRE FILL AREA FACILITIES 158 

INQUIRE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 162 

INQUIRE LEVEL OF GKS 128 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVES 161 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE WORKSTATION TYPES 129 

INQUIRE LIST OF COLOUR INDICES 145 

INQUIRE LIST OF NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBERS 133 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM LENGTH OF WORKSTATION STATE TABLES 162 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 130 

INQUIRE NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 133 

INQUIRE OPERATING STATE VALUE 128 

INQUIRE PATTERN FACILITIES 159 

INQUIRE PIXEL 171 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY 170 

INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY DIMENSIONS 170 

INQUIRE POLYLINE FACILITIES 154 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER FACILITIES 1 56 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED COLOUR REPRESENTATION • 161 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 159 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED PATTERN REPRESENTATION 160 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 155 

199 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Ordered by level Annex A 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 156 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED TEXT REPRESENTATION 158 

INQUIRE SET OF OPEN WORKSTATIONS 1 30 

INQUIRE TEXT EXTENT 141 

INQUIRE TEXT FACILITIES 157 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CATEGORY 152 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CLASSIFICATION 1 52 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION CONNECTION AND TYPE 1 35 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION DEFERRAL AND UPDATE STATES 136 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION STATE 136 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION TRANSFORMATION 147 

INTERPRET ITEM 127 

OPEN GKS 67 

OPEN WORKSTATION 67 

POLYLINE 74 

POLYMARKER 74 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM 126 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 97 

SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS 89 

SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 84 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 85 

SET CHARACTER SPACING 84 

SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 85 

SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 97 

SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION 94 

SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 88 

SET FILL AREA INDEX 86 

SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 87 

SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 87 

SET LINETYPE 80 

SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 81 

SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 82 

SET MARKER TYPE 82 

SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 88 

SET PATTERN SIZE 88 

SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 81 

SET POLYLINE INDEX 80 

SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 83 

SET POLYMARKER INDEX 81 

SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 86 

SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 85 

SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 83 

SET TEXT INDEX 83 

SET TEXT PATH 86 

SET VIEWPORT 96 

SET WINDOW 96 

SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 98 

SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 97 

TEXT 75 

UPDATE WORKSTATION 71 

WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 126 

A.3.2 Level Ob 

INITIALISE CHOICE . i09 

INITIALISE LOCATOR 106 

INITIALISE STRING 1 1 1 

INITIALISE STROKE 107 

200 



IS:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex A Ordered by level 

INITIALISE VALUATOR 108 

INQUIRE CHOICE DEVICE STATE 1 50 

INQUIRE DEFAULT CHOICE DEVICE DATA 167 

INQUIRE DEFAULT LOCATOR DEVICE DATA 165 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STRING DEVICE DATA 168 

INQUIRE DEFAULT STROKE DEVICE DATA 166 

INQUIRE DEFAULT VALUATOR DEVICE DATA 166 

INQUIRE LOCATOR DEVICE STATE 148 

INQUIRE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE LOGICAL INPUT DEVICES 164 

INQUIRE STRING DEVICE STATE 151 

INQUIRE STROKE DEVICE STATE 149 

INQUIRE VALUATOR DEVICE STATE 149 

REQUEST CHOICE 117 

REQUEST LOCATOR 1 1 5 

REQUEST STRING 118 

REQUEST STROKE 1 16 

REQUEST VALUATOR 1 1 7 

SET CHOICE MODE 114 

SET LOCATOR MODE 1 1 3 

SET STRING MODE 115 

SET STROKE MODE 113 

SET VALUATOR MODE 1 14 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY 96 

A.3.3 Level Oc 

AWAIT EVENT 122 

FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS 123 

GET CHOICE 124 

GET LOCATOR 123 

GET STRING 125 

GET STROKE 123 

GET VALUATOR 124 

INQUIRE INPUT QUEUE OVERFLOW 172 

INQUIRE MORE SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS 135 

SAMPLE CHOICE 121 

SAMPLE LOCATOR 1 19 

SAMPLE STRING 122 

SAMPLE STROKE 120 

SAMPLE VALUATOR 120 

A.3.4 Level la 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 
CLOSE SEGMENT ^ 99 

CREATE SEGMENT 99 

DELETE SEGMENT 100 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 100 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 

INQUIRE DEFAULT DEFERRAL STATE VALUES 154 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 164 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF WORKSTATION ATTRIBUTES 153 

INQUIRE FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 143 

INQUIRE LIST OF FILL AREA INDICES , 143 

INQUIRE LIST OF PATTERN INDICES * 144 

INQUIRE LIST OF POLYLINE INDICES 1 3 7 

INQUIRE LIST OF POLYMARKER INDICES 138 

INQUIRE LIST OF TEXT INDICES 139 

201 



18:12369.1987 
180 7942-1985 

Ordered by level Annex A 

INQUIRE NAME OF OPEN SEGMENT 134 

INQUIRE NUMBER OF SEGMENT PRIORITIES SUPPORTED 163 

INQUIRE PATTERN REPRESENTATION 145 

INQUIRE POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 137 

INQUIRE POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 139 

INQUIRE SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 169 

INQUIRE SET OF ACTIVE WORKSTATIONS 130 

INQUIRE SET OF ASSOCIATED WORKSTATIONS 169 

INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES IN USE 134 

INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES ON WORKSTATION 147 

INQUIRE TEXT REPRESENTATION 140 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION MAXIMUM NUMBERS 129 

MESSAGE 72 

REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 70 

RENAME SEGMENT 99 

SET DEFERRAL STATE 72 

SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 93 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 104 

SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION 94 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION * 90 

SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 91 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 104 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 103 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 92 

SET VISIBILITY 103 

A.3.S Level lb 

INITIALISE PICK UO 

INQUIRE CURRENT PICK IDENTIFIER VALUE 131 

INQUIRE DEFAULT PICK DEVICE DATA 168 

INQUIRE PICK DEVICE STATE 151 

REQUEST PICK 118 

SET DETECT ABILITY 105 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER 89 

SET PICK MODE 115 

A.3.6 Level Ic 

GET PICK 124 

SAMPLE PICK 121 

A.3.7 Level 2a 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 101 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 101 

INSERT SEGMENT 102 

A.4 Ordered by state 

A.4.1 Functions allowed in state GKCL 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS 174 

ERROR HANDLING 174 

ERROR LOGGING 174 

Inquiry functions ♦ 

OPEN GKS 67 



202 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex A Ordered by state 

A.4.2 Functions allowed in state GKOP 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 

CLOSE GKS 67 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS 174 

ERROR HANDLING 174 

ERROR LOGGING 174 

ESCAPE 73 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 173 
Inquiry functions 

INTERPRET ITEM 127 

OPEN WORKSTATION 67 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 97 

SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS 87 

SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 84 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 85 

SET CHARACTER SPACING 84 

SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 85 

SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 97 

SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 88 

SET FILL AREA INDEX 86 

SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 87 

SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 87 

SET LINETYPE 80 

SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 81 

SET MARKER SIZfe SCALE FACTOR 82 

SET MARKER TYPE 82 

SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 88 

SET PATTERN SIZE 88 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER 89 

SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 8 i 

SET POLYLINE INDEX 80 

SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 83 

SET POLYMARKER INDEX 8 1 

SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 86 

SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 85 

SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 83 

SET TEXT INDEX • 83 

SET TEXT PATH 86 

SET VIEWPORT 96 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY 96 

SET WINDOW 96 

A.4.3 Functions not allowed in state WSOP 

CELL ARRAY 77 

CLOSE GKS 67 

CREATE SEGMENT 99 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 69 

FILL AREA 75 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) 78 

INSERT SEGMENT 102 



OPEN GKS 



67 



POLYLINE 74 

POLYMARKER . 74 

TEXT 75 

WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 126 



203 



IS : 12369 - 1987 
180 7942-1985 

Ordered by stale 

A.4.4 Fanctions not allowed in state WSAC 

CLOSE GKS 
CLOSE SEGMENT 
OPEN GKS 

A.4.5 FimctfcHis not allowed in state SGOP 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 

CLEAR WORKSTATION 

CLOSE GKS 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 

CREATE SEGMENT 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 

OPEN GKS 



Airaex A 



67 
99 
67 



69 
101 
69 
67 
101 
99 
69 
67 



A.S Applicability to worlcstation groups 

Table 3 lists all GKS functions and the workstation categories to which they apply, directly or indirectly. 

TaMe 3 - GKS tmctiotts and worlutation categories to which they apply 



GKSFMKtkM 


ApvUolo 


CoMrri AnctkMB 












OPEN GKS 




not applicable 




CLOSE GKS 




not applicable 




OPEN WORKSTATION 


SS 


MO 


O 


OI I 


MI 


CLOSE WORKSTATION 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI I 


MI 


ACTIVATE WORKSTATION 


SS 


MO 


O 


OI 




DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 




CLEAR WORKSTATION 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 




REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 




MO 


O 


01 




UPDATE WORKSTATION 




MO 


O 


OI 




SET DEFERRAL STATE 




MO 


O 


OI 




MESSAGE 




MO 


O 


01 I 




ESCAPE 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI I 


Ml 


OatpiM fMKtiMH 












POLYLINE 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




POLYMARKER 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




TEXT 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




FILL AREA 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




CELL ARRAY 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE (GDP) 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




OvtpMt lUiibBlu 












SET POLYLINE INDEX 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




SEf LINETYPE 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




SET POLYMARKER INDEX 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




SET MARKER TYPE 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


i 


SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


i 


SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 




j SET TEXT INDEX 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


i 


I SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


1 


I SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


1 


SET CHARACI tR SPACING 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


1 


SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


j 


; SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 


ss 


MO 


o 


Ol 


• 


1 SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


1 


SET TEXT PATH 


ss 


MO 


o 


Ol 




SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 





204 



IS 1 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex A 



Applicability to workstation groiips 



SET FILL AREA INDEX 

SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 

SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 

SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 

SET PATTERN SIZE 

SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 

SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 

SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 

SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 

SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION 

SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION 

TraMfonutioB fuactioiw 

SET WINDOW 

SET VIEWPORT 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 

SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 

SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 

SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 

SegMMt hioctloM 

CREATE SEGMENT 

CLOSE SEGMENT 

RENAME SEGMENT 

DELETE SEGMENT 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 

INSERT SEGMENT 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 

SET VISIBILITY 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 

SET DETECTABILITY 

l«^t fuMctimit 

INITIALISE LOCATOR 

INITIALISE STROKE 

INITIALISE VALUATOR 

INITIALISE CHOICE 

INITIALISE PICK 

INITIALISE STRING 

SET LOCATOR MODE 

SET STROKE MODE 

SET VALUATOR MODE 

SET CHOICE MODE 

SET PICK MODE 

SET STRING MODE 

REQUEST LOCATOR 

REQUEST STROKE 

REQUEST VALUATOR 

REQUEST CHOICE 

REQUEST PICK 

REQUEST STRING 

SAMPLE LOCATOR 

SAMPLE STROKE 

SAMPLE VALUATOR 
I SAMPLE CHOICE 
I SAMPLE PICK 
j SAMPLE STRING 
I AWAIT EVENT 



ss 


MO 





OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


01 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


OI 




MO 


O 


OI 




MO 


O 


OI 




MO 


O 


OI 




MO 


O 


OI 




MO 


O 


OI 




MO 


O 


OI 


ss 


MO 


O 


01 I 


ss 


MO 


O 


01 I 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI I 


ss 


MO 


o 


01 I 


ss 


MO 


o 


01 




MO 


o 


OI I 




MO 


o 


OI I 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


O! 


ss 


MO 





OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


(SS) 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 


ss 


MO 


o 


OI 

01 I 
OI I 
OI 1 
OI I 
OI 

OI 1 
OI I 
OI 1 
OI I 
OI i 
OI 

OI I 
01 I 
OI I 
OI 1 
OI I 
OI 

01 I 
01 I 
OI 1 
OI I 
01 I 
OI 

OI I 
OI 1 



205 



IS: 12369 -1987 
180 7942-1985 

Applicability to workstation groups 



Annex A 



FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS 

GET LOCATOR 

GET STROKE 

GET VALUATOR 

GET CHOICE 

GET PICK 

GET STRING 

MetNflte functions 
WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 
GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM 
READ ITEM FROM GKSM 
INTERPRET ITEM 

Iwiiiiry functions 

INQUIRE OPERATING STATE VALUE 
INQUIRE LEVEL OF GKS 

INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE WORKSTATION TYPES 
INQUIRE WORKSTATION MAXIMUM NUMBERS 

INQUIRE MAXIMUM NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 
INQUIRE SET OF OPEN WORKSTATIONS 
INQUIRp SET OF ACTIVE WORKSTATIONS 
INQUIRfe^URRENT PRIMITIVE ATTRIBUTE VALUES 
INQUIRE CURRENT PICK IDENTIFIER VALUE 
INQUIRE CURRENT INDIVIDUAL ATTRIBUTE VALUES 
j INQUIRE CURRENT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBER 
INQUIRE LIST OF NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION NUMBERS 
INQUIRE NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 
INQUIRE CLIPPING 
INQUIRE NAME OF OPEN SEGMENT 
INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES IN USE 
INQUIRE MORE SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS 
INQUIRE WORKSTATION CONNECTION AND TYPE 
INQUIRE WORKSTATION STATE 

INQUIRE WORKSTATION DEFERRAL AND UPDATE STATES 
INQUIRE LIST OF POLYLINE INDICES 
INQUIRE POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE LIST OF POLYMARKER INDICES 
INQUIRE POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE LIST OF TEXT INDICES 
INQUIRE TEXT REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE TEXT EXTENT 
INQUIRE LIST OF FILL AREA INDICES 
INQUIRE FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE LIST OF PATTERN INDICES 
INQUIRE PATTERN REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE LIST OF COLOUR INDICES 
INQUIRE COLOUR REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE WORKSTATION TRANSFORMATION 
INQUIRE SET OF SEGMENT NAMES ON WORKSTATION 
INQUIRE LOCATOR DEVICE STATE 
INQUIRE STROKE DEVICE STATE 
INQUIRE VALUATOR DEVICE STATE 
INQUIRE CHOICE DEVICE STATE 
INQUIRE PICK DEVICE STATE 
INQUIRE STRING DEVICE STATE 
INQUIRE WORKSTATION CATEGORY 
INQUIRE WORKSTATION CLASSIFICATION 
INQUIRE DISPLAY SPACE SIZE 

INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF WORKSTATION ATTRIBUTES 
INQUIRE DEFAULT DEFERRAL STATE VALUES 
INQUIRE POLYLINE FACILITIES 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE POLYMARKER FACILITIES 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE TEXT FACILITIES 
INQUIRE PREDEFINED TEXT REPRESENTATION 



OI 
OI 
OI 
OI 
OI 
OI 
OI I 



MO 



SS MO 


O 


OI I 


not applicable 


not 


applicable 


not applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


not 


applicable 


SS MO 


O 


OI I 


SS MO 


O 


OI 


MO 


O 


OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 





OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 


o 


OI 







OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 





OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 


o 


OI 


MO 





OI 


MO 





OI I 


SS MO 


o 


OI 

OI I 
OI I 
OI 1 
OI 1 
OI . 
01 I 


SS MO 





OI 1 







OI 




o 


OI 1 




o 


OI 




o 


OI 




o 


OI 




o 


OI 







OI 




o 


OI 




o 


OI 




o 


OI 



Ml 
MI 



MI 



Ml 



206 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex A 



Applicability to workstation groups 



INQUIRE FILL AREA FACILITIES 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE PATTERN FACILITIES 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED PATTERN REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE COLOUR F;ACILITIES 

INQUIRE PREDEFINED COLOUR REPRESENTATION 
INQUIRE LIST OF AVAILABLE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVES 
INQUIRE GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 
INQUIRE MAXIMUM LENGTH OF WORKSTATION STATE TABLES 
INQUIRE NUMBER OF SEGMENT PRIORITIES SUPPORTED 
INQUIRE DYNAMIC MODIFICATION OF SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 
INQUIRE NUMBER OF AVAILABLE LOGICAL INPUT DEVICES 
INQUIRE DEFAULT LOCATOR DEVICE DATA 
INQUIRE DEFAULT STROKE DEVICE DATA 
INQUIRE DEFAULT VALUATOR DEVICE DATA 
INQUIRE DEFAULT CHOICE DEVICE DATA 
INQUIRE DEFAULT PICK DEVICE DATA 
INQUIRE DEFAULT STRING DEVICE DATA 
INQUIRE SET OF ASSOCIATED WORKSTATIONS 
INQUIRE SEGMENT ATTRIBUTES 
INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY DIMENSIONS 
INQUIRE PIXEL ARRAY 
j INQUIRE PIXEL 
INQUIRE INPUT QUEUE OVERFLOW 

Utility fMBCtions 
I EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 
j ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 

', Error handling 

I EMERGENCY CLOSi 6kS 
I ERROR HANDLING 
[ERROR LOGGING 



Key: 

SS 
MO 
O 
OI 

I 
Ml 

(SS) 



Worksution Independent Segment Slprage 

workslalion of category MO 

workstation of category OUTPUT 

workstation of category OUTIN 

workstalion^of category INPUT 

workstation of category MI 

Workstation Independent Segment Storage is fundamental to the operation of 

this GKS function, but the workstation identifier parameter cannot be Worksta* 

tion Independeni Segment Storage 







O 


OI 









01 






O 


01 






O 


OI 






O 


OI 






O 


OI 






O 


OI 






O 


01 






O 


OI 






O 


OI 






O 


oooooooo 


SS 


MO 





OI 


SS 


MO 





01 









OI 






O 


OI 






O 


OI 




not applicable 








not applicable 








not applicable 








not applicable 








not applicable 








not applicable 







207 



IC « 1 90C0 4 00-* 

ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex B 

Error list 

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.) 

B.l Imirieiiientation dependent 

< Implementation dependent errors 

B.2 States 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state GKCL 

2 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state GKOP 

3 GKS not in "ro"er state: GKS shall be in the state WSAC 

4 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in the state SGOP 

5 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSAC or in the state SGOP 

6 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be either in the state WSOP or in the state WSAC 

7 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

8 GKS not in proper state: GKS shall be in one of the states GKOP, WSOP. WSAC or SGOP 

B.3 Workstations 

20 Specified workstation identifier is invalid 

21 Specified connection identifier is invalid 

22 Specified workstation type is invalid 

23 Specified workstation type does not exist 

24 Specified workstation is open 

25 Specified workstation is not open 

26 Specified workstation cannot ue openeu 

27 Workstation Independent Segment Storage is not open 

28 Workstation Independent Segment Storage is already open 

29 Specified workstation is active 

30 Specified workstation is not active 

31 Specified workstation is of category MO 

32 Specified workstation is not of category MO 

33 Specified workstation is of category MI 

34 Specified workstation is not of category MI 

35 Specified workstation is of category INPUT 

36 Specified workstation is Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

37 Specified workstation is not of category OUTIN 

38 Specified workstation is neither of category INPUT nor of category OUTIN 

39 Specified workstation is neither of category OUTPUT nor of category OUTIN 

Afi Cn^^t^^yV \Airkvh- ^tt^firkwt Itjyv vtn ni\-£rl vtnrt> ri»n/ihnr*k- mn/Trhiiifv 

41 Specified workstation type is not able to generate the specified generalized drawing primitive 

42 Maximum number of simultaneously open workstations would be exceeded 

43 Maximum number of simultaneously active workstations would be exceeded 



B.4 Transformations 

50 Transformation number is invalid 

51 Rectangle definition is Invalid 

52 Viewport is not within the Normalized Device Coordinate unit square 

53 Workstation window is not within the Normalized Device Coordinate unit square 

54 Workstation viewport is not within the display space 



208 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex B Output attributes 

B.5 Output attributes 

60 Polyline index is invalid 

61 A representation for the specified polyline index has not been defined on this workstation 

62 A representation for the specified polyline index has not been predefined on this workstation 

63 Linetype is equal to zero 

64 Specified linetype is not supported on this workstation 

65 Linewidth scale factor is less than zero 

66 Polymarker index is invalid 

67 A representation for the specified polymarker index has not been defined on this workstation 

68 A representation for the specified polymarker index has not been predefined on this workstation 

69 Marker type is equal to zero 

70 Specified marker type is not supported on this workstation 

71 Marker size scale factor is less than zero 

72 Text index is invalid 

73 A representation for the specified text index has not been defined on this workstation 

74 A representation for the specified text index has not been predefined on this workstation 

75 Text font is equal to zero 

76 Requested text font is not supported for the specified precision on this workstation 

77 Character expansion factor is less than or equal to zero 

78 Character height is less than or equal to zero 

79 Length of character up vector is zero 

80 Fill area index is invalid 

81 A representation for the specified fill area index has not been defined on this workstation 

82 A representation for the specified fill area index has not been predefined on this workstation 

83 Specified fill area interior style is not supported on this workstation 

84 Style (pattern or hatch) index « equal to zero 

85 Specified pattern index is invalid 

86 Specified hatch style is not supported on this workstation 

87 Pattern size value is not positive 

88 A representation for the specified pattern index has not been defined on this workstation 

89 A representation for the specified pattern index has not been predefined on this workstation 

90 Interior style PATTERN is not supported on this workstation 

91 Dimensions of colour array are invalid 

92 Colour index is less than zero 

93 Colour index is invalid 

94 A representation for the specified colour index has not been defined on this workstation 

95 A representation for the specified colour index has not been predefined on this workstation 

96 Colour is outside range [0,1] 

97 Pick identifier is invalid 

B.6 (^put primitives 

100 NunAer of points is invalid 

101 Invalid code in string 

102 Generalized drawing primitive identifier is invalid 

103 Content of generalized drawing primitive data record is invalid 

104 At least one active workstation is not able to generate the specified generalized drawing primitive 

105 At least one active workstation is not able to generate the specified generalized drawing primitive under 
the current transformations and clipping rectangle 

B.7 Segments 

120 Specified segment name is invalid 

121 Specified segment name is already in use 

122 Specified segment does not exist * 

123 Specified segment does not exist on specified workstation 

124 Specified segment does not exist on Workstation Independent Segment Storage 

125 Specified segment is open 

209 



IS: 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Segments Annex B 

126 Segment priority is outside the range [0,1 J 

B.8 Input 

J40 Specified input device is not present on workstation 

141 Input device is not in REQUEST mode 

142 Input device is not in SAMPLE mode 

143 EVENT and SAMPLE input mode are not available at this level of GKS 

144 Specified prompt and echo type is not supported on this workstation 

145 Echo area is outside display space 

146 Contents of input data record are invalid 

147 input queue has overflowed 

148 Input queue has not overflowed since GKS was opened or the last invocation of INQUIRE INPUT 
QUEUE OVERFLOW 

149 Input queue has overflowed, but associated workstation has been closed 

150 No input value of the correct class is in the current event report 

151 Timeout is invalid 

152 Initial value is invalid 

153 Number of points in the initial stroke is greater than the buffer size 

154 Length of the initial string is greater than the buffer size 

B.9 Metafiles 

160 Item type is not allowed for user items 

161 Item length is invalid 

162 No item is left in GKS Metafile input 

163 Metafile item is invalid 

164 Item type is not a valid GKS item 

165 Content of item data record is invalid for the specified item type 

166 Maximum item data record length is invalid 

167 User item cannot be interpreted 

168 Specified function is not supported in this level of GKS 

B.IO Escape 

180 Specified escape function is not supported 

181 Specified escape function identification is invalid 

182 Contents of escape data record are invalid 

B.11 Miscellaneous 

200 Specified error file is invalid 

B.12 System 

3(H) Storage overflow has occurred in GKS 

301 Storage overflow has occurred in segment storage 

302 Input/Output error has occurred while reading 

303 Input/Output error has occurred while writing 

304 Input/Output error has occurred while sending data to a workstation 

305 Input/Output error has occurred while receiving data from a workstation 

306 Input /Output error has occurred during program library management 

307 Input/Output error has occurred while reading workstation description table 

308 Arithmetic error has occurred 

B.13 Reserved errors 

Unused error numbers less than 2 000 are reserved for future standardization. ♦ 

Error numbers 2 000-3 999 are reserved for language bindings. 



210 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Annex B Reserved errors 

Error numbers greater than or equal to 4 000 are reserved for registration, 

NOTE - Error numbers are registered in the the ISO International Register of Graphical Hems, which is maintained by the Registration 
Authority (see 4.1.2). When an error has been approved by ISO, the error number will be assigned by the Registration Authority. 



211 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 



Annex C 
Interfaces 

(This a^nex does not form an integral part of the standard, but provides additional information.) 

C.l Gereral 

GKS is Jescribed in abstract terms, in order that it may be useful to applications written in a wide range of 
nro'^at7>ming languages (host languages). Before it can be used by a particular application program written 
in a particular language, two further stages of specification are required: 

a) the abstract functions and data types of GKS need to be expressed in terms of the constructs available 
in the host language; 

b) this set of language specific facilities then needs to be provided using the facilities of a particular 
machine and operating system. 

C.2 Language binding 

A GKS language binding is a document describing how GKS functions are accessed by programs written in a 
specific language. The following rules need to be observed when binding GKS to a host language. The 
object of a binding is to provide the functions and data types of GKS in a natural and efficient manner using 
the facilities of the host language. 

Rule LI: All GKS functions, other than inquiry functions, need to appear atomic to the application pro- 
gram. 

This rule forbids the binding from mapping single GKS functions into sequences of language functions called 
by the application program, except possibly for inquiry functions, which, for example, in certain language 
bindings may need to be called once for each element of a list. 

Rule L2: The language binding needs to specify, for each GKS abstract function name, exactly one 
identifier acceptable to the language. 

The names used for GKS functions in the International Standard are merely tools for describing the seman- 
tics of the International Standard; they should be replaced by actual identifiers conforming to the restrictions 
of the host language. A one-to-one mapping from language functions tp abstract functions is preferred. 

Rule L3: The language binding needs to specify, for each of the GKS data types, a corresponding data 
type acceptable to the language, except where convenient for the host language, additional data 
types may be specified in terms of the GKS data types. 

The data types used in the International Standard are merely tools for describing the semantics of the Inter- 
national Standard; they need to be replaced by acttial data types conforming to the restrictions of the host 
language. 

Rule L4: The language binding needs to specify, for each GKS abstract function, how the corresponding 
language function is to be invoked, and the means whereby each of the abstract input parameters 
is transmitted to the language function and each of the abstract output parameters is received 
from the language function. 

Where the host language allows, the abstract functions are mapped onto language functions or procedures. 
The parameters are typically transmitted via a parameter list. The items in such a list may either be, or be 
references to, items of the data types corresponding to the GKS data types, or aggregates of these types. 

Rule L5: The language binding needs to specify a set of identifiers, acceptable to the language, which may 
be used by an implementation for internal communication. 

An implementation is normally unable to restrict its use of externally visible identifiers to those specified as a 
consequence of rules LI to L4. Applications should, therefore, avoid using identifiers from the set required 
by rule L5. The set may consist, for example, of all identifiers beginning with GKS. ^ 



717 



18:12369.1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex C Implementation 

C.3 Implementation 

A GKS implementation i$ a module or library of modules written for a specific programming language and 
conforming to a GKS language binding. The following rules need to be observed when implementing GK.S. 
The objective is to provide all the functions of a particular level of GKS, and none of the functions of higher 
levels of GKS, in an efficient manner using the facilities available from the host machine and operating sys- 
tem. 

Rule II: The documentation of a GKS implementation needs to include a list of all identifiers for pro- 
cedures, functions, global data aggregates, and files that are visible either to an application pro- 
gram or to the underlying operating system. 

Because this set of identifiers is, in general, a superset of the names specified by the language binding, pro- 
grams transported to an implementation from other implementations of the same binding might have used 
names that clash. Documentation is required to enable potential clashes to be detected (see also rule LS). 

Rule 12: Implementations should not restrict an application program's use of any I/O faciUties provided 
by the host language or operating system. However, implementations should prevent applica- 
tions from bypassing GKS and accessing graphical resources directly. 

An implementation needs to assimie that it has exclusive control over the graphical resources it is managing. 
However, as few restrictions as possible should be placed upon tKe use of other resources. 

Rule 13; The documentation of an implementation needs to specify, for each of the implementation and 
workstation dependencies, how the dependencies are resolved. 

Several details of the International Standard are deliberately not specified so as to provide implementors with 
sufficient freedom to adapt to particular computers and operating systems. These are indicated in the text by 
the words 'implementation dependent'. Others are not specified to allow for adaptation to particular graphics 
devices. These are indicated in the text by the words 'workstation dependent'. A list of all such details is 
given as annex D. The resolution of each of these details needs to be documented so that the behaviour of 
application programs may be predicted. 

Rule 14: The documentation of each workstation of an implementation needs to specify the correspon- 
dence between physical input devices and operator actions, and the logical input devices on that 
workstation (if any). \ 

The correspondence between physical input devices and operator actions, and the logical input devices •on a 
workstation is static, and not under the control of the application program. These correspondences need to 
be documented. It is also desirable that workstation implementors provide means whereby these correspon- 
dences may be changed, perhaps during a GKS configuration phase. However, any such means lie outside 
the scope of the International Standard. 



213 



18:12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex D 
Allowable differences in GKS implementations 

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard, but provides additional information.) 

D.l General 

A number of details of GKS are deliberately not specified, so as to provide the freedom to adapt implementa- 
tions to different environments and different requirements. In particular, GKS is described in abstract terms, 
so that it can be useful to application programs written in a wide range of programming languages. In a 
language binding, the abstract GKS functions are embedded in a language dependent layer, according to a 
number of rules. These rules are set out in annex C and are not considered further here. 

Other allowable differences fall into two categories: 

a) global differences; 

b) workstation dependent differences. 

The purpose of this annex is to itemize these allowable differences. The documentation accompanying a par- 
ticular implementation needs to list, for each allowable difference, the specific choices made in that implemen- 
tation. 

D.2 Global differences 

A number of differences are global in the sense of applying to s*n implementation as a whole rather than to a 
particular workstation. These global differences are itemized below. 

a) Functional scope: 

1) GKS level. 

b) Capacity: 

1 ) number of available workstation types; 

2) hst of available workstation types; 

3) maximum number of simultaneously open workstations; 

4) maximum number of simultaneously active workstations; 

5) maximum number of workstations associated with a segment; 

6) maximum normalization transformation number; 

7) number of simultaneously definable segments (per workstation); 

8) maximum size of input queue; 

9) number of fonts available; 

10) number of GDFs; 

1 1 ) number of ESCAPE functions, 

c) Miscellaneous: 

1 ) initial setting of Associated Source Flags (ASFs); 

2) EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS behaviour; 

3) actions performed on parameters of inquiry functions; if information is unavailable; 

4) metafile format used by each worksta/ion type of category MO; 

5) font definitions (with the restriction 'that font numbers greater than 1 may be registered). 



214 



18:12369*1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex D Global differences 

NOTES 

1 hems in a) and h) I) lo b) 6) are held in the GKS descriplion table, itnd can be inquired by an appHcaiion program. 

2 As well as specifying 'maximum size of input queue", the documentation needs to specify its interpretation (including the relative 
lengths of each item if necessary). 

3 At different GKS levels, certain minimum capabilities are defined in 4.10. 

D.3 Workstation dependent differences 

This group of allowable differences provides for a range of workstations to ^be used in a GKS implementa- 
tion. The major group of differences are listed as the workstation description table, specified in 6.6, which 
forms part of the GKS data structures. Entries in this table may be inquired by an application program. 

There are restrictions, however, on the values of some entries; at different GKS leyels, certain minimal capa- 
bilities of a workstation are defined (see 4.10). 

In addition, a nimiber of further workstation dependent differences are listed here: 

a) Control functions: 

1) Realization of GKS functions: MESSAGE, ESCAPE; 

2) Buffering of deferred actions in deferral modes BNIL, BNIG and ASTI. 

b) Output functions and attributes: 

1) POLYLINE 

i) whether linetype is continuous or restarted, at the start of a polyline, at the start of a clipped 
piece of a polyline and at each vertex of a polyline; 

ii) graphical representation of available linetypes (with the restrictions .^at linetypes 1 to 4 need to 
be recognizable as solid, dashed, dotted and dashed-dotted, linetypes greater than 4 may be 
registered and linetypes less than need to have similaf appearance on all workstations on which 
they are available); 

iii) the shape of the ends of lines for certain values of the linewidth sc^ factor aspect; 

2) POLYMARKER 

i) graphical representation of available niaiker types (with the restriction that marker types I to 5 
need to be recognizable as dot, plus sign, asterisk, circle and diagonal cross, marker types greater 
than 5 may be registered and marker types less than need to have similar appearance on all 
workstations on which they are available); 

ii) clipping of markers, whose position is just inside a clipping houi^4^; 

3) TEXT 

i) clipping of STRING and CHAR precision text; 

ii) for STRING precision, how current settings of the text aspects are taken into account; 

iii) for CHAR precision, evaluation of the asi)ects character expansion factor, CHARACTER 
HEIGHT, and CHARACTER UP VECTOR; 

iv) the effect of control characters in the character string; 

4) FILL AREA 

i) graphical representation of available hatch styles (with the restriction that hatch styles greater 
than may be registered and hatch styles less than need to have similar appearance on all works- 
tations on which they are available); 

ii) whether patterns and hatching are affected by transformations; 

iii) linetype and linewidth for interior style HOLLOW; 

5) CELL ARRAY 



215 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Workstation dependent differences Annex D 

i) whether CELL ARRAY is fully supported or sometimes simulated and, if the latter, the simula- 
tion (minimal action required is to draw the transformed boundaries of the cell rectangle, using 
implementation dependent colour, linetype and hnewidth); 

6) GDP 

i) realization of each GDP; 

7) all primitives 

i) colour index used if an output primitive is displayed with a colour index that is not present in the 
colour table; 

ii) on monochrome workstations, algorithm for mapping (red, green, blue) colour values to inten- 
sity. A recommended algorithm is: 

intensity = 0.3 x red + 0.59 x green + 0.11 xblue 

and this intensity is mapped to the nearest available; 

iii) what is drawn when points are coUinear or points or lines coincide (see 4,5.3). (All primitives 
except POLYMARKER.) 

c) Segments: 

1) picking segments of equal priority; 

2) display of overlapping segments of equal priority; 

3) realization of highUghting. 

d) Input functions (see also annex C): 

1) realization of logical input devices (for each logical input device, its measure and trigger need to be 
described in terms of the physical devices available on a workstation); 

2) default prompt and echo type realization; 

3) use of input data record for optional parameters. 

e) Inquiry 

1) values returned by INQUIRE TEXT EXTENT; 

2) values returned by PIXEL inquiry functions; 

3) answers returned by inquiry when the REALIZED flag is set. 



216 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 '1985 



Annex E 
Metafile structure 

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard, but provides additional information.) 
E.1 Metafiles 

E.1.1 General 

In clause 1, it states that GKS 'includes functions lor storage on and retrieval from an external graphics file'. 
This external file is called a graphics metafile or metafile. GKS metafiles can be used for a variety of pur- 
poses (as stated in 4.9); 

a) transporting graphical information between systems; 

b) transporting graphical information from one place to another; 

c) transporting graphical information from one GKS application to another; 

d) storing accompanying non-graphical information. 

These purposes cover different aims including picture capture, structured picture capture and session capture, 
the latter also being called audit trail. The graphical information needed for these aims corresponds to 
different types of metafile. For picture capture, some output-related functions (such as those that manipulate 
segments) may be recorded as the resulting set of primitives and their attributes. For structured picture cap- 
ture or session capture, all functions that GKS sends to the workstation need to be recorded. 

The encoding mechanism used for writing the metafile may depend on the application or environment, for 
example: 

e) encoding within the rules of ISO 2022 to enable network transfer; 

f) binary encoding to ease storage on a machine for later use on that machine or to minimize the process- 
ing requirement; 

g) clear text encoding to enable transfer between highly different computer architectures and easy editing. 

The specification of the format and content of a metafile is not part of GKS. GKS only specifies the inter- 
face to the metafile. An implementation of GKS may support any number of workstation types of category 
MI or MO. The user may. select the most appropriate of these depending on the application and environ- 
ment. Two metafiles are outlined in E.1.2 and E.1.3. 

E.1.2 ISO 8632 Metafile 

This metafile (ISO 8632) may be categorized as one which aims to provide a means of recording pictures 
using metafile elements compatible with Level Oa of GKS. It is suitable for picture capture but less suitable 
for session capture or structured picture capture, the latter not being possible. 

The metafile permits a variety of encoding schemes to be used from a single abstract metafile specification. 
The encodings that are included are: 

a) a character encoding based on ISO 2022 code extension procedures; 

b) a binary encoding based on IEEE (Draft 810 Task P754) floating point formats; 

c) a clear text encoding. 

Other standardized encodings may be added in time; private encodings based on the abstract structure and 
the rules of conformance given in the International Standard are also allowed. 

E.1.3 Metafile designed for GKS 

This metafile may be categorized as one which aims to provide a means of recording the exact sequence of 
function calls made to a GKS workstation. Its functional capability covers the entire range of GKS output 
functions, from level to level 2. It is suitable for picture capture, structured picture capture or session cap- 
ture. It is particularly suitable for transporting graphical information from one GKS application to another 
and for applications where the individual graphics actions need to be replayed, with optional editing. 

217 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Metafiles 



Annex E 



TviO encodings are specified for this metafile. They are: 

a) a clear text encoding; 

b) an unspecified binary format. 

This metafile is described in the following clauses. 

E.2 File format and data format 

The GKS metafile is built up as a sequence of logical data items. The file starts with a file header in fixed 
format which describes the origin of the metafile (author, installation), the format of the following items, and 
the number representation. The file ends with an end item indicating the logical end of the file. In between 
these two items the following information is recorded in the sense of an audit trail: 

a) workstation control items and message items; 

b) output primitive items, describing elementary graphics objects; 

c) attribute information, including output primitive attributes, segment attributes, and workstation attri- 
butes; 

d) segment items, describing the segment structure and dynamic segment manipulations; 

e) user items. 



FILE: 



file 
header 


item 

1 


... 


item 
i 


... 


item 

N 


end 
item 



ITEM: 



item 
header 



item data record 



ITEM 
HEADER: 



GKSM' 

optional 


identification 
number 


length of item data record 
in bytes 



All data items except the file header have an item header containing: 

f) the character string 'GKSM' (optional) which is present to improve legibility of the file and to provide 
an error control faciUty; 

g) the item type identification number which indicates the kind of information that is contained in the 
item; 

h) the length of the item data record. 

The lengths of these fields of the item header are implementation dependent and are specified in the file 
header. The content of the item data record is fully described for each item type later in this annex. 

The metafile contains characters, integer numbers, and real numbers marked (c), (i), (r) in the item descrip- 
tion. Characters in the metafile are represented according to ISO 646 and ISO 2022, Numbers arc 
represented according to ISO 6093 using format Fl for integers and format F2 for reals. 

NOTE - FormaJs F! and F2 can be written and read via FORTRAN fornnats I and F respectively. 

Real numbers describing coordinates and length units are stored as normalized device coordinates. The 
workstation transformation, if specified in the application program for a workstation writing a metafile of 
this format, is not performed but WORKSTATION WINDOW and WORKSTATION VIEWPORT are 
stored in data items for later use. Real numbers may be stored as integers. In this case transformation 
parameters are specified in the file header to allow proper transformation of integers into noripalized device 
coordinates. 

For reasons of economy, numbers can be stored using an internal binary format. As no International 



218 



is: 12369-1 987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex E File format and data format 

Standard exists for binary number representation, this format limits the portabihty of the metafile. The 
specification of such a binary number representation is outside the scope of this International Standard. 

When exchanging metafiles between different installations, the physical structure of data sets on specific 
storage media should be standardised. Such a specification is outside the scope of this International Stan- 
dard. 

E.3 Generation of metafiles 

Table 4 contains a list, by class, of all GKS functions which apply to workstations of category MO, and their 
effects on this GKSM. In the table, GKSM-OUT is a workstation identifier indicating a workstation writing 
a metafile of this format. 

The concepts of clipping rectangle and clipping indicator are encapsulated in one metafile item which specifies 
a cHpping rectangle. This item is written to the metafile on activate workstation with the values (0,1,0,1), if 
the 'cHpping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is NOCLIP, or the clipping rectangle in the GKS state Ust, 
if the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is CLIP. If the clipping rectangle in the GKS state list is 
redefined when the 'cHpping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is CLIP, a further clipping rectangle item is 
written. If the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is changed to NOCLIP, a clipping rectangle 
item (0,1,0,1) is written. If the clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list is changed to CLIP, an item 
containing the clipping rectangle in the GKS state list is written. This is analogous to the handling of clip- 
ping in segments (see 4.7.6). 



219 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Generation of metafiles 

Table 4 - GKS functions and their effect on GKSM output workstations 



Annex £ 



GKS functions which apply 


GKSM item created 


Ito workstations of category MO 


or effect 


Control functions 




OPEN WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT,. .) 


- (file header) 




1 (CONDITIONAL) 


CLOSE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT) 


(end item) 


ACilVATE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT) 


(61, 21-44) 




ensure attributes current; 




enable output 


DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT) 


disable output 


CLEAR WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 


1 


REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON 


2 


WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT) 




UPDATE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 


3 


SET DEFERRAL STAIE (GKSM-OUT,..) 


4 


MESSAGE (GKSM-OUT,...) 


5 (message) 


ESCAPE 


6 


Output primitives 




POLYLINE 


11 


POLYMARKER 


12 


TEXT 


13 


FILL AREA 


14 


CELL ARRAY 


15 


GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 


16 


Output attributes 




SET POLYLINE INDEX 


21 


SET LINETYPE 


22 


SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 


23 


SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 


24 


SET POLYMARKER INDEX 


25 


SET MARKER TYPE 


26 


SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 


27 


SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 


28 


SET TEXT IISTDEX 


29 


SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 


30 


SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 


31 


SET CHARACTER SPACING 


32 


SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 


33 


SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 


34 


SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 


34 


SEl TEXT PATH 


35 


SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 


36 


SET FILL AREA INDEX 


37 


SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 


38 


SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 


39 


SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 


40 


SET PAllERN SIZE 


41 


SET PAl lERN REFERENCE POINT 


42 


SET ASPECl SOURCE FLAGS 


43 ! 


SET PICK IDENTIFIER 


44 



220 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 '1985 



Annex E 



Generation of metafiles 



Workstation attributes 

. 

1 SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 
SET POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 
SET TEXT REPRESENTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 
SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 
SET PAITERN REPRESENTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 
SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 


51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 


Transformation functions 

SET WINDOW of current 

normalization transformation 

(see note 2) 
SET VIEWPORT of current 

normalization transformation 

(see notes 1 and 2) 
SELECl NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 

(see notes 1 and 2) 
SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 

(see note 1) 
SET WORKSTATION WINDOW (GKSM-OUT, ..) 
SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT (GKSM-OUT,...) 


34,41,42 

61,34,41,42 

61,34,41,42 

61 

71 
72 


Segment functions 

CREATE SEGMENT 

CLOSE SEGMENT 

RENAME SEGMENT 

DELETE SEGMENT 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 

(GKSM-OUT,...) 
ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH 

WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT,...) 
COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 

(GKSM-OUT,...) 
INSERT SEGMENT 


81 
82 
83 
84 
84 

81, (91-95), (21-44), 

(11-16),(61),82 
(21-44),(11-16),(61) 

(21-44),(11-16),(61) 


Segment attributes 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 
SET VISIBILITY 
SET HIGHLIGHTING 
SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 
SET DETECl ABILITY 


91 
92 
93 
94 
95 


Metafile functions 

WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 


>100 



NOTES 

1 Ilcm 61 (CLIPPING RECTANGLE) is described more fully in clause E.3. 

2 When the current normalization transformation is altered, items corresponding to attributes containing coordinate information are 
sent (items 34, 41 and 42). 



221 



IS .12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Interpretation of metafiles Annex E 

E.4 Interpretation of metafiles 

E.4.1 General 

The interpretation of metafiles in GKS is described in 4.9. The effects of INTERPRET ITEM for all types of 
metafile item are described in E.4. 2 to E.4. 8. Items are grouped by class as in table 4, 

E.4.2 Control items 

Interpretation of items in this class is described under the definitions of each item in clause E.5. 

E.4.3 Output primitives 

Interpretation of items in this class generates output corresponding to the primitive functions, except that 
coordinates of points are expressed in NDC. Output primitives have bound to them thcappropriate primi- 
tive attributes from the GKS state list. 

E.4.4 Output primitive attributes 

Interpretation of items in this class sets entries in the GKS state list. The geometric attribute information, 
which is expressed in NDC, is transformed by the inverse of the currently selected normalization transforma- 
tion before being used to set these entries. Interpretation of the character vectors item causes the two vectors 
to be thus transformed and the entries in the GKS state Jist to be set as follows. The 'current character 
height' entry is set to the length of the transformed character height vector and the 'current character up vec- 
tor' entry is set to a vector of arbitrary length, parallel to the transformed character height vector. The 
'current character width' and 'current character base vector' are similarly set using the transformed character 
width vector. 

£.4.5 Workstation attributes 

Interpretation of items in this class has the same effect as invocation of the corresponding GKS functions 
shown in table 4. The GKS functions are performed on all active workstations. 

E.4.6 Transformations 

Interpretation of a clipping rectangle item sets the 'clipping rectangle' entry in the GKS state list and also sets 
the 'clipping indicator' entry in the GKS state list to CLIP. Interpretation of other items in this class 
(WOT^KSTATION WINDOW ^nd WORKSTATION VIEWPORT) causes the invocation of the correspond- 
ing GKS functions on all active workstations. 

E.4.7 Segment manipulation 

Interpretation of items in this class has the same effect as invocation of the corresponding GKS functions 
shown in table 4. (Item 84 causes an invocation of DELETE SEGMENT.) 

E.4.8 Segment attributes 

Interpretation of items in this class has the same effect as invocation of the corresponding GKS functions 
shown in table 4. 

£.5 Control items 
EILE HEADER 



GKSM NlDIVH TiLlI 



R I F I RI 



ZERO 



ONE 



All fields in the file header item have fixed length. Numbers are formatted according to Format Fl of 
.ISO 6093. 



222 



GKSM 


4 bytes 


N 


40 bytes 


D 


8 bytes 


V 


2 bytes 



IS ; 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex E Control items 

General information: 

containing string 'GKSM' 

containing name of author/installation 

date (year/month/day, for example 79/12/31) 

version number: the metafile described here has version number 1 

Specification of field length 

H 2 bytes integer specifying how many bytes of the string 'GKSM' are repealed 

at the beginning of each record. Possible values: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. 
T 2 bytes length of item type indicator field 
L 2 bytes length of item data record length indicator field 
I 2 bytes length of field for each integer in the item data record 

[applies to all data marked (i) in the 

item description] 
R 2 bytes length of field for each real in the item data record 

[applies to ail data marked (r) in the 

item description] 

Specification of number representation 

F 2 bytes Possible values: 1, 2. This applies to all data in the items marked (i) or 

(r) and to item type and item data record length: 

1 : all numbers are formatted according to ISO 6093 

2: all nimibers (except in the file header) aie stored in an internal 

binary format 
RI 2 bytes Possible values: 1, 2. This is the number representation for data 

marked (r): 

1 = real, 2 = integer 
ZERO 1 1 bytes integer equivalent to 0.0, if RI = 2 
ONE 1 1 bytes integer equivalent to 1 .0, if RI = 2 



After the file header, which is in fixed format, all values in the following items are in the format de^ed by 
the file header. For the following description, the setting 

H-4; T = 3; F=l 

is assumed. In addition to formats (c), (i) and (r), which are already described, (p) denotes a point 
represented by a pair of real numbers (2r). The notation allows the single letter to be preceded by an expres- 
sion, indicating the number of values of that type. 

END ITEM 

r 



'GKSM 0' 



Last item of every GKS Metafile. Sets condition for the error 'No item is left in GKS Metafile input' 



223 



18:12369- 


1987 


ISO 7942 - 


1985 


Control items 




CLEAR WORKSTATION 


"gksm r"^ 


L i C 



Annex £ 



Requests CLEAR WORKSTATION on all active workstations 

C(i): clearing control flag 

(O = CONDITIONAL, 1 = ALWAYS) 

REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 



rT 



GKSM T 



Requests REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION on all active workstations 
UPDATE WORKSTATION 



'GKSM 3' 



Requests UPDATE WORKSTATION on all active workstations 

R(i): update regeneration flag 

(0 = PERFORM, 1= POSTPONE) 

DEFERRAL STATE 



'GKSM 4' 



D R 



Requests SET DEFERRAL STATE on all active workstations 

D(i): deferral mode 

(0 - ASAP, 1 = BNIG, 2 = BNIL, 3 = ASTI) 

R(i): implicit regeneration mode 

(0 = ALLOWED, 1= SUPPRESSED) 



MESSAGE 
['GKSM S-yi" 



N 



Requests MESSAGE on all active w<3rkstation$ 
N(i): number of characters in stri ng 
T(Nc): string with N characters 

ESCAPE 



'GKSM 6' L 


FI I L M 


I 


R 



Requests ESCAPE 

FI(i): function identifier 

L(i): length of integer data in datii record 

M(i): length of real data in dafta re cord 

I(Li): integer data 

R(Mr): real data 



224 



Annex E 

E.6 Items for output primitives 

POLYLINE 



IS : 1 2369 - 1 987 
ISO 7942 > 1985 

Items for output primitives 



^GKSM ir 



N 



N(i): number of points of the polyline 
P(Np): list of points 

POLYMARKER 



r-GKSM 12' L ' N P 

U ^ I 1 1 



N(i): number of points 
P(Np): list of points 

TEXT 



pGKSM 13' I L 



N 



P(p): starting point of character string 
N(i): number of characters in string T 
T(Nc): string with N characters from the set of ISO 646 

FILL AREA 



'GKSM 14' L N P 



N(i): number of points 
P(Np): list of points 

CELL ARRAY 



'GKSM 15' 



N M 



^ 



P(p),Q(p),R(p): coordinates of comer points of pixel array [P and Q are the images of the points P and 

Q specified in the function CELL ARRAY and R is the image of the comer point as- 
sociated with the (DX,1) element by the function CELL ARRAY] 

N(i): number of columns in array 

M(i): number of rows in array 

CT(MNi): array of colour indices stored row by row 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 



•GKSM 16' L GI N LI LR P I | R 


GI(i)-. 


GDP identifier 


N(i): 


number of points 


LI(i): 


length of integer data in data record 


LR(i): 


length of real data in data record 


P(Np): 


list of points 


I(LIi): 


integer data 



R(LRr): real data 



225 



IS : 12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Items for output primitive attributes Annex E 

E.7 Items for output primitive attributes 
POLYLINE INDEX 



I 'GKSM 2r J L U 
I(i): polyline index 

LTNETYPE 



'GKSM 22' L LT 



LT(i): linetype 

LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 



'GKSM ITTT." 



LW 



LW(r): linewidth scale factor 
POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 



GKSM 24' I L I CI 



CI(i): polyline colour index 
POLYMARKER INDEX 



'GKSM 25' 



I 



I(i): polymarker index 

MARKER TYPE 



'GKSM 26' 



MT 



MT(i): marker type 

MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 

pGKSM 27' I L I MS ] 



MS(r): marker size, scale factor 
POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 



•GKSM 28' L ! CI 



CI(i): polymarker colour index 

TEXT INDEX 

["GKSM 29' FlT ~i1 

! . L „ 1 1 

I(i): text index 



226 



Annex E 



TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 



IS : 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Items for output primitive attributes 



'GKSM 30' TTT F I P 



F(i): text font 

P(i): text precision 

(0 = STRING, 1 = CHAR, 2 = STROKE) 

CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 



GKSM 31' L CEF 



CEF(r): character expansion factor 
CHARACTER SPACING 



'GKSM 32' I L I CS 



CS(r): character spacing 
TEXT COLOUR INDEX 



'GKSM 33' L CI 



CI(i): text co' ju^ index 



CHARACTER VECTORS 



I GKSM 34' 



CH 



CW 



CH(2r): character height vector 
CW(2r): character width vector 

NOTE - These vectors are the height and width vectors described in 4.4.5 

TEXT PATH 



'GKSM 35' L 


P 



P(i): text path 

(0 = RIGHT, 1 = LEFT, 2 = UP, 3 = DOWN) 

TEXT ALIGNMENT 



'GKSM 36' L H V 



H(i): horizontal character alignmeni 

(0 = NORMAL, 1 = LEFT, 2 = CENTRE, 3 = RIGHT) 

V(i) vertical character alignment 

(0^ NORMAL, 1-TOP, 2=*CAP, 3 = HALF, 4 = BASE, 5 = BOTTOM) 

FILL AREA INDEX 



'GKSM 37' 



I(i): 



fill area index 



227 



13 : 1^3^ - Y987 

Items for output primitive attrilwtes 
FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 



Ammex E 



GKSM 38' 






lui ar€a iiitsncr Sty'iC 



(0 = HOLLOW, I = SOLID, 2=* PATTERN, 3 = HATCH) 
FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 



'GKSM 39' L SI 



SI(i): fill area style index 
FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 



*GKSM 40' L CI 



CI(i): fill area colour index 
PATTERN VECTORS 



GKSM 41' L PW PH 



PW(2r): pattern width vector 
PH(2r): pattern height vector 

PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 



•GKSM 42' L P 



P(p): reference point 
ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS 



*GKSM 43' L F 



F{13i): aspect source flags 

(0 = BUNDLED, 1= INDIVIDUAL) 

PICK IDENTIFIER 



'GKSM 44' LP 



P(i): pick identifier 

£.8 IteiiB for workstation attributes 
POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 



'GKSMSr LI LT LW 



CI 



I(i): polyline index 

LT(i); linetype number 

LW(r): linewidth scale factor 

CI(i): polyline colour index 



'99ft 



Annex E 



POLYMARKER REPRESENTATION 



rS 112^^-1987 
ItMM for workitatkNi attrilvtes 



GKSM 52' L I MT MS CI 



I(i): polymarker index 

MT(i): marker type 

MS(r): marker size scale factor 

CI(i): polymarker colour index 

TEXT REPRESENTATION 



'GKSM 53' L I F P CEF CS U 



I(i): text index 

F(i): text font 

P(i): text predsion 

(0 - STRING, 1 - CHAR, 2 - STR0KE) 

CEF(r): character expansion factor 

CS(r): character spacing 

CI(i): text colour index 

FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 



GKSM 54' L I S SI CI 



I(i): fill area index 

S(i): fill area interior style 

(0 = HOLLOW, 1 - Sm.ID, 2 - PATTERN, 3 = HATCH) 

SI(i): fill area style index 

CI(i): fill area colour index 

PATTERN REPRESENTATlbN 



*GKSM55' L I N M CT 



I(i): pattern index 

N(0: number of columns in array 

M(i): number of rows in array 

CT(MNi):table of colour indices stored row by row 

COLOUR REPRESENTATION 



*GKSM56' L CI RGB 



CI(i): colour index 

RGB(3r): red, green, blue intensities 



229 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Items for transformations 

E.9 Items for transformations 

CLIPPING RECTANGLE 



Annex E 



'GKSM 61' 



C(4r): limits of clipping rectangle (XMIN, XMAX, YMIN, YM AX) 
WORKSTATION WINDOW 



'GKSM 71' 



W 



W(4r): limits of workstation window (XMIN, XMAX, YMIN, YMAX) 

WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 
f'GKSM IT 



V(4r): limits of workstation viewport (XMIN, XMAX, YMIN, YMAX) 

E.10 Items for segment manipulation 

CREATE SEGMENT 



GKSM 81' L S 



s(jy. 



segment name 



CLOSE SEGMENT 



'GKSM 82' 



Indicates end of segment 
RENAME SEGMENT 



'GKSM 83' 



SO SN 



SO(i): old segment name 
SN(i): new segment name 

DELETE SEGMENT 



GKSM 84' L S 



S(i): segment name 

E.ll Items for segment attributes 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 



•GKSM 91' 



M 



S(i): segment name 
M(6r): transformation matrix 

M \\,M |2,A/ i3,Af 2i,A/22?A/23 



230 



Annex E 



SET VISIBILITY 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Items for segment attributes 



GKSM 92' 



S(i): segment name 

V(i): visibility 

(0 = VISIBLE, 1= INVISIBLE) 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 



'GKSM 93' 



H 



S(i): segment name 
H(i): highlighting 

(0 = NORMAL, 1 = HIGHLIGHTED) 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 



'GKSM94* L S P 



S(i): segment name 
P(r): segment priority 

SET DETECTABILITY 



GKSM 95' LSD 



S(i): segment name 
D(i): detectability 

(0- UNDETECTABLE, 1 = DETECT ABLE) 

E.12 User items 

USER ITEM 



GKSMXXX' L D 



XXX > 100 

D: user data (L bytes) 



231 



IS; 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex F 
Sample programs 

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard, but provides additional information.) 
The following sample programs, using Pascal-like syntax, illustrate the use of CJKS functimis. 

Example I 

A batch job creates output primitives and stores them permanently on a metafile. 

{Definitions and declarations omitted} 

OPEN GKS (ERRFILE, MEM); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT, FlLEl. GKSM OUTPUT); {metafile Output} 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT); {output on met*fil«) 

application program acqtiires parameter values for GKS functions (inclading segment functions) and calls them, for example: 
POLYLINE (#points, array of points); 
FILL AREA (#points, array of poinU); 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT); 

CLOSE WORKSTATION (GKSM-OUT); {meufile released} 

CLOSE GKS; 

Example 2 

A batch job reads a metafile and creates output on a plotter. 

{Definitions and declarations omitted} 

OPEN GKS (ERRFILE, MEM); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (GKSM-IN, FILEl, GKSMJNPUT); (metafile input} 

OPEN WORKSTATION (PLOTTER, DDPLT, FLAT_BED_PLOTTER); {plotter workstation} 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); {output on plotter} 

REPEAT 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM (GKSM-IN, ITEM-TYPE. ITEM-LENGTH); 
READ ITEM FROM GKSM (GKSM-IN, ARRAY-LENGTH, ARRAY); 
INTERPRET ITEM (ITEM-TYPE, ITEM-LENGTH, ARRAY); 
UNTIL ITEM-TYPE = EOFTYPE; 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); {no more output on plotter} 

CLOSE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 

CLOSE WORKSTATION (GKSM-IN); {meUfile released} 

CLOSE GKS; 

Example 3 

An interactive job reads segments from long term storage (the GKSM) and displays them on the display sur- 
face. It allows the operator to pick one of the segments, place it on the screen, transform it and insert it into 
the picture he builds up. It lets him do this until he hits an end of picture key. The final picture is then out- 
put on a plotter. 

The segments may be, for exatittple, flowchart symbols. They appear on the top or bottom or at the side of 
the screen and are ({ren ilsed to build the flowchart. 

{Definitions abd^iilaclaration&.ainitisd} 

OPEN GKS (ERftf ILE, MEM); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (DISlH-AY. DDDIS, REFRESHVECTORDISPLAY); {display workstaUon} 

OPEN WORKSTATION (PLOTTER, DDPLT. DRUMPLOTTER); {plotter workstation} 

OPEN WORKSTATION (GKSM-IN. FILEl. GKSM INPUT); * {metafile input} 

OPEN WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE. DDSEG, WISS); {Workstation Independent Segment Storage} 



232 



tSs 12369-1987 
f SO 7942- 1985 

Adikx F Sample progmms 

{The contentf. of the m«laiile »re displayed on Ihe display} 

{Segments, irprcs^ent, are stored on Workstation Independent Segment Storage) 

{as well as on the display workstation} 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY); {output on display) 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); {output on WorksUUon Independent Segment Storage) 

REPEAT {reading the GKSM) 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM (dKSM-IN, ITEM-TYPE. ITEMIENGTH); 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM (GKSM-IN. ARRAY-LENGTH. ARRAY). 

INTERPRET H EM (ITEM-TYPE. ITEM-LENGTH, ARRAY); 
UNTIL ITEM-TYPE = EOFTYPE; 

CLOSE WORKSTATION (GKSM-IN); {meUfile released} 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 

(no more output on Workstation Independent Segment Storage) 

{By now the picture contained in the metafile is visible on the display. The segments contained in these data can be used for creating a 

new picture which will be output on a plotter) 

REPEAT 

{A segment is identified and provided with a reference point) 

' SET PICK MODE (DISPLAY, I, EVENT, ECHO); {allow pick event input) 

SET LOCATOR MODE (DISPLAY, 1, EVENT, ECHO); {allow locator event input) 

FOR I:=l TO 2 DO 
BEGIN 

{read one pick and one locator event in arbitrary sequence) 
TIMEOUT = 8 HOURS; {standard working day) 

AWAIT EVENT (TIMEOUT, WORKSTATION, CLASS, DEVNO); {wait for pick and locator input) 

IF (CLASS = PICKCLASS) THEN 
BEGIN {SEGNAME received) 

GET PICK (STATUS, SEGNAME, PICKIDENTIFIER); 
SET PICK MODE (DISPLAY, I, REQUEST, ECHO); 
END ELSE 
BEGIN {segment ref. point POINT I received) 

GET LOCATOR (TRANS-NUMBER 1, POINT!); 
SET LOCATOR MODE (DISPLAY, I, REQUEST, ECHO); 
END; 
END; 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (TRANS-NUMBERl); 
{Subsequent points are expected to be in viewport of normalization transformation TRANS-NUMBERl. This would be zero, since no 
transformations have been set up explicitly) 

INITIALISE VALUATOR (DISPLAY, 1.1,1, (0.95, 1.0), (0.95, J.O), (0, 10)); 

(valuator I has initial value 1, range (0,10] and echo area in top right) 
INITIALISE VALUATOR (DISPLAY, 2. 0, 1, (0.90,0.95), (0.95,1.0), (0,3.14)); 

{valuator 2 has initial value 0, range {0,3.14] and echo area next to valuator 1) 
INITIALISE LOCATOR (DISPLAY, ), TRANS-NUMBERl, POINTl, 2, (0.0,1.0), (0.0,1.0), NULL); 

(locator 1 has initial value = segment ref. point and crosshairs echo) 
SET VALUATOR MODE (DISPLAY, 1, SAMPLE, ECHO); {allow valuator 1 sample input) 

SET VALUATOR MODE (DISPLAY, 2, SAMPLE, ECHO); {allow valuator 2 sample input) 

SET LOCATOR MODE (DISPLAY, 1, SAMPLE, ECHO); {allow locator sample input) 

SET CHOICE MODE (DISPLAY, 1, EVENT, ECHO); {allow choice event input) 

{for indicating end of transformation or end of picture) 

(Transforming the segment SEGNAME) 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX ((0,0), (0,0), 0, (1,1). WC, MATRIX); 

{initialise transformation matrix) 



233 



IS: 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942 - 1985 

Sample programs 



Annex F 



REPEAT 

SAMPLE VALUATOR (DISPLAY, 1, SCALE); 

SAMPLE VALUATOR {DISPLAY. 2. ANGLE); 

SAMPLE LOCATOR (DISPLAY. 1, TRANS-NUMBER2, POINT2); 

IF TRANS-NUMBER1/'=TRANS-NUMBER2THEN GOTO ENDLOOP; 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX (MATRIX. POINTI, 

P0INT2-P01NT1 . ANGLE, (SCALE.SCALE), WC, MATAC); 
SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION (SEGNAME, MATAC); 

{segment SEGNAME i$ scaled by SCALE in x and y direction,} 

{rotated by ANGLE (both relative to POINTI), and finally} 

{shifted from POINTI to POINT2} 



{scale Tactor} 

{rotation angle} 

{target point) 



{accumulate transformation matrix} 



{choice input present?} 

{end of segment transformation if choice input given} 

{no more valuator I sample input} 

(no more valuator 2 sample input} 

{no more locator sample input} 



{no more choice input allowed) 
{ALTERNATIVE = 2 indicates end of picture} 



TIMEOUT := 0; 

AWAIT EVENT {TIMEOUT, WORKSTATION, CLASS. DEVNO); 
UNTIL CLASS = CHOICECLASS; 

ENDLOOP: 

SET VALUATOR MODE (DISPLAY, 1. REQUEST, ECHO); 
SET VALUATOR MODE (DISPLAY. 2, REQUEST, ECHO); 
SET LOCATOR MODE (DISPLAY, I. REQUEST, ECHO); 

{Output transformed segment on plotter and display} 
COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION (PLOTTER, SEGNAME); 
GET CHOICE (CHOICE-STATUS, ALTERNATIVE); 
SET CHOICE MODE (DISPLAY, I, REQUEST, ECHO); 
UNTIL CHOICE-STATUS = OK AND ALTERNATIVE = 2; 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 
CLOSE GKS; 

Example 4 

A polygon is generated at an interactive workstation, it is modified interactively, and a hardcopy is produced 

on a plotter. 

{Definitions and declarations omitted} 

OPEN GKS (ERRFILE, MEM); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (DISPLAY, DDDIS, 3); 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE, DDSEG, WISS); 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 

{set normalization transformation} 

SET WINDOW (I , WINDOWBOUNDS); 

SET VIEWPORT ( I . VIEWPORTBOUNDS); 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY (1,0. HIGHER); 

{Construction of segment POLYGON} 

CREATE SEGMENT (POLYGON); 

SET POLYLINE INDEX (3); 

NEXT;= 1; 

REQUEST LOCATOR (DISPLAY, 1, STATUS, TRANSI. P[l]); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (TRANSI); 

REPEAT 

NEXT:= NEXT + 1; 

REQUEST LOCATOR (DISPLAY. 1 . STATUS, TRANS, PfNEXT]); 
UNTIL STATUS = NONE OR TRANS/ = TRANSI; 
P(NEXT]:= P[l]; 
POLYLINE (NEXT. P): 
CLOSE SEGMENT; 



234 



IS 1 12369-1987 
ISO 7942-1985 

Annex F Sample programs 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX ((0,0), (0,0), 0, (1,1), WC, MATRIX), 

{initialise transformation matrix} 
REPEAT 

REQUEST CHOICE (DISPLAY, I. STATUS, CH); 

IF STATUS = NONE OR STATUS = NOCHOICE GOTO ENDLOOP; 

CASE CH OF 

{shift the polygon to a given position} 
SHIFT: BEGIN 

REQUEST LOCATOR (DISPLAY, 1, STATUS, TRANS2, PI); 

IF STATUS = NONE GOTO ENDLOOP; 

REQUEST LOCATOR (DISPLAY, I, STATUS, TRANS, P2); 

IF STATUS = NONE OR TRANS/ = TRANS2 GOTO ENDLOOP; 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (TRANS2); 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX (MATRIX, (0,0), P2-F1, 0, (1,1). WC. MAT AC); 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION (POLYGON, MATAC); 

END 

ZOOM. ; 

ROTATE: ....; 
ELSE:; 
ENDCASE; 

UPDATE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY, PERFORM); 
UNTIL CH/ = SHIFT, ZOOM, ROTATE; 

ENDLOOP: 

{Now the polygon is plotted} 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY); 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (PLOTTER, DDPLOT, FOURPENPLOTTER); 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 

{Set up representations for this workstation} 

SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION (PLOTTER, COLOUR 1, (1,0,0)); 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION (PLOTTER, 3, 1, 1.5, COLOUR 1); 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION (PLOTTER, 2, 1, 0, COLOUR_l); 

SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT (PLOTTER, 0, SX, 0, SY); 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION (PLOTTER, POLYGON); 

SET TEXT INDEX (2); 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT (0.1); 

TEXT ((0.5,0.5), This is a polygon'); 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (DISPLAY); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 
CLOSE OKS; 

Example 5 

A batch program reads commands from an arbitrary input file and generates a picture on a plotter. The 
commands specify types of graphical symbols (for example transistors, resistors, capacitors) and locations at 
which they are to be placed. First the graphical representation of the symbols is read from a metafile and 
placed in the segment storage, then the commands are interpreted and the symbols are sent to the plotter 
workstation using the INSERT SEGMENT function. The symbols are represented on the metafile by primi- 
tives grouped in segments. 

{Definitions and declarations omitted} 

OPEN GKS (ERRFILE, MEM); 

{read the symbols from Input-metafile and store them in the segment storage} 

OPEN WORKSTATION (GKSM-IN, FILE I, GKSM INPUT); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE, DDSEG, WISS); 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 

REPEAT 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM (GKSM IN, ITEM-TYPE. ITEM-LENGTH); 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM (GKSM-IN, ARRAY-LENGTH. ARRAY); 

IF NOT (ITEM-TYPE = USERTYPE) THEN * 

INTERPRET ITEM (ITEM-TYPE, ITEM-LENGTH, ARRAY); 
UNTIL ITEM-TYPE = EOFTYPE; 
DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 

235 



IS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942-1985 

SwBple programs 



Aimex F 



{Now open and activate plotter workstation} 

OPEN WORKSTATION (PLOTTER, DDPLOT, FLATBEDPLOTTER); 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 

{Set up a coordinate system} 

SET WINDOW (I, WINDOWLIMITS); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (I); 

{Command processing} 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX ((0.0). (0.0), 0, (1,1), WC, MATRIX); 

REPEAT 

READ (symbol type, (XPOS.YPOS). ANGLE); 

CASE symbol type OF ^ 

transistor: 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX (MATRIX, (0,0), (XPOS,YPOS), 

ANGLE, (1,1). WC. MATAQ; 
INSERT SEGMENT (transistor-segment, MATAQ; 
resislor: 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX (MATRIX. (0,0), (XPOS,YPOS). 

ANGLE. (1»1). WC, MATAO; 
INSERT SEGMENT (resistor^gment. MATAQ; 
connection: BEGIN 



READ (XPCKl, YPOSl); 

POLYLINE (2, (XPOS,YPOS,XPOSl,YPOSl)); 



{read in parameter from non-graphic file} 



END 

etc. 



ENDCASC; 
UNTIL end of input file; 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (PLOTTER); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (GKSM-IN); 
CLOSE WORKSTATION (SEGSTORE); 
CLOSE GKS; 

Exeanple 6 

A picture is being composed from portions input by a LCKDATOR. The whole picture is displayed on the 

right side of the screen while on the left side it is possible to display a sub-picture at greater magnification. 

Updates to the picture can be made in either drawing area with the left hand picture being used for detailed 

drawing. A LOCATOR position defines which area is being tised for inputting data as well as the data value 

itself. 

To redefine the display in the left hand window, a LOCATOR input is required in a command area, contain- 
ing NEW VIEW, at the bottom of the display area. The next two LOCATOR inputs define the lower left 
and upper right of the sub-picture to be displayed on the left region. To cause a move to a new sequence of 
connected Unes, a LOCATOR input is required in another command area, containing GAP, also at the bot- 
tom of the display area. The NONE status on REQUEST is always used to terminate the series of interac- 
tions. 



{Definitions and declarations omitted} 

OPEN GKS (ERRFILE. MEM); 

OPEN WORKSTATION (FIRST, IOC, DISPLAY); 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION (FIRST); 

^ET WINDOW (1, 0, 100, 0. 100); 
SET VIEWPORT (1. 0.55. 0.95, 0.4. 0.8); 
SET WINDOW (2. 0, 100, 0, 100); 
SET VIEWPORT (2, 0.05. 0.45, 0.4, 0.8); 
SET WINDOW (3, 0, 8. 0, I); 
SET VIEWPORT (3, 0.1. 0.9, 0.05, 0.15); 
SET WINDOW (4, 0, 8. 0, I); 
SET VIEWPORT (4. 0.1, 0.9. 0.15. 0.25); 
SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY (1.0. HlGHERl: 



(whole picture} 
{for sub-picture; initially whole picture) 



236 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex F 



SET VIEWPORT FNPUT PRIORITY (2, 1, HIGHER); 
SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY (3, 2. HIGHER): 
SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY (4, 3. HIGHER); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (3); 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT (0.8); 

TEXT ((0.1. 0.1), 'NEW VIEW'); 

Pll]: = (0,0); 

PI2]: = (0.1); 

Pt3]:=(8.1); 

114]: =(8,0); 

P(5J: = PtU; 

POLYLINE (5. P); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (4); 

TEXT ((0.1. 0.1), 'GAP'); 

POLYLINE (5, P); 

0(1]: = (0.0); 

Q{2]: = (0.100); 

0(3]: -(100,100); 

0(4]: =(100.0); 

0(5]: = 0(1]; 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (2). 

POLYLINE (5, 0); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (1); 

POLYLINE <5, 0); 

{Regions have been set up and outlines drawn. Array PIC contains pairs of points defining line in picture 

DRAW PIC draws all the polylines in PIC in currently selected window 

ADD TO PIC (P) adds point P to the current polyline in PIC 

NEW POLYLINE IN PIC (P) adds point P to PIC and indicates that a new polyline is begun. 

DELETE PIC deletes whole set of polylines in currently selected window 

OUTPUT PIC puts the picture to a file or a liardcopy device.) 



SET CLIPPING INDICATOR (CWP); 

{Set up locator device I on workstation FIRST. Prompt/echo type is to be crosshairs} 
INITIALISE LOCATOR (FIRST, 1, 1, (0,0), 2, (0,0), (1,1), NULL); 
SET LOCATOR MODE (FIRST 1, REQUEST, ECHO); 
LASTPOS: = NULLPOS; 



{no drawing outside viewports} 



237 



18 1 12369- 1987 
ISO 7942. 1985 

Sanple programs Annex F 

REPEAT 

REQUEST LOCATOR (FIRST. 1 , STATUS, TRNO, POS); 
IF STATUS = NONE THEN GOTO FINISH; 
IF TRNO =3 OR TRNO =4 THEN 
BEGIN 

REPEAT 

TRN01=TRN0; 

REQUEST LOCATOR (FIRST, 1, STATUS, TRNO, POS); 
IF STATUS = NONE OR TRNO=0 THEN GOTO FINISH; 

IF TRNO =3 OR TRNO =4 THEN GOTO NEXT; {allow for second hit on command areas} 

{now, we have TRNOl selecting an action and POS a position in window I or 2} 
IF TRNOl = 3 THEN {Zoom. Need 2 bounds.} 

{Obtain second using rubber-band rectangle prompt/echo} 
BEGIN 

INITIALISE LOCATOR (FIRST, I, TRNO, POS, 5, (0,0), (1,1), NULL); 
REQUEST LOCATOR (FIRST, 1, STATUS, TRNO, UPPERRIGHT); 
IF STATUS =» NONE OR TRNO =0 THEN GOTO FINISH; 
IF TRNO = 3 OR TRNO =4 THEN GOTO NEXT; 

{now, point is in one of the picture areas - first restore device state} 
INITIALISE LOCATOR (FIRST, 1, 1, (0,0), 2. (0,0), (1,1), NULL); 

{now set new window and redraw picture} 
SET WINDOW (2, POS.X, UPPERRIGHT.X, POS.Y, UPPERRIGHT. Y); 
SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (2); 
DELETE PIC; 
DRAW PIC; 
END 

ELSE {GAP. No further points needed} 

BEGIN 

NEW POLYLINE IN PIC (POS); 
LASTPOS = POS; 
END; 

GOTO EXITLOOP; 
NEXT: 

UNTIL FALSE; 
EXITLOOP: 
END 

ELSE IF TRNO=l OR TRNO = 2 THEN 
BEGIN 

{LOCATOR hit was in one of the picture areas. Which one is immaterial.} 
IF LASTPOS = NULLPOSTHEN 
BEGIN 

NEW POLYLINE IN PIC (POS); 
LASTPOS=POS; 
END 
ELSE 
BEGIN 

ADD TO PIC (POS); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (I); 
POLYLINE (2, (LASTPOS,POS)); 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION (2); 
POLYLINE (2. (LASTPOS,POS)); 
END 
END 

ELSE GOTO ERROR; 
UNTIL FALSE; 

FINISH: 

OUTPUT PIC; 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION (FIRST): 

CLOSE WORKSTATION (FIRST); 

CLOSE GKS: 



238 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 



Annex G 
GKS functions sununnry 

(This annex does not fonn an integral part of the standard, but provides additional information.) 

G.l Control functions 

OPEN GKS 

Start working with GKS. 

CLOSE GKS 

Stop working with GKS. 

OPEN WORKSTATION 

Create a connection between the specified workstation and GKS. 

CLOSE WORKSTATION 

Release the connection between the specified workstation and GKS. 

ACTIVATE WORKSTATION 

Output is routed to the specified workstation. 

DEACTIVATE WORKSTATION 

Output is no longer routed to the specified workstation. 

CLEAR WORKSTATION 

Perform all deferred actions and clear display space on the specified workstation. All segments stored on 
the workstation are deleted. 

REDRAW ALL SEGMENTS ON WORKSTATION 

Redraw all visible segments stored on the specified workstation. 

UPDATE WORKSTATION 

Perform all deferred actions and, if necessary, redraw all visible segments stored on the specified worksta- 
tion. 

SET DEFERRAL STATE 

Set deferral state for the specified workstation. 

MESSAGE 

Send a message to the specified workstation. 

ESCAPE 

A standard way of invoking non-standard features. 

G.2 Output functions 

POLYLINE 

Generate a polyline defined by points in world coordinates. 

POLYMARKER 

Generate markers of a given type at specified points in world coordinates. 

TEXT 

Generate a text string at the given position in world coordinates. 

FILL AREA 

Generate a polygon which may be filled with a colour, a hatch or a pattern, or may be hollow. 

CELL ARRAY 

Map the given array of colour indices onto the display surface. 



239 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Omtfmt fwnctioiis Annex G 

GENERALIZED DRAWING PRIMITIVE 

Generate a generalized drawing primitive defin^ by a sequence of points in world coordinates and a data 
record. 

G.3 Output attributes 

G.3.1 Worltstation independent primitive attriirates 

SET POLYLINE INDEX 

Select a bundle index for polylines. 

SET LINETYPE 

Set the linetype for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET LINEWIDTH SCALE FACTOR 

Set the Unewidth scale factor for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET POLYLINE COLOUR INDEX 

Set the polyline colour index for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET POLYMARKER INDEX 

Select a bundle index for polymarkers. 

SET MARKER TYPE 

Set the marker type for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET MARKER SIZE SCALE FACTOR 

Set the marker size scale factor for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET POLYMARKER COLOUR INDEX 

Set the polymarker colour index for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET TEXT INDEX 

Select a bundle index for text. 

SET TEXT FONT AND PRECISION 

Set the text font and precision for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET CHARACTER EXPANSION FACTOR 

Set the character expii^sion factor as a fraction of the character height for use when the corresponding 
ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET CHARACTER SPACING 

f Set the character spacing as a fraction of the character height for use when the corresponding ASF is 
INDIVIDUAL. 

SET TEXT COLOUR INDEX 

Set the text colour index for use wljen the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET CHARACTER HEIGHT 

Set the character height in world coordinates. 

SET CHARACTER UP VECTOR 

Set the character up vectcH in world coordinates. 

SET TEXT PATH 
Set the text path. 

SET TEXT ALIGNMENT 

Set the horizontal and vertical alignment of text strii^s. 

SET FILL AREA INDEX 

Select a bundle index for fill area. 

SET FILL AREA INTERIOR STYLE 

Set the fill area interior style for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET FILL AREA STYLE INDEX 

Set the fill area style index for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 



240 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1986 

AmiexjG OvtfNrt atCribMw 

SET FILL AREA COLOUR INDEX 

Set the fill area colour index for use when the corresponding ASF is INDIVIDUAL. 

SET PATTERN SIZE 

Set the pattern size in world coordinates for use in the display of fill area primtives with interior style 
PATTERN. 

SET PATTERN REFERENCE POINT 

Set the pattern reference point in world coordinates for u»e in the display of fill area primitives with inte- 
rior style PATTERN. 

SET ASPECT SOURCE FLAGS 

Define whether the value of each non-geometric aspect is obtained from the corresponding individual 
attribute or from the appropriate bundle On the workstation. 

SET PICK IDENTIFIER 
Set pick identifier. 

G.3;2 WorkstatkM attrilNites (repraWBtatimis) 

SET POLYLINE REPRESENTATION 

Define the representation of polylines on the specified workstation. 

SET POLYMAJIKER REPRESENTATION 

Define the representation of polymarkers on the specified workstation. 

SET TEXT REPRESENTATION 

Define the representation of text on the specified workstation. 

SET FILL AREA REPRESENTATION 

Define the representation of fill area primitives on the specified workstation. 

SET PATTERN REPRESENTATION 

Define the pattern to be associated with a pattern index (i.e. a fill area style index) on the specified worics- 
tation. 

SET COLOUR REPRESENTATION 

Define the colour to be associated with a colour index on the specified workstation. 

G.4 Transformation functions 

G.4.1 Nomialization transfonmtioii 

SET WINDOW 

Set the window in world coordinates of the specified normalization transformation. 

SET VIEWPORT 

Set the viewport in normalized device coordinates of the specified normalization transformation. 

SET VIEWPORT INPUT PRIORITY 

Set the input priority of the specified viewport for locator and stroke input. 

SELECT NORMALIZATION TRANSFORMATION 
Select a normalization transformation for output. 

SET CLIPPING INDICATOR 

Set the clipping indicator for the clipping rectangle. 

G.4. 2 Workstation transformation 

SET WORKSTATION WINDOW 

Set the workstation window in normalized device coordinates. 

SET WORKSTATION VIEWPORT 

Set the workstation viewport in device coordinates. 



241 



tS: 12369 -1987 
ISO 7942- 1985 

Segamit fuictioiis Annex G 



G.5 Segment functions 

G.5.1 Segittent nuniimlation fvnctioas 

CREATE SEGMENT 

The specified segment is created and becomes the open segment. 

CLOSE SEGMENT 

Close the opfen segment. 

RENAME SEGMENT 

Change the name of the specified segment. 

DELETE SEGMENT 

Delete the specified segment. 

DELETE SEGMENT FROM WORKSTATION 

Delete the specified segment from the specified workstation. 

ASSOCIATE SEGMENT WITH WORKSTATION 

Associate the specified segment, present in workstation- independent segment storage, with the specified 
open workstation. 

COPY SEGMENT TO WORKSTATION 

Copy the primitives of the specified segment, present in workstation independent segment storage, to the 
specified workstation. 

INSERT SEGMENT 

Insert the specified segment, present in workstation independent segment storage, (after the segment 
transformation and the insert transformation have been applied) into the open segment or the stream of 
primitives outside segments. 

G.5.r Segment attrilrates 

SET SEGMENT TRANSFORMATION 

Set the segment transformation attribute for the specified segment. 

SET VISIBILITY 

Set the visibility attribute for the specified segment. 

SET HIGHLIGHTING 

Set the highlighting attribute for the specified segment. 

SET SEGMENT PRIORITY 

Set the segment priority attribute for the specified segment. 

SET DETECTABILITY 

Set the segmeni detectability attribute for the specified segment. 

G.6 Input functions 

G.6.1 Initialisation of input devices 

INITIALISE LOCATOR 

Initialise the specified locator device. 

INITIALISE STROKE 

Initialise the specified stroke device. 

INITIALISE VALUATOR 

Initialise the specified valuator device. 

INITIALISE CHOICE 

Initialise the specified choice device. , 



242 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942-1985 

Annex G Input functions 

INITIALISE PICK 

Initialise the specified pick device. 

INITIALISE STRING 

Initialise the specified string device. 

G.6.2 Setting mode of input devices 

SET LOCATOR MODE 

Set operating mode of the specified locator device. 

SET STROKE MODE 

Set operating mode of the specified stroke device. 

SET VALUATOR MODE 

Set operating mode of the specified valuator device. 

SET CHOICE MODE 

Set operating mode of the specified choice device. 

SET PICK MODE 

Set operating mode of the specified pick device. 

SET STRING MODE 

Set operating mode of the specified string device. 

G.6.3 Request input functions 

REQUEST LOCATOR 

Request position in world coordinates and normalization transformation nimiber from the specified loca- 
tor device. 

REQUEST STROKE 

Request sequence of points in world coordinates and normalization transformation number from the 
specified stroke device. 

REQUEST VALUATOR 

Request real value from the specified valuator device. 

REQUEST CHOICE 

Request non-negative integer, representing a selection from a number of choices, and choice status from 
the specified choice device. 

REQUEST PICK 

Request segment name, pick identifier and pick status from the specified pick device. 

REQUEST STRING 

Request character string from the specified string device. 

G.6.4 Sample input functions 

The current setting of a logical intput device is tested and the value is sent back without waiting for any 
operator action. 

SAMPLE LOCATOR 

Sample the specified locator device, delivering a point in world coordinates and a normalization transfor- 
mation number. 

SAMPLE STROKE 

Sample the specified stroke device, delivering a sequence of points in world coordinates and a normaliza- 
tion transformation number. 

SAMPLE VALUATOR 

Sample the specified valuator device, delivering a real value. 

SAMPLE CHOICE 

Sample the specified choice device, delivering a non-negative integer, which represents a selection from a 
number of choices, and choice status. 



243 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Input fimctions Anex G 

SAMPLE PICK 

Sample the specified pick device, delivering a segment name, pick identifier and pick status. 

SAMPLE STRING 

Sample the specified string device, delivering a character string. 

G.6.5 Event input fnnctiotts 

Input items are collected in an input queue managed by GKS and can be obtained by the application pro- 
gram from this queue. 

AWAIT EVENT 

If the input queue is empty, wait for an input item until the specified time has elapsed. Read the worksta- 
tion identifier, input class, and logical input device number of the oldest entry in the input queue and pass 
the values to the current event report for subsequent interrogation by the GET functions. 

FLUSH DEVICE EVENTS 

Delate all the events from the specified logical input device in the input queue. 

GET LOCATOR 

Transfer position in world coordinates and normaUzation transformation number from the current event 
report to the application program. 

GET STROKE 

Transfer sequence of points in world coordinates and normalization transformation number from the 
current event report to the appUcation program. 

GET VALUATOR 

Transfer real value from the current event report to the application program. 

GET CHOICE 

Transfer non-negative integer, representing a selection from a nimibcr of cboices, and choice status from 
the current event report to the application program. 

GET PICK 

Transfer segment name, pick identifier and pick status from the current event report to the application 
program. 

GET STRING 

Transfer character string from the current event report to the application program. 

G.7 Metafile functions 

WRITE ITEM TO GKSM 

Pass non-graphical data from the application program to the GKS metafile. 

GET ITEM TYPE FROM GKSM 

Pass the item type and item data record length of the current item back to the appUcation program. 

READ ITEM FROM GKSM 

Pass the current item to the application program (graphical or non-graphical item). 

INTERPRET ITEM 

Interpret the item read in by READ ITEM FROM GKSM. The interpretation causes appropriate 
changes in the set of GKS state variables and generates appropriate graphical output as determined by the 
metafile specification. 

G.8 Inquiry functions 

There are some 75 different inquiry functions in GKS. All variables contained in any existing state list and in 
the description tables may be inquired at any time when GKS is open. 

An inquiry function is provided for text extent to allow concatenation of character strings. On raster worksta- 
tions, the size and colour of pixels may be inquired. , 

The operating state of GKS may be inquired, even when GKS is closed. 



244 



18:12369-1987 
ISO 7942 -1985 

Annex G Utility fuoctions 



G.9 Utility functions 

EVALUATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 

Evaluate the transformation specified by fixed point, shift vector, rotation angle and scale factors and re- 
turn the result in the output transformation matrix. 

ACCUMULATE TRANSFORMATION MATRIX 

Evaluate the transformation specified by fixed point, shift vector, rotation angle and scale factors, com- 
bine it with the input transformation matrix and return the result in the output transformation matrix. 

G.IO Error handling 

EMERGENCY CLOSE GKS 

Tries to close GKS in case of an error, saving as much information as possible. 

ERROR HANDLING 

A procedure called by GKS when an error is detected. It may be user supplied. 

ERROR LOGGING 

A procedure called by the standard GKS error handling procedure. It prints an error message and func* 
tion identification on the error file. 



245 



