***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 12737 (1988): Standard Test Procedures for Semiconductor 
X-Ray Energy Spectrometers [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 



.^^llli^=ac^^fc^ll f fm^>N:>;»gaTCAaiiTgs 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:%^>^ift^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12737 : 1988 
lEC Pub 759(1983) 

Indian Standard < Reaffirmed 2006) 

SIANDARD TEST PROCEDURES FOR 
SEMICONDUCTOR X-RAY ENERGY 
SPECTROMETERS 



UDC 62I-384-8 



© BI^ 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1990 Price Group 14 



IS 12737 : 19ae 
lEC Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 



Indian Standard 



STANDARD TEST PROCEDURES FOR 

SEMICONDUCTOR X-RAY ENERGY 

SPECTROMETERS 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with lEC Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 'Standard test procedures for 
semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometers* issued by the International Electrotechnica] Commission 
( lEG ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 21 September 1988 on the recommenda- 
tion of the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee ( LTDG 26 ) and approval of the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard* appear, reefrring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard', 

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker in the adopted standard while in Indian 
Standard, the current practice is to use point ( • ) ^s the decimal marker. 

GROSS REFERENCES 



In this standard the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective 
places the following : 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

lEC Pub 50 International Electro- IS 1885 ( Part 63 ) : 1985 Electro- 
technical Vocabulary (IE V ) technical vocabulary: Part 63 

Nuclear instrumentation 



Degree of Correspondence 
Identical 



IS 11425 : 1985 
semiconductor 
detectors 



Test procedure for 
ch arge d • particle 



Identical 



lEC Pub 333 Test procedures for 
semiconductor detectors for ioniz- 
ing radiation 

lEC Pub 340 Test procedures for 
amplifiers and preamplifiers for 
semiconductor detectors for ioniz- 
ing radiation 

I EC Pub 656 Test procedures for 
high-purity germanium detectors 
for X and gamma radiation 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting it 
in this Indian Standards. 



IS 11645 : 1985 Test procedures for 
amplifiers and preamplifiers for 
semiconductor detectors for ionizing 
radiation 

IS 12639 : 1988 Test procedures for 
high- purity germanium detectors 
for X and gamma radiation 



Identical 



Identical 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS 12737 : 1988 
IECPiib759( 1983) 



1 . Scope 



This standard presents standard test procedures for semiconductor X-ray energy 
spectrometers. Such systems consist of a semiconductor radiation detector assembly and 
signal processing electronics interfaced to a pulse-height analyzer/computer. Test 
procedures for pulse-height analyzers and computers are not covered in this standard. 
Clause 5 is essentially tutorial. 



2. Object 



This standard is not intended to imply that all tests described herein are mandatory, 
but only that such tests as are carried out shall be performed in accordance with the 
procedures described herein. 

Companion publications to this standard are I EC Publication 333: Test Procedures for 
Semiconductor Detectors for Ionizing Radiation, I EC Publication 340; Test Procedures 
for Amplifiers and Preamplifiers for Semiconductor Detectors for Ionizing Radiation, and 
I EC Publication 656: Test Procedures for High-purity Germanium Detectors for X and 
Gamma Radiation. The list of symbols and the glossary are derived from those in the 
above-mentioned publications. 

Contrary to previous convention in the X-ray spectroscopy field, this standard utilizes 
the characteristic energy E of the X-ray rather than its wavelength A. This approach is 
consistent with the fact that the basic quantity measured by this type of spectrometer is 
the X-ray energy. A convenient conversion is provided by the relationship: 

A(m) = 12.4 •10-10 £-1 (i^eV) 
(A (A) = 12.4 •£-! (keV)) 



3. Glossary (according to English alphabetical order) 

Analog to digital converter (ADC) 

A sub-assembly designed to provide an output signal which is a digital representation 
of the analog input signal (lEV 391-11-36). 

Background (associated with a spectral peak from a semiconductor detector) 

Non-ideal spectral response which results from radiation which is not a part of the 
monoenergetic line of interest. 

Baseline (at pulse peak) 

The instantaneous value that the voltage would have had at the time of the pulse peak 
in the absence of that pulse (lEC Publication 340). 



IS 12737 : 1988 
lEG Fob 759 ( 1983 ) 

Baseline restoration (BLR) 

Appropriate linear or non-linekr techniques which are used to accelerate the return of 
a voltage to its baseline. 

Bias resistor (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The resistor through which bias voltage is applied to the detector (I EC Publication 
340). 

Biased pulse amplifier 

A pulse amplifier designed to provide an amplified output pulse only for that portion 
of an input signal exceeding a predetermined threshold value (lEV 391-11-05). 

Bias voltage (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The voltage applied to the detector to produce the electric field to collect the signal 
charge. 

Breakdown (of a reverse-biased junction) 

Transition from a state of high dynamic resistance to a state of substantially lower 
dynamic resistance for increasing magnitude of reverse voltage (lEV 391-10-50). 

Breakdown region (of a semiconductor diode characteristic) 

That entire region of the voltage-current characteristic beyond the initiation of 
breakdown for increasing magnitude of reverse current. 

Breakdown voltage (of a semiconductor diode) 
The voltage measured at a specified current in the breakdown region 

Capacitance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The small-signal capacitance measured between terminals of the detector under 
specified conditions of bias and frequency. 

Charge carrier (abbreviation: carrier) 
In a semiconductor, a free conduction electron or a mobile hole (lEV 391-10-53). 

Charge collection time (of a semiconductor detector) 

By convention, the time interval for the integrated current due to the charge collected 
in the semiconductor detector, after the passage of an ionizing particle, to increase from 
10% to 90% of its final value (lEV 391-10-59). 

Clip, clipping (jargon) 

A limiting operation such as: 1) use of a high-pass filter (see Differentiated), or 2) a 
non-linear x)peration such as diode limiting of pulse amplitude. 



I8127S7il9M 

IBG P«b 759 ( lias ) 

Compensated, semiconductor 

A semiconduaor in which the effects of the impurities of a given type on the charge 
carrier density partially or completely cancel those of the other type. Such a 
semiconductor has properties which are similar to those of an intrinsic semiconductor 
(lEV 391-05-03). 

Compensated semiconductor detector 

A semiconductor detector consisting of a region of compensated semiconductor between 
a P-type region and an N-type region (lEV 391-09-44). 

CR'RC shaping 

The pulse shaping present in an amplifier that has a simple high-pass filter consisting 
of a capacitor and a resistor together with a simple, low-pass filter, separated by 
impedance isolation. Pulse shaping in such an amplifier cuts off at 6 decibels per octave 
at both ends of the band. 



Crest factor (of an average reading or root-mean-square voltmeter) 

The ratio of (1) the peak voltage value that an average reading or root-mean-square 
voltmeter will accept without overloading to (2) the full scale value of the range being 
used for measurement (I EC Publication 340). 



D.C level (see Baseline) 



Dead layer (of a semiconductor detector) 

A layer of a semiconductor detector in which no significant part of the energy lost by 
particles can contribute to the resulting signal (lEV 391-10-55). 



Decay time constant 

The time for a true single-exponential waveform to decay to a value of \/e of the 
original height (I EC Publication 340). 



Depletion layer (in a semiconductor detector) 

A layer of a semiconductor deteaor in which no significant part of the energy lost by 
particles can contribute to the resulting signal. 



Differentiated (pulse) (pulse amplifier jargon) 

A pulse that is passed through a high-pi»ss network, such as a CR filter (I EC Publi- 
cation 340). 



Efficiency (of a semiconductor radiation detector for a monoenergetic radiation source) 

The ratio of the number of events in the spectral distribution to the total number of 
photons incident on the active detector volume during the same time interval. 



IS 1273? 1 19SS 
I£G Pub 759 (1983) 

Energy resolution (FWHM) (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The detector's contribution (including detector leakage current noise), expressed in units 
of energy, to the FWHM of a pulse-height distribution corresponding to an energy 
spectrum (I EC Publication 340). 

Energy resolution (per cent) (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

One hundred times the energy resolutiofi divided by the energy for which the 
resolution is specified (I EC Publication 340). 

Equivalent noise referred to input (of a linear amplifier) 

The value of noise at the input that would produce the same value of noise at the 
output as does the actual noise source (I EC Publication 340). 

Full energy peak (for a monoenergetic photon spectrum for a semiconductor spectrometer 
system) 

The distribution of events within the peak of the pulse-height distribution spectrum 
representing response to the monoenergetic photon source. 

Note — Notwithstanding other definitions or procedures for subtracting background and other distortions, the full 
energy peak intensity is defined as not including any events which exceed a Gaussian distribution by 
more than a factor la. 

Full energy peak efficiency (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The ratio of the number of events in the full energy peak of the spectral distribution 
to the total number of photons incident on the active detector volume during the same 
time interval. 

Full width at fifth maximum 

Same as full width at half maximum except that measurement is made at one-fifth of 
the maximum ordinate rather than one-half (N.B.: This definition should be written in its 
entirety). 

Full width at half maximum (FWHM) 

In a distribution curve comprising a single peak, the distance between the abscissae of 
two points on the curve whose ordinates are half of the ordinate of the peak. 

Note. — If the curve considered comprises several peaks, a full width at half maximum exists for each peak (lEV 
391-15-08). 

Full width at tenth maximum (FWTM) 

Same as full width at half maximum except that measurement is made at one-tenth of 
the maximum ordinate rather than one-half (I EC Publication 340). 

FWFM (see Full width at fifth maximum) 
FWHM (see Full width at half maximum) 
FWTM (see Full width at tenth maximum) 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pnb 759 ( 1963 ) 

Gate 

A device or element that, depending upon one or more specified inputs, has the ability 
to permit or inhibit the passage of a signal. 

Geometry, detector (detector jargon) 
The physical configuration of a solid-state detector. 

Inactive region (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A region of a detector in which charge created by ionizing radiation does not 
contribute significantly to the signal (I EC Publication 340). 

Integral non-linearity (INL) (%) 

The departure from the linear response expressed as a percentage of the maximum 
rated output pulse amplitude (I EC Publication 340). 

Integrated (pulse) (pulse amplifier jargon) 

A pulse that is passed through a low-pass network, such as a single RC network or a 
cascaded RC network (I EC Publication 340). 

Integrating preamplifier 

A pulse preamplifier in which individual pulses are intentionally integrated by passive 
or active circuits (I EC Publication 340). 

Intrinsic semiconductor (I-type) 

An effectively pure semiconductor in which, under conditions of thermal equilibrium, 
the charge carrier densities of each sign are nearly equal (lEV 391-05-02). 

Note. — By extension, this term is incorrealy used to designate compensated semiconductors. 

Inversion layer 

For a given type of semiconductor, a surface layer of the opposite type (lEV 
391-10-57). 

Ionization detector 

A radiation detector based on the use of ionization in the sensitive volume of the 
detector (lEV 391-08-06). 

Junction (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A transition layer between semiconductor regions of different electrical properties, or 
between a semiconductor and a superficial layer of different type. This layer is 
characterized by a potential barrier impeding the movement of charge carriers from one 
region to the other (lEV 391-10-42) (I EC Publication 340). 

Junction depth (of a p-n semiconductor radiation detector) 
The distance below the crystal surface at which the conductivity type changes. 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 (1983) 

Leakage current (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 
The total detector current flowing at the operating bias in the absence of radiation. 

Linear gate 
A gate whose presence does not affect the linearity ot the gated signdl. 

Line-to-background ratio (of a spectral line) 

The ratio of the intensity of a monoenergetic line to the intensity of the background 
immediately adjacent to the line. 

Lithium drifted semiconductor detector 

A compensated semiconductor detector in which tne compensated region is obtained by 
causing lithium ions to move through a P-type crystal under an applied electric field in 
such a way as to compensate the charge of the bound impurities (lEV 391-09-45). 

Load impedance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

The impedance shunting the detector, and across which the detector output voltage 
signal is developed (I EC Publication 340). 

Load resistance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 
The resistive component of the load impedance (I E C Publication 340). 

Modal channel 

The modal channel is that channel in the distribution containing the largest number of 
counts. 

Multichannel analyzer (MCA) 

An analyzer with more than one channel, usually containing a sufficient number of 
channels to determine a distribution function of a group of signals by sorting the pulses 
into the various channels according to one of their characteristics (amplitude, duration, 
etc.) (lEV 391-11-32). 

Noise linewidth 
The. contribution of noise to the width of a spectral peak. 

Non4nJecting contact (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A contact at which the carrier density in the adjacent semiconductor material is not 
changed from its equilibnum value (I EC Publication 340). 

Non-linearity (of a pulse amplifying system) 

Distortion caused by a deviation from a desired linear relationship between specified 
measures of the ouptut and input pulse amplitudes of a system or device. 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 (1983 ) 



Ohmic contact {of a semiconductor radiation detector) 



A purely resistive contact, i.e. one that has a linear voltage-current ctoaractcristic 
throughout its entire operating range (I EC Publication 340) 

Overload pulse 
Any signal which drives a section of the amplifying chain into saturation. 

Paralyzable system 

Any system or device whose response characteristics contain a region where the ratio 
of output to input count rate decreases with increasing input count rate. 

Partially dead region or layer (of a semiconductor detector) 

Any region or layer on or in the detector which contributes an output pulse which is 
less than the full energy peak for that incident radiation. 

Per cent energy resolution (see Energy resolution [per cent]) 

Pile-up (in a counting assembly) 

A phenomenon where a pulse occurs on the tail of the preceding pulse so as to result 
in an incorrect indication of the pulse amplitude. The pile-up can also result in failure 
to resolve some pulses (lEV 391-15-15), 

Pile-up rejection 
A technique used to identify and reject pulses (signals) which are piled up. 

p-i-n detector 

A detector consisting of an intrinsic or nearly intrinsic region between a p and n 
region. 

Pole-zero cancellation 

A pulse-shaping method, usually by means of a differentiator, eliminating undershoots 
of long duration (I EC EHiblication 340). 

Pulse decay time (tj 

The interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value last reaches 
specified upper and lower Umits, namely, 90% and 10% of the peak pulse value unless 
otherwise stated. (In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier that has simple 
CR-RC shaping, the decay time is given by t^ « 3.36 CR.) 



Pulse amplifier 

An electronic amplifier designed to provide withih the limits of its normal operating 
characteristics a single output pulse for each input pulse (IE V 391-11-02). 



IS 12737 1 1968 
me Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

Pulse rise time {(,) 

The interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value first reaches 
specified lower and upper limits, namely, 10% and 90% of the peak pulse value unless 
otherwise specified. (In the case of a step function applied to an RC low-pass filter, the 
rise time is given by /, » 2.2 RC. In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier 
that has simple CR-RC shaping, i.e., one high-pass and one low-pass RC filter of equal 
time constants, the rise time is given by i^ « 0.57 RC.) 

Resolution, energy (per cent) {see Energy resolution (per cent)) 

Semiconductor detector 

An ionizing detector using a semiconductor medium in which an electric field is 
provided for the collection at the electrodes of the excess charge carriers produced by 
ionizing radiation (lEV 391-08-13). 

Space-charge generation (in a semiconductor radiation detector) 
The thermal generation of free charge carriers in the space-charge region. 

Space-charge region (of a semiconductor radiation detector) 

A region in which the net charge density is significantly different from zero (see also 
Depletion region). 

Spectral line 

A sharply peaked portion of the spectrum that represents a specific feature of the 
incident radiation, usually the full energy of a monoenergetic radiation. 

Spectrum (radiation) 

A distribution of the intensity of radiation as a function of energy or its equivalent 
electric analog (such as charge or voltage) at the output of a radiation detector. 

Standard source diameter 

The diameter of the X-ray emission source which is used to measure the response 
characteristics of the spectrometer. Unless otherwise specified, this is assumed to be a 
point source. 

Standard working axis (of a semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer) 

A straight line drawn between the centre of the entrance window on the detector and 
the specified location of the source of X-rays. 

Surface barrier contact 

A rectifying contact that is characterized by a potential barrier associated with an 
inversion or accumulation layer; said inversion or accumulation layer being caused by 
surface charge resulting from the presence of surface states and/or work function 
differences. 

Surface barrier semiconductor detector 

A semiconductor detector in which the potential barrier due to the junction results 
from a superficial inversion layer (lEV 391-09-42), 



10 



IS 12737 s 1M8 
ffiGF«b 759 (fits) 

Sweep-out time, charge (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (see Charge collection time) 

Tail or tailing (on a monoenergetic peak) 

Any peak shape distortion which xloes not comply with the limits defining the full 
energy peak intensity and which does not come from a source of radiation other than 
the monoenergetic source in question. 

Total depletion voltage (of a semiconductor detector) 

The reverse voltage at which the depletion layer extends over essentially the whole 
thickness of the semiconductor. 

Total detector dead layer (of a semiconductor detector) 

All insensitive materials of the detector system which the radiation must penetrate to 
reach the sensitive volume (I EC Publication 596). 

Totally depleted detector 

A detector in which the thickness of the depletion region is essentially equal to the 
thickness of the semiconductor material. 

Transmission semiconductor- detector 

A semiconductor detector whose thickness, including its entrance and exit windows, is 
sufficiently small to permit the radiation to pass completely through the detector (lEV 
391-09-47). 

Window (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (see Dead layer thickness) 
Window amplifier (see Biased amplifier) 

Working distance 

The distance, measured along the working axis, between the source of X-rays and the 
outermost window on the detector. 



4. Symbols 



A = intensity of full energy monoenergetic peak; total number of counts in a full 

energy peak 

y4b = number of counts in the background under a peak 

Ae = intensity of spectral peak at energy E; the total number of counts in the full 
energy peak of energy E 

v4Mn ^ intensity of backscattered Mn K^ peak 

A^ == total peak area, number of counts in the full energy peak, plus background 



11 



18127371 1988 
lEG Mb 759 ( 1983 ) 

a, b »« constants x^haracterizing noise 

£ « bandwidth / 

C » electrical capacitance 

Q - detector capacitance 

Cc « calibrated capacitor used to couple a pulse generator to a circuit under test 

C^ » effective input capacitance of a preamplifier 

Q — feedback capacitance in the integrating loop of a charge-sensitive preamplifier 

C\ » total capacitance at a preamplifier input 

Ci « the average number of counts per channel in five contiguous channels centred 
around the energy of 5.4 kcV in the tail of a Mn K^ X-ray energy spectrum 

Q ■» same as Q except 4.5 kcV 

Q « same as C, except 1 keV 

A — FWHM of a monoenergetic spectrial peak 

Ae ^ FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to amplifier noise 

^K ^ FWHM, expressed in channels, due to amplifier noise 

^Q ^ FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to amplifier noise 

A^ « FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to detector noise 

^N ■* FWHM, expressed in channels, due to detector noise 

^Q « FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to detector noise 

AEmax* the maximum deviation, in units of energy, between the measured linearity 
curve and the ideal linear response curve 

AN — a shift, expressed in channels, of the peak centre (modal) channel 

42 « FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to all factors other than electrical 
noise 

A% - FWHM, expressed in channels, due to all factors other than electrical noise 

A% — FWHM for monoenergetic incident radiation, expressed in units of energy, 
including all spectral broadening effects 



12 



IS 12737 1 1988 
nSG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

A% - FWHM for monoenergetic incident radiation, expressed in channels, including 
all spectral broadening effects 

^£ = FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to the combined effect of detector 
and amplifier noise 

^N - FWHM, expressed in channels, due to the combined effect of detector and 
amplifier noise 

Jq = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to the combined effect of detector 
and amplifier noise 

E ~ energy of a particle or photon 

E =* average energy required to form one hole-electron pair in a semiconductor 



e = electron charge 

JS'f = the energy corresponding to the maximum linear output of a spectrometer 

c„i = equivalent root-mean-square noise voltage referred to the preamplifier input 

jpno = root-mean-square noise voltage 

^qj = root-mean-square noise in units of charge at the amplifier input 

F = Fano factor, the ratio of the dispersion (square pf the standard deviation) of 
real (or actual, true, empirical) statistics of charge carriers to the dispersion of 
calculated Poisson statistics 

Gb = gain of a biased amplifier (dimensionless) 

<p = noise spectral power density 

/ = detector noise current 

/ = electric current 

/d = detector leakage current 

4 ^ diode equivalent Gaussian noise current in a specified frequency band 

INL ^ integral non-linearity; the maximum deviation from linearity expressed as a 
percentage of the maximum linear output 

k « Boltzmann's constant 

K « constant relating FWHM in units of energy to FWHM in units of charge 

Id « differential non-linearity of an amplifier 



13 



IS 127S7 f 1988 
lEG Pnb 759 ( 1983 ) 

Li — integral non-linearity of a biased amplifier 

L, = integral non-linearity of an amplifier 

-N = channel number corresponding to the maximum of a monoenergefic spectral 
peak 

^avg = average number of counts in all channels of a multichannel pulse-height 
analyzer spectrum 

N^ =» equivalent number of channels suppressed by a biased amplifier 

iVp = the total number of counts in the modal (peak centre) channel of the Mn full 
energy peak from a Mn K^ X-ray energy spectrum 

Nj^ « number of counts in channel X of a multichannel pulse-height analyzer 
spectrum 

P^ =« the peak-to-tail ratio at 5.4 keV for a Mn K^ X-ray energy spectrum 

Pz = the peak-to-tail ratio at 4.5 keV for a Mn A;, X-ray energy spectrum 

/*3 = the peak-to-tail ratio at 1 keV for a Mn K^ X-ray energy spectrum 

Q » electric charge 

R « electrical resistance 

R^ =- resistor used in parallel with Q to effect pole-zero cancellation 

Rf =* a resistor in parallel with Q (used to stabilize the operating point of the first 
active element in a preamplifier) 

Ki « input data rate to a system or device 

i?L ^ detector load resistor 

To ^ output data rate of a system or device 

5l = output pulse-height stability 

Sm ^ sensitivity of MCA or AE)C/computcr system expressed in energy units of 
eV/channel 

T =« absolute temperature 

tc ^ charge collection time in a detector 

ta » dead time in a device or system 

t^ « observed detector rise time due to the combined effects of the charge collection 
time and detector electrical rise time 



14 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1989 ) 

tp «= detector electrical rise time 

t, « rise time (10% to 90%) 

T = time constant 

Tc = time constant of a CR network used to simulate the rise of a pulse from a 
radiation detector 

Tj — decay time constant 

t„ = width of a pulse, in time units, at the baseline established by the discriminator 
threshold level 

V = electric voltage 

Ka = amplitude of amplifier output voltage 

V^ = detector bias voltage 

Kd ~. depletion vohage 

Vp === amplitude of the voltage step impressed on Q by the pulse generator 

Wg ~ window attenuation index at energy E as determined by the spectrum from a 
standard target excited with "Fe 

X - channel number in a multichannel analyzer (MCA) or computer display of a 
photon energy spectrum 

* 

Z = atomic number 

Zq = characteristic impedance 

A = the characteristic wavelength associated with an X-ray photon 

5| = FWTM for monoenergetic incident radiation, expressed in units of energy, 
including all spectral broadening effects 

S% == FWTM for monoenergetic incident radiation, expressed in channels, including 
all spectral broadening effects 

5| «= FWTM, expressed in units of energy, due to the combined effect of detector 
and amplifier noise 1 

5g =« FWTM, expressed in units of energy, due to all factors other than electrical 
noise 

^T = FWTM, expressed in clianaels, due to tht combined effects of detector and 
amplifier noise 



15 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pnb 759 ( 1983 ) 

5. Introduction 

5.1 Detector system 

A semiconductor detector is analogous to a gas ion chamber in which the gas has 
been replaced by a solid. Figure 1» page 41 illustrates this type of detector and its 
pre^^npltfler configuration. The detector consists of a semiconducting crystal between two 
conducting electrodes. A potential difference is established between the electrodes thereby 
producing an electric field in the semiconductor. When an X-ray photon enters the 
semiconductor it produces free charge carriers in the crystal, the number of which is 
proportional to the energy lost by the X-ray photon. The charge motion resulting from 
the influence of the electric field produces an induced current pulse in the external 
circuit.^ This current represents the basic signal information and the integrated current 
pulse is proportional to the energy lost by the X-ray. The pulses are routed to a 
multichannel pulse-height analyzer (MCA) where they are sorted and stored according to 
the amplitude distribution to produce a pulse-height spectrum that corresponds to the 
X-ray energy spectrum. The MCA may be a dedicated instrument or an analog-to-digital 
converter (ADC) interfaced to a computer. 



The semiconductor materials which are most frequently used for X-ray spectrometers 
(i.e., silicon and germanium) do not have sufficiently high resistivity to withstand large 
electric fields without excessive leakage currents. It is therefore necessary to use special 
techniques to limit the current flow through the semiconductor device. This is usually 
accomplished by utilizing the ^pace charge regicjn of a reverse biased diode junction as 
the detector sensitive volume. Silicon and germanium are the only semiconductor 
materials which are presently available with sufficient crystalline perfection and purity to 
be generally useful for this type of device, although work is progressing on other 
semiconductors such as Hglj, CdTe and GaAs. 



Although both Si and Ge crystals are available in very pure form, the electrically 
active impurity level is sometimes too high to allow fabrication of usefully large 
detectors. This limitation can be ""overcome by using mobile lithium ions to compensate 
the electrically active impurities. If the lithium compensation technique is used, the 
germanium semiconductor device is subject to inherent stability problems since the 
compensation can be classed as highly unstable at room temperature and therefore 
lithium-compensated germanium devices must be stored at reduced temperatures. In 
silicon the compensation is quasi-stable, with the degree of stability depending on the 
presence of other impurities in the crystal and on the details of the device fabrication. 



Since there is no internal gain in the type of semiconductor detector considered here, 
the problem of noise in the detecitor and in the preamplifier circuits is significant, 
particularly at low X-ray energies. Consequently, both the semiconductor detector and 
first stage of the preamplifier are usually operated at low temperature to reduce the 
thermal noise. 

Energy resolution is one of the most important characteristics of an X-ray energy 
spectrometer since it sets the limit on the ability to resolve closely spaced lines. Figure 2, 
page 42 shows the K^ separation of adjacent elements as a function of atomic number. 



16 



18 12737 sl98t 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1M3 ) 

In comparing instruments it is necessary also to examine the other specifications, since 
improved energy resolution may be provided at the expense of other important 
parameters such as count-rate capability, gain stability, and detector size (efficiency). 

The limit resulting from the statistical uncertainty involved in the process whereby the 
incident X-ray energy produces free charge carriers is a fundamental limit on energy 
resolution and is discussed in detail in Sub-clause 5.2, 

Preamplifier and detector noise also affect the resolution and are examined in 
Sub-clauses 5.3 and 5.4. Charge loss from trapping and recombination can also have 
significant effects on the spectral quality. The peak-width broadening from charge loss 
typically increases with increasing energy since the fluctuation in the amount of charge 
trapped usually increases with total charge. "Partially dead" regions or layers can also 
produce spectral distortion in the form of low energy tails, non-linearities, and loss of 
detectoi efficiency at low energies. These effects are described in Sub-clause 5.5. 



Electronic stability is an important variable which includes not only the stability of the 
preamplifier, l>ut also that of other parts of the system, such as the main amplifier and 
the MCA. 

Effects of high count-rate such as pulse pile-up and d.c. level shifts are also important. 
Every time an event produces a pulse in the amplifying equipment, the d,c. levels 
throughout the system are perturbed and take some time to return to their original 
values. If another event occurs within this time interval, its effective output pulse height 
may be altered, thereby contributing to spectral distortion. 



5.2 Statistical limit of resolution 

If Poisson (random) statistics are applied to the process of the X-ray energy loss 
mechanism by free charge carrier formation, then it would be possible to calculate the 
statistical broadening of a monoenergetic X-ray peak from FWHM « 2.35 j/f £, where E 
is the energy of the incident radiation and e is the average energy required to create a 
free electron-hole pair. Frequently used values of f at 77 K are 3.8 eV/pair for silicon 
and 3.0 eV/pair for germanium. In fact, the charge production process does not follow 
Poisson statistics because the multiple events that occur in the energy loss process are 
correlated. Therefore, the statistical formula is usually modified by inserting a correction 
factor F (called the Fano factor), resulting in the expression FWHM « 2.35 J/f F E. This 
corrects for the fact that the observed broadening is substantially less than that predicted 
by Poisson statistics. For Si and Ge, F is not accurately known, but measurements have 
indicated limits between 0.05 and 0.15. 

Since it is not possible to measure the Fano factor and the resolution broadening 
caused by charge carrier trapping independently, the two effects arc frequently combined 
in the value assumed for F This is equivalent to the assumption that the charge loss 
(trapping) is a constant fraction of the free charge created. 

5.3 Preamplifier noise 

Preamplifier noise arises from a nuqiber of sources. One is the thermal noise in the 
input field effect transistor (FET) of the preamplifier (see Figure 1, page 41). This is 
usually minimized by cooling the FET and using selected FETs. With regard to the FET 



17 



IS 12737 1 1988 
QEG rab 759 ( 1983 ) 

contribution, the signal-to-noise ratio (S/n) decreases with increasing total capacitance at 
the FET gate and therefore decreases with increasing detector area. Thus, there is an 
important compromise between detector size and the observed S/n. Parasitic capacitance 
also affects S/n. Consequently, the physical configuration of the detector and preamplifier 
package is critical. The resistors Rf and R^^ shown in the circuit of Figure la, page 41 ^ 
also can be important sources of noise. In order to minimize the effect of stray 
capacitance and resistor noise, Q and iitL are usually eliminated by d.c. coupling the 
detector to the gate of the first FET as in Figure lb, page 41. Hence all of the current 
caused by the radiation must flow through Rf or the high impedance gate of the field 
effect transistor. This can change the FET operating point and the overall ^ain of the 
system, unless there is sufficient d.c. feedback via Rf to provide the required count-rate 
versus gain stability. The greater the feedback resistance (R^) the smaller the resistor 
noise contribution but the poorer the count-rate energy product capability. This presents 
an important compromise consideration between noise broadening of the resolution and 
performance at high count-rates. 



In this respect, it should be pointed out that it is not enough to specify just the 
simple count-rate capability because it is the product of count-rate and average radiation 
energy which is important, for example 100 keV X-rays present 20 times the count-rate 
problem of 5 keV X-rays. Other more sophisticated feedback mechanisms such as optical 
feedback, d.c. feedback, or pulsed optical feedback can be used in place of Rf and are in 
common usage as methods for reducing noise. However, these techniques also involve 
similar resolution versus count-rate compromises* 

Figure 3, page 43 shows the combined effects of preamplifier noise and statistics for 
two values of Fano factor, amplifier noise and e. The preamplifier contribution is 
independent of energy, while the statistical broadening varies as the square root of the 
energy. At a noise level of about 400 eV, the preamplifier noise dominates over the 
entire range of interest for the X-lines of the stable elements, while with 100 eV noise, 
the noise and statistical effects are about equal at the photon energy of 3.7 keV. 



5 4 Detector noise 

Leakage current in the detector element and Johnson noise in the detector series 
resistance can also contribute to system noise and resolution broadening. In integrated 
X-ray spectrometer systems, it is usually not possible to distinguish unambiguously 
between series noise sources (e.g., the FET series noise) and parallel noise sources such 
as detector leakage current, feedback resistor, and microphonics. Since the parallel noise 
predominates at lower frequencies, some indication of the presence of detector current 
noise or excess feedback noise can be obtained by examining the noise as a function of 
amplifier passband. 



5.5 Charge loss 

Loss of free charge carriers because of trapping in the semiconductor crystal can be a 
significant source of spectral distortion. The peak width broadening from this effect is 
proportional to the energy of the X-ray and therefore more pronounced at higher 
energies. Charge trapping, which is a function of detector bias voltage, frequently results 



18 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

in low energy tails on monoenergetic spectral lines. The effect is therefore often more 
readily apparent in the full width at tenth maximum of the peak height (FWTM) than in 
the FWHM of the spectral peak. The peak-to-valley ratios of K^ - K^ X-ray lines are 
also quite sensitive to this effect. The FWTM performance of the system is more 
important than it might appear on superficial examination. For example, if it is desired 
to determine a 10% X-ray fluorescence contribution from one element in the presence of 
a 90% contribution from the next higher element, the FWTM is more relevant than the 
FWHM. 

Windows and dead layers, even when not an intimate part of the detector element, 
contribute to loss of efficiency at low X-ray energies. In addition, charge loss in 
"partially-dead" layers in the portion of the detector adjacent to the entrance window 
can result in both a loss of full energy peak efficiency and in undesirable spectral 
distortion in the form of a low energy tail, spurious peaks, and non-linearity. 

Since major charge loss problems frequently occur around the outer periphery of the 
detector active area, these problems tend to be very sensitive to the source-detector 
geometry employed in the measurement. Consequently, for specification parameters where 
charge loss is a key variable, it is essential to define the source-detector geometry. This 
geometry can be conveniently defined in terms of the standard working axis, standard 
working distance, and standard source diameter. Por detectors used in microanalysis 
applications, the standard source diameter is negligible (a point source). ^ 

For the measurements described herein, it is desirable to make a distinction between 
background and non-ideal peak shapes such as asymmetries, tails, spurious peaks, etc. As 
used herein, the term background will refer only to non-ideal spectral response which 
results from radiation that is not a part of the monoenergetic X-ray line of interest. 



5.6 Electronic stability and extraneous noise 

The gain stability of the system and excess noise from spurious electrical effects or 
from microphonics can affect the performance of the system. The FWTM is frequently 
more sensitive to these problems than the FWHM. 

5.7 Count-rate effect. 

5.7.1 Pulse-shape considerations and distortion by pulse pile-up 

In order to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio as well as to provide reasonable 
count-rate capability, it is necessary to restrict both the upper and lower limits of the 
amplifier passband. At any given count-rate, the width (in time) of the resulting pulse 
will determine the probability that the preceding or succeeding pulse will be distorted b> 
pulse-on-pulse or pulse-on-tail pile-up. Choice of the type of pulse shaping and the time 
constants associated with the pulse therefore involves an important compromise between 
optimum energy resolution at low count-rates and the performance of the system at iiigh 
count-rates. Preamplifier noise can frequently be minimized by using relatively long pulse 
shaping time constants (~10|xs). However, the resulting optimum shaping time constant 
for minimum noise can be inconsistent with the count-rate requirements of the user. 
Consequently, energy resolution specifications should always be accompanied by either 
the maximum applicable count-rate and detailed information on the pulse shape, or a 
detailed description of the change in FWHM and FWTM as a function of count-rate at 
a specified energy. The latter description of performance is particularly useful in cases 



19 



ISlt7S7tl98$ 
IEGV«li75»(lM3) 

where the instrtiment is to be used in quantitative analysis where changes in resolution 
with changing count-rate would seriously complicate analysis of the resulting data. 



The usual shaping time constant number associated with the amplifier is by itself only 
marginally useful in predicting count-rate capability. The pile-up limitation of the system 
is primarily determined by the width of the pulse near the baseline. 

For a given nominal time constant^ this time interval can vary by a factor of two or 
more, depending on the type of pulse shaping and the convention used for assigning a 
time constant value. Although the attainment of low pile-up requires that the 
characteristic width of the pulse be small compared to the mean interval between pulses, 
it is also necessary that the pulse return cbsely to the baseline (average d.c. level) in a 
time interval small compared to the mean interval between pulses. Many preamplifier- 
amplifier systems utilize a design principle referred to as pole-zero (PZ) cancellation to 
minimize undesirable undershoots. 

Failure to achieve accurate PZ cancellation can degrade the FWHM and FWTM and 
can also result in low or hi^ energy tails on spectral peaks, depending on whether an 
undershoot or overshoot exists. This source of distortion is particularly important at high 
count-rates. 

5.7.2 Baseline (d.c. level) shifts, baseline (d.c.} restoration, £Ount-rate induced gain shifts <md 
non-linearities 

A count-rate induced d.c. level shift anywhere within the electronic amplifying chain 
will introduce gain shifts and non-Hnearities whenever the d.c. level exceeds the linear 
dynamic range of that portion of the signal processing chain. Also, when the limit of the 
h*near dynamic range is approached, statistically induced fluctuations in the d.c. level can 
exceed this limit, resulting in peak broadening and other related spectral distortions. In 
addition, a short-term d.c. level shift at the output of the amplifier system will produce 
an equivalent shift in the magnitude of the output voltage pulse presented to the ADC 
of the MCA or single-channel analyzer, thereby degrading the resolution. Customarily, 
these problems are reduced by using d.c. feedback and by using a baseline restorer 
(BLR) at the output of the amplifying chain. Baseline restoration can also add a noise 
contribution which depends on the restoration mode and restoration rate (time constant). 



Consequently, when specifying resolution, subility. gain shift, linearity, etc.. as a 
function of count-rate, it is essential that the following information be stated: 

a) the energy for which the performance is specified; 

b) details of the pulse shaping; 

c) details of restoration mode; 

d) details of pile-up rejection. 

Specifications as a function of count-rate shall be obtained at the same operating 
conditions (e.g., same pulse shape, feedback configuration, restoration mode. etc.). This 
requirement is particularly relevant to applications where it is not practical to reoptimize 
the spectrometer system every time the product of the count-rate and the energy changes. 



20 



1812797 11988 
lEC Fab 758(1803) 



5.7.3 Overload recovery 



Overload pulses produced by high*energy radiation events which exceed the dynamic 
range of che amplifying equipment can produce undesirable effects such as baseline 
overshoot or undershoot and system paralysis (dead time). However, since good overload 
performance may compromise other system diaracteristics it should not be emphasized in 
those applications where overload signals are not a significant problem. 



5.8 Detector material selection: germanium versus silicon 

The two semiconductor detector materials which are presently available for 
high-resolution X-ray energy spectrometers are germanium and silicon. The relative 
potential advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized as follows: 

Germanium 
Advantages 

1) Higher atomic number (Z) which results in better efficiency at high energies. 

2) The smaller value of e reduces the relative importance of noise (see Sub-clause 5.3) 
and possibly the statistical contribution to the resolution (see Sub-clause 5.2). 

Disadvantages 

1) Higher efficiency at high energy produces more background problems from high-energy 
sources. 

2) An equal linear thickness for the dead layer (entrance window) corresponds to a much 
greater efficiency loss at low energy. 

3) Worse low-energy tailing on low-energy peaks. 

4) High efficiency at high energy increases the probability of amplifier overload. 

5) High Z results in increased spectral complication by escape peak problems and a 
more complex relation between efficiency and energy. 

6) Smaller band-gap increases the potential detector leakage current noise problems. 

Silicon 

Advantages 

1) Dead layer effects are smaller. 

2) It exhibits relative freedom from escape peak complications in complex spectra. 

3) Silicon is less sensitive to high-energy background problems. 

4) Silicon can be used at higher temperatures with less detector noise contribution. 

Disadvantages 

1) Efficiency is lower at high energy (>30 keV). 

2) Higher average energies required to form an electron-hole pair (i.e., larger e). 



21 



IS 12737 s 1988 
ira Fab 759 ( 19SS ) 

5.9 Detector efficiency 

The full-energy peak efficiency of a semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer is energy 
dependent. It is a function of the physical size and shape of the detector, the presence 
of windows or dead layers on the detector and its container, charge trapping problems 
within the detector, the Z of the detector material, and the energy of the K^ edge of 
the semiconductor. 

Typical graphs of efficiency versus energy are illustrated in Figure 4, page 44 The 
low-energy response threshold is established by absorption in the window of the detector 
entrance surface. In addition, any partially-dead layer within the detector near its 
entranqe window may contribute to the drop in efficiency at low energy and may also 
result in low-energy background counts for peaks at lower energies (i.e., a low-eneigy tail 
on a monoenergetic X-ray peak). Variations of full-energy peak efficiency as a function 
of energy are also caused by the sharp change in the absorption coefficient near the A^^^s 
edge. Since this sudden increase in cross-section results in a high probability of 
interaction near the entrance window on the semiconductor, dead or partially-dead layers 
adjacent to the entrance window can cause large drops in the full-energy peak efficiency 
at energies just above the K^^ edge. 



The drop in efficiency at high energy depends on the sensitive depth and volume of 
the detector. The efficiency at high energies, as well as the spectral quality (low-energy 
tailing) can also be affected by the existence of a partially-dead layer near the back 
contact to the sensitive region, poor charge collection throughout the sensitive region, or 
by isolated partially-dead layers within the sensitive volume. 



5. JO Resolution of adjacent lines and line-to-background ratio 

The question of when two adjacent spectral lines are "resolved" is somewhat subjective 
since it depends on the particular experimental conditions and performance criteria. For 
example, when attempting to analyze a line in the presence of a nearby much stronger 
line, it may be the FWTM of the more intense line that determines whether the lines are 
"resolved*'. When attempting to analyze a line in the presence of a much more intense 
higher-energy neighbour, it may be the low-energy tailing from the more intense line that 
establishes the sensitivity and accuracy of the measurement. This standard does not 
attempt to establish an arbitrary - and possibly misleading - definition to determine if 
two adjacent lines are resolved. Rather, the approach adopted in this standard is that of 
defining key characteristics of the spectral response so that the user can interpret the 
instrument specification with respect to his own needs. 

The concept of line-to-background ratio has traditionally been of considerable 
usefulness to the X-ray analyst. However, the line-to-background ratio in any particular 
application depends not only on the performance of the X-ray energy analyzer, but also 
on other factors such as the method of X-ray excitation (e.g. electron, heavy ion, 
secondary X-ray, radioactive source), the character of the fluorescing sample, and 
geometrical arrangement of the exciting source, target, and detector. Since these latter 
factors are frequently beyond the control of the X-ray energy spectrometer manufacturer, 
this standard does not include test procedures for line-to-background ratio determination. 



22 



IS 12737 s 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

However, standards for specifying the characteristic spectrometer parameters such as 
FWHM, TWTM, peak-to-tail, and peak-to-valley ratios which directly affect the 
line-to-background ratio have been included (e.g. if the FWHM doubles, the 
line-to-background ratio will decrease to one-half, all other factors remaining constant) 



5.11 Miscellaneous other effects 

5.11.1 Microphonics 

Micropnomc noise generation may be a serious source of resolution broadening. In 
cryogenic systems, mechanical vibrations of the input circuit components relative to 
surfaces at different potentials can introduce noise. Such vibrations can be produced by 
bubbling of liquid nitrogen, irbulence from automatic nitrogen transfer systems, vibration 
of other equipment in contact with the detector cryostat, and environmental noise. A 
change of capacitance between the FET ^ate and the high voltage (detector bias 1 000 V) 
of only 5 X 10-^ pF is sufficient to generate a microphonic signal equivalent to that of a 
10 keV X-ray. Since the typical stray capacitances are of the order of 1 pF, mechanical 
motions (within the frequency pass-band of the shaping amplifier) of approximately one 
part in 10^ are significant. Since most of the vibration problems are at relatively low 
frequency, much of the microphonic noise is filtered out by the low-frequency response 
of the amplifier. Consequently, microphonic problems become more serious at long 
shaping time constants. This problem involves the excitation of internal mechanical 
resonances by internal or external vibrations and is quite complex. Microphonics 
problems can be studied in a qualitative way by exciting the system with an audio 
speaker driven by a variable frequency generator. However, because of the wide diversity 
of detector mechanical configurations available, it would be difficult to establish a 
standard for microphonics. None the less, the user should be aware of this potential 
problem. 



5. 1 L2 Secondary fluorescence 

Secondary fluorescenpe of metal parts of the cryostat, detector, and preamp mount and 
the metal electrodes on the detector can cause spectral distortion in the form of spurious 
peaks in the spectrum. Detector producers are urged to give detailed information about 
the jnaterial, especially of related components, the detector mount itself and the contact 
zone. Additionally, the geometry of the preamp FET relative to the radiation main axis is 
needed to assess the influence of the secondary fluorescence. 



5.11.3 Liquid nitrogen loss rate 

Most semiconductor X-ray analyzers use liquid nitrogen for cooling the detector and 
preamplifier. The efficiency of the cryostat design is directly reflected in the liquid 
nitrogen consumption rate. Excessive liquid nitrogen consumption aggravates 
microphonics, and increases the operating cost, inconvenience, and the chance of 
accidental warm-up. This performance parameter is usually covered by specifying the 
capacity of the liquid nitrogen reservoir and the minimum guaranteed holding time (of 
the temperature). 



23 



IS 12737 1 1988 
mC Fob 759 ( 1983 ) 

6. General 

6.1 Definition of semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer 

A semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer is an instrument which utilizes the 
pix)portionality between the energy of an X-ray and the number of free electron-hole 
pairs created in a semiconductor radiation detector by that X-ray as a means of 
measuring the energy of the X-ray. In this standard the spectrometer is assumed to 
consist of the semiconductor detector, preamplifier, means for cooling, encapsulation, 
required vacuum and mechanical housings, amplifier, power supplies, and other required 
analog electronics. For the puirposes of this standard, analog-to-digital data conversion 
and subsequent data-handling equipment, are not considered to be a part of the 
spectrometer, even though it is recognized that they are an essential ingredient in 
establishing the total system performance. In addition, sample stages, the X-ray emitter, 
and means for exciting same (e.g., radioactive sources, electron beams, etc.) are 
considered to be ancillary equipment and not part of the spectrometer. 

6.2 General precautions and specifications 

The following general precautions and specifications are relevant to all of the test 
procedures described herein. 

Maximum detector bias voltage, rate of bias voltage change, radiation fiux ratings, line 
voltage, maximum detector temperature, and other manufacturer's specification limits 
should not be exceeded or permanent damage to the instrument may result. 

The values of the parameters specified should be reproducible within the precision of 
the measurements after the performance of any one or all of the tests performed. Care 
should be taken to ensure that power-line noise, earth loops, mechanical vibration, and 
the characteristics of ancillary test equipment do not substantially influence the test 
results. 

Relevant test conditions such as pulse shaping (type and time constants), detector bias, 
etc., shall be clearly stated. In no case shall performance data which require change in 
operating condition or mode be presented as a plotted envelope or table (e.g., if energy 
resolution versus count-rate is plotted, all data points must correspond to the same 
operating conditions). If it is desired to show results for several operating modes (e.g. 
time constants), then these should be shown as a family of curves with operating mode 
as a parameter. 



Since the semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometer user seeks energy and intensity 
distribution information, it is reasonable to specify system performance in terms of energy 
spectrum distortion and variations in the system detection efficiency as a function of 
energy. Consequently, many of the performance parameters contained herein are described 
in terms of deviations from ideal behaviour. 

In order to establish standardized test procedures which are independent of the various 
sources of X-rays which might eventually be used with the instrument, readily available 
radioactive sources have been specified for the test procedure^. Whenever possible, 
isotopes having simple energy spectra have been selected. This is particularly important in 
resolution versus count-rate tests where multiple lines greatly complicate the interpretation 
of the data. An attempt has been made to specify standard sources covering the enei^y 



24 



I813737il98t 
IEGPabtS9(19M) 

range of interest for T>oth Si and Ge detectors when used with characteristic elemental 
X-rays. It is recognized that special applications or requirements may necessitate the use 
of additional X-ray energies to adequately characterize the instrument. 



6.3 Simulating the signal pulse of a detector 

A pulse from a pulse generator is useful for measuring the electronic noise 
contribution to the resolution, electronic linearity, gain stability, and also for energy 
calibrations. In order for all sources of noise, drift, etc., to be sampled by the test pulse, 
the charge shall be injected into the input of the preamplifier as. illustrated in Figure 5, 
page 45 The type of pulse generator shown in Figure 6, page 46 > is frequently referred 
to as a tail pulse generator. Pulse generators which produce a square pulse are also 
occasionally used instead of tail pulse generators. 

Test pulses applied by capacitive coupling cannot precisely simulate true signal pulses. 
The exponential decay T4 shown in Figure 6 corresponds to an uncancelled pole which 
results in an undershoot at the amplifier output. Pole-zero cancellation of the charge 
coupling capacitance is not appropriate to this problem, since it would result in excess 
noise at the preamplifier input. For a square pulse, droop in the pulse corresponds to a 
long time constant pole and, in addition, the negative going portions of the pulse will 
produce a pulse of the wrong polarity in the amplifier and possibly result in undesirable 
baseline shifts. 

Consequently, pulse generators should not be used to generate the high and variable 
count-rate required for count-rate effect measurements. In addition, it is preferable to 
turn the pulser ^^uring X-ray resolution measurements, particularly if the 
measurements are p^ormed at high count-rates and/or with long pulse shaping time 
constants. Some systems, for example amplifiers with gated BLR, may not tolerate the 
undershoot from a tail pulse generator or the opposite polarity signal produced by a 
square pulse generator 



7. Energy resolution and spectral distortion 

7.1 Noise measurement by pulse-height distribution (preferred method) 

The electroniq and detector noise contribution to the resolution width can be 
determined by this method only if the instrument is provided with a pulser coupling 
capacitor (Q) as shown in Figure 5. The spectrometer is connected to a multichannel 
analyzer as shown in Figure 5. With all elements of the system operating within their 
linear range and with the detector at its specified operating voltage, expose the detector 
to an appropriate X-ray source (e.g., 5.9 keV Mn K^ from "Fe) and accumulate a 
spectrum. The system gain and pulse amplitude shall be such that the FWHM of the 
X-ray peak is at least eight channels and that of the pulser peak is at least Hvt 
channels. (For MCAs with a small number of channels it may be necessary to use a 
biased amplifier or a digital off-set in the ADC following the main amplifier to achieve 
this condition.) Remove the X-ray source and calibrate the pulse generator by setting its 
output amplitude dial to the appropriate X-ray energy (e.g. 5.9 keV) and adjusting the 
calibration controls until the pulser peak and the X-xay peak have the same peak centre 
(modal) channel. With the source removed, and with the system gain such that the 



25 



IS 12737 : 198^ 
lEG Pab 759 ( 1983 ) 

FWHM of the pulser peaks is at least five channels, accumulate the two pe ii 
corresponding to pulse generator equivalent output energies £i and Ej in channels X, an 
X2 as shown in Figure 7, page 47* The system total noise line width is defined as: 



-1 " ^A AT 



^g-( ^' 7; i-^N (ij 



where zl5 is the interpolated number of channels corresponding to the full width of the 
peak at one-half the maximum height of the peak. 

The FWTM is defined as: 

where S'^ is the number of channels corresponding to the full width of the peak at 
one-tenth the maximum height of the peak. 

If the pulse generator is triggered by line frequency, this technique may not detect the 
presence of noise which is correlated with line frequency. This problem may be avoided 
by using a pulse generator with an internal trigger which is asynchronous with line 
frequency. 

When stating the total noise line width, complete information on the pulse shaping 
(including the full-pulse width) shall be given (e.g. 2 jxs CR-RC, or semi-Gaussian with 
four 2 [IS CR integrations and one 2 \is RC differentiation). If baseline restoration (BLR) 
and/or gating techniques are used, the characteristics of the BLR and/or gating shall 
also be stated (see Clause 5). 



7.2 Alternate techniques for noise measurement 

7.2.1 Noise measurement by oscilloscope and r.m.s. voltmeter 

An alternative method of measuring noise employs the system snown in Figure 8, 
page SS. The root-mean-square (r.m.s.) noise voltage level is indicated on an r.m.s. 
voltmeter having a flat-band frequency response extending to at least ten times the band 
centre frequency of the amplifier pulse-shaping networks. In addition, the amplifier 
incremental-gain shall be constant down to below the noise level (a biased amplifier, 
BLR, or gating can render this measuring technique useless). The same constraints 
regarding operating conditions and reference specifications outlined in Sub-clause 7.1 
apply here also. The pulse generator is calibrated as in Sub-clause 7.1 except that the 
oscilloscope is used to compare the pulse heights of the source and pulser. A pulse 
generator-pulse equivalent to energy E^ is applied and the resulting amplifier output V^ is 
measured in the oscilloscope. The pulse generator is Switched off and the r.m.s. noise 
voltage e^o is read from the voltmeter. The system FWHM noise linewidth is given by: 



^i = 2.35-a-eno^^) 



(3) 



where a is 1. 11 for a sine-wave-calibrated average-reading voltmeter and unity for a tru^; 
r.m.s. voltmeter. The value of E^/V^ can also be obtained by using a monoenergetic X-ray 
source of energy E^. 



26 



IS 12737 : 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 



,2 Noise approximation from X-ray spectral resolution 



Tie electronic noise contribution to the resolution broadening can also be 
approximated from the variation of X-ray peak width as a function of energy as given 

by: 

where dJ: is the FWHM noise linewidth of equation (3) and (A%) and (A\) are the 
FWHM total line widths for the peak at energies E^ and £2^ respectively (see also 

Sub-clause 7.4). 

Considerable caution needs to be applied in the use of equation (4), since it is prone 
to error for the following reasons: 

a) the value for A'^ may be the result of taking a smaii difference between large 
numbers and therefore, the error propagation problem is significant; 

b) equation (4) assumes that the fractional charge loss effects are independent of energy, 
an assumption that is questionable below 3 keV or over a large energy range; 

c) the X-ray peaks are multiplets (e.g. A^aj, KJ). The separation of these multiplets is a 
function of energy and whether the peak is a K or L or M line. This source of 
variable peak broadening has not been taken into account in equation (4). 

7.3 Noise iinewidth as a function of amplifier time constants 

Information concerning the series and parallel noise contributions can be obtained by 
plotting noise linewidth as a function of amplifier time constants. In addition, such a 
plot can give important information regarding the count-rate versus energy resolution 
compromise. To perform this measurement, the method of Sub-clause 7.1 or 7.2 is 
employed with an amplifier having adjustable shaping time constants. The results are 
displayed as a plot of noise linewidth as a function of pulse-shaping time constants (with 
other possible variables such as BLR as a parameter). 



7.4 X-ray linewidth measurements by pulse-height distrioution 

7.4.1 X~ray sources 

rhe following radioactive sources are recommended for specification of energy 
resolution ; 

a) -•^Fc 5.9 keV - Mn iCa(iCoci - 5,898, K^. -- 5.887); 

b) i^^*Cd 22,162 (Xai) and 21.988 (Kag) keV Ag K X-rays and 88 keV gamma-ray; 

cj '^^Co 6.4 re K^{K^i - 6.403, K^2 ~ 6.390) and 14.4, 122, and 136 keV gamma-rays (not 
reco^Finisnded for count-rate effect measurements). 

■: *i'soJution is specified at one energy only, "Fe is the preferred source. The 5.9 keV 
Mn X ray represents a reasonable compromise between amplifier noise broadening and 
other detector resolution broadening effects. The lines above 30 keV are relevant mostly 
to Ge detectors. To prevent spectral distortion from backscattered radiation, the source 
backiiig thickness and Z should be kept as small as possible 



27 



18 12737 f 1988 
lEC Pub 759 ( 1883 ) 

If lower-energy lines are desired, they may be obtained by secondary fluorescence of a 
target such as the standard glass described in Clause 12. 

In case a secondary fluorescent target is used as a source of X-rays for resolution 
measurements, the background from the continuum should be subtracted before 
determining N^ (the counts in channel X). A suitable technique for background 
subtraction is described in Sub-clause 12.1 of this publication and Syb-clause 4.1 of I EC 
Publication 340. 

7.4.2 Spectral resolution 

These tests are carried out using the system of Figure 5, page 45 and one of the 
radiation sources listed in Sub-clause 7.4.1. The source is located on the standard 
working axis of the detector at the standard working distance. The active diameter of the 
source must not significantly exceed the standard working diameter. For those cases 
where the source is a true characteristic X-ray, the location of the centres of the ^^ and 
K^ peaks can be used to obtain the calibration: 



/ Ei-E2 \ 



(5) 



For other cases, or if the K^ and K^ are not sufficiently well resolved, the pulser 
technique of Sub-clause 7.1 may be used to obtain calibration. The results should be 
expressed as the FWHM and FWTM. The FWHM is obtained from the relation: 



Al 



-i^)-' 



(6) 



where ^n is the full width (in interpolated fractional channels* of the peak at one-half its 
maximum amplitude. The FWTM is given by: 



i^y- 



(7) 



where ^|r is the full width (in fractional channels) of peak at one-tenth its maximum 
amplitude. For a Gaussian peak: 5% - 1.78 (J|r), thus ^| = 1.78 (J|). 

The FWHM must be at least ten channels with a minimum of 40 000 counts in the 
peak centre (modal) channel. In reporting information on spectral resolution, the 
following shall be noted: 

a) incident X-ray source and energy; 

b) count-rate at which measurement was taken; 

c) detector-source geometry (standard working distance and standard source diameter); 

d) detailed description of detector and its collimator (shape, area, depth. Si or Ge, etc.); 

e) detector operating bias; 

J) system noise linewidth under the same operating conditions; 

g) amplifier pulse-shaping parameters (including the full pulse width and BLR 
parameters). 



The method of interpolation shall be given by the manufacturer. 



28 



n 12737 : 198S 
I£G Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

Another set of parameters of interest are those contributions to the detector linewidth 
caused by all factors other than electrical noise (e.g. statistical and charge collection 
problems). These quantities are found by subtracting the noise linewidth contributions in 
quadrature according to the relationships, 

Jg ^ V(^%y - {aW (8) and ^g - Vm' " {Sir (9) 

It is relevant to point out that the resolution limit set by statistical considerations alone 
is given by: 

lim (^?) = 2.35 yrjE (10) 

where: 

As = FWHM linewidth in units of energy 

E = X-ray energy 

e = average energy to form an electron-hole pair 

F = Fano factor 

The value of the Fano factor is not accurately established at the present time for 
either Si or Ge. Existing experimental data establish only a probable upper limit for F; 
however, F = 0.1 is commonly employed as a useful estimate of F. 

7.5 Peak-to-valley and peak-to-tail ratios 

Peak-to-valley ratios (Sub-clause 7.5.1) for two closely spaced peaks (e.g., the K^ and 
Ap of Mn from ^^Fe) and peak-to-tail ratios (Sub-clause 7.5.2) can be very sensitive 
indicators of spectral distortions caused by a variety of factors ranging from charge 
collection problems in the detector (or its partially-dead windows) to baseline instability 
and other related count-rate effects in the electronics. Peak-to-tail ratios can also be 
sensitive indicators of the detector system's line-to-background ratio capability. 

When quoting peak-to-valley or peak-to-tail ratios complete details of the measurement 
conditions, including source-detector geometry (standard working distance and standard 
source diameter) amplifier time constant settings, input count-rate, and any other major 
variables which would significantly affect the measurement shall be clearly stated. The 
system parameter adjustments used for these specifications should be consistent with 
those used for specification of other performance parameters, such as FWHM, etc. 



7.5.1 Feak-to-valley ratio 

The peak-to-valley ratio between two specified peaks is defmed as the ratio of the 
height of the larger peak to the height in the minimum of the valley between the two 
peaks. 

Specifications of peak-to-valley ratios should be based on sufficient statistical information 
(i.e. number of counts per channel in the valley) to ensure a maximum statistical probable 
error of less than 5% in the peak-to-valley ratio. 

7.5.2 Peak-tO'tail ratio 

This test consists of placing the active side of a standard '^Fe source normal to and 
centred on the standard working axis and located at the standard working distance, 
adjusting gains so that at least ten channels appear across the FWHM, and counting 
until TVp counts (20 000 minimum) are accumulated in the peak centre channel (modal 



29 



la 12737: 1988 
IEGPab759( 



1983) 



channel) 
channels 
averaged 



at 



5,9 keV. IJje number of counts in each of the groups of five contiguous 
(^entred around th^ energies of 5.4 keV, 4.5 keV and I keV, respectively, are 
give values C,, C^ arid Q respectively. 



to 



The pea|k-to-taii. ratios P^, Pj and P^ are calculated from: 

Pi=:Np/Ci P2 = Np/C2 and P^^NjCz 



(11 



Reduction of the peak-to-tail ratio may result from deterioration in system performance 
from conljributions due to backscattering from the surroundings or source backing, high 
count-rate:i, system noise (ground loops, a.c, noise, etc.), improper equipment settings 
(misadjust^ent in pole-zero cancellation networks, non-optimum shaping times, etc.) oi 
the presejice of other radiation sources in the vicinity. Background from origins other 
than the ^^Fe source must be negligible in order to make this measurement meaningful. 



This method for. the det;eHrmination of the peak-to-tail ratio can yield misleading results 
if there are other radionuclide impurities in the source which contribute to events in the 
tail. Errors resulting from impurities in the source can be detected by remeasuring the 
peak-to-t^il ratio with an absorber placed between the "Fe source and the detector. 



8. Pulse-heigh^ linearity 

8.1 System XVay linearity by pulse-height analyzer method (preferred method) 

■ 
This technique measures the combined integral non-linearity of the detector system and 
the pulse-height analyzer. To determine the integral linearity of any component of the 
instrumerit chain, the effect of the other components must be measured and subtracted. 

With the arrangement shown in Figure 5, page 45. the detector is expos,ed to a series 
of charaqteristic X-ray lines spanning the energy region of interest. Normally, a minimum 
of ten li^es, more or less uniformly spaced over the region of interest is required for a 
good linearity check. These lines may be generated by secondary excitation induced with 
X-rays, gamma-rays, or charged particles. The lowest energy line should be less than 10% 
and the maximum-energy line greater than 90% of full-scale energy range of interest. 



Care $hould be exercised to use only lines whose characteristic energy is accurately 
establishspd (e.g. unresolved multiplets which result in significant resolution broadening 
should be avoided whenever possible). 



If these lines are generated sequentially rather than simultaneously, care should be 
exercisecf to ensure that the counting rate is low and comparable; otherwise, count-rate 
induced I gain shifts may be mistakenly interpreted as a pulse-height linearity problem. 
Also, care should be taken that equipment gain drifts are not mistakenly interpreted as 
non-linearities. The most reliable method is tp generate all of the lines simultaneously. 

Integral non-linearity (INL) is defined as the maximum deviation from linearity 
expressed as a percent^ige of the specified maximum linear output. When characterized 
by a siijgle unqualified number, INL shall not exceed that number anywhere within the 
specifieq operation range oif the instrument and shall be determined under the same 
conditiojis (instrument settings, etc.) used to specify resolution performance. The INL 



30 



IS 12137 ! 1^8 
lEC Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

miy b€ obtained from the previously described X-ray spectrum by piotting p^ak centre 
(modii) channel number for each peak versus the X-ray energy of that peak as shown in 

pHiu^e 9, page 48 






deal response curve is a straight line corresponding to a linear regression least 
ua i R ni to the data points with the same statistical weight for all measurements. The 
aun~linearity, in per cent, is then defined by: 






INL = 100 — ,-^^ il2) 



v/here 1£max is the maximum deviation (in energy units) between the measured and the 
ideal response, and E^ is the energy corresponding to the full scale of the energy range 
of uiterest. 

Integra! linearity by the bridge method 

This measurement (supplementary method) is described in detail in Clause 21 of I EC 
Publication 340. It can be utilized only with detector Systems that incorporate a pulser 
coupling capacitor as described in Sub-clause 7.1. 



9. Count-rate effects 

9.1 Experimental arrangement 

Because most instruments which utilize gated baseline restoration do not tolerate the 
reverse polarity part of the pulse for a tail pulse generator or a sqjuare pulse generator, 
techniques which rely on a pulse generator to measure count-rate effects are frequently 
not useful for X-ray spectrometers. 

The experimental arrangement for using a radioactive source to measure count-rate 
effects on spectral distortion is shown in Figure 10, page 49. The "Fe source shown in 
Figure 10 is located on the working axis of the detector, and the source to detector 
distance is varied to change the counting-rate. Generally, it is preferable that the 
radioactive source be sufficiently intense that the maximum desired counting-rate is 
obtained at a source to detector spacing not less than the standard working distance. If 
the source to detector spacing is too small, spectral distortions from edge effects in the 
detector may be misinterpreted as count-rate induced distortions. All extraneous scattering 
materials shall be kept well away from the space between or adjacent to the source and 
detector to eliminate spectral distortion by Compton scattered photons, or by secondary 
fiuorescence X-rays. In general, it is preferable to use an X-ray source that does not 
produce any high energy events which would overload the amplifier. It is essential that 
the input stages of the ADC be d.c. coupled. 



The equivalent input count-rate (rj is measured by the fast amplifier, discriminator, 
and counting ratemeter. In preamplifiers which utilize pulsed feedback, the r^ shown in 
Figure 10 does not represent the true input rate: to obtain the true input rate in this 
case a correction must be made for the dead time caused by the gated-off periods. In 
some cases, this correction may be very significant. The fast filter amplifier chain shall 



31 



18 127^ 3 1988 
KG Pub 759 ( 1883 ) 

have a band-pass sufTident to ensure negligible counting losses or an accurate correction 
for the counting loss from pile-up must be applied. A good first-order correction is given 
by the relation: 



ro-ri-e-'-i'w (13) 

where: 

r,, — unpiled-up output data rate 

r^ <« input data rate 

t^ - width of the pulse (in seconds) at the baseline established by the discriminator threshold level 

If the arrangement shown in Figure 10, page 49 is operated in the ungated mode (i.e., 
with the gate by-passed) the observed count-rate effects will include the contributions 
from the MCA. The contribution from the MCA (and gate) alone can be approximated 
in the following way: 

Set the scaler overflow output to divide-by-one condition and the delay and the 
one-shot period long enough to gate the entire amplifier output pulse through the linear 
gate. Adjust the "Fe source position to produce the maximum desired counting-rate. Vary 
the counting-rate into the MCA by switching the scaler overflow output to -^ 2, -i- 4, -^ 8, 
-T- 16, ~ 32, etc. The resulting shifts in resolution and peak shape can be attributed to the 
MCA and linear gate. The contribution from the linear gate can be minimized by using 
a good quality d.c. coupled linear gate. 



Because of the derandomizing effect of the scaler, this technique will tend to 
underestimate the count-rate effects in the MCA at low and medium count-rates. 

The main problems with count-rate effect measurements are: 

a) the difficulty of isolating the contribution of any one component of the 
detector-preamplifier-amplifier-MCA system; 

b) the dependence of count-rate perforinance on many factors, such as signal energy, 
preamplifier noise, and amplifier shaping time constants. It is therefore necessary, in 
specifying the system performance, that all the relative operating conditions be clearly 
stated, and that the system parameters are selected so as to approximate the 
conditions under which the system will be used. When investigating count-rate 
performance, it is imperative that the pole-zero cancellation networks and baseline 
restorers be properly adjusted. 

When specifying system performance, the following shall be stated: 

a) whether the results include the MCA effects; 

b) energy range; 

c) amplifier shaping time constants, including BLR setting and pile-up rejection; 

d) low count-rate resolution; 

e) energy at which the amplifier overloads; 

J) radiation source and energy used for random signal source (preferred source is "Fe). 



32 



IS 12737 s 1988 
lEG F«ib 759 ( 1983 ) 

When specifying performance as a function of counting-rate, the counting-rate specified 
shall always be the counting-rate at the input (cktector) of the spectrometer. The output 
counting-rate which corresponds to this input counting-rate shall also be stated. 



9.2 Pulse-height distribution peak shift 

The peak location (centroid) of a pulse-height distribution may exhibit dependence on 
total counting-rate. The experimental set-up shown in Figure 10, page 49, provides a 
means to measure pulse-height shift as a function of average counting-rate for random 
pulse spacing in time. The counting-rate is varied by adjusting the spacing between the 
radiation source and the detector and is measured with a count-rate meter. The Mn K^ 
peak should be set at 90% of the maximum specified linear output of the system. The 
counting-rate should then be varied over the entire range of interest, and the shift of the 
Mn K^ peak centroid plotted as a function of total i^put count-rate. 



9.J Spectral resolution and line shape versus count-rate 

The set-up shown in Figure 10 is also used for this measurement. 

The FWHM, FWTM, and peak-to-tail of the Mn K^ pulse-height distribution are 
measured for each of several counting-rates over the range of interest *and tabulated or 
plotted as a function of input count-rate. The Mn K^ peak should be set as specified in 
Sub-clause 9.2. 

9.4 Counting losses 

At high counting-rates, pulse pile-up will cause a loss of counts from the peak as well 
as spectral distortion. In addition, systems which use gating techniques to eliminate 
spectral distortion or to effect pulsed feedback to the preamplifier will exhibit dead times 
during the gate closed periods. All systems are paralyzable; i.e., at some level of input 
count-rate, the output count-rate actually decreases with increasing input rate. Figure 11, 
page 50 illustrates this effect. 



Either the arrangement shown in Figure 10 or that of Figure 12, page/ 51^ may be used 
for this measurement- If the arrangement of Figure 10 is used, the counting-rate meter 
should be replaced with a counter-timer and the gain should be adjusted as in 
Sub-clause 9.2. If the arrangement in Figure 12 is used, the window widths in the fast 
single-channel analyzers should be set at six times the FWHM, and the centre of the 
window should correspond to the peak centre (modal point of the peak) at low 
count-rate. The arrangement shown in Figure 12 can be used only under situations where 
the pulse-height distribution peak shift with counting rate will not shift the peak out of 
the window of the SCA. The fast filter amplifier chain shall have a band-pass sufficient 
to ensure negligible counting I6sses, although a small calculated dead-time loss correction 
for the fast filter amplifier chain may be required. 

The xjount-rate is increased by decreasing the source-to-detector distance, and the 
counting-rate of the analyzed pulses in the X-ray peak is plotted as a function of total 
count-rate in the fast fiher amplifier chain as shown in Figure 13, page 52 » The results 
of Figure 11 can be derived from those of Figure 13. 



33 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 { 1983 } 

Counting loss effects which are attributable to the MCA may be measured by disabling 
the coincidence gate input shown in Figure 10, page 49 (as described in Sub-clause 9.1). 

The arrangements of Figure 10 or 12, page 51 can also be used to verify dead time 
corrections. 



10. Overload effects 

10. 1 General 

The behaviour of an amplifier receiving an input pulse that drives the amplifier far 
into the overload region depends on many factors. The order in which different sections 
of the amplifier overload as the input amplitude is increased may depend on the gain 
control and time constant settings. All of the gain control settings and pulse-shape 
parameters shall be stated when the overload recovery time is specified; otherwise, the 
specification shall apply for all gain and filter network combinations available in the 
system. Amplifiers having adjustable pole-zero cancellation and baseline restoration 
networks must be properly adjusted before overload tests are performed. 



10.2 Amplifier gain recovery time 

A system is defined as having recovered from overload when the output waveform 
returns to and remains within a band about the baseline of 1% of the maximum 
specified output voltage, and when the gain for small, signals has returned to normal. 
After an overload pulse, the output waveform of some amplifiers returns to the baseline 
sooner than the gain returns to normal. Return to normal gain may usually be judged by 
the reappearance of full noise or small signal response on the oscilloscope trace. The test 
arrangement shown in Figure 5, page 45 permits a quick measurement of recovery time 
after an overloading pulse. If the pulse generator is replaced with a sine-wave generator, 
working at low signal level, the reappearance of the sine wave can be used instead of 
the noise. 

An example of such overload behaviour is illustrated in Figure 14, page 52 . Note that 
the small sinusoidal signal on the trace reappears when the amplifier gain has returned 
to normal. The waveform returns to the baseline very quickly after the overload pulse, 
but the gain does not recover until much later. Oscilloscope overload must be avoided. 
Amplifier gain recovery time shall be stated for overload factors of 10, 100, and 1 GOO at 
all relevant time-constant and gain settings. 



11. Pulse-height stability 

11.1 Line voltage variations 

The test set-up is identical with that shown in Figure 5 except that the line voltage is 
variable for all parts x>f the system except the T>recision pulse generator, multichannel 
analyzer, and oscilloscope. A pulse generator peak and/or a peak from a monoenergetic 
X-ray line (e.g. ^^Fe) may be used to measure stability. 



34 



18 12737 r 1988 
mC Pttb 759 ( 1983 ) 

Set the line voltage at its nominal value and adjust the amplifier output so that the 
peak centre (mods!) channel of the peak Aj is at 90% of full scale on the MCA, Observe 
the maximum deviation of AT, as the line voltage is varied over a range of 88% to 110% 
of the nominal operating voltage while all other conditions are maintained constant. This 
variation is often expressed in percentage for a given line voltage change and is obtained 
by the relation: 

100 ANi 
S. = -^^ (14) 

A similar tesi may be performed with a biased amplifier in the system. In this case, 
the pulse generator and gains should be adjusited to give 90% of maximum rated output 
voltage from the biased amplifier at the desired gain and bias level setting. Spectra 
should be obtained at 88% and 110% of nominal line voltage. Output pulse height 
stability Sl (pulse-height variation over a +10%, —12% line voltage range) is given in 
per cent by: 

ANi 

where AJV, is the number of channels between the peak centre (modal) channels of the 
peaks, Gb the gain of the biased amplifier and N^ is the equivalent number of channels 
suppressed by the biased amplifier. Measurement of the effect of the MCA on 
pulse-height stability can be accomplished by repeating the above with variable line 
voltage to the MCA only. 

11.2 Temperature effects 

For this test, the system shown in Figure 5, page 45, (e^^cept for the pulse generator, 
MCA, and oscilloscope) is placed in an environmental test chamber. The maximum 
change in pulse height produced by incremental changes of the amt>ient air temperature,, 
with other conditions maintained constant, is the temperature coefRfcient of pulse height; 
for example, 0.01% per Kelvin. 

In amplifiers with d.c. coupling, pulse-height shifts can be caused by either gain 
changes or d.c. level shifts. When applicable, temperature induced pulse-height changes in 
both gain and d.c. level shall be measured and specified. When specifying the 
temperature coefficient of pulse height, the range over which the specification applies 
shall be clearly stated. The measurements shall be made over a specified temperature 
range and taken at no greater than 10 K increments. The specified temperature 
coefficient shall be valid for all increments within the specified temperature range. Care 
should be taken not to damage the system by operating outside the manufacturer's 
recommended operating temperature ranse. 



11.3 Qain stability 

The test set-up is identical with that shown in Figure 5 and Sub-clause 11.1. Gain 
variations can be determined by observing the peak centre (modal) channel shift in the 
MCA. Test conditions should be maintained constant and the maximum gain variations 
noted over an extended period of time which shall be stated. 



35 



IS 12737 1 1988 
IBG Pub 759 (198a) 

12. Efficiency 

The efficiency of a semiconductor detector at a given photon energy is a function of a 
number of variables including the area, shape and depth of the active region, the 
presence of collimators, and the absorption in windows (or dead layers) between the 
source of X-rays and the active region. In addition, the presence of nearby extraneous 
scattering material can also bias the accuracy of efficiency measurement. In specifying the 
efficiency of the detector, it is also essential that the active area be specified. 

Since the periphery of the sensitive region is usually a charge collection problem area, 
many semiconductor X-ray spectrometers are constructed with internal collimation. Any 
description or specification of the active area of the detector should unambiguously 
specify the dimensions, shape, Z, and location of collimators. Other regions of low 
electric field in the device may also cause spectral distortions; therefore, in specifying the 
sensitive depth of the detector, the thickness of any non-depleted material shall be clearly 
stated. 

12.1 Window attenuation measurements with glass fluorescent source (preferred method for 
instruments intended for use below 5 keV) 

In this measurement, the ratios of the relative intensities of fluoresced X-rays from a 
standard glass with composition as in Table I are used to quantify the attenuation in the 
cryostat window and the detector dead layer. 

The standard glass shall be excited by *'Fe as illustrated in Figure 15, page SS- The 
resulting X-ray spectrum obtained with the arrangement of Figure 5, page 45 ^ is used to 
characterize the window attenuation. 

Since the relative intensities of the fluorescent X-ray lines incident on the detector 
window are affected by absorption in the glass target, this measurement is sensitive to 
the source-glass-detector geometry. The geometric arrangement shown in Figure 15 has 
been selected to minimize the effect of small variations in the dimensions, while still 
maintaining a reasonable counting rate. With the geometry shown in Figure 15 and a 
1.9 10' Bq (50 mCi) *^e source, the data shown in Figure 16, page 54, (with 400 000 
counts in the Mn K^ peak) can be obtained in about 5 h. Any portion of the structure, 
except the glass target, which could emit interfering secondary X-rays shall be shielded 
from the detector with plastic. Plastics containing catalysts or fillers which emit 
interfering X-rays shall be avoided. 

The typical spectrum shown in Figure 16a, page 54, was obtained using a Si (Li) 
detector in a cryostat with an 8 fim thick Be window. Figure 16b, page 54 , shows the 
effect of interposing an additional 124 jim thick Be absorber. The indices of interest are 
the intensities of the low-energy lines relative to the intensity of the coherently 
backscattered Mn K^ line. 

The composition of the standard glass is as in Table L 

Table I 

Composition of standard glass 

(Percentage of weight) 



SiOj 


42.5 


MgO 


20.0 


BaO 


2.0 


ZnO 


20.0 


CaO 


1.5 


B2O3 


10,0 


U2O 


4.0 







36 



18 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1963 ) 

Fluorescence of the standard glass with a "Fe source produces the prominent lines 
shown in Table II. 

Table II 

Characteristic X-ray lines from the standard glass 
fluoresced by "Fe source 



Mn, IC« ^.90 kcV (coherent backscattcr) 

Ba, Lai 4.47, L«2 - 4.45, Lpi - 4.83; Lpa - 5.16; l^ - 5.53 

Ca. K^ 3.69, Kp - 4.01, L - 0.34 

Si, K„ 1.74. Kp - 1.83 

Mg, K^ 1.25, Kp - 1.30 

Zn, L„ 1.01, Lp - 1.03 

O, iC„ 0.523 

B, Ka 0.185 kcV 

Figure 16a, page 54, clearly shows Mn, Ca, Si and Mg lines, while the Zn-L line is 
barely detectable above the background. 

The window index (We) at a given energy {£) is defined by the relationship: 

\^E=4^ (16) 

where A^ is the total number of counts in the peak at energy E, and ^Mn is the intensity 
of the backscattered Mn A^ line. The procedure for determining A from a spectrum such 
as Figure 16, page 54, is described at the end of this sub-clause. 

Frequently, a single value for W^ will adequately characterize the drop in efficiency at 
low energies. However, additional useful information about the origin of the window 
attenuations can sometimes be obtained by comparing values of W^ at several energies. 
When an instrument is characterized by a single W^ it should correspond to the lowest 
energy line \yhich will provide data of reliable statistical accuracy. Lines with 
line-to-background ratios of less than 3 should normally not be used. If the propagation 
of statistical errors in the determination of W^^ exceeds ±3% at the 90% confidence level, 
then the probable error (90% confidence limit) in the value of W^ shall also be specified. 

Typical values of We for the example shown in Figure 16, are illustrated in Figure 17, 
page 55 , which is included here only for the purpose of illustrating the sensitivity of this 
technique. 

The procedures described in this sub-clause are also useful for **windowless" detectors 
where the vacuum-tight barrier between the detector and source of X-rays is removed 
during operation. In this case, care must be exercised to ensure that the detector and/or 
preamplifier are not damaged by poor quality of the vacuum in the vicinity of the X-ray 
fluorescent source. 

The method for peak area and spectral background subtraction has been chosen for its 
simplicity and ease of computation, although in certain circumstances, such as in the 
presence of seriously distorted spectral peaks, the method could yield misleading results. 

For the analyses described below, a spectral peak shall be at least six channels wide 
at half-maximum and the total number of counts within the FWHM shall be at least 
10 000. If computer fitting of the data is used, the 10 000 counts minimum need not 
apply, provided the result as calculated by computer is accurate to within ±3% (90% 
confidence level). 



37 



IS 12737 t 1988 
BEG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 

Pulse-height spectral data should be plotted as the log of the number of counts N^ in 
the channel x vprsus channel number X. On this plot, background under the X-ray peaks 
is determined by a linear fit to the average backgrounds on the upper and lower energy 
sides of the peaks of interest (see line BiBj of Figure 18, page 56) The counts within the 
peaks are determined as those above this background line up to clearly defined minima 
between adjoining peaks. Background and peak definitions are shown in Figure 18. Peaks 
not clearly defined shall not be used; peak-to-valley ratio shall be not less than 10. 



12.2 Window attenuation measurement with radioactive sources 

Some detectors not intended for operation below 6 keV may have a dead layer or 
window which is too thick to allow use of the techniques of Sub-clause 12.1. In this 
case, a similar procedure which employs a radioactive source with two or more lines 
whose relative intensities are well known can be used to specify W^. The intensity of the 
higher energy line is the denominator in equation 16. The detector shall be thick enough 
to totally absorb the higher energy X-ray. For this measurement, the glass target and the 
^^Fe source are replaced by the appropriate radioactive source located on the working 
axis of the detector at the specified working distance. 

For example, if ^°''Cd is used, the detector sensitive region shall be thick enough to 
totally absorb the 88 keV X-rays and the window thickness index is given by the ratio of 
A22 over Agg. For cases where the source has more than two characteristic lines care shall 
be taken to clearly specify which two lines are used to determine W^. Care shall be 
taken also to ensure that self-absorption in the source and its housing is negligible. 

Typical sources which are useful for this measurement are listed in Table III. 

Table III 
Radioactive sources for characterizing window thickness 



Radioactive 
source 


Energy 
(keV) 


Probability 
per decay 


"Co 


6.4 

14.4 
122.0 
136.0 


0.494 ± 0.015 
0.0954 ± 0.0013 

0.866 ± 0.019 
0.1061 ± 0.0018 


109Cd 


22.1 
88.0 


0.842 ± 0.028 
0.0373 ± 0.0006 


'"Ba 


30.9 
35.0 
53.2 
81.0 
161.0* 


0.969 ± 0.02 
0.226 ± 0.006 

0.0217 ± 0.0004 
0.335 ± 0.005 

0.0062 ± 0.0004 


'"I 


27.2 
27.5 
31.0** 
35.5 


0.398 ± 0.014 

0.742 ± 0.025 

0.258 ± 0.010 

0.0667 ± 0.0022 



* Avoid the use of the 161 keV line of '"Ba as a 
reference peak because of interference from sum 
peaks. 

'* Average of K^ lines. 



38 



IS 12737 ! 1988 

lEG Pab 759 { 1983 ) 



12.3 High energy efficiency measurements 



The drop in efficiency at high energies is a function of detector sensitive depth and 
diameter, the Z of the semiconductor, and the details of the collimation. The easiest way 
to measure most of these parameters is by direct i>hysical measurement before the system 
is assembled. 

In addition, the sensitive depth of the detector element can usually be estimated by the 
capacitance (voltage characteristics of the diode before it is assembled with the preamp). 
Some verification of these parameters may be obtained by measuring the absolute 
efficiency at one '^r more appropriate energies. Additional information may sometimes 
also be obtained by measuring the efficiency as a fiinction of source to detector spacing. 
In these types of measurement, care should be taken to avoid the presence of extraneous 
scattering material that might scatter photons into the detector. 

In attempting to interpret these types of measurements, it is essential to know the 
relevant dimensions, positioning, and Z of the collimators since the collimators may not 
be totally effective at high energies. 

If the detector element is not totally depleted, then its efficiency will be a function of 
detector bias voltage for X-ray energies which are not totally absorbed by the sensitive 
region. 

Some available standard sources which are useful for absolute efficiency measurements 
are listed in Table IV. 



39 



IS 12737 s 1988 
lEG Pab 759 ( 1983 ) 



Table IV 
Standard sources for efficiency measurements 



Source 


Half-life 


Energy 


Probability 






(keV) 


per decay 


»Fc 


2,7 yrs 


5.89 


0.082 ± 0.007 


(Mn K^, K^ 




5.90 


0.163 ± 0.012 






6.49 


0.033 ± 0.003 


mi 


60.1 days 


27.2 


0.398 ± 0.014 






27.5 


0.742 ± 0.025 






31.0 


0.258 ± 0.010 






35.5^ 


0.0667 ± 0.0022 


'»»Cd 


464 days 


22.1 


0.842 ± 0.028 






24.9 


0.0604 ± 0.0023 






88.0 


0.0373 ± 0.0006 


'«Eu 


13.3 yrs 


121.8 


0-2838 ± 0.0023 






244.7 


0.0751 ± 0.0007 






344.3 


0.2658 ± 0.0019 






411.1 


0.02233 ± 0.000 13 






444.0 


0.03179 ± 0.000 45 






779.0 


0.1296 ± 0.0007 






964.0 


0.1452 ± 0.0006 






1 086.0 


0.1016 ± 0.0005 






1 112.0 


0.1356 ± 0.0006 






1 408.0 


0.2085 ± 0.0009 


"Co 


5.27 yrs 


1 173.2 


0.999 00 ± 0.000 20 






1 332.5 


0.999 824 ± 0.000 005 


'»Ba 


10.74 yrs 


30.9 


0.969 ± 0.020 






35.0 


0.226 ± 0.006 






53.2 


0.0217 ± 0.0004 






81.0 


0.335 ± 0.005 






276.4 


0.0709 ± 0.0013 






302.9 


0.1840 ± 0.0020 






356.0 


0.621 ± 0.007 






383.9 


0.0891 ± 0.0010 



40 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 (IMS) 



detector 




'tA 






AAAr 




x-ray 



Preamplifier 



T 



I 



i37/S5 



Fig. la. — A.C.-coupled configuration. 




/?f 



He 




7iS/»J 



Fig. lb- — D.C.-coupled configuration. 



Fig. 1 . — Schematic of semiconductor detector and preamplifier. 



41 



IS 12737 : 1988 
lEG Pub 759 { 1983 ) 



Atomic number 



11 


15 


21 


25 32 


45 


62 74 92 


o,U 




1 


1 1 1 

,, , 12,4x10-" 


1 1 1 1 1 


1 


1 1 1 1 1 1 1 


2.0 














> 










• 


• 


0) 










»• 




^ 1.0 


.^^ 








• • 


" ™"' 


1 0,8 


-^ 








..•* 


,^_ 










• 















« • 






g 


^^ 






. • 




*■" 


o 








• • 






2 0,6 


— 






-• 




— i 


c 








• 






o 








• 






(D • 


"" 




• 


• 
• 




— 


Xf 






• 








CO 














•5 0.4 


~^ 




• 
• 






^^ 








• 








Q 






• 








'^ 






• 








k. 






• 








1 


-.M 


• 
• 








— 


s 














^^ 


• 


• 










0.2 


• 










^~ 


0.1 




L 


1 1 1 


1 1 1 1 1 


1 


1 1 1 M 1 1 



6 8 10 



Ka photon energy 



20 



(keV) 



40 60 80 100 

IS9/83\ 



Fig. 2. — Spectral line separation as a function of energy and atomic number. 



42 



IS 12737 i 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 



10* 



Ul I I I 



10= 



10' 



1 1 1 1 1 



1 — I — I I I 1 1 1 



J I I I 1 1 II 



Photon energy 



10 
(keV) 



1 — \ — I I I I I u 




lOOeV 



electronic noise 



76 eV 



i I ' 



100 

140/S3 



Fig. 3. — X-ray energy line width as a function of energy for several values of electronic 
noise and Fano factor. 



43 



(keV) 




0,6 0,8 1,0 1,24 2,0 

(Longueur d'ohde A) (Wavelength A) 



^5 



S 



s 



8,0 10 12,4 



141/83 



Fig. 4. — Full-energy peak efficiency versus energy for several X-ray energy spectrometers. 



Fig. 5. — Measurement of pulse-height distribution. 



IS 12737 : 1988 
lEG Pab 759 ( 1983 ) 



Precision pulse 
generator 



Radiation source 



jTW/V^ 



Detector 
with bias 



Multichannel pulse-height analyzer 




Main amplifier 



45 



IS 12737 i 1988 
lEG Pub 759 (1983 



Precision voltage 
supply 



i 



]■ 



Mercury relay 




AAAr— 3^ 



u 



/f. » Q . 



rn 



Direct output 



Attenuated output 



143/83 



Fig. 6a. — 



0,9 14 



0,1 Vp 



Precision pulse generator. 



Time scale change 



y '^ (single exponential decay) 




Fig. 6b. — 



Waveform. 



Fig. 6. — Precision pulse generator and waveform. 



Time 



144/83 



46 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 



o 


/T\ 




/TV 


c 
c 


I 


b 


/ 1 \ LHM .T 

— "A 



Channel nunnber 



145/83 



Fig. 7. — Typical nr>ise measurement pulse-height spectrum. 



Bias voltage 



Detector ! 






I J 




Zo 



( 



Precision pulse 
generator 



Attenuated output 



True r. m. s. voltmeter 



X 



Direct ^ Synchron- 

output ^ ization 



Oscilloscope 



i46/83 



Fig, 8. — Noise measurement by oscilloscope and true root-mean-square voltmeter. 



47 



1812737:1988 
lECPnb 759 (1983) 




X-ray energy 



FiCi. 9. — Measurement and display of linearity. 



147/83 



48 



PrearrtDlifier 



source 



'L Kruub^ 



£>8t8CtGr 



I 



Detector 
bias supply 




(£> 




D. C. coupied linear 
gate (optional) 




Spectroscopy shaping amplifier 



Fast filter amplifier 




Fast discriminator 



Counter 
2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 

(optional) 



Une shot gate delay 

and shape generator 

(optional) 



Counting-rate meter 
or counter-timer 



14S/83 



as 

M 



Fig. 10. — 



Experimental set-up using multichannel analyzer to measure spectral distortion 
resulting from counting-rate effects. 



s 



i 



IS 12737: 1988 
lEC Pub 759 ( 1983 ) 



1,0 



V? 



0.1 



0.01 




Fig. 11. — Output rate r^ v-rsus input rate r, for a paralyzable system with a dead-time t^. 



50 



V 


Bias supply 1 






, 






t 


Sv 


rstem under test 


■ ^^a^^ ^H^BM ■ 




1 — 














1 




\ .rK" 




Fast single- 
channel analyzer 






«Fe 

source 


1 

f 


Detector 


— ► 


Scaler 


/ 


;iy^ 


"■ 1 


l^ 








1 ■ 






t 






/- 




Fast ampHtier 






1 












1 


Charge sensitive 
preamplifier 






Timer | 








/ 






>i 


Fast single- 


H 


« 






Scaler 






L 




' 1 









150/83 



Fig. 12. — Experimental arrangement using single-channel analyzers to measure counting losses. 






§ 



I8 12737j198S 
me Fab 759 ( 1983 ) 




10 



10^ 



10^ 10* 

Fast amplifier count-rate 



10» 



F»G. 13. — Analyzed count-rate in Mn K^ and K^ peaks as a function of the count-rate from a 
fast amplifier. 




152/S3 



FiQ. 14. — Example of gain recovery after overloading pulse. 



52 



19 12737 t IMS 
IEGFab759(lM3) 



Diameter 



25 mm 



3 mm 



Thickness 




Spacers 



153/S3 



He. 1 5a. — Apparatus for window thitkness measurements. 



High temperature 
epoxy seals 



100 v.m beryllium 
window 



r 


s 


~* 1 








^ 26,*""" "' 




__^ 




50,B ^^ 



Nickel plated 
brass capsule 



H 



'*Fe source 



154/83 



Fig. 15b. - Annular "Fe X-ray source 



Ffc. 15, — Fluorescent X-ray source assembly for window thickness measurements. 



53 



IS 12737 : 1988 

lEG Pnb 759 ( 1983 ) 



5i/f„ 
1,74 keV 



Ca/f„ 
3,69 keV 



\ 

•V 



1,25 keV I \ 
9 « 



5,9 keV 



V'"^ Wf*^" 






1,0 



2,0 



3,0 



4,0 



5,0 



Fig. 16a. — Spectrum obtained with an 8 jim beryllium window. 



t 



6,0 7,0 

(keV) 



Energy 



155/S3 



Si /fa 

1,74 keV 



Ca/fa 
3,69 keV 



Mn/f« 
5,9 keV 



Vvj>f,- 









iV'VvA/^ VA 



1.0 



2,0 



3.0 



4,0 



5,0 



-I- 



6,0 



Energie 
Energy 



(keV) 



7,0 



156/8? 



Fig. 1 6b. — Spectrum obtained with a B2 ^m beryllium window. 



Fig. 16. —Typical Si detector spectra for "Pe-excited standard glass. 



54 



18 12737 t 1988 
lEGPnb 759 (1983) 



10° 



Nl I I I I I I I I I =1 



10- 



c 

o 

> 

I 




Mg/f„(1,25keV) 
Mn/Ca 



100 



150 



200 



250 



Window thickness 



(nm) 



Fic. 17. — Typical behaviour of the window index, W^, as a function of window thickness at 
several energies. 



55 



IS 12737 1 1988 
lEG Fab 759 ( 1983 ) 



10* 



10' 



102 



B, 



10' 



10° 





• • 

• • 


• 


• • 
• 




— 


* • 


• 


• 
• 






• 


• • 


• 

• 


• 


••. • 




• 
• 


• 


• 


• • 

^. ■■■•■■....- •' 1* . 




1 

1 
1 


9 

m • 
• 
•• 


• 


• , • ••• •• 








• 
• • 


1 






1 


1 



^ B, 



Channel number x 



158/83 



Fig. 18- — Background subtraction and peak area measurements. 



56 



Borean of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmomous development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyriojht of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addresse 1 to the Director ( Publications), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
lo BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. LTDC 26 ( 1249 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

{ Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Centra;! : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 (331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 G. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Koad, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 36 24 99 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-G, CHANDIGARH 160036 (2 18 43 



(2 18 43 
(3 16 41 



r41 24 42 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Gross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 ^ 41 25 19 

L41 29 16 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDG, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. 
TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Printograph, Delhi, India 



