**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



^^^Eii^^^^^ti^^i f mj^VNS ^g^^Ts^>^^i \v t >^?;i . =i : A ± \itK^;X^^ 



IS 11912 (1986) 
Food Additives] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Lime Oil, Distilled, Food Grade [FAD 



i&^^f f /lA^sh^^JS^ rsJ^a^TTTF^ 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



J5: I^BM'* 198G 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIME OIL, DISTILLED. FOOD GRADE 



UDG Iifi4*0fl9 : 665-526*476 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAIw iHAVAN, D BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAftC 

Nb^W DELIU 1900C2 

Gr 3 May 1%7 



IS : 11912 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIME OIL, DISTILLED, FOOD GRADE 

Food Additives Sectional Committee, AFDC 19 

Chairman Representing 

Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan* Bush Boake Allen ( India ) Ltd, Madras 
Members 
Shbi B. Hanumantha Rau ( Alternate to 
Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan ) 
Dr J. C. Ax AND All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 

Dr S. Jindal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Arya Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati) T. S. Vasukdhara ( Alternate ) 
Shrimati Anita Chaxjdhaby Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development, New Delhi 
Shri R. J. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Desai Atul Products Limited, Atul 

Dr J. M. TUREL ( Alternate ) 
Brig S. K. Dewan Technical Standardization Committee, Army 

Purchase Organization, New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Krishnamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dhingra Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Drugs Controller ( India ) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Deputy Drttgs Controlleb 
( India ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. N. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Iyer Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. S. Mohan ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. C. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Shrimati Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr E. K. Jayanarayanan Mohan Meakin Limited, Ghaziabad 

Shri D. K. Rastogi ( Alternate ) 
Joint Commissioner ( Dairy Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Agriculture 
Development ) and Rural Development ), New Delhi 

Deputy Commissioner ( Dairy 
Development ) ( Alternate ) 



•Dr T. S. Santhanakrishnan acted as chairman at the meeting in which the docu- 
ment was finalized. 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copynght 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copynght under the said Act. 



IS : 11912 • 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. Kasthuri King Institute, Madras 

Public Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Shhi J. G. KathraNi Asian Chemical Works, Bombay; ani All India 

Saccharin Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 
Dn S. S. Pandit (^Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Khanna Industrial Toxicology Research CentrCj Lucknow 

Shbi V. K. Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Dr M. J. MuLKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Db V. R. Shirhatti ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. G. Naik Kurade Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Dr B. K. Nandi Foods and Nutrition Board, Department of Food 

( Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies ), New Delhi 
Shbi M. M, Kwatara ( Alternate) 
Dr C. S. Narayanan Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Trivandrum 

Db C, Arttmughan ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. M. Narayanan National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Dr M. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Rajadhayksha Corn Products Company ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. R. Palekab ( Alternate ) 
Dr R, Rajagopala Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Dr R. Seshadbi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Ramamitrthy Indian Confectionery Manufacturers* Association, 

New Delhi 
Representative The Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association 

of India, New Delhi 
Dr a. K. Roy Council for Indian Food Trade and Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shbi D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. W. Shende Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shbi K. P. Rane ( Alternate ) 
Db L S. Shenolikar National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 

Db Ramesh Bhax ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. A. SiDDiQi Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & Fats, 

Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Dr T. V. SuBBAiAH Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Db R. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. B. Bedekab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Tiwari Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 

Bhavnagar 
Dr R. M. OzA ( Alternate ) 
Db G. M. Tiwari Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. P. S. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri M- B. Turakhia Idachem Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. J. Navloor ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Vin Vin Flavours, Vadodara 

Shri T. Pubnanandam, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shbimati Shasbi Sabeen 
Deputy Director { Agri & Food ), BIS 

( Continued on page 9 ) 



IS : 11912 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIME OIL, DISTILLED, FOOD GRADE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 November 1986, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Additives Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 With the increased production of processed foods, manufacturers 
have started adding a large number of substances, generally in small 
quantities, to improve the appearance, flavour, texture or storage 
properties of the processed foods. As certain impurities in these 
substances could be harmful, it is necessary to have a strict quality 
control of these food additives. A series of standards is, therefore, 
being prepared by this Institution to cover purity and identification of 
these substances. These standards would help in checking purity which 
requires to be checked at the stage of manufacture for it is extremely 
difficult ( and in many cases impossible ) to detect the impurity once 
these substances have been added to the processed foods. Besides, these 
standards are intended to guide the indigenous manufacturers in making 
their product conform to specifications that are accepted by scientists, 
health authorities and international bodies. 

0.3 Lime oil, distilled is the volatile oil obtained by distillaiion from the 
juice, or the whole crushed fruit of Citrus aurantifolia Swingle. It is 
widely used as a flavouring agent in food. 

0,4 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from Food Chemical Codex, Pub. National Academy of 
Sciences and National Research Council, Washington DC, USA. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied v/ith, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded oflf in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 

*Kuies for rounding off numerical vaiues ( revised ). 



IS : 11912 - 1986 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and methods of sampling 
and test for lime oil, distilled, food grade. 

2. REOUIREMENTS 

2.1 Description — Lime oil, distilled, shall be a colourless to greenish 
yellow liquid. It shall be soluble in most fixed oils and in mineral oil. 
It shall be insoluble in glycerin and in propylene glycol. 

2.2 Angular Rotation — The angular rotation at 25''C in neat oil in 
a 100 mm tube shall be between -^-34° and 4-47^ 

2.3 Refractive Index — The refractive index at 20^G shall be between 
i -474 and r477. 

2.4 Solwbility in Alcohol — 1 ml shall be soluble in 5 ml of 90 
percent alcohol. 

2.5 Specific Gravity — The specific gravity at 25''/25°C shall be 
between 0-855 and 0863, 

2.6 The material shall also conform to the requirements given in 
Table 1. 

TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR LIME OIL, DISTILLED, FOOD GRADE 



Sl 
No. 



U) 

i) 

ii) 
iii). 
iv) 



Characteristic 



(2) 



Aldehydes, calculated as citral 
( GioHigO ), percent by mass 

Lead ( as Pb ), mg/kg, Max 
Arsenic ( as As ), mg/kg, Max 
Heavy metals ( as Pb }, mg/kg, 
Max 



Requirement 


Method of Test, 
Ref to 




Appendix 
of this 
Standard 


-1 
Clause of 
IS : 1699- 

1974* 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


0-5 to 2-5 


A 


— 


10 





9 


3 


_ 


10 


40 


B 






*Methods of sampling and test for food colours {first revision ). 



3. PAGKING5 STORAGE AND MARKING 

3,1 Packing — The material shall be packed in full in air tight glass, 
tin-lined, galvanized, or black iron containers. 



IS: 11912 •1986 

3.2 Storage — The material shall be stored in a cool place protected 
from light. 

3.3 Marking — Each container shall be marked legibly to give the 
following information: 

a) Name of the material including the words, *food grade'; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

c) Minimum net mass of the contents; 

d) Batch or code number; and 

e) Date of manufacture* 

3.3.1 The containers may also be marked with the Standard Mark, 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance 
that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard 
under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised 
and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products 
are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 The representative samples of the material shall be drawn and 
conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification shall 
be determined according to the procedure prescribed in 3 of IS ; 1699- 
1974*. 

5. TESTS 

5.1 Tests shall be carried out by the methods specified in col 4 and 5 
of Table 1. 

5.2 Qjaality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1977t ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — *Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



♦Methods of sampling and test for food colours {Jirst revision ) 
tSpecification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 



IS : 11912 - 1986 

APPENDIX A 

[ Table 1, Item (i) ] 
DETERMINATION OF ALDEHYDES 

A-1. REAGENTS • 

A-l*l Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride Solution — Dissolve 50 gm 
of hydroxylamine hydrochloride, preferably recrystallized before using, 
in 90 ml of water and dilute to 1 000 ml with aldehyde-free alcohol. 
Adjust the solution to a />H of 3*4 with 0*5 JV alcoholic potassium 
hydroxide. 

A-1.2 Alcoholic Potassium Hydroxide — 5 X 

A-1.3 Bromophenol Blue Test Solution — Dissolve 100 mg of 
bromophenol blue in 100 ml of dilute aicohol ( 1 in 2 }, and filter if 
necessary. 

A-2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Weigh accurately about 5 grams of sample and transfer into a 
125-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 30 ml of hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
solution, mix thoroughly and allow to stand at room temperature for 
15 minutes. Perform a blank determination simultaneously with the 
sample determination. Titrate the liberated hydrochloric acid with 
0*5 jV alocholic potassium hydroxide to a greenish yellow end-point, 
using bromophenol blue test solution as indicator or titrate to a pYi of 
3 '4 using a />H meter. 

A-3. CALCULATION 

A,^ 1. ^ u {V -Vx) (76-12 X 100) 
Aldehyde, percent by mass = -^^ -j^ 



where 



V = volume, in ml, of 0*5 JV alcoholic potassium hydroxide 

consumed in the titration of the sample. 
V\ = volume, in ml, of 0*5 JV* alcoholic potassium hydroxide 

consumed in the titration of the blank. 
M = mass, in grams, of the sample taken for the test. 



IS: 11912 -1986 

APPENDIX B 

[ Table 1, Item (iv) ] 

DETERMINATION OF HEAVY METALS 

B-l. REAGENTS 

B-1.1 Ammonia Solution — Dilute 400 ml of ammonium hydroxide 
( 28 percent ) to 1 000 ml with water, 

B-1.2 Hydrochloric Acid — 10 percent. 

B-1.3 Lead Nitrate Stock Solution — Dissolve 159'0 mg of lead 
nitrate in 100 ml water containing 1 ml of nitric acid. Dilute with 
water to 1 000 ml and mix. Prepare and store the solution in lead- 
free glass containers. 

B-1.4 Standard Lead Solution — Dilute 10 ml of lead nitrate 
stock solution, accurately measured, with water to 100 ml. Each ml of 
the solution so prepared contains the equivalent of 10 ^g of lead ion 
( Pb ). Prepare the solution on the day of use. 

B-1.5 Nitric Acid — 10 percent ( vjv ). 

B-1.6 Sulphuric Acid — 94-5 to 95-5 percent ( vh ). 

B-1.7 Acetic Acid — 6 percent ( mjv ). 

B-1.8 Hydrogen Sulphide — A saturated solution of hydrogen sulphide 
made by passing H2S in cold water. 

B-2. PROCEDURE 

B-2.1 Solution A — Take 2 ml of the standard lead solution in a 50-ml 
Nessler tube and add 23 ml of water. Adjust the PH to between 3 
and 40 by addition of acetic acid or ammonia solution. Dilute with 
water to 40 ml and mix. 

B-2.2 Solution B — Place 500 mg of the sample, accurately weighed 
in a Suitable crucible, add sufficient nitric acid to wet the sample, and 
carefully ignite at a low temperature until thoroughly charred, covering 
the crucible loosely with a suitable lid during the ignition. After the 
substance is thoroughly carbonized, add 2 ml of nitric acid and 5 drops 
of sulphuric acid and cautiously heat until white fumes are evolved. 
Then ignite, preferably in a muffle furnace, at 500 to GOO'^C until the 
carbon is burnt off. Cool, add 4 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, cover 
and digest on a steam bath for 10 to 15 minutes. Uncover and slowly 
evaporate on a steam-bath to dryness. Moisten the residue with one 
drop of hydrochloric acid, add 10 ml of hot water and digest for 



IS : 11912 - 1986 

2 minutes. Add, dropwise, ammonia solution until the solution is just 
alkaline to litmus paper, dilute with water to 25 ml and adjust the pH 
to between 3*0 and 4'0 ( pH indicator paper ) by the addition of diluted 
acetic acid. Filter, if necessary. Wash the crucible and the filter with 
10 ml of water. Transfer to a 50-ml Nessler tube. Dilute the combined 
filtrate and washings with water, to 40 ml and mix. 

B-2.3 To each tube add 10 ml of freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide. 
Mix and allow to stand for 45 minutes and view down over a white 
surface. The colour of solution B shall not be darker than that of 
Solution A. 



IS : 11912 " 1986 



( Continued fnm page 2 ) 

Food Colours and Flavours Subcommittee, AFDC 19 : 1 



Convener 
Shri K. V. Nagaraja 

Members 



Representing 

Central Food Laboratory, Central Food Tech ■ 
nological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

All India Food Preservers* Association, New Delhi 



Ajanta Chemical Industries, New Delhi 



DrJ, G. Anand 

Db S. JiKDAL ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Bhabdwaj 

Shbi Kapil Dbv ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vam Dev Bhardwaj Arun Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shbi Ashok Dogba ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dhinoba Food Research and Standardization Laboratory, 

Ghaziabad 
Shri M. K. Jain National Dairy Research Institute ( IGAR ), Karnal 

Shri J. G. Jaisani Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi 

Shriscati Debi Mukherjeb ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S, Kasthubi King Institute, Madras 

Dr S. K. Khanna Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Shbi S. M. Mehta AtuI Products Limited, Atul 

Shri M. V. Dbisai ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Menon Amar Dye Chemi Limited, Kalyan 

Dr M. J. MuLKY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Db V. R- Shibhatti ( Alternate ) 
Dr A, G. Naik Ktjbade Indian Dehydrated Foods Industries Association, 

New Delhi 
Shrt B. a. Rawb Hickson & Dadajee Limited, Bombay 

Shbi M. W, Shkndb { Alternate ) 
Shri B. Hanumasttha Rait Bush Boake Allen (India ) Limited, Madras 

Db T. S. Santhanakrishnan < Alternate ) 



Dr L. V. L. Sastry 



Shri Navinchandba R. Shah 

Dr V. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Sule 
Shri S. G. Vasudbvan 

Shri S. R, Palekar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. G. Vin Vin Flavours, Vadodara 



Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Devarsons Private Limited, Ahmadabad 



Naarden ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Corn Products Go ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base Units 



Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Lcnjfth 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary VoH» 








Qtctantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








QlCJANTITy 


Unit 


Symbol 


Defiwition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N =- 1 kg.m/s" 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W- IJ/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.S 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T « 1 Wb/m« 


Frequency 


hertz 


Ha 


I Hz=- lc/s(s-») 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


I S« 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V = I W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa -- 1 N/m» 



