**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13358-5 (1993) : Codes of Practice for cultivation of 
aromatic plants, Part 5: piperita (Peppermint) and Mentha 
spicata (Spearmint) [PCD 18: Natural and Synthetic 
Fragrance Materials] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i img*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13358 ( Part 5) : 1993 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CULTIVATION OF 

AROMATIC PLANTS 

PART 5 MENTHA PIPERITA ( PEPPERMINT ) AND MENTHA SPICATA ( SPEARMINT ) 

UDC 665-526-22 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1993 Price Gronp 1 



Natural & Synthetic Perfumery Materials Sectional Committee, PCD 18 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Natural & Synthetic Perfumery Materials Sectional Committee, had been approved by the 
Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Natural perfumery materials like essential oils, are known to vary in olfactory and other physico- 
chemical characteristics depending on different agro-climatic conditions. Working on this premise, 
the Committee had quite some time back published IS 6774 : 1972 Classification of essential oil 
bearing aromatic plants'. This standard covers information relating to botanical identity, habitat, 
economic stage of growth, harvesting season and part of the plant used for essential oil production. 
These factors have long been recognized to govern the quality of the natural essential oils. 

Realizing the importance of endemic variations of these factors including fertilizer, irrigation, 
modern technology and appropriate agronomic practices developed through a process of 
evaluation trials at recognized cultivation centres for aromatic plants in the country, the 
Committee decided to amplify these efforts directionally and prepare specific codes for good 
cultivation practice for individual aromatic plants used for essei tial oil production. This series 
of Indian Standards for specific aromatic plants is expected to provide guidance to prospective 
cultivators, producers and users of the essential oils to obtain the optimum yield of the essential 
oil of an acceptable quality for the perfumery industry. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from R & D work of ICAR and 
CSIR laboratories besides State Directorates and Institutions for Medicinal Plants. 



IS 13358 ( Part 5 ) ; 1993 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CULTIVATION OF 

AROMATIC PLANTS 

PART 5 MENTHA PIPERITA ( PEPPERMINT ) AND MENTHA SPICATA ( SPEARMINT ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes a code of practice 
for cultivation of the aromatic plants 
for production of oil of peppermint, botanically 
known as Mentha piperita Linn, and spearmint 
botanically known as Mentha spicata Linn., 
introduced mainly from Europe and USA where 
these are extensively cultivated. The oil of 
peppermint is cooling, sweet in taste and possess 
45 to 50 percent menthol, whereas the spearmint 
oil has 59 to 62 percent 1-carvone, emitting 
warm, fruity spicy aroma. These crops grow in 
U.P, and parts of Punjab and their respective 
oil is now being exported to Europe/USA. 

2 VARIETIES AND CULTIVARS 

Mentha piperita 

Black Mitchen ( var. vulgaris Linn, ) a 
hardy introduced culture is generally grown in 
India. It contains higher oil content. Another 
culture called white mint ( var. officinalis Linn. ) 
has low oil content, is less hardy but is reported 
to yield superior odour value of oil. A number 
of clonal material and selections of black 
Mitchen occur into cultivation in India. 

Mentha spicata 

Similarly common spearmint culture with thick 
broad foliage and pink stems continue to be 
popular in the cultivation. Lately, some 
selections have also been broughtout and 
introduced into cultivation. 

3 SOIL AND CLIMATE 

These species favour cooler temperature, climate 
of foot-hills and longer days ( more sun light ) 
for higher growth and yield, though organic 
well drained soils with pH ranging 6 to 8 is 
ideal, other conditions remaining same as 
described. 

4 PROPAGATION AND PLANTING 

Live juicy stolons of Mitchenmint and spearmint 
are planted in February ( foot-hills & plains ) to 
March and April ( hills ) in well prepared fields 
( or terraced lands ) in rows. These stolons 5 
to 8 cm in size arc planted in furrows at 2 cm 
depth at 40 to 45 cm spacing in rows either end 
to end or 10 cm distance in the row and given a 
light irrigation. It sprouts in 10 to 21 days and 
grow into erect healthy shoots. 



5 MANURES AND FERTILIZERS 

Generally nitrogeneous, phosphatic and potash 
fertilizer in 100:40:20 kg/ha ratio is given. 
About 1/6 of total nitrogen, along with entire 
quantity of phosphatic and potash fertilizers is 
applied at planting whereas the remaining 
nitrogen is divided into two equal splits and 
given as top dressing in moist soil in April and 
July months when the plants are 8 to 12 cm 
high. The fertilizers optimize growth and 
increase yield significantly showing it has 
influence on oil content or oil quality produced. 

6 WEEDING AND INTER-CULTURE 

These mints maintain rows before the first 
harvest is taken and allow wheel hoe, tractor- 
tillers, bullock drawn interculture and hand 
hoes, used in rows in early growth stage. 
Usually two weeding cum hoeings are given 
before the first crop is harvested in mid-June. 
The crop sprouts in a fortnight and spread all 
over the field during rainy season, forming thick 
growth. Incessant jains ( because of high soil 
moisture & thick growth ) limit mechanized 
interculture. Only two or three hand wcedings 
are possible. Pre-emergent use of chemical 
weedicides like Sinbar ( Terbacil ) at 1*5 kg in 
805 litres of water/ha is recommended to 
control weed growth. 

7 IRRIGATION 

The crops needs copious irrigation three to four 
times c^ch month in summer months of April to 
June before the first harvest is taken. Since 
monsoon continue in most part of July — 
August and September the fields needs a suitable 
network of drainage system. The crop is given 
irrigation if rains are erratic to maintain soil 
moisture till second harvest is taken. 

8 HARVESTING AND YIELD 

The oil content in these two mint crops is low 
(03 to 0'35 percent on fresh weight basis ). The 
stage of hnrvest in mint plays a crucial role in 
its quality and odour value, immature pepper- 
mint produce oil with less sweet aroma, The 
optimum harvesting time is determined by 
crushing foliage between two lingers when it 
emits characteristic minty odour and confirmed, 
by test distillation. Falling of lower leaves in 
an otherwise well grown branched stem full of 
foliage gives indication of approaching maturity 



1 



IS 13358 ( Part 5 ) : 1993 



of the c^ops where flowering is scattered in 
spearmint but is shy or absent in piperita species. 
The first cutting is taken in second to fourth 
week of May and the second in July/August. 

Total harvests yield varies from 4 to 6 tons 
producing 60 to 80 kg of oil per hectaieof 
peppermint and spearmint depending upon soil 
fertility, crop strand, growth and management. 
The oil of peppermint has 35-40 percent 
menthol, 25-30 percent methone ( calculated as 
menthol ) and 3-4 percent menthyl acetate. 

9 DISTILLATION 

Usual steam or water steam ( hydro ) distillation 
is used and the crop is distilled in 90 minutes. 
The peppermint oil is yellow, mobile liquid, 
cooling to senses and sweet in taste with 40 to 50 
percent of menthol. Presence of moisture in 
stored mint be avoided as it oxidizes or resinify 
the oil and spoil it The mint oils are slightly 
acidic in nature and galvanized steel drums are 
used for storage. 



10 DISEASES AND PESTS 

Stolen rot caused by Macrophomina phase oli 
( Maubl ) Hobby sometimes occur in both of 
these species causing loss of crop strand in early 
stages. The infected stems show brown lesions, 
turning black and later results into soft decay. 
T his causes yellowing of leaves, stunted growth 
and wilting. The stems be treated with O'l 
percent solution of suitable pesticide before 
planting. Once disease occur, the infected 
plants be segregated, pulled and burnt. 

Spearmint is susceptible to blight in Himachal 
Pradesh. Leaf blight is caused by Alternaria 
spp. which is another disease known for sizeable 
losses for some years in India. It forms oval 
brown spots which coalesce and become bigger. 
Spraying of copper fungicides like cuprous oxide 
and copper oxychloride in early stages of 
infection, control the disease. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer* Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a icence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as ths need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook* and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard mgy be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference : 

Doc : No. PCD 18 (1155) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No, Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones ; 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg /331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Maniktola (37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 (.37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 J" 38 43 ' 53 16 40 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 I 235 ° 2 \f 2 l 5 ° 4 42 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) J632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 






Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COrMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. TH1RUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Patagon fcinerpriscs, Dciln, JnUia, 



