**************** 


*■  *Z**K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 
Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


mrjsssss^^ft^: 


,_A» 


**************** 


BLANK  PAGE 


<_<ii££ 


UJ> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14855  (Part  2):  2001 

Indian  Standard 

PLANT  PROTECTION  AND  VECTOR  CONTROL 
EQUIPMENT  —  FOGGING  MACHINES  — 

SPECIFICATION 

PART  2     AIR-BLOWER  TYPE  THERMAL  FOGGER 


ICS     65.060.40 


©BIS  2001 

BUREAU    OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

December  2001  Price  Group    4 


Farm  Implements  and  Machinery  Sectional  Committee,  FAD  59 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Farm 
Implements  and  Machinery  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Division 
Council. 

Thermal  fogging  equipment  are  used  to  produce  fog  of  pesticide  formulations.  These  are  used  as  plant 
protection  and  vector  control  equipment.  These  work  on  the  principle  that  when  droplets  of  a  volatile 
liquid  comes  into  contact  with  hot  air  stream  (300  °C  ±  30  °C)  at  high  velocity  the  droplets  shear-off  and 
gets  vapourized  and  form  a  fog  when  condenses  in  the  atmosphere. 

This  standard  is  being  published  in  two  parts.  Part  1  of  this  standard  covers  requirements  of  pulse-jet  type 
thermal  fogger  whereas  this  part  (Part  2)  covers  requirements  of  air-blower  type  thermal  fogger. 

In  the  preparation  of  this  standard  assistance  has  been  derived  from  WHO  specification  WHO/VBC/89-973  : 
1989  'Thermal  fogging  equipment' published  by  World  Health  Organization,  Geneva  and  approved  in  1989. 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  responsible  for  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  B. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with  the  final 
value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance 
with  IS  2: 1960,  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'.  Thenumberof  significant  places  retained 
in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  14855 (Part  2):  2001 

Indian  Standard 

PLANT  PROTECTION  AND  VECTOR  CONTROL 
EQUIPMENT  —  FOGGING  MACHINES  — 

SPECIFICATION 

PART  2    AIR-BLOWER  TYPE  THERMAL  FOGGER 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  specifies  material,  constructional, 
performance  and  other  requirements  and  method  of 
test  of  air-blower  type  thermal  fogger. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  Indian  Standards  contain  provisions 
which  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute 
provision  of  this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication, 
the  editions  indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are 
subject  to  revision  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on 
this  standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the 
standards  indicated  below: 

IS  No.  Title 

8480 :  1996       Crop  protection  equipment  — 

Glossary  of  terms 
14855  (Part  1) :  Plan  protection  and  vector  control 
2000  equipment  —  Fogging  machines  — 

Specification:  Part  1  Pulse-jet  type 

thermal  fogger 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  definition  given 
in  3  of  IS  8480  shall  apply. 

4  MATERIALS 

All  materials  used  in  the  construction  shall  be 
resistant,  or  painted  or  otherwise  coated  to  provide 
resistance,  to  insecticides  and  chemicals  used  in 
their  formulations  under  a  wide  range  of  climatic 
conditions  and  shall  meet  the  performance 
requirement  specified  in  8.1. 

5  CONSTRUCTIONAL  REQUIREMENTS 
5.1  General 

5.1.1  A  thermal  fog  applicator  shall  have  a  system  for 
producing  a  flow  of  hot  air  into  which  the 
pesticide  formulation  is  metered. 

5.1.2  The  air  velocity  shall  be  sufficient  to  shear-off 
the  liquid  into  droplets  and  the  temperature  high 
enough  (300  °C  ±  30  °C)  to  vaporize  the  droplets 
rapidly  before  the  hot  gas  meets  the  surrounding  air  at 
ambient  temperature. 


5.13  There  shall  be  no  sharp  edges  or  projections  that 
might  injure  operators  during  normal  operation. 

5.1.4  The  fogger  shall  have  a  four  stroke  or  turbo 
petrol  engine  or  equivalent  diesel  engine  to  drive  an 
air-blower  which  shall  provide  a  large  volume  of  air 
at  low  pressure  to  a  combustion  chamber  into  which 
petrol  is  injected  and  ignited.  The  hot  air  (300  °C  ± 
30  °C)  shall  pass  to  a  nozzle  in  which  the  pesticide 
formulation  is  pumped  separately  and  spread  thinly  to 
facilitate  vapourization.  The  nozzle  may  be  fixed  or 
adjustable  to  alter  the  angle  at  which  the  fog  is 
projected,  or  it  can  be  transferred  to  the  end  of  a 
heat-resistant  extension  hose. 

5.1.5  The  complete  vehicle-mounted  unit  shall  be 
robustly  constructed  for  rugged  field  use,  easily 
mounted  on  a  flat-bed  truck  or  trailer,  and  so 
designed  that  it  may  be  operated  from  the  vehicle 
cab.  The  weight  of  a  complete  unit  assembled  for 
operation,  but  not  including  the  weight  of  fuel  and 
pesticide  formulation,  shall  not  exceed  250  kg. 

5.2  Dimensions 

The  thermal  fogger  mounting  frame  or  base  shall  not 
exceed  1.20  m  x  1.00  m  without  pesticide  tank  and 
1 .8  mx  1.2  m  with  pesticide  tank.  The  overall  height 
shall  not  exceed  1.2  m.  The  tank  may  be  separated 
from  the  mounting  frame.  The  size  of  any  separate 
control  panel  mounted  in  a  vehicle  shall  be  so 
designed  that  interference  with  normal  operation  in 
the  cab  are  avoided. 

53  Mounting  Frames 

The  mounting  frames  to  support  the  various 
components  of  the  aerosol  generator  shall  be 
robustly  constructed  to  withstand  prolonged  and 
variable  vibration  caused  by  driving  the  vehicle 
along  rough  roads.  The  frame  shall  be  equipped  with 
parts  or  devices  to  reduce  transmission  of  vibration 
of  the  vehicle  to  components  of  the  thermal  fogger. 

5.4  Engine 

An  internal  combustion  engine  of  minimum  8  kW 
rated  power  shall  be  provided  to  drive  a  blower  to 
provide  not  less  than  4.8  m3  of  air  per  minute  to  the 


IS  14855  (Part  2):  2001 


nozzle  via  a  combustion  chamber  to  discharge  the 
fog  at  a  maximum  output.  The  engine  shall  be 
provided  with  an  electric  starter  and  alternator.  The 
fuel  tank  capacity  shall  allow  the  engine  to  operate 
for  at  least  3  h  with  the  combustion  chamber 
ignition  operational.  A  50  mesh  strainer  shall  be 
provided  at  the  inlet  of  the  tank  as  well  as  an  efficient 
filter  in  the  supply  line  between  the  tank  and 
carburetor.  A  fine  mesh  filter  or  replacement 
cartridge  type  filter  shall  be  provided  with  the 
engine.  An  engine  identification  plate,  securely 
fastened  to  the  engine,  shall  be  provided  to  show 
the  make,  model  number,  type  and  power  or 
capacity. 

5.5  Air  Compressor 

A  heavy  duty  air  compressor  shall  be  fitted  so  that  its 
position  relative  to  the  engine  can  be  adjusted  easily 
to  ensure  that  any  connecting  belts,  if  provided,  are 
correctly  tensioned.  A  strong  guard  shall  be  securely 
fitted  to  protect  the  operator  from  any  moving  parts. 
The  air  intake  of  the  compressor  shall  be  fitted  with 
an  air  filter  of  100  mesh  size.  The  filter  shall  be  of  the 
permanent  type  and  the  kind  that  can  be  washed  and 
re-oiled  periodically.  An  indicator  shall  be 
mounted  on  the  control  panel  to  monitor  air 
pressure  so  that  the  operator  knows  the  compressor 
is  functioning  correctly,  or  there  shall  be  an 
automatic  flow  control  system  with  a  cut-off  valve. 
A  device  should  be  affixed  to  the  thermal  fogger 
that  will  allow  combustion  only  when  adequate 
pressure  is  present  at  the  combustion  chamber  for 
operation. 

5.6  Pesticide  Tank 

5.6.1  General 

The  pesticide  tank  shall  be  fitted  either  directly  to 
the  mounting  frame  or  to  a  separate  frame  fixed  to 
the  vehicle  so  that  the  tank  can  be  easily  refilled  and 
removed,  when  necessary,  for  cleaning.  The  outlet 
from  the  tank  to  the  nozzle  shall  be  above  the  floor 
of  the  tank  so  that  any  solid  sediment  from  the 
fogging  formulations  is  left  in  the  tank.  A  drainage 
plug  shall  be  provided  so  that  the  tank  can  be 
emptied  completely  during  cleaning. 

5.6.2  If  pressurized,  the  tank  shall  be  able  to 
withstand  a  pressure  double  the  maximum  operating 
pressure  without  leakage,  and  shall  be  fitted  with  a 

safety  valve. 

5.6.3  Capacity 

The  pesticide  tank  shall  have  a  capacity  of  at  least 
120  1  or  sufficient  capacity  to  allow  fogging  for  a 
minimum  of  2  h  at  maximum  output.  The  tank  shall 
be  equipped  with  a  metering  device  to  know  or  to 
measure  the  liquid  content  of  the  tank. 


5.6.4  Filler  Opening 

The  tank  shall  be  designed  to  allow  rapid  filling  and 
complete  emptying  and  have  an  opening  in  the  top  of 
not  less  than  95  mm  in  diameter.  The  filler  opening 
shall  be  fitted  with  an  airtight  lid  which  is  easily  fitted 
and  which  cannot  be  removed  while  the  pesticide  tank 
is  pressurized. 

5.7  Pesticide  Metering  System 

5.7.1  Cut-off  Valve 

The  liquid  shall  be  displaced  from  the  tank  by  means 
of  air  pressure,  or  alternatively  a  pump  shall  be  fitted 
to  transfer  the  liquid  to  the  nozzle.  A  valve  shall  be 
provided  between  the  tank  and  the  nozzle  assembly  to 
control  the  flow  of  pesticide  liquid.  Anon/off  switch 
shall  be  provided,  mounted  on  the  control  panel,  to 
operate  the  valve.  The  cut-off  valve  shall  be  so 
designed  that  all  parts  are  readily  accessible  for 
cleaning   and  replacement. 

5.7.2  Delivery  Hose 

The  delivery  hose  from  spray  tank  to  cut-off  valve 
and  nozzle  shall  be  made  of  material  resistant  to 
chemical  components  of  pesticide  formulations.  It 
shall  be  of  adequate  inside  diameter  to  allow  easy 
and  continuous  flow  of  the  liquid  pesticide 
formulation.  The  hoses  used  from  pesticide  systems 
shall  be  readily  identifiable  and  have  couplings  that 
are  distinguishable  from  the  fuel  system  to  the  engine 
and  combustion  chambers. 

5.7.3  Control   System 

A  control  panel  shall  be  provided  with  a  light  with  an 
on/off  switch  to  illuminate  the  panel.  The  air 
temperature  at  or  very  close  to  the  nozzle  shall  be 
monitored  and  displayed  on  the  control  panel.  At  the 
option  of  the  purchaser,  the  control  panel  shall  be  of 
the  kind  that  can  be  mounted  in  the  cab  of  the 
vehicle,  behind  the  cab  on  the  bed  of  the  vehicle,  or 
on  the  mounting  frame  of  the  fogger.  In  each  case, 
the  control  panel  shall  be  so  mounted  that  it  can  be 
operated  by  the  driver  or  operator  as  required  by  the 
purchaser. 

5.8  Nozzle  System 

5.8.1  General 

The  nozzle  shall  be  designed  so  as  to  produce  a  thermal 
fog  using  the  thermal  energy  of  the  combustion 
chamber,  and  maximum  flow  rate  outputs.  The 
nozzle  shall  withstand  a  temperature  of  1  000  °C. 
The  actual  temperature  of  the  air  at  or  very  close  to 
the  nozzle  shall  be  monitored  by  a  pyrometer.  If 
requested  by  the  purchaser,  the  angle  of  direction 
of  the  nozzle  shall  be  adjustable  through  180° 
horizontally  and  adjustable  vertically  to  project  fog 
either  upwards  or  downwards  to  the  rear  or  sides  of 


IS  14855  (Part  2):  2001 


the  vehicle  on  which  it  is  mounted.  The  nozzle  shall 
be  designed  so  that  a  thermal  fog  is  produced  using 
hot  air  from  the  combustion  chamber,  even  with  the 
maximum  flow  rate.  The  maximum  flow  rate  shall  be 
not  less  than  3  t/min  and  not  more  than  6  I/min. 

5.8.2  Combustion  Chamber 

A  combustion  chamber  is  a  chamber  in  which  petrol 
is  ignited  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  air  delivered 
to  the  nozzle  at  300  °C  +  30  °C.  Ignition  shall  be 
provided  by  a  spark  plug,  and  an  electronic  ignition 
unit  with  a  coil.  The  fuel  flow  shall  be  controlled 
automatically  by  the  engine  speed,  with  a  fail-safe 
system  to  shut-off  all  valves  if  the  engine  stops. 

6  PERFORMANCE 

6.1  Engine 

When  tested  in  accordance  with  8.2,  the  engine 
shall  comply  following  requirements: 

a)  the  operational  speed  shall  be  within 
+  50  rev/min  of  that  stated  by  the  manufacturer 
as  described  in  8.2.1. 

b)  fuel  consumption  shall  be  less  than  12  1/h, 
including  operation  of  combustion  chamber 
ignition  to  heat  the  air  delivered  to  the 
nozzle,  as  described  in  8.2.2. 

c)  the  noise  level  at  maximum  speed  shall  not 
exceed  90  decibels  (dB-A)  as  described  in 
8.2.3. 

d)  the  engine  shall  operate,  with  no  operational 
problem  after  50  h,  as  described  in  8.2.4. 

6.2  Air  Compressor 

6.2.1  When  tested  in  accordance  with  83.2  the 
air  compressor  shall  provide  an  air  flow  of 
4.8  ±  0.2  m3/min  to  the  nozzle. 

6.3  Nozzle 

6.3.1  When  tested  in  accordance  with  method 
specified  in  8.4.1  nozzle  through  output  shall  not 
differ  by  ±  5  percent  of  the  declared  value. 

6.3.2  When  tested  in  accordance  with  the  method 
specified  in  8.4.2  the  droplet  size  shall  be  in  the  range 

of  8  Jim -20  Jim  VMD. 

6.4  Field  Performance  and  Durability  Test 

The  thermal  fogger  shall  successfully  undergo  a  field 
trial  for  a  period  of  250  h  without  change  in 
specifications  provided  by  the  manufacturer  and 
without  development  of  major  and/or  frequent 
breakdowns  of  any  part(s)  of  the  sprayer.  Guidelines 
for  field  trials  of  ground  spraying  equipment 
including  fogging  machines  are  given  in  Annex  A  of 
IS  14855  (Part  1). 


7  OTHER  REQUIREMENTS 

7.1  Spare  Parts  and  Tools 

The  manufacturer,  unless  otherwise  specified  by  the 
purchasing  agency,  shall  supply  spare  parts, 
including  a  spark  plug,  washers,  belts  and  tools, 
required  for  routine  replacement  during  normal  use  of 
the  equipment  over  a  period  of  one  year.  A  list  of  spare 
parts,  illustrated  and  coded,  shall  be  provided  to  the 
purchaser. 

7.2  Operation  and  Maintenance  Manual 

An  adequately  illustrated  manual  on  the  blower 
type  thermal  fogger  and  its  operating  procedures, 
maintenance  and  repair,  in  the  language  specified 
by  the  purchasing  agency,  shall  be  provided  with 
each  unit.  The  manual  shall  include  complete 
instructions  on  the  operation,  cleaning,  maintenance 
and  repair  of  the  equipment  with  a  list  of  all  parts,  and 
also  give  details  of  fitting  the  equipment  to  various 
vehicles.  The  parts  of  the  units  that  are  in  contact  with 
the  pesticide  and  may  be  affected  by  specific 
pesticide  formulations  shall  be  indicated  in  the 
manual.  The  instructions  for  the  maintenance  and 
repair  of  the  engine,  compressor  and  combusdon 
chamber  shall  be  an  integral  part  of  the  manual. 

7  J  Optional  Extras 

At  the  option  of  the  purchasing  agency,  the  thermal 
fogger  may  be  provided  with  the  following:  an 
extension  for  the  control  panel  to  be  mounted  in  the 
vehicle  cab;  extension  tubing  to  operate  nozzle  for 
fogging  drains. 

7.4  Specification  Sheet 

Manufacturer  shall  supply  the  specifications  of  the 
machine  consisting  of  the  items  listed  in  the  data  sheet 
given  in  Annex  A. 

8  TEST  PROCEDURES 

8.0  As  far  as  possible,  all  tests  should  be  carried  out 
with  the  complete  unit  without  dismantling  any 
component. 

8.1  Test  for  Resistance  of  Construction  Materials 
to  Chemicals 

To  test  non-metallic  parts  of  the  unit  that  are  in 
contact  with  pesticide  formulations,  the  following 
solvent  mixture  shall  be  used;  40  perecent  kerosene 
(by  volume);  20  perecent  toluene  (by  volume);  and 
40  perecent  xylene  (by  volume).  The  parts  being  tested 
shall  be  soaked  in  the  mixture  for  72  h  at  ambient 
temperature  or  at21°C  (whichever  is  the  highest).  The 
parts  shall  then  be  allowed  to  dry  in  the  air  for  a  further 
24  h.  After  this  exposure,  the  parts  shall  not  deform 
and  when  reassembled  shall  not  leak  and  shall  function 
normally.  Care  should  be  taken  when  handling  this 
mixture  as  it  is  toxic  and  inflammable. 


IS  14855  (Part  2) :  2001 


8.2  Engine  Performance  Tests 

8.2.1  Engine  Speed 

The  engine  shall  be  operated  at  the  speed  specified 
by  the  equipment  manufacturer,  and  the  speed  in 
revolutions  per  minute  checked  with  a  tachometer. 
All  subsequent  tests  shall  be  conducted  at  the  same 
throttle  setting/engine  speed. 

8.2.2  Fuel  Consumption 

The  engine  shall  be  operated  until  it  stops  because  of 
shortage  of  fuel.  A  measured  volume  of  fuel  shall  be 
placed  in  the  fuel  tank  and  the  pesticide  tank  filled 
with  water.  The  engine  shall  be  operated  at 
maximum  speed  without  the  combustion  chamber 
ignition  being  operational  while  applying  water  at  the 
maximum  flow  rate  until  the  engine  stops  through 
shortage  of  fuel.  The  period  over  which  the  engine 
operates  shall  be  measured,  and  then  a  similar  volume 
of  fuel  added  for  a  repeat  test.  The  mean  fuel 
consumption,  expressed  in  litres/hour,  and  the  time 
the  machine  runs  on  a  full  fuel  tank  shall  be 
calculated.  The  test  shall  be  repeated  with  the 
combustion  chamber  ignition  in  use  and  the  time  that 
the  machine  operates  with  a  full  fuel  tank  shall  be 
calculated. 

8.2.3  Noise  Level 

The  noise  level  shall  be  measured  adjacent  to  the 
operators  ear  when  he  or  she  is  in  the  operating 
position.  The  noise  level  so  measured  shall  not 
exceed  90  decibels  (dB-A)  for  an  8  h  exposure. 
Where  the  noise  level  cannot  be  reduced  to  the 
acceptable  level,  the  manufacturer  shall  provide  the 
purchaser  initially  with  suitable  ear  protectors 
appropriate  to  the  noise  spectrum  produced  by  the 
fogger. 

8.2.4  Durability  of  Engine 

The  thermal  fogger  shall  be  operated  at  the  maximum 
flow  rate  for  at  least  5  h/day  until  a  total  of 
50  h  of  operation  has  been  completed.  The  engine 
shall  be  stopped  after  each  emptying  of  the  fuel  tank 
load  and  any  difficulties  in  restarting  and 
maintenance  required  noted.   Engine  speed  shall  be 


checked  after  every  5  h  and  the  liquid  discharge  rate 
and  fuel  consumption  after  every  25  h.  This  50  h  operation 
shall  be  completed  without  any  major  interruption  in 
the  use  of  the  machine. 

8  J  Air  Compressor  Tests 

83.1  Air  Velocity 

The  air  velocity  shall  be  measured  at  the  nozzle  and  at 
a  point  5  m  along  the  nozzle' s  centre  axis,  horizontally 
from  the  nozzle  with  and  without  the  use  of  the 
combustion  chamber  ignition. 

83.2  Air  Volume 

The  output  of  air  from  the  nozzle  shall  be  measured 
with  and  without  the  use  of  the  combustion  chamber 
ignition. 

833  Air  Pressure 

The  pressure  of  air  delivered  to  the  nozzle  shall  be 
measured  with  the  help  of  a  pressure  gauge. 

8.4  Nozzle  Performance  Tests 

8.4.1  Throughput 

The  throughput  shall  be  measured  over  the  range  of 
restrictors  provided  with  the  unit,  to  determine  the 
time  (not  less  than  1  min)  to  emit  a  known  volume 
of  liquid.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  odourless 
kerosene  shall  be  the  test  liquid  with  viscosity  and 
temperature  recorded. 

8.4.2  Droplet  Size 

Glass  slides  coated  with  Teflon  or  Silicon  may  be 
placed  horizontally  on  a  floor  in  a  chamber  (0.5  m  x 
0.5  m  x  0.5  m)  into  which  the  fog  is  projected  while 
travelling  past  the  opening  at  1  m/s  and  allowed  to 
settle  for  at  least  15  min.  Method  for  determining 
droplet  size  spectra  is  given  in  Annex  C  of 
IS  14855  (Part  1).  The  temperature  and  humidity 
during  the  test  shall  be  recorded.  Other  proven 
methods  of  droplet  size  determination  may  be  used 
at  the  discretion  of  the  testing  institute.  In  particular, 
advanced  laser  systems  for  measuring  spray  droplet  in 
flight  are  available  in  some  centres. 


IS  14855  (Part  2):  2001 


ANNEX  A 

(Clause  7.4) 
DATA  SHEET  FOR  AIR-BLOWER  TYPE  THERMAL  FOGGER 


A-l  GENERAL  INFORMATION 


a) 


b) 
c) 
d) 


Dimensions: 

1)  frame 

2)  overall  height 
Weight  (empty) 

Construction  material  for  mounting  frame 
Type  of  vehicle  required  for  mounting  unit 


A-2  INSECTICIDE  TANK 


a) 
b) 


c) 
d) 


e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 

J) 
k) 


Capacity 
Dimensions: 

1)  overall  height 

2)  floor  area 
Material  for  construction 
Placement  of  the  tank: 

1)  directly  on  mounting  frame 

2)  separate  frame 
Diameter  of  filler  opening 
Type  of  filler  opening  lid 
Maximum  pressure  tolerance 

Type  of  metering  device  to  show  liquid  content 

of  tank 

Type  of  safety  valve 

Type  of  tank  pressure  monitoring  gauge  on 

control  panel 


A-3  ENGINE 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
0 


g) 
h) 


J) 


k) 

m) 


n) 


Make 

Type  and  model 

Power 

Material  of  construction 

Maximum  speed  (rev/min) 

Fuel  consumption  (1/h)  at  maximum  speed: 

1 )  with  combustion  chamber  ignition 

2)  without  combustion  chamber  ignition 
Fuel  type  and  grade 

Fuel  tank: 

1)  capacity 

2)  material  of  construction 

3)  presence  of  strainer  at  inlet 

4)  fuel  filter  type 
Carburetor: 

1)  type 

2)  fuel  filter  type 

3)  air  filter  type 

Type  of  speed  control  from  control  panel 
Silencer: 

1)  type 

2)  location 

Noise  level  at  maximum  speed  (dB-A) 


p)    Battery: 

1)  type 

2)  voltage 

3)  placement 
q)  Spark  plug  type 
r)    Ignition  type 

s)    Method  of  starting: 

1)  electrical 

2)  pulley  wheel  and  rope 
t)    Method  of  stopping 

u)    Oil,  type  and  grade 

A-4  AIR  COMPRESSOR 

a)  Type 

b)  Make 

c)  Material  of  construction 

e)  Connection  to  the  engine  (type  of  drive) 

e)  Presence  of  protecting  guard 

f)  Type  of  filter  at  the  air  intake 

g)  Air  velocity  at  the  nozzle: 

1 )  with  combustion  chamber  ignition 

2)  without  combustion  chamber  ignition 
Air  volume  (output  from  the  nozzle): 

1 )  with  combustion  chamber  ignition 

2)  without  combustion  chamber  ignition 
Air  pressure  delivered  to  the  nozzle 
Pressure  monitoring  gauge  on  control  panel 
Automatic  flow  control  with  cut-off  valve  on 
control  panel 

A-5  DISCHARGE  SYSTEM 


h) 


k) 
m) 
n) 


a) 
b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


Insecticide  pump,  type 
Discharge  control  valve: 

1)  type 

2)  location 

3)  type  of  on/off  switch  on  control  panel 
Delivery  hoses: 

1)  material 

2)  internal  diameter 

3)  type  of  connection  to  insecticide  tank 
Nozzle  system: 

1)  type 

2)  material  of  construction 

3)  maximum  temperature  it  can  withstand 

4)  output  under  average  working  pressure 
Droplet  size  (VMD)  (p.m): 

1 )  with  combustion  chamber  ignition 

2)  without  combustion  chamber  ignition 
Type  of  monitoring  device  of  air  temperature 
at  or  very  close  to,  the  nozzle 

Angle  of  direction  of  nozzle: 

1)  horizontally 

2)  vertically 


IS  14855  (Part  2):  2001 


A-6  COMBUSTION  CHAMBER 

a)  Material  of  construction 

b)  Type  of  spark  plug 

c)  Type  of  fuel  injector 

d)  Type  of  ignition  unit 

e)  Temperature  of  air  after  ignition 

f)  Type  of  control  of  fuel  flow  and  rate  of  ignition 

g)  Type  of  fail-safe  system  to  shut-off  all  valves 
if  engine  stops 

A-7  CONTROL  PANEL 

a)  Dimensions 

b)  Location 

c)  Monitoring  gauges  on  the  panel: 

1 )  flow  rate  of  insecticide 

2)  air  pressure  from  compressor 

3)  fuel  gauge 

4)  temperature  of  air  at,  or  very  close  to,  the 
nozzle 

d)  Controlling  switches  on  the  panel 

e)  Illuminating  device  for  the  panel 

A-8  OPTIONAL  ITEMS 

a)  A  variable  displacement  pump  to  regulate 
the  flow  of  insecticide  liquid  to  the  nozzle 

b)  A  variable  flow  controlled  by  the  vehicle  speed 

c)  An    extension    for  the  control  panel  to  be 
mounted  in  the  vehicle  cab 

d)  Extension  tubing  to  operate  nozzle  for  fogging 
drains 

A-9  MARKINGS 

a)    Insecticide  tank  capacity,  and  markings  to 
indicate  different  levels 


b)  Fuel  tank  capacity 

c)  Type  of  fuel  to  be  used 

d)  Open  and  closed  positions  of  engine  choke 
control 

e)  Throttle  settings  of  the  engine 

f)  Open  and  closed  positions  of  insecticide  valve 

g)  Engine  specification,  make,  model  number, 
type,  etc 

h)    Net  weight  of  complete  unit 

A-10  ACCESSORIES 

List  of  accessories,  including  ear  protectors  if 
necessary. 

All  SPARE  PARTS 

List  of  recommended  spare  parts  to  be  provided  with 
the  unit  for  replacement  during  normal  use  over  a 
period  of  one  year. 

A-12  TOOLS 

List  of  tools  to  be  provided  with  the  unit. 

A-13  PUBLICATIONS  (samples  to  be  attached) 

a)  Manual  of  operation,  language  used 

b)  Instructions  for  safe  use  of  the  unit 

c)  Manual  for  maintenance  and  repair,  language 
used 

d)  List  of  spare  parts,  names  and  code  numbers 
Manufacturer's  name  and  address: 
Collaborating  centre: 

Date  completed: 


IS  14855  (Part  2):  2001 


ANNEX  B 

( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Farm  Implements  and  Machinery  Sectional  Committee,  FAD  59 


Organization 
Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  Research,  New  Delhi 
American  Springs  and  Pressing  Works  Ltd,  Mumbai 
Bajaj  Tempo  Ltd,  Pune 

Central  Farm  Machinery  Training  and  Testing  Institute,  Budni 

Centra]  Institute  of  Agricultural  Engineering,  Bhopal 

Consumer  Education  and  Research  Centre,  Ahmedabad 

Directorate  of  National  Anti-malaria  Operation,  New  Delhi 
Escorts  Ltd,  Faridabad 

HMT  Limited,  Pinjore 

Indian  Agricultural  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi 

Indian  Council  of  Forestry  Research  and  Education,  Dehra  Dun 
Light  Carts  Private  Ltd,  Meerut 

Madhya  Pradesh  Krishi  Upkaran  Nirmata  Sangh,  Indore 

Mechanical  Engineering  Research  and  Development  Organization, 

Ludhiana 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  New  Delhi 

National  Plant  Protection  Training  Institute,  Hyderabad 

North  Eastern  Region  Farm  Machinery  Training  and  Testing 

Institute,  Hissar 
Northern  Region  Farm  Machinery  Training  and  Testing  Institute, 

Sonitpur 
Office  of  the  Development  Commissioner,  New  Delhi 

Passi  Mechanical  Works,  Ludhiana 
Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 

Royal  Trade  Links  Private  Ltd,  New  Delhi 
S  igma  S  teel  Industries ,  Ludhiana 

Southern  Regional  Farm  Machinery  Training  &  Testing  Institute, 

Anantapur 
Steel  Authoriy  of  India  Ltd,  Ranchi 

TAFE  Access  Ltd,  Chennai 

BIS  Directorate  General 


Representatives) 
Dr  N.  S.  L.  Srivastava  (Chairman) 
Shri  S.  L.  Patel 
Shri  V.  M.  MUNDADA 

Shri  G.  Venkatramanan  (Alternate) 
Director 

Senior  Test  Engineer  (Alternate) 
Director 

DrV. V.Singh  (Alternate) 
Shri  L.  S.  Sharma 

Shri  S.  N.  Desai  (Alternate) 
Deputy  Director 
Shri  N.  K.  L.  Malhotra 

Shri  S.  K.  Garg  (Alternate) 
Shri  C.  Patnaik 

Shri  Atol  Kumar  (Alternate) 
DrA.  P.  Srivastava 

Dr  I.  M.  Mishra  (Alternate) 
Director 
Shri  K.  K.  Sagar 

Shri  PuLAK  Garo  (Alternate) 
Shri  Sharad  Phatak 

Shri  Om  PrakashChowksey  (Alternate) 
Shri  R.  Nigam 

Shri  C.  L.  Garg  (Alternate) 
Shri  R.  S.  Doharey 

Shri  R.  Tiwari  (Alternate) 
Shri  G.  Shankar 

Shri  S.  N.  Pathak  (Alternate) 
Director 

Senior  Test  Engineer  (Alternate) 
Director 

Senior  Test  Engineer  (Alternate) 
Shri  M.  K.  Bhat 

Shri  V.  D.  Narang  (Alternate) 
Shri  Sarbagh  Singh  Passi 
Dr  V.  K.  Sharma 

Dr  N.  S.  Sandhar  (Alternate) 
Shri  Pankaj  Arora 
Shri  K.  K.  Mangal 

Shri  Jagdish  Chancer  (Alternate) 
Director 

Senior  Test  Engineer  (Alternate) 
Shri  A.  K.  Bhakt 

ShriT.  A.  N.  Suthan  (Alternate) 
Shri  N.  P.  Raghunathan 

Shri  T.  R.  Subramaniam  (Alternate) 
Shri  P.  K.  Sarkar,  Director  &  Head  (Food  &  Agri) 
[Representing  Director  General  (Ex-officio)] 


Member-Secretary 

Shri  S.  K.  Singh 

Assistant  Director  (Food  &  Agri),  BIS 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  stardardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and 
attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publication),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of 'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  FAD  59  (  1000). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 
Telephones:  323  01  31,  323  3375,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices: 


Central 

Eastern 

Northern 
Southern 

Western 

Branches 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,V.I.P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA  700054 

SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  6001 13 

Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 


Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

323  76  17,323  38  41 

T337  84  99,  337  85  61 
1337  86  26,337  9120 

r60  38  43 

160  20  25 

r254  12  16,254  14  42 

1254  25  19,254  13  15 

f832  92  95,  832  78  58 
1832  78  91,  832  78  92 


AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
N  ALAGARH,  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  TFHRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


