**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14736 (Parti): 1999 
^ ISO 7626-1 : 1986 

'^{NaPT *1M<P ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

//7c//an Standard 

VIBRATION AND SHOCK — EXPERIMENTAL 
DETERMINATION OF MECHANICAL MOBILITY 

PART 1 BASIC DEFINITIONS AND TRANSDUCERS 



ICS 17.160 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1999 Price Group 9 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which Is identical with ISO 7626-1:1986 'Vibration and shock — Experimental 
determination of mechanical mobility — Part 1 : Basic definitions and transducers' issued by the 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
the recommendation of Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Light 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved «as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. In the adopted standard certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. 
Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read 
as 'Indian Standard*. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is 
to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place'are listed below 
along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of 

Standard Equivalence 

ISO 2041 IS 11 71 7:1 999 Vocabulary on vibration and shock {first revision) Identical 

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards 
referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this 
standard: 

International Standard Title 

ISO 4865 Vibration and shock — Methods for analysis and presentation of data 

ISO 5347 Vibration and shock — Methods of calibration of vibration and shock pickups 

lEC Publication Scale and sizes for plotting frequency characteristics and polar diagrams 

263 



IS 14736 (Parti ):1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 

Indian Standard 

VIBRATION AND SHOCK — EXPERIMENTAL 
DETERMINATION OF MECHANICAL MOBILITY 

PART 1 BASIC DEFINITIONS AND TRANSDUCERS 



Introduction 

0.1 General introduction to ISO 7626 on mobility 
measurement 

Dynamic characteristics of structures can be determined as a 
function of frequency from mobilitv measurements or measure- 
ments of the related frequency-response functions, l<nown as 
accelerance and dynamic compliance. Each of these frequency- 
response functions is the phasor of the motion response at a 
point on a structure due to a unit force (or moment) excitation. 
The magnitude and the phase of these functions are frequency- 
dependent. 

Accelerance and dynamic compliance differ from mobility only 
in that the motion response is expressed in terms of acceler- 
ation or displacement, respectively, instead of in terms of velo- 
city. In order to simplify the various parts of ISO 7626, only the 
term "mobility" will be used. It is understood that all test pro- 
cedures and requirements described are also applicable to the 
determination of accelerance and dynamic compliance. 

Typical applications for mobility measurements are for 

a) predicting the dynamic response of structures to known 
or assumed input excitation; 

b) determining the modal properties of a structure (natural 
frequencies, mode shapes and damping ratios); 

c} predicting the dynamic interaction of interconnected 
structures; 

d) checking the validity and improving the accuracy of 
mathematical models and structures; 

e) determining dynamic properties (i.e. the complex 
modulus of elasticity) of materials in pure or composite 
forms. 

For some applications, a complete description of the dynamic 
characteristics may be required using measurements of transla- 
tionai forces and motions along three mutually perpendicular 
axes as well as measurements of moments and rotational mo- 
tions about these three axes. This set of measurements results 
in a 6 X 6 mobility matrix for each location of interest. For N 
locations on a structure, the system thus has an overall mobility 
matrix of size 6^ x QN. 



For most practical applications, it is not necessary to know the 
entire 6N x 6/V matrix. Often it is sufficient to measure the 
driving-point mobility and a few transfer mobilities by exciting 
with a force at a single point in a single direction and measuring 
the translational response motions at key points on the struc- 
ture. In other applications, only rotational mobilities may be of 
interest. 

In order to simplify the use of the various parts of ISO 7626 in 
the various mobility measurement tasks encountered in prac- 
tice, ISO 7626 will be published as a set of five separate parts. 

ISO 7626/1 (this part of ISO 7626) covers basic definitions and 
transducers. The information given in this part of ISO 7626 is 
common to most mobility measurement tasks. 

ISO 7626/2 covers mobility measurements using single-point 
translational excitation with an attached exciter. 

ISO 7626/3 covers mobility measurements using single-point 
rotational excitation with an attached exciter. This information 
is primarily intended for rotor system rotational resonance 
predictions. 

ISO 7626/4 covers measurements of the entire mobility matrix 
using attached exciters. This includes the translational, ro- 
tational and combination terms required for the 6 x 6 matrix 
for each location on the structure. 

ISO 7626/5 covers mobility measurements using impact excita- 
tion with an exciter which is not attached to the structure. 

Mechanical mobility is defined as the frequency-response func- 
tion formed by the ratio of the phasor of the translational or 
rotational response velocity to the phasor of the applied force 
or moment excitation. If the response is measured with an ac- 
celerometer, conversion to velocity is required to obtain the 
mobility. Alternatively, the ratio of acceleration to force, know 
as accelerance, may be used to characterize a structure. In 
other cases, dynamic compliance, the ratio of displacement to 
force, may be used. 

NOTE — Historically, frequency-response functions of structures have 
often been expressed in terms of the reciprocal of one of the above- 
named dynamic characteristics. The arithmetic reciprocal of 
mechanical mobility has often been called mechanical impedance. It 
should be noted, however, that this is misleading because the 
arithmetic reciprocal of mobility does not, in general, represent any of 
the elements of the impedance matrix of a structure. This point is 
elaborated upon in annex A. 



IS 14736 { Part 1 ) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



Mobility test data cannot be used directly as part of an im- 
pedance model of the structure. In order to achieve compatibi- 
lity of the data and the model, the impedance matrix of the 
model shall be converted to mobility or vice-versa {see 
clause A.3 for limitations). 



0.2 Introduction to this part of ISO 7626 

Before carrying out mobility measurements, it is necessary to 
evaluate the characteristics of the force and response 
transducers to be used in order to ensure that accurate 
amplitude and phase information can be obtained over the 
entire frequency range of interest. 

This part of ISO 7626 is primarily a guide for the selection, 
calibration and evaluation of the transducers and instruments 
for their suitability in making mobility measurements. 



1 Scope and field of application 

This part of ISO 7626 provides basic definitions with comments 
and identifies the calibration tests, environmental tests and 
physical measurements necessary to determine the suitability 
of impedance heads, force transducers and response 
transducers for use in measuring mechanical mobility. 

This part of ISO 7626 is limited to information which is basic to 
various types of driving point and transfer mobility, acceterance 
and dynamic compliance measurements. Blocked impedance 
(see 4.3) measurements are not dealt with. 

NOTE — Procedures for carrying out mobility measurements in various 
circumstances will be dealt with In ISO 7626/2, ISO 7626/3, 
ISO 7626/4 and ISO 7626/5. 



2 References 

ISO 2041, Vibration and shock — Vocabulary. 

ISO 4865, Vibration and shock — Methods for analysis and 
presentation of data, n 

ISO 5347, Vibration and shock — Methods of calibration of 
vibration and shock pickups. D 

lEC Publication 263, Scales and sizes for plotting frequency 
characteristics and polar diagrams. 



3 Symbols and units 



Symbol 


1 

Quantity 


SI unit 


a 


Acceleration 


m/s2 


a^lFj 


Accelerance 


m/(N-s2) 


E 


Transducer output 


V 


f 


Frequency 


Hz 


F 


Force 


N 


k 


Stiffness 


N/m 


m 


Mass 


kg 


S 


Sensitivity 


V/ units of 
input variable 


V 


Velocity 


m/s 


X 


Displacement 


m 


X,lFj 


Dynamic compliance 


m/N 


^U 


Mobility 


m/{N.s) 


Z 


Free impedance 


N.s/m 


Zu 


Blocked impedance 


N-s/m 



4 Definitions 

For the general terms and their definitions used in this part of 
ISO 7626, see ISO 2041. Several of the more important defi- 
nitions used in the measurement and presentation of mecha- 
nical mobility data are listed below to emphasize their use in 
this part of ISO 7626. 

4.1 frequency-response function: The frequency depen- 
dent ratio of the motion-response phasor to the phasor of the 
excitation force. 

NOTES 

1 Frequency-response functions are properties of linear dynamic 
systems which do not depend on the type of excitation function. Ex- 
citation can be harmonic, random or transient functions of time. The 
test results obtained with one type of excitation can thus be used for 
predicting the response of the system to any other type of excitation. 
Phasors and their equivalents for random and transient excitation are 
discussed in annex B. 

2 Linearity of the system is a condition which, in practice, will be met 
only approximately, depending on the type of system and on the 
magnitude of the input. Care has to be taken to avoid non-linear ef- 
fects, particularly when applying impulse excitation. Structures which 
are known to be non-linear (e.g. certain riveted structures) should not 
be tested with impulse excitation and great care is required when using 
random excitation for testing such structures. 



1 ) At present at the stage of draft. 



IS 14736 (Parti ) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



3 Motion may be expressed in terms of eitlier velocity, acceleration or 
displacement; the corresponding frequency-response function 
designations are mobility, accelerance and dynamic compliance, 
respectively. 



4.2 mobility, y,/. The frequency-response function fornned 
by the ratio of the velocity-response phasor at point / to the ex- 
citation force phasor at point j, with all other measurement 
points on the structure allowed to respond freely without any 
constraints other than those constraints which represent the 
normal support of the structure in its intended application. A 
typical graph is given in figure 1 . 

NOTES 

1 The velocity response can be either translational or rotational, and 
the excitation force can be either a rectilinear force or a moment. 

2 If the velocity response measured is a translational one and if the 
excitation force applied is a rectilinear one, the mobility term should be 
expressed in metres per newton second in the St system. 



4.3 blocked Impedance, Zjf. The frequency-response func- 
tion formed by the ratio of the phasor of the blocking or driving- 
point force response at point / to the phasor of the applied ex- 
citation velocity at pointy, with all other measurement points 
on the structure "blocked" (i.e. constrained to have 2ero velo- 
city). All forces and moments required to constrain fully all 



r\*-\Ir»+«* /^f ir»t£l*■Oc^+ r\r^ thic 



■^fi if£^ oK-all Kd 



r^a^^i irc^i 



,H if-» r>triA£^r +<-» 



obtain a valid blocked impedance matrix. Blocked impedance 
measurements (see [13]) are, therefore, seldom made and are 
not dealt with in the various parts of ISO 7626. 

NOTES 

1 Any changes in the number of measurement points or their location 
will change the blocked impedances at all measurement points. 



2 The primary usefulness of blocked impedance is in the 
mathematical modelling of a structure using lumped mass, stiffness 
and damping elements or finite element techniques. When combining 
or comparing such mathematical models with experimental mobility 
data, it is necessary to convert the analytical blocked impedance matrix 
into a mobility matrix, or vice versa, as discussed in annex A. 

4.4 free impedance: The ratio of the applied excitation 
force phasor to the resulting velocity phasor, with all other con- 
nection points of the system free (i.e. having zero restraining 
forces). Free impedance is the arithmetic reciprocal of a single 
element of the mobility matrix, as defined in 4.2. 

NOTES 

1 Historically, no distinction has often been made between blocked 
impedance and free impedance. Caution should, therefore, be exer- 
cised in interpreting published data. 

2 While experimentally determined free impedances could be 
assembled into a matrix, this matrix would be quite different from the 
blocked impedance matrix resulting from mathematical modelling of 
the structure and, therefore, would not conform to the requirements 
discussed in annex A for using mechanical impedance in an overall 
theoretical analysis of the system. 

4.5 Other frequency-response functions related 
to mobility 



sometimes used instead of mechanical mobility. These are 
summarized in table 1. 

Careful note should be taken of the comments on each type of 
ratio. Typical magnitude graphs for accelerance and for 
dynamic compliance, corresponding to the mobility graph 
shown in figure 1, are shown in figures 2 and 3, respectively. 



Table 1 — Equivalent definitions to be used for various kinds of measured frequency response functions 

related to mechanical mobility 





Motion expressed 


Motion expressed 


Motion expressed 




as velocity 


as acceleration 


as displacement 


Term 


Mobility 


Accelerance 


Dynamic compliance 


Symbol 


y„ = ^,i^\, 


«,/F, 


x,/F, 


Unit 


m/(N.s) 


m/{N.s2) = kg-1 


m/N 


Boundary conditions 


F, = 0:k * J 


Ff, ^ 0; k * j 


F, = 0;k * J 


See figure 


1 


2 


3 


Comment 


Boundary conditions are easy to achieve experimentally 


Term 


Blocked impedance 


Blocked effective mass 


Dynamic stiffness 


Symbol 


Z,, = F^/Vj 


Fila, 


FA) 


Unit 


(N.s)/m 


(N-s2)/m = kg 


N/m 


Boundary conditions 


v^ = 0:k * j 


a^ = ; k * j 


.V(. = Q ; k It j 


Comment 


Boundary conditions are very difficult or impossible to achieve experimentally 


Term 


Free impedance 


Effective mass (free effective mass) 


Free dynamic stiffness 


Symbol 


^u 


F,la, 


F,fx, 


Unit 


(N.s)/m 


(N-s^l/m = kg 


N/m 


Boundary conditions 


f , = ; At * y 


/> = ; ^ ^ ,/ 


F, = 0;k*j 


Comment 


1 p 
Boundary conditions are easy to achieve, but results shall be used with great caution in system modelling 



IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



NOTES 

1 Dynamic compliance is called "receptance" by several authors. 

2 Accelerance has, regrettably, been called "inertance" In some 
publications. This term is not a standard term and should be avoided 
because it is in conflict with the common definition of "acoustic iner- 
tance" and also contrary to the implication carried by the term "iner- 
tance". 



5.2. 1 The motion transducer should be of lightweight (or non- 
contacting) design so as to minimize structural toading of the 
structure under test. 

5.2.2 The attachment of the transducer to the structure under 
test should be stiff in the direction of the primary measurement 
axis of the transducer. 



4.6 frequency range of interest: Span, in hertz, from the 
lowest frequency to the highest frequency at which mobility 
data are to be obtained in a given test series. 



5.2.3 The attachment should have a sufficiently small contact 
area to prevent stiffening or damping of the structure by the 
transducer or its mounting fixture. 



5 Basic requirements for force- and 
motion-measurement transducers 

5.1 General 

The basic characteristics of all measurement transducers which 
are important in acquiring adequate mobility data are as 
follows: 

a) Transducers shall have sufficient sensitivity and low 
noise in order to obtain a signal-to-noise ratio of the 
measurement chain which is adequate to cover the dynamic 
range of the mobility of the structure. Since lightly damped 
structures require a larger dynamic range than structures 
with considerable damping, transducer noise is of particular 
concern when testing lightly damped structures. 

b) If the frequency- response function of the measurement 
transducer is not compensated by suitable signal process- 
ing, the natural frequency of the response transducer shall 
be far enough below or above the frequency range of in- 
terest that no unacceptable phase shift will occur. 

c) Transducer sensivity shall be stable with time and have 
negligible d.c. drift. 

d) Transducers shall be insensitive to extraneous en- 
vironmental effects, such as temperature, humidity, 
magnetic fields, electrical fields, acoustical fields, strain and 
cross-axis inputs. 

e) Transducer mass and rotational inertia shall be small so 
as to avoid dynamic loading of the structure under test, or 
at least small enough so that a correction can be made for 
the loading. 

Low susceptibility of the measurement system to the effects of 
electrical ground loops and other extraneous signals is also im- 
portant. 



5.2 Requirements for motion-measurement 
transducers 

Although motion-measurement transducers require the 
characteristics outlined in 5.1, certain of these characteristics 
are more important than others. Motion transducers used in 
mechanical mobility measurements are most commonly ac- 
celerometers; however, displacement or velocity transducers 
are sometimes used. The major characteristics to be considered 
in transducer selection are outlined in 5.2.1 to 5.2.4. 



5.2.4 When applying impulse excitation, zero drift of 
piezoelectric accelerometers due to the pyro-electric effect is 
likely to occur and this will limit the accuracy of the measure- 
ment at low frequencies. Other types of motion transducers 
(e.g. piezoresistive, electrodynamic»or some shear type piezo- 
electronic accelerometers) can provide the solution to this 
problem. 



5.3 Requirements for force-measurement 
transducers 

Some of the characteristics outlined in 5.1 are more important 
than others in the selection of a force-measurement transducer 
to be used for mechanical mobility measurements. Since com- 
promises in design have to be made, the items outlined in 5.3.1 
to 5.3.3 shall be considered as being of prime importance. 

5.3.1 The effective end mass (mass between the force- 
sensing element of the transducer and the structure) should be 
small enough to minimize extraneous inertial signals related to 
such mass. (See 8.4 for further details.) 



5.3.2 The stiffness of the force transducer and its com- 
ponents should be selected so that no resonances involving this 
stiffness occur within the frequency range of interest. As a 
compromise, the effect of such resonances on the signal from 
the force-sensing element should be compensated for by 
suitable signal processing. 

5.3.3 The static preload shall be adequate for the range of ex- 
citation forces required by the test application. Transducers 
with built-in preload are available to minimize this problem. 



5.4 Requirements for impedance heads and 
attachments to the structure under test 

A device which combines an accelerometer and a force 
transducer in one assembly for the purpose of mobility 
measurement Is traditionally called an "impedance head". The 
design is a compromise based on the characteristics outlined in 
5.2 and 5.3. However, certain characteristics of prime import- 
ance, given in 5.4.1 to 5.4.4, should be borne in mind. 



5.4.1 The total compliance between the structure and the in- 
ternal accelerometer should be small, because a large com- 
pliance will cause errors in acceleration measurements. 



IS 14736 (Parti ) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



NOTE - The total compliance is the sum of the attachment com- 
pliance and the internal compliance of the impedance head. The at- 
tachment compliance includes the localized "die effect" compliance of 
the structure under test The total compliance can be measured as 
described in annex C. 



5.4.2 The effective end mass (mass between the force- 
sensing element of the transducer and the structure) should be 
small in relation to the free effective mass of the structure 
under test. 

5.4.3 The moment of inertia of the impedance head, relative 
to an axis in the plane of attachment, should be small enough 
to minimize structural loading due to rotational motion about 
that axis. 

NOTE — Further guidelines for av/oiding loading of the structure under 
test by the attachment of impedance heads will be given In ISO 7626/2. 

5.4.4 In the design of an impedance head, care is required to 
avoid cross-sensitivity of the acceleration transducer to the ap- 
plied force. 



6 Calibration 

Calibrations fall into three categories: 

a) operational calibration of the combined measurement 
and analysis system; 

b) basic transducer calibrations; 

c) supplementary transducer calibrations. 



6.1 Operational calibrations 

Operational calibrations of the combined measurement and 
analysis system shall be carried out at the beginning and end of 
each measurement series (and at intermediate times, as re- 
quired). Detailed procedures w/ill be covered in the relevant 
parts of ISO 7626 pertaining to the various types of mobility 
measurements, as outlined in clause 0. 

Combined system calibrations are easier to perform, more ac- 
curate and in wider use than the basic calibrations discussed in 
clause 7. These system calibrations are achieved by driving, in 
free space, a known free mass while the acceleration and force 
channel gains are set at the values that will be used in later 
measurements. The ratio output shall follow the appropriate 
mass line on the resulting mobility graph. If any difficulties are 
experienced in combined system calibrations, basic calibrations 
should be carried out. 



used for mobility measurements, and the accelerometer is of a low 
damping design. However, it Is good practice to display the phase 
angle between the force transducer and accelerometer outputs on a 
phase meter and record any deviations from the proper phase angle be- 
tween the force transducer and accelerometer outputs while carrying 
out the operational calibration. 



6.2 Basic and supplementary transducer 
calibrations 

The basic and supplementary calibrations (see table 2) are in- 
tended for determining the suitability of the transducers for 
mobility measurements. Piezoelectric transducers are very fre- 
quently used. If other types of transducers are used, the pro- 
cedures may have to be modified to determine the suitability of 
such transducers. 

Transducers exhibiting changes in basic or supplementary 
calibrations should not be used if the changes are unac- 
ceptable, as indicated in the appropriate clauses in this part of 
ISO 7626. 

Table 2 — Summary of transducer calibrations and tests 



Calibration 


Accelerometer 


Force 
transducer 


or test 


Basic 


Supple- 
mentary 


Basic 


Suppler 
mentary 


Sensitivity 


.7.2.1 




7.2.2 




Electrical impedance 


7.3 




7.3 




Dimensions 




8.2 




8.2 


Mass 




8.3 




8.3 


Effective end mass 








8.4 


Transducer 










compliance 








8.5 


Polarity 




8.6 




8.6 


Frequency 










response 




8,7.1 




8.7.2 


Linearity 




8.8.1 




8.8.2 


Temperature 




8.9.1 




8.9.1 


sensitivity 




and 8,9,2 




and 8.9.2 


Transverse 










sensitivity 




8.9.4 






Strain 










sensitivity 




8.9.5 







The accuracy of the frequency scale of the response graph or 
other data output should always be checked during the oper- 
ational calibration. 

NOTES 

1 An example of the resulting mobility graph, showing the effect of 
the impedance head attachment compliance, is shown in annex C. 

2 It is usually unnecessary to perform a phase-shift calibration provid- 
ed that the accelerometers, force transducers and amplifiers are 
selected to have nearly flat response throughout the frequency range 



Transducers intended for use with specific amplifiers or signal 
conditioners should have the calibration performed under the 
conditions of intended use. For example, piezoelectric force 
transducers, impedance heads and accelerometers are in- 
tended for use with either charge amplifiers or high impedance 
voltage amplifiers and should be calibrated with the intended 
amplifier. For these transducers, the capacitance of the cables 
used between transducer and amplifier is important and the 
transducers should be calibrated together with the intended 
cable. Other types of transducers should be calibrated with 



IS 14736 ( Part 1 ) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



their intended signal conditioning devices in accordance with 
the manufacturer's specifications for electrical excitation, 
special terminating impedance, etc. 

When calibrating force transducers and impedance heads, 
special care should be taken to use mounting conditions similar 
to those specified by the manufacturer. Flatness of the mount- 
ing plate and proper torquing of the attaching screws is impor- 
tant. A thin film of oil or grease or wax between the transducer 
and the mounting surface may increase transducer coupling 
and rigidity for use at high frequencies. If special fixtures are 
used, every effort should be made to carry out force transducer 
calibrations using a mechanical arrangement closely resembling 
that to be used during the mobility measurement. 



7 Basic piezoelectric transducer calibratior^s 

7.1 General 

All basic calibrations and tests listed in table 2 shall be carried 
out by the manufacturer on each transducer and the results 
shall be recorded in the documentation supplied with the 
transducer. All basic calibrations should be repeated periodi- 
cally by the user (or by a commercial calibration laboratory, if 
the user does not have adequate calibration facilities). 



Tka I 



ifiaA ' 



intAniat f/ir ranAatinn Kaei/« /^aliKra+inne 



and tests is 1 year. In addition, calibrations such as sensitivity 
should be repeated more frequently, particularly if the 
transducer is subjected to conditions which may change its 
sensitivity. 



NOTE — Since the output signal of the charge or voltage ampliftef 
associated with the accelerometer is always a voltage, the resultant ac- 
celeration channel sensitivity should always be expressed in volts per 
metre per second squared IV/lm/s^)]. )n general, the acceleration 
channel sensitivity Is determined from the knowledge of the sepfKSte 
sensitivities of the accelerometer and the amplifier; in cases where 
precise mobility measurements are required, the accelerometer and the 
amplifier to be used with .the accelerometer should be calibrated 
together in order to obtain the acceleration channel sensitivity directly. 



7.2.2 Force-transducer sensitivity 

Force transducers and the force section of impedance heads 
shall be calibrated using a mass-loading technique. 

The sensitivity calibration shall be carried out by mounting 
the force transducer on a suitable shaker using the rated pre- 
loading torque recommended by the manufacturer. The force 
transducer shall be vibrated at a controlled acceleration 
amplitude, Oq, with only a reference accelerometer attached to 
its opposite face. The force transducer amplifier voltage out- 
put, Eq, and the applied acceleration, Oq, shall be measured. A 
loading mass, m, shall then be attached to the opposite face of 
the force transducer without changing the amplifier gain set- 
tings. The voltage output, E^, shall be measured with the 
shaker input adjusted so that the applied acceleration, a, has 
exactly the same amplitude as before (that is a = a^). The sen- 
sitivity of the force channel, Sf, is then given by the following 
equation : 



Sf = 



where 



Em ^ ^0 



{m + m^ + m2 + m^a - (m^ -I- wj + mjfaQ 



(1) 



7.2 Sensitivity 

7.2.1 Accelerometer sensitivity 

Sensitivity of accelerometers and the accelerometer portion of 
impedance heads shall be determined by using the comparison 
method. Calibration shall be carried out by mounting the ac- 
celerometer on a suitable shaker equipped with a reference ac- 
celerometer previously calibrated by or referenced to an ab- 
solute calibration. The calibration amplitude should be within 
the range encountered in actual mobility measurements, 
generally between 1,0 and 100 m/s2. 



m is the loading mass; 

m^ is the mass of the reference accelerometer; 

m2 is the effective mass of the bolt; 

m^ is the effective end mass of the force transducer. 

All the masses are expressed in kilograms and the accelera- 
tion shall be expressed in metres per second squared. As 
(mi -(- ffij + m^QQ = (mi -H mj + ni'^a, because Qq = a, 
equation (1) becomes 



S, = 



Em — En 



,. (2) 



ma 



I ne sensiiiviiy uaiiurdi.iun SnuUia us Ceirriea uui ai a Singie rre- 
quency, generally 80 Hz. 

NOTE — A different frequency may be used, if 80 Hz is outside the 
operating frequency range of the transducer or if another frequency is 
more suitable for the particular transducer design or experimental ap- 
plication of the transducer. 

For accelerometers designed to be used with a charge 
amplifier, accelerometer sensitivity shall be expressed in 
picocoulombs per metre per secoiKl squared [pC/(m/s2)l. For 
accelerometers designed to be used with a voltage amplifier 
and for accelerometers with a buitt-in charge amplifier or im- 
pedance transformer, accelerometer sensitivity shall be ex- 
pressed in volts per metre per second squared IV/(m/s2)]. 



ivu I c — ror rarce transauceis wnicn nave not oeen pre-assemoiea, 
extreme care should be taken to ensure that the mounted preload does 
not change from application to application, since sensitivity and 
calibration depend on transducer preload. 

Equation (2) gives the sensitivity of the force channel (i.e. the 
transducer/amplifier combination) in volts per newton. The 
sensitivity of the force transducer alone can be deduced from 
equation (2) arid the sensitivity of the amplifier used. 

For force transducers designed to be used with a charge 
amplifier, force-transducer sensitivity shall be expressed in 
picocoulombs per newton. For force transducers designed to 
be used with a voltage amplifier, force-transducer sensitivity 
shall be expressed in volts per newton. 



6 



IS 14736 (Parti) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



NOTE — In cases where precise mobility measurements are required, 
the force transducer and the amplifier to be used with the force 
transducer should be calibrated together In order to obtain the total 
force channel sensitivity directly. 

The method described is adequate only at frequencies below 
approximately one-fifth of the resonance frequency due to the 
effective mass of the system and the stiffness, k, of the force 
transducer. This resonance can be estimated by means of the 
following equation : 



/n = 



1 

2n 



(m + Wi + wj + "73) 



1/2 



(3) 



where f„ is the resonance frequency of the mass-loaded 
transducer, in hertz. 

7.2.3 Impedance-head sensitivity 

The sensitivity of an impedance head can be obtained from the 
individual calibrations of the accelerometer and the force 
transducer performed using the methods given in 7.2.1 and 
7,2,2, respectively. Field calibration of an impedance head 
usually consists of driving two or three differently sized free 
masses. This ensures that the impedance head can- measure 
known mobilities over a wide range. 



7.3.2 Insulation resistance 

The direct current resistances between ail the terminals of the 
transducer and its mounting surface shall be measured and 
supplied as data by the manufacturer. 

If the transducer is not of an isolated type, the manufacturer 
shall indicate the type of mounting needed to achieve isolation 
when using the transducer (see 5.1). 



8 Supplementary calibrations 



8.1 General 

The supplementary calibrations and tests listed in table 2 shall 
be carried out by the manufacturer on samples of the 
transducers for each type manufactured. Furthermore, some of 
the supplementary calibrations and tests should be carried out 
by the user to determine the condition of a transducer which 
exhibits peculiar operating characteristics or changes in perfor- 
mance. 



7.3 Electrical impedance 

7,3.1 Transducer resistance and capacitance 

The direct current resistance between the terminals of the 
transducer shall be measured by the manufacturer with a 
megohmmeter, using an applied voltage not exceeding 50 V. 

The capacitance shall be measured with an impedance bridge, 
using an excitation voltage within the operating frequency 
range of the transducer. If the capacitance changes with fre- 
quency, the nneasurement shall be carried out at a minimum of 
two frequencies, including the frequency at which the 
reference sensitivity shall be determined. For transducers the 
capacitancJe of which does not change significantly with fre- 
quency, the measurement shall usually be carried out at 
1 000 Hz. 

Since the capacitance of some piezoelectric materials changes 
with temperature and voltage, the capacitance measurement 
shall be performed at room temperature (20 to 30 °C) and at an 
excitation voltage recommended by the transducer manufac- 
turer. Variations due to temperature can be minimized by 
avoiding handling immediately before or during the capacitance 
measurements. 

NOTE — For some transducers containing internal electronic com- 
ponents, the above impedance measurement operation may produce 
inaccurate results or possibly cause damage. In these cases, insertion 
methods should be used. 

Resistance and capacitance measurements should be repeated 
at suitable time intervals (see 7.1). Since these measurements 
are generally not very accurate, only significant variations, 
compared to previous calibrations, shall be taken into account. 
For instance, if resistance and/or capacitance has changed by 
more than 5 %, the transducer should be further evaluated by 
performing all basic and supplementary calibrations or it should 
be repaired, as required. 



8.2 Dimensions 

Pertinent dimensions, including height, width, length, diameter 
and dimensions of any mounting holes or studs, shall be given. 
The dimensions shall be provided in the form of an outline 
drawing. Descriptions of connectors, cable sizes and cable 
types shall also be provided. 



8.3 Mass 

The mass specified is the total mass of the transducer, ex- 
cluding mounting studs and cables which do not form an in- 
tegral part of the transducer. 



8.4 Effective end mass of force transducers and 
impedance heads 

The effective end mass of force transducers and impedance 
heads is the mass between the force-sensing elements and the 
specimen end of the transducer. This effective end mass 
should be included in the manufacturer's specifications. 
However, the user should be aware that the effective end mass 
is increased by the addition of the hardware used to attach the 
transducer to the structure under test and/or to preload the 
transducer. Thus, the total effective end mass is the sum of the 
manufacturer's effective end mass and the mass of the at- 
taching hardware. 



8.5 Compliance of impedance heads 

The compliance of an impedance head is the compliance of that 
part of the assembly between the point of attachment to the 
structure and the internal accelerometer (see [10]). 



IS 14736 (Parti ) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



In addition to the compliance of the impedance head as pro- 
vided by the manufacturer, the compliance of the attachment 
hardware shall also be considered when carrying out mobility 
measurements. 

A procedure for experimentally determining the total com- 
pliance is given in annex C. 

8.6 Polarity 

Polarity of the transducer, usually laid down by the nufac- 
turer, shall be by a comparison methfld to determine whether a 
positive or negative output voltage change is produced when 
the mechanical input is applied in a direction from the mounting 
surface towards the opposite end of the transducer and along 
the axis of maximum sensitivity of the transducer. This defini- 
tion of polarity is applicable to most transducers which have the 
sensitivity axis perpendicular to the mounting surface. 



The reference voltage, E^, is the output of the transducer 
amplifier obtained at the reference frequency, geperally 80 Hz. 
It is important that the mass load on the force transducer does 
not cause a resonance involving the loading mass and the 
transducer compliance. This can be checked using equation 
(3). The frequency-response deviation shall be less than ± 5 % 
of the response at the reference frequency over the frequency 
range of interest. 

NOTE — As in the sensitivity calibration of the force transducer, better 
accuracy Is obtained by not adjusting the torque of the force- 
transducer mounting bolt at any time during the frequency-response 
calibration, if force transducers without built-in preload are used. 



8.8 Linearity 

Linearity calibrations shall be carried out by harmonic excitation 
using the comparison method. 



8.7 Frequency response 

8.7.1 Accelerometer frequency response 

The frequency-response calibration shall be performed by the 
comparison method at an acceleration amplitude chosen to 
provide a signal-to-noise ratio exceeding ten (S/N > 20 dB) 
and over the frequency range corresponding to the range of 
use of the accelerometer. Harmonic or wide-band excitation, 
applied with a suitable vibration exciter, may be used to 
measure the frequency responses. Wide-band excitation may 
be random or transient. 

Harmonic excitation may be applied at discrete frequencies or 
by a continuous sweep. In the first case, there shall be enough 
discrete frequencies, for instance ten frequencies per decade, 
to ensure that, the transducer is free from local or internal 
resonances within the frequency range of interest. If the 
calibration is carried out at a limited number of discrete fre- 
quencies, addition of a frequency sweep is useful to ensure the 
same objective. 

When a continuous sweep is used, the frequency should be 
swept slowly, while the amplitude of the excitation acceleration 
is maintained constant over the full frequency range by means 
of a feedback control system using a reference accelerometer. 

The frequency r- -,ponse shall be flat within ± 5 % in the fre- 
quency range of interest. Care shall be taken so that transverse 
motion of the vibration exciter, combined with the cross-axis 
sensitivity of the transducer, does not cause measurement 
errors of the order of the specified ± 5 %. 

8.7.2 Force-transducer frequency response 

Frequency-response calibration shall be performed under the 
same conditions described for the accelerometer frequency 
response. However, the force transducer shall be mass-loaded 
and vibrated at a constant amplitude of acceleration at each 
specified frequency. The voltage output of the force- 
transducer amplifier, Lf, shall be measured at each of the fre- 
quencies. The frequency-response deviations, expressed as a 
percentage, shall be determined from the following equation: 



Frequency-response deviation = 100 x 



E, 



8.8.1 Accelerometer linearity 

The amplitude-linearity deviations shall be determined by 
measuring the ratio of the reference and test accelerometer 
outputs. This ratio shall be measured by the manufacturer at a 
minimum of three acceleration levels in the upper decade of the 
design range of the accelerometer. It may be useful for the user 
to check the linearity in his own range of use. The deviations at 
each acceleration shall be determined by computing the dif- 
ference from the average ratio at all accelerations. This dif- 
ference shall be expressed as a percentage of the average ratio. 
If the deviations at all accelerations are within ± 2 %, the ac- 
celerometer is suitable for mobility measurements. 



8.8.2 Force-transducer linearity 

The linearity calibration shall be carried out by vibrating the 
mass-loaded force transducer, generally at 80 Hz, at various ac- 
celeration levels and measuring the voltage output of the force- 
transducer amplifier, Ey^, at each of the applied accelerations, 
a^. The linearity deviations, expressed as a percentage, shall be 
determined from the following equation: 



Amplitude-linearity deviation 



= 100 X 



'^x'^x'avg 



1 



... (5) 



where 



... (4) 



f^ is the force-transducer amplifier voltage output at a 
discrete acceleration amplitude, V; 

a^ is the discrete acceleration amplitude as determined by 
a standard accelerometer, in metres per second squared; 

(ZT^/ffx'avg is the average of the ratio of force-transducer 
amplifier output amplitude to the acceleration amplitude for 
all acceleration levels, expressed in volt seconds squared per 
metre, and is equal to 



(EJa^Jn 



IS 14736 (Parti ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



A different frequency may be used if 80 Hz is outside the 
operating frequency range of the transducer or if another fre- 
quency is more suitabe for the particular transducer design or 
application. 

The applied force shall be computed as follows. At one of the 
applied accelerations, the applied force shall be computed by 
dividing the amplifier output, E^. by the force-transducer chan- 
nel sensitivity, previously determined in 7.2.2. The force applied 
at every other calibration point shall be determined by multiply- 
ing the force just computed by the ratio of new applied ac- 
celeration to the acceleration used to compute the force above. 

A force transducer, or the force transducer in an impedance 
head, is not suitable for mobility measurements if the linearity 
deviations exceed 2 %, within the rated range of operating 
forces. 



8.9 Supplementary calibrations necessitated by 
environmental and secondary effects 

Certain calibrations are necessitated by the fact that secondary 
and/or environmental conditions can cause transducer outputs 
which are not direct analogues of the transduced quantities. 
The supplementary calibrations described in 8.9.1 to 8.9.5 
reflect the need to quantify such effects. 

8.9.1 Change in transducer sensitivity with 
temperature 

It is usually desirable to select transducers which have 
temperature-sensitivity deviations not exceeding ± 1,0 % 
throughout the temperature range of intended use. 

8.9.2 Noise induced in signal transducers by 
temperature variations 

Variation in temperature generates low-frequency noise in 
piezoelectric transducers and in any built-in transducer 
amplifiers that may be used. As the frequency range of use of 
piezoelectric transducers is generally much higher, the noise 
and the measured signal are not correlated so that there are no 
consequences on the results of the mobility measurements. 
However, during low-frequency measurement, rapid variations 
in temperature may cause sufficient noise to saturate the 
transducer electronics, thus inducing wrong measurements. 

8.9.3 Force-transducer preload effects on sensitivity 

The effect of different mounting torques on the sensitivity of 
force transducers which have not been pre-assembled may be 
determined by repeating the sensitivity calibration when the 
force transducer is remounted using different torques. 

8.9.4 Accelerometer transverse sensitivity 

Transverse-sensitivity calibrations shall be performed at a single 
frequency below 500 Hz. The transducer shall be mounted on a 
vibration exciter perpendicular to the transducer-sensing axis. 
Harmonic excitation shall be applied at a frequency where it is 
known that the shaker motion in a plane perpendicular to the 
sensing axis is at (east 100 times the motion in the direction of 



the sensing axis. For measurement of transverse-sensitivity 
ratios of much less than 1 %, the excitation requirements are 
more strict. Extreme care and skill are required to obtain valid 
values for such transverse sensitivities. 

The transducer shall be mounted and rotated about its sensing 
axis through 360°, in increments of 45° or less, to determine 
the maximum transverse response. If the transverse-sensitivity 
ratio exceeds 5 % of the axial sensitivity or changes significant- 
ly from an earlier calibration, the transducer should be further 
evaluated by performing supplementary calibrations or it 
should be repaired, as required. 

8.9.5 Strain effects 

The effect of strain on the sensitivity of a transducer can be 
measured by use of a simple cantilever beam, clamped to a rigid 
support. A suitable beam design would have a first natural fre- 
quency of approximately 5 Hz. The transducer shall be 
mounted on the cantilever beam at a suitable location. The 
strain shall be measured by strain gauges bonded to the beam 
near the transducer mounting. 

Details of the procedure for determining the effect of strain on 
the sensitivity of force transducers and impedance heads can 
be found in [121. 



9 Presentation of data 

The interpretation of mobility test data can be greatly enhanced 
by the use of a suitable graphic display. A variety of display for- 
mats is available to suit various applications. 



9.1 Logarithmic plotting 

At frequencies well below the lowest resonance or anti- 
resonance frequency of a structure, the magnitude of any of 
the three structural frequency-response functions follows an 
almost straight line on a plot of log magnitude versus log fre- 
quency. At frequencies well below the lowest resonance, the 
curve tends to be asymptotic to lines of constant compliance. 
Well below the lowest anti-resonance, the curve tends to be 
asymptotic to lines of constant mass. For mobility plots, com- 
pliance lines slope upwards at one magnitude decade per fre- 
quency decade and mass lines slope downwards at one 
magnitude decade per frequency decade, as shown in figure 1 . 

If accelerance or dynamic compliance data are plotted, the 
slopes of the mass and compliance lines change accordingly, as 
shown in figures 2 and 3. 

When plotting the results of mobility measurements with a 
logarithmic frequency scale, the magnitude and frequency 
scales should conform to the recommendations given in lEC 
Publication 263. A recommended format for plotting mobility 
data, including lines for mass and dynamic compliance, is 
shown in figure 4. 

NOTES 

1 In the system of SI units, lines for constant dynamic compliance, 
lines for constant nnobility and lines for constant mass, in increments of 
one decade of magnitude, always intersect at frequencies of 1 12n, 
10/271, 100/2n, etc. The frequency of 159 Hz (equivalent to 1000/2rcl is 
a convenient one for reference purposes, as shown in the examples in 
the lower part of figure 4. 



IS 14736 (Parti ) 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



1999 



2 In accordance with lEC Publication 263, the ratio of the length of 
the scale for a decade of magnitude to the length of the scale for a 
decade of frequency should be as 2/5. The format in figure 4 for plot- 
ting mobility data follows the 2/5 rule. 

3 Appropriate exponents to use as the power of 10 for mobility, mass 
and dynamic compliance should be determined from the test results to 
suit the data to be plotted and then noted on the plot. 



9.2 Alternative plotting methods 

Instead of plotting the nnagnitude and phase of the mobility test 
results, it is sometinnes advantageous to plot the real and im- 
aginary components as functions of frequency, as illustrated in 
figure 5. It may also be desirable to plot the test results in polar 
coordinates, as illustrated in figure 6 (Nyquist plot). The polar 



diagram has the advantage that the data may be enhanced by 
circle-fitting procedures. This may be important for extracting 
modal damping coefficients from the test data. 

NOTES 

1 In figure 6, the actual measured data points are connected by 
straight lines. These lines are not part of the measured data. They are 
shown as an aid to distinguishing between data points belonging to 
one mode of the structure and those belonging to a second mode. 

2 The fact that the straight lines connecting the measured data points 
in figure 6 do not approach a circle through the data points shows that 
not enough data points were measured near the resonance frequency 
to determine directly the true resonance frequency, peak response and 
damping of the modes. In order to identify these parameters properly, 
either more data points should be measured or a suitable circle-fitting 
procedure shall be applied to the measured dafa points. 



10 



IS 14736 (Parti ): 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



180-r 

135- 

90- 

45- 

0- 

-45- 

-90- 

-135- 

-180- 



-I r 



» 1 — I — r 



VJ 



-1 r 



T r 



-I 1 1 — r 




-« r 

Frequency, Hz 
Figure 1 — Typical graph of plotted mobility test results 



2 000 



11 



IS 14736 (Parti ) : 1999 
tSO 7626-1 : 1986 



180 



-D 



to 



135- 

90- 

45- 





-45- 

-90- 

-135- 

-180- 



10 



10' 






10' 



10 



-1 



■n 



LJ 



^ 



r 



m 



L 



^ I ■ . I 




2000 



Frequency, Hz 
Figure 2 - Accelerance graph corresponding to the mobifity graph plotted in figure 1 



12 



IS 14736 (Parti ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 




^000 



Figure 3 — Dynamic compliance graph corresponding to the mobility graph plotted in figure 1 



13 



i -90 



E 




O 

t 

.. -D 

-t. B) 

«o a. 

o> 



CO 



2000 



NOTE — At 159 Hz, the following sets of values apply: 

Mobility Compliance Mass 

10 3 m/(N.s) 10 6m/N 1,0 kg 

10-tm/(N.s) 10-7 m/N 10,0 kg 



Frequency, Hz 



Figure 4 — Paper for plotting mobility graph 



IS 14736 (Parti ):1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



2 

E 



1.0 



0.8 - 
0.6- 
0,4- 
0.2- 



i 

Q. 

I -0,2 



-0,4- 
-0,6- 
-0.8 

-1.0 



200 



1 — I — r 



T 



r4 



rr 



T 1 — I — r— t 

2 000 



1.0 



0,8 -j 
0,6- 
0.4- 
0.2- 
0- 



-0.2- 

-0.4- 

-0.6- 

-0.8 

-1,0 



200 



-\ r 1 — I — r 



U- 



\ — rH 



T 1 I 1 1 1 1 P 

Frequency, Hz Z vOvJ 



Figure 5 — Graph of the real and imaginary components of mobility corresponding to figure 1 



15 



IS 14736 (Parti): 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 




Real component, lO-^m/CN.s) 



Figure 6 — Polar diagram of the mobility results for the two lowest frequency modes in figure 1 



16 



IS 14736 (Parti ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



Annex A 
Relationship between mechanical impedance mobility and modal analysis 

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard.) 

A.I General 

The dynamic response of a mechanical system basically depends on two parameters, i.e. the exciting forces and the dynamic 
characteristics of the system. If the level of the exciting forces is within the range in which the system behaves essentially linearly, the 
system characteristics can be described in the frequency domain either by a mobility matrix [Y] or by an impedance matrix [Z], 
resulting in the following two equivalent relations between exciting forces and response velocities: 

{v/(a;)} = [rj{f (w)} ... (6) 

{Fioj)} = [ZJIv^lw)} ... (7) 

where 

tF {a>)\ is the column vector of the external dynamic forces expressed as functions of frequency, acting on the system at 
various points; 

{v (uj)\ is the column vector of the corresponding response velocities at all points of interest. 

NOTE — The term "point" designates a location and the associated direction. The term "coordinate" is often used with the same meaning as 
"point". 

The matrix notation of equations (6) and (7) is convenient because, in general, more than a single point on the structure has to be con- 
sidered. If jV is the number of points at which motion response is to be considered, plus any additional points at which external forces 
act (either exciting forces or reaction forces), the column vectors in equations (6) and (7) are of order N and the matrices are of order 

N X N. 

From equations (6) and (7), it follows that 

[Zl = [K]-i ... (8) 

It should be noted that the matrix inversion, expressed by equations (8), means that the elements Z,y of the impedance matrix are not 
arithmetic reciprocals of the elements Yjj of the mobility matrix, and vice versa. 



A. 2 Boundary conditions 

In mobility testing, a dynamic exciting force is supplied to the structure at one point at a time. Thus, 

Ff, = 0;k^j ... (9) 

where 

./' is the point of excitation; 

k denotes all other points of interest. 

Equation (9) defines the boundary conditions for experimental determinations of mechanical mobility. Given these boundary condi- 
tions, measurement of the velocity response at point / and of the force at J yields the ij element of the mobility matrix: 

^', = iv>Jf'jh^=.0:k.j ■•■ (10) 

This is tl^ie mathematical expression of the definition of mobility given in 4.2. 
It should be noted that the above boundary condition can easily be achieved in experimental procedures, 

17 



IS 14736 (Parti ) :1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



In contrast, the elements of the impedance matrix Z [equation (7)] are 

Zij = Fi/vj ... (11a) 

with the boundary conditions 

Vj^ = 0;k *J ... (lib) 

Equations (11a) and (lib) are the mathematical expressions of the definition of blocked impedance given in 4.3. The boundary condi- 
tions of equation (lib) are very difficult or impossible to achieve in practical experimental procedures. Thus, it is generally not possible 
to determine the elements of the impedance matrix [equation (7)1 by experimental means. 

The difference in the boundary conditions of equations (9) and (lib) is very important for the proper use of mobility and impedance 
data. It should be noted that this difference becomes irrelevant, however, in the special case in which a single point (and direction) on 
the structure (the driving point) is the only point of interest. 

This special case is not uncommon in practice. This accounts for the often-used definition of impedance as being the ratio of the 
exciting force to the velocity response, without specifying the boundary conditions. In this special case, the jmpedance matrix and the 
mobility matrix only have a single term, and, therefore, impedance is the arithmetic reciprocal of mobility. It should be noted that this 
special impedance is a free impedance as defined in 4.4. Thus, it is not an element of the general N x N impedance matrix of the 
structure. 



A. 3 Comparing impedance and mobility data 

Experimental investigations of the dynamic characteristics of structures result in mobility type data. In mathematical modelling, 
however, it is generally easier to use mass and stiffness matrices. In the frequency domain, these result in blocked impedance data. 
When comparing mobility and blocked impedance data, it is necessary to convert one into the form of the other. In doing this, special 
care shall be exercised because blocked mechanical impedance is not an invariant characteristic of a structure, but it is dependent 
upon the number of degrees of freedom considered (see [1]). The elements of an impedance matrix can, therefore, be compared with 
those of an inverted mobility matrix, only if all degrees of freedom of both matrices (points and directions) are identical. If the 
mathematical model (and its impedance matrix) has more degrees of freedom than the experimental mobility matrix, as will often be 
the case in practice, it is necessary to convert impedance to mobility to allow comparison with the corresponding elements of an 
experimentally-determined mobility matrix, rather than vice versa. This is so because mobility is free of artificial constraints, but 
impedance is not. 



A.4 Modal analysis 

Modal analysis is a very useful tool for linking experimental analysis with mathematical modelling. It is particularly convenient for 
predicting the dynamic interaction of interconnected sub-stuctures. 

When using experimental mobility data, modal analysis uses statistical methods to extract the modal parameters, including natural 
frequencies, damping and modal mass (or stiffness), within the frequency range of interest. A number of different methods are 
available for identifying these parameters accurately and taking into account the effect of modes outside the frequency range of 
interest. 

When using mathematical models, the modal parameters can be extracted from the computed mass, stiffness and damping matrices 
of the sub-structures by eigen-value/eigen-vector computation or other matrix reduction procedures. These procedures are often 
more efficient that the direct inversion of the entire impedance matrix. 



18 



IS 14736 (Parti ):1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



Annex B 
Mobility as a frequency-response function 

(This annex does not form part of the standard.) 

B.I Harmonic excitation 

When a time function can be expressed as 

x(r) = A cos(a>? + <P) ... (12) 

where 

A is the amplitude of the harmonic waveform; 

oj is the circular frequency, in radians per second ; 

t is the time, in seconds; 

<P is an initial phase angle, in radians, 
the function can be represented on a complex plane as 

xU) = /le)i^'+ '^> ... (13) 

where 

x{t) is the projection of x{t) on the real axis. 

x(t) can be thought of as a rotating vector centred at the origin of the complex plane. This rotating vector is commonly called a 
"phasor" 1'. If the ratio of two phasors is formed at a given frequency, the result is a complex number, and is not a function of time. If 
a set of these complex numbers is formed for all frequencies of interest, the result is called a frequency-response function. For exam- 
ple, if the two phasors are 

x^{oj,t) = /li(a»)eil^' + *il''j'l 

X2(oj,t) = /l2<'^>e'''-'" ^ *2l(^'l 
then 

H[oj) = — = B(a>)eiei'"> ... (14) 

where 

B(w) = A^{cu)IA2{aj) 
diio) = (tyUo) - ^2'<^' 

Both B(u)) and d{a>) are functions of the frequency cy. The frequency-response function, Hito), can be expressed in polar form by the 
amplitude and phase [Blto) and 6(cy) above] or in rectangular form as real and imaginary components: 

//(w) = R(a}) + i/(w) ... (15) 

where 

R(uj) = B(aj) cos 9{(jj] 
Koj) = B(oj) sin 6(m) 

Mobility can be considered as a frequency-response function given by the ratio of the velocity and force phasors. Similar arguments 
can be made for the other mobility-like quantities. 



1) Some authors define the phasor as /lei*. Both definitions are consistent with the use of the term "phasor" in this part of ISO 7626 because this 
part of ISO 7626 is only concerned with the ratio of phasors. 

19 



IS 14736 (Parti ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



B.2 Random excitation 

In random vibration with a stationary Gaussian distribution, a fundamental equation that relates the output and input of a linear 
bilateral system is 

G^2{(o) = f^{aj)G22ioyi ... (16) 

where 

Gi2(to) is the cross-spectral density between the input and output of the system; 
Hioj) is the frequency-response function of the system; 
G22(t<j) is the auto-spectral density of the input. 

Gi2 is a complex function of frequency and G22 is a real function of frequency; hence, Hico) is a complex function of frequency. 
Mobility can be considered as a frequency-response function given by the ratio of the cross-spectral density between the velocity and 
force excitation to the auto-spectral density of the force excitation, the input. In actual practice, only estimates of the cross- and auto- 
spectra are available. Hence, mobilities can only be estimated using a random excitation. The estimation errors can be made less than 
other measurement errors and do not necessarily limit the accuracy of the measurements. 



B.3 Transient excitation 

In transient vibrations, the input and response of a line'ar system can be related through the expression 

Xi(w) = H{oj)X2{aj] ... (17) 

where 

X^lco) is the Fourier transform of the output, A'i(?) ; 
X2{co) is the Fourier transform of the input, X2{t); 
H{a>) is the frequency-response function of the system. 

All of the quantities in equation (17) are complex functions of frequency. The inverse Fourier transform of Hioj) is the unit impulse 
response function, hit), of the system; that is, if a unit impulse is applied to the input, the system output is given hy h{t). Mobility can 
be considered as a frequency-response function given by the ratio of the Fourier transforms of the time histories of the velocity 
response and of the input force. 

In actual practice, the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is used as an approximation of the continuous Fourier transform. Careful 
selection of sample rate and sample size can reduce the errors of this approximation to levels less than other measurement errors. The 
use of the DFT does not, therefore, necessarily limit the accuracy of the measurements. 



20 



IS 14736 (Parti ) :1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



Annex C 
Determination of impedance-head attachment compliance and damping 

(This annex does not form an integral part of the standard.) 



Overall calibration and determination of the sensitivity of a mobility measurement set-up, including the attachment hardware between 
the vibration exciter and the structure under test, may be accomplished using the following test procedure. This procedure also pro- 
vides data on the attachment compliance and the structural damping of the impedance head (see [10)1. 

The test shall be carried out by mounting a large rigid block on a sufficiently compliant support so that the natural frequency of the 
block on the compliant support is 2 Hz or less. A cylindrical block of sufficient mass should be used to place the anti-resonance fre- 
quency well within the frequency range of interest. The magnitude, in kilograms, of the appropriate mass, m; may be estimated from 

m = 1/[(23t/)2C] .-. (18) 

where 

/ is a convenient frequency, in hertz, in the upper part of the frequency range over which mechanical mobility measurements are 
to be carried out; 

C is an estimate of the compliance, in metres per newton, of the impedance head and the attachment hardware between the 
force transducer and the structure under test. 

In order to design the compliant support for the calibration block, rearrangement of equation (18) yields the minimum required sup- 
port compliance, C^: 

C3= 1/[(27i/3)2m] ... (19) 

where 

/s is the natural frequency, in hertz, for the mass of the supported block (2 Hz or lower); 

m is the mass, in kilograms, of the block selected for the test. 

The impedance head (or the force transducer) should be mounted colinear with the centre of gravity of the calibration block. The 
transducer manufacturer's specifications for mounting bolt torque should be closely adhered to. The mounting hardware should be as 
closely as possible identical to that to be used when testing the structure. The vibration exciter should be attached to the impedance 
head (or to the force transducer) in the manner to be used in the mobility test. The vibration exciter should be supplied with the same 
type of excitation waveform which is to be used during the mobility test. The range of frequencies to be used for the test with the 
calibration block should extend beyond the frequency range of interest at the high end. The mathematical model for this calibration 
test set-up is given in [4]. 

The output signals from the force transducer and the motion-response transducers should be processed in the same way as for the 
mobility test and should be plotted as either a mobility or accelerance curve on suitable graph paper. 

The curve will appear in the typical form as shown in figure 7 for mobility data. The results shown in figure 7 were obtained with a 
calibration block having a mass of 5,5 kg and represent a rather typical attachment compliance of the impedance head of about 
8 X 10-^0 m/N. In the frequency range from 30 to 1 1(X) Hz, the measured mobility curve closely approaches that of the mass of the 
block used for the calibration, plus the mass of the impedance head below the force transducer, combined with the mass of the at- 
tachment hardware. If the mass indicated by the low-frequency portion of the results of the mobility test does not equal the total 
calibration system mass, the mobility measuring system has failings which should be corrected. Inadequate sensitivity, incorrect 
calibration or electronic instrument problems are likely causes. 

The anti-resonance (response dip) in the measured mobility curve at 2 400 Hz indicates that, at that frequency, the mobility of the 
caiibration block has the same magnitude as that due to the attachment compliance of the impedance head. Since the two mobilities 
have essentially opposite phase, the total mobility magnitude tends towards zero at the anti-resonance frequency. It remains finite 
because of damping at the interface between the impedance head and the calibration block. This also accounts for the 0° phase angle 
at the anti-resonance. 

21 



IS 14736 {Parti ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 : 1986 



At frequencies above the 2 400 Hz anti-resonance, the measured mobility curve approaches asymptotically the series combination of 
the compliance of the mounting hardware and that of the impedance head itself. It may be difficult to check the total compliance if the 
attachment has considerable damping. If the anti-resonance dip is not very sharp, the mobility curve will not approach the effective 
compliance asymptote at high frequencies. 

NOTE - The irregularity at 4600 Hz in the measured mobility curve shown in figure 7 is the result of a transverse rocking mode of the impedance head 
about its attachment point. 

If the overall calibration and sensitivity test is extended to sufficiently high frequencies, the mobility curve becomes controlled by the 
effective damping of the impedance head and its mounting hardware. The magnitude of the effective damping can seldom be com- 
puted. Thus, the test described in this annex is the only practical way to determine how much damping is present in the coupling of 
the force transducer to the structure to be tested. 



4-180 

c 

1-360 





























n 








J 




































































































































































/ 




■T 










r 


— 



10" 



10" 



% 10 

o 



-5 



10 



-6 



10" 



^ 


"N 







'■ 1 













C=l 


— 


:::: 


■^ 






\ 






— 


— 


— 




- 


C=3 






^ 


te 




















































^ 


,^ ^ 




















































^^-^^ 










































1 






FP 


"^ 


....^^^ 


r=^ 




1 — ' 


.^^ 


























^ 


-■— M 








— _ 












^ 


— 1 




— 1 


















— 




5 


;=a 












^ 












V 


^ 












1 








^ ■ 






























s 










J 




,^ 






































\ 


"^ 






1 


^ 
















> 






1 . 














. 




— ■ 


-X^ 




^ 


\ 
























n 


>- 




1 








— 


"— 




ti 


^==^ 




^=^ 


— i 


— 


— 


~ 




— 
















































' 


_,. 


- 






















































— 

































































— 














-^^ 








\ / 






1=3 








c= 


r 












~ 


:: 












— 


~" 




III 












~ 


"ZZ. 




^ 




















































^~ 












































'~~ 






■" 


^— . 


t 






























































. 


•■M 












_ 


_ 




I— 1 


\ • 












r 






— ' 



30 



100. 



1000 



10 000 



Frequency, Hz 



Figure 7 — Example of test results showing the effect of impedance-head attachment compliance (256 averages) 



22 



IS 14736 (Parti ) : 1999 
ISO 7626-1 :1986 



Bibliography 



[I) O'Hara, G.J. Mechanical Impedance and Mobility Concepts, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 41, 1967: pp. 1180-1184. 

[2] EwiNS, D.J. Measurement and Application of Mechanical Impedance Data, Parts 1, 2 and 3, J. Soc. Environ. Eng. Vol. 14.3, 
15,1 and 15.2, Dec. 1975 - June 1976. 

[31 Sainsbury, M.G. and EwiNS, D.J. Vibration Analysis of a Damped Machinery Foundation Structure Using the Dynamic Stiff- 
ness Coupling Technique Transactions ASME, J. Eng. Ind. 96, Aug. 1974: pp. 1000-1005. 

[41 HtxsoN, E.J. Mechanical Impedance, in Shock and Vibration Handboo/( (2nd ed.), ed. Harris, CM. and Crede, C.E., 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1976: chap. 10. 

[51 Rubin, S. Mechanical Immittance- and Transmission-Matrix Concepts, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 41, 1967: pp. 1171-1179. 

[6] EwiNS, D.J. Whys and Wherefores of Modal Testing, J. Soc. Environ. Eng. 18-3, 1979: pp. 3-19. 

[71 EwiNS, D.J. and Griffin, J, A State-of-the-Art Assessment of Mobility Measurement Techniques — Results for the Mid-Range 
Structures (30-3000 Hz), J. Sound and Vibration 1^(2) , 1981: pp. \°i7-'222. 

[8] EwiNS, D.J. State-of-the-Art Assessment of Mobility Measurements, A Summary of European Results, Shocit Vib. Buff. 51, 
1981; Part 1, pp. 15-35. 

[91 EwiNS, D.J. State-of-the-Art Assessment of Mobility Measurement Techniques, J. Soc. Environ. Eng. 20(1), March 1981: 
pp. 3-13. 

[10] Brownjohn, J.M.W., Steele, G.H., Cawley, P. and Adams, R.D. Errors in Mechanical Impedance Data Obtained with Im- 
pedance Heads, J. Sound and Vibration 73, 1980: pp. 461-468. 

[II] Klaassen, K.B. Piezoelectric Accelerometers in Modern Electronic IVIeasuring Systems, ed. Regtien, P.P.L., Delft University 
Press, Delft, Netherlands, 1978: chap. III. 

[12] BoucHE, R.K. Calibration of Shock and Vibration Measuring Transducers, Monograph SVM-H, The Shock and Vibration In- 
formation Center, U.S. Department of Defense, 1979. 

[13] Cansdale, R., Gaukroger, D.R. and Skingle, C.W. A Technique for Measuring Impedances of a Spinning Model Rotor, 
Technical Report TR 71092, Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, United Kingdom, May 1971. 



23 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, 
type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
(Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such 
review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, 
it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 
'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LM 04 (0247). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31 , 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : fvlanak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

NEW DELHI 110 002 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

r 323 76 17 
I 323 38 41 



Eastern 



Northern 



Southern 



V\/estern 



1/14 C. l.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 

SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
C. l.T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



("337 84 99,337 85 61 
I 337 86 26, 337 91 20 

r 60 38 43 
1 60 20 25 

r 235 02 16,235 04 42 
I 235 15 19,235 23 15 

/ 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
I 832 78 91,832 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIf^BATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



