**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11105 (2004) : Design and Construction of Tunnel Plugs - 
Code of Practice [WRD 14: Water Conductor Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1811105:2004 

f Wc77 ^^mi ) 

Indian Standard 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNEL 
PLUGS — CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 93.16 



© BIS 2004 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 



August 2004 Price Group 5 



Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee, WRD 14 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 

Diversion tunnels are constructed to divert water of a river during construction stage of a dam. These tunnels 
would need to be suitably plugged after the utilization of diversion works. The tunnel plugs resist the entire 
unbalanced water pressure and transfer it to the surrounding rock. The seepage/leakage is kept to a minimum 

manageable quantity. 

To facilitate construction, adits are provided at one or more intermediate points of long tunnels. These adits have 
to be suitably plugged before commissioning of the tunnels. 

This standard was first published in 1984. This revision has been taken up to include construction aspects of the 
tunnel plugs to make this standard comprehensive. 

There is no ISO Standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared taking into consideration the practices 
prevalent in the field in India. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofatest or analysis, shall be rounded offin accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)' . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in tiiis standard. 



1811105:2004 



Indian Standard 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNEL 
PLUGS — CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers design and construction 
aspects of tunnel plugs including keys, concreting, 
grouting and cooling of concrete. 

L2 This standard does not cover the criteria for 
suitability or otherwise of providing solid concrete plug 
or concrete plug with gated access for facilitating 
inspection. 

13 This standard does not cover design of adit section, 
structural design of gate and its recess in the body of 
the plug. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



IS No, 

456 : 2000 

457 : 1957 



5878: 
(Part 7) 1972 

14591 : 1999 
3 MATERIAL 



Title 
Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 
Code of practice for general 
construction of plain and reinforced 
concrete for dams and other massive 
structures 

Code of practice for construction of 
tunnels conveying water: Part 7 
Grouting 

Temperature control of mass concrete 
for dams — Guidelines 



Plain and reinforced concrete/work shall conform to 
IS 456. 

4 LOCATION 

4.1 For permitting utilization of diversion tunnels as 
spillway tunnels, outlet tunnels, tail race tunnels, etc, 
the plugs shall be placed immediately upstream of the 



intersection point of the diversion tunnel with the 
vertical/inclined shaft, water conductor tunnel, etc. 
Additional concrete may be required to be placed 
for necessary hydraulic profile at the junction (see 
Fig. I). 

4.2 For plugging construction adits, solid concrete 
plugs shall be provided at their junctions with main 
tunnel. Gates if provided, shall be as close to the tunnel 
as possible to cause minimum hydraulic losses. It shall 
open inside the tunnel so that water pressure shall force 
closure and sealing of gates (see Fig. 2). 

5 TYPES OF PLUGS 

Plugs are mainly classified as: 

a) Solid concrete plug (see Fig. 1); and 

b) Gated plug (concrete plug with gated opening, 
see Fig. 2). 

6 CONSTRUCTION FEATURES OF THE 
CONCRETE PLUG 

6.1 Wedge shaped keys are generally provided for 
better plug action. 

6.2 Keys shall be provided in rock/concrete interface 
and within concrete to ensure effective plug action by 
providing adequate bearing of the plug concrete on 
the tunnel lining or plug concrete/tunnel lining on the 
surrounding rock. The keyways in the tunnel lining 
may be filled up with lean concrete/wood packing/ 
masonry to ensure smooth flow of water during 
diversion stage and this shall be removed prior to the 
concreting of the plug. 

6.3 Keyways provided in the first stage plug concrete 
shall be designed for anticipated horizontal thrust. 
Keyways thus provided shall be filled up with the 
material given in 6.2 so long as the tunnel is used for 
restricted flow purposes. 

6.4 The solid concrete plug may be provided in 
stages where required from operational/functional 
requirements for diversion tunnels (see Fig. I). For 
ensuring proper bonding between existing and 
subsequent stages of concrete chipping/roughening of 



1811105:2004 



LU 

2 
Z 

H 

UL 
O 
< 
Q 



LENGTH OF 
CONCRETE PLUG 



G.L OF INTAKE 
STRUCTURE 




legend: 



\y^ 



INITIAL LINING 
CONCRETE 

FIRST STAGE 
CONCRETE 

SECOND STAGE 
CONCRETE 



SECOND STAGE 
CONCRETE 




C.L. OF TUNNEL 



INITIAL UNIN6 
CONCRETE 



FIRST STAGE 
CONCRETE 



SECTION X-X 



Fig. 1 Typical Section (Showing Concrete Plug IN Stages) 



C.LOF TUNNEL 




C.L. OF GALLERY 



CLOFADIT 



PLAN 



CLOFADIT 



PLUG CONCRETE 
(2ND STAGE) 



INITIAL CONCRETE 
(1ST STAGE CONCRETE) 



PERFECT CONTACT 
WITH 2ND STAGE 
CONCRETE 




Fig. 2 Plan Showing Gated Plug 



GALLERY 



DRAIN 



ENLARGED 
SECTION X -X 



c/i 



o 



K> 



18 11105:2004 



existing concrete should be carried out along with 
provision for suitable dowels. 

6.5 The reinforcement of the tunnel lining shall be so 
placed that this does not get damaged and hinder during 
the chipping of concrete keys. 

6.6 The length of concrete plug in the tunnel if 
provided, without keys will depend mainly upon 
frictional resistance offered by the surrounding initial 
concrete or rock and bearing on the rock depending 
upon shape of the plug. 

6.7 Adequate provisions shall be made for dewatering 
during construction. 

6.8 To facilitate grouting a gallery may also be left in 
the plug wherever required. 

7 DESIGN OF PLUG 

7.1 Design Head 

7.1.1 Plugs in the tunnel are designed for the maximum 
reservoir level with no flow or minimum flow in the 
tunnel 

7.1.2 Allowance shall be made for increase in water 
head in reservoir due to any rare situations like wave 
build up, surge and water hammer effects, if applicable, 
in case of sudden stoppage of flow in the tunnel. 

7.2 Plug Length 

7.2.1 The length of the plug shall not be less than the 
excavated diameter of the tunnel. The overall length of 
the plug may be increased to keep an allowance for seals 
at the near ends. The plug length may be calculated based 
on any of the following formulae as applicable: 

Hydrostatic f(M-ce on the 
plug due to water head 



a) Length of the plug > 



Permissible average 
shear stress x Perimeter 
of tunnel section 

Hydrostatic force on the 
plug due to water head 

Frictional resistance per 
unit length of the plug 

Hydrostatic force on the 
plug due to water head 

Frictional resistance of 
plug and shear resistance 
of anchors per unit 
length of the plug 
NOTES 

1 Value of permissible average shear stress/shear friction 
between the plug and surrounding concrete/rock shall allow 
for any imperfections in contact grouting between the plug 
and the tunnel lining. Conservative values with ample safety 
factors shall be considered. 



b) Length of the plug > 



c) Length of the plug > 



2 Values of permissible shear and frictional resistance shall be 
validated where required at site. 

7.2.2 It is preferable to provide the whole length of 
plug in one block without any construction joint. 

8 DEPTH OF KEY WAYS 

8.1 Key in Concrete/Rock 

The depth of key may be calculated from the average 
bearing stress in concrete/rock from the following 
formula. The permissible stresses in concrete shall be 
in accordance with IS 456. In many cases the stresses 
m concrete will govern as rock would be generally 
stronger than concrete. 



Average bearing = 
stre^ 



Hydrostatic force on the plug 

Effective projected bearing 
area 



NOTES 

1 Effective projected bearing area shall be assumed 75 percent 
of the total projected bearing area of the keys to allow 
imperfections in grouting. 

2 The depth of any key where feasible shall not be less than 
450 mm. 

9 GROUTING 

9.1 General 

9.1.1 Grouting is required to improve the quality of 
the rock by filling the fissures/voids of the rock 
surrounding the plug. This shall also be done to ensure 
better shear friction. 

9.2 Types of Grouting 

9.2.1 Following are the two types of grouting: 

a) Consolidation grouting, and 

b) Contact grouting. 

9.2.1.1 Consolidation grouting is done to improve the 
quality of bearing rock in the vicinity of plug and to 
reduce leakage at that location. In poor rocks, 
consolidation grouting is done to make good any fissures 
in the rock which may either be existing previously or 
caused during tunnel driving. Consolidation grouting 
also reduces ti\e possible leakage through the rock. 
Consolidation grouting of the rock surrounding the 
plug shall be done prior to the placement of the plug 
(see Fig. 3). 

9.2.1.2 Contact grouting is low pressure grouting 
through shallow holes. Contact grouting shall be done 
to fill any cracks developed at the interfaces on account 
of shrinkage of concrete and to ensure better shear 
friction and prevent excessive leakage along the contact 
of plug concrete and rock/tunnel lining. It shall be done 



IS 11105: 2004 



C.L.OFADIT 



PLUG CONCRETE 




CONSOLIDATION 
GROUT HOLES 



INITIAL LINING 
CONCRETE 



Fig. 3 Typical Section (Showing Consolidation Grouting) 



from the outer ends of the plugs by means of system 
of supply, return and vent headers embedded in the 
plug concrete. Contact grouting shall be done after 6 
weeks of concreting the plug {see Fig. 4). 



9.2.1.3 In case of gated plug, contact grouting may 
also be done by direct holes from the gallery. 

9.2.1.4 Grouting of rock surrounding the plug shall 
conform to IS 5878 (Part 7). 



CLOFADIT 
AIR VENT 




CONTACT GROUTING 
H0LE5 

INITIAL LINING 
CONCRETE 



Fig. 4 Typical Section (Showing Contract Grouting) 



18 11105:2004 



9.2.L5 In case of excessive leakage grouting using 
micro cement and/or chemical grout shall be done to 
achieve the desired result. 

10 COOLING OF CONCRETE 

10.1 Plug concrete shall be placed at temperatures to 
be determined based on cooling studies for concrete 
(see IS 14591 and other specialist literature). In 
absence of such studies plug concreting can be done 
at a placement temperature of 13*^0. In case 
precooling of concrete is not possible, then post- 
cooling may be done by circulating chilled water 
through coils of thin tubing installed on top of each 
lift of concrete (see Fig. 5). 

10.2 Special care shall be taken at lift joints to ensure 
adequate shear resistance. 

10.3 In case of gated plugs, cooling of concrete may 
not be required, if concreting is done in stages to reduce 
the thickness of concrete. Keys shall be provided in 
first stage concrete for transferring the water head 
which is acting on the second stage of concrete . 

11 ANCHORAGE OF MAIN TUNNEL LINING 
IN PLUG CONCRETE 

11.1 In case of gated plug, full circular shape of lining 
gets broken by the access opening through the plug. 
The main tunnel lining would have to be supported 
with suitable arrangements. The lining may be 
supported on portal and concreting of this frame shall 



be done monolithic with the lining of main tunnel. 
Fig. 6 shows main tunnel lining of the plug access 
portion (supported on the rectangular frame around 
the access through plug). 

11.2 In the portion, where main tunnel lining gets 
broken by the access opening through the plug, the 
tunnel invert and overt shall be anchored to the 
existing rock, as shown in Fig. 6, so that the loads 
acting on the straight leg between invert and portal, 
and overt and portal are not transferred to the tunnel 
lining. 

12 BLOCKOUT FOR GATE 

12.1 Blockouts for embedments of gate shall be 
suitably anchored into the plug concrete. 

12.2 Double water seals shall be provided in the 
blockout to check leakage of water through the joints 
between the plug concrete and blockouts. 

13 CLEARANCE OF SILT IN GATE CHAMBER 

13.1 In case of gated plugs with access through the 
plug, there are chances of silt deposits in gate chamber 
behind the gate. This deposited silt needs clearance to 
avoid any difficulty in operation of the gate. 

13.2 Suitable arrangements shall be provided to 
remove the anticipated silt. This may be done by 
injecting air/water jet under pressure through the 
access of plug. 



CLOFADIT 



INITIAL LINING 
CONCRETE 



PLUG CONCRETE 




COOLING TUBES 



LIFT LINES 



Fig. 5 Typical Section (Showing Cooling Arrangement) 

6 



IS 11105 : 2004 



n 



>^ ANCHORS 
[>-';ry>:;A:r:/:':.<„r ^-;'.v,*-/..'^ 'X y x 



* ■ '*'. ■ 



FIRST STAGE- 
CONCRETE 



SECOND STAGE 
CONCRETE 



PORTAL 
GATE CHAMBER 







HEAD PACE TUNNEL 
(H.R.T) 



Fig. 6A Plan at Junction of H.R.T. with Adit 



18 11105:2004 



r ANCHORS 



HOOP REINFORCEMENT 



DISTRIBUTION 
REINFORCEMENT 



SHEAR STRIRRUPS- 




> STRAIGHT BEAM- 

MAIN REINFORCEMENT 



BOTTOM BEAM 
OF PORTAL 



MULTILEG SHEAR STIRRUPS 



ANCHORS 



SECTION X - X 



Fig, 6B Anchorage of Main Tunnel Lining 



IS 11105: 2004 



ANNEX A 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee, WRD 14 



Organization 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board, Hyderabad 

Assam State Electricity Board, Guwahati 

Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township, 
Himachal Pradesh 

Central Mining Research Institute, Rooritee 

Central Soil and Material Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Consulting Engineering Services (India) Ltd, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Faridabad 

Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board, Sundernagar 

Irrigation Department, Govt of Haryana, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Govt of Maharashtra, Nashik 

Irrigation Department, Govt of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Govt of UP, Roorkee 

Irrigation Department, Govt of Kamataka, Gulbarga District 

Jaiprakash Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Bangalore 

Kerala State Electricity Board, Thiruvananthapuram 
Nathpa Jhakri Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 

North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, Shillong 

Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 



Representative (s) 
Shri D. K. Mehta (Chairman) 

CfflEF Engineer (Civil) 

Superintending Engineer (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Civil) 

ADDmoNAL Chief Engineer (DES) (Alternate) 

Chief EwaNEER (BSL) 

Director (Water Regulation) (Alternate) 

Dr V. V. R. Prasad 

Shri Anil Swaruf (Alternate) 

Director 

Deputy Director (RM) (Alternate) 

Dr L Azaraiah 

Shri R. M. Sinnarkar (Alternate) 

'Director (SSPH ) 

Director (HCD) (NW&S) (Alternate) 

Shri V. K. Kapur 

Shri T. K. Das (Alternate) 

Shri G. K. Kaistha 

Shri D. N. Bhattacharyva (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Design) 

Superintending Engineer (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Canals) 

Superintending Engineer (CDO) (Alternate) 

Superintending Engineer 

Executive Engineer (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Civil) 

Superintending Engineer (SCC) (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Design) 

Superintending Engineer (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer 

Deputy Chief Engineer (Alternate) 

Shri D. G. Kadkade 

Shri Narendra Singh (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Civil Design) 

Superintending Engineer (Alternate) 

Deputy Chief Engineer (Civil) 

Director (Civil) 

Shri R. K. Sharma (Alternate) 

Shri V. K. Gupia 

Shri Satyanarayan (Alternate) 

Shri A. C. Goswami 

Shri Utpal Bora (Alternate) 

Shri M. Durairaj 



1811105:2004 

Organization 

RJ. Shah & Co Ltd, Mumbai 

Rashtrya Pariyojana, Nirman Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 

Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Tamil Nadu 

Tehri Hydro Development Corporation Ltd, Rishikesh 

TEXMACO Limited, Kolkata 

Water & Power Consultancy Services (I) Ltd, New Delhi 

Water Resources Development Centre, Roorkee 

BIS Directorate General 



Representative (s) 

Shri S. M. Shah 

Shri S. V. Patwardhan 

Shri R, C. Rastogi {Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Hydro Project) 

Superintending Engineer {Alternate) 

Shri G. M. Prasad 

Shri Shailendra Singh {Alternate) 

Shri S. R. Sinha 

Shri Sujit Banerjee {Alternate) 

Shri P. L. Diwan 

Shri A. P. Chowdhury {Alternate) 

Dr Nayan Sharma 

Dr B. N. Asthana {Alternate) 

Shri S. S. Sethi, Director & Head (WRD) 
[Representing Director General {Ex-officio)] 



Member-Secretary 

Shrimati Rosy Dhawan 

Joint Director (WRD), BIS 



10 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in -the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 14 (274). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 9402 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : CT.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

/ 2323 7617 
\ 2323 3841 

r2337 8499, 2337 8561 
12337 8626,2337 9120 



{ 



60 3843 
60 9285 



("2254 1216,2254 1442 
\2254 2519,2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
\2832 7891, 2832 7892 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at R-abhat Offset Press, New DeIhi-2 



