**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 10485 (1983) : Code of practice for the installation of 
single and community antenna systems for the reception of 
sound and television broadcasting [LITD 12: Transmitting 
Equipment for Radio Communication] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Be |04BI- IVfi) 

r J. f, , , Resffinred 19^9' 
imuan Standard (Reaffirmed 2003) 

CODE OF PRACTfCI^ FOR INSTALLATION 

OF SINGLE AND COMMUNITY ANTENNA 

SYSTEMS FOR RECEPTION OF SOUND 

AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 



UDC 621 '396-67 005 ( 026 ) ■ 621-397 13 




© Copyright 1933 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVA^, 9 BAHADUR SHATI J^AKAK MARG 

NEW riElJil 1 J 0002 

^""^ Jiity[9%2 



tS i 10465 - 1963 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION 

OF SINGLE AND COMMUNITY ANTENNA 

SYSTEMS FOR RECEPTION OF SOUND 

AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 

Radio Communications Sectional Committee, LTDG 20 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi H. S. Jolly All India Radio, New Delhi 

Members 

Shbi O. P. KausHtr ( Alternate to 
Shri H. S. Jolly ) 
Additional Dikeotob Standards Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
(S&T),RDSO 
Joint Director Standards 
( S&T )-lV, RDSO ( Alternate ) 
Cdb S. S. Baidwan Ministry of Defence ( DPI ) ( N ) 

Lt a. Bhowmiok ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Basak Small Scale Industries Development Commis- 

sioner, New Delhi 
Shri P. P. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. M. Bhatnagar Indian Television Manufacturers ' Association, 

New Delhi 
Shri H. S. Chandramouli Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. Ramaseshu ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. G. Deodhar Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing 

( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi 
Shri M. L, Dhab Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Dhingra ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Ghosh Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. Kbishnan Kutty ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. C. Mukherjbb ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Gupta The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers 

Association (RETMA), Bombay 
Shri T. S. B0XI ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Gupta Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Saohdbv ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Hajela Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication 

Engineers, New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



(g) Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS i 10485 -1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi Jagjit Singh Federation of Association of Small Industries of 

India, New Delhi 
Shei R. S. Kale Police Wireless ( Directorate of Coordination ) 

( Ministry of Home Affairs ), New Delhi 
Shbi S. Janakibaman ( Alternate ) 
Col K. V. Ktjdva Ministry of Defence ( DPIL ) 

Lt-Col Keishan Lal ( Alternate ) 
Db S. p. Luthba Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shbi R. C. Pandey Ministry of Defence ( DTD&P ) ( AIR ) 

Shei T. V. Vaeadeajan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. N. Peasad Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi M. G. Seidhaean ( Alternate ) 
Shei K. P. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi 

Shei K. B. Borkbe ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Ranqole Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani 
Shei H. K. Jain { Alternate ) 
Shei M. Sankaealingam Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shei R. S. Aeoea ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. P. Saxbna Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi 

Shbi N. K. Mangla ( Alternate ) 
Shei S. Shaema Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

De K. S. K. Sai ( Alternate ) 
Shei G. G. Sxtbeamanyan Electronics Trade and Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Shei Ishwae Dutt ( Alternate ) 
Shei Surbsh Chandra National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shei K. K. Taneja Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shei H. S. Dubey ( Alternate ) 
Shei C. M. Thibttmuethy Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Shei R. C. Jain, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Head ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shei D. K. Nayyau 
Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS] 

Panel for Receiving Aerials, LTDG 20/P4 

Convener 
Shei P. K. Ranqole Central Electronics Engineering Research Insti- 

tute ( CEERI ), Pilani 
Members 

Dr M. D. Singh ( Alternate to 
Shri P. K. Rangole ) 
Shki a. K. Bansal Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New 

Delhi 
Shri B. K. Kochae ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 33 ) 



IS : 10485 ■ 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION 

OF SINGLE AND COMMUNITY ANTENNA 

SYSTEMS FOR RECEPTION OF SOUND 

AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 18 February 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Com- 
munications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics 
and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 This code of practice is intended for the guidance of manufacturers 
and customers of single and community antenna systems for the reception 
of sound and television broadcasting. 

0.3 This code of practice is based on British Standard CP 1020-1973 
'The reception of sound and television broadcasting', issued by British 
Standards Institution. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code of practice recommends erection and cabling of single and 
community antenna systems (that is, antennae and associated equipment) 
for good reception of sound and television broadcasts. It includes the 
protection of such systems against atmospheric electricity and recom- 
mendations for the certification of the systems. 

Note 1 — Compliance with the recommendations given in this code does not 
confer immunity from relevant legal requirements, if any. 

Note 2 — The single or community antenna system is supposed to feed to the 
proper receiving apparatus covered by relevant Indian Standards such as IS : 615- 
1966*, IS : 4547-1978t and IS : 6759-1972J. 



♦Minimum requirements of domestic radio receivers ( revised), 

^Specification for receivers for monochrome television broadcast transmissions 
(first revision ). 

{Requirements for radio receivers for frequency modulation broadcast transmissions. 



Is : 10485 - 1983 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the following terms and definitions 
in addition to those already specified in IS : 1885 ( Parts XVIII to XXII)- 
1967* shall apply. 

2.2 Antenna — A single element or an assembly of elements so spaced 
and connected as to have the necessary receiving properties. 

2.3 Antenna Cable — A cable connecting an antenna to its associated 
terminal equipment. 

2.4 Antenna Mast — The supporting structure for an antenna, including 
any brackets, struts and stays. 

2.5 Antenna System — A system comprising one or more antennae On a 
single mast, the appropriate single-cable distribution system, and other 
appropriate components, which will enable the intended reception of sound 
or television broadcasts. 

2.6 Bonding — The connection of a circuit or a component ( that is re- 
quired to be bonded ) to the metallic cold water mains or electricity supply 
earth point ( where permitted ), by means of a conductor or conductors 
in such a manner that a resistance of 0*2 ohm is not exceeded and a cur- 
rent of 30 A may be carried for a period of 5 s. 

2.7 Channel Converter — A device for changing the carrier frequencies 
of all the signals in a particular channel before the signals are transmitted 
on a cable distribution system. 

2.8 Community Antenna System — A common antenna system serving 
a group of independent users ( for example, households, business concerns, 
etc. ) and in which signals received by the antenna system are distributed, 
by a cable distribution system, to a number of television or sound recei- 
vers or both. 

2.9 Cross Modulation — The modulation, arising from the interaction 
of the radio frequency signals in nonlinear circuits, of a wanted signal by 
the modulation of an unwanted signal on a different carrier frequency. 

2.10 Head End — Any equipment that is connected between one or more 
antennae or other signal sources and the distribution network in order to 
process the signals that are to be distributed. 



♦Electrotechnical vocabulary : 

Part XVni General terms on radio communications. 
Part XIX Radio communication circuits. 
Part XX Radiowave propagation. 
Part XXf Aerials. 
Part XXII Equipments for radio communications, transmitting and receiving. 



is : i0485 - 196S 

2.11 Mutual Attenuation — The attenuation at specified frequencies, 
between any two outlet sockets within a distribution system. 

2.12 Outlet Socket — A socket provided for the connection of a 
standard receiver ( sound or television or both ) to the antenna system. 

3. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 

3.1 Installation Requirements — The initial and ultimate requirements 
should be ascertained by the contract or from the client. On the basis of 
this information a specification, drawings and schedule of requirements 
should be prepared and should include as appropriate: 

a) broadcast services to be received; 

b) number, location and finish of distribution points; 

c) location of central equipment; 

d) location of aerials; 

e) signal levels at the outlets; 

f) anticipation of future requiremets; and 

g) operating and safety instructions. 

Note — The above practice is essential for cable distribution system and 
desimable for systems with single outlet to a receiver. In case of contracts for 
buildings under construction the architect and the consultant as appropriate should 
also be made parties to the contract. 

4. TIME SCHEDULE 

4.1 Initial Planning — Time should be allowed for: 

a) preparation of installation requirements, and when appropriate 

b) submission of tenders, 

c) appraisal of tenders, and 

d) approval of proposals before contract is let. 

4.2 Ordering Central Equipment — For large installations the equip- 
ment may have to be specially manufactured and should be ordered 
early to ensure its availability at the right time for installation. 

4.3 Installation of Equipment — Work may commence on the instal- 
lation of the equipment at any stage of the building work provided that 
all building work in the actual room, including decoration, is finished, and 
that the room is dry. Electric light and power should be available al the 
commencement of the installation. Work of other contractors likely to 
give rise to dust should not be carried out in the vicinity after installation 
of the central equipment has begun. 



IS : 10485 ■ 1983 

4.4 Antennae — Antennae fittings may be installed at any convenient 
stage of the building work. 

4.5 Wiring — Wiring in ducts, conduits, chases and the like should be 
carried out at a late stage of building construction. 

5. MATERIALS, APPLIANCES AND COMPONENTS 

5.1 Cables and Wires — Standard types of cables and wires known to 
give a reliable performance should be used. 

5.2 Socket Outlets and Plugs — Socket outlets and plugs used for 
telecommunication services should not be interchangeable with those 
used for electric light or power circuits. 

5.3 Quality of Materials — The quality of materials, finish and the 
performance of the components, apparatus and equipment should be 
adequate to meet the test requirements specified in 8 and to ensure 
satisfactory operation for the designated period. 

5.4 Fire and Explosion Risk — The provision of telecommunication 
equipment in any situation where there may be an explosive or flammable 
atmosphere should be avoided. Where no alternative exists and it 
becomes essential to install telecommunication equipment then the equip- 
ment certified to be intrinsically safe and flameproof should be used. 

6. PLANNING AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

6.1 Antenna and Earth System — It is customary for long and 
medium wave receivers for domestic use to be fitted with internal antenna 
and in majority of cases these provide reception of a quality that the 
listener considers to be satisfactory. Receivers for short wave and for 
very high frequency ( VHF ) are commonly provided with a telescopic 
antenna intended to be stretched when the receiver is in use. Where 
reception with such an inbuilt antenna is not satisfactory and the design 
of the receiver permits, reception is usually improved by using an antenna 
external to the receiver and preferably outside the building. Where an 
external aerial is used, an earth connection should also be used. 

Where because of screening, interference or planning restrictions it 
is either undesirable or impractical to use individual antennae, it is 
strongly recommended that a community antenna and wired distribution 
system be used ( 6.4 ) . This may be combined with a system for the 
distribution of television signals when appropriate. 

6.2 Sound Reception 

6.2.1 Services to he Received — Sound broadcasting in the following 
frequency sounds is dealt with in 6.2.2 and 6.2.3. Receivers may receive 



IS ( 10485 . 1983 

transmissions in any one of these bands, combination of these bands or all 
these bands: 

Medium-wave band 525*5 — 1 606-5 kHz 

Short-waveband 2-3— 261 MHz 

VHF band 87 — 109 MHz 

6.2.2 Antenna Systems for the Medium-and Short-wave Bands 

6.2.2.1 Outdoor antenna systems — Basically both vertical and hori- 
zontal antennae are capable of giving satisfactory results, and practical 
conditions at the receiving site may indicate the type to be used in 
individual cases. For reception in weak signal areas a high horizontal 
antenna is to be preferred. 

Antenna should preferably be mounted above roof level. Care 
should be taken to keep the antenna and the lead-in as far as possible, 
away from any source of interference and from metallic objects that may 
conduct and radiate interference. Care may be taken of the pipes and 
electrical wiring often concealed in the walls of modern buildings. 

6.2J2.2 Vertical antenna — A vertical antenna usually takes the form 
of a metal rod, properly insulated from its support. The insulated wire 
connecting the antenna to the receiver should also be vertical as far as 
possible and a permanent and weather-resistant electrical connection 
should be made between the antenna and the wire. 

For private houses it is usually satisfactory for the antenna to be 
fitted as illustrated in Fig. 1. 

Where this arrangement is impracticable, the antenna may be fixed 
in various positions, for example to a point on a window sill with some 
loss of effectiveness. 

6.2.2.3 Horizontal antennae — The most usual arrangement consists 
of a horizontal wire with a lead-in from the near and direct to the receiver, 
the whole forming roughly an inverted letter 'L' as in Fig. 2. 

The support for the house end of the antenna should be taken to a 
high point and a support at the far end should be approximately of the 
same height. The lead-in should be taken from a point situated at some 
distance from the house so that it hangs clear of the wall and away from 
pipes and gutters. As far as possible the wire should not run parallel to 
other nearby conductors. 

Insulated copper wire should be used, suspended by low capacitance 
insulators at each end. The horizontal wire and lead-in should prefera- 
bly be a continuous length of wire. 



1$ : 10485 - 1983 




1 Metal rod aerial mounted on insulating support. 

2 Down -lead. 

3 Insulator supportiag down-lead clear of gutter. 

5 Earth terminal. 

6 Earthing lead ( see 6.7 ). 

Note — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 



Fig 1. Example of Outdoor Aerial and Earth SysTiM 



IS 1 10485 • 1983 




1 Aerial wire and lead-in in one continuous insulated length. 

2 Lead-in tube through wall or window frame. 

3 Insulators. 

4 Wire suspensions. 

5 Steadying stay for down-lead. 

Note — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity and dealt with 
in 6.6. 

Fig. 2 Example of an 'Inverted L' Aerial 

6.2.3 Antenna System for VHF Band ( 87-109 MHz) 

6.2.3.1 General — Antennae for the reception of very high frequency 
sound broadcasting take the same general form as television antenna 
systems in that they consist basically of elements that resonate at frequen- 
cies to be received. As with television the type of antenna needed 
depends upon local reception conditions and it should not be assumed 
that an effective outdoor antenna is unnecessary because the listener lives 
within a few kilometres of the transmitting station. 

The placement and positioning of the antenna is most important and 
has to take into consideration : ( a ) the polarisation of the transmitters 
and ( b ) the fact that there may by large differences in signal strength at 
points only about one metre apart, particularly in built up areas, and this 
effect may not be the same at all frequencies on which a station 
transmits. 

VHF antennae with appropriate directivity, depending upon the 
conditions of reception, should be used. Using high directivity antennae 
in areas of low field strength or where interference is experienced is 
recommended. A few conventional types are shown in Jig. 3, 4, 5, 6 



IS : 10485 - 1983 



and 7. A characteristic form of distortion ( buzzing sound ) may be heard 
in areas where signals reflected from hills or large structures are received 
in addition to the main signal. Highly directional antenna carefully 
placed should be used under the situation. 




FEEDER 



The overall dimension a is approximately one-half of the wavelength of the 
service concerned; for Band I a will be between 2"3 m and 34 m depending upon the 
channel to be received, and for Band II it will be 1-5 m. The dimension fc should be at 
least 076 m for Band I and may be proportionately less for Band II. 

Note — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 
in 6.6. 

F^G. 3 Example of Simple Half- Wave Dipol^ 

10 



IS : 10485 . 1983 



R EFLECTOR 




The dimension a is tlie same as for a simple dipole ( see Fig. 3 ) and the reflector 
is slightly longer. The dimension b is between one-quarter to one-eight wavelength 
depending on the design of the aerial. 

NoTB — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 
in 6,6. 

Fig. 4 Example of Half-Wave Dipole Aerial with Reflector 

6.2.3.2 Indoor antenna — When a VHF receiver is used with an 
antenna fitted inside the cabinet or with a telescopic rod antenna it will 
be usually necessary to try alternate positions in the room and as the 
inbuilt antenna is directional the receiver may need to be facing in a cer- 
tain direction. When antennae of these types are found to be inade- 
quate, a simple antenna erected preferably in the roof space may be 
satisfactory. 

The use of any form of antenna inside ferro-concrete or steel 
framed buildings is likely to give unsatisfactory reception and is not 
recommended. 

6.3 TELEVISION RECEPTION 

6.3.1 The television programmes transmitted in India are so far in Band 
I (VHF) channels 2-4 (47-68 MHz) and Band HI (VHF) channels 
5-12 ( 174-223 MHz ). Television antennae may be required to receive 
one or more channels in one or both bands. Antennae will be required 
to receive channels also in the 'Ultra High Frequency' band as and when 
the transmission in this band is adopted. 



II 



IS 1 10485 • 1983 



-REFLECTOR 




The dimension a is approximately one-half the wavelength concerned, as follows; 
Band I — between 2'3 m and 3"4 m depending on the channel used; 
Band II — 1'5 m; and 
Band III — 69 m to 0-84 m. 

The spacing between the elements depends upon the design of the aerial and the 
dipole is sometimes of the folded type, as indicated in Fig. 6. 

Note — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 
in 6.6. 

Fig. 5 Example of Three- Element Aerial 



REFLECTOR 



DIRECTORS 




FOLDED DIPOLE/ 




Dimension a is approximately one-half the wavelength concerned. For Band 
III the dimension is 0'69 m to 0'84 m. The spacing between the elements depends up- 
on the design of the aerial. 

Note — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 
in 6.6. 

Ji"iG. 6 Example of Highly-Directional Aerials 

12 



IS i 10485 • 1983 




Note — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 
in 6,6. 

Fig. 7 Example of Aerials Used for VHF Reception 

6.3.2 Basic Requirements for Good Reception — The strength of the signal 
received decreases rapidly with increasing distance from the transmitting 
station. The use of an effective antenna is of utmost importance. Apart 
from providing the receiver with adequate input voltage, the antenna has 
other functions like minimizing multiple images, discriminating against 
unwanted signals, etc. 

In situations where it is undesirable to use individuals antennae (for 
example, in blocks of flats ) a community antenna system should be 
provided or connection made to the existing wired distribution system 
( 6.4 ). Where feasible, this could also be combined with a system for 
the distribution of sound signals ( see also 6.1 ). 



13 



IS : 10485 - 1983 

6.3.3 Antenna System for Television Reception 

6.3.3.1 General — The conventional type of antennae used for 
television reception are shown in Fig. 3 to 7. The antenna could be 
mounted vertically or hori?ontally depending upon the polarization of the 
transmitting station^. The directional properties of the antenna are used 
to take advantage of directive gain, minimizing multiple images, and 
rejecting unwanted signals. 

The three most important electrical parameters to be considered are 
forward gain, directional properties and band width. The directive 
properties of the antenna to be considered are of greatest importance in 
areas where the signal is weak or where reflected signals or interference 
from other stations using the same channel may occur. 

6.3.3.2 Antenna for band I — The design of the antenna or the 
antenna system shall be such that it is suitable for use with standard 
television receivers that comply with the relevant recommendations of 
IS : 4547-1978* at the location at which it is intended to operate. 

Usually antennae for band I are designed for a particular channel 
and may take a suitable form as in Fig. 3 to 7. The actual size of the 
antenna will be guided by the prevailing field strength and the problems 
of interference or multiple images at the site under consideration. 

6.3.3.3 Antenna far band III — The characteristics of radio propoga- 
tion and reception in bandJII require higher sensitivity for the antenna 
system thant hat required for band I system. The problem of multiple 
images is also more troublesome. Use of antennae with multiple elements 
as in Fig. 5 and 6 is recommended. Band III antennae may be so 
designed as to cover more than one channel for the whole of band III. 
This is particularly convenient when an area is served by two or more 
transmissions originating from approximately the same direction. 

The system of the performance shall be such that when a television 
receiver that complies with the requirements of IS : 4547-1978* is con- 
nected to the outlet socket and tuned to the respective transmission the 
reproduction of both sound and vision is acceptable. 

6.3.3.4 Composite band I and band III antenna — Antenna can be 
designed to receive one or possibly two channels in band I as well as one 
or more channels in band III. The performance of this antenna shall be 
acceptable on all channels it is intended to receive. If the band I and 
band III transmitters do not lie in the same direction it will be necessary 

♦Specification for receivers for monochrome television broadcast transmissions 
\ first revision). 

14 



IS : 10485 - 1983 

to select a type in which the antenna for the two bands and channels can 
be separately oriented. In fringe areas or where local conditions make 
reception difficult use of separate antennae for band I and band III is 
recommended. 

6.3.3.5 Indoor antenna — The use of any form of antenna inside 
feroconcrete or steel framed buildings is likely to give inadequate recep- 
tion and is not recommended. 

It is some times possible to obtain satisfactory reception with an 
antenna installed in the loft or roof space. Greater care is required in 
siting such antennae. The use of room antenna is generally deprecated 
because these tend to give variable reception and inferior pictures. 

6.4. COMMUNITY ANTENNA AND WIRED DISTRIBUTION 
SYSTEM ( see Fig. 8 and 9 ) 

6.4.1 General — Distribution systems provide a means of distributing 
sound or television programmes, or both, over a wire network to a number 
of receivers that may be within individual dwellings, in dwelling in 
a block of flats or in rooms in a hotel, etc. The programmes may be 
derived from a wired input to the building or from an antenna system or 
from both. The wired system will comprise of any necessary equipment to 
process or amplify the incoming programmes. 

6.4.2 Antennae — The requirements for the antennae are the same as 
those for feeding individual receivers, although it is normally possible 
and desirable to use a better and more advantageously sited antenna 
system. 

6.4.3 Distribution of Television and Sound Programmes — A typical system 
will include most, but not necessarily all of the following components 
(we Fig. 10). 

a) the antenna system for which it will generally be necessary to the 
best position for a given dwelling pattern or a building; 

b) in weak field strength areas, low-noise preamplifier(s) located 
close to the antenna system elements; 

c) amplifiers and channel translators, converters, and combining 
units; 

d) trunk, branch and spur feeders; 

e) equalizers ( normally incorporated in amplifiers ); 

f) subscriber feeders and tap-off units; and 

g) subscriber outlet units. 

It is generally impractical to feed a, number of receivers from one 
antenna system without additional amplification. It may become 

15 



IS 1 10485 • 1983 

necessary, to translate the signals or signals to a channel that is 
otherwise unused in the area in order to avoid interference problems that 
can arise. 

Splitting or distribution units are used to divide the signal between 
different cable routes and should be designed to ensure a correct match 
to the cable. Subscribers are connected to the spur feeder. The tap-off 
units also limit signals being fed back from receiver into the spur feeder. 




DOWN LEAD FROM 
AERIAL 

TO SET 



1 Metal-rod aerial mounted on insulated support. 

2 Transformer. 

3 Screened feeder connected to transformer in each-flat; the screening of the 

cable to be earthed. 

4 Transformer with output leads connected to aerial and earth terminals of 

receiver. 

Mote — Precautions against the effects of atmospheric electricity are dealt with 
in 6.6. 

Fig. 8 Example of Long-, Medium- and Short-Wave 
CloMMUNiTY Aerial System in Small Block of Flats or 
Terrace Housing 



\^ 



IS : 10485 • 1983 





AMPLIFIER 1 

AMPLIFIER 2 

AMPLIFIER 3j 

POWER SUPPLY 



DISTRIBUTION' 




\ FRAME OF EQUIPMENT 
\ EARTHED 




Note — Precautions asrainst the effects of atmnsniiorir e1pffriV;t,7 am r^colr ,.>;t)i 
in 6.6. " ■" ' '■ 

Fig. 9 Example of Long-, Medium- and Short-Wave Band Com- 

MUNiTif Aerial System in Large Block of Flats using 

Wide-band Amplifier 



1 1 
• 1 



IS 1 10485 • 1983 



AERIAL 
AMPLIFIERS 




HEAD END 
r EQUIPMENT 



SUBSCRIBER 




TRUNK AMPLIFIERS 



TRUNK FEEDER 



BRANCH FEEDER 
AMPLIFIER 



TRUNK-BRIDGER/ 
AMPLIFIER 



SPUR BOX-^^)— 
SUBSCRIBERS . ^, /t\ r ■ 
vTAP-O FF — -^1) ^■^^ 



SPUR FEEDER 



AUTOMATIC LEVEL 
CONTROL AMPLIFIER 



ALC 



Ds 




NOTE 4 



VHF SOUND 
RECEIVER 



Note 1 — Wired receiver connected to HF system. 

Note 2 — Aerial receiver connected to HF system via an adaptor. 

Note 3 — Dual-standard ( or VHF-only ) receiver connected to VHF system. 

Note 4 — VHF-only receiver connected to VHF system via adaptor. 

Note 5 — Not all the items shown are required in any one installation, the 
items required being dependent on the size, type and layout of the system. 

Fig. 10 Principal Items of Eq,uipment Employed in Wired 
Distribution System 



18 



IS: 10485 -1983 

The subscriber feeder should be terminated in an outlet unit that is 
fitted with sockets to provide for the connection of a television or a Very 
High Frequency/Frequency Medulated sound receiver or both. Where 
both services are provided, filters should be embodied to provide isolation 
between VHF/FM sound and television receivers. Due care should 
be taken to isolate the outer and inner conductors of the cable from the 
outlet sockets by use of proper capacitors. 

Use of proper screened cables is necessary to ensure minimum 
radiation from the system and adequate protection from outside 
interference. 

6.4.5 System Performance — The performance of the system should be 
such that when a television or sound receiver complying with the relevent 
Indian Standards is connected to the appropriate outlet socket on the 
system and tuned to the appropriate transmission the reproduction of 
vision and sound or sound should be acceptable. The picture should be 
appreciably free from noise, reflected images and other interference. 
Sound reproduction should be essentially free from noise and distortion. 

6.4.5.1 Antennae — The antenna( e ) erected shall comply with the 
relevent requirements of balanced or unbalanced impedance, range of 
input and output voltage, radiation of electromagnetic energy, frequency 
coverage, voltage standing wave ratio, temperature range and safety 
considerations. 

6.4.5.2 Polarization — The antenna( e ) shall be mounted in accor- 
dance with the instructions of the manufacturer and correctly oriented to 
ensure optimum performance. 

6.4.5.3 Frequency coverage — The antenna(e) shall be suitable for 
covering the total band of frequencies for all the channels which are 
broadcast to or planned for the area in which it is erected. 

6.4.5.4 Impedance — The system shall generally be suitable for 
matching into a characteristic impedance of 75 ohms { unbalanced ) and 
a voltage standing wave ratio of less than 2'5 : 1 for input circuits shall be 
maintained over the entire frequency range for which the system is 
designed. Exceptionally a system may be designed for a balanced 
impedance of 300 ohms or suitable value. The input circuits then shall 
match with the appropriate impedance. 

All plugs, sockets, connectors and other components shall comply 
with the above requirements. 

6.5 Auxiliary Equipment — All auxiliary equipment ( for example 
amplifiers, translators, frequency changers, etc ) necessary to ensure the 
good performance of the system shall be provided. 

19 



IS : 10485 - 1983 

6.5.1 Translators and Channel Converters -^ In high signal strength areas, 
where direct signal pick up of television transmissions and distribution 
over the community antenna system may lead to unwanted interference 
effects, or situations where distribution in other than the received bands 
is deemed necessary, translators or channel converters shall be used before 
the signals are distributed in the system. 

6.5.2 Channel Conversion Frequencies — No channel other than an unused 
channel that is within the recognised range of bands used by Doordarshan 
for VHF and UHF television broadcasting in the country shall be used 
for frequency conversion. 

Note — Possible plan for channel conversion frequencies may be available from 
. the planners for this purpose. When available, such a plan should necessarily be 
followed for the selection of proper frequencies. 

6.5.3 Frequency Stability — The frequency stability of channel converters 
shall be maintained to an accuracy of 1 part in 10* over the entire 
temperature and humidity range specified for the equipment. The tempe- 
rature range for equipment intended for indoor mounting shall be at 
least +5''C to +50°G, and the temperature range intended for outdoor 
mounting shall be at least — 10 to 65" G. 

Amplifiers used in the system shall also be subject to the same 
stability considerations. 

6.5.4 Input and Output Connections — Amplifiers, channel converters, and 
other components shall be so designed and constructed so that they may 
be connected in the cable distribution system while the appropriate 
impedance level is maintained. 

Design of systems around unbalanced impedance of 75 ohms is 
recommended. 

6.5.5 Input and Output Voltages — As overloading, cross-modulation and 
other non-linear performance effects must be prevented the range of the 
input and output voltages of amplifiers, channel converters for which 
normal operation within the manufacturers specifications can be 
maintained must be ascertained. 

6.5.6 Radiation of Electromagnetic Energy — Amplifiers, channel converters 
and other active components shall be so designed that, when installed in 
a distribution system, the limits for the radiation of electromagnetic energy 
as specified in relevent Indian Standards are not exceeded. 

6.5.7 Frequency Coverage — The frequency coverage of amplifiers and 
other associated equipment shall be clearly specified. A voltage standing 
wave ratio of less than 2*5 : 1 shall be maintained for input circuits over 
the entire frequency range specified for the equipment. 



20 



IS : 10485 - 1983 

6.5.8 Cables — Standard radio-frequency cables should be used for 
distribution of television and/or VHF FM sound broadcast receptions to a 
number of receivers in the system. The following general characteristics 
are amongst those that determine the most suitable type of cable for use in 
a given situation : 

a) Characteristic impedance; 

b) Impedance irregularities; 

c) Attenuation per unit length; 

d) Type of outer conductor in coaxial cables; 

e) The balance of individual pairs of multi-pair cables; and 

f) Flexibility, bending radius, etc. 

To secure the maximum transfer of energy and to avoid reflections 
that could cause distortion, the impedance of the cable used for television 
or VHF/FM reception should be well matched to the antenna system. 
The receiver input impedance shall match the feeder impedance. As 
far as possible long runs of feeder to individual receivers should be 
avoided. 

It is necessary that impedance irregularities are small, otherwise 
standing waves and multiple images can be produced. The permissible 
attenuation in the cable is a matter for the designer of the system. 
Particular care should, however, be taken of the matching of consecutive 
lengths of cable both in the methods of joining and in the cable 
impedance tolerance limits. The screening and balance of cables is 
important in avoiding interference to other services and from other 
transmissions. 

6.5.9 Outlet Sockets 

6.5.9.1 General — At every outlet point an outlet socket shall be 
provided. Double outlet socket shall be provided where the system is 
equipped for both television and VHF/FM broadcast distribution. 

6.5.9.2 Outlet socket voltages — In the case of community antenna 
systems the outlet socket voltage at every outlet socket point measured as 
given below shall be within the appropriate range of the values given 
in Table 1, 

In each band for the same input voltage the outlet socket voltages 
shall not vary between the channels by more than 6dB in the television 
and the VHF/FM bands. 

Using a selective voltmeter with an input impedance of 75 ohms 
measure the rms value of the radio frequency voltage at the peak of the 
synchronising pulses on all television broadcasting services for the relevant 

21 



IS : 10485 > 1983 

area, and the rms value of the radio frequency voltage on the FM sound 
broadcast channels for the relevant area. 



TABLE 1, 



OUT PUT SOCKET VOLTAGES FOR COMMUNITY SYSTEMS 
AND DOMESTIC SYSTEMS 



Sl 
No. 

(1) 



Systems 



(2) 



i) Television 

Band I and III 
300 ohm. system 
ii) Band I and III 

75 ohm system 

iii) Television 

Band I and III 

Fringe area 
300 ohm system 

iv) . 75 ohm system 

v) VHF ( FM) 

75 ohm system 

vi) VHF (FM) 
Fringe area 
75 ohm system 



( Clause 6.5.9.2 ) 


GoMMtTNiTY System 


Max 


Min 


(3) 


(4) 


mV 


mV 


55 


1-5 


27 


0-75 


15 


0-30 


7-5 


0-15 


5 


0-1 



2-5 



0-1 



Domestic System 


Max 




Min 


(5) 




(6) 


mV 




mV 


55 




1 


27 




0-5 


15 




0-25 


7-5 




0-1 


5 




0-1 



25 



O'l 



6.5.9.3 Mutual attenuation — When measured as given below, the 
mutual attenuation between any two television outlet sockets shall exceed 
33 dB and the mutual attenuation between any TV socket and FM socket 
that are not mounted in the same outlet box shall exceed 46 dB. 

While injecting a radio frequency signal into any outlet socket at an 
appropriate frequency level given in Table 2, measure ( by means of 
selective voltmeter with an input impedance of 75 ohms ) the output of any 
outlet socket chosen at random to give the mutual attenuation. 



TABLE 2 TEST VOLTAGE FOR MUTUAL ATTENUATION 

Frequency Level Socket 

(2) ■ (3) 



(1) 
MHz 

65 
100 
200 



mV 
2 
2 
2 



TV 
FM 
TV 



22 



IS : 10485 - 1983 

6.6 Precautions Against Damage And Interference From Atmos- 
pheric Electricity — Metal masts, cross-arms and booms of television and 
VHF/FM antenna systems should be connected to earth. In most cases, 
it is sufficient to ensure that the mast is earthed, relying on the clamp 
that secured the antenna to the mast for adequate earthing of the antenna 
metal work. In the case of some antenna designs the elements may not 
be in electrical contact with the boom to which they are secured, and no 
attempt should be made to earth such elements. 

The antenna system should be bonded to any earthed metal work 
situated near the top of the structure ( for example, water tanks, pipes, etc ) 
using a proper earthing lamp. If no earthed metal work is available the 
earth connection should be made by the most direct route to the nearest 
earthing point. The minimum size of the conductor for this connection 
should be 1'5 mm^. In cases where an earth terminal is not provided, the 
earth connection should be secured to one of the clamping bolts. 

It may be possible, with some antennae, that the outer conductor of 
the antenna feeder cable is not connected to the metal work of the 
antenna. In this case the outer conductor should be separately earthed. 

For protection against lightning reference should be made to 
IS : 2309-1969*. 

6.7 Earth Connection for Receivers — Earth connections are provided 
for : 

a) safety, 

b) protection against atmospheric electricity, and 

c) better signal reception. 

For safety considerations reference may be made to IS : 616-1981t , 
IS : 3043-1 96 6t and IS : 8240-1976§. 

Sound receivers for medium and short wave bands somietimes have 
an earth terminal provided for the improvement of reception. When an 
antenna external to the receiver is used an earth is required. Provided 
that the earth continuity conductor of the electric supply is connected to 
a solid earth and interference is not introduced, the earth connection of 
mains operated receiver may be nnade by means of the earth pin of the 
three-pin mains plug. 



♦Code of practice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against 
lighting i first revision ). 

tSafety requirements for mains operated electronic and related apparatus for 
household and similar general use (first revision ). 

{Code of practice for earthing. 

§Guide for electrical equipment for atmospheres. 

23 



IS : 10485 - 1982 

If the earth continuity conductor does introduce interference, a 
separate 'quiet' earth should be provided. Where practicable the earth 
connection should be distinct from other earth connections, and should be 
connected by the shortest available route either to a rising metal water 
pipe near its point of emergence from the ground or to a buried 
electrode. Structural steel work of a building should not be used for 
obtaining an earth connection. The earth conductor should not be used 
for obtaining an earth connection. The earth conductor should be run as 
a stranded conductor of law resistance. It is essential that any metal 
water pipe used provides a low resistance connection with the general 
mass of earth and any connection to a water pipe should be made 
by means of a suitable clamp. 

6.8 Equipment and Accommodation 

6.8.1 General — The installation initially required in a building would 
rarely suffice throughout the life of the building without additions or 
modifications, or both. Careful consideration should therefore be given 
at an early stage to the installation requirements particularly for commu- 
nity wires distributions. Provision should be made for foreseeable 
additions and modifications. Ease of maintenance and adequate protec- 
tion against mechanical damage are of importance. Ideally it should be 
possible to run cables from any position in a building to any other position 
through concealed ducts, chases and conducts. The actual provision 
made will depend upon the general standard of amenities desired and 
the expenditure permissible. References to relevant standards shall be 
made while designing of ducts, chases, etc, for the accommodation of pipes 
and cables. 

6.8.2 Cable Holes 

6.8.2.1 Outside walls — A sleeve of non-hygroscopic material should 
be connected into the wall. It should slope downwards towards the out- 
side and should be plugged with a suitable non-hardening waterproof 
compound to prevent the entry of rain, dust, etc. 

6.8.2.2 Internal walls — Surface wiring should be taken through 
walls in sleeves of adequate size. Sharp edges at the cable entry and exit 
should be avoided either by bushing or by fitting the sleeve with its ends 
short of the surface and rounding the plaster or other surface material. If 
the number of cables is so large as to render the use of a sleeve impracti- 
cable, a rectangular hole should be made and lined with wood. 

6.8.2.3 Floors — Similar considerations apply to floors as to internal 
walls. The sleeve or wooden lining should extend at least 300 mm, 
above floor level. 

24, 



IS : 10485 . 1983 

6.8.3 Central Equipment — Central equipment should preferably be 
accommodated in a seperate room to which only authorized persons have 
access. The room should be dry, well ventilated and not subject to 
extremes of temperature. Good artificial lighting and a mains socket 
outlet separate from the power supply for the equipment should be 
provided for maintenance purposes. The floor should be constructed of or 
covered with non-conducting material. 

6.8.4 Vertical Ducts — In every multiple-floor building, vertical ducts 
with fire breaks, provided as necessary, are required. These should be 
continuous through the height of the building and their number and posi- 
tion should be such as to allow convenient lateral distribution on each 
floor. In general vertical ducts should not be more than 30 m apart as 
measured along the corridors. Provision for the support of cables at 
frequent intervals is necessary. 

Where floor distribution or junction boxes are required they should 
be located within or adjacent to the vertical ducts. 

6.8.5 Horizontal Ducts — Horizontal ducts are required between the 
main distribution points to the various rooms and within individual roiDms. 
If a basement is included in the building, the main horizontal duct lining 
the main distribution point Avith vertical ducts would probably be most 
conveniently located therein Floor distribution may be provided by 
underfloor ducts or conduits, floor chases, hollow detectable skirting, wall 
grooves with detachable covers or in hollow ceilings along corridors. 
Where access to positions remote from the wall may be required, full 
flexibility can be given by the use of under-floor duct systems. 

7. INSTALLATION CONSIDERATIONS 

7.1 Antenna (e) — The antenna( e ) shall be installed with following 
considerations : 

7.1.1 Construction — Each antenna and associated clamps shall be 
constructed in a manner consistent with good electrical and mechanical 
practice, and adequate steps shall be taken to prevent adverse electrolytic 
action. 

All elements of an antenna, with the possible exception of parasatic 
elements, shall be directly and galvanically connected to the metal 
structure of the antenna. The construction of the antenna shall be such 
that mounting, loading, and weather conditions to which the antenna is 
reasonably expected to be exposed, cannot cause any part to become 
dislodged or permanently distorted. Steps should be taken to prevent the 
entrapment of water and the generation of adverse noise, 

25 



IS : 10485 ■ 1983 

The antenna structure shall be so designed that, when it is mounted 
on the mast the mast will have no significant influence on the characteris- 
tics of the antenna. 

It should be possible to rotate the antenna horizontally or vertically, 
as appropriate, to find an optimum receiving orientation. This is parti- 
cularly true for VHF and TV antenna ( e ). 

7.1.2 Materials — The installer of an antenna system should ensure that 
the materials used will give a reasonable operating life to the installation. 
Special care should be taken to avoid adverse electrolytic action between 
dissimilar materials. For example, copper or copper alloys should never be 
used in direct contact with aluminium. Protective coating of the materials 
should be carefully preserved. Damaged parts should be protected by a 
suitable coating 'after installaion. 

7.1.3 Cable Connection — The cable shall be so connected to the antenna 
that proper impedance matching is maintained, with due regard to 
balanced-to-unbalanced transformation, throughout the entire frequency 
range of the antenna. 

The connection facilities shall be such that the outer conductor of 
the coaxial cable will be directly and galvanically connected to the 
earthing structure of the antenna by means of a conductor of cross-section 
at least 10 mm^. The connection of the cable shall be made in a suitable 
connection box to protect the connection from the weather and to prevent 
the ingress of moisture. The enclosure shall be made of a fire retarding 
material. ( The effects of heat and sunlight on plastic materials should 
be considered if such materials are chosen for the enclosure ). 

7.1.4 Wind Loading — The wind loading of an antenna must be obtained 
for the worst mounting conditions at maximum wind velocities recorded 
in the area ( see IS : 616-1981* ). 

7.1.5 Antenna Site — The actual position of the antenna is of consi- 
derable importance. As far as possible all local obstructions between the 
antenna and transmitter should be avoided. Where reception conditions 
are difficult it may be advantageous to find the best position by experi- 
ment. Where practicable, antenna should be mounted clear of conductors, 
including structural metal work. When siting indoor antenna in the loft 
or attic care should be taken to position it as far as possible clear of pipes, 
cisterns and other metal work. 

The plane of polarisation inside the building may not be the same 
as that of the transmitted signal and the antenna may need to be tilted 
accordingly. 

♦Safety requirements for mains operated electronic and related apparatus for 
household and similar use {Jirsl revision ). 

26 



Is : 164^^ • 198^ 

At sites wliere corrosion of the antenna structure is likely to occur 
as a result of salt-laden atmosphere, fumes and smoke, the antenna and 
its supporting structure should be provided with a suitable coating. 

When an antenna is sited at an existing installation, both the 
strength of the installation and its suitability to carry the additional stress 
should be checked. The effectiveness of the existing antennae, if any, 
should also be checked. 

7.2 Location and Installation of Equipment and Apparatus — Sub- 
ject to any earlier specific recommendation in 6, locations should be 
chosen with regard to optimum operation and where they are easily 
accessible for maintenance without requiring access to private premises. 
In all cases reference should be made to the manufacturer's instructions 
and standard wiring regulations. 

7.3 Assembly and Wiring — As much assembly and wiring of the 
equipment and apparatus as possible should be carried out in the factory 
to reduce installation work to a minimum. 

7.4 Inspection and Tests — Arrangements may be made when desired 
for general inspection, including operational tests, to be carried out 
in the presence of the purchaser's representative. 

7.5 Delivery and Storage ■ — To avoid damage and deterioration, equip- 
ment and apparatus should not be delivered until installation can proceed, 
provided that suitable storage accommodation has been made, 

7.6 Work on Site — The work to be done on the site may consist of : 

a) meeting structural requirements during building operation, 

b) siting and installation of antennae and feeders, 

c) internal and external cabling and wiring, and 

d) fitting and connecting amplifiers, converters and combining 
units, etc. 

7.7 Antenna Feeder Cables — A feeder routed externally to the antenna 
mast should be held by suitable clips or weather proof tape at a suffi- 
cient number of points to minimize strain on connections. A feeder taken 
over tilted roof should be secured by suitable clips. A loop of cable 
should be provided to form a water-trap together with sufficient slack 
for possible installation of combining units at a later date. The feeder 
should be taken behind the guttering and on the gutter board, or else 
stand-off brackets should be used. Where antenna transformers, amplifiers, 
etc, are used out-of doors, they should be of the weatherproof type 
or enclosed in fully weatherproof cover and mounted in a position that 

n 



11^ : i0483 • 198^ 

will provide as much protection as possible. Down leads should be pro- 
tected against mechanical damage. Where such downleads are exposed 
to high winds, they should be kept under slight tension. Unscreened cables, 
if any, should be mounted so that distance from walls and metallic 
objects is not less than ten times the spacing between the conductors. 

Any down leads that are carried through the building structure by 
means of circuits or ducts, or are embedded in plaster should be of a 
screened type. 

The feeder should be looped slightly away from any wood work. It 
should be fastened to the walls at intervals of 1 m for vertical runs and 
300 mm for horizontal runs, using fixings designed to avoid damage to 
the cables. At the point where the feeder enters the building a water drip 
loop should be formed in the feeder. If it is not possible to use an air 
vent for the down leads in the building then entry holes should be drilled 
at an angle of about 45° downwards from inside the building. Internal 
runs of feeder runs should be as unobtrusive as possible. 

Both the inner and outer conductors of the coaxial cable should be 
securely connected both mechanically and electrically to the plug or out- 
let socket. Before inserting the feeder plug to the receiver it should be 
ensured that no dangerous voltages exist on the aerial. 

Wires and cables run on external walls of buildings should prefera- 
bly be not less than 3 m above ground level. In case this is not possible 
then adequate protection should be provided. Rubber and PVC sheathed 
cables are likely to be damaged by exposure to various preservatives (for 
example, certain wood preservatives ). 

7.8 Internal Cabling and Wiring 

7.8.1 General — Telecommunication cables should not be placed in the 
same ducts or conduits as power cables. Wiring should be carried out 
according to the standard practice. 

Joints in cables should be avoided as a general rule. Suitable junc- 
tion boxes should be used for connecting cables. Ends of the feeder 
cables should be sealed to prevent ingress of moisture. 

All pipes, conduits and ducts and cables should be marked for 
identification. 

Some plasters and cements have a corrosive effect on metals, and 
precautions against this may be necessary when cables or conduits are in- 
stalled in damp situations. 

Gables insulated with rubber, PVC or polyethylene should not be 
used where the cable temperature is likely to exceed 45° C without 
reference to the manufacturer's specifications. 

28 



IS : 10485 ■ 1983 

7.8.2 Cables — The cables should be of the standard type as recom- 
mended in 6.5.8. 

7.8.3 Vertical Ducts — Gables in vertical ducts, chases, casings, etc, 
should be adequately supported, the provisions of wood battens, etc, will 
facilitate this work. Gables should be protected where they emerge. 

7.8.4 Conduit and Metallic Ducts — Standard practices should be followed 
for installing conduits. They should preferably be concealed. They should 
effectively be bonded and earthed. 

The number and size of wires or cables drawn into any conduit or 
duct should be such as to permit easy drawing in the out of the cables 
concerned. Future expansions should be taken into consideration. 

7.8.5 Surface Wiring — Cables run on wall surface should be neatly 
laid and secured at points sufficiently close together to prevent sag. 
Battens should be fixed to walls where many cables are to be run or where 
fixing is difficult. Where cable changes direction it should not be bent to 
a radius less than that recommended by the cable manufacturer { usually 
it is four to six times the cable diameter ). Gapping can be used to 
advantage. 

Protection by conduit or capping should be provided wherever there 
is a risk or damage to or interference with wiring. 

Gables run on girders should be secured by metal clips. Whenever 
it is necessary to run the cables on tops of girders they should be run in 
conduit. 

Gable holes as described in 6.8.2 should be used when cables have 
to pass through walls on floors. 

7.8.6 Distribution and Joint Boxes 

7.8.6.1 Provision — Normally it is necessary to be able to gain 
access to cable junctions and splitting points for testing. Therefore, such 
connections should be contained within a box designed to provide both 
protection and ready access. 

7.8.6.2 Location — Boxes installed outdoors should be weather- 
proof. Boxes likely to be vulnerable to flooding should be of a submersible 
type. All types of boxes should be located so as to provide reasonable 
access. 

7.8.6.3 Wiring — It is essential that pairs of wires are not divided. 
Where the pairs of wires are twisted within the cable the twist should be 
maintained up to the point of connection. Minimum amount of slack wire 
should be left in the bos consistent with the need to avoid fracturing the 
wire. 

29 



IS : 10485 ■ 1983 

7.9 Marking and Numbering — All elements of the system including 
the antenna, conduits, ducts, etc, cables and boxes and equipment should 
be suitably marked for identification and extent of use. 

8. INSPECTION AND TESTING 

8.1 Inspection of Installation — The complete installation should be 
inspected by the client or an engineer authorised by him to ensure that 
the work of installation has been carried out satisfactorily and that the 
methods, materials and components used conform with the recommenda- 
tions of this code. The record plans and operating instructions should be 
checked for accuracy and to ensure that the signal levels measured 
conform to those mentioned in 6.5.9 or those mentioned in this 
section ( 8.2 ). 

8.2 Testing of Installations — On completion of an installation or of 
extensions or alterations to an installation, tests should be made to ensure 
that as far as possible the system meets all functional requirements and 
will give satisfactory service under the extreme points. In case of a com- 
munity antenna system outlet socket voltages for conformity to Tables 1 
and 2 as in 6.5.9 should be tested. 

Typical signal levels required for satisfactory reception by receivers 
using external antennae shall be in accordance with relevant standards of 
performance ( For example IS : 4547-1978*, IS : 615-1968t, etc ) 

8.2.1 Recommended Design Details — Notwithstanding anything contai- 
ned in 6.5.9 and 8.2 it is recommended that design details given in Table 1 
should as far as possible be aimed at for the antenna systems for domestic 
and community set-ups. 

Signal levels for subscriber outlet sockets for community antenna 
systems for VHF, FM and TV systems should be as given in Table 1 and 
2 under 6.5.9. The community antenna systems for band I and band III 
should aim at following specifications. 

a) Attenuation for adjacent channels — 6 dB, 

b) Attenuation for in band channels — 12 dB, 

c) Attenuation out of band channels — 16 dB, 

d) Signal/noise ratio — better than 30 dB for minimum signal as 

per IS : 4547-1978*, 

e) Cross modulation — better than 40 dB, 



♦Specification for receivers for monochrome television broadcast transmissions 
{first revision ). 

f Minimum requirements of domestic radio receivers ( revised ). 

30 



IS ; 10485 - 196i 

f ) Intermodulation — better than 55 dBj and 

g) Slope over a single channel — less than 0*5 dB. 

Note — It is theoretically possible to design community TV distribution 
systems at HF or VHF distribution, systems at audio frequencies. Recommenda- 
tions for these will be incorporated at appropriate time. 

Recommendations for UHF and colour TV systems are under 
consideration. 

8.2.2 Protective Earth Connections — These should be tested in accordance 
with standard practice. 

8.2.3 Secondary Cells — When they are used in the system they should 
be cTaecked for satisfactory condition. 



9. MAINTENANCE 

These recommendation relate particularly to large installation and 
to these in which it is important to minimize the risk of failure. 

9.1 Commissioning — Telecommunication systems generally function 
best when in constant use. The completion date should, therefore, be 
timed so that the installation can be commissioned at the earliest possible 
date afterwards. If this is not possible adequate arrangements should be 
made for maintenance. 

9.2 Regular Maintenance — In the absence of personnel with necessary 
jspecialized knowledge an agreement should be made with the makers, 
suppliers or contractors for regular maintenance. 

9.3 Routine Inspection — Routine inspection of the installations should 
be carried out at regular intervals particularly in regard to the security 
and safety of the antenna( e ). 

9.4 Log Book — A log book giving details of all routine attention and 
faults should carefully be recorded so that if makers, suppliers or contrac- 
tors are called in for special service they may know what services have 
been carried out, etc. 

9.5 Keeping of Plans — The record of plans, diagrams and instructions, 
etc, should be carefully preserved and kept up-to-date. 

5.6 Masthead Equipment — Masthead equipment needs special 
attention due to vulnerability to corrosion and atmospheric electricity and 
is usually the possible cause of unsatisfactory reception. 

31 



Is : 10^85 - 198^ 

10. SEGREGATION OF CIRCUITS 

10.1 General Safety Requirements — Gables for RF signals shall not 
be placed in the same ducts as power cables. 

10.2 Interference — In many cases it may be permissible for cables of 
different telecommunication facilities to share ducts. Individual authori- 
ties concerned should be consulted for this type of sharing, 

10.3 Particular Safety Requirements — Apparatus connected to 
telecommunication circuits associated with or energized from a low 
voltage or medium voltage should be isolated in such a way as to protect 
the telecommunication circuit from low- and medium-voltage supplies. 

11. ABATEMENT OF ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE 

11.1 For reception to be satisfactory, the level of electrical interference 
has to be low compared with that of the signal. A wide variety of domestic 
electrical appliance and industrial equipment may cause objectional 
interference, and this is best suppressed at source. 

When suppression at source is not possible, some improvement may 
be obtained by fitting a suitable interferfince suppress or in the house 
wiring as possible with due regard to the source. Alternatively some 
improvement may be obtained by fitting an interference suppressor in the 
mains lead to the receiver. 

Other possible sources include intermittent open circuit or earth 
faults in the electrical installation. Such defects are best guarded against 
by inspection and maintenance at regular intervals. Normal operation 
of some devices like fluorescent lamps, thyristors, etc, may give rise to 
salient interference. 

If interference is radiated from electrical wiring associated with a 
source of radio noise, the severity of the interference can be reduced 
considerably if the wiring is enclosed in a continuous earthed metal screen. 
Attention should therefore be given to the bonding and earthing of existing 
conduit or metal sheaths of cables. 



Is : l0485 - 1983 



( Continued from page 2 ) 



Members Representing 

Shki D. p. Bobdb Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

De K. S. K. Sai ( Alternate) 
Shri M. Butohi Raju Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Enoinebr-in-Ghahqb Wireless Planning & Co-ordination Wing 

( Ministry of Communications ), New Delhi 

Shbi S. Bai-akrishan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Janakiraman Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ), 

Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Kalidas Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New 

Delhi 

Shri S. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Db V. K. KoSHY Bharat Electronics Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Shri A. K. Majumdab ( Alternate ) 
Db S.P. Kosta ISRO Satellite Centre, Bangalore 

SnBi Rajiv Mbhbotra Shyam Antenna Electronics Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shei R. C. Pandky Ministry of Defence ( DTD & P ) ( AIR ) 

Shbi G. M. Krishnamukthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi 

Shbi K. B. Boeker ( Alternate ) 
Da C. S. R. Rao All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shbi A. S. GuiN ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. N. Sharma Federation of Associations of Small Industries of 

India, New Delhi 
Db K. K.. Sbivastava Defence Electronics Research Laboratory, 

( Ministry of Defence ), Hyderabad 



33 



INTERNATIONAL SVSf EiVl dl^ UMlf ^ ( Si UNlf ^ ) 



Base Units 

Quantity 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Tliermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity 

Plane angle 
Solid angle 
Derived Units 
Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Unit 



Symbol 



metre 


m 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candei^a 


cd 


mole 


moi 


Unit 


Symbol 


radian 


rad 


steradlan 


sr 


Unit 


Symbol 


newton 


N 


joule 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesia 


T 


tiertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


volt 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

1 N = 1 kg.m/s2 
1 J = lN.m 
1 W = 1 J/s 
1 Wb = 1 V.s 
1 T = 1 Wb/m2 
1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-J) 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V = 1 W/A 
1 Pa = 1 N/mi 



