**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10076-1 (1981) : linearity control units used with TV 
Picture Tubes, Part I: General Requirements and Tests [LITD 
5: Semiconductor and Other Electronic Components and 
Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



[S ; IOC7A(Part l)-iral 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LINEARITY CONTROL UNITS USED WITH 

TV PICTURE TUBES 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 



UBG 62J-397-3321 :621-397'6I2 




© Copyright 1992 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MAKAK EHAVAN, H HAllAULK SHAH ^\F.\R MARC 

NEW DEI-HI 1 10002 

Qip 4 DecemheT 1902 



IS : 10076 ( Part I )- 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

LINEARITY CONTROL UNITS USED WITH 

TV PICTURE TUBES 

PART i GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 



Transformers and Inductors for Electronic Equipment 
Sectional Committee, LTDC 8 

Chaiman Representing 

Shri G. K. Sreenivas Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 
Shri M. S, K. Rao ( Alternate to 
Shri G. K. Sreenivas ) 
Shri R. P. Bahah Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri B, S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. P. Balsara Electronic Component Industries Association 

(ELGINA), New Delhi 
Shri M. Dayal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. P. Bhargava National Research Development Corporation of 

India, New Delhi 
Shri R. Krkhnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Das Gxjpta Pieco Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. M. Bapat { Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Km K. R. Jaya Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri T. G. Vasudevan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Krishnamurthy Railway Board, New Delhi 

Shri V. Jayaraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Majumdar The Development Commissioner, Small Scale Indus- 

tries, New Delhi 
Shri V. K. R. Prabhu ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Y. Phatak The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' 

Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 
Dr p. B. Parikh ( Alternate ) 
DrN. Ramesh NGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri Roy Abraham ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Rao Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. N. Mohammed ( Alternate ) 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

( Continued Jrom page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Representative ELGOMPO Electronics Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri M. K. Rewal Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi 

Shri Satyamurthy ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. Sankaralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri D. R. Ghanpran ( Alternate ) 

Shri B. M. Shankar Prasad Ministry of Defence ( LGSO ) 

Shri H. K. Thandani National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Vishwanatha Civil Aviation Department, New Delhi 

Shri R. S. Sandhu ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. G. Jain, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 
Head ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri Y. S. Arya 
Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Panel for TV Transformers and Coils, LTDG 8 : P3 

Members 

Shri Abdul Razza^ue Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 
Shri J. P. Bhargava National Research Development Corporation of 

India, New Delhi 
Shri M. S. Mxjrthy Suchitra Electronics Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri S. Y. Phatak The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers* 

Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 
Dr p. B. Parikh ( Alternate ) 
Representative All India Radio & Electronics Association, Bombay 

Representative ELGOMPO Electronics Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Subba Rao Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr R. K. Trehan M, G. Electronics Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

LINEARITY CONTROL UNITS USED WITH 

TV PICTURE TUBES 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 
0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Trans- 
formers and Inductors for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division 
Council. 

0.2 The object of this standard is to establish uniform requirements for 
the electrical, mechanical and climatic properties and test methods for 
linearity control unit used with TV picture tubes. 

0.3 Individual specifications for different types of linearity control units 
which shall cover the requirements appropriate to the type of the linearity 
control units shall form other parts of the series of standards. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part I ) deals with the general requirements and 
methods of tests for judging the mechanical, electrical and environmental 
properties of linearity control units primarily intended for use with TV 
picture tubes. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 



♦Rides for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 

3 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

2.1 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each linearity control units 
to check the requirements which are likely to vary during production. 

2*2 Acceptance Tests — • Tests carried out on linearity control units 
selected from a lot for the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 

2.2.1 Lot — All linearity control units of the same type, category and 
rating manufactured by the same factory during the same period using 
the same process and materials. 

2.3 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove the conformity to the require- 
ments of this standard. These are intended to prove the general qualities 
and design of a particular type of linearity control units. 

2.4 Type — A type comprises products having similar functions manu- 
factured by the same techniques and falling within the manufacturers 
usual range of ratings for these products. 

2.5 Linearity Control Units — Linearity control units is a coil wound 
on a ferroxcube rod and three ferroxdure magnets. It is intended to adjust 
the linearity of the line deflection. 

3. TYPE DESIGNATION 

3.1 The type designation used shall be abbreviations to identify a particular 
type of linearity control unit as given in the following example. 

LCU 1 S 

where 

LCU denotes linearity control unit; 

1 represents TV picture tubes of sizes 470 mm, 510 mm, 

590 mm and 610 mm; and 
S denotes solid state circuitry. 

3.2 The type designation of a particular linearity contiol unit shall be 
specified in the relevant specification. 

4. CLIMATIC SEVERITY 

4.1 The linearity control units shall be subjected to the following cUmatic 
severity. 

Climatic Test Severity 

[ see IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977* ] 

Dry heat 70°C for 16 h 

Gold - WC 

Damp heat ( steady state ) 21 days 

Damp heat ( cyclic ) 2 cycles, upper temperature 55''C 

Low air pressure 60 kPa 

Note — Higher severity may be specified, if so required for specific application 
in the relevant specification. 



♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part I General. 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 
5. MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 

5.1 Materials — The components shall be constructed from materials 
free from flaws and other defects. As far as practicable, materials used 
for construction shall be non-flammable, non-explosive and non-corrosive. 

5.2 Terminations — Linearity control units shall be provided v^ith 
leads or any other acceptable terminations. 

5.3 Workmanship — Ail parts of the linearity control units shall be 
manufactured in accordance with good engineering practices. 

€. MARKING 

6.1 Each linearity control unit shall be marked with the following minimum 
information : 

a) Type designation and manufacturer's name or trade-mark, and 

b) Manufacturer's code or batch number. 

6.2 In all cases the carton shall carry the following minimum information : 

a) Type designation and manutlicturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Manufacturer's code or batch number, and 

c) Recommended application circuits schematic for which the linearity 
control unit is designed for satisfactory operation. 

6.3 Data sheet giving the following minimum information shall be supplied: 

a) Schematic diagram; 

b) Ratings namely inductance, dc resistance, ac voltage drop; and 

c) Other performance ratings. 

6.4 The markings shall be such as not to become illegible while in storage 
and during service through normal handling. 

6.5 Any additional marking shall be so applied that no confusion may 

arise, 

6.6 Linearity control units may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 



IS : 10076 ( Part I )- 1981 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a 
licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. TESTS 

7.1 General Conditions for Tests 

7.1.1 General — Tests shall be carried out on the linearity control units 
received from the manufacturers or suppliers. 

7.1.2 Atmospheric Conditions for Testing — Unless specified otherwise, all 
tests shall be carried out under standard atmospheric conditions specified 
in IS :9000 ( Part I )-1977* 

7.1.3 Preconditioning — Before measurements are made the linearity 
controls units shall be stored at the measuring temperature and relative 
humidity for a time sufficient to allow the entire component to reach 
these conditions. The recovery period called for after conditioning is ade- 
quate for this purpose. 

7.1.4 Correction to be Applied — When measurements are made at an 
ambient temperature other than the reference temperature, the results 
shall, where necessary be corrected to the reference temperature. The 
ambient temperature during the test shall be stated in the test report. 

7.1.5 Other Precautions — During measurements the linearity control 
units shall not be exposed to draughts, direct sun rays or other influences 
likely to cause errors. 

7.1.6 Test Frequency — When a test frequency is specified with no toler- 
ance, the frequency used shall be within 1 percent of the specified value. 

7.1.7 Test Voltage — The test voltages shall be sufficiently free of dis- 
tortion and noise to such a degree as not to produce any false or spurious 
indications. 

7.2 Classifications of Tests 

7.2.1 Type Tests — The procedure for type approval shall be in accord- 
ance with IS : 2612-19651. 



*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part I General. 
•[•Recommendation for type approval and sampling procedures for electronic components. 



IS : 10076 (Parti)- 1981 



a) Number of samples — The number of samples for type tests shall 
be 15 of same code number unless otherwise stated in the relevant 
specification. 

b) Sequence of type tests — The sequence of type tests shall be in 
accordance with Table 1 unless specified otherwise in the relevant 
specification. 







TABl.F. 1 TYPE T1ESTS 




Group 


Number of Specimen 


Test 


Clause Number 


(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


0. 


All 




Visual examination 
Dimensions 

Continuity of winding 
DC resistance 
Inductance 

Correction voltage range 
Voltage proof 
Insulation resistance 


7.3.1 
7.3.2 
7.4.1 
7.4.2 
7.4.3 
7.4.4 
7.4.5 
7.4.6 


1. 


3 




Solderability 

Robustness of terminations 

Bump 

Vibration 

Climatic 


7.5 
7.6 
7.8 
7.7 
7.9 


2. 


3 




Vamp heat ( steady state ) 


7.10 


3. 


3 




Endurance 


7.11 


4. 


2 




Mould growth 


7.12 


5. 


2 




Rapid change of temperature 
( when specified ) 


7.13 


6. 


2 




Salt mist 


7.14 



7.2.2 Routine Tests — The routine tests shall be performed in the following 
order: 



Title of Test 

Visual examination 

DC resistance 

Inductance 

Correction voltage range 

Voltage proof 

Insulation resistance 



Clause Number 

7.3.1 
7.4.2 
7.4.3 
7.4.4 
7.4.5 
7.4.6 



IS : 10076 ( Part I )- 1981 

7.2.2.1 If during routine tests more than 10 percent of the lot fails, 
the entire lot may be rejected. 

7*2*3 Acceptance Tests — The acceptance tests shall be carried out In 
a limited number of samples selected in accordance with the sampling 
procedure given in IS : 2612-1965* and which have passed the routine 
tests as specified in 7.2.2. 

The two groups of samples shall be selected and each group shall be 
subjected to the tests specified in the order in Table 2 unless otherwise 
specified in the individual relevant specification. 



TABT.K 2 ACCEFrANCE TEST 




Title of Test 


Clause 
Number 


AQL* 

( Percent 

Defective ) 


[Inspection 
Level 


D|^f\ 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


Group M' Test 
Dimensions 


7.3.2 








Continuity of winding 
DC resistance 
Inductance 

Correction voltage range 
Voltage proof 
Insulation resistance 


7.4.1 
7.4.2 
7.4.3 
7.4.4 
7.4.5 
7.4.6 


1 percent 


IV 


N 


Group *B' Test 

Robustness of termination 

Bump 

Vibration 

Climatic 

Visual examination 


7.6 
7.8 
7,7 
7.9 
7.3.1 


4 percent 


I 


D 


♦IS : 2500 ( Part I ).1973 Inspection by attributes and by count of defects 
fi)= Destructive and X= Non-Destructive. 


(first revisim ). 



7.3 General Tests 

7.3.1 Visual Examination — - The linearity control units shall be visually 
examined for worknaanship, finish, condition and marking and these shall 
be satisfactory. 

7.3.2 Dimensions — The dimensions shall be checked for compliance 
with those specified in the relevant specification and as per manufacturers 
drawings wherein the requirements are not covered. 



♦Recommendation for type approval and sampling procedures for electronic components. 

8 



IS : 10076 ( Part I )- 1981 



7.4 Electrical Tests 



7.4.1 Continuity of Winding — The winding of the linearity control units 
shall be tested for electrical continuity by any suitable method. The winding 
shall be continuous. 

7.4.2 DC Resistance — The do resistance shall be measured with a resist- 
ance bridge or other suitable test equipment. The current through the 
specimen shall be as small as practical considering the sensitivity of the 
indicating instruments, unless the current or voltages is specified. When 
it is important that the temperature of the specimen shall not rise appreciably 
during measurement, the test voltage shall be applied uninterruptedly 
for as short a time as practicable, but in no case for more than five seconds , 
unless otherwise specified. The measurement shall be made at or corrected 
to 27°C. The value shall be within the tolerance limits as specified. 

7.4.3 Inductance — The winding, whose inductance is to be measiaed 
is connected as shown in Fig. 1 with an external capacitor of value C^ 
across it. The resonance frequency/, of the circuit is measured by varying 
the frequency of the RF signal generator for maximum deflection on the 
electronic voltmeter. The value of the external capacitor is changed to C^ 
and the new resonance frequency / is determined. The inductance L of 
the winding is then given by : 



/. - 



/a^ 



-f^ 



47r^/iV2^(C,-C, 







II 






11 










c 






II 

c 












_^A 


Co- 

Do- 


-^ 




RF 

SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 




—^D 


ELECTRONIC 
VOLTMETER 








— <?B 



















Fig. 1 Set-up for the Measurement of Inductance 



7*4.3.1 Alternatively, inductance may be measured by a suitable 
inductance bridge of sufficient accuracy. The vahies shall be within the 
limits specified in the relevant detail specification. 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) < 1981 

7AA Correction Voltage Range — A jig based on line output circuit specified 
by the manufacturers shall be used for testing. When a specified saw tooth 
current ( without S-correction ), frequency of which and the flyback ratio 
as specified in the relevant specification flows through the linearity control 
unit, the correction voltage shall be adjustable between the specified limits. 

7.4.5 Voltage-Proof — Unless otherwise specified, the linearity control 
unit shall withstand without breakdown the application of an ac test voltage 
of the value shown as under: 

Maximum Working Voltage Test Voltage 

V V 

25 and below 50 

Over 25 up to 50 100 

Over 50 up to 100 300 

Over 100 up to 175 500 

Over 175 up to 700 2'6x Maximum working voltage 

Over 700 1 • 4 x Maximum working voltage 

+ 1 000 

Specimens shall be mounted by normal means. The test voltage shall 
be applied between windings and the case, if any. The voltage shall be 
raised at a rate not exceeding 500 V per second and shall be maintained 
at the maximum value for 1 minute. All windings not under test shall be 
connected to the case. 

When this test is carried out as a routine test, the voltage shall be 
applied for 5 seconds only. The maximimi peak voltage between terminals 
of line and field coils at 50 Hz shall be 2 500 volts. 

The limiting current for the test equipment shall not exceed 2 mA. 

7.4.6 Insulation Resistance — Unless otherwise specified, the insulation 
resistance shall be measured by applying dc test voltages as mentioned 
beJow for one minute ±5 seconds between the case and each winding and 
also between windings, if applicable. The voltage shall not be applied 
gradually but shall be applied immediately through the internal resistance 
of the test apparatus. The insulation resistance shall be read after one 
minute +5 seconds. 



Maximum Working Voltage 
V 


Test Voltage 
V 


25 and below 
Over 25 up to 175 
Above 175 


50 
100 
500 



The insulation resistance shall not be less than 1 000 M ohms. 

10 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

7.5 SolderabiUty — The linearity control units provided with the tag 
and lead type terminations shall be subjected to the soldering iron test 
(Method 3) with a soldering iron of suitable size in accordance with 
IS :9000 (Part XVIII Sec i )-1981*. 

At the end of the test, the component shall be visually examined. 
It shall not show any loosening of connections, melting or seepage of sealing 
material or any other deterioration. The continuity of the winding shall 
also be checked. 

7.6 Robustness of Termination 

7.6.1 Tensile Test on all Terminations — All terminations shall be subjected 
to the test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part XIX Sec 1 )-1978*. 
The loading weight, the duration of the test and the number of bends 
shall be as specified in the relevant specifi.cation. In the case of the tag 
terminations, the bending tests shall be carried out in accordance with 
IS : 9000 ( Part XIX Sec 3 )-1978*. 

7.6.2 There shall be no sign of fracture, loosening of parts of any mecha- 
nical failure. The continuity of all the windings shall be checked. 

7.7 Vibration 

7.7.1 The linearity control unit shall be mounted as required in 
IS : 9000 (Part VIII )-1981* taking care that the terminations are not 
stressed and that equal number of samples are subjected to vibration test 
in each of the three principal axes. The vibration severity should be 10- 
55 Hz within a duration of 6 hours. 

7.7.2 After this test, the linearity control unit shall be visually examined 
and there shall not be any damage or deterioration. The continuity of the 
winding shalf be checked. The dc resistance and inductance shall be 
measured and should be within specified limit. Voltage proof test shall 
be carried out. There shall be no change in insulation resistance when 
measured at the end of this test. 

7.8 Bump 

7.8.1 The linearity control unit shall be mounted as specified in 
IS : 9000 ( Part VII Sec 2 )-1979*. Samples shall be subjected to 
1 000 bumps at an acceleration of 250 m/s^. After the test, the linearity 
control unit shall be visually examined and shall not show any damage 
or deterioration. 



♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: 
Part VII Impact test. Section 2 Bump. 
Part VIII Vibration. 

Part XVIIT SolderabiUty test, Section 1 Solderability of wire and tag terminations. 
Part XIX Test for robustness of terminations and integral mounting devices: 

Section 1 Tensile test. 

Section 3 Bending test. 

11 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

7.8.2 The continuity of the winding shall be checked. 
7.9 Climatic Tests 

7,9.1 Climatic Sequence 

7.9.1.1 Dry heat — The components shall be subjected to this test 
in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part III Sec 5 )-1977*, the temperature 
of the test chamber being maintained at the appropriate maximum value 
for the category. 

At the end of the period of conditioning and while still at the high 
temperature, the insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance 
with 7*4.6 and shall be not less than the following values: 

1 or 50 Megaohms as specified in the relevant specification. 

The components shall then be removed from the dry heat chamber 
and allowed to remain under standard recovery conditions. 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no damage or deterioration. 

The insulation resistance shall be measured after recovery in accordance 
with 7.4,6 and shall be not less than the values specified in 7.4.6. 

7.9.1.2 Damp heat ( cyclic ) (first cycle ) — The components shall be 
subjected to the first cycle of this test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part V 
Sec 2 )-1981*. After the specified period of conditioning, the components 
shall be removed from the chamber and allowed to remain under standard 
recovery conditions for a period of one and a half hours. 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The marking 
shall be legible. 

7.9.1.3 Cold — The components shall be subjected to this test in 
accordance with IS : 9000 (Part II Sec 4 )-1977*, the temperature of 
the chamber being maintained at the appropriate value for the category 
of components under test. The duration of exposure shall be two hours. 
After the specified period of conditioning, the components shall be removed 
from the chamber and allowed to remain under standard recovery conditions 
for a period of two hours. 



*Basic environnxental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: 

Part 11 Cold test, Section 4 Gold test for heat dissipating hems with gradual change 

of temperature. 
Part ITT Dry heat les(:, Section T) Dry heal lest for heat dissipating items with 

gradual change of temperature. 
Part V Damp heat ( cyclic ) tests, Section 2 12 + 12 h cycle. 

12 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The insulation 
resistance shall not be less than the values specified in 7.4.6. The magni- 
fication factor shall be measured and this shall conform to the specified 
value. 

7.9.1.4 Loif air pressure — The components shall be subjected to this 
test in accordance with IS : 9000 (Part XIII)-1981*, the test chamber 
being maintained at a pressure appropriate to the category of the com- 
ponents. The duration of the exposure shall be five minutes. 

During the period of exposure, a test voltage equal to 120 percent 
of the working voltage shall be applied across the winding. 

The high voltage test shall be carried out in accordance with 7.4.5. 
During and after this test, there shall be no sign of glow, discharge, break- 
down, or flashover. 

7.9.1.5 Damp heat ( cyclic ) ( remaining cycle ) — The components shall 
be subjected to the remaining cycle, of this test in accordance with 
IS ; 9000 ( Part V Sec 2 )-i981*. 

After the specified period of conditioning, the components shall be 
removed from the chamber and allowed to recover under recovery 
conditions appropriate to this test. 

After recovery, the components, shall be visually examined. There 
sliall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The marking 
shall be legible. The voltage proof ( high voltage ) and insulation resistance 
tests shall be carried out in accordance with 7.4.5 and 7.4.6. 

The insulation resistance shall not be less than the values as specified 
in the relevant specification. 

After further period of recovery for 24 hours, the insulation resistance 
shall be measured in accordance with 7.4.6 and shall not be less than the 
values as specified in the relevant specification. 

The magnification factor shall be measured and shall conform to the 
specified value. 

7.10 Damp Heat ( Steady State ) — The components shall be subjected 
to this test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part IV )-1979*. The duration 
of the exposure shall be appropriate to the category of the components. 
During exposure, the normal polarizing voltage, to which the components 
will be subjected in the actual usage, shall be applied. After the specified 
period of conditioning, the components shall be removed from the chamber 
and allowed to recover under recovery conditions appropriate to this test. 



*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: 
Part IV Damp heat ( Steady State ). 
Part V Damp heat ( cyclic ) test, Section 2 12 + 12 h cycle. 
Part XIII low air pressure test. 

13 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

After recoveryj the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. Marking shall 
be legible. The insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance 
with 7.4,6 which shall not be less than the values as specified in the relevant 
specification. 

After further period of recovery for 24 hours, the insulation resistance 
shall be measured in accordance with 7.4.6 and it shall not be less than 
the values as specified in the relevant specification. 

The magnification factor shall be measured after the test and this 
shall conform to the specified value. 

7.11 Endurance — The component shall be operated at the maximum 
category temperature for the rated voltage and frequency for 2 000 hours. 
The loads shall be those for which the component is designed. After com- 
pletion of the specified duration of operation, the coil shall be exposed to 
recovery conditions for 24 hours and shall be subjected to the following 
tests ; 

a) Visual Examination — There shall be no deterioration so as to impair 
operations and the markings shall be legible. 

b) Insulation Resistance — The values shall not be less than those specified 
in 7.4.6. 

7.12 Mould Growth — The components shall be subjected to this test 
in accordance with IS : 9000 (Part X)-1979* 

After expiry of the specified period of exposure, there shall be no 
mould growth on the components visible to the naked eye. 

7.13 Rapid Change of Temperature ( When Specified ) — This test 
shall be carried out in accordance with IS ; 9000 ( Part XIV Sec 1 )- 
1978*. The maximum and minimum temperatures shall be appropriate 
to the category of the components. The total number of cycles shall be five. 
The period of exposure to both maximum and minimum temperature 
shall be one hour each. 

After exposure, the components shall be removed from the chamber 
and allowed to recover under conditions appropriate to this test. The 
components shall be visually examined and there shall be no visible damage 
or mechanical deterioration. 



*Basic environmental testing procedures for dectronic and electrical items: 
Part X Mould growth test. 

Part XIV Rapid change of temperaturcj Section 1 Rapid change of temperature 
by two-chamber method. 

14 



IS : 10076 ( Part I ) - 1981 

Ailcr recovery, the components shall be subjected to high voltage 
test and insulation resistance test in accordance with 7.4,5 and 7.4.6 res- 
pectively. The insulation resistance shall be not less than the values specified 
in 7.4.6. 

7.14 Salt Mist — The components shall be subjected to salt mist test in 
accordance with 7.10 of IS : 589-1961* the period of exposure shall be 
four days. 

After specified period of conditioning, the components shall be removed 
from the chamber and allowed to recover under recovery conditions 
appropriate to this test. 

After recovery and cleaning, the components shall be visually exa- 
mined. There shall be no corrosion or mechanical deterioration or any 
other visible damage. The marking shall be legible. The continuity of 
winding, and the robustness of terminations shall be checked. 



*Basic climatic and mechanical durability tests for components for electronic and electrical 
equipment ( revised ) , 



15 



