**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  10430  (2000) :  Criteria  for  Design  of  Lined  Canals  and 
Guidance  for  Selection  of  Type  of  Lining  [WRD  13:  Canals 
and  Cross  Drainage  Works] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


REAFFIRMED 

2009        IS  10430:2000 

37^^  WJ\  ^*  ^  r^vcdi^H  %  w^  ^^  ?r^ 

Indian  Standard 

CRITERIA  FOR  DESIGN  OF  LINED  CANALS  AND 
GUIDANCE  FOR  SELECTION  OF  TYPE  OF  LINING 

(First  Revision) 

ICS  93.160 


©  BIS  2000 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

October  2000  Price  Group  6 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1      AUGUST  2005 

TO 

IS  10430  :  2000    CRITERIA  FOR  DESIGN  OF 

LINED  CANALS  AND  GUIDANCE  FOR  SELECTION  OF 

TYPE  OF  LINING 

(First  Revision) 

[  Page  1,  clause  3(r)  ]  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

'r)     Availability  of  suitable  construction  material  within  economic  leads, 
such  as: 

1)  Cement  of  requisite  quality; 

2)  Building  lime  of  requisite  class; 

3 )  Flyash  for  use  as  pozzolana; 

4)  Suitable  clay  for  manufacture  of  calcined  clay  pozzolana; 

5)  Coarse  and  fine  aggregates; 

6)  Soil  of  suitable  quality  for  manufacture  of  burnt  clay  tiles/bricks; 

7)  Pulverized  fiiel  ash-lime  and/or  clay  flyash  building  bricks;  and 

8)  Stones  of  required  size  and  quality. ' 

[  Page  3,  clause  6(a)  ]  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 
'a)    Rigid  Lining 

1)  Stone-pitched  lining; 

2)  Burnt  clay  tile  or  brick  lining; 

3)  Burnt  bricks  or  pulverized  fuel  ash-lime  bricks  or  burnt  clay 

flyash  building  bricks  lining; 

4)  Precast  cement  concrete/stone  slab  lining; 

5)  Cement  concrete  tile  lining; 

6)  In  situ  cement/lime  concrete  lining; 

7)  Stone  masoniy  lining; 

8)  Soil  cement/soil  cement  and  flyash  lining; 

9)  Shotcrete  lining; 

10)  Ferrocement  lining;  and 

11)  Asphaltic  cement  concrete  hning. 


Amend  No.  1  to  IS  10430  :  2000 

[  Page  4,  clause  6Qy){\)  ]  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

1)  Geomembrane  like  High  Density  Polyethylene  (HDPE),  Polvinyl 
chloride  (PVC),  Low  Density  Polyethylene  (LDPE)  with  cover 
comprising  layer  of  bentonite  with  adequate  earth^umt  clay  tile  brick 
or  pulverized  fuel  ash-lime  brick  or  burnt  clay  flyash  building 
brick/precast  cement  concrete. ' 


(WRD13) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


Irrigation  Canals  and  Canal  Linings  Sectional  Committee,  WRD  13 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Irrigation  Canals  and  Canals  Linings  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Water  Resources 
Division  Council. 

Lining  of  canals  is  an  important  feature  of  irrigation  projects  as  it  improves  the  flow  characteristics  and 
minimises  the  loss  of  water  due  to  seepage.  The  water  thus  saved  can  be  utilised  for  the  extension  and  improvement 
of  irrigation.  Lining  of  water  courses  in  the  areas  irrigated  by  tubewells  assumes  special  significance  as  the 
pumped  water  supply  is  relatively  more  costly.  The  reduced  seepage  also  prevents  rise  of  the  sub-soil  water 
table  and  thus  reduces  the  possibility  of  damage  to  the  adjoining  areas  by  water  logging.  Further,  due  to 
adoption  of  higher  velocities  in  a  lined  canal  there  is  a  saving  in  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  canal  and  land 
width  required,  with  corresponding  saving  in  the  cost  of  excavation  and  masonry  works.  It  helps  in  retention 
of  shape  of  the  canal.  Lining  also  results  in  improvement  of  command  and  larger  working  head  for  power 
generation. 

This  standard  deals  with  design  of  lined  canals.  However,  before  lining  of  a  canal  is  decided,  techno-economic 
justification  for  the  same  should  be  established.  Selection  of  a  particular  type  of  lining  should  be  arrived  at 
based  on  materials  available  and  overall  cost  vis-a-vis  saving  in  seepage  and  head.  Performance  data  for 
various  types  of  lining  shall  be  collected  and  consulted  before  deciding  on  a  particular  type  of  lining. 

Only  general  guidelines  with  regard  to  factors  influencing  the  selection  of  the  type  of  lining  are  given  in  this 
standard,  for  the  assistance  of  the  designer.  But  each  project  should  be  individually  analysed  taking  into 
consideration  its  peculiar  features. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1982.  The  first  revision  has  been  taken  up  in  the  light  of  the  comments 
received  from  the  Irrigation  departments  of  various  states.  In  this  revision  functions  of  lining  and  various  types 
of  lining  have  been  included.  Changes  in  side  slopes,  free  board,  etc,  have  also  been  incorporated. 

There  is  no  ISO  standard  on  the  subject.  This  standard  has  been  prepared  based  on  indigenous  manufacturers' 
data/practices  in  the  field  in  India. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  1960  *Rulesforroundingoff  numerical  values  (rm^e<i)\  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the 
rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  10430  :  2000 

Indian  Standard 

CRITERIA  FOR  DESIGN  OF  LINED  CANALS  AND 
GUIDANCE  FOR  SELECTION  OF  TYPE  OF  LINING 

(First  Revision) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  lays  down  design  criteria  tor  lined  canals 
and  presents  guidelines  for  selection  of  type  of  lining. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  Indian  Standards  contain  provisions 
which  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute 
provisions  of  this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication 
the  editions  indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are 
subject  to  revision  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on 
this  standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the 
standards  indicated  below: 

'IS  No.  Title 

4558  :  1995       Code  of  practice  for  under  drainage 
of  lined  canals  (second  revision) 

9451  :  1994       Guidelines  for  lining  of  canals  in 
expansive  soils  (second  revision) 

3  NECESSARY  INFORMATION 

For  arriving  at  a  suitable  design  of  a  lined  canal  and 
for  selection  of  type  of  lining  the  following  infor- 
mation is  necessary  for  the  entire  length  of  the  canal: 

a)  Capacity  —  Capacity  required  for  the  canal  to 
irrigate  the  command  depends  on  the  crop 
pattern,  irrigation  intensity,  rotation  period, 
water  required  during  critical  period,  trans- 
mission losses,  etc.  For  fixing  the  canal  capacity, 
a  design  statement,  or  capacity  statement  should 
be  separately  prepared,  reach  by  reach.  The 
section  of  a  particular  reach  should  be  designed 
for  the  maximum  discharge  in  that  reach. 

NOTE  —  Suitable  transmission  loss  (  niVs  per  million 
square  metre  of  wetted  perimeter)  for  lined  canal 
depending  upon  the  type  of  lining,  climatic  condi- 
tions shall  be  assumed. 

b)  Longitudinal-section  along  the  canal  alignment 
plotted  generally  to  a  horizontal  scale  of  1  in 
10  000  and  a  vertical  scale  of  I  in  100.  Vertical 
scale  may  be  changed,  if  desired,  depending 
upon  the  drop  in  the  ground  levels; 

c)  Full  supply  level  (FSL),  bank  level  and  the  bed 
level  of  the  parent  canal  (if  any); 


d) 


Cross-sections  along  the  canal  alignment  an 
intervals  not  more  than  300  m  for  a  uniform 
terrain  and  at  closer  intervals  for  undulating 
terrain.  The  cross-sections  should  extend  at  least 
1 0  metres  beyond  the  limits  of  canal  section  on 
both  sides; 


e) 


t) 


Road  and  railway  crossings,  cart/pedestrian 
tracks,  drainage  crossings,  etc; 

Nature  and  quantity  of  sediment  likely  to  be 
transported; 

g)  Profile  of  soil  up  to  at  least  half  the  full  supply 
depth  or  1  m  whichever  is  more,  below  the  canal 
bed  level  along  the  canal  alignment  at  500  m 
intervals.  However,  if  any  variation  in  soil  strata 
is  found,  the  spacing  shall  be  at  shorter  intervals. 
Soil  samples  should  be  tested  for  usual  soil 
properties  including  permeability,  swelling 
pressures,  and  dispersive  properties; 

Salt  content  of  the  soil,  specially  presence  of 
sulphates,  to  be  determined  at  suitable  intervals; 

Sub-soil  water  level  and  its  quality  along  the 
canal  alignment; 

Availability  of  skilled  and  unskilled  labour; 
m)   Availability  of  construction  machinery; 
n)    Cattle  traffic; 

Climatic  and  other  local  conditions; 

Thickness  of  ice  formation  (if  applicable); 

Availability  of  suitable  construction  materials 
within  economic  leads,  such  as: 

1)  Coarse  and  fine  aggregate  for  canal  lining; 

2)  Soil  for  making  tiles/bricks;  and 

3)  Stones  of  required  size,  specific  gravity  and 
soundness  for  stone  lining. 

4  FUNCTIONS  OF  LINING 

4.1  The  functions  of  lining  pxe: 

a)  Seepage  control, 

b)  Prevention  of  water  logging, 

c)  Increased  hydraulic  efficiency, 

d)  Increased  resistance  to  erosion/abraison. 


h) 


J) 


k) 


P) 
q) 
r) 


IS  10430  :  2000 


e)     Reduction  in  cross-section  area  and 
consequential  smaller  structures,  and 

1)     Low  operation  and  maintenance  cost. 

4.1.1  Seepage  Control 

The  seepage  control  mainly  depends  on  the  soundness 
and  impermeability  of  lining.  Seepage  losses  also 
depend  on  nature  and  permeability  of  soil,  depth  of 
water  in  the  canal  and  position  of  sub-soil  water  table 
below  the  bed  level.The  permissible  seepage  losses 
depend  on  the  local  conditions  such  as  value  of  water 
and  any  likely  damage  to  land  and  other  property  by 
water  loggings,  etc. 

Generally  canal  reaches  of  sufficient  length  having 
permeability  of  1  x  10'^'  cm/s  or  less  need  not  be  lined 
v/hen  the  velocity  in  the  canal  does  not  exceed  the 
permissible  velocity.  However,  reaches  of  permeability 
!  X  1 0"^'  cm/s  or  less  may  be  lined,  particularly  in  power 
cliannels,  for  hydraulic  efficiency  and  erosion  resis- 
tance. Canal  reaches  of  greater  permeability  may  be 
lined  with  suitable  material. 

4.1.2  Increased  Hydraulic  Efficiency 

The  discharge  carrying  capacity  of  a  canal  varies 
inversely  with  the  value  of  rugosity  coefficient  of  a 
particular  type  of  lining.  It  may,  however,  undergo 
changes  with  passage  of  time,  it  may  decrease  with 
the  lining  undergoing  deterioration  and  consequent 
increase  in  roughness. 

4.1.2.1  The  values  of  rugosity  coefficient  (n)  to  be 
used  in  Manning's  formula  for  various  types  of  linings 
are  given  m  Table  I . 

4.1.2.2  Effective  rugosity  coefficient 

An  effective  rugosity  co-efficient  is  possible  to  be 
derived  m  such  situation  where  the  sides  and  bed  are 
having  different  types  of  lining.  For  such  channels 
the  equivalent  manning's  'n  can  be  calculated  by  the 
following  formula; 

N 
[(^{n^'^jx)^' 
i^  1 


Table  1  Values  of  Rugosity  Coefficient  (n)  for 
Lined  Canals  with  Straight  Alignment 

(Clauses 4A2 A  and  4.L2.2) 


where 

n 
P 


lengths  of  different  portion  of  perimeter 
with  corresponding  roughness; 

roughness  of  portion  p.;  and 


SI  No, 

Surface  Characteristics 

Value  of  *«* 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

i) 

Concrete  with  surface  as  indicated 
below: 

a)    Formed,  no  finish/PCC  tiles 

0.018-0.020 

or  slabs 

b)    Trowel  float  finish 

0.015-0.018 

c)    Gunited  finish 

0.018-0.022 

ii) 

Brick/tile  lining 

0.018-0.020 

iii) 

U.C.R./Random  rubble  masonry 
with  pointing 

0.024-0.026 

iv) 

Asphalt 

a)    Smooth 

0.013-0.015 

b)    Rough 

0.016-0.018 

V) 

Concrete  bed  trowel/float  finish 
and  slopes  as  indicated  below: 

a)    Hammer  dressed  stone 

0.019-0.021 

masonry 

b)    Coursed  rubble  masonry 

0.018-0.020 

c)    Random  rubble  masonry 

0.020-0.025 

d)    Masonry  plastered 

0.015-0.017 

e)    Stone  pitched  lining 

0.020-0.030 

vi) 

Gravel  bed  with  side  slope  characteristics 

as  given  below: 

a)    Formed  concrete 

0.02-0.022 

b)    Random  rubble  in  mortar 

0.017-0.023 

c)    Dry  rubble  (rip-rap) 

0.023-0.033 

Co-efficients  as  given  in  SI  No.  (v)  and  (vi)  of  Table  1 
are  suggested  for  some  cases,  where  an  analytical 
derivation,  as  above,  is  not  feasible. 


NOTES 

1  For  canals  with  an  alignment  other  than  the  straight,  a 
small  increase  in  the  value  of  '«'  may  be  made  or 
alternatively  bend  losses  may  be  accounted  for.  In  case 
of  canals  with  relatively  higher  discharges  in  straight 
reaches,  lower  values  of  '«'  indicated  may  be  adopted. 

2  The  Vi'  value  shall  be  decided  in  view  of  the  age  of 
lining,  surface  roughness,  weed  growth,  channel  irregu- 
larities, canal  alignment,  silting,  suspended  material  and 
bed  load,  etc. 


4.1.3  Increased  Resistance  to  Erosion 

Sometimes  the  canal  transports  considerable  amount 
of  sediment  which  can  damage  the  lining  by  abrasion. 
The  lining  shall,  therefore,  be  able  to  withstand  such 
abrasion. 

NOTE  —  Cement  concrete  and  stone  masonry  linings 
provide  better  abrasion  resistance  as  compared  to  brick 
tile  lining. 

4.1.4  Prevention  of  Water  Logging 

There  is  increase  in  ground  water  level  if  the  canals 
remain  unlined.  This  condition,  if  unchecked,  brings 
alkali  salt  to  the  surface  rendering  land  unfit  for 


IS  10430  :  2000 


cultivation.  Lining  of  canals  reduces  the  seepage 
appreciably  and  thus  prevents  the  occurrence  of  water 
logging  condition. 

4.1.5  Reduction  in  Cross-Sectional  Area 

With  the  increase  in  efficiency  of  canal  due  to  lining 
and  higher  velocity,  reduced  areas  of  cross-section  is 
required  to  pass  same  discharge.  Consequently,  there 
is  large  saving  in  the  cost  of  land  acquisition  and  also 
of  canal  structures. 

4.1.6  Low  Operation  and  Maintenance  Cost 

Unlined  canals  require  considerably  increased  operation 
and  maintenance  cost  for  periodical  removal  of  silt, 
minor  repairs,  removal  of  weeds  and  water  plants.  The 
provision  of  lining  reduce  these  costs  considerably. 

5  REQUIREMENTS  OF  LINING 

5.1  General 

The  following  are  the  important  requirements  for  the 
selection  of  type  of  canal  lining: 

a)  Economy; 

b)  Structural  stability; 

c)  Strength  and  durability; 

d)  Repairability  and  easy  maintenance; 

e)  Maximum  hydraulic  efficiency; 

f)  Impermeability; 

g)  Resistance  to  erosion; 

h)  Ability  to  prevent  weed  growth; 

j)    Resistance  against  burrowing  animals;  and 

k)  Reasonable  flexibility. 

The  lining  material  shall  be  so  selected  that  it  should 
meet  most  of  the  requirements  for  the  specific  site. 

5.1.1  Economy 

The  selection  of  suitable  type  of  lining  for  any  project 
is  mainly  a  question  of  economics  and  availability  of; 

a)  material  available  within  economical  leads; 

b)  skilled  and  unskilled  labour; 

c)  construction  machinery  and  equipment;  and 

d)  time  required  during  which  the  work  should  be 
completed. 

The  type  of  lining  selected  should  not  only  be  econo- 
mical in  initial  costs,  but  also  in  repair  and  mainte- 
nance in  the  long  run, 

5.1.2  Structural  Stability 

The  sides  of  the  canal  to  be  lined  should  preferably  be 
kept  at  the  stable  slope  of  the  soil  so  that  there  is  no 


earth  pressure  or  any  other  external  pressure  against 
the  lining.  Pressure  due  to  saturated  backfill  and  the 
differential  water  head  across  lining  should  be  avoided. 
Arrangements  like  weep  holes,  graded  filter  behind 
weep  holes  shall  be  made  so  that  no  water  gets  behind 
the  lining  from  an  external  sources. 

Where  the  side  slopes  are  made  steeper  than  the  stable 
slopes  of  the  soil,  or  where  external  pressures  cannot 
be  avoided,  the  lining  will  have  to  be  designed  accor- 
dingly in  such  special  case. 

To  provide  relief  from  differential  pressure,  adequate 
sub-soil  drainage  arrangements  and  pressure  release 
arrangements  {see  IS  4558)  shall  be  provided  wherever 
necessary. 

5.1.3  Strength  and  Durability 

The  canal  lining  shall  be  able  to  withstand  the  effect 
of  velocity  of  water,  rain,  sunshine,  frost,  freezing  and 
thawing  (where  applicable),  temperature  and  moisture 
changes,  chemical  action  of  salts,  etc.  With  suitable 
treatment,  lining  should  be  able  to  withstand  the  effect 
of  gypsum,  black  cotton  soil/bentonite.  It  should  also 
be  able  to  withstand  the  damaging  effect  caused  by 
abrasions,  cattle  traffic,  rodents  and  weed  growth. 

5.1.3.1  For  the  purpose  of  economic  analysis,  the  life 
expectancy  of  concrete,  brick/tile  and  stone  pitched 
lining  may  be  assumed  to  be  of  the  order  of  60  years. 
However,  experience  gained  from  data  on  lined 
canal  in  the  vicinity  can  be  utilized  to  review  the  life 
expectancy  of  lining. 

5.1.4  Repairability/Easy  Maintenance 

Since  with  lapse  of  time  the  lining  may  get  damaged, 
it  should  be  such  that  it  can  be  repaired  easily  and 
economically. 

5.1.4.1  Brick/tile,  stone-pitched  and  precast  slab 
linings  are  more  easily  repairable  or  replaceable  than 
in-situ  concrete  lining. 

5.1.5  General 

Other  factors  indicated  in  5.1  (e)  to  5.1  (h)  are  achieved 
to  different  extent  by  various  options  available  for 
lining. 

The  multi-dimensional  effect  of  choice  on  the  various 
parameters  affecting  the  requirements  thus  require  a 
judicious  evaluations  before  a  final  choice. 

6  DIFFERENT  TYPES  OF  LININGS 

a)  Rigid  Lining 

1)  Stone-pitched  lining; 

2)  Burnt  clay  tile  or  brick  lining; 

3)  Precast  cement  concrete/stone  slab  lining; 

4)  In-situ  cement  lime/concrete  lining; 


IS  10430  :  2000 


5)  Stone  masonry  lining; 

6)  Soil  cement  lining; 

7)  Shotcrete  lining;  and 

8)  Asphaltic  cement/concrete. 

b)    Flexible  Lining 

1)  Geomembrane  like  High  Density  Polye- 
thylene (HDPE),  Polyvinyl  chloride  (PVC,) 
Low  Density  polyethylene  (LDPE)  cover 
comprising  layer  of  ben  to  rite  with  adequate/ 
earth/burnt  clay  tile  brick/precast  cement 
concrete, 

Bituminous  or  bituminous/asphaltic  felt 
lining, 

Fibre  reinforced  plastic  tissue  as  phallic 
membrane,  and 


2) 
3) 
4) 


Composite  membrane/rubber  lining. 

c)   Combination  Lining  (membrane  in  the  bed  and 
brick/tile  or  concrete  lining  on  sides) 

7  SELECTION  OF  LINING 

7.1  Considerations  for  Selection 

Taking  mto  consideration  all  the  above  factors, 
suitable  types  of  lining  for  different  sizes  of  canals 
will  be  selected  on  the  basis  of  type  of  subgrade, 
position  of  water  table,  climatic  conditions,  availability 
of  materials,  speed  of  construction,  time  schedule, 
performance  of  lining  in  the  existing  canals  in  the 
adjoining  areas.  Adoption  of  a  particular  type  of  lining 
will  require  careful  consideration  of  all  these  factors. 

7.2  After  collecting  necessary  information  as  given 
in  3.1,  the  entire  canal  or  specific  reaches  to  be  lined, 
may  be  decided  as  per  4.1.1.  The  types  of  lining 


generally  suitable  for  the  site  condition  may  be  listed 
in  the  light  of  5  and  6.  The  most  economical  of  the 
linings  selected  from  amongst  the  suitable  linings  may 
be  evaluated  as  per  Annex  A  for  economical  viability. 
To  select  type  of  lining  to  keep  seepage  within  desirable 
limits,  reference  may  also  be  made  to  performance  data 
of  existing  canals.  There  may  be  other  intangible 
factors  like  presence  of  high  population  intensity, 
aesthetics,  limitations  of  land  availability,  etc,  which 
may  influence  the  final  selection  of  type  of  lining. 

8  PARAMETER  FOR  DESIGN  OF  LINED 
CANALS 

8.1  Side  Slopes 

8.1.1  inner  Slopes  of  Lined  Canals 

Lining  is  usually  made  to  rest  on  stable  slopes  of  the 
natural  soil;  so  slopes  should  be  such  that  no  earth 
pressure  or  any  other  external  pressure  is  exerted  over 
the  back  of  the  lining.  Sudden  drawdown  of  water 
level  in  the  lined  canal  should  be  controlled  by  strict 
operation  rules  and  regulations  to  avoid  external 
pressure  on  the  lining.  However  where  chance  of 
sudden  drawdown  in  the  canal  is  considerable,  the 
canal  slopes  should  be  checked  for  stability  using  slip 
circle  analysis  as  given  in  IS  7894.  In  addition,  other 
suitable  measures  like  adequate  drainage  should  be 
provided  before  lining  work  commences.  As  a  rule, 
steeper  slopes  are  economical  but  stable  slopes 
depending  on  type  of  soil  are  preferred.  For  general 
guidance,  the  following  side  slopes  as  given  in  Table 
2  are  recommended. 

8.1.2  Outer  Slopes  of  Lined  Canal 

Suggested  outer  slopes  for  lined  canals  are  seen  in 
some  of  the  typical  sections  such  as  given  in  Fig.  lA, 
IB,  2A,  2B,  etc.  However,  engineering  properties  of 


Table  2  Recommended  Side  Slopes 

{Clauses  A  A) 


SI  No. 

T^'pe  of  Soil 

i) 

Very  light  loose 

sand  to  average  sandy  soil 

li) 

Sandy  loam 

iii) 

Sandy  gravel/murum 

iv) 

Black  cotton 

V) 

Clayey  soils 

vi) 


Rock 


Side  Slopes  (Horizontal  :  Vertical) 

2:1    to  3  :  1 


)  .5  :  1  to  2  :  1  (in  cutting) 
2  :  i  (in  embankment) 

1.5  :  1  (in  cutting) 

\.5  :  1  to  2  :  1  (in  embankment) 

1.5  :  1  to  2.5  :  1  (in  cutting) 
2  :  I  to  3.5  :  1  (in  embankment) 

1 .3  :  1  to  2  ;  1  (in  cutting) 

1 .5  :  1  to  2.5  :  1  (in  embankment) 

0.25  :  1  to  0.5  :  1 


NOTE  —  The  above  sIope55  are  recommended  for  depth  of  cutting/height  of  embankment  up  to  6  m.  For  depth/height 
in  excess  of  the  above,  special  studies  for  the  stability  of  slopes  are  recommended. 


IS  10430  :  2000 


soil  shall  govern  the  design  of  outer  slopes  giving 
due  consideration  to  stability  of  slopes  for  functional 
situations  (like  moist  conditions  of  fill,  etc.)  The  need 
for  introduction  of  berms  will  also  be  kept  in  view 
where  the  fill  height  is  in  excess  of  6  m. 

8.2  Free  Board 

Free  board  shall  be  measured  from  the  full  supply  level 
to  the  top  of  lining.  Minimum  free  boards  for  various 
canal  discharge-are  given  below. 

Canal  Discharge  Free  Board 

More  than  10  cumecs  0.75  m 

Between  3  to  10  cumecs  0.60  m 

1  to  3  cumecs  0.50  m 

Less  than  1  cumec  0.30  m 

Less  than  0.1  cumec  0.15  m 

(Water  Course) 

8.3  Berm 

In  deep  cut  reaches  of  canals  with  discharge  capacity 
exceeding  10  cumecs,  it  is  desirable  to  provide  berms 
of  3  m  to  5  m  width  on  each  side  for  stability,  facility 
of  maintenance,  silt  clearance,  etc  {see  Fig.  ICj.  In 
such  sections,  the  inner  sides  above  the  berms  may  be 
provided  with  turfing. 

8.4  Bank  Top  Width 

The  width  of  the  banks  may  vary  according  to  the 
importance  and  capacity  of  the  canal.  In  case  of 
distributaries,  service  road  should  be  provided  on  one 
bank  for  inspection  and  maintenance  purpose. 
However,  in  case  of  main  and  branch  canals  service 
road  should  be  provided  on  both  the  banks.  The 
minimum  values  recommended  for  top  width  of  the 
bank  are  as  follows: 


Discharge 

Minimum  Bank  Top 

Width 

(mVs) 

'inspection  Bank/ 

Non 

Inspection ' 

Wider  Bank 

Bank/Other  Bank 

m 

m 

0.15  to  1.5 

4.0 

1.5 

1.5  to  3.0 

4.0 

2.0 

3.0  to  10.0 

4.0  +  dowel 

2.5 

10.0  to  30.0 

5.0  + dowel 

4.0 

30-0  and  above           6.0  +  dowel 

5.0 

NOTES 

1  Bank  widths  given  above  may  be  altered  when  justified 
by  specific  conditions. 

2  For  distributary  canals  canning  less  than  3.0  cumecs  and 
minor  canals,  it  is  generally  not  economical  to  construct  a 
service  road  on  top  of  bank  as  this  usually  requires  more 
materials  than  the  excavation  provides.  In  such  cases, 
service  road  suitably  lowered  below  top    of  lining  may  be 


provided  on  natural  ground  surface  and  adjacent  to  the 
bank;  however,  the  importance  of  providing  adequate 
service  roads  where  they  are  needed  should  always  be 
kept  in  view.  The  service  road  should  be  above  normally 
encountered  high  flood  level  (HFL)  with  some  free  board. 

3  Where  the  stability  of  the  embankment  is  required,  wider 
bank  widths  can  be  provided.  Turfing  should  be  provided 
on  the  outer  slopes. 

4  In  hilly  terrain  where  it  is  not  possible  to  provide  above 
bank  widths,  the  bank  widths  may  be  suitably  reduced. 

5  When  the  bank  widths  are  reduced  on  exceptional 
ground,  refuges  after  every  100  m  should  be  provided  for 
passing  and  sheltering  of  opposing  traffic. 

8.5  Dowla  (Dowel 'Dwarf  Bund') 

Suitable  dowels  may  be  provided  on  the  canal  side  of 
the  service  road,  on  one  or  both  the  banks  depending 
upon  the  type  and  size  of  the  lined  canal.  From 
economic  consideration,  dowels  may  be  replaced  by 
parapets  particularly  in  case  of  high  embankments. 
However,  the  parapet  should  not  be  considered 
additional  free  board.  To  check  the  ingress  of  rain  water 
behind  the  lining  of  the  side  slopes  of  the  canals, 
horizontal  cement  concrete  coping  100  mm  to 
150  mm  thick,  depending  upon  size  of  canal  should 
be  provided  at  the  top  of  lining.  The  width  of  coping 
at  the  top  shall  not  be  less  than  225  mm  for  discharge 
up  to  3  cumecs,  350  mm  for  discharge  more  than  3 
cumecs  and  550  mm  for  discharge  more  than  10 
cumecs. 

8.6  Roadway  and  Drainage 

Wherever  additional  spoil  banks  are  to  be  provided 
on  the  land  side  of  the  embankment,  adequate  drainage 
channels  shall  be  provided  with  suitable  slope  on  the 
roadway  sloping  away  from  the  canal  side.  No  rain 
water  shall  be  allowed  to  flow  or  percolate  towards 
the  canal  slope  behind  the  linings. 

8.7  Typical  Cross-Sections 

Typical  cross-sections  of  the  lined  canals  in  cutting 
and  filling  are  given  in  Fig.  1  and  2.  Three  typical 
cross-sections  of  lined  canals  in  rock  cutting  are  shown 
in  Fig.  3.  Depending  upon  the  quality  of  rock,  full 
supply  discharge,  velocity,  depth  of  flow  and  bed 
width,  similar  arrangements  may  be  adopted. 

8.8  Cross-Section,  Discharge  and  Velocity 

8.8.1        The  cross-section  of  lined  canal  may  be 

a)  trapezoidal  with  or  without  rounded 
corners  (see  Fig.  1 ).  This  section  can  be 
used  for  all  types  of  lined  canals. 

b)  cup  shaped  {seeFig.  2).  It  may  be  used 
for  distributaries/minors  for  discharge 
up  to  3mVs  as  far  as  possible. 


IS  10430  :  2000 


8.8.2    The  discharge  that  can  pass  through  a  canal 
section  is  calculated  by 


Q^A  xV       (mVs) 


where 


A        =  area  of  cross-section  in  m^,  and 
V       =  mean  velocity  in  m/s. 
8.8.3       The  mean  velocity  V^^^.^^^  is  given  by  : 


V       =• 

mean 


'    -(m/s) 


n 


where 


R^^  =    hydraulic  mean  depth  (- A/P)  (m); 

A    -    cross  sectional  area  (m^); 

P    -    wetted  perimeter  (m); 

S    =    longitudinal  slope  of  water  surface 
(m/m);  and 

n    -    rugosity  coefficient  as  given  in 
Table  L 

8.8.4  The  critical  velocity  ratio  should  be  aimed  at 
higher  than  unity  or  by  any  other  method,  it  should  be 
ensured  that  silting  will  not  take  place  in  the  lined 
canal. 

8.8.5  Limiting  Velocities  in  Different  Types  of  Lining 
The  maximum  permissible  velocities  for  guidance  for 


some  types  of  lining  are  given  below: 

a)  Stone-pitched  lining  1.5  m/s 

b)  Burnt  clay  tile  or  brick  lining       1.8  m/s 

c)  Cement  concrete  lining  2.7  m/s 

9  UNDER  DRAINAGE 

9.1  Embankments  of  relatively  permeable  soil  do  not 
need  drainage  measures  behind  the  lining.  However, 
the  following  conditions  require  suitable  under  drainage 
measures  to  be  provided  to  protect  the  canal  lining  in 
accordance  with  IS  4558. 

i)  Where  the  lined  canal  passes  through  an  area 
with  seasonal  ground  water  level  higher  likely 
to  be  higher  than  the  water  level  inside  the  canal, 

ii)  Where  sub  grade  is  sufficiently  impermeable  to 
prevent  the  free  drainage  of  seepage  or  leakage 
from  the  canal,  and 

iii)  Where  there  is  built  up  pressure  due  to  time  lag 
between  drainage  of  the  sub-grade  following 
drawdown  of  canal. 

10  EXPANSIVE  SOIL 

10.1  In  reaches  of  expansive  soil  where  swelling 
pressure  is  more  than  50  kN/m^  reference  may  be 
made  to  IS  9451. 


IS  10430  :  2000 


FREE  BOARD 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  I  a  Natural  Ground  Below  Bed 


»  1  TO  1   -'  1 


r"°    h 


"  1   P" 

»-150o|-*^ ^ 


BANK  WIDTH -*4 


INBO^^OUI 


BOUNDARY  ROAD 
5000  APPROX 


-    DOTTED  UNE  REPRESENT 
CONSTRUCTION  SEQUENCE 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  IB  Natural  Ground  Between  Bed  and  Full  Supply  Level 


H- SANK  WIDTH -J   J 

I  -fll  I— '»» 

I  S*t  IN  80 


^iO 


-  BOUNDARY  ROAD 
5000  APPROX 


1  J^\   j  500-1 

— J  1—600 


_-  COPING 
/  I—  FREE  BOARD 


UNINGBED-F 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  1 C  Natural  Ground  is  Avove  Top  of  Lining 


IS  10430:2000 


LEFT     BANK 


tOFCUP    — -U 
SHAPED  rjkNAL 


1 


-  BOUNDARY  ROAD 
5000APPROX. 


RIGHT    BANK 

-  FREEBOARD 


I*— BANK  WIDTH J 

^1 S  -  1IN  60*  I 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  2A  Natural  Ground  Below  Bed 


1500  min »-|  Um- 


LEFT    BANK 


h— £OFCUP 
SHAPED  CANAL 


FREEBOARD 


RtGHT     BANK 

ISOOtnln 


..^^ ISOOtnln 

—  <£OFCUP  L— -BANK  WIDTH —*4         f— 4- 1500 

SHAPED  CANAL  \\  W  's~ 

r  FREE  BOARD  S=1.5TO1^^  |         |  I        'h*^^]~'^^^^^^^ 


DOTTED  LINE  REPRESENT  - 
CONSTRUCTION  SEQUENCE 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  2B  Natural  Ground  Between  Bed  and  Full  Supply  Level 


IS  10430:2000 


in L>^ 


;  =  t  TO  1  -7       6000  m«  <> 


s«  1  m  20 
1000 


LEFT   BANK 


4.0FCUP  - 


BOUNDARY  ROAD 
5000APPROX 


RIGHT    BANK 


sy.rrMeo  k 


mA      Y ""^ 


A 


f^y    V.** 


^6000  max  -s-ITQ 


BOUNDARY  ROAD  - 
SOOOAPPROX 


Ail  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  2C  Natural  Ground  is  Avove  Top  of  Lining 


IS  10430:2000 


20  mm  THICK  PLA5TFR1WG  \ 
CEMCNT  MORTAR  I'.t- 


FILLING  UP  TO  UNDER  SlOE   OF  LINING  WITH  ROCK  SPALLS   AND 
CHIPS   AVAILABLE  .FROM  CANAL   CUTTING  tTYPl  LEAN  CEMENT 
CONCRETE 


300  mm  |THlCK  RANDOM  RUBBLE  MASONRY  IN  CEMENT  MORTAR 
Mi.  MIX  WITH  20  7,  REPLACEMENT  OF  CEMENT    BV  FlY   ASH 
AND  EXPOSED  FACE  PLASTERED  WITH    20  mm  THICK  CEMENT 
MORTAR    !:i   WITH  ?0V.  REPLACEMENT    OF   CEMENT  SY   FLY 
ASH 


PRESSURE   RELIEF  VALVES  75  mm  OIA  IN  FILTER 
POCKETS  PROVIDED    AT    10  000  mm  C/C  IN  TV^O 
ROWS    2  000  mm  APART   STAGGERED  (TYPlCALl 


'■REFILLING  UR  TO  UNDER  SIDE 
OF  LINING  WITH  SPALLS  AND 
CHIPS/LEAN  CEMENT  CONCRETE 


PRESSURE  RELIEF  VALV£S   7S  mm  DIA  IN  FILTER  POCKETS 
PROVIDED    AT   10  000  mm  C/C  IN  TWO  ROWS  2  DOO  mm 
APART  (STAGGERED) 


PRESSURE   RELIEF  VALVES 
75  mm  DIA  IN  FILTER  POCKET7 

20  mm  THICK  CEMENT  PLASTEft 
WITH  CEMENT  MORTAR   l;i 
WITH  20%  REPLACEMENT  [ 
CEMENT   BY  FU    ASH^ 

1  000  mm  WIDTH 
MANUALLY  PACKED 
CONCRETE-v 


HOOmm  THICK  CEMENT 
CONCRETE  (M-T50)  LINING 


DETAIL    AT    A 


3A  CAST-IN-SITU  CEMENT  CONCRETE  LINING  IN   BED  AND 
RANDOM  RUBBLE  MASONRY  LINING  ON  SIDES 


20  mm  THICK  PLASTER  IN 
CEMENT  MORTAR  114- 


-loo  mm  THICK  COPING  ICEMENT 
CONCRETE    M  100 


■REFILLING  UffJO  UNDER  SIDE 
OF  LINING  WfTH  ROCK  SPALLS 
AND  CHIPS  AVAILABLE  FROM 
CANAL  CUTTING  LEAN/CEMENT 
CONCRETE  (TYPICAL) 


PRESSURE  RELIEF 
VALVE  <^75mm 


ILTER  MATERIAL 

-75  mm  AVERAGE 
POROUS  CONCRETE 
^PRESSURE  RELIEF   VALVES   7S  mm  QIA  IN  FILTER 
POCKETS  PROVIDED   AT    T  000  mm  C/C  IM  TWO 
ROWg  AT  ENDS  OF  8E0  (STAGGERED! 

3B  CAST-IN-SITU   CEMENT   CONCRETE   (M-]50)  LINING  IN 
BED  ANO  RANDOM  RUBBLE  MASONRY  I ININP,  nw  ctncc 


300' 
FOUNDATION 
CONCRETE  WV5 


LINING  IN  CtMtHT  rONCREIE 

CONCRETE  (M  tSOl         ^^'^^^^^^ 


3C  CAST-IN-SITU  CEMENT  CONCRETE  (M-i50]  LINING  IN 
BED. AND  RANDOM  RUBBLE  MASONRY  LINING  ON  SIDES 


NOTES  ,     ^   ^       ^     ., 

1  In  case  of  sound  rock,  cement  concrete  lining  may  be  provided  m  bed  and  sides. 
On  sides,  the  lining  may  be  anchored  suitably  to  the  rock  behind. 

2  All  the  dimensions  are  in  millimetres  unless  otherwise  specified. 

Fig.  3  Typical  Cross-Sections  of  Lined  Canals  in  Rock  Cutting 


10 


IS  10430 :  2000 


ANNEX  A 

{Clause  12) 

ECONOMICS  OF  CANAL  LINING 


A-1  NOTATIONS 

A-1.1  For  the  purpose  of  analysis  for  determining  the 
maximum  rate  of  expenditure  on  lining  that  is 
economically  justifiable,  the  following  notations 
should  apply: 

C  :  Cost  of  lining  in  rupees  per  square  metre 
including  the  additional  cost  of  dressing 
the  banks  for  lining. 

C  '  :  Saving  in  the  land,  earthwork  and  struc- 
tures (bridges,  cross  drainage  works,  etc) 
due  to  reduced  section  on  account  of 
lining,  in  rupees. 

s  and  S  Seepage  losses  in  unlined  and  lined  canal 
respectively  in  cubic  metres  per  square 
metre  of  wetted  surface  per  day. 

p  and  P  Wetted  perimeter  in  metres  of  unlined  and 
lined  sections  respectively. 

T       =        Total  perimeter  of  lining  in  metres. 

d  -  Number  of  running  days  of  the  canal  per 
year. 

W      =        Value  of  water  saved  in  rupees  per  cum. 

L       ~       Length  of  the  canal  in  metres. 

Y       =       Life  of  the  canal  in  years. 

M  =  Annual  saving  in  rupees  in  operation  and 
maintenance  due  to  lining. 

B  ~  Annual  estimated  value  in  rupees  of  other 
benefit  for  the  length  of  canal  under  consi- 
deration. These  will  include  prevention  of 
water  logging,  reduced  cost  of  drainage  for 
adjoining  lands,  reduced  risk  of  breaching, 
etc. 


X       =       Percent  rate  of  interest  per  year. 

a       ~       Total  annual  benefits  resulting  from  the 
lining  of  canals. 

A-2  METHOD 

A-2.1  The  annual  value  of 
water  lost  by  seepage 
from  the  unlined  section  =  /7L5^Wrupees 

The  annual  saving  by 
lining  in  value  of 
water  otherwise  lost 
by  seepage  if  unlined 

Total  annual  benefits 
resulting  from  the 
lining  of  canals,  a 


--(pLsdW-PLSdW)Iis 
--{LdWips-PS)}Rs 


■.{Uw{ps~PS) 
-Hfi  +  M}Rs  .. 


.(1) 


A-2. 1.1  Additional  capital  expenditure  on 
construction  of  lined  canal  =  Rs  TLC  C.  If  the 
prevalent  rate  of  interest  is  X,  the  net  present  worth 
(NPW)  of  the  total  annual  benefits  a,  over  the  life  of 
the  canal  (Y  years)  is  determined  from  the  following 
formula: 


NPW=  a 


(1  ^xy~  1 

X(l+X)^ 


-(2) 


For  the  lining  to  be  economically  feasible  the 
additional  initial  cost  of  the  lined  canal  should  be 
equal  to  or  less  than  Net  Present  Worth  of  savings. 

that  is,  TLC- C<  NPW 

NOTE — In  the  above  analysis  it  may  be  noted  that  the 
actual  evaluation  of  benefits  grouped  under  item  B  and 
M  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain  particularly  on  a  new 
project.  It  can  only  be  approximately  estimated  on  the 
basis  of  experience  on  similar  existing  projects. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  WRD  13  (45). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110  002  Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02  (Common  to  all  offices) 

Regional  Offices :  Telephone 

Central        :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  J  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110  002      '  \323  38  41 

Eastern        :  1/14  C.  I.  T  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  L  R  Road,  Kankurgachi  r337  84  99,  337  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700  054  \337  86  26,  337  91  20 


Northern     :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  r60  38  43 

60  20  25 


{; 


Southern     :  C.  I.  T  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113  J  235  02  16,  235  04  42 

\235  15  19,  235  23  15 

Western      :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  r832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI 400  093  L  832  78  91,  832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR-  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  :  Prabhat  Offset  Press,  New  Delhi -2 


