**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14451-2 (1999) : Telemetering for Consumption and 
Demands^ Part 2: Direct Digital Transfer of Meter Values 
[ETD 13: Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement and 
Load Control] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14451 (Part 2): 1999 
( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



^ 2 iffeT 'TI^ ^ IJrq^ 3»T 3Ft!T^ 

Indian Standard 

TELEMETERING FOR 
CONSUMPTION AND DEMANDS 

PART 2 DIRECT DIGITAL TRANSFER OF METER VALUES 



ICS 33.220 



©BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1999 Price Group 5 



Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee, ETD 13 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The specification on telemetering for consumption and demand is based on the requirements oudined in 
Annex A and comprise two parts : 

Part 1 — Impulse transmitting and receiving devices. This deals with transfer of incremental meter values 
by impulsing devices. 

Part 2 — Direct digital transfer of meter values. This deals with digital data transfer in which off-line and 
on-line demand and energy information is transferred through a digital communication channel. 

This standard is to be read with IS 13779 : 1993, 'Specification for a.c. static watt-hour meters class 1 and 2*; 
and IS 13010 : 1990 *a.c. watt-hour meters, class 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0' and CBIP report No. 88 (revision 1996) for 
a.c. static watt-hour meters, class 0.2S and 0.5S. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with , the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)' ^ The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS14451(Part2):1999 



Indian Standard 

TELEMETERING FOR 
CONSUMPTION AND DEMANDS 

PART 2 DIRECT DIGITAL TRANSFER OF METER VALUES 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to telemetering apparatus 
intended to operate in conjunction with ax. static 
electrical energy meters, in particular for billing and 
statistical purposes. 

1.2 This standard covers telemetering apparatus 
consisting of : 

i) A Master Unit with built in communication 
interface which receives actual meter values 
from one or more Slave Units. The information 
received is either displayed, stored, recorded 
or mathematically processed (for example in 
Summation Units) by the Master Unit. 
ii) One or more Slave Units which are essentially 
a.c, static electrical energy meters with built in 
Communication Interface, which respond to 
the commands received from the Master Unit 
by transmitting actual meter values. 

1.3 This standard is applicable regardless of the 
distance between the Master and Slave Units of the 
telemetering system. 

1.4 This standard does not apply to : 

i) Telemetering systems transmitting informa- 
tion in an analog form, for example by means 
of a voltage or current proportional to the 
measured electrical parameters from the Slave 
Unit(s). 
ii) Telemetering systems employing exclusively 
impulsing devices. 

NOTE — Such systems have been covered by Part I of 
this standard. 

iii) Meter Reading Instruments (MRI), which are 
portable devices used for collection, tem- 
porary storage and transfer of data. 

1.5 This standard does not cover the channels or 
media of communication between the Master and 
Slave Units, such as wired media, telephone lines, 
radio, optical fibres, microwave, etc; since these 
channels and media should comply to the appropriate 
documents /standards. 

1.6 Data conversion or modulation devices, if 
employed, shall be covered by this standard if they 
form an integral part of the telemetering system. 



2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed in Annex B are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard 

3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions, in addition to those given in IS 13779 
shall apply. 

3.1 Supporting Meter 

An integrating meter to which it is intended to 
incorporate a communication device for direct digital 
transfer of meter values. 

3.2 Slave Unit 

A supporting meter with communication facility 
which accepts commands from the master unit and 
responds by cyclic transfer of meter values as per 
request. 

3.3 Master Unit 

A device with capability to communicate and collect 
the data from the local or remote Slave Unit(s) and 
process/store the data, if required, in its non-volatile 
memory. 

3.4 Summation Unit 

A summation unit is a master unit that sequentially 
communicates with two or more Slave Meter Units, 
collects meter values by cyclic transfer, and computes/ 
store summated meter values and concurrent demand 
values as required by the system. 

3.5 Remote Meter Reading Unit 

A remote meter reading unit is a device that 
communicates with one or more Slave Units and 
displays and/or stores and/or records the meter 
information at the remote site on cyclic basis. 

3.6 Optical Isolation 

The communication port provided in the Master/Slave 
unit and based on the light pulses emitted/received 
by photo diode and transistors which have no 
direct physical contact with internal electrical circuit, 
there by having a superior method of input/output 
isolation. 



IS 14451 (Part 2): 1999 



3,7 Meter Values 

The measured and registered parameters like current 
consumption and demand values, billing consumption 
and demand values like kWh and kW and many other 
parameters registered in the Slave Unit. 

4 SYSTEM CLASSIFICATION 

4.1 The Slave Unit shall be classified according to the 
accuracy class of the supporting meter as defined in 
the relevant standards. 

4.2 The Master Unit shall be classified according to 
the function performed by it as mentioned below. 

4.2.1 Remote Meter Reading Unit 

A remote meter reading unit should be able to 
communicate with one or more Slave Units and 
display and store and record the meter information 
available in Slave Units at remote sites. The meter 
reading could be either undertaken on a rapid cyclic 
basis or on demand depending on the application. 
Facilities to programme the parameters to be read 
remotely and the interval of reading should be 
available in the remote meter reading unit. 

4.2.2 Summation Unit 

A remote meter reading unit that sequentially collects 
meter values from two or more Slave Meter Units on 
repetitive basis. It should be able to process the 
collected data from the Slave Units to calculate 
summated energy, demand, etc. The parameters to be 
processed and method of calculation depends on 
applications and it is a matter of purchase contract. The 
Master Unit should have programming facility for 
selecting various parameters depending on the 
application. The real time of Slave Units shall be in 
synchronization with the Master Unit. 

5 RATINGS 

The following standard values shall be applicable. 

5.1 Rated Supply Voltage 

Standard values for rated supply voltage to Master and 

Slave Units are : 

i) For a.c. : 57.7; 63.5; 100; 1 10; 230; 240 V; and 
ii) For d.c. : 9; 12; 24; 30; 48; 60; 1 10; 220 V. 

5.2 Rated Supply Current 

The rated supply current for the Slave Units shall be 
as per the relevant standard of the supporting meter. 

5.3 Rated Supply Frequency 

Standard a.c. supply frequency shall be 50 Hz . 



5.4 Demand Integration Period 

Standard values of demand integration period are : 15; 
30 and 60 min. 

6 GENERAL AND CONSTRUCTIONAL 
REQUIREMENT 

6.0 The Slave Unit shall conform to the general and 
constructional requirement laid down by the relevant 
standard of the supporting meter; the additional 
requirements for Slave Meters are listed in 6.3 and 6.7. 
The Master Unit is not a measuring device and not 
covered under any standard. Hence the requirements 
are laid down below. 

6.1 General 

The telemetering system shall be designed and 
constructed in such a way so as to avoid introducing 
any danger in normal use and under normal conditions, 
so as to ensure especially: 

— personal safety against electric shock, 

— personal safety against effects of excessive 
temperature, 

— safety against spread of fire, and 

— protection against penetration of dust and water. 

All parts which are subject to corrosion under normal 
conditions shall be effectively protected. Any 
protective coating shall not be liable to damage by 
ordinary handling, nor damage due to exposure to air, 
under normal working conditions. 

The use of metal enclosures using material subject to 
corrosion and rusting, shall in general be avoided. 
However, if the enclosure of any unit is wholly or 
partially made of metal, it shall be provided with a 
protective earth terminal. 

6.2 Enclosures 

The enclosures shall be so constructed and arranged 
that any non permanent deformation can not prevent 
the satisfactory operation of the unit. 

6.2.1 Sealing 

Master Units shall have a case which can be sealed in 
a way that the internal parts are accessible only after 
breaking the seal(s). The physical communication 
interface also shall not be removable without breaking 
the seal(s). This requirement shall also be applicable 
to Slave Meters forming part of a telemetering system . 

6.2.2 Resistance to Heat and Fire 

The enclosures shall be resistant to heat and fire and 
shall provide reasonable safety against spread of fire. 
They should not be ignited by thermic overload of live 
parts in contact with them. The material used for the 
enclosure shall conform to method FHl category 1 of 
IS 11731 (Parti). 



IS 14451 (Part 2): 1999 



6.2.3 Protection Against Penetration of Dust and 
Water 

The enclosures shall provide adequate protection 
against penetration of dust and water. The degree of 
protection shall be IP51 as per IS 12063. 

6.3 Display and Display Window 

The Slave Units may or may not have a display and a 
corresponding display window based on the 
application. This shall be a matter of purchase 
contract. 

The Master Unit shall display the various transferred 
meter values as well as the processed values if any on 
an electronic display. All data stored in the memory 
shall have a minimum retention time of 24 months in 
the absence of power by means of a non-volatile 
memory. 

In the case of multiple values presented by a single 
display it must be possible to display the contents of 
all relevant memories. Provision shall be made for 
identifying the memory/register being displayed with 
proper legend. 

When the unit is not energised, the display need not 
be visible. 

The registers on display shall be able to record and 
display starting from zero, for a minimum of 1 500 h 
all accumulated energy registers corresponding to 
rated maximum current(s) and reference voltage(s) of 
the relevant Slave Units. 

6.4 Terminal, Terminal Block(s) and Protective 
Earth Terminal 

The Master Unit shall have a suitable termination 
arrangement to accommodate the connections for its 
auxiliary power supply and the communication 
interface. The terminals may be grouped in suitable 
terminal blocks/strips having adequate insulating 
properties and mechanical strength. In order to satisfy 
such requirement, when choosing insulating material 
for terminal blocks adequate testing of the material 
shall be taken into account. 

The terminal block, the terminal cover (if not of 
metal), and the case (if not of metal) shall be of a 
material which complies with the requirement of the 
method FHl of IS 11731 (Part 1). 

Terminals with different potentials which are grouped 
close together shall be protected against accidental 
short circuit. Protection may be obtained by insulating 
barriers. 

The protective earth terminal (if any) : 

a) shall be electrically bonded to accessible metal 
parts, 

b) should preferably be located close to the ter- 
minal block, and 



c) shall be cleariy identified by the earth symbol. 

After installation, it shall not be possible to loosen the 
protective earth terminal without the use of a tool. 

6.5 Terminal Cover 

The terminals of the Master Unit, if grouped in a 
terminal block and if not protected by any other means, 
shall have a separate cover which can be sealed 
independently of the Master Unit main cover. The 
terminal cover shall enclose the actual terminals, the 
conductor fixing screws and unless otherwise 
specified, a suitable length of the external conductors 
and their insulation. 

No access to the terminals shall be possible without 
breaking the seal(s) of the terminal cover(s). 

6.6 Clearance and Creepage Distance 

The clearances and creepage distances of the terminal 
block and those between the terminals and the 
surrounding parts of the metal enclosure shall not be 
less than the value specified in Table 1. 

Table 1 Clearance and Creepage Distances 

SI Voltage Phase to Earth Derived Minimum Minimum 

No. from Rated System Voltages Clearances Creepage 

Distance 

(Volts) (mm) (mm) 

i) Not exceeding 50 0.8 1.2 

ii) Not exceeding 100 0.8 1.4 

iii) Not exceeding 150 1.5 1.6 

iv) Not exceeding 300 3.0 3.2 

v) Not exceeding 600 3.5 6.3 



The clearance between terminal cover, if made of 
metal, and the upper surface of the screws, when 
screwed down to the maximum shall be not less than 
the relevant values given in Table 1. 

6.7 Physical Communication Interface 

The physical communication interface connections on 
the master or the Slave Unit shall be made either 
through screw terminals or on a separate connector. It 
shall be possible to seal the interface connection either 
directly or indirectly (by enclosing in a scalable 
cover), in order to prevent unauthorised connection or 
disconnection of the interface. 

7 MARKING 

7.1 The Slave Unit shall be marked as per the relevant 
standard of the supporting meter. 

7.2 The Master Unit shall bear the following 
information, as applicable : 

a) Manufacturers name (or trade-mark) and place 
of manufacture. 



IS 14451 (Part 2) J 1999 



b) Designation of type (if applicable) and if 
required space for approval mark. 

c) The auxiliary supply voltage : Nominal value, 
type (a. c. ord.c), number of wires and number 
of independent supplies (when a PT change- 
over arrangement is provided). Example of 
voltage marking is given below : 

Type of Supply Method of Example 

Marking 

d.c. Supply Nominal supply 48 V d,c, 

voltage 

Single phase a.c. Nominal supply 240 V a.c. 
voltage 

3 phase a.c. 3 x Nominal supply 3 x 110 V a.c. 

voltage 

Single phase Nominal supply 1 10 V a.c. x 3 
multiple feeder voltage x Number 
of feeders 

d) The serial number and year of manufacture. 

f) The reference frequency in Hertz. 

g) The sign of double square for insulating 
encased units. 

h) The electrical nature of the communication 
interface, for example RS232 or RS485. 

7.3 The marking shall be indelible, distinct and 
readable from outside the meter. 

7.4 The master or the slave units may be marked with 
the BIS Standard Mark, if certified by BIS. 

8 CLIMATIC CONDITIONS 

The climatic conditions as laid down in the relevant 
standards of supporting meter shall be applicable to 
both Slave and the Master Units. 

9 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENT 

9.1 The Slave Unit shall meet all the electrical 
requirement as laid down by the relevant standard of 
the supporting meter. 

9.2 The following electrical requirement shall apply 
to the Master Unit. 

9.2.1 Power Consumption 

The total power consumption of the master unit shall 
not exceed 2W and lOVA, at the reference voltage 
conditions. 

9.2.2 Voltage Range 

The limit range of operation for the auxiliary supply 
voltage of the master unit shall be from 70 percent to 
1 15 percent of the nominal voltage. 

9.2.3 Frequency Range 
47.5 Hz to 52.5 Hz. 



9.2.4 Influence of Heating 

Under normal conditions of use the electrical circuits 
and the insulation shall not reach a temperature which 
might adversely affect the operation of the Master 
Unit. The temperature rise at any point on the external 
surface shall not exceed 20K with an ambient 
temperature between 25 to 45°C. 

9.2.5 Insulation 

The master unit shall retain adequate dielectric 
qualities under normal conditions of use, taking 
account of the atmospheric influences and different 
voltages to which it is subjected under normal 
conditions of use. 

The master unit shall withstand impulse voltage test 
and a.c. voltage test as specified in 13.2.3.2. 

10 ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY 

10.1 The Slave Unit shall conform to the EMI/EMC 
requirement as laid down by the relevant standard of 
the supporting meter, 

10.2 The Master Unit shall conform to the following 
requirements. 

10.2.1 Immunity to Electro Magnetic Disturbance 

The unit shall be designed in such a way that 
conducted or radiated electromagnetic disturbance as 
well as electrostatic discharges do not damage or 
substantially influence the unit. 

10.2.2 Radio Interference Suppression 

The unit shall not generate conducted or radiated noise 
that will interfere with other equipment. 

11 COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENT 

11.1 The telemetering system shall be classified 
according to the type of physical interface to the Slave 
Units as mentioned below. 

1 1.1.1 Optically Coupled System 

The physical communication interface shall be 
optically isolated from the electrical measurement 
system. Such systems would include Infra red 
interfaces (including IrDA) and such electrical 
interfaces that are galvanically isolated from the 
measurement system by opto-couplers. 

11.1.2 Inductively Coupled System 

The physical communication interface shall be 
magnetically isolated from the electrical measurement 
system of the supporting meter. 

11.2 Physical Interface 

The physical interface of the communication system 
to the Master or Slave Unit could be coupled 
electro-magnetically or optically. In either case, the 



IS 14451 (Part 2): 1999 



physical interface for the direct digital transfer shall be 
independent from the interface (if any) for local 
reading using hand held meter reading instrument. 

11.3 Electrical Interface 

The electrical circuit of the Slave or Master Unit shall 
be galvanically isolated from the communication 
circuit. 

11.4 Data Integrity 

The data received from the Slave Unit shall not be 
prone to tampering. If however tampered, the event of 
the tamper shall be detectable. There shall be no loss 
of data even when data is retrieved from the Master 
Unit by external devices such as Meter Reading 
Instrument. 

The slave unit shall not be configurable by 
unauthorised personnel. 

11.5 System Communication Requirements 

The Master Unit should be able to communicate with 
the slave units located remotely or locally on rapid 
cycle basis or on demand depending on the 
requirements. The communication speed between 
master unit and slave unit should be > 1 200 baud 
depending on the communication channel. In case of 
direct coupling between Master Unit and Slave Unit(s) 
the reproduction time of the meter values should not 
exceed 30 s. 

The Master Unit shall be provided with alternative 
power supply in the event of power failure of one or 
two Slave Units and communication shall continue 
with the Slave Units remaining energised. 

11.6 Communication Failure Safety 

The Master Unit should be able to indicate events of 
loss of communication with the Slave Unit(s). It 
should also record last 10 events of such failures and 
the corresponding occurrence and restoration time/ 
duration time. The system shall be able to provide 
energy consumed since communication loss to 
communication restoration or since communication 
loss up to the time when user requests the meter value. 
The system shall be designed such that communication 
loss gets restored automatically once the cause of 
communication loss is rectified that is no external 
stimulus/manual intervention is required to re- 
synchronize the communication. However, the 
primary responsibility of restoring the communication 
shall rest with the Master Unit.* 

12 ACCURACY REQUIREMENT 

12.1 The Slave Unit shall conform to the accuracy 
requirement laid down by the relevant standard of the 
supporting meter. 



12.2 The Master Unit itself would have no measuring 
element and hence, its own accuracy is irrelevant. 
However the data from the slave meter(s) should be 
reproduced with the same accuracy and resolution. 
Moreover the uncertainty of the processed (For 
example Summated) values where applicable should 
not exceed the error levels of the Slave Unit. 

NOTE — Lower accuracy class of Slave Unit will be taken in 
to consideration. 

13 TESTS 

13.1 Slave Unit Tests 

The Slave Unit shall meet all the test requirement of 
the relevant standard of the supporting meter. 

13.2 Master Unit Tests 

All tests shal I be carried out under reference conditions 
unless otherwise stated. The type test shall be carried 
out on one or more specimens of the unit selected by 
the manufacturer, to establish the specific 
characteristics and to prove conformity with the 
requirement of this standard. In case of modification 
to the Master Unit after the type test and affecting only 
part of the meter, it will be sufficient to perform limited 
tests on the characteristics that may be affected by the 
modification. 

13.2.1 Type Tests 

13.2.1,1 Test of mechanical requirement 

13.2.1.1.1 Shock test 

The test shall be carried out as per IS 9000 (Part 
7/Sec 1) : 1979 , under the following conditions: 

— Master Unit is non-operating condition, without 
the packing 

— Half-sine pulse 

— Peak acceleration 15g(147m/s^) 

— Duration of the pulse 1 8 ms 

After the test, the unit shall show no damage or change 
of the information and shall operate correctly in 
accordance with the requirements of this standard. 

13.2.1.1.2 Vibration test 

The test shall be carried out as per IS 9000 (Part 8) 

under the following conditions : 

Master Unit in non-operation condition. Without the 

packing 

— Test procedure A 

— Frequency range : 10-150-10 Hz. 

— Transition frequency : 60 Hz. 

— f< 60 Hz constant amplitude of movement 
0.15 mm 

— f > 60 Hz constant acceleration 2g {\g= 9.8 m/s^) 

— Single point control 

— Number of sweep cycles per axis : 10 
NOTE — 10 sweep cycles = 75 min. 



IS14451(Part2):1999 



After the test the unit shall show no daniage or change 
of the information and shall operate correctly in 
accordance with the requirements of this standard. 

13.2.1.1.3 Non-flammability 

The terminal block, the terminal cover (if not of metal) 
and the case (if not of metal) shall be of a material 
which complies with the requirements of method 
FHlofIS 11731 (Parti). 

NOTE — [f the materials of the terminal block, terminal cover 
and the case meet this requirement, the finished meter need not 
be tested. 

TB terminal cover and case shall conform to the 
requirements of method FH 1 of IS 11731 (Part 1). 

13.2.1.1.4 Test of protection against penetration of 
dust and water 

The test shall be carried out according IS 12063 under 
the following conditions: 

a) Protection against penetration of dust 

— Master Unit in non-operating condition 
and mounted on an artificial wall. 

— The test should be conducted with sample 
lengths of cable (exposed and sealed) of 
the types specified \^y the manufacturer in 
place. 

— 1st characteristic digit : 5 ( IP 5X) resp. 

— Any ingress of dust shall be only in a 
quantity not impairing the operation of the 
unit, and not impairing its dielectric 
strength (insulating strength). 

b) Protection against penetration of water 

— Master Unit in non-operating condition. 

— 2nd characteristic digit : I (IP X 1) for 
indoor meters. 

Any ingress of water must only be in a quantity not 
impairing the operation of the unit, and not impairing 
its dielectric strength (insulating strength). 

13.2.2 Test for Climatic Influences 

After the climatic tests, the Master Unit shall show no 
damage or change of the information and shall operate 
correctly. 

13.2.2.1 Damp heat cycle test 

The test shall be carried out according to relevant 
section of IS 9000 (Part 5/Sec 1) under the following 
condition: 

— Unit in operating condition. 

— Voltage and auxiliary circuits energised with 
reference voltage. 

— Without any current in the current circuits. 

— Variant 1. 

— Upper temperature 450±2°C. 

— No special precautions shall be taken regarding 
the removal of surface moisture. 



— Duration of test : 6 cycles. 

24 hours after the end of this test, the unit shall be 
submitted to the following tests : 

a) An insulation test according to 13.2.3.2, except 
that the surge voltage shall be multiplied by a 
factor of 0.8. 

b) A functional test. The unit shall show no 
damage or change of information and shall 
operate correctly. 

The damp heat test also serves as a corrosion test. The 
result is judged visually. No trace of corrosion likely 
to affect the functional properties of the unit shall be 
apparent. 

13.2.3 Test of Electrical Requirements 

13.2.3.1 Test of power consumption 

The power consumption in the auxiliary supply circuit 
of the Master Unit shall be determined at reference 
values as given in 5.1 by any suitable method. The 
overall precision shall be better than 5 percent. 

13.2.3.2 Test of insulation properties 

13,2.3.2.1 General test conditions 

The test shall be carried out only on a complete unit 
with its cover (except when indicated hereafter) and 
tenninal cover, the terminal screws being screwed 
down to maximum applicable conductor fitted in the 
terminals. Test procedure shall be in accordance with 
IS 2071 (Parti). 

The impulse voltage tests shall be carried out first and 
the a.c. voltage tests afterwards. 

During type tests, the dielectric property tests are 
considered to be valid only for the terminal 
arrangement of the unit which has undergone the tests. 
When the terminal arrangement differ, all the 
dielectric property tests shall be carried for each 
arrangement. 

For the propose of these tests, the 'earth' has the 
following meaning : 

a) When the unit case is made of metal, the earth 
is the case itself placed on a flat conducting 
surface. 

b) When the master unit case or only a part of it 
is made of insulating material, the earth is a 
conductive foil wrapped around the unit and 
connected to the flat conducting surface 
on which the unit base is placed. Where the 
terminal cover makes it possible, the conduc- 
tive foil shall approach the conductors within 
a distance of not more than 2 cm. 

During the impulse and the a.c. voltage tests, the 
circuits which are not under test are connected to the 
earth as indicated hereafter. A flashover (capacitance 



IS 14451 (Part 2): 1999 



discharge) is not necessarily a criterion of failure as 
this may occurs in a position that does no damage and 
the manufacturer shall decide. Whether or not to 
eliminate the cause, provided other criteria of 
acceptance are met. 

After these tests, the master unit shall keep functioning 
normally and the data in the memory registers shall be 
maintained. 

In this sub-clause, the expression all the terminals 
means the whole set of the terminals of the circuits 
and, if any, auxiliary circuits having a reference 
voltage over 40 V. 

These shall be made in normal conditions of use. 
During the test, the quality of the insulation shall not 
be impaired by dust or abnormal humidity. 

Unless otherwise specified, the normal conditions for 
insulation test are : 

— ambient temperature 200°C to 350°C 

— relative humidity 45% to 95% 

— atmospheric pressure 86 to 106 kPa (860 mbar to 

1 060 mbar) 

NOTE — If the ac voltage test is to be repeated for second time, 
the applied voltage shall be 80 percent of the specified voltage. 

13.2.3.2.2 Impulse voltage test 

The impulse voltage is applied ten times with one 
polarity and then repeated with the other polarity. The 
minimum time between the impulses shall be 3 s. 



a) Impulse voltage tests for circuits and between 
the circuits 

The test shall be made independently on each 
circuit (or assembly of circuits) which are in- 
sulated from the other circuits of the unit in 
normal use. The terminals of the circuits which 
are not subjected to impulse voltage shall be 
connected to earth. 

The auxiliary circuits intended to be connected 
either direcdy to the mains or to the same 
voltage transformers as the master units and 
with a reference voltage over 40 V shall be 
subjected to the impulse voltage test in the 
same conditions as those already given for 
voltage circuits. The other auxiliary circuits 
shall not be tested. 

b) Impulse voltage test of electric circuits relative 
to earth 

All the terminals of the electric circuits of the 
unit, including those of the auxiliary circuits 
with a reference voltage over 40 V, shall be 
connected together. 

The auxiliary circuits with a reference voltage below 
or equal to 40 V shall be connected to earth. 



The impulse voltage shall be applied between all the 
electric circuits and earth, 

13.2.3.2.3 ac voltage test 

The ac voltage test shall be carried out in accordance 
with Table 2 (if repeated second time the voltage 
wave shall be 80 percent of the specified voltage). 

The test voltage shall be substantially sinusoidal, 
having a frequency between 45 Hz and 65 Hz, and 
applied for one minute. The power source shall be 
capable of supplying at least 500 VA. 

During the tests relative to earth the auxiliary circuits 
with reference voltage equal to or below 40 V shall be 
connected to earth. 

Table 2 ac Voltage Tests 



Test Voltage Points of Application of 

(rms) the Test Voltage 

(i) (2) 

2 kV (A) Test to be carried out with the case closed, and 

terminal cover in place 

(a) Between, on the one hand all the voltage circuits 
as well as the auxiliary circuits whose reference 
voltage is over 40 V, connected together, and act on 
the other hand, earth. 

(b) Between circuits not intended to be connected 
together in service 

4 kV (B) Additional tests for insulating encased meters of 

protective class II 

(a) Between on the one hand all the (for test a) 
voltage circuits as well the auxiliary circuits whose 
reference voltage is over 40 V. Connected together, 
and, on the other hand, earth 

NOTE — The test in item (a) of Part B is to be carried out, with 
the case closed, the cover and terminal cover in place. 



13.2,3.2.4 Insulation resistance test 

The insulation resistance test shall be carried out in 
accordance with Table 3 given below. The voltage 
shall be applied for a minimum of one minute or more 
for the pointer of the insulation tester to have coine 
practically to rest. 

Table 3 Insulation Resistance Test 



rest Voltage 

(rms) 
(1) 



Points of Application 
of the Test Voltage 

(2) 



500 ± 50 V dc Between frame and voltage circuits 
all connected together 



Insulation 
Resistance 

(3) 



5 Megohms 



Where two or more voltage circuits are permanently 
joined together, the combination may be treated as one 
circuit for this test. 



IS 14451 (Part 2): 1999 



13.2.4 Test for Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC 
Immunity) 

13.2.4.1 General test conditions 

For all these tests, the master unit shall be in its normal 
working position with the cover and terminal cover in 
position. All parts intended to be earthed shall be 
earthed. After these tests, the master unit shall show 
no damage and operate correctly. 

13.2.4.2 Test for immunity to electrostatic discharge 
(ESD) 

The test shall carried out according to lEC 1000-4-2 
(1995) 'Electromagnetic compatability (EMC)— Part 
4 : Testing and measurement technique — Section 2: 
Electrostatic discharge immunity test' under the 
following conditions : 

— contact discharge 

— test voltage 8 kV 

— test severity level : 4 

— number of discharges : 10 

— voltage and auxiliary circuits energised with 
reference voltage 

The application of the electrostatic discharge shall not 
produce a change in the registers to more than 0.001 
principal units. 

13.2.4.3 Test for immunity to electromagnetic HE 
fields 

The test shall be carried out according to lEC 1000-4-3 
(1995) 'Electromagnetic compatability (EMC) — Part 
4: Testing and measurement techniques — Section 3 : 
Radiated, radio-frequency electromagnetic field 
immunity test' under the following conditions: 

— voltage and auxiliary circuits energised with 
reference voltage, 

— frequency band: 80 MHz to 1 000 MHz, 

— test field strength : 10 V/m 

— test severity level : 3 

The application of the HP field shall not produce a 
change in the register of more than 0.001 per principal 
unit. 

13.2.4.4 Fast transient burst test 

The test shall be carried out according to lEC 1000-4-4 
(1995) 'Electromagnetic compatability (EMC) — Part 



4: Testing and measurement techniques — Section 4: 
Electrical fast transient/burst immunity test' under the 
following conditions : 

— Meter in operating condition 

— Voltage and auxiliary circuits energised with 
reference voltage 

— Test voltage : 4 kV 

— Test severity level : 4 

— Duration of the test : minimum 60 s 

— Test points are : 

a) between the terminal of each circuit normally 
connected to the mains 

b) between any two independent circuits having 
reference voltages over 40 V 

c) between each independent circuits having 
reference voltages over 40 V and earth. 

During the test the meter shall not produce a change 
in the register to more than 0.001 principle unit. 

13.2.4.5 Radio interference measurement 

The test for radio interference shall be carried out for 
the frequencies from 0.15 to 30 MHz and for the 
frequencies from 30 to 300 MHz as per IS 6842. 

13,3 System Level Tests 

The system level test of the Telemetering system shall 
be earned out to ensure proper functioning of the 
integrated system. This test shall be carried out with 
the maximum number of slave units for which the 
system is intended to be tested. The basic objective of 
the test is to check data communication fidelity. 

The slave units are all supplied with the reference 
voltage and reference current. The initial memory 
register values of the slaves and master units are noted 
down prior to commencement of test. The test duration 
shall be 24 hours. At the end of the test, the supplies 
to the slave units shall be switched off. The register 
value changes for all the slave and master unit is 
recorded after a gap of 30 seconds from the switching 
off of the supply. The master unit register should show 
the processed register values as per the slave register 
values after application of the desired processing 
function. The error shall not exceed the resolution of 
the display. 



IS 14451 (Part 2) : 1999 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 
TELEMETERING SYSTEM 



A-1 The Part 1 of this standard based on the lEC 
338-1970, is applicable to the conventional telemetering 
system that utilises activated switching contacts of 
impulsing devices in conjunction with electro- 
mechanical/static meters for transfer of incremental 
meter values to local/remote electromechanical/static 
receivers via a transmission channel with or without 
intermediate summation/ subtraction/integration of such 
incremental meter values. While such devices are still in 
use in large numbers, certain limitations of such 
impulsing devices like electromechanical relays or 
semiconductors for the sake of transfer of incremental 
meter values, may be born in mind. Figure 1 illustrates 
the telemetering system. 

A-2 The limitations observed with electromechanical 
meters with impulsing devices are as given hereunder. 

A-2.1 These devices have an inherent uncertainty 
error as discussed in 5.2.3 of IS 14451 (Part 1). This 
resolution uncertainty is limited by the maximum 
response rate that can be achieved by conventional 
electromechanical relay contacts. 

A-2.2 The limited resolution of the impulsing devices 
lead to measurement inaccuracies, for example in 
applications involving concurrent kVA demand 
computation from multiple meters, under varying 
power factor conditions. 

A-2.3 These devices also suffer from contact bounce, 
improper contacts and distortion problems, leading to 
data loss and inaccuracies. 

A-2.4 Conventional transfer of incremental meter 



values can only support one parameter information (for 
example Active import, reactive lag, etc) per meter. 

A-3 The new generation of static meters employing 
improved impulsing techniques with rapid switching 
contacts of semiconductor devices, have over come some 
extent, few of the problems mentioned in A-2 above. 
They are fast, less uncertain and more dependable. 
Besides, they can support multiple parameter 
information per meter. However, they do not reap the full 
benefit of the static metering technology. 

A-4 A number of manufacturers have now come out 
with more efficient telemetering apparatus employing 
direct digital transfer of original meter values by utilizing 
communication interfaces to overcome the inherent 
limitations of the conventional transfer of incremental 
meter values by impulsing devices and to provide 
improved performance with advanced features. 

A-4.1 Multiple parameter information can not only be 
supported by a single supporting meter, but only a 
single data transfer channel is sufficient. 

A-4.2 Effective reliability can be achieved with 
commensurate accuracy. Single transfer of meter 
value is direct and original. 

A-4.3 This technology can be gainfully used to detect 
data integrity and take corrective actions in case of 
temporary loss of data link. 

A-5 Telemetering system that utilises static meters for 
direct digital transfer of original meter values 
employing communication interfaces, has been dealt 
with in Part 2 of this standard. 



ANNEX B 

{Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. 
1401 : 1970 

2071 

Part(l): 1993 
4905 : 1968 
6842 : 1977 



9000 

(Part5/Sec 1) 
1981 

11731 
(Parti): 1986 



Title IS No, 

Accessibility test probes (first 
revision) 

High voltage test techniques: Part, I 
General definitions and test requirements 13010 : 1990 
Methods for random sampling 12032 series 

Limits for electromagnetic 
interference 12346 : 1988 

Basic environmental testing proce- 
dures for electronic and electrical 12360: 1988 
items: Part 5 Damp heat (cyclic) test. 
Section 1 

Methods of test for determination of 1 3779 : 1 993 
flammability of solid electrical 



Title 

insulating material. When exposed 
to an igniting source: Part 1 
Horizontal specimen method 
ac Watt-hour meters, class 0.5, 1 and 2 
Graphical symbol for diagrams in 
the field of electrotechnology 
Testing equipment for ac electrical 
energy meter 

Voltage bands for electrical installa- 
tions including preferred voltages 
and frequency 

ac Static watt-hour meters class I 
and 2 



IS 14451 (Part 2) : 1999 




COMMUNICATION 
CHANNEL 



S1,S2,S3,S4 
P1,P2, P3, P4 

D1,D2,D3, D4 




MASTER UNIT 



Supporting meters 

Pulse output devices, this part is covered under Part 1 of this 

standard 

Digital communication ports, this part is covered under Part 2 

of this standard 



Fig. 1 Telemetering System 



10 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ETD 13 (5021). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI J 10 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



{ 



Telephone 

323 76 17 
323 38 41 



{ 



{ 
{ 



337 84 99,337 85 61 
337 86 26,337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



235 02 16,235 04 42 
235 15 19,235 23 15 

832 92 95, 832 78 58 
832 78 91,832 78 92 



Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.GHAZIABAD.GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE.RAJKOT.THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at ; Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



