•*•*•••••*•*•••• 






^ 



m^% 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10038 (1981) : Textured Plant Protein Foods Prepared By 
Extrusion Cooking [FAD 16: Foodgrains, Starches and Ready 
to Eat Foods] 




.^^_ 



^sf m 



^ 



1 w 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




- M 






BLANK PAGE 




><3 



^ri*jr.-^. 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; 10038- 1981 
(Reaffirmed 2005) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TEXTURED PLANT PROTEIN FOODS 

PREPARED BY EXTRUSION COOKING 



UDC 664*38 : 664" 87 




© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DliLHI 110002 



Gr. 2 



February 1982 



IS : 10038 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

TEXTURED PLANT PROTEIN FOODS 

PREPARED BY EXTRUSION COOKING 

Nutrition Sectional Committee, AFDG 37 

Chairman Representing 

Dk K. T. Achaya United Nations University Programme, Central Food 

Technological Research Institute ( CSIR ), 
Mysore 

Members 

Dr A. S. Aiyar Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Asso- 

ciation of India, Bombay 
Dr. B. P. Baliga Tata Oil Mills Company Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. C. Badami ( Alternate ) 
Db M. G. Deo Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi 

Dr Baldev Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. D. Deodhar National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Dk B. N. Mathtjr ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) Rajammal Home Science Association of India, Coimbatore 
P. Devabas 

Dr Syed Riaz Ahmed ( Alternate ) 
ShuiJasbib Singh Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri T. Ramasivan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Kaknan The Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr R. Jayaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. H. Ltllawey Solvent Extractors' Association of India, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Seth ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. B. Mitbander Modern Bakeries ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr M. M. Krishna ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. S. Naik Indian Agricultural Research Institute (ICAR), 

New Delhi 

Dr B. M. Lal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Phatak Food & Nutrition Board, Ministry of Agriculture & 

Irrigation, l»Jew Delhi 

Shri G. D. S harm a ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. S. Rajagopal Directorate of Vegetable Oils & Fats, Department 

of Civil Supplies and Co-operation, New Delhi 

Dr M. K. Kunitu ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10038 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Assistant Development 

Officer ( Alternate ) 
Db B. S. Nabasinga Rao National Institute of Nutrition, New Delhi 

Db S. Venkata Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( GSIR ), Mysore 
Db P. B. Rama Rao { Alternate ) 
Dr P. C. Sen Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Shbi D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. G. Sathe Sathe Biscuits and Chocolate Company Limited, 

Pune 
Shbi S. V. Phadke ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. H. Shah Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers' Union 

Limited, Anand 
Shbi Kailash Vyas ( Alternate ) 

Db K. Srinivasan Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Maj-Gen A. R. Stjjbramanian Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 

Service, New Delhi 
Col P. B. Gill ( Alternate ) 
Db G. A- Sttlebele Bangalore Dairy Miltone Project, Bangalore 

Shbi B. K. Ramaiah ( Alternate ) 
Db M. S. Swaminathan Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Dr V. Nagarajan ( Alternate ) 
Kumari M. S. Usha G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Techno- 

logy, Pantnagar 
Dr P. K. Vijayaraghavan Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Dr M. V. Rama Rao { Alternate ) 
Shri Vineet Virmani Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri Santanit Chaudhttri ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Puenanandam, Director General, I SI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shrimati Shashi Sareen 
Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), I SI 

Protein Rich Foods Subcommittee, AFDC 37 : 2 

Convener 
Dr M. S. Nabasinga Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 

Members 

Shri M. Kantharaj Urs ( Alternate to 
Dr M. S. Narasinga Rao ) 
Db A. S. Aiyar Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Asso- 

ciation of India, Bombay 
Dr K. T. Achaya United Nations University Programme, Central 

Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 

( Continued on page 9 ) 



IS : 10038 - 1981 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

TEXTURED PLANT PROTEIN FOODS 

PREPARED BY EXTRUSION COOKING 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the 
Nutrition Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Textured plant protein foods are products in which the proteinaceous 
raw materials have been modified by a process known as extrusion 
cooking. The moistened proteinaceous materials are plasticized in a 
tube by a combination of moisture, pressure, heat and mechanical 
shear as the material passes, through dies, from a high pressure point to 
atmospheric pressure. The product is cut into pieces of required size 
and then dried to a suitable moisture level. 

a i tm ~„„-j *„ i .„ ,.„^ n „ „ r,^, ^ ~r ,-, +„:_, :„ *u„ J:„* t-i 

v.«s J. j.ic»c piuuuna uavc mat; <xa a. auuiw ui jjivjicih m tuc viicv. j. iicy 

can be used as meat extenders in non-vegetarian diets to make the food 
economical, and as a good source of protein in vegetarian diets. 
Introduction of these products has opened a new way of using vegetable 
proteins ( especially oil meal proteins ), in human diets, by conversion 
into an acceptable food product by a thermally efficient process. 

0.4 A few manufacturers have introduced textured plant protein foods 
in the Indian market. To protect the consumer and at the same time 
to provide guidelines for manufacture of such foods, it has been thought 
timeiy to prescriue quality requirements *or tuis prouuct. 

0.5 This standard does not define any particular plant raw material or 
mixture of raw materials but leaves the option open to the manufacturer. 
This standard specifies only the minimum level of food nutrient in the 
product, the quality of protein, and the product texture. Levels of 
anti-nutritional factors are also laid down. 

0.6 While formulating this standard, necessary consideration has been 
given to the relevant Rules prescribed under the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Standards of Weights and Measures ( Packaged 



IS : 10038 - 1981 

Commodities ) Rules, 1977. This standard is however subject to restrictions 
imposed under these wherever applicable. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retain- 
ed in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and methods of sampling 
and test for textured plant protein foods ( TPPF ) prepared by extrusion 
cooking. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Type Test — Tests to provide the conformity of requirements to 
this standard. They are intended to approve the formulation and 
quality of the product at least in the beginning of marketing and/or 
certification. These tests may also be conducted whenever the basic 
formulation is changed. 

2.2 Acceptance Test — Tests carried out on samples selected from the 
lot for the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The following raw material, singly or in combination ( having 
protein content not less than 45 percent ) may be used for the production 
of TPPF. They should be clean and of good quality and should 
conform to the relevant Indian Standards: 

a) Edible oilseed meals, concentrates and isolates; 

b) Cereals and DHALS; and 

c) Protein concentrates and isolates. 

3.2 Description — The method of production shall be extrusion 
cooking. The TPPF may be in different shapes and sizes depending 
upon the die used. It shall however be reasonably uniform in shape and 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

4 



IS : 10038 - 1981 

size. The product shall be fully cooked and shall have an acceptable 
mouth feel and flavour. It shall also be free from extraneous matter and 
harmful material. The TPPF shall be processed under hygienic condi- 
tions as prescribed in IS : 2491-1972*. 

3.3 Water Absorption Capacity — A 10-gram sample of the product 
shall absorb at least 20 grams of water under the test conditions specified 
in Appendix A. 

3.4 Texture Stability — The TPPF shall pass the hydration, grinding 
and sieve-retention test described in Appendix B. 

3.5 Flavour and Colour — Flavour and colour permitted under the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 may be added. The unflavoured 
product shall have an acceptable flavour. 

3.6 The TPPF shall also comply with the requirement given in Table 1. 

3.6.1 Protein Efficiency Ratio ( PER ) — The PER of the TPPF shall 
not be less than 1 '8 ( corrected PER ) when determined by the method 
given in IS : 7481-1 974f. 

3.6.2 Aflatoxin — The anatoxin content of the TPPF shall not be 
more than 30 jug/kg when tested according to the method prescribed 
in Appendix K of IS : 4684-1 975+. 

3.6.3 Gossypol — The TPPF shall not have a free gossypol content of 
more than 0*06 percent by mass and total gossypol contents more 
than 1'2 percent by mass, when tested according to the method 
prescribed in Appendix A of IS : 4874-1968§. 

3.6.4 Urease Activity — The TPPF shall not show a change in pH by 
more than 0'5 when determined by the method given in Appendix D 
of IS : 7837-1975H. 

3.6.5 Oxalic Acid — The oxalic acid content of TPPF shall not 
exceed 0'5 percent, when tested according to the method prescribed in 
Appendix B of IS : 6109-1 971 If. 

Note — Aflatoxin content, gossypol content, urease activity and oxalic acid 
content shall be determined only if flours of groundnut, cottonseed, soya and sesame 
respectively have been used in making the TPPF, 



*Code for hygeinic conditions for food processing units ( first revision ). 
fMethod for determination of protein efficiency ratio ( PER ). 
{Specification for edible groundnut flour ( expeller pressed ) (first revision ). 
^Specification for cotton seed flour ( expeller pressed ) (first revision ). 
HSpecification for edible full fat soya flour. 
^Specification for edible sesame flour ( expeller pressed ). 



IS : 10038 - 1981 



TABLE 1 REQUIREMENT FOR TEXTURED PLANT 
PROTEIN FOODS ( TPPF ) 

( Clause 3.6 ) 



Si 

No. 



CH Ali ACTEKIST1C 



(1) (2) 

i) Protein, percent by mass, Min 
ii) Moisture, percent by mass, Max 

iii) Calories per 100 gm , Min 

iv) Total ash, percent by mass, Max 

v) Acid insoluble ash, percent by 
mass, Max 

vi) Crude fibre ( on dry basis ), 
percent by mass, Max 

vii) Total bacterial count, per g, 
Max 

viit) Coliform count, per g, Max 

is.) Salmonella, bacteria 



Requirement 


Method of Test, 
Ref to 


(3) 


(4) 


45 


IS : 7219-1973* 


6-0 


Appendix A of IS ; 
1011-198lt 


340 


By computation from 
proximate com- 
position 


7-0 


Appendix E of IS : 
1547-1968* 


0'25 


Appendix E of 
1011-1981t 


3'50 


Appendix A of IS : 
1656-1969§ 


50 000 


IS : 5402-I969H 


10 


IS : 5401-1969H 


Nil 


IS : 5887 ( Part III ) 



1976** 



•Method for determination of protein in foods and feeds. 
tSpecification for biscuits ( second revision ). 
} Specification for infant milk foods {first revision ). 
§Specification for processed cereals weaning foods (first revision }. 
DMethod for standard plate count of bacteria in food stuffs. 
IJMethods for detection and estimation of coliform bacteria in foodstuffs. 
** Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning^; 
Isolation and identification of salmonella & shigella. 



Part III 



4. PACKING 

4.1 The TPPF shall be packed in clean, sound containers made of 
tinplate, cardboard cartons having a strong water-proof lining or of any 
other material agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor in such a 
way as to protect these from crumbling, contamination and absorption 
of moisture. 

4.2 The product may be packed in any suitable quantity from 10 
to 1 000 grams depending upon the vendor and purchaser agreement. 
The product may also be packed in large size tin container of 5 kg, 
10 kg or 20 kg. These containers shall have a polyethylene lining to 
protect the product from coming in contact with the tin surface of the 
container. 



IS : 10038 - 1981 
5. MARKING 

5.1 The following particulars shall be marked or labelled on each 
container: 

a) Protein and calories per 100 gm; 

b) Name of the material and trade name or brand name; if any; 

c) Description according to shape and size; 

d) Name and address of the manufacturer; 

e) Batch or code number; 

f ) Net mass of the product; 

g) Other labelling requirements according to provision of the 
Standards of Weights and Measures ( Packaged Commodities ) Rules, 
1977. 

3*1.1 The container may also be marked with the IS I Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

€. SAMPLING 

6.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn as prescribed 
in Appendix A of IS : 9487-1980*. 

7. TESTS 

7.1 Tests shall be carried out as prescribed in 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5 
and 3.6. 

7.2 Quality of Reagents — Unless otherwise specified, pure chemical 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1977]" ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — 'Pure chemicals* shall m^an chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



•Specification for c ready-to-eat' protein-rich extrude foods. 
tSpecification for water for general laboratory use ( second revisio>i ). 



IS : 10038 - 1981 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.3 ) 
WATER ABSORPTION CAPACITY TEST 

A-l. APPARATUS 

A-l.l Beakers — 200 ml capacity. 

A-1.2 Balance — ■ 10-mg accuracy. • 

A-1.3 Measuring Cylinder — 25-ml capacity. 

A-1.4 Hot Plate 

A-2. METHOD 

A-2.1 Weigh 10 grams of sample in a 200-ml beaker and add 100 ml 
water to it. Heat the water to simmering for 10 minutes. Cover the 
beaker with a wire gauze and clean the water. Weigh the hydrated 
product and calculate the water absorption capacity. 

A-3. CALCULATION 

V 

Water absorption capacity = rr- 



where 



V ~ maximura volume of water absorbed ( A — M ), 
M = mass in g of dry sample, and 
A = mass in g of hydrated product. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 3.4 ) 
TEXTURE STABILITY TEST 



B-l. METHOD 



B-l.l Take 100 g of sample and hydrate with excess amount of cold 
water for 1 hour. Retort for 30 min at 120°C. Drain off excess liquid and 
grind in a meat grinder through 3 mm plate. Spread 100 g portion of 
ground material evenly in a 20 cm diameter 850-micron IS Sieve 
[ see IS : 460 ( Part I )-1978* ] and spray rinse with cold water for 
1 minute. Shake off excess water. At least 35 percent of the material 
( from the 100 g sample ) shall remain on the screen of the sieve. 



•Specification for test sieves: Part I wire cloth test sieves ( second revision ). 

8 



IS : 10038 - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shki S. N. Agakwal Prag Ice and Oils Mills, Aligarh 

Shri M. C. Badami Tata Oil Mills Company Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. S. Sabnis ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi 

Shrimati Debi Murker jee ( Alternate ) 
ShriJ. M. Datta The Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay 

ShriJasbir Sistgh Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri T. Ramasivan ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. Lakshminarayana Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad 

Shri V. Krishnamoorthi ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Malik Technical Standardization Committees ( Food- 

stuffs), New Delhi 

Shri M. Bandyopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. S. Rajagopal Directorate of Vegetable Oils & Fats, Department 

of Civil Supplies & Co-operation, New Delhi 

Dr M. K, Kitndu ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Dr B. S. Narasinga Rao National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 

Dr U. Y. Rege Raptakos Brett and Company Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. H. Shah Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producers' Union 

Ltd, Anand 
Shri Dinesh Shahea General Foods Private Ltd, Indore 

Shki Santosh Shahra {Alternate ) 

Dr G. D. Sharma Food & Nutrition Board, Department of Food, New 

Delhi 
ShriK. K. Kkishnamubthy ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. A. Sulebele Bangalore Dairy Miltone Project, Bangalore 

Shri B. K. Ramaiah ( Alternate ) 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base Units 



Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mast 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


s 


Electric current 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 


Supplementary Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


iteradian 


sr 


Derived Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Force 


newton 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


Frequency 


hertz 


Ha 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



1 



Definition 

N _ 1 kg.m/s* 



1 J - 1 N.m 

1 W - 1 J/t 

1 Wb - 1 V.s 

1 T « 1 Wb/m a 

1 Hz — 1 c/s (s-i) 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V - I W/A 

1 Pa — 1 N/m s 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1998 

TO 

IS 10038:1981 SPECIFICATION FOR TEXTURED 

PLANT PROTEIN FOODS PREPARED BY EXTRUSION 

COOKING 

( Page 5, clause 3j63, lines 3 and 4 ) — Substitute 'methods prescribed in 
Appendix B and C of IS 4876 : 1986$' for 'method prescribed in Appendix A of 
IS4874:1968§*. 

( Page 5, foot-note ) — Substitute '{Specification for edible cottonseed floor (solvent 
extracted) (first revision)' for ^Specification for cotton seed flow (expeller pressed) (first 
revision)'. 

[ Page 6, Table 1, SI No. (ii), col 4]— Substitute 'Appendix B of IS 4684 : I975f 
for 'Appendix A of IS 101 1 : 1981t\ 

[ Page 6, Table 1, St No. (iv), col 4 ] — Substitute 'Appendix D of IS 4684: 
19751 '■' for 'Appendix E of IS 1547 : 1968$' . 

[ Page 6, Table 1, 5/ No. (v), col 4 ]— Substitute 'Appendix E of IS 4684 : 1975f 
for 'Appendix E of IS 1011 : 198 It'. 

[ Page 6, Table 1, SI No. (vi), col 4] — Substitute 'Appendix H of IS 4684 : 

19751"' for 'Appendix A of IS 1656 : 19695'. 

{Page 6, Table 1, foot-notes ) — Delete the following references: 

} >jp€€j.iiCSuOu 1O1 uuCUitS ^ ScCvfU* rcViSiOn ). 

^Specification for infant milk foods ( first revision ). 
^Specification for processed cereals weaning foods (first revision),' 

and insert the following reference: 

'tSpedfication for processed cereals weaning foods ( first revision ).' 

( Page 7, clause 5.1.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'5.1.1 BIS Certification Marking 

The product may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

5.11.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the 
Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards/ 

(FAD15) 



