**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14999 (2001) : Melamine-Formaldehyde Resins for its Safe 
use in Contact with Foodstuffs, Pharmaceuticals and 
Drinking Water - Specfication [PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1814999:2001 

vh'mRjci ^m^— RRifc 

Indian Standard 
MELAMINE-FORMALDEHYDE RESINS FOR ITS 

SAFE USE IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 
PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER — 

SPECIFICATION 



ICS 67.250; 83.080.10 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



September 200\ Price Group 4 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Use of plastics and resins in the form of cured moulded articles, in packaging of foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water has now become a universally accepted method. In so far as there is any cause for concern in the 
use of plastics/resins in intimate contact with foodstuffs, etc, it arises from the migration of the constituents of the 
plastics composition or residues thereof in their original or an altered form. Where direct contact occurs between 
the packed commodity and the plastics, the high molecular mass polymer itself does not pose toxic hazards being 
inert and essentially insoluble in food. There is, however, a likelihood that some transfer may occur of polymer 
additives, adventitious impurities such as monomers, catalyst remnants and residual polymerization solvents and 
of low molecular mass polymer fractions from the plastics into the packaged material with consequent hazard to 
the consumers. The occurrence of acute toxicity due to plastics material in contact with food is most unlikely, 
since only trace quantities of potentially toxic materials are likely to migrate. However, the accumulation of 
these toxic materials with time may lead to hazards which may be serious. 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins commonly known as MF resins are produced by reacting one mole of melamine 
with not more than three moles of formaldehyde. Part of the melamine fraction may be replaced by urea or by 
benzoguanamine. The moulding materials of the resin are produced by mixing the resin with refined wood 
pulp (cellulose) or with untreated wood reduced to particulate form. This mixture may also contain other 
ingredients/optional adjuvant substances like lubricants and flow promoters, catalysts, polymerization control 
agents, pigments and colourants. 

MF resins has the hardest surface of all plastics materials, the trade-off being its brittleness. They are transparent, 
but when sufficient filler is added (to overcome the extreme brittleness of the unfilled resin), they become 
translucent and excellent diffusers of light; the colour possibilities being unlimited. They are having very high 
resistance to abrasion, acids and alkalis and repeated exposure to liquids. The basic property of its ability to 
accept a moulded-in-decoration in addition to its having high resistance to direct heat has made it very popular 
for use in dinnerware, cutlery handles, large serving utensils and bowls, etc, and various other food-contact 
applications. MF resins can be moulded in flash, semi-positive and positive shut-off compression moulds and 
can also readily be moulded in transfer and injection moulds. 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins in the form of cured moulded articles can be safely used as the food contact 
surface of moulded articles intended for use is producing, manufacturing, packing, processing, preparing, treating, 
packaging, transporting or holding foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water in accordance with the code 
of federal Regulations, FDA(USA) (21 CFR 177.1460). 

This standard is intended to be used with the series of Indian Standards on plastics for food contact applications 
which are given in Annex A. 

It is emphasized that these standards need to be used in combination to provide a system of control to the resins 
manufacturers as well as the fabricators to derive maximum benefits. Besides, it may also serve as basis for 
official agencies to frame suitable legislations to ensure effective safeguards for the safety and health of consumer 
where plastics in general for food contact applications are concerned. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14999 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

MELAMINE-FORMALDEHYDE RESINS FOR ITS 

SAFE USE IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 
PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER — 

SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test of melamine- 
formaldehyde (MF) resins for the manufacture of items 
intended to be used in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

1.2 This standard does not purport to establish the 
suitability of the packaging media with particular 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water, from 
other than toxicological considerations. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this Indian Standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 

Title 
Methods of random sampling 
List of pigments and colourants for 
use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Determination of overall migration 
of constituents of plastics materials 
and articles intended to come in 
contact with foodstuffs — Method of 
analysis {second revision) 
Positive list of constituents of 
melamine-formaldehyde resins in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water — 
Specification 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Melamine-Formaldehyde Resin 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins are those produced 
when one mole of melamine is made to react with not 
more than three moles of formaldehyde in water 
solution. Part of the melamine fraction may be replaced 
by urea or benzoguanamine. 



IS No. 


4905: 


1968 


9833: 


: 1981 


9845: 


: 1998 



14998:2001 



3.2 Melamine-Formaldehyde Moulding Materials 

Melamine-formaldehyde resins mixed with refined 
wood pulp (cellulose) or with untreated wood reduced 
to particulate form. This mixture may also contain other 
optional adjuvant substances like lubricants and flow 
promoters, catalysts, polymerization control agents. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Basic Resins — As defined in 3.1. 

4.2 Moulding Materials — As defined in 3.2. 

4.2.1 Moulded articles made from melamine- 
formaldehyde moulding material shall, when 
determined in accordance with 4.3.1 of IS 14998, not 
yield more than 3 g formaldehyde per 100 mm^ of 

exposed surface in each test. 

4.3 Material 

The material shall also comply with the threshold 
limits of the manufacturing residues, polymerization 
ingredients, auxiliary items as prescribed in IS 14998. 

4.4 Pigments and Colourants 

In case coloured material is used for food contact 
applications, it shall comply with the lists and limits 
of the pigments and colourants prescribed in IS 9833. 

4.5 Overall Migration 

The material shall also comply with the overall 
migration limits to 60 mg/1, Max of the simulant and 
10 mg/dm^, Max of the surface of the material or 
article, when tested by the method prescribed in 
IS 9845. 

4.6 Storage and Control 

4.6.1 Storage 

Plastics materials intended for food-contact use shall 
be stored separately from other materials in closed, 
properly identified containers. 

4.6.2 Control 

An authorized person shall supervize and control the 
issue of plastics materials to the process or 



IS 14999 :2001 



manufacturing area and shall maintain appropriate 
written records of the issue of such materials. 

4.6.3 Adequate standards of hygiene shall be 
maintained at all sites and plant operators and store 
men shall be trained in proper hygiene practice. 

5 PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing 

The material shall be packed in paper/plastics/gunny 
bags with suitable liner, or boxes or cartons, as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier, in a manner 
so as to ensure that the items do not become 
contaminated during storage. 

5.2 Marking 

5.2.1 Each package shall be clearly marked with the 
following information: 

a) Name and type of the material; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture and 
recognized trade mark, if any; 

c) Date of manufacture; 

d) Batch No. or Code No.; and 

e) 'Food-grade' material. 

5.2.2 The packages shall also carry the symbol 
(seeFxg. 1) clearly embossed/printed on it (in 
accordance with the EEC Directives 80/590/EEC 
'Symbol' that shall accompany plastics materials and 
articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs). 




Fig. 1 Symbol 

5.2,3 BIS Certification Marking 

The package may also be marked with the Standard 

Mark. 

5.2.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act , 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers, may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

6 SAMPLING 

The method of drawing representative sample of the 
material and the criteria for conformity shall be as 
prescribed in Annex B. 



ANNEX A 

(Foreword) 

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON PLASTICS SUITABLE FOR USE IN CONTACT WITH 
FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



IS No. 


9833: 


1981 


9845: 


1998 


10141 


:2001 



Title IS No. 

List of pigments and colourants for 
use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 1 1 42 : 1 999 

Determination of overall migration 
of intended to come into contact with 
foodstuffs — Method of analysis 
(second revision) 10146 : 1982 

Positive list of constituents of 



Title 
polyethylene in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water (first revision) 
Polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 
Polyethylene for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 



IS 14999 : 2001 



IS No, Title IS No, 

10148 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 

polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 12248 : 1988 
copolymers in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 

10149 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 12252 : 1987 

polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

10151 : 1982 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 13449 : 1992 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

10171 : 1999 Guide on suitability of plastics for 13576 : 1992 
food packaging {second revision) 

10909:2001 Positive list of constituents of 
polypropylene and its copolymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 13577 : 1992 
ceuticals and drinking water (first 
revision) 

10910 : 1984 Polypropylene and its copolymers for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 13601 : 1993 

11434 : 1985 lonomers resins for its safe use in 

contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

11435 : 1985 Positive list of constituents of 14971 : 2001 

ionomer resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 14972 : 2001 

1 1 704 : 1 986 Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) copoly- 

mers for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 14996 : 2001 

11705 : 1986 Positive list of constituents of 

Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) copoly- 
mers for their safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 14997 : 2001 

12229 : 1987 Positive list of constituents of 
polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 14998 : 2001 
drinking water 

12247 : 1988 Nylon-6 polymer for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 



Title 

ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents ofNylon- 
6 polymer for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) co- 
polymers in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Ethylene methacrylic acid (EMAA) 
copolymers and terpolymers for their 
safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene methacrylic acid (EMAA) 
co-polymers and terpolymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) copoly- 
mers for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Polycarbonate resins for its safe use 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
polycarbonate resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Positive list of constituents of 
modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) resins in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 

Modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
melamine-formaldehyde resins in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 



IS 14999 : 2001 



ANNEX B 

(Clause 6) 

SAMPLING OF MELAMINE-FORMALDEHYDE (MF) RESINS 



B-1 GENERAL 



B-1.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 
samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed. 

B-1.2 Samples shall not be taken in an exposed place. 

B-1.3 The sampling instrument, whenever applicable, 
shall be made of stainless steel or any other suitable 
material on which the material shall have no action. 
The instrument shall be clean and dry. 

B-1 .4 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, 
the material being sampled, the sampling instrument 
and the containers for samples from adventitious 
contamination. 

B-1. 5 The samples shall be placed in a suitable, clean, 
dry, air-tight metal or glass containers on which the 
material has no action. The sample containers shall 
be of such a size that they are almost completely filled 
by the sample. 

B-1. 6 Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight 
with a stopper after filling and marked with full details 
of sampling, such as the date of sampling, the month 
and year of manufacture of the material, etc. 

B-1. 7 Samples shall be stored in such a manner that 
the temperature of the material does not vary unduly 
from the normal temperature. 

B-2 LOT 

B-2.1 In a single consignment all the packages of the 
same class, same type, same form and belonging to 
the same batch of manufacture shall be grouped 
together to constitute a lot. If a consignment is known 
to consist of packages belonging to the different 
batches of manufacture of different forms, the packages 
belonging to the same batch of manufacture and same 
form shall be grouped together and each such group 
shall constitute a lot. 

B-2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
to the requirements of this specification, samples shall 
be tested from each lot separately. The number of 
packages to be sampled shall depend on the size of the 
lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1 . 

B-2.2,1 These packages shall be selected at random 
from the lot and in order to ensure the randomness of 
selection, procedures given in IS 4905 may be followed. 

B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

From each of the packages of material selected, small 



Table 1 Scale of Sampling 

(Clause B-2.2) 



Number of Packages 


Sample Size 


in the Lot 




(1) 


(2) 


Up to 50 


3 


51 to 150 


4 


151 to 300 


5 


301 to 500 


7 


501 and above 


10 


NOTE — When the number of packages in the lot is less than 


three, all the packages shall be sampled. 





portions of material shall be drawn with the help of a 
suitable sampling instrument. The total quantity of 
material collected from each package shall be sufficient 
to test all the requirements given in 4, 

B-4 NUMBER OF TESTS 

The tests for determining all the requirements given 
in 4 shall be carried out on the individual test samples. 

B-5 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

From the individual test results Calculate the average 
(Jp) and the range (/?) 

where 



— _ Sum of the test results 
Number of tests 

R = Difference between the maximum and the 
minimum values of the test results 

The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of various characteristics if: 

X -^ KR < the maximum value specified; and 

where the value of /T shall be chosen from table given 
below: 

Value of /l for various sizes and AQL: 



Sample 






AQL 






Size 


^ 












0.65 


1.00 


1.50 


2.50 


4.00 


3 


— 


— 


— 


0.587 


0.502 


4 


— 


0.651 


0.598 


0.525 


0.450 


5 


0.663 


0.614 


0.565 


0.496 


0.431 


7 


0.613 


0.696 


0.525 


0.465 


0.405 


10 


0.755 


0.703 


0.650 


0.579 


0.507 



IS 14999 : 2001 



ANNEX B 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



Organization 
Internet Exchange Nextxom Limited, Mumbai 
Amines anfl Plasticizers Ltd, Mumbai 

Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, Chennai 

Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 

Gas Authority of India Ltd, Noida 

GE Plastics India Limited, Gurgaon 

GhardaChemcials Ltd, Thane 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Polymers Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Centre for Plastics in Environment, Mumbai 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Plastics Institute, Mumbai 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd, Jalgaon 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), Kanpur 

Ministry of Defence, RDSO, Lucknow 

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, DGHS, New Delhi 

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 

National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuchem Ltd, Faridabad 
Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal 



Representative (s) 
Shri Sarltp Chowdhary {Chairman) 

SHRI V. V. KULKARNl 

Dr R. V, Utekar (Alternate) 
Dr C. S. Narasimhan 

Dr M. Balakrishnan {Alternate) 
Shri J. Sengupta 
Dr Vijai Kumar 

Dr K. Palanivelu {Alternate) 
Shri S. K.. Kumar 

Shri Baldev Raj {Alternate) 
Shri Shivaji Basu 

Shri V. K. Singh {Alternate I) 

Shri Manish Khandelwal {Alternate II) 
General Manager 

Dr (Shrimati) Rashmi Bhardwaj {Alternate) 
DrB. K. Desai 

Dr U. M. Vakil {Alternate) 
Shri B. D, Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. p. Singh {Alternate) 
Shri Shankar Banerjee 

Shri Amitava Sanyal {Alternate) 
Shri S. V. Parveen 

Shri N. C. Dhocendranath {Alternate) 
Dr a. N. Bhat 
Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis {Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Narayanan 

Dr N. G. Mokashi {Alternate) 
Shri D. R. Patel 

Shri R. K. Aggarwal {Alternate) 
Dr V. P. Sharma 
Dr H. C. Mruthyunjaya 

Shri S. B. Joshi {Alternate 1) 

Shri A. P. Choudhari {Alternate II) 
Shri V. Mohan 

Shri R. Suba Rao {Alternate) 
Shri M. N. Saraf 

Dr L. D. Khandpal {Alternate) 
Joint Director (Rubber) 

Director (SS) {Alternate) 
Addl Director General (PFA) 

Shri Sundar Lal {Alternate) 
Shri O. P. Gera 
Dr S. S. Mahajan 

Dr S. S. Kulkarni {Alternate) 
Dr R. S, Lathana 

Shri S. K. Khandelwal {Alternate) 
Shri V. K. Sharma 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria {Alternate) 
Dr R. M. Mehta 
Shri C. C. Sakarda 

Shri S. K. Kodesia {Alternate) 



{Continued on page 6) 



IS 14999 : 2001 



(Continued from page 5) 

Organization 
Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Saint-Gobain Vetrotex India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Parwanoo, (H.P.) 

Shriram Fertilizers & Chemcials, Kota 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

Tata Engg & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

The All India Plastics Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

The Plastics & Linoleums Export Promotion Council, Mumbai 
VIP Industries, Mumbai 

XPRO India Ltd, Faridabad 

BIS Directorate General 



Representativefs) 

Dr Y. B. Vasltdeo 

Dr K. S. Jadhav (Alternate) 
Shri S. Sundaram 

Shri S. K. Ghosh (Alternate I) 

Dr B. J. C. Basu (Alternate II) 
Shri Arun Anand 

Shri Yog Raj Kapur (Alternate) 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta (Alternate) 
Dr R. C. Sood 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
ShriU. K.Nath 

Shrimati A. D. Sathe (Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Aggarwal 

Shri K. B. Easwaran (Alternate) 
Shri R. P. Kalyanpur 
Shri Siddhartha Roy 

Shri A. S. Dalve (Alternate) 
Shri C. Bhaskar 

Shri MANfMOHAN Krishan (Alternate) 
Shri Anian Kar, 
Director & Head (PCD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio Member)] 



Member-Se ere tary 

Shri T. Kalaivanan 

Joint Director (PCD), BIS 

Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries Subcommittee, PCD 12:12 



Organization 
Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 
All India Plastic Industries Association, Delhi 
AS & T India Limited, New Delhi 
Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Mumbai 

Britannia Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Centre for Processed Food, Bangalore 

Central Committee for Food Standards (Directorate General 

of Health Services), New Delhi 
Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata 

Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Drugs Controller (India), New Delhi 
GE Plastics India Ltd, Distt Vadodara 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Co Ltd, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 

Hitkari Potteries Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 



Representativefs) 
Shri K. R. Kumar (Convenor) 
Shri Ravi Kltmar 
Shri G. D. Agrawal 
Dr C. Shankar 

Shri S. N. Murthy (Alternate) 
Shri G. S. Aurora 

Shri M. R. Sundar (Alternate) 
Shri R. Prakash 

Shri Chetan L. Hanchate (Alternate) 
AssTT Director General (PFA) 

Dr K. C. Guha 

Dr S. Vanchinathan (Alternate) 
Shri Anil Agarwal 

Shri A. N. Srivastava (Alternate) 
Dr p. Das Gupta 
Dr G. Mukhopadhvaya 

Dr (Shrimati) Rashmi Bhardwaj (Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. p. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Amitava Sanyal 

Shri Raj Datta (Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Lahiri 

Shri P. S. Lakshmanan (Alternate) 
Shri Milind Bhole 
Ms M. C. Dordi 

Shri N. C. Saha (Alternate) 



(Continued on page 7) 



{Continued from page 6) 

Organization 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
National Dairy Development Board, Anand 
National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Rollantainers Ltd, Faridabad 
Sriram Fertilizers & Chemicals, Kota 

Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

XPRO India, Faridabad 



IS 14999 : 2001 



Representative (s) 

Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis {Alternate) 
Dr p. K. Seth 
Senior Executive 
Shri J. K. Vadodaria 

Shri V. K. Sharma {Alternate) 
Dr K. S. Jadhav 

Dr R. Rangaprasad {Alternate) 
Shri Sanjaya Varma 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta {Alternate) 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi {Alternate) 
Shri Pankaj Mithel 

Shri Vineet Gupta {Alternate) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 12 (1332). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

J323 16 17 
\323 38 41 

r337 84 99, 337 85 61 
L337 86 26, 337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



J25A 12 16, 254 14 42 
\254 25 19,254 13 15 

r832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Pless, New Delhi-2 



