•*•*•••••*•*•••• 






^ 



m^% 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 11435 (1985) : Positive list of constituents of ionomer 
resins for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water [PCD 12: Plastics] 




.^^_ 



^sf m 



^ 



1 w 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




- M 






BLANK PAGE 




><3 



^ri*jr.-^. 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 11435-1385 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF 

IONOMER RBSINS FOR ITS SAFE USE IN 

CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



UDC 678-7 : 62l*79B : GG3.GG4 + 615 1/4 : 614 8 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, & BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI M0OO2 

Cr 3 Mtrck L986 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF 

IONOMER RESINS FOR ITS SAFE USE IN 

CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 

Plastics Sectional Committee, PCDC 12 

Chairman Representing 

D» K. Aghoramubthy Ministry of Energy ( Department of Petroleum ) 

Members 

Shbi Abtjn Anand Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Parwanoo 

(H.P.) 

Shri Yog Raj Kapub ( Alternate ) 
Db P. G. Antony Indian Plastics Ltd, Bombay 

Sbri N. L. Bibla ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shbi B. B. Rai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Bastj Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shbi G. L. Anand ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. Bhatia Department of Food ( Ministry of Food & Civil 

Supplies ), New Delhi 

Db B. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. J. Bhatt State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New 

Delhi 

Shri Bhagwan Daswani ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. T. Bhojwani Bright Brothers Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi A. H. Khan t Alternate ^ 
Shri R. C. Brab Indian Plastics Institute ( IPI ), Bombay 

Shbi V. K. Groveb ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Chellam Chemicals & Plastics India Ltd, Madras 

Shri G. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. V. Chittal Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr M. Krishan ( Alternate ) 
Db R. P. Dambal Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri G. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Db S. P. Singh Dhakarey Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri N. C. Bose ( Alternate ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri V. Dor air a J Polyolafins Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. L. Pathak ( Alternate ) 
ShbiChandrakast B. Gabwakb Garware Synthetics Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. P. Pathak {Alternate) 
Shbi A, Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. M. Lahiri ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K.Jain Hoechst Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. B. Gadre ( Alternate ) 
Dr L. D. Kasdpal Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Dk Amah Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. U. Khandheria Polychem Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. K. Grover ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. K. Kundu Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetables Oils & Fats 

(Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies), New 
Delhi 

Dr R. A. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. Lakshman Metal Box India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri O. BaneRJEE ( Alternate ) 
Shri Looasttndaram Plastics & Linolium Export Promotion Council, 

Bombay 

Shri K. Ramani ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Malhan Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 

Shri D. P. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. P. Manik Railway Board (Ministry of Railways), New 

Delhi 

Dr Krishan Kdmab ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. N. Mathur Harcourt Butler Technological Institute, Kanpur 

Shri C. K. Mbhrotra Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri S. S. Chopra ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kirti M. Mbhta All India Plastic Manufacturers Association, 

Bombay 

Shri Roshan Lal Dha ( Alternate ) 
Shrimati'Debi Mukherjee Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 

Shri V. S. Munoe Gujarat State Fertilizers Co Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri V. Nijhawan Union Carbide India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Gtj:pta ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. B. Patra Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Hooghly 
Shri O. P. Ratra National Building Organization, New Delhi 

Shri R. Santhanam Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Tools, 

Madras 

Dr K. Ramamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri'P. R. Seshan Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri B. D. Chatter jee ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. U. Shenoy Ilac Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. Y. Sukhthankar ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. K. Vadobaria National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri R. V. Adarkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. Vaid Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Pune 

Dr L. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 9 ) 



IS t 11435 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF 

IONOMER RESINS FOR ITS SAFE USE IN 

CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 2 December 1985, after the draft finalized by Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Products Division Council. 

0.2 Plastics are now being used on a large scale for packaging of 
foodstuffs and pharmaceuticals. Where direct contact occurs between the 
packed commodity and the plastics, the high molecular mass polymer 
itself does not pose a toxic hazard being inert and essentially insoluble in 
food. There is, however, a likelihood that some transfer will occur of 
polymer additives, adventitious impurities, such as monomers, catalyst 
remants and residual polymerization solvents and of low molecular mass 
polymer fractions from the plastics into the packaged material with 
consequent toxic hazard to the consumers. The occurrence of acute 
toxicity due to plastics materials in contact with food is most unlikely, 
since only trace quantities of potentially toxic materials are likely to 
migrate. However, the accumulation of these toxic materials with time 
may lead to hazards which may be serious. 

0.3 Ionomer resins which at present are not being manufactured in the 
country, are a new breed of third generation polymers. These resins are 
of particular usefulness in the packaging industry. Ionomer resins may 
be converted into films by conventional processing methods, such as blown, 
coextrusion, cast, lamination. The distinctiveness of ionomer resins lies 
in the following areas: 

a) Sealing through product ( particularly oils and dusty powders ) 
residue, 

b) Resistance to oil penetration, 

c) Very high hot seal ( hot tack ) strength, and 

d) Low sealing temperature. 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

These properties would reduce seal failures. Ionomer resins may 
also be combined with a variety of other polymers to give film structures, 
such as nylon/ionomer, HDPE/ionomer, polyester/LDPE/ionomer, 
BOPP/ionomer, polyester/aluminium/ionomer. 

0.4 This standard is intended to be used with the following Indian 
Standards on plasties for food contact applications: 

IS : 9833-1981 List of pigments and colourants for use in plastics 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water; 

IS : 9845-1981 Method of analysis for the determination of 
specific and/or overall migrations of constituents of plastic 
materials and articles intended to come into contact with 
foodstuffs; 

IS : 10141-1982 Positive list of constituents of polyethylene in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water; 

IS : 10142-1982 Specification for styrene polymers for its safe use 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water; 

IS : 10146-1982 Specification for polyethylene for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

IS : 10148-1982 Positive list of constituents of polyvinyl chloride 
( PVG ) and its copolymers in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

IS : 10149-1982 Positive list of constituents of styrene polymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

IS : 10151-1982 Specification for polyvinyl chloride ( PVC ) and 
its copolymers for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

IS : 10171-1982 Guide on suitability of plastics for food packaging. 

IS : 10909-1984 Positive list of constituents of polypropylene in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

IS: 10910-1984 Specification for polypropylene and its copolymers 
for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water. 

Specification for ionomer resins for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

0.4.1 Standards for other plastics for food contact applications like 
ethylene/acrylic acid ( EAA ) copolymer which are under preparation are 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

expected to follow the same pattern, namely, a product specification with 
a corresponding positive list. 

0.5 It is emphasized that these standards need to be used in combination 
to provide a system of control to the manufacturers of plastics as well as 
the fabricators of thermoplastic packaging materials to derive maximum 
benefits. Besides, it may also serve as basis for official agencies to frame 
suitable legislation to ensure effective safeguards for the safety and health 
of consumers where thermoplastics for food contact applications are 
concerned. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers positive list of constituents of ionomer resins, 
the manufacturing residues and necessary additives which may be 
regarded, as safe for use when properly processed in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water when present only in the 
prescribed limits of concentrations. 

1.2 It does not purport to establish the suitability of the ingredient singly 
and in a particular foodstuff from other than toxicological considerations. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard ionomer polymer shall mean the 
following: 

2.2 Ionomers of Acid Copolymers — A basic resin produced by the 
polymerization of ethylene and methacrylic acid at high pressure and 
by neutralizing to 100 percent of the carboxyl groups in the 
ethylene-methacrylic acid copolymers to produce the ammonium, 

2.3 Ionomers of Acid Tar polymers 

a) A basic resin produced by the polymerization of ethylene, 
methacrylic acid and vinyl acetate at high pressure and by 
neutralizing to 100 percent of the carboxyl groups in the 
ethylene-methacrylic acid vinyl acetate terpolymer to produce 
the ammonium, calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium and/or 
zinc partial salts. 

b) A basic resin produced by the polymerization of ethylene, 
methacrylic acid and isobutyl acrylate at high pressure and by 
neutralizing to 100 percent of the carboxyl groups in the 
ethylene-methacrylic acid-isobutyl acrylate terpolymers to 
produce the sodium, potassium and/or zinc partial salts. 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

2.4 Additive Concentrates — A resin produced by making up a 
master batch of a slip agent and /or an antiblock agent in an 
ethylene-methacrylic acid copolymer for use only in contact with food 
after being let-down into an ethylene-methacrylic acid copolymer 
of terpolymer or ionomer or other compatible polymer which may contact 
food. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 
3.1 Basic Resins 

3.1.1 In the ethylene-methacrylic acid copolymers, the methacrylic acid 
content shall not exceed 20 percent by mass. 

3.1.2 In the ethylene-methacrylic acid — vinyl acetate terpolymers, the 
methacrylic acid content shall not exceed 15 percent by mass. In the 
ethylene-methacrylic acid-isobutyl acrylic terpolymers, the resin shall 
contain not less than 70 percent by mass of ethylene and not more 
than 15 percent by mass of methacrylic acid and not more than 
20 percent by mass of isobutyl acrylate. 

3.1.3 Blends — There shall be no limits on the proportions of any of 
the ionomeric copolymers and ionomeric terpolymers that may be 
blended with each other. 

3.1.4 Additive Concentrates — The total level of slip agent and/or 
anti-block agent added to the acid copolymers shall not exceed 25 percent 
by mass prior to let-down. 

3.1.5 General — To comply with this list the resins defined 
in 3.1.1 to 3.1.4 shall be made in such a way that they contain no 
ingredients or residues of ingredients used in their manufacture other 
than those listed in 3.2 and/or coming within provisions of 3.3. 

3.2 Manufacturing Residues — The basic resins may contain a total 
of not more than 02 percent by mass of ethylene, propane, methacrylic 
acid vinyl acetate, isobutyl acrylate, organic peroxides or their 
decomposition products, and inert odourless mineral spirits. 

3.3 Auxiliary Items for Working 

3.3.1 Lubricants — The total lubricant shall not be more than 2 percent 
by mass of the finished resin except in those cases wherein it is specifically 
prescribed as in the additive concentrates. 

3.3.1.1 The following lubricants may be present: 

a) Stearamide; 

b) Oleyl pal mit amide; 

6 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

c) Bohenamide; 

d) Polyethylene; 

e) Erucamide; 

f) Dioleoyl ethylene diamine; 

g) Polybutane; 

h) Stearyl erucamide; 

j ) Distearoyl ethylene diamine; 

k) Dimethylpoly siloxane; 

m) Linoleamide; and 

n) Palmitamide. 

3.3.2 Anti-block Agents — The total anti-block additive content shall not 
be more than 2 percent by mass of the finished resin except in those cases 
wherein it is specifically prescribed as in the additive concentrates. 

3.3.2.1 The following anti-block agents may be present: 

a) Silica; 

b) Aluminium calcium silicate; 

c) Calcium silicate; 

d) Magnesium silicate; 

e) Sodium aluminosilicate; 

f ) Sodium calcium aluminosilicate; 

g) Tricalcium silicate; 
h) Titanium dioxide; 
j ) Aluminium oxide; 
k) Magnesium oxide; 

m) Zinc oxide; 
n) Aluminium silicate; 
p) Kaolin. 

3.3.3 Antioxidants — The total antioxidant content shall not be more 
than 2 percent by mass of the finished resin. 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

3.3.3.1 Any of the antioxidants prescribed in 3.4.2 of 
IS : 10141-1982* may be used. 

3.3.4 Antistatic andfor Antifogging Agents — The total antistatic and/or 
antifogging agent concentration shall not exceed 0"5 percent. 

3.3.4.1 Any of the antistatic and/or antifogging agents prescribed 
in 3.4.3 of IS : 10141-1982* may be used. 



♦Positive list of constituents of polyethylene in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

8 



IS i SH35 - 1985 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi T. S. Venkitachalam Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. V. L. Narasimhan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. S. Saxbna, Director Genera], ISI {Ex-ojficia Member) 

Director ( P & G ) 

Secretary 

Shbi Amarjit Sinqh 

Assistant Director (P & C), ISI 



Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries 
Subcommittee, PCDG 12 : 12 

Convener 

Shrimati Devi Mukiiekjjse Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry 

of Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi 

Members 

Shri A. S. Aiyar Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shbi Cybus Bagwadia Du Pont Far East Inc., Bombay 

Dr N. Balasubramanyan Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 

Shri K. R. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. S. Bhargava Indian Explosives Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. B. Patra ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. T. Bhojwani Bright Brothers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. H. Khan ( Alternate } 
Shri S. Chowdhuby Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri S. Banerji ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. V. Datar Polychem Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. K. Grover ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. Dobairaj Polyolefins Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. L. Pathak ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Gothoskar Directorate General of Health Services (Ministry 

of Health & Family Welfare), New Delhi 
Dr K. C. Guha Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Shbi A. K. Dhab { Alternate ) 
Shbi R. Kalidas Chemicals & Plastics { India ) Ltd, Madras 

j Shri S. S. Gattani ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. N. Koshy M. M. Rubber Company Ltd, Ranipet 

( Tamil Nadu ) 

Shri T. M. Chakravarthy ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. Krishna*! Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi G. S. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. Lakbhmanan Metal Box India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi V.S. Mttnge Gujarat State Fertilizers Corporation Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Shbi P. V.Narayanan Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri G. S. PubshoThaman ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 11435 - 1985 

( Continued from page 9 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. G. Sah Union Carbide India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. Nijhawan ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. Sen Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Shri O. P. Srivastava Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri A. N. Srivastava ( Alternate) 
Shri J. K. Vadodaria National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri R. V. Adarkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Santosh Yellore Analytical Testing Services, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Bindra ( Alternate ) 



10 



