***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10811 (1984): Oxygen and acetylene manifold regulators 
for welding, cutting and related processes [MTD 11: Welding 
General] 



-^JJIi^^^3^^^aVfi/I^taKNMgg^T<>>^irFS 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:%^>^ift^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10871 < 1984 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFIC ATJON FOR 

OXYGEN AND ACETYLENE MANIFOLD 

REGULATORS FOR WELDJNG. CUTTING 

AND RELATED PROCESSES 



UDC €2! 7tJl 5 03 : eari>4C-4 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BllAVAN, y ItAllAlH K SHAH ZAIAU WARO 

Gr 4 Aiigiisi ir^a-i 



IS : 10811 • 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

OXYGEN AND ACETYLEN'E MANIFOLD 

REGULATORS FOR WELDING, CUTTING 

AND RELATED PROCESSES 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri D. S. Honavar D & H Secheron Electrodes Pvt Ltd, Indore 

Members 

Shbi S. R. J AN A ( Alternate to 
Shri D. S. Honavar ) 
Shki J. K. Ahluwalia Stewards & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shki T. K, Bast; ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. N. Ahuja Directorate General of Employment and Training, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. Balmanohar Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri R. V. Kale ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Basu Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Sum K. Ban^hjee { Alternate) 
Shri S. C. Bhowal National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri K. L. Barui ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Bubman M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. B. Ghosh ( Alternate I ) 

Shri B. B. Saha ( Alternate II ) 
Shri S. G. Dey Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Director ( M & C ), RDSO, Ministry of Railways 

LUCKNOW 

Chemist & Metallurgist-2, 

RDSO, LucKNow ( Alternate I ) 
Production Engineer, 
ICF, Madras ( Alternate II ) 
Shri C. C. Girotra Association of Indian Engineering Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. S. Aggarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri M, T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Krishnamurthy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shri N. K. Sethi ( Alternate I ) 
Shri K. Pooranchandra Rao ( Alternate II ) 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUIION 

This publication b protected under the Indittn Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the laid Act. 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. Majumdar Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shki S. K. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri a. V. MuLAY Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 

Shri P. S. Jos hi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Mum Moorthy Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri J. D. Panda Dalmla Institute of Scientific and Industrial 

Research, Rajgangpur 

Shri Rajindba Nath ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. L. V. Rangak ( Alternate II ) 
Shri Anil Pandya Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), 

Bokaro Steel City 
Shri K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar 

Shri G. D, Apte ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. D. Pbnnathur Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Vishakhapatnam 

Dr S. Pjrasannakumar Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. K. Nanda ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. R. Prasher Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri N. RadhakrishnaK Binny Ltd, Madras 

Shri B. Ramaswamy Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. Ramaswamy Research & Development Organization, Steel 

Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri S. K. Choudhury { Alternate ) 
Shri P. B. Rao ' Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri A. L. Lala ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. G. Rao Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shri L. M. Tolani ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. H. G. Rau Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. R. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Represkntativb Jessop & Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri H. K. Taneja Indian Register of Shipping, Calcutta 

Shri S. Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. R, UpadhyaY Apar Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Patwardhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. K. Venkataraman Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Visvanath Advani-Oerlikon Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. Raghavendran, Director General, I SI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Seeretarjf 

Shri P. Dakshiita Murty 
Senior Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



( Continued on page 13 ) 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

OXYGEN AND ACETYLENE MANIFOLD 

REGULATORS FOR WELDING, CUTTING 

AND RELATED PROCESSES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 2 January 1984-, after the draft finalized by the Welding 
General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Pressure regulators for gas cylinders used for welding, cutting and 
allied processes have been covered in IS : 6901-1981*. This standard 
specifies requirements for regulators used in manifold systems. 

0.3 In preparing the standard, assistance has been derived from ISO/TC 
44/SC 8 N311 (DP 7291 ) 'Manifold regulators for welding, cutting 
and related processes — Definitions, requirernents and te.'ting', issued by 
the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960"f. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers oxygen and acetylene manifold regulators for 
welding, cutting and related processes. The regulators are meant for 
fitting at the ends of high pressure line ( manifold ) in cylinder batteries 
for providing central supply of compressed and dissolved gases. This 
standard does not apply to pressure regulators designed for direct 
connection to gas cylinders. 

♦Pressure regulators for gas cyiinders used in welding, cutting and related processes 
( first revision ). 

fRules for rounding off nuinerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Manifold Regulator — A manifold regulator ( referred to as a 
pressure regulator in this standard ) is a device for reducing a generally 
variable inlet pressure to as constant as possible outlet pressure, even if 
the discharge varies ( see Fig. 1 ). 

3. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Material 

3.1.1 The material of the regulator components liable to come into 
contact with the gases shall have adequate lesistance to the chemical 
action of the gases under operating conditions. 

3.1.2 The maximum content of the copper in the material for the 
manufacture of acetylene regulator coming directly in contact with 
acetylene shall be limited to 70 percent. The materials used for parts in 
acetylene regulators and coming in contact with acetylene shall be proof 
against acetone conforming to IS : 170-1966*. 

3.1.3 Material subject to rusting shall not be used for parts in contact 
with oxygen. 

3.2 Design, Machining and Assembly 

3.2.1 Oxygen Regulators — Regulators for oxygen shall be so designed, 
machined and assembled as to avoid internal ignition; all components 
and accessories shall be thoroughly cleaned and degreased before 
assembly. 

Note — Although this clause has been specially specified for oxygen regulators in 
the interest of safety it may be desirable to follow this provision for all gas regulators. 

3.2.2 Filter — • A dust filter having an effective cross section compatible 
with the discharge of the regulator shall be mounted within the regulator 
upstream of the pressure regulating valve. 

3.2.3 Inlet Pressure Connection — The choice of the regulator connection 
to the high pressure line is at the discretion of the manufacturer. 

The inlet connection of the regulator for special type of gas shall be 
designed to prevent connection to cylinders for other types of gases. 

3.2.4 Outlet Pressure Connection — The choice of the outlet pressure 
connection is at the discretion of the manufacturer. 



♦Specification for acetone {first revision ). 

4 



PRESSURE GAUGE 



tji 




INLET PRESSURE 
CONNECTION 



REGULATING BODY 



OUTLET PRESSURE 
CONNECTION 



REGULATOR BONNET 



^H^ PRESSURE ADJUSTING 
SCREW 



Fig. 1 Manifold Pressure Regulator 



CA 



69 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

3.2.5 Regulator Bonnet — The regulator bonnet shall be provided with 
sufficiently large relief hole or holes open to atmosphere to prevent any 
accumulation of pressure inside the cover due to accidental leakage of 
gas from the inside of the regulator or due to bursting of the diaphragm/. 

3.2.6 Relief Valoe — The regulator should be provided with a blow off 
vent on the outlet pressure side so that in case of any accidental pressure 
build-up, the gas can be safely vented to the atmosphere. 

3.2.7 Pressure Gauges — The regulator shall be fitted with a pressure 
gauge to read outlet pressure with an accuracy of ±3 percent of maxi- 
mum scale reading. A pressure gauge of similar accuracy shall also be 
fitted for the inlet pressure reading unless the manifold is equipped with 
a suitable pressure gauge. 

3.2.7.1 Marking on pressure gauges — Oxygen pressure gauges shall be 
marked with the word: 

*OXYGEN — USE NO OIL' or with the word *OXYGEN' followed by 
the sketch of a crossed oil can. 




Acetylene pressure gauges shall be marked with the word 
'ACETYLENE'. 



3»2.8 Pressure Adjusting Device — The travel of the adjusting screw of 
all pressure regulators is to be limited so that spring cannot be compressed 
to its solid height. 

4. PRESSURE AND FLOW-NOTATIONS 

4.1 Notations used in the standard are as follows: 

p^ — Nominal ( maximum ) inlet pressure — It is the highest pressure 
in MPa of the high pressure line ( manifold ) at a temperature 
ofl5°C. 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

p^ — Outlet pressure P^ — It is the maximum operating pressure in 
MPa of the outlet pressure of the pipe line to which the regulator 
is to be fitted. 

P3 — Upstream ( critical ) test pressure P3 ^ 2P2 + 0* I MPa. This is 
the minimum inlet pressure for the purpose of rating flow 
performance of the regulator. 

Pi — Stabilized Outlet Pressure — This is the stabilized pressure 
measured at the outlet of the regulator one minute after 
cessation of flow where the flow has been set to the standard 
discharge. 

Note — The test inlet pressure P3 and outlet pressure P^ ^^V be adjusted to give 
the standard discharge Q,i. 

P5 — The highest or the lowest outiet pressure during a test regulating 
from a variation of the inlet pressure between P^ and P3 at 
previously adjusted conditions Px> ■f*2) Q.!* 

0,1 — Standard discharge ( m^jh ) — The minimum flow rate for a 
regulator outlet pressure Pg. 

Q^max — Maximum discharge. 

The gas flow rate established at the test inlet pressure P3 and 
outlet pressure P2. 

p p 

R — Coefficient of pressure increase upon closer ( R = -^— p — ~ )- 



p p 

i — Irregularity coefficient ( i = ~^-^ — ^ ). 



5. PERFORMANCE REQjUIREMENT 

5.1 The manufacturers claim for flow and pressure regulation for the 
equipment shall be verified by tests. 

5.2 The information should be available in a tabular form ( see 
Table 1 ). 

6. SPECIAL STIPULATION FOR OUTLET PRESSURE OF 
ACETYLENE REGULATORS 

6.1 The outlet pressure P^ of acetylene regulator shall be dependent on 
the diameter of the acetylene outlet pipeline as given in Table 2. 



TABLE 1 


PERFORMANCE 


REQUIREMENT FOR REGULATORS PRESSURE AND FLOW 
CHARACTERISTICS 






( Clause 5.2 ) 






Gas 


Nominal Imtlet 

Pbessuee 

(Max) 


Nominal Outlet 
Pressure 

{Max.) 

P2 


Standard 
Discharge 


Maximum 
Discharge 

dMax 


Coefficient iRKEorLARiTY 
or Pressure Coefficient 
Ikorease 
Upon Closure 




MPa 


MPa 


ra»/h 


ra»/h 


R i 


Oxygen and other 
compressed gases 


20 


A 


at 


dMax 


0-5 Max -0-5 < »< +0-5 



Dissolved acetylene 



1.8 



Pi 



di 



dMax ^'^Max -0-4<»<+0-4 



jsIqtjj — Xhe manufacturer of the regulator shall provide information regarding the outlet pressure P^^ standard 
discharge (^i, maximum discharge <2. Afa* for which the regulator is designed, j^-i should not be less than 0*5 dj^ax- 



CO 



S 



00 



IS : 10811 - 1984 



TABLE 2 INTERNAL DIAMETERS OF PIPES AND OUTLET PRESSURE 
P, FOR MANIFOLD ACETYLENE REGULATORS 



( Clause Q.\ ) 



Internal diameters <50 60 70 80 90 100 > 100 to 150 > 150 
of pipes ( mm ) 

Outlet pressure Pj V5 V\ 0*9 O'S 07 0*6 0*3 0-2 

( MPa) 

Note — Intermediate values for internal diameters up to 100 mm may be selected 
by straight-line interpolation. 

7, TEST REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 The regulator shall conform to the following test requirements: 

a) Initial approval/rating test, 

b) Production control test, and 

c) Periodic check test. 

7.2 Initial Approval/Rating Test — These tests shall be conducted 
on each type or modified type of regulator. 

7.2.1 Maximum Discharge, Q^Max — The discharge Q^Max shall be 
obtained by discharging to atmosphere with the regulator set to the 
outlet pressure P2 and the test inlet pressure F3. 

7.2.2 Standard Discharge^ Q^^ — This will be carried out with a suitable 
control valve attached to the outlet of the regulator and the test inlet 
pressure P3 applied, the outlet pressure shall be raised to P2 with the 
outlet control valve closed. The outlet control valve shall then be 
gradually opened until the standard discharge is attained. If the outlet 
pressure has deviated, it shall be re-adjusted to the value P^. The 
standard discharge under these conditions shall be obtained with the 
downstream control valve in the fully opened position and with the 
appropriate corrections for the pressure drop due to the downstream 
flow measuring equipment to give the corrected discharge to atmosphere. 

7.2.3 Stabilised Outlet Pressure, P4 — • The standard discharge flow rate 
<2^j shall be adjusted as stated in 7.2.2, When a steady state is reached, 
the gas flow shall suddenly be stopped and after 60 seconds the stabilised 
pressure shall be observed. This value shall be used to calculate the 
coefficient of the pressure increase R upon closure. 

7.2.4 Expansion Curve with Rising or Falling Characteristics Plotted During 
Continuous Discharge — An expansion curve ( see Fig. 2 ) giving the outlet 
pressure as a function of the inlet pressure shall be plotted during a test 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

starting with the initial values of Pi, P2 and Q,i. The test shall last 
for at least 15 minutes and continue until the inlet pressure comes down 
toPa. 



'\ 




uu 


a ♦ ^ ^'**'^ 


on 


^2 J 


X 


Z) 




to 




\ 


y) 




■X 


LJ 




1 \ 


q: 


; \ 


£L 


P5 1 \ 


1— 




\ 


UJ 




\ 


J 




1 \ 


»— 




1 \ 


3 




' I 





1 


, 



INLET PRESSURE 



2A With Rising Characteristic 




1NLE7 PRESSURE P3 

2B With Falling Characteristic 

Fig. 2 Typical Dynamic Expansion Curve 

The curve shall show no sudden variation between Pi and P3. There 
shall be no alteration in the outlet pressure setting or the flow control 
during the test. 

From this irregularity coefficient ' i ' shall be measured. 

Note — For the test covered in 7.2.1 to 7.2.4, oil free air or nitrogen shall be used 
for the resulting curves and data shall be derived for air at 27 °C ± 2°C and 0*1 MPa 
with the appropriate conversion for the required gas. 

10 



IS : 10811 - 1984 

7.2.5 Ignition Safety Test {for oxygen regulator only ) — The regulator 
heated to SCG with fully closed pressure regulating valve ( for example, 
pressure adjusting screw loosened ) shall be exposed at the inlet to 
pressure shocks with commercial grade oxygen. The oxygen shall be 
heated to 60°G i 3°G at a minimum pressure of Pi. 

Each test series shall consist of 20 pressure shocks at 30 seconds 
intervals, each pressure shock being applied for 10 seconds. 

After each pressure shock the test regulator shall be depressurized. 
The venting of the oxygen shall not be through the regulator but 
upstream of the inlet connection. 

During the test series the inlet pressure shall not decrease by more 
than 3 percent. 

Regulators shall not burn out during this test nor shall the internal 
components show signs of scorching. 

7.2.6 Mechanical Strength Test ( Hydraulic Pressure Test ) — The bodies of 
regulators shall withstand a pressure of 1*5 times the inlet pressure P^, but 
not less than 30 MPa for the inlet passages. For these tests the valve 
orifices may be blanked and the inlet pressure gauge ( if fitted ) replaced 
by a blanking plug. The outlet pressure chamber and the intermediate 
chambers on two stage regulators shall withstand a pressure of not less 
than 3 MPa. During this test the diaphragm, relief valve and pressure 
gauges may be replaced with suitable blanks and the blanking plugs used 
shall be free from leaks. This test shall be conducted hydraulically. 

7.3 Production Control Test — These shall consist of the following to 
be conducted on each regulator: 

a) Seat Leak Test — With the pressure adjusting screw fully released 
and the regulator inlet subjected to a minimum pressure of 
7 MPa for oxygen regulator and 1*4 MPa for acetylene regulator, 
there shall be no leakage of gas from the regulator outlet. 

b) Overall Leak Test — With the regulator outlet blocked and the 
regulator inlet subjected to a minimum pressure of 7 MPa for 
oxygen regulators and 1 '4 MPa for acetylene regulators, there 
shall be no leakage from the regulator including threaded connec- 
tions, diaphragm clamping surfaces, pressure relief devices or 
pressure gauges. For this test the regulator should be adjusted to 
a flow rate of Q,i at an outlet pressure of P2* 

11 



IS : 10811 * 1984 

c) Inlet pressure lower than P^ is suggested after due consideration 
of the available experience that leak tightness can be obtained 
easily at higher inlet pressure when neoprene rubber seat is used 
but if proper care is not taken, ihe seat may start leaking when 
the pressure is lowered. 

Note — Leak test may be performed with an appropriate leak testing solution such 
as soap solution applied as a film over the part being tested, continued distention of 
the film shall be considered as evidence of leakage. 

7.4 Periodic Check Tests — These shall comprise of the following to 
be conducted at least once a year: 

a) Seat leak test, see 7.3 (a); 

b) Overall leak test, see 7.3 (b); 

c) Maximum discharge; and 

d) Standard discharge. 

7,4.1 The ignition test shall be included as a periodic check test if 
there is a change in the material or in the design of the regulator after its. 
initial approval. 

8. MARKING 

8.1 Each regulator shall show the following markings: 

a) The manufacturer's identification, 

b) A distinctive catalogue number or equivalent, and 

c) The name of the gas for which the regulator is to be used. 

8.2 All markings shall be legible and reasonably permanent. 

8.2.1 The pressure regulator rhay also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Nqte — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard; 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
' control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ]SI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a Unce for the^ 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Institution. 

9. INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY THE MANUFAC- 
TURER 

9.1 All leaflets and catalogues on the regulators shall provide the perfor- 
mance requirements of the regulator in the tabular form as indicated in_ 
Table 1 and 5.1. 

12 



13 : iOSii - 1984 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Subcom mi ttee for Welding Equipments and Accessories 
( Other Than Power Services ), SMDG 14 : 6 

Convener Representing 

Shbi R. Purkaystha Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shtii a, K. Mitba ( Alternate to 
Shri R. Purkaystha ) 
Shri T. R. Bhatia Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri J. C. Magoo ( Alternate I ) 

Shri R. S. Babu ( Alternate II )' 
Shri D. K. Gabg The Industrial Gases Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Sangal ( Alternate ) 
Shri I.. N, Mtjbthy Chief Inspector of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri Charaujit Lal ( Alternate ) 
Representative Advani-Oerlikon Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Upendra Singh Heavy Engineering Corporation ( HMBP ), Ranchi 

Shbi S. K. Roy ( Alternate ) 



13 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

WELDING EQinPMENT 

IS: 

4972-1968 Resistance spot-welding electrodes 

6016-1970 Hose connection for welding and cutting equipment 

6901-1981 Pressure regulators for gas cylinder* used in welding cutting and related 
processes ( first revision ) 

7653-1975 Manual blowpipes for welding and cutting 



