**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14348 (1996) : Code for hygienic conditions for alcoholic 
beverage industry [FAD 15: Food Hygiene^ Safety Management 
and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14348 : 1996 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 



ICS 67. 160. 10; 13. 100 



©BIS 1996 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 
March 1996 Price Group 4 



Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, FAD 45 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

Alcoholic beverage industry has established itself in India as a well organized industry. Besides meeting 
the indigenous demand, some quantities of alcoholic drinks are exported and there is considerable 
l)otential for exports. The broad objective of this standard is not only to enable the Indian consumers to 
get a product of good quality manufactured under hygienic conditions but also to help manufacturers to 
provide them the necessary guidelines for maintaining and manufacturing their products under hygienic 
conditions. 

This standard provides guidelines in maintaining optimum hygienic conditions in aicoholicl)everage industry. 
It is hoped that this standard will be of considerable assistance to the industry in enforcing hygienic 
conditions in the interest of public health. 

This code is subject to the prr)visions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules 
framed thereunder as amended from time to time and other local Regidations. 



IS 14348 : 1996 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the hygienic conditions 
required for establishing and maintaining an alcoholic 
beverage producing units. 

2 REFERENCE 

The following standard contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



IS No, 



Title 



10500 : 1983 Drinking water 

3 SITE 

3.1 An alcoholic beverage industry shall be situated 
in open, clean and healthy surroundings away from 
cattle sheds, open sewage drains and other such places 
likely to breed insects and pests, 

3.2 Premises shall be devoid of objectionable odour 
or smoke. There shall not be accumulation of garbage 
or similar wastes in the vicinity of the plant. 

3.3 Site shall be preferably so silnatedthat no pesticide/ 
chemical/petrochemical/paper/leather industries are 
nearby. Since effluent from these industries results in 
contamination of ground water through seepage, 
rendering ground water unfit for usage. 

4 BUILDING 

4. 1 Structure shall be of permanent nature and shall 
be designed as to provide sufficient space for equipment 
and material storage and facilitate carrying out process/ 
packing operations in hygienic manner. 

4.2 Material of construction shall be bricks, RCC, 
plaster, tiles, asbestos sheets or any such suitable 
material which ensures cleanliness. 

4.3 No portion of building shall be used for domestic 
purposes or other food preparations unless separated 
by suitable partitions to avoid contamination of product 
with microbes, off odour, filth, etc. 

4.4 Floor 

Floor of receiver room, blending room and bottling 
hall shall be laid with smooth and easily cleanable 



material like polished stone, tiles or cement. The floor 
of fermentation room shall be laid with acid/alkali proof 
tiles. Floor should be properly sloped and provided 
with trap drains, 

4.5 Walls and Ceilings 

Internal walls shall have a smooth, non-absorbant 
surface, free from sharp angles and crevices to faciUtate 
their ef&cient cleaning. The walls in bottling hall shall 
have a tiling up to the height reached by splash or 
water spray. Ceiling should have proper slope to 
prevent water logging and shall be provided with 
proper vents for good ventilation and air circulation. 

4.6 Doors and Windows 

Blending room and bottling area shall be provided 
with meshed, self-closing doors or air curtains and 
meshed windows to prevent entry of insects, dust. 
Doors and windows shall open outside. 

4.7 Ventilation and Lighting 

Manufacturing and storage area shall be well lighted 
and ventilated. Light source may be natural, artificial 
or a combination of both. The electrical wiring in 
manufactxiring as well as storage areas whould be fool 
proof to prevent short circuiting which otherwise can 
cause a major fire. 

a) Natural light should be emphasized as far as 
possible. 

b) Proper grounding should be provided to electric 
connections. 

4.8 Maintenance and Repair 

A scheduled repairs and maintenance programme 
including white wash, painting, disinfection should 
be carried out regularly. 

5 DISTILLERY AND PROCESSING HYGEINE 

5.1 Fermentation 

Fermentation area including equipments shall be 
cleaned regularly to prevent contamination. Floor of 
the fermentation area should have acid/alkali proof 
tiles. Yeast propogation vessels, fermentation vats, 
vessels, pipelines, valves, plate heat exchangers and 
all other equipment should be cleaned and disinfected 
using prescribed sanitising agents on a regular basis. 
It shoTild be ensured that molasses obtained is free 
from contamination. Similarly care must be taken to 
maintain the purity of yeast culture to aviod production 
of undesired by-products. Proper care must be taken 



IS 14348 : 1996 



to cover the fermentation vats and vessels. Temperature 
of fermentation should not be allowed to exceed 35°C. 
Molasses should be stored in closed mild steel MS 
tanks. 

5.2 Distillation/Redistillation 

All the distillation/redistillation columns, pipe joints, 
etc, shall be leak proof. All the pipe lines shall be of 
copper or stainless steeL In distillation plant, analyser 
colimms and plates can be of stainless steel material 
whereas purifier and rectifier columns and plates 
should be of copper material or suitable non-toxic 
material. 

5.3 Receiving Room 

Tanks in the receiving room for EN A/RS should be of 
mild steel/stainless steel material. They should be 
cleaned and maintained in such a way as to prevent 
corrosion. The pumps in this area shall be flame proof. 
Pipes and fittings shall be leak proof. 

5.4 Blending Room 

Tanks with agitators and pipe lines in blending room 
shall be constructed of wooden vats, stainless steel 
material. The pumps in this area shall be flame proof. 
Tanks and pipelines shall be preferably earmarked for 
a particular product to prevent contamination from 
one product to other. Pipes and fittings shall be leak 
proof. Caramel and food flavours shall be properly 
marked so prevent mix up. Motors driving the agitators 
shall be so placed as to prevent dripping oil into the 
tanks. Filter paper used for filtration of liquor shall 
be calcium fi*ee. 

5.4.1 Dimineralized water storage tanks shall be 
constructed of stainless steel material and the pipehnes 
for dimineralized water may be of stainless steel or 
any suitable material. 

5.5 Spillage on floor should be kept minimum and 
should be cleaned periodically to avoid slippery floor 
and to facilitate free movement. 

5.6 Bottlery 

All the tanks, pipelines, bends, filling lines, etc, shall 
be made of non-corrosive material such as staiidess 
steel. The entry and exit points shall have air curtains 
to prevent entry of insects and dust. Electronic insect 
destroying devices shall be installed at suitable places 
like entry and exit points, bottle washer, etc, to act as 
further deterrent to insects and flies. Roads surrounding 
bottlery should be kept dust free. 

5.6.1 Bottle Washing 

All bottles shall be thoroughly cleaned immediately 
before filling by automatic/semi automatic washing 
machines. Washing shall be accomplished by pre- 
rinse, and final rinse. For final rinse dechlorinated 
potable water shall be used. Bottles should be 
thoroughly drained after final rinse so that strength 
of liquor is not afiected after filling. Water jets in the 



washing machine should be so designed and jet pressure 
so maintained as to throughly rinse the whole internal 
and external smface area of the bottles. Wash water 
in the bottle washer should be thoroughly drained and 
changed frequenfly to prevent algal growth. 

5. 6. 1, 1 Wherever second hand bottles are being used, 
all the bottles shoiild be pre-washed prior to feeding 
to the bottle washer. This should be done in the 
following marmer: 

a) Pre-rinse first soaking in a tank to remov 
lables and other extraneous matter. 

b) Rinse in the second tank with hot water around 
60°C and 3 percent caustic solution at 60''C 
using brushes to clean the interior and exterior 
of bottles thoroughly. 

c) Final rinse in the third tank with potable water. 

d) Feed the bottles to bottle washer. 

5.6.2 Bottle Filling 

Filler nozzles shall be of stainless steel material 
with poly liners or PVC to prevent chipping of bottles. 
Filler bungs above the nozzles shall be cleaned everyday 
and periodically replaced to prevent particxilate matter 
settling into liquor. Filling of the product into bottles 
can be automatic/semi automatic fillers. Liquor falling 
on hne due to breakage of bottles should be immediately 
cleaned and broken glass taken off to prevent 
contamination.\ 

5.6.3 Bottle Sealing 

Bottle sealing can be on automatic/semi automatic 
sealing machines. Sealing heads shallbe so adjusted 
so as to prevent defects like tucking defects, over 
tightening, etc. 

5.6.4 Inspection 

After sealing, filled bottles shall be checked for presence 
of foreign material in liquor, sealing of bottle, etc. 
Inspection table should have difiused lighting from 
top. Inspection of bottles should be carried out by 
holding bottles in inverted upright position against 
board with black and white bands over which diffiised 
light from top should be directed. Defective bottles so 
found should be kept separately and should be taken 
off the bottling hall on hourly basis. 

5.6.5 Labelling 

Labelling of filled bottles can be on automatic/semi 
automatic labellers. Quantity of gum and label rollers 
should be so adjusted as to avoid excessive gumming 
or no gumming to prevent labels peeling off. 
Overprinting of labels for batch, date and other 
stipulated legends should be carefiilly carried out to 
meet Excise Regulations. 

5.6.6 Packing of Bottles 

Sealed and labelled bottles shall be packed in 



IS 14348 : 1996 



monocartons and master cartons as per requirement. 
Master carton will be stapled and gum taped cleanly 
to prevent pilferage. 

5,6.7 Finished Good Warehouse 

Master cartons shall be suitably stacked in such a way 
as to prevent breakages, since any bottle broken results 
not only in wastage of liquor but also it spoils other 
bottles/labels monocartons. 

5.7 Malt Mashing/Grape Crushing 

5.7.1 Care shall be taken to avoid spillage of mah 
while handling to avoid harbouring of insects, birds, 

etc. 

5.7.2 Spillage of cooked malt on floor, machinery 
and other equipment shall be avoided to prevent fungal 
growth and off odours in mashing area. 

5.7.3 Grapes shall be crushed immediately on receipt. 
During grape crushing, care should be taken to avoid 
spillage of juice and pulp on the floor, machinery and 
equipment to prevent infestation by fungi, insects, etc, 
and avoid emanation of foul smell. 

5.7.4 Malt mashing and grape crushing areas shall 
be thoroughly cleaned before, during and after 
processing of above at regular intervals with potable 
water. 

5.7.5 All the equipment, machineiy, containers, floors, 
walls, etc, m the above areas shall be thoroughly cleaned 
periodically even when not in use, and at regular 
intervals during operations, with potable water to 
prevent contamination and emanation of off odours. 

5.7.6 All the spent grain and grape pulp waste shall 
be thoroughly decanted and disposed to outside 
agencies on a daily basis, to prevent accimiulation of 
the above which would, otherwise, result in 
contamination and foul odours. 

5.8 Maturation HallAVarehouse 

5.8. 1 Maturation area including the equipment, vats, 
etc, should be cleaned periodically to prevent 
contamination. 

5.8.2 All the pipe lines in this area shall be of stainless 
steel or copper and shall be leak proof 

5.8.3 All the oak/salwood vats and casks should be 
properly hooped and care shall be taken to prevent 
leakages. Periodic repairs should be carried out as 
and when required to prevent leakages and cross 
contamination. 

5.8.4 Specified laid down procedure shall be followed 
for contamination and maintain/the desirable quality 
of matured spirit. 

6 EQUIl^MENT AND CONTAINER 
CLEANLINESS 

6.1 Material used for making fabrication tanks. 



valves, pipe lines, vessels, bottling lines, etc, shall be 
smooth, corrosion resistant, non-toxic and food grade. 
All the weldings shall be grounded smooth, joints shall 
be flush and leak proof 

6.2 Cleaning and Sanitation of Equipment 

All the tanks, pipe hues, bottling lines, conveyors, filler 
heads, sealers, labelling machines, etc, shall be 
itnmediately cleaned after use thoroughly with potable 
water. Entire processing system shoidd be flushed out 
prior to its reuse again. 

7 WATER SUPPLY 

Adequate safe and potable water shall be made available 
for day-to-day running of distillery (see IS 10500: 1983). 

7.1 Demineralised Water 

QuaUty of demineraUsed water plant should be properly 
maintained with anionic, cationic and mixed beds for 
proper treatment of water. 

7.2 Bottlery Wash Water 

Adeqiiate care should be taken to have potable water 
for use in bottlery especially during final rinse of bottle 
washer. This water should be passed through sand 
filters to prevent undesirable organic matter 
contaminating the above water. Sand filters should 
be periodically cleaned to prevent building up of 
organic matter in it. 

7.3 JStorage tanks for water should be kept covered 
with tight fitting lids, examined regularly, and cleaned 
out thoroughly atleast once in six months. 

7.4 Water shall be periodically analysed chemically 
and microbiologically and record of such examinations 
shall be maintained. 

7.5 Proper care shall be taken to prevent contamination 
of ground water by effluent through seepage, 

7.6 Effluent treatment is managed in such a way that 
its off odours is minimized and contamination brought 
down to minimum possible level as specified by the 
pollution control board. Discharge of effluents into 
open lagoons is not desirable and care shall be taken 
to locate such lagoons in a place from where 
contamination/off odours do not spoil the atmosphere. 

8 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

8. 1 Every employee of the distillery shall be medically 
examined by an authorized medical practitioner and 
the examination should include X-Ray of chest for 
Tuberculosis. This examination should be done once 
in an year. The examination shall include examination 
of stools for protozoal infection and salmonella, shigella 
and cholera infection. 

8.2 All the employees should inform the management 
in case of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentry, 
boils, cuts, sores or any other notifiable diseases 
occining at home and families. 



IS 14348; 1996 



8.3 No worker suspected of disorders noted 
under 7.2 shall be permitted to work in the Unit. StafiD^ 
workers having frequent cough and cold shall not be 
deputed in areas prior to packing and storage of 
finished products. 

8.4 All the personnel working in blending room, 
bottling hall must wear clean garments including 
working apron, cap and a pair of rubber shoes. 

8.5 All the employees shall keep their finger nails 
short and clean and wash their hands with soap or 
detergent before commencing work and after each 
absence, especially, after using sanitary conveniences. 
Towels used for ^ing hands should be clean. 

8.6 No employee shall be allowed to chew tobacco, 
smoke, eat or drink in manufacturing, packing and 
storage areas. 

8.7 Employees shall not be allowed to store food, 
beverages, etc, as these might act as carriers for 
contamination and add to litter. Spitting on the floor 
shall be strictly prohibited. 

8.8 Toilet and comfort room walls and bowls shall 
be washed with detergent at regular time intervals. 

8.9 Soap or detergent along with adequate water 
supply shall be made available for washing and 

cleaning purposes. 

8.10 Toilet flushing system shall always be in good 
functioning condition. 

8.11 Trash cans shaflbe covered and garbage disposed 
off regularly. 

8.12 Signs shall be displayed in attractive coloured 
posters on waUs as reminders to inculate good hygiene 
and sanitation practices in employees. 

8.13 Entire distillery area shall always be kept clean 
and free of obnoxius odours. 

9 HYGIENIC QUALITY OF INGREDIENTS 

9.1 Water used in liquor shaU be free from pathogenic 
organisms and should meet the specifications laid down 
for DM water. 

9.2 All the olher materials like ENA, RS, Caramel, 
Food Flavours, Packaging material shall conform to 
the specifications laid down. 

9.3 In addition to control by official agencies, it is 
desirable that each bottling unit has their own control 
laboratory to ensure quality of products made there. 

9.4 The end product has to be analysed and shall 
conform to standards laid down. 

9.5 Godown for Barley Malt/Grapes 

9.5. 1 Storage godown shall have provision for ample 
aeration and ventilation and shall be damp proof. 
Surrounding areas should be clean and devoid of bushy 
vegetation, water logged areas, rat holes and burrows. 



9.5.2 Roof shall be terraced or of asbestos sheets and 
should be free from leakage. Walls should be free 
from seepage. High plinth and cement flooring should 
be provided with smooth walls to serve as rodent 
proofing. 

9.5.3 Godown shall be free from cracks, crevices and 
holes to prevent hiding places for insects, birds and 
rodents. Doors, windows and other openings should 
have wire netting to prevent entry of insects and birds. 

9.5.4 All the materials having strong smell, fertilizers, 
pesticides, etc, shall under no circumstances be stored 
in the same godown. 

9.5.5 All the barley malt bags shall be examined for 
damage, dampness, etc, before stacking in godown. 
Damaged/infested bags and barley should not be stored 
as this would attract insects and rodents. 

9.5.6 AU the barley malt bags shall not be stored 
directly on the floor. Care must be taken to ensure 
that gunny bags used for packing barley malt are not 
used previously for storing fertilizers, pesticides, etc. 
Since this would also impart undesirable odour and 
result in poor quality, 

9.5.7 Barley maU can be stored in silos mad of mild 
steel/other approved material. Silos should be inspected 
regularly and thoroughly cleaned and disinfected. Silos 
should have proper ventilation to prevent sweating of 
malt, which results in mould/fungus infestation. 
Manholes/lids of the silos should be tight fitting to 
ensure proper closure to prevent rodent/insect 
infestation. 

9.5.8 Grapes procured shall be healthy and devoid of 
any blemishes such as insect/bird/fungal damage/ 
physical damage. 

9.5.9 Grapes shall be packed properly in wooden boxes 
or corrugated fibre board boxes with proper liners so 
that grapes are not crushed during handling and 
transportation. 

9.5.10 Grapes shall be devoid of pesticide residue, 
which otherwise leads to off notes. 

9.5.11 Grapes in the containers shall not be stacked 
directly on floor, carefully and should be pulped 
immediately to avoid spoilage and loss due to storage. 

9.5.12 Irrespective of whether infestation is apparent 
or not, tb'^ godown shall be thoroughly cleaned and 
the flooi walls, pillars, etc, sweptA)rushed and 
disinfected periodically. Fumigation should be carried 
out regularly using formaldehyde or any other approved 
fumigant. 

9.5.13 Barley malt/grapes should conform to the 
specification laid down. 

10 STORAGE 

10.1 Storage areas/halls for packaging material and 
finished goods shall be free from dampness and shall 
be rodent free. 



IS 14348 : 1996 



10.2 Separate storage space shall be provided for 
storing machinery, equipment, acid, caustic soda, 
urea, etc. 

10.3 Packaging materials must be stored in their 
original packing and should be issued on "First in First 

out" basis. 

10.4 Glass bottles shall be stored appropriately to 
prevent dust contamination. 

10.5 ROPP caps shall be stored in plastic bags which 
are then kept in cartons and labels to be stored in 
cartons to prevent dust contamination, insect damage. 

10.6 Activated carbon shall be stored in an area which 
is completely devoid of odours to prevent pick up of 
odours by activated carbon. 

11 SAFETY MEASURES 

11.1 Fire extinguishers shall be installed at suitable 
places as to enable easy handling of above in case of 
an emergency. These extinguishers should be examined 
periodically for their proper functioning. Personnel 
from different sections in the distillery shall be trained 
in fire fighting and such training should be repeated 
once in six months. 

11.2 Pressure vessels, hoists, lifts, etc, should be 



regularly checked for their proper functioning. 

11.3 Personnel operating fork lifts should always wear 
protective head gear. 

11.4 Personnel handling hazardous chemicals like 
caustic soda, acid, etc, should wear protective glasses, 
gloves, aprons and rubber boots. 

11.5 First aid boxes with basic first aid equipment 
shall be provided in each and every division at places 
where these can be conveniently handled. First aid 
training should be provided to personnel from each 
section of distillery. Periodical first aid training must 
be given regularly. 

11.6 An "In-House Safety Committee" should be 
formed within the distillery comprising of personnel 
from various sections. This committee should meet 
atleast once in a month to monitor the abovementioned 
safety aspects and improve safety aspects wherever 
necessary. 

12 CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENE/SANITATION 
AND SAFETY MEASURES 

A check list for use by a responsible officer of the 
management is given in Annex A. It shall be used at 
regular intervals, to ensure hygienic sanitation and 
safety measures of the unit. 



ANNEX A 
{Clause 12.1 ) 

CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENE AND SANITATION IN 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 



A-1 SITE 

a) Are there any pesticide/chemical/ Yes/No 
petrochemicayieather paper 

industries nearby? 

b) Any cattle sheds and open sewage Yes/No 
drains nearby? 

A-2 BUILDING 

a) Is any part of the building being Yes/No 
used for domestic purposes/food 
preparations without proper 
partitions? 

b) Are the floors being maintained Yes/No 
properly without any breakages/ 
cracks/holes? 

c) Are the roofs/ceiling free of water Yes/No 
leakage? 

d) Are the doors/windows having Yes/No 



proper netting/mesh? 

e) 



f) 



Are scheduled repairs, white 
wash, disinfection being carried 

out regularly? 

Are the lights shielded to prevent 
broken glass contaminating the 
product? 



A-3 DISTILLERY 

a) Is steam sterilization being 
carried out regularly and 
prescribed sanitising agents 
being used to clean and 
sterilize the fermentation room, 
pipes, valves and other equip- 
ment in fermentation area? 

b) Are the fermentation vats/vessels 
properly covered? 



Yes/No 



Yes/No 



Yes/'No 



Yes/No 



IS 14348 : 1996 



c) 



d) 



e) 



f) 



g) 



h) 



Is the molasses stored in closed 
mild steel tanks? 

Are the pipelines, joints, etc, in 
distillation/redistillation columns 
leak proof? 

Are the pipelines/joints, etc, in 
receiver room leak proof? 

Are the pipes and fittings in 
blending room leak proof? 

Is there any dripping of oil mto 
blending tanks through agitators? 



in above areas 



Is the floor 
slippery? 

j) Are the air curtains at entry point, 
exit in bottlery working properly? 

k) Are the electronic insect destroy- 
ing devices in bottlery working 
properly? 

m) Whether water used in bottle 
washing is free of off odoiirs? 

n) Is the water being used for final 
rinse of water free from chlorine 
and non-alkaline? 

p) Are the nozzles and jets in bottle 
washer clean without clogging and 
the pressure for cleaning bottles 
sufficient to thoroughly clean the 
bottles? 

q) Are the second hand bottles pre- 
washed prior to feeding to bottle 
washer? 

r) Are the filter bungs/filter nozzles 
being cleaned everyday? 

s) Is the spilt liquor and broken 
glass being swept off immediately 
in the bottlery? 

t) Are the defective bottles, after 
inspection, being taken off the 
bottlery at hourly intervals? 

u) Are the master cartons being 
stapled and gum taped 
immediately after packing? 

v) Are the grapes being crushed 
immediately after receipt? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 



w) Are the maU mashing/ grape 
crushing areas being cleaned at 
hourly intervals when in use and 
periodically when not in use, with 
potable water? 

x) Is the spent grain/grape pulp waste Yes/No 



being disposed off" on daily basis? 

y) Are all the vats/casks in the 
maturation area devoid of leaks? 

z) Are all the vats/casks being 
filled and refilled as per the 
guidelines specified? 

zz) Are all the vats/casks being 
repaired immediately if leakages 
are noticed? 

A-4 EQUIPMENT/CONTAINER 
CLEANLINESS 



a) 



b) 



Is the entire processing system 
including pipelines,vessels,tanks, 
filling, sealing and other machin- 
ery being cleaned imediately after 
use ? 



processing system 
prior to its reuse 



Is entire 
flushed out 
again? 

A-5 WATER SUPPLY 

a) Is the DM water from DM plant 
conforming to the specifications 
laid down? 

b) Is the bottiery wash water devoid 
of foul smell and organic matter? 

c) Are the sand filters and storage 
tanks being periodically cleaned 
once in six months? 

d) Are the storage tanks for water 
thoroughly covered. 

e) Is the water being analysed for 
its potability and record of such 
analysis being maintained? 

f) Does the effluent treatment plant 
give any off odours and is there 
any overflow/leakage from ETP? 

g) Is the distillery effluent being 
discharged into open lagoons? 

A-6 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

a) Are the employees being 
subjected to complete medical 
examination once an year ? 

b) Are any employees with cold 
and cough being sent to areas 
prior to packing and storage? 

c) Are the personnel in fermenta- 
tion area, mashing and grape 
crushing area, receiving room, 
blending room, bottler wearing 
clean uniforms with apron, cap 
and rubber shoes? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 



Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 



IS 14348 : 1996 



d) Are employees keeping finger Yes/No 
nails short? 

e) Are employees washing their Yes/No 
hands with soap or detergent, 
especially after using sanitary 
conveniences? 

f) Is any employee chewing Yes/No 
tobacco, smoking, eating or 
drinking in manufacturing, 

packing and storage area? 

g) Are the floors and washbasins Yes/No 
of toilet and comfort room being 
thoroughly washed with deter- 
gent every two hours? 

h) Is there adequate water supply, Yes/No 
soaps/ detergents available for 
sanitary conveniences? 

j) Is the toilet flushing system in Yes/No 
good functioning condition? 

k) Are the trash cans tighfly Yes/No 
covered and being disposed oflf 
thrice a day? 



m) Are coloxur posters 
displayed? 

A-7 STORAGE 



and signs Yes/No 



a) Is the storage area damp proof Yes/No 
and rodent proof ? 

b) Are the surroundings devoid of Yes/No 
bushy 

c) Is the roof free from leakage ? Yes/No 

d) Are the walls free from seepage? Yes/No 

e) Are there any insecticides/ Yes/No 
pesticides being stored in the 

same area? 

f) Are the employees segregating Yes/No 
incoming Barley/Grapes which 

are soiled, damaged and infested? 

g) Are the malt bags/grape boxes Yes/No 
stored on pallets? 

h) Are the malt bags/grape boxes Yes/No 
stored on the floor? 

j) Are the bags^oxes being stored Yes/No 
at a distance of 1/2 meter from 
walls? 

k) Are the bags/boxes numbered Yes/No 
and rotated to prevent insect/ 
pest nesting areas? 

m) Are damaged bags/boxes stored Yes/No 
in separate areas? 



n) Is there space between rows for 
inspection of rodent activity/ 
insect infestation? 

p) Have the bags, in which barley 
malt is packed, used for 
fertilizers/ insecticides 

previously? 

q) Do the grapes have insecticide/ 
pesticide residue on them? 

r) Are the silos/warehouse for malt 
and grapes being regularly 
cleaned, disinfested and 
fumigated? 

s) Are there separate areas 
earmarked for glass bottles, 
caps, labels, etc? 

t) Is the merchandise being stored 
in the area earmarked for them? 

u) Are finishing cases being 
properly stacked on pallets? 

A-8 SAFETY 

a) Are fire extinguishers available 
at suitable places and are in 
proper working condition? 

b) Is training being conducted in 
fire fighting once every six 
months? 

c) Are pressure vessels, hoists, lifts, 
etc, being regularly checked 
tobacco, for proper functioning? 

d) Are the personnel operating 
fork lift wearing head gear 
always? 

e) Are the personnel handling 
caustic soda, acid, etc, wearing 
protective glasses, gloves, aprons 
and rubber boots? 

f) Is first aid equipment available 
in every division? 

g) Is first aid training being given 
to employees periodically? 

h) Does an 'In-House Safety 
Committee' exist? 

j) Does the committee carry out 
inspection of various safety 
aspects once in a month? 

k) Are all the electrical lines 
properly earthed? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook* and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 45 (225) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 83 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah 21afar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 



{ 



323 16 17 
323 48 41 



/ 37 
\ 37 



84 99, 37 85 61 
86 26, 37 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



r 235 02 16,-235 04 42 
\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1.832 78 91,832 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.-GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



