**************** 


*■  *Z**K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 
Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


mi>*s*><^^ft^: 


,_A» 


**************** 


BLANK  PAGE 


<_<ii££ 


UJ> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  15642  (Parts  1  and  2) :  2006 
(Reaffirmed  2011) 

^ihh  <srrei  ^tWi  if  siqfJrfWr/^icjfcicbi  cf5t 

Indian  Standard 

QUICK  METHODS  FOR  DETECTION  OF 
ADULTERANTS/CONTAMINANTS  IN  COMMON 

FOOD  PRODUCTS 


ICS  67.050 


©  BIS  2006 
BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR   MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 


February  2006  Price  Group  5 


Foodgrains,  Starches  and  Ready-to-Eat  Foods  Sectional  Committee,  FAD  16 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Foodgrains, 
Starches  and  Ready-to-Eat  Foods  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Division 
Council. 

Food  is  an  essential  and  basic  requirement  for  nourishing  and  sustenance  of  human  life.  Preparation  of  food 
products  from  the  raw  agriculture  produce  to  their  final  stage  of  consumption  is  a  big  business  worldover.  Food  is 
adulterated  by  unscrupulous  persons  from  time  immemorial  and  is  continued  even  today  for  certain  commercial 
benefits.  With  the  development  of  food  science  and  technology,  the  techniques  of  adulteration  have  also  changed 
and  contamination  is  often  observed  due  to  unhygienic  practices,  chemicalization  of  technology,  etc.  Food 
adulteration  may  lead  to  innumerable  health  hazards.  Food  adulteration  is  thus  a  punishable  offence  under  the 
provisions  of  the  Prevention  of  Food  Adulteration  Act,  1954  and  the  Rules  made  thereunder. 

Consumer  awareness  regarding  the  quality  of  food  and  alertness  in  detection  of  common  type  of  food  adulteration 
can  help  in  arresting  this  menace  and  provide  a  healthy  and  wholesome  food  to  the  consumers.  Therefore,  simple 
methods  to  detect  adulteration/contamination  of  various  foods  at  the  household  level  will  be  useful  to  the  consumers 
to  select  a  right  type  of  food  or  to  avoid  foods  of  doubtful  quality.  Keeping  this  in  view  this  standard  has  been 
formulated.  This  standard  includes  methods  involving  visual  examination,  physical  methods  and  methods  involving 
the  use  of  certain  chemicals  and  reagents.  Part  1  of  this  standard  covers  methods  where  only  visual  examination  or 
physical  tests  are  involved  while  Part  2  covers  tests  where  simple  chemical  reactions  are  involved. 

The  test  methods  contained  in  this  standard  are  very  simple  and  quick,  thereby  making  them  useful  for  school 
children,  housewives,  social  workers,  etc,  or  any  other  person  for  detecting  food  adulteration  and  contamination. 
Based  on  these  methods,  certain  quick  test  kits  can  also  be  developed  which  may  be  used  by  schools  for  imparting 
basic  education  in  detecting  adulteration  or  contamination  or  by  housewives,  women  organizations  or. voluntary 
consumer  organization  for  detecting  adulteration  in  foods.  However,  these  quick  methods  are  only  indicative  of 
possible  adulteration/contamination  in  food  items,  and  need  to  be  confirmed  by  other  detailed  methods. 

While  formulating  this  standard,  assistance  has  been  drawn  from  the  information  provided  by  the  National  Institute 
of  Nutrition,  Hyderabad,  Ramakrishna  Bajaj  —  CFBP  Consumer  Education  and  Testing  Center,  Mumbai  and 
CONCERT,  Chennai  a  Voluntary  Consumer  Organization. 

Annex  A,  which  is  informative  only,  contains  the  botanical  names  of  the  plants  which  find  reference  in  this 
standard. 


IS  15642  (Part  1)  :  2006 


Indian  Standard 


QUICK  METHODS  FOR  DETECTION  OF 
ADULTERANTS/CONTAMINANTS  IN  COMMON 

FOOD  PRODUCTS 


PART1  PHYSICAL  METHODS 


1  SCOPE 


This  section  prescribes  physical  methods  for  detection 
of  adulterants/contaminants  in  common  food  products, 

2  APPARATUS 

a)  Cotton  —  absorbant; 

b)  Dropper; 

c)  Filter  paper  —  ordinary  or  blotting  paper; 

d)  Forceps; 

e)  Glass  beakers  —  1 00  ml  and  250  ml  capacity; 

f)  Magnet  —  a  powerful  magnet; 

g)  Magnifying  glass  —  with  a  handle  of  about 
7.5  cm  length  and  having  magnification  of 
10  x; 

h)    Matchstick;  and 

j)     Milk  lactometer  with  lactometer  jar. 

3  TEST  METHODS 

3.1  Detection  of  Foreign  Matter 

3.1.1  General 

Foodgrains  meant  for  human  consumption  shall  be 
whole  or  broken  kernels  of  cereals  and  pulses.  Small 
stones,  marble  chips  identical  to  foodgrains  and  pulses 
are  mixed  or  get  mixed,  if  good  agricultural  practices 
are  not  followed.  Rodent  hair  and  excreta  of  animals 
are  also  found  in  foodgrains,  if  not  properly  stored. 
These  inorganic  foreign  matters  may  irritate  the  mucus 
membrane  of  human  digestive  system.  Similarly,  the 
excreta  of  animal  origin  may  carry  harmful  bacteria. 

3.1.2  Procedure 

Spread  approximately  100  g  of  smaller  size  foodgrains 
like  rice,  ragi,  bajra,  etc,  and  250  g  of  bigger  size 
foodgrains  like  wheat,  pulses,  oil  seeds,  etc,  on  a  white 
paper.  Using  the  magnifying  glass  visually  examine  the 
foodgrains  closely.  Any  foreign  matter  in  foodgrains  will 
be  clearly  visible  and  can  be  picked  up  by  using  forceps. 

3.2  Detection  of  Ergot  Effected  Grains 

3.2.1  General 

Wheat  and  bajra  are  affected  by  ergot  which  is  a  fungus 
and  can  liberate  toxins  in  the  affected  grains. 


3.2.2  Procedure 

Spread  approximately  50  g  of  bigger  size  and  25  g  of 
small  size  foodgrains  on  a  white  paper.  Using  a 
magnifying  glass  examine  the  grains  closely.  The  ergot 
affected  grains  will  be  purple  black  in  colour  and 
slightly  longer  in  size  than  the  normal  size.  These  can 
be  separated  out  using  forceps 

3.2.3  The  ergot  affected  grains  can  also  be  detected 
by  taking  20  percent  common  salt  solution  in  a  beaker 
and  adding  some  affected  grains  to  this.  The  ergot 
affected  grains  will  float  on  the  top  while  the  healthy 
grains  will  settle  at  the  bottom. 

3.3  Detection  of  Datura  Seeds/Argemone  Seeds/ 
Khesari  and  Khesari  Dal  in  Foodgrains 

3.3.1  General 

Foodgrains  meant  for  human  consumption  shall  be  free 
from  poisonous  and  harmful  seeds  like  Datura, 
Argemone  mexicana,  Khesari  {Lathyrus  sativus)  and 
Khesari  dal  in  any  form.  Argemone  mexicana  seeds 
contain  alkaloids-sangunarine  and  dihydro  sangunarine 
which  are  toxic  and  cause  epidemic  dropsy.  Khesari 
seeds  are  flat  and  yellow  and  light  grey  in  colour. 
Khesari/Khesari  dal  contains  a  toxic  amino  acid  BOAA 
(Beta  oxalyl  amino  alanine)  which  causes  crippling 
paralysis.  Datura  seeds  are  intoxicants. 

3.3.2  Procedure 

Spread  about  25  g  of  foodgrains  on  a  white  paper.  Using 
a  magnifying  glass  visually  examine  the  grains  closely. 
Datura  seeds  look  like  chilly  seeds,  Argemone  seeds 
look  like  mustard  seeds  but  it  contains  a  spike  and 
grainy  rough  surface  while  mustard  seeds  have  a  smooth 
surface.  Also  Argemone  seeds  are  black  in  colour.  When 
crushed,  mustard  seeds  are  yellowish  inside  while 
Argemone  seeds  are  white.  Khesari  Dal  can  be  detected 
by  their  physical  appearance  which  is  wedge  shaped 
having  a  slant  on  one  side  and  appear  square  as 
compared  to  other  dais. 

3.4  Detection  of  Iron  Filings  in  Rava  and  Tea  Dust 
3.4.1   General 

Suji  or  rava  means  a  product  obtained  by  grinding  and 


IS  15642  (Parti):  2006 


bolting  of  wheat  free  from  rodent  hair  and  excreta 
while  tea  means,  a  product  exclusively  obtained 
from  the  leaves,  buds  and  tender  stems  of  plant 
Camellia  genus.  Iron  filings  get  into  rava  and  tea  during 
the  manufacturing  process.  Due  to  the  constant  wear 
and  tear  of  the  machinery,  fine  particles  of  iron  may 
enter  into  the  food  product.  If  the  iron  particles  go 
unnoticed  it  may  damage  the  digestive  system  and, 
therefore,  shall  be  removed  before  the  consumption  of 
the  food. 

3.4.2  Procedure 

Spread  about  50-100  g  of  rava/tea  dust  on  a  white 
paper.  Plough  the  magnet  through  the  food  item  several 
times.  The  iron  fdings  will  stick  to  the  magnet  and  can 
be  easily  detected. 

3.5  Detection  of  Artificially  Coloured  Tea  Dust 
Mixed  with  Genuine  Tea 

3.5.1  General 

Tea  being  a  cheap  beverage  and  a  product  of  mass 
consumption  has  a  potential  of  adulteration.  Genuine 
tea  is  mixed  with  the  used  tea  which  is  collected  from 
tea  shops.  This  tea  collected  from  the  tea  shops  is 
sprinkled  with  water  soluble  coal  tar  dyes  and  dried 
under  sun  or  air  and  mixed  with  the  genuine  tea.  Tea  is 
also  sometimes  coloured  to  get  a  dark  coloured 
decoction  for  giving  an  impression  that  the  tea  is  of 
good  quality. 

3.5.2  Procedure 

Take  about  5  g  of  tea  leaves/dust  and  place  it  in  the 
center  of  a  fdter  paper.  Using  the  dropper,  add  water 
drop  by  drop  at  the  heap  of  the  tea  leaves/dust.  If  the 
genuine  tea  is  adulterated  with  a  coloured  tea,  water 
will  dissolve  the  added  colour  and  leave  streaks  of 
colour  on  the  fdter  paper. 

3.6  Detection  of  Chicory  Powder  in  Coffee 

3.6.1  General 

Coffee  powder  means  a  material  made  from  freshly 
roasted  and  ground  pure  coffee  beans  while  chicory 
powder  means  the  material  prepared  by  roasting  and 
grinding  of  cleaned  and  dried  chips  of  chicory  roots. 
The  addition  of  chicory  to  the  coffee  is  not  allowed 
unless  the  product  is  labelled  as  coffee-chicory  mixture. 
The  chicory  root  has  a  characteristic  structure  and 
dissolves  in  cold  water  due  to  the  presence  of  inulin. 
This  feature  can  be  made  use  of  in  distinguishing 
chicory  from  coffee. 

3.6.2  Procedure 

Take  about  50  ml  of  water  in  a  beaker  and  sprinkle  the 
doubtful  coffee  powder  on  the  surface  of  water.  Pure 
coffee  powder  will  float  on  the  surface  of  the  water 


while  chicory  powder  will  sink  with  a  brownish  red 
colour  to  the  bottom  of  the  beaker. 

3.7  Detection  of  Cassia  Bark  in  Cinnamon 

3.7.1  General 

Cinnamon  (Dalchini)  means  the  dried  pieces  of  the 
inner  bark  oiCinnamomum  zeylanicum  Blume.  Cassia 
(Tej)  means  dried  pieces  of  bark  of Cinnamomum  cassia 
blume.  Offering  or  substituting  Cassia  bark  in  place  of 
Cinnamon,  (which  is  a  common  trade  name)  is  an  act 
of  deceiving  the  consumer.  Cassia  can  be  sold  only  in 
the  name  of  Cassia  and  not  as  Cinnamon. 

3.7.2  Procedure 

Cinnamon  barks  are  very  thin  and  can  be  rolled.  It  can 
be  rolled  around  a  pencil  or  pen.  It  has  a  distinct  smell. 
Whereas  cassia  bark  are  very  thick  and  stiff  and  cannot 
be  rolled.  Cassia  bark  comprises  of  several  layers  in 
between  the  rough  outer  and  inner  most  smooth  layers. 
On  examination  of  the  bark  closely,  a  clear  distinction 
can  be  made. 

3.8  Detection  of  Pappaya  Seeds  in  Black  Pepper 

3.8.1  General 

Black  pepper  is  a  common  spice  used  in  household 
both  for  flavouring  and  for  its  medicinal  value.  It  is 
obtained  from  the  dried  berries  of  Piper  nigrum  L.  It  is 
commonly  adulterated  with  dried  Pappaya  fruit  seeds 
which  have  similar  appearance.  Substituting  pepper 
with  pappaya  seeds  is  an  act  of  adulteration.  Apart  from 
financial  loss,  a  consumer  may  not  get  the  value  of 
medicinal  effect,  which  he  normally  expects  from  this 
valuable  spice.  In  addition,  the  pappayefseed  may  create 
or  add  to  the  digestive  problems. 

3.8.2  Procedure 

Spread  the  spice  on  a  white  paper.  Closely,  observe 
the  appearance  of  the  sample,  using  the  magnifying 
glass.  Black  pepper  is  brown  to  black  in  colour.  It 
has  wrinkled  surface  and  has  a  characteristic  smell 
and  pungent  taste.  The  pappaya  seed  has  shrunken 
smooth  surface  and  oval  shape.  It  is  greenish  brown 
or  blackish  brown  in  colour  and  has  a  repulsive 
flavour. 

3.9  Detection  of  Added  Colour  and  Brick  Powder 
in  Chilli  Powder 

3-9.1   General 

Chilli  powder  (Lai  Mirchi)  means  the  powder  obtained 
by  grinding  clean  dried  chilly  pods  of  Capsicum 
frutescens  hICapsicum  annum.  Chilli  powder  is  widely 
used  as  a  condiment  in  every  household.  To  increase 
the  bulk  and  to  appear  better,  chilli  powder  is 
adulterated  with  brick  powder  and  water  soluble  coal 


IS  15642  (Part  1):  2006 


tar  colour  respectively.  The  colour  is  also  added  to  mask 
the  added  starch  and  to  increase  the  brightness  in  the 
case  of  a  substandard  chilli  powder.  The  coal  tar  colour 
may  be  injurious  to  health.  The  brick  powder  may 
irritate  the  stomach  and  damage  the  teeth  and  intestinal 
lining. 

3.9.2  Procedure 

Sprinkle  25  g  of  chilli  powder  on  the  surface  of  water 
in  a  glass  beaker.  Artificial  colourants  will  descend  as 
coloured  streaks.  Brick  powder  will  settle  down  at  the 
bottom  due  to  its  heaviness. 

3.10  Detection  of  Dried  Maize  Fibres  in  Saffron 

3.10.1  General 

Saffron  means  the  dried  stigmata  or  tops  of  styles  of 
Crocus  sativus.  Saffron  is  a  food  classified  under  spices 
and  condiments.  It  is  one  of  the  costlier  natural 
flavouring  and  colouring  agent  with  rare  nutritional 
quality.  Due  to  its  high  cost,  it  is  adulterated  with  dyed 
tendrils  of  maize  cob  and  coloured  paper  strips. 

3.10.2  Procedure 

Take  some  saffron  and  spread  it  on  a  piece  of  paper 
and  observe  closely  with  the  help  of  the  magnifying 
glass.  The  magnified  structure  of  the  plant  part  like 
stigma,  style  can  be  easily  identified  while  the  paper 
strips  will  be  seen  flat  and  thin.  The  genuine  saffron 
will  not  break  easily  while  the  spurious  saffron  will 
break.  Also  take  some  saffron  sample  and  dissolve  it 
in  water  taken  in  a  beaker.  The  separation  of  colour 
will  indicate  the  presence  of  spurious  saffron  prepared 
by  soaking  maize  cob  in  sugar  and  colouring  it  with 
coal  tar  colour. 

3. 1 1  Detection  of  Water  in  Milk 

3.11.1  General 

Water  is  the  most  common  adulterant  in  milk.  Its 
addition  straight  away  adds  to  the  volume  and  goes 
unnoticed  because  there  is  no  change  in  colour  of  the 
milk  because  of  its  addition.  However,  pure  milk  has 
a  normal  specific  gravity  between  i  .030  and  1 .034  at 
room  temperature  (27°C).  Any  addition  of  water  to 
milk  will  disturb  the  specific  gravity  of  milk.  This 
fact  can  be  used  to  detect  adulteration  of  milk  with 
water. 

3.11.2  Procedure 

Take  milk  in  a  lactometer  jar  and  slowly  immerse  the 
lactometer  in  milk.  The  lactometer  reading  which  is 
indicative  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  milk  shall  be 
between  1 .030  and  1 .034.  The  lactometer  reading  less 
than  1.030  is  an  indication  of  the  addition  of  water  in 
milk. 


3.12  Detection  of  Sugar  and  Water  in  Honey 

3.12.1  General 

Pure  honey  is  a  natural  sweet  substance  produced  by 
honey  bees  from  the  nectar  of  blossoms  or  from 
secretions  of  plants  which  honey  bees  collect,  transform 
and  store  in  honey  combs  for  ripening.  However,  there 
is  a  common  practice  to  adulterate  honey  with  sugar 
dissolved  in  water.  Though  it  may  not  cause  any  harmful 
health  effect,  yet  it  remains  an  unethical  way  of  making 
commercial  profits. 

3.12.2  Procedure 

Take  some  cotton  and  make  a  wick  out  of  it.  Dip  the 
wick  in  the  honey  and  burn  it  with  the  help  of 
matchstick.  The  cotton  wick,  dipped  in  honey 
adulterated  with  water  and  sugar  will  either  not  burn 
or  burn  with  a  cracking  sound. 

3.13  Detection  of  Artificial  Coloured  Green  Peas 

3.13.1  General 

Green  peas  in  their  natural  form  may  vary  from  light 
green  to  dark  green  in  colour.  However,  to  make  them 
look  fresh  and  attractive  the  peas  are  artificially 
coloured  with  coal  tar  dyes.  Sometimes,  they  are 
coloured  with  non-permitted  dyes  like  malachite  green, 
congo  red  and  yellow  aniline  dyes. 

3.13.2  Procedure 

Take  little  amount  of  green  peas  in  a  250  ml -beaker 
add  water  to  it  and  mix  well.  Let  it  stand  for  half  an 
hour.  Clear  separation  of  colour  in  water  indicates 
adulteration. 

3.14  Detection  of  Exhausted/Deoiled  Cloves  in 
Sound  Cloves 

3. 1 4. 1  General 

Cloves  (Laung)  means  the  dried,  unopened  flower  buds 
of  Eugenia  caryophyllus  (C  sprengel).  Cloves  have 
characteristic  smell  of  Eugenol.  Genuine  Clove  contains 
not  less  than  15  percent  v/w  volatile  oil  which  has 
medicinal  value.  It  is  used  as  a  strong  natural  flavouring 
agent  in  cookery.  The  abundant  volatile  oil  is  extracted 
fully  or  partially  and  the  exhausted  cloves  are  mixed 
with  genuine  ones. 

3.14.2  Procedure 

Using  the  magnifying  glass,  observe  the  individually 
spread  cloves  closely.  Exhausted  cloves  can  be 
identified  by  its  small  size  and  shrunken  appearance. 
The  characteristic  pungent  taste  of  genuine  cloves  is 
less  pronounced  in  exhausted  cloves. 


IS  15642  (Parti):  2006 


3.15  Detection  of  Aluminium  Leaves  Being  Sold  as 
Silver  Leaves 

3.15.1   General 

Pure  silver  leaves  in  a  very  fine  thinness  are  extensively 
used  to  give  good  appearance  to  Indian  sweets  as  well 
as  are  used  in  paan  (betel  leaves).  Silver  leaves  have 
some  medicinal  values  also.  However,  because  of  silver 
leaves  being  costly,  aluminium  leaves  obtained  to  very 
fine  thinness  are  often  passed  on  as  silver  leaves. 


3.15.2  Procedure 

Take  some  portion  of  the  leave  and  crush  it  between 
two  fingers.  Pure  silver  leaves  will  be  easily  crushed 
and  crumble  to  the  powder  form  while  aluminium  leave 
will  only  break  into  smaller  shreds.  Further,  take  the 
suspected  silver  leaves  and  make  it  in  the  form  of  a 
ball  and  burn  it  with  the  help  of  a  flame.  Pure  silver 
leaves  burn  away  completely  leaving  glistening  balls 
while  aluminium  leaves  are  reduced  to  grey  ash. 


IS  15642  (Part  2):  2006 


Indian  Standard 


QUICK  METHODS  FOR  DETECTION  OF 
ADULTERANTS/CONTAMINANTS  IN  COMMON 

FOOD  PRODUCTS 


PART  2  CHEMICAL  METHODS 


1   SCOPE 


This  section  prescribes  chemical  methods  for  detection 
of  adulterants/contaminants  in  common  food  products. 

2  APPARATUS 

a)  Cotton; 

b)  Filter  paper  —  ord  inary; 

c)  Gas  burner/spirit  lamp; 

d)  Litmus  paper; 

e)  Matchstick; 

f)  Milk,  lactometer  with  lactometer  jar; 

g)  Tea  spoon; and 

h)     Test  tube  —  1 50  *  18  mm. 

3  REAGENTS 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 
0 
g) 
h) 

J) 

k) 
m) 


n) 


P) 


Acetonitrile  Reagent  —  prepared  by  mixing 

acetonitrile  and  water  in  7:3  ratio; 

Alcoholic  Potash  —  prepared  by  dissolving 

8.6  g  of  potassium  hydroxide  in  100  ml 

alcohol; 

Ammonium  Molybdate  Solution  —  prepared 

by  dissolving  1  g  ammonium  molybdate  in 

100  ml  concentrated  sulphuric  acid; 

Antimony   Trichloride  —  prepared   by 

dissolving  40  g  of  antimony  trichloride  in 

100  ml  of  chloroform; 

Chloroform; 

Concentrated  hydrochloric  acid; 

Concentrated  nitric  acid; 

Dilute  Hydrochloric  Acid —  1:1  (prepared 

from  concentrated  hydrochloric  acid); 

Ferric  Chloride  —  prepared  by  dissolving  6  g 

ferric  chloride  in  100  ml  of  water; 

Hexane; 

Iodine  Solution  —  prepared  by  dissolving 

1 2.69  g  of  iodine  and  24  g  of  potassium  iodine 

in  1  litre  water; 

p- Dimethyl  Amino  Benzaldehyde  Reagent  — 

1.6  percent  in  ethy!  alcohol  containing 

10  percent  hydrochloric  acid; 

Petroleum  ether; 


q) 


r) 

s) 
t) 
u) 

v) 
w) 


Potassium  Chromate  Solution  —  prepared  by 
dissolving  5  g  of  potassium  chromate  in 
100  ml  water; 

Potassium  Iodide  —  prepared  by  dissolving 
10  g  of  potassium  iodide  in  100  ml  water; 
Rectified  Spirit  —  95  percent  ethyl  alcohol; 
Resorcinol  Solution  —  about  2  percent; 
Rosalie  Acid — prepared  by  dissolving  1  g 
rosalic  acid  in  100  ml  of  ethyl  alcohol; 
Silver  Nitrate  Solution  —  0.1  N;  and 
Starch  Solution  —  freshly  prepared  by 
dissolving  1  g  starch  in  100  ml  water  and 
boiling  it. 


4  TEST  METHODS 

4. 1  Detection  of  Non-edible  Gum/Resin  in  Asafoetida 
{Ring) 

4.1.1  General 

Pure  asafoetida  gives  a  milky  white  solution  in  water. 
However,  if  the  asafoetida  is  adulterated  with  other 
resins,  the  adulterants  have  to  be  detected  by  certain 
chemical  methods.  Colophony  is  a  resin  obtained  as  a 
residue  after  the  distillation  of  turpentine  oil.  This  is 
one -of  the  adulterants  in  asafoetida.  Colophony  forms 
a  coloured  complex  when  shaken  with  rectified  spirit 
and  ferric  chloride. 

4.1.2  Procedure 

4.1.2.1  Method  1 

Powder  a  gram  of  asafoetida  and  take  it  in  a  test-tube. 
Add  one  tea  spoon  of  water.  Mix  thoroughly  by  shaking. 
Milky  white  solution  with  no  sediments  represents  pure 
asafoetida.  Further,  a  small  amount  of  powdered 
asafoetida,  taken  in  a  spoon  and  burnt  on  a  gas  flame, 
burns  with  a  bright  flame  like  camphor,  which  is  an 
indication  of  pure  asafoetida. 

4.1.2.2  Method  II 

Take  1  g  of  asafoetida,  powder  it  thoroughly  and  take 
it  in  a  test-tube.  Add  some  rectified  spirit  and  filter/ 
decant  the  solution.  Take  5  ml  of  filtrate  and  add  few 
drops  of  ferric  chloride  solution.  Olive  green  colour 
shows  the  presence  of  adulteration  with  other  resins. 


IS  15642  (Part  2):  2006 


4.2  Detection  of  Starch  in  Milk  Products  Like 
Khqya,  Butter  and  Cheese 

4.2.1  General 

Starch  is  a  common  adulterant  in  milk  products  as  it 
gets  easily  mixed  up  with  these  products  because  of 
the  similarity  in  the  colour.  Starch  adds  to  the  weight 
of  the  products,  and  is,  therefore,  a  cheap  source  of 
adulteration.  The  adulteration  of  these  products  with 
starch  can  be  detected  by  addition  of  iodine  to  these 
products  which  results  in  the  formation  of  a  blue  colour. 
The  blue  colour  is  due  to  the  formation  of  an  inclusion 
complex  between  iodine  and  the  amylose.  The  amylose 
coils  into  the  spiral  and  the  iodine  molecule  aligns 
within  the  centre  of  this  spiral  and  causes  light 
absorption  which  gives  a  blue  colour. 

4.2.2  Procedure 

Take  about  2  g  of  milk  product  in  a  test-tube  and  add 
about  5  ml  water  to  it.  Boil  for  a  few  minutes  on  the 
gas  burner.  Cool  and  add  iodine  solution  to  the  test- 
tube.  The  formation  of  a  blue  colouration  shows  the 
presence  of  starch. 

4.3  Detection  of  Neutralizers  in  Milk 

4.3. 1  General 

Milk  sold  in  the  cities  is  being  transported  from  a  longer 
distance.  If  the  milk  is  not  transported  at  a  low 
temperature,  there  is  every  likelihood  of  its  getting 
spoilt  because  of  bacterial  action.  Neutralizers  are 
added  in  the  milk  to  avoid  spoilage  of  milk  but  their 
addition  to  milk  is  not  permitted  under  PFA  Rules. 
Common  neutralizers  used  are  sodium  hydroxide, 
sodium  carbonate  and  sodium  bicarbonate.  The 
presence  of  neutralizers  can  be  detected  by  use  of 
alcoholic  rosalic  acid  solution.  Addition  of  this  reagent 
gives  a  red  colour  if  bicarbonates  and  carbonates  are 
present  while  a  deep  rose  red  colour  will  appear,  if 
sodium  hydroxide  has  been  used  as  a  neutralizes 

4.3.2  Procedure 

Take  5  ml  of  milk  in  atesttube  and  add  5  ml  of  rectified 
spirit  to  it.  Then  add  four  drops  of  rosalic  acid  solution. 
The  appearance  of  a  red  colour,  or  a  deep  rose  red 
colour  indicates  the  presence  of  _a  neutralizer  while 
a  brownish  colouration  shows  absence  of  any 
neutralizer. 

4.4  Detection  of  Extraneous  Urea  in  Milk 

4.4.1   General 

Although  addition  of  urea  is  prohibited  under  the  PFA 
Rules,  still  it  is  added  to  the  milk  by  unscrupulous 
persons  to  increase  its  viscosity  thereby  giving  a  feeling 
of  rich  milk. 


4.4.2  Procedure 

Take  5  ml  of  milk  in  a  test-tube  and  add  5  ml  of 
/^-dimethyl  amino  benzaldehyde  reagent  to  it.  The 
appearance  of  a  distinct  yellow  colour  indicates  the 
presence  of  added  urea.  The  appearance  of  slight  yellow 
colour  may  be  ignored  which  may  be  because  of  the 
presence  of  natural  urea  in  milk. 

4.5  Detection  of  Sodium  Chloride  in  Milk 

4.5.1  General 

Lactometer  is  a  simple  device  which  can  be  used  to 
detect  adulteration  of  milk  with  water.  Addition  of  water 
alters  the  density  of  milk  which  can  be  read  on  the 
lactometer  scale.  Hence,  to  increase  the  density  of  milk, 
adulterant  [ike  sodium  chloride  is  added. 

4.5.2  Procedure 

Take  2  ml  of  milk  in  a  test-tube  and  add  0.1  ml  of 
5  percent  potassium  chromate  solution  and  2  ml  of 
0.1  N  silver  nitrate  to  it.  The  appearance  of  a  yellow 
colour  indicates  the  presence  of  added  sodium  chloride 
in  the  milk  while  the  appearance  of  a  brick  red 
precipitate  indicates  the  absence  of  added  sodium 
chloride  in  the  milk. 

4.6  Detection  of  Metanil  Yellow  in  Sweets 

4.6.1  General 

To  make  a  sweet  attractive,  various  colours  are  added 
to  sweet  preparations.  As  per  the  PFA  Act,  only  natural 
food  colours  or  permitted  artificial  food  colours  can 
be  used  in  sweets.  Metanil  yellow  is  a  cheap  textile 
dye  which  is  commonly  used  in  colouring  sweets  which 
amounts  to  adulteration.  The  metanil  yellow  is 
carcinogenic. 

4.6.2  Procedure 

Take  about  5  g  of  the  sweet  sample  in  a  test-tube  and 
add  hot  water  to  bring  the  sample  in  pure  solution. 
Separate  the  coloured  matter  by  filtration  and  add 
few  drops  of  concentrated  hydrochloric  acid.  The 
appearance  of  a  pinkish  red  colour  shows  the  presence 
of  metanil  yellow. 

4.7  Detection  of  Washing  Soda  in  Bura  Sugar 

4.7.1  General 

Bura  sugar  is  obtained  by  grinding  plantation  white 
sugar  and  finds  extensive  use  in  sweetmeat  preparations 
and  also  for  direct  consumption.  Its  white  colour  makes 
it  easily  adulterable  with  washing  soda  which  is  harmful 
to  the  body,  if  consumed. 

4.7.2  Procedure 

There  are  two  methods  by  which  presence  of  washing 
soda  in  bura  sugar  can  be  detected. 


IS  15642  (Part  2):  2006 


4.7.2.1  Method  I 

Take  about  half  tea  spoon  of  bura  sugar  in  test-tube 
and  add  some  water  to  bring  it  to  solution.  Dip  a  strip 
of  red  litmus  paper  in  the  solution.  The  appearance  of 
a  blue  colour  on  the  litmus  paper  shows  the  presence 
of  washing  soda. 

4.7.2.2  Method  II 

Take  about  half  tea  spoon  of  bura  sugar  in  a  test-tube 
and  add  few  drops  of  1:1  hydrochloric  acid.  The 
immediate  appearance  of  small  bubbles  (effervescence) 
indicates  the  presence  of  washing  soda  in  bura  sugar. 

4.8  Detection  of  Chalk  Powder  in  Bura  Sugar/ 
Jaggery /Common  Salt 

4.8.1  General 

Chalk  powder  is  added  to  food  items  like  bura  sugar, 
jaggery  and  common  salt  as  an  adulterant  to  increase 
the  weight.  Chalk  powder  is  carbonates  of  calcium 
which  is  insoluble  in  water  and  if  consumed  is  injurious 
to  health. 

4.8.2  Procedure 

There  are  two  methods  for  detection  of  chalk  powder 
in  adulterated  foods  like  bura  sugar//aggery/common 
salt. 

4.8.2.1  Method  I 

Dissolve  about  10-15  gofa  sample  in  water  in  a  beaker. 
Allow  to  settle  for  5  min.  The  unadulterated  samples 
will  dissolve  completely  while  the  presence  of  any 
sediment  at  the  bottom  of  the  beaker  will  indicate  the 
presence  of  chalk  powder  in  the  sample. 

4.8.2.2  Method  II 

Take  some  sample  of  the  food  item  to  be  examined  in 
a  test-tube  and  add  few  drops  of  1 : 1  hydrochloric  acid. 
The  appearance  of  bubbles  (effervescence)  will  indicate 
the  presence  of  chalk  powder  in  the  sample. 

4.9  Detection  of  Vanaspati  in  Ghee  and  Butter 

4.9.1  General 

Ghee  and  butter  has  been  used  in  the  Indian  homes 
from  times  immemorial.  The  introduction  of  vanaspati 
into  the  Indian  market  has  opened  ways  for  adulteration 
of  ghee  and  butter  with  vanaspati.  The  presence  of 
vanaspati  in  ghee  and  butter  can  be  checked  indirectly 
by  checking  the  presence  of  sesame  oil  which  is 
normally  one  of  the  constituents  of  oils  going  into  the 
manufacture  of  vanaspati. 

4.9.2  Procedure 

Take  a  little  amount  of  melted  ghee  or  butter  (1  to  2  g) 
in  a  test-tube  and  add  equal  amount  of  concentrated 


hydrochloric  acid.  Add  a  little  sugar  and  shake 
vigorously.  Let  it  stand  for  5  min.  The  appearance  of 
crimson  red  colour  shows  the  presence  of  vanaspati. 

4.10  Detection  of  Mashed  Potatoes  and  Other 
Starches  in  GV/ee/Butter 

4. 1 0. 1  General 

Mashed  potatoes  and  edible  starches  are  one  of  the 
adulterants  in  g/jee/butter  as  these,  without  hampering 
the  colour  appeal  of  g/jee/butter  will  add  to  the  weight 
of  ghee/butter. 

4.10.2  Procedure 

Take  some  g/zee/butter  in  a  test-tube  and  warm  it. 
Add  few  drops  of  iodine  solution  to  the  sample. 
The  appearance  of  a  blue  colour  will  indicate  the 
presence  of  mashed  potatoes  and  edible  starches  to 
ghee/butter. 

4.11  Detection  of  Argemone  Oil  in  Edible  Oils 

4.11.1  General 

Argemone  oil  is  a  common  adulterant  in  edible  oils 
particularly  mustard  oil.  Argemone  oil  contains  the 
alkaloids  sanguanarine  and  dihydro  sanguanarine  which 
are  toxic  and  cause  epidemic  dropsy. 

4.11.2  Procedure 

4.11.2.1  Method  1 

Take  small  quantity  of  oil  (4  to  5  ml)  in  a  test-tube  and 
add  an  equal  quantity  of  concentrated  nitric  acid.  Shake 
carefully  avoiding  any  contact  with  the  skin.  The 
appearance  of  a  red  or  reddish  brown  colour  in  the  acid 
layer  indicates  the  presence  of  argemone  oil. 

4.11.2.2  Method  II 

Take  small  quantity  of  oil  (4  to  5  ml)  in  a  test-tube  and 
add  some  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  to  it.  Mix  well  and 
add  few  drops  of  ferric  chloride  solution.  The 
appearance  of  reddish  brown  precipitate  indicates  the 
presence  of  argemone  oil. 

4.12  Detection  of  Mineral  Oil  in  Edible  Oils 

4.12.1  General 

Mineral  oil  because  of  its  colourless  property  is  an  easy 
adulterant  with  edible  oils.  Its  presence  in  edible  oil 
can  be  detected  by  a  simple  chemical  reaction.  Mineral 
oil  which  originates  from  petroleum  are  not  saponifiable 
by  alcoholic  potassium  hydroxide.  They  also  give 
turbidity  on  addition  of  water. 

4.12.2  Procedure 

Take  about  2  ml  of  the  sample  in  a  test-tube  and  add 
2  ml  of  alcoholic  potash  to  it.  Warm  the  sample  on  a 


IS  15642  (Part  2):  2006 


low  flame  burner  for  about  10  min  and  add  water  to  it. 
The  appearance  of  turbidity  shows  the  presence  of 
mineral  oil. 

4.13  Detection  of  Karanja  Oil  (Pungam  Oil) 

4.13.1  General 

Karanja  oil  (Pungam  oil)  is  a  cheap  source  of 
adulteration  in  mustard  oil  and  groundnut  oil. 

4.13.2  Procedure 

Take  a  little  amount  of  mustard  oil  or  groundnut  oil  in  a 
test-tube  and  add  few  drops  of  antimony  trichloride 
solution  in  chloroform  and  mix  well.  The  appearance  of 
a  canary  yellow  or  orange  colour  indicates  the  presence 
of  karanja  oil  in  mustard  oil  or  groundnut  oil. 

4.14  Detection  of  Castor  Oil  in  Edible  Oils 

4.14.1  General 

Castor  oil  is  another  source  of  adulteration  in  edible 
oils.  It  gets  mixed  with  edible  oils  very  well  and  is  not 
noticeable  because  of  its  colour. 

4.14.2  Procedure 

Take  1  ml  of  the  sample  and  10  ml  of  acidified 
petroleum  ether  to  it.  Shake  for  10  min  and  add  a  drop 
of  ammonium  molybedate  to  it.  The  appearance  of  a 
white  turbidity  shows  the  presence  .of  castor  oil. 

4.15  Detection  of  Added  Dyes  in  Turmeric  Powder 

4.15.1  General 

Yellow  aniline  dyes  are  added  to  turmeric  powder  as 
these  are  cheap  source  of  adulteration  and  go  unnoticed 
in  its  physical  form. 

4.15.2  Procedure 

Take  some  turmeric  powder  in  a  test-tube  and  add 
water  to  bring  it  to  the  solution  form.  Add  1  to  2  mi 
of  rectified  spirit.  An  immediate  separation  of  yellow 
colour  fn  the  rectified  spirit  will  indicate  the  presence 
of  added  dyes. 

4.16  Detection  of  Sudan  HI  in  Chilli  Powder 
4.16.1   General 

Sudan  III  is  an  artificial  colour  which  finds  much  use 


in  wax  polishes.  However,  it  has  also  been  found  that 
it  is  being  used  to  give  shineness  to  the  chilli  pods  which 
ultimately  find  its  way  into  chilli  powder. 

4.16.2  Procedure 

Take  1  g  of  suspected  chilli  powder  in  a  test-tube  and 
add  2  ml  of  hexane  to  it  and  shake  well.  Let  it  settle 
for  some  time  and  decant  the  clear  solution  to  another 
test  tube.  Add  2  ml  of  aceto-nitrile  reagent  and  shake 
well.  The  appearance  of  a  red  colour  in  the  lower 
aceto-nitrile  layer  is  an  indication  of  the  presence  of 
Sudan  III. 

4.17  Detection  of  Presence  of  Iodine  in  the  Iodized 
Salt 

4.17.1  General 

Because  of  the  medicinal  reasons,  iodization  of  the 
edible  salt  is  being  carried  out  in  the  country.  As  per 
the  current  regulation  in  force,  salt  containing  less  than 
30  ppm  of  iodine  is  considered  to  be  adulterated. 

4.17.2  Procedure 

Take  about  5  g  of  salt  in  a  test-tube  and  add  5  ml  of 
water.  Add  10  ml  of  10  percent  sulphuric  acid  solution. 
To  this,  add  10  m!  of  10  percent  potassium  iodide 
solution  followed  by  few  drops  of  starch  solution. 
Appearance  of  a  blue  colour  indicates  that  the  salt  is 
iodized. 

4.18  Detection  of  Chicory  Powder  in  Coffee 

4.18.1  General 

Coffee  powder  means  a  material  made  from  freshly 
roasted  and  ground  pure  coffee  beans  while  chicory 
powder  means  the  material  prepared  by  roasting  and 
grinding  of  cleaned  and  dried  chips  of  chicory  roots. 
The  addition  of  chicory  to  the  coffee  is  not  allowed  unless 
the  product  is  labelled  as  coffee-chicory  mixture.  While 
a  simple  method  involving  physical  means  is  described 
in  Section  I,  another  method  involving  a  chemical 
reaction  is  described  in  4.18.2. 

4.18.2  Take  about  2  g  of  the  sample  in  a  test-tube  with 
25  ml  of  water  and  boil.  Filter  and  collect  about  1 0  ml 
of  the  filtrate  in  another  test-tube.  Add  2  ml  of 
resorcinol  solution  and  boil.  Appearance  of  a  cherry 
red  colour  indicates  the  presence  of  chicory. 


IS  15642  (Parts  1  and  2)  :  2006 


ANNEX  A 

(Foreword) 

BOTANICAL  NAMES  OF  THE  PLANTS  REFERRED  TN  THE  STANDARD 


SI  No. 

Common  Name 

(1) 

(2) 

i) 

Argemone 

ii) 

Asafoetida  (Ning) 

iii) 

Bajra 

iv) 

Black  pepper 

v) 

Cassia  (Tef) 

vi) 

Chicory 

vii) 

Chilli 

viii) 

Cinnamon  (Dakhini) 

ix) 

Clove 

x) 

Coffee 

xi) 

Datura 

xii) 

Jaggery 

xiii) 

Khesari  dal 

xiv) 

Maize 

XV) 

Papaya 

xvi) 

Peas 

xv  ii) 

Potatoes 

xv  iii) 

Pungam  oil 

xix) 

Rava 

XX) 

Saffron 

xxi) 

Tea 

xx  ii) 

Turmeric 

xx  iii) 

Wheat 

Botanical  Name 
(3) 
Argemone  mexicana 
Ferula  foetida 
Pennisetum  typhoidenm 
Piper  nigrum 
Cinnamomum  tamla 
C ichor hi n  intybus 
Capsicum  anniium 
Cinnamomum  zeylanicum 
Syzygium  aromaticum 
Coffea  arabica  and  coffea  caenophora 
Datura  innoxia 
Saccharum  offmarum 
Lathynts  sativus 
Zea  mays 
Carica  papaya 
Pisum  sativum 
Solanum  titverosum 
Pongamia  pinnata 
Triticum  aestivum 
Crocus  sativus 

Cam  ill Ua  sinensis  or  Thea  sinensis 
Curcuma  domistica 
Triticum  aestivum 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  FAD  16  (1631). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10  002 
Telephones :  2323  01  31,  2323  33  75,  2323  94  02 

Regional  Offices : 

Central        :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEWDELHI110  002 

Eastern        :  1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA  700  054 

Northern      :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 
Southern      :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  1 1 3 


Western 


Branches 


Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400  093 


Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


{ 


Telephone 

2323  76  17 
2323  38  41 


{2337  84  99,2337  85  61 
2337  86  26,2337  9120 


{ 


260  38  43 
260  92  85 


{2254  12  16,2254  14  42 
2254  25  19,2254  23  15 

f  2832  92  95,  2832  78  58 
\  2832  78  91,  2832  78  92 


AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM, 


Printed  at  Prabhat  Offset  Press,  New  Delhi- 2 


