**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11461 (1985) : Code of practice for compressor safety 
[MED 22: Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62T51 : 61 4-8 : 006-76 



IS: 11461 -1985 




Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
COMPRESSORS SAFETY 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



1 . Scope — Lay down requirements for safe design and construction of stationary and skid-mounted 
air comperssors for general use. 

1.1 This standard does not cover the prime movers. 

2. Definitions 

2.1 Maximum Allowable Working Pressure — The maximum operating air pressure which the manu- 
facturer prescribes for any service condition specified for the compressor or any part which the term is 
referred, such as an individual stage of casing. 



2.2 Relief Valve or Safety Valve Set Pressure 
safety valve when opening compresses. 



•The pressure on the inlet side of a relief valve or 



2.3 Maximum Allowable Working Temperature —The maximum compressed air temperature which 
the manufacturer prescribes at any service condition specified for the compressor or any part to which 
the term is referred. 

2.4 Maximum Expected Outlet Temperature — The highest predicted outlet air temperature resulting 
from any specified service condition including part load operation. 

2.5 Maximum Allowable Compressor Speed — The highest rotational frequency at which the manu- 
facturer's design will permit operation, assuming that overspeed and governor mechanisms are 
installed and operating. 

2.6 Trip Speed — The rotational frequency at which the primemover is automatically tripped out. 

2.7 Surge Limit — The limiting flow below which stable operation of a turbocompressor is not 
possible. 

3. Compressor Categories — Air compressors are grouped into the following three categories from 
lubrication viewpoint: 

a) 'Oil- free' Compressors in which the air does not come into contact with the oil used to 
lubricate the machine, for example, dynamic compressors, labyrinth compressors, diaphragm 
compressors or compressors with unlubricated piston rings. 

b) Oil Lubricated Compressors in which the moving parts in the compression chamber are 
lubricated with oil which is either specially injected for that purpose by a mechanical 
lubricator or is carried over from other parts of the machine, as in singleacting trunk type of 
reciprocating compressor without a crosshead. 

Oil-lubricated compressors are grouped into any of the four classes below: 

i) Air-cooled reciprocating types with a power input up to 20 kW, usually built as single 

or two-stage machines up to about 25 bar (2*5 MPa ) often for intermittent services, 
ii) Air-cooled reciprocating types with a power input about 20 kW, usually built as single- 
stage machines up to about 3 bar (0"3 MPa ) two-stage up to about 25 bar ( 2*5 MPa ) 
and more stages for higher pressures. 

iii) Water-cooled reciprocating types, usually built as single-stage machines up to about 
5 bar ( 0'5 MPa ), two stage up to about 25 bar ( 2'5 MPa ) and more stages for higher 
pressures. 



Adopted 30 August 1985 



© May 1986, ISI 



Gr4 



I N D I AN STAN D ARD S INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELH1 110002 



IS: 11461 -1985 

iv) Water or air-cooled rotary vane types, usually built as single-stage machines up to 
about 4 bar (0'4 MPa ) to 7 bar (07 MPa ) and two-stage up to about 12 bar (1'2 MPa). 

c) Oil-flooded rotary compessors in which relatively large quantities of oil are injected into the 
compression chamber not only to lubricate the working parts but also to assist in sealing and 
to absorb the heat of the compression. 

4. Potential Hazards 

4.1 Improper Lubrication 

4.1.1 The more common causes of improper lubrication are: 

a) use of improper lubricant, 

b) lack of oil, 

c) poor maintenance leading to bearing wear with increased clearance and too low oil pressure, 

d) insufficient or excessive cooling, and 

e) overlubrication. 

4.1.2 Malfunction of the lubrication system may lead to a temperature increase which, with 
continued operation, may introduce the risk of an oil fire. 

4.2 Improper Cooling — The risks stemming from poor cooling are obvious. However, overcooling 
shall also be avoided because it gives rise to internal cylinder corrosion as the condensate modifies 
the lubricant. 

4.3 Mechanical Failures — These usually emanate from one or more of the following causes: 

a) Excessive pressure, 

b) Overspeed, 

c) Secondary phenomena caused by improper lubrication, 

d) Secondary phenomena caused by improper cooling, 

e) Poor maintenance, and 

f) Excessive vibrations or external forces. 

4.4 Personal Injury — The more common potential causes of injury are: 

a) contact with moving parts; 

b) contact with hot parts; 

c) falling from elevated positions; 

d) slipping ( for example, caused by oil spillage ); 

e) electrical hazards; 

f) use of incorrect tools during maintenance; 

g) bursting or explosion of an apparatus or component under pressure; and 

h) production of smoke or toxic oil vapour arising from accidental ignition of the oil. 

4.5 Exposure to Noise — Noise, even at reasonable levels, can cause irritation and disturbance which 
over a long period of time may cause severe injuries to the human nervous system and may take 
such forms as lack of sleep, and irritation. Noise at average sound pressure levels exceeding 90 dB(A) 
is considered to damage hearing. The effect depends on the level and the duration of the exposure. 
Reference is made to national regulations. 

The noise from a compressor has three main components: intake noise, noise radiated from the 
surfaces of the machine and noise from pipework. The noise level in a room depends on the noise 
emission from all noise sources in the room and the acoustic properties of the room itself, that is the 
sound absorption of walls, floors and ceiling. The noise emission from the compressors is not 



IS: 11461- 1985 

always the most important factor for the total noise level. The noise from the prime movers must 
also be considered (see a/so Appendix A). 

4.6 Fires and Explosions in the Pressure System 

4.6.1 Oil- lubricated compressors — It is generally accepted that the occurrences of fires in oil- 
lubricated compressor system is dependent on the build-up of oil degradation (oilcoke) deposits. 
When the pressure system is designed according tothe advice given in Appendix B and the lubricating 
oii is chosen according to the advice in Appendix D, both the compressor and the pressure system 
shall remain clean without any oil degradation, thereby reducing the risk of fire. However, with 
pressure systems that allow the build-up of oil degradation deposits, the quality of the oil is still more 
important as is also a regular cleaning of the pressure system ( see Appendix C ). 

Four factors that effect coke formation are listed below: 

a) Hate of oii feed— Excessive oil feed promotes deposit formation. 

b) Air filteration ~- Solids ingested with the suction air thicken the oil and delay its passage 
through the hot part of the delivery system, increase the time it is subject to oxidation, and 
hence increase the rate of deposit formation. 

c) Temperature — The temperature at which significant oxidation starts is related to the grade and 
type of oil used. In the case of compressors with water-cooled cylinders, it is recommended 
that treated or demineralised water be used to prevent the formation and deposit of scale 
inside the pipework. A failure of cooling water may result in a sharp rise in temperature above 
the level appropriate to that particular machine, and is a well-recognized cause of fire 
initiation when the coke layer in the hot zone is thick enough. Failure of valves may similarly 
raise the temperature and cause dangerous conditions. 

Note — !n compressors with a very high stage pressure ratio, 'dieseling' may occur when the cooling is 
poor and the lubrication is rich. Such a cylinder 'explosion', may under special circumstances, propagate along 
the delivery pipe as a detonation. 

d) Catalysts present, for example, iron oxides. 

4.6.2 OH- flooded rotary compressors (special precautions) — Experience shows that oil-flooded 
rotary air compressors of good design, correctly lubricated and maintained, are free from fire hazards. 
Abnormal temperature rise in the oil filter pads may, however, accelerate the oil oxidation with 
consequent fire risk. 

Laboratory tests and experience from the field indicate that the following three factors are 
important to prevent the risk of such oii fires: 

a) Design; 

h) Choice of oil; and 

c) Operation and maintenance of the compressor; the following points are of particular importance: 
i) keeping the oil consumption low, 
ii) regular oil changes, and 
iii) ensuring that the oil cooling arrangements are working satisfactorily. 

4.7 Crankcase Explosions — Explosions shall and have occured in the crankcases or gear cases of 
compressors (see Appendix D). 

4.8 Incorrect Installation, Operation or Maintenance — Besides the types of potential hazard described 
above, hazards also exist if the installation, operation and maintenance work shall not be carried out 
in the'correct way (see Appendix B). 

5. General Requirements — Compressors shall be des'gned and built to withstand safely all 
specified pressures, temperatures and other service conditions. The design shall facilitate the 
convenient operation and maintenance of the compressor unit, whiist minimizing the risk of physical 
injury. 

5.1 Every compressor shall have a permanently attached and clearly visible nameplate of durable 
material and carrying the following information: 

a) Name of manufacturer, 

b) Model Resignation and serial number, 



IS: 11461 -1985 

c) maximum allowable working pressure, and 

d) maximum allowable continuous shaft speed. 

Note — On compressors above 20 kw, information about capacity, shaft input and coolant flow, etc, shall be 
included. 

5.2 The function of all instruments shall be clearly indicated, and in the case of a remote capacity 
control the actual capacity load shall be displayed in the compressor room. 

5.3 Compressor parts which cannot be lifted by one man without danger shall be fitted with suitable 
devices for attaching them to lifting gear unless the shape of the part is such as to make this 
unnecessary. 

5.4 Reciprocating compressor valve and valve part design shall be such that no inlet valve shall be 
fitted instead of a discharge valve and that no discharge valve shall be wrongly fitted in such a way 
as to prevent the proper discharge of air. 

5.5 To provide safe conditions during removal of the piston rod from the piston, provision shall be 
made in the design to ensure that dangerous quantities of compressed air shall not remain trapped in 
the piston. 

5*6 When considered necessary for large compressors, crankcase explosion-relief devices shall be 
fitted ( see Appendix D ). 

6. Guards 

6.1 Guards shall be provided on ail rotating and reciprocating parts which may be hazardous to 
personnel. Guards shall also be provided for flywheels. An opening shall be provided in flywheel 
guards, when required, for barring over the machine and to provide access to timing marks, wheel 
centres and any other part which may require attention. 

6.2 The guards shall be easy to remove and to reinstall, and shall have sufficient rigidity to with- 
stand deflection and prevent rubbing as a result of bodily contact. 

6.3 Belt and chain-drive guards for outdoor installations shall be weather proof. 

6.4 Pipework or other hot parts shall be adequately guarded or insulated. 

6.5 Pipework running in a horizontal plane or which might otherwise be accessible to personnel shall 
either be guarded or shall be robust enough, when supported, to carry a vertical load of 1'5 kIM* 
without unacceptable deflection or damage. 

7. Pipework and Pressure Vessels 

7.1 Ail pipework and auxiliaries integral to a unit snail be supported in such a way that the possi- 
bility of damage due to vibration, thermal expansion and own mass is eliminated. 

7.2 Unguarded pipework (other than local gauge, cylinder lubrication, instrument and control air 
and similar pipework) shall have a wall thickness great enough to resist damage by accidental 
impact. 

7.3 Delivery pipework, up to the after cooler or receiver, for oil-lubricated compressor shall, where 
possible be run so that gravity assists the flow of oil through the hot zone. Interstage pipework 
and coolers like other vessels, where fitted, shall be similarly arranged (see Appendix B ). 

7.4 pipework and compressor accessories, such as water jackets, coolers, pulsation dampers and 
air receivers shall be provided with drainage facilities at low points to prevent damage from freezing 
during idle periods. 

7.5 The coolant outlet from cylinder jacketsand compressor casings shgll be open or so arranged that 
excessive pressures shall not occur. 



♦1-5 |cN = 150k9. 



IS: 11461 -1985 

7.6 All auxiliaries which come within the scope of pressure vessel codes (for example, air coolers, 
silencers, separators and traps) shall be designed in accordance with the relevant applicable codes. 

7.7 The compressed air side of the compression space shall be hydrostatically tested at a pressure 
of not less than 1 '3 times the 'maximum allowable stage working pressure. However, sample testing 
is sufficient for batch-produced compressors for effective working pressures below 15 bar ( 1*5 MPa ). 

Mote — Valves and fittings shall be properly vented before the hydrostatic test in order to prevent the formation of air 
pockets. 

8. Vibrations and Pressure Pulsations 

8.1 Vibration and shaft axial movement alarms and shutdowns may be utilized to prevent destructive 
failures. 

8.2 Pressure pulsations are inherent in reciprocating compressor installations owing to the pulsating 
flow of air into and out of the cylinders. If the frequency of the pulsations is in resonance with the 
natural frequency of pipework or the foundations, fatigue failure of pipework, nipples, anchor bolts 
and other parts may result. With air compressors it is often possible to calculate the resonance 
frequency and to arrange the pipework system to obtain satisfactory damping (see B-7 of Appendix 
B ). When this is not possible, properly designed pulsation dampers with draining devices shall be 
installed adjacent to the compressor cylinders or incorporated into the cylinder construction to 
minimize the pressure pulses and their effect on other parts of the system. When pulsation dampers 
are used with lubricated compressors, they shall be designed to prevent the build-up of oil degradation 
deposits (see also! A). 

9. Electrical Equipment 

9.1 All electrical equipment shall comply with the relevant statutory regulations and directives. 

10. Overheating 

10.1 The design of signle-stage, oil-flooded compressors shall be such that the maximum tep3rature 
at the delivery flange of the compressor before the oil separator does not exceed 110°C at an ambient 
temperature of 30°C. 

Mote Higher temperatures shall be permissible when special oil are used. 

10.2 Oil-flooded compressors shall have an automatic shutdown device to prevent the temperature 
of the compressor oil from exceeding the safe limit. The tripping temperature shall not exceed 120°C. 

Note — Higher temperatures shall be permissible when special oils are used. 

10.3 When electric immersion heaters are used for heating the lubricant, they shall have a maximum 
energy dissipation of 25 kW/m 2 (2"5W/cm 2 ). If overheating or ignition of the oil occurs, the oil 
shall be systematically replaced. 

10.4 Oil-choking sometimes occurs in gear transmissions with high pitchline velocities. This has 
in some instances resulted in overheating of the oil and subsequent fires. Sufficient free volume 
inside the gear casing and adequate draining facilities shall be provided. 

11. Materials 

11.1 In each compressor, all seals or gaskets shall be made from materials which are capable of 
withstanding any pressure and temperature likely to be encountered in service. 

11 .2 Materials used shall be competible with the lubricants. 

11 .3 It is recommended that cast iron valves and fittings be avoided in pipework subjected to shocks 
or vibrations, 



5 



IS: 11461 -1985 

APPENDIX A 
( Clause 4.5 ) 

EXPOSURE TO NOISE 

A-1. Noise, even at reasonable levels, can cause irritatian and disturbances which over a long period 
of time may cause injuries to the human nervous system which may take such forms as lack of sleep, 
and irritation. For more than 8 hour exposure per day, noise at sound pressure levels exceeding 
90 dB ( A ) is considered to cause hearing damage. 

A-2. It is often a good practice to have a separate compressor room in order to screen off the 
compressor noise from the general working area. Depending on the number of compressors and 
their noise emission, the noise in the compressor room can be considerable. Intake noise can, how- 
ever, be reduced to a satisfactory level by the use of suction silencers. The acoustic environment 
in the compressor room can be improved and the general noise level reduced by introducing materials 
on walls and ceilings and putting up baffles for noise reduction and to prevent formation of standing 
waves. Care shall be taken that noise transmitted through walls and windows does not create too 
high noise levels in the surrounding environment. 

It is recommended to follow IS : 8152 -1976 'Method of measurement of speed fluctuation 
in sound recording and reproducing equipment' as regards the sound pressure level in all piaces 
where personnel may be exposed for a certain time. 

A-3. Measurement of noise from stationary compressors shall be carried out in accordance with 
IS : 11446- 1985 'Measurement of air borne noise emitted by compressor units intended for outdoor 
use'. 

APPENDIX B 

( Clauses 4.6.1 , 4.8, 7.3 and 8.2 ) 

DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR THE PRESSURE SYSTEM OF OIL-LUBRICATED COMPRESSORS 

B-1- It is generally accepted that oil fires in compressed air systems are nearly always due 
to the ignition of deposits of oil coke. In a compressed air system, high temperature and high 
partial pressure of the oxygen lead to oxidation of the oil. When an oil is oxidized, it generally 
becomes more viscous, and sludge-like products are formed which in their final stage convert into 
oil coke. If sufficiently thick deposits are built up, this coke may self-ignite and cause a fire in the 
pressure system. This fire can in rare cases initiate an explosion (see Appendix C). 

B-2. Practice has shown that the design of the hot zone of the air discharge system of the compressor 
has a decisive influence on the formation of coke deposits, since it is mainly the design of the system 
which determines the time needed for an oil molecule to pass through the hot zone. 

B-3. Some of the lubricating oil leaving the delivery flange or pressure valve of the compressor is 
'atomized' in droplets of such a small mass that they will be rapidly transferred by the air directly to the 
cold zone of the pressure system without touching the hot walls. This part of the oil passes the hot 
pressure zone so quickly that practically no oxidation of the oil occurs. 

B-4. Owing to their greater mass and inertia, the larger oil droplets cannot be transported by the 
air flow and are therefore deposited on the walls of the hot system, where the oil may be exposed 
to oxidation for a sufficient length of time for decomposition to begin. 

B-5. There are two principal ways of ensuring rapid transport to the cold zone of the oil which has 
settled on the walls. The first is by partial vaporization of the oil and the second is to design the 
interior of the pressure system in such a way that the sweeping effect of the passing air, 
together with gravitational forces, will assist the oil in creeping along the walls towards the cold 
zone. As a rule, both of these conditions must be positively exploited for a hot compressed air 
system to remain clean. 

B-6. Systematic investigations have shown that the discharge system of a reciprocating, oil- 
lubricated compressor will stay clean and free from deposits if the air velocity in every part of the 
piping system and its elements is above 8 m/s provided that the proper oil viscosity and type is 
chosen. At this air velocity, any oil deposited on a vertical wall will creep upwards. Of course, 
whenever possible the air flow should be directed downwards so that gravitational forces will assist 
the oil creeping. 

6 



IS : 11461 -1d86 

B-7. As consequence of the preceeding clause, the best aftercooler design will have the compressed 
air inside the tubes and the coolant outside. Such a design with narrow tubes will also give a good 
pressure pulsation damping. The length of the pipework connecting the compressor and the after- 
cooler must be designed to obtain the maximum damping of the pressure pulsations. 

To best utilize this pulsation damping, each compressor should have its own aftercooler and 
preferably also air receiver. Such a layout is also favourable from service and maintenance 
viewpoints. 

APPENDIX C 

( Clauses 4.6.1 and B-1 ) 
THE MECHANISM OF OIL COKE IGNITION AND THE ORIGIN OF OIL EXPLOSIONS 

C-1- Oil exposed to air is subject to oxidation. The rate of oxidation increases with temperature, 
the partial pressure of oxygen and the presence of small particles of iron or iron oxides that act as 
catalysts. Oxidation increases the viscosity of the oil and may produce solid deposits (oil coke) in the 
hot discharge system of a compressor if the residence time of the oil in the high temperature zone is 
sufficient. These solid deposits continue to oxidize, and as the oxidation reaction is exothermic, 
evolution of heat occurs. Consequently, the necessary conditions for spontaneous ignition exist. 

C-2. In practice, the heat generated by oxidation is removed both by the cooling effect of the air 
stream over the layer and by the heat being conducted through the layer to the metal on which the 
layer is resting. When this heat balance is changed so that less heat is removed, the coke tempe- 
rature rises and can, under special conditions, reach a temperature at which the coke ignite 
spontaneously, generating enough heat to weaken or melt the metal in the walls of the pressure 
system. Although no real explosion takes place, the sudden breakage of the wail may be mistaken 
for an explosion. 

C-3. Studies have shown that in order for an oil fire to occur there must be a certain thickness 
of the coke layer [ about 25 mm at 7 bar (700kPa) effective pressure ), a temperature around 
+ 150°C and a degrade of porosity often called dryness ] to limit heat transfer through the layer. 
Under these conditions, a fire can start when a reduction in the flow of compressed air over the 
coke layer unduly reduces the rate of heat dissipation. Such conditions can occur at meal breaks, 
shift changes or when the compressor is unloading. Alternatively, a fire can start without any change 
in the air flow conditions if the deposit layer builds up to such a thickness that heat transfer can no 
longer maintain the interior of the layer below the spontaneous ignition temperature. 

C-4. The critical thickness of the coke layer, in terms of fire risk, can vary with each individual 
compressor depending on air pressure and temperature, foreign particles in the deposit, and actual 
location of the deposit and running conditions of the compressor. Consequently, the 'safe' thickness 
of the coke layer will vary for different installations. 

C-5. Occasionally, but in practice very seldom, an oil fire in a pressure system can initiate an oil vapour 
or oil mist explosion. For this to occur a mixture of air and vaporized oil, or oil mist, must be within 
the explosive limits, and this mixture must further come into contact with a source of ignition. 

C-6. Fortunately, the range of air-to-oil ratio necessary for an explosion to occur is limited. Either 
too much oxygen or too much flammable material inhibits the explosion. This might be the main 
reason why explosions are rare. Nevertheless, the risk must always be recognized. 

C-7. Only limited information is available about the precise cause of an initial compressor oil 
explosion but the following explanation appears to be the most likely; A fire is initiated when the 
compressor is unloaded and no flow of air passes the burning zone of the coke bed. After a while, 
the oxygen in the air is consumed to an extent where incomplete combustion occurs and carbon 
monoxide together with decomposed and vaporized oil and oil mist from the coke bed form a poten- 
tially flammable mixture. The flammable gases and mists are transferred downstream to a cooler part 
of the system, where they mix with unburnt air to produce an explosive mixture. Under these 
conditions, an explosion can occur when the compressor starts to deliver air again and the sudden 
increase in air flow loosens a particle of burning coke from the layer and transfers it to the explosive 
zone. 

Note — It must be taken into consideration that even if no explosion occurs, the compressed air will be contami- 
nated by noxius gases from the incomplete combustion. 

C-8. This initial explosion can be followed by violent detonations according to the following: 

The inside of delivery lines in systems connected to lubricated compressors quickly becomes 
coated with a thin film of oil. A sufficiently strong shock wave from the initial explosion passing 



IS: 11461 -1965 

down the delivery line can then strip the oil film from the pipe and form an initimate mixture of oil- 
mist and air. If a flammable mixture is produced and the temperature at the shock wave front reaches 
the spontaneous ignition limit, a second explosion occurs, which accelerates the shock wave to the 
speed of detonation (supersonic) when brittle fracture of the pipe wall takes place. The 
process may repeat itself at intervals along the compressed air line, frequently giving breakages at 
restrictions. Explosions of this type are disastrous for the pressure system and highly dangerous 
for people in the vicinity. 

C-9. If the formation of coke is minimized by strictly following the rules set forth in this standard, 
the risk of oil fires or explosion can be minimized. 

APPENDIX D 

( Clauses 4.6.1 , 4.7 and 5.6 ) 
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST CRANKCASE EXPLOSIONS 
D-1. Cranckcase explosions result from ignition of a combustible mixture of lubricating oil and air. 
Combustion pressure which develops following ignition within the confined space frequently exceeds 
the strength of the crankcase and destructive failure occurs. The ignition source is generally an over- 
heated part. 

D-2. Prevention of crankcase explosions requires either elimination of the ignition source or 
prevention of flammable atmospheres. 

D-3. Elimination of the ignition source is not feasible as some form of mechanical seizure is always 
possible. Technical difficulties inherent in measuring temperatures of ail moving parts preclude and 
attempt to prevent potential ignition sources through early detection of overheated parts- 
D-4. However, proper maintenance and operation are recommended as a means of minimizing 
mechanical failure. If a machine is shut down owing to mechanical trouble which might involve an 
overheated part, inspection doors should not be opened immediately. This is to allow for a period 
of cooling of the heated part before air is permitted to enter the crankcase, and thereby minimize 
the possibility of an explosion. 

D-5. Approaches sometimes recommended to prevent flammable mixture include forced ventilation 
of the crankcase or operating the crankcase below atmospheric pressure. When such methods are 
employed, it should be recognized that under certain conditions crankcase ventilation may dilute a 
rich mixture into the flammable or explosive range. 

D~6. As an alternative to ventilation, the crankcase may be continuously purged with inert gas. 
The volume of gas required to effectively purge a large machine will usually make this approach 
impractical. 

D-7. Because it is difficult to eliminate the cause of explosions, relief devices are sometimes 
installed to prevent pressures exceeding the strength of the crankcase. Relief devices may range 
from spring-loaded coverplates to specially designed valves fitted with flame traps. 
D-8. Bursting discs are forbidden since the inrush of air to fill the partial vacuum created by an 
explosion may lead to a second explosion, sometimes more violent than the first. 
D-9. As to sizing relief devices, investigations, including fullscale tests, have shown that it would 
not be practical to provide sufficient relief area to maintain a safe pressure level when conditions 
are favourable to an explosion developing maximum intensity. However, experience has shown 
that many typical crankcase explosion can be safely relieved with conventional crankcase explosion 
relief devices, if the total throat area of the devices satisfies the requirements: 

A ^ 0'07 V 
where 

A is the total throat area, m 2 ; and 
V is the crankcase volume, in m 3 . 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard specifies requirements to help minimize compressor accidents and defines general 
safety practice for the field. The standard is based on the requirements that the compressor com- 
ponents be designed in accordance with recognized good practice and applicable standards. 
Following types of compressors are specifically excluded: 

a) Compressors with a shaft input less than 2 kW; 

b) Compressors with an effective discharge pressure less than 0*5 bar (50 kPa); 

c) Compressors with an effective discharge pressure exceeding 50 bar ( 5 MPa ); 

d) Compressor specifically supplying air for breathing, diving or surgery; 

e) Compressors used for air brake systems; and 

f) Ejectors. 

The selection, installation, operation and maintenance are already covered in IS : 6206 -1971 
'Guide for selection, installation and maintenance of air compressor plants with operating pressure up 
to 10 bars'. 

This standard is prepared on the basis of ISO 5388-1981 Stationary air compressors— 
Safety rules and code of practice. 

8 

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, Indi' 



