**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10135 (1985) : Code of practice for drainage system for 
gravity dams^ their foundations and abutments [WRD 9: Dams 
and Spillways] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 10135- ia&5 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODii OF PRACTICE FOR 

DRAINAGE SYSTEM FOR GRAVITY DAMS, 

THEIR FOUNDATIONS AND ABUTMENTS 



( First Revision ) 



UDC e27'8l4-7a34-96 : 0Ci6"76 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MAPI Alt BHAVAX, S RaHaDUR SftAH ZAFAR MAUG 

Gr4 .'ic^i^J/ IQfle 



IS: 10135 -1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DRAINAGE SYSTEM FOR GRAVITY DAMS, 

THEIR FOUNDATIONS AND ABUTMENTS 



( First Revision ) 



Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee, BDG 53 

Chairman Representing 

Shri V. B. PateIi Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, 

Gandhinagar 

Members 
Shri R. K. Bhasin Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 

ShriJ. S. Khurana ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. Bhat In personal capacity ( JVb. 599, lOth Cross, Jayanagar, 

Bangalore ) 
Shri M. V, Brahme Tata Consulting Engineers, Bangalore 

Shri R. Sivasankar ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Chadha Consulting Engineering Services ( India ) Private 

Ltd, New Delhi 
Prof Kari Krishna ( Alternate ) 
Prof M. C. Ghaturvedi Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Chief En-gineer, Thein Dam Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 

Design Chandigarh 

Director ( Dam ), Thein Dam 
Design ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Etty Darwin In personal capacity ( Muttada P, 0., Trivandrum ) 

Shri B. Dass Irrigation and Waterways Department, Government 

of West Bengal, Calcutta 
D iREcTOR Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 

Shri S, L. Mokhashi ( Alternate ) 
Director ( E&RDD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( E&RDD-I ) ( Alternate ) 
Director, Institute of Hydra- Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
uiiics & Hydrology, Poondi Nadu, Madras 

Superintending Engineer 
( Designs ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. S. Iyengar Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi K. Madhavan Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Director ( C&MDD-I ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 } 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10135 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. p. Mathttb Major, Medium and Minor Irrigation Department, 

Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
Shri a. M. Nayak ( Alternate ) 
Shei Ramabhadran Nair Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum 

Officek-on-Special Ditty, Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra 

APERL Pradesh, Hyderabad 

Superintending Engineer 
( Dams ) ( GDO ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ram Iqbal Singh Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shki Bisham Lal Jatana ( Alternate ) 
ShriT. Rang anna Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Bangalore 

Representative Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Director ( Civil ) ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, 

( GDO ) Gandhinagar 

Unit Leader ( G ) ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

( MD ), GDO Bombay 

Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretarjy 

Shri K. K. Sharma 
Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



Masonry and Concrete Dams Subcommittee, BDC 53 : 1 

Convener 

Dr B, Pant Water Resources Development Training Centre, 

University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Members 

Additional Chief Engineer Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar 

( Designs ) Pradesh, Lucknow 

Dr B. M. Ahuja Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Shri R. K. Bhasin Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 

Shri K. K. Khosla ( Alternate ) 

Shri H. S. Bhat In personal capacity ( No. 599, lOtk Cross, Jayanagar, 

Bangalore ) 
Chief Engineer, GDO Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra 

Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Officer-on-Special Duty, 
APERL ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Etty Darwin In personal capacity ( Muttada P, 0., Trivandrum ) 

Director ( C&MDD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( C&MDD-I ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 12 ) 



IS : 10135 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DRAINAGE SYSTEM FOR GRAVITY DAMS, 

THEIR FOUNDATIONS AND ABUTMENTS 



( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 20 November 1985, after the draft finalized by 
Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 A dam constructed across any stream disturbs the natural drainage — 
surface and sub-surface. The seepage water inside the body and founda- 
tions of the dam should be disposed of to enhance the safety factor of 
the structure. Hence, a well planned drainage system is essential. 

0.3 During operation of the dam, a watch should be kept on the 
prevailing uplift pressures so as to assess the adequacy or otherwise of 
the drainage provided. 

0.4 It is necessary to observe and study the quantum of seepage from 
various sources individually as well as collectively with respect to data 
on rainfall, reservoir level, etc, and to take remedial measures in case of 
abrupt departures from the normal. 

0.5 This standard was first published in 1982. Many technical comments 
were received since then. The present revision is being issued to take 
care of these comments. Important modifications incorporated in this 
revision include: 

a) Provision of water seal to prevent entry of air in drainage holes 
for minimizing formation of calcium carbonate and thereby 
reducing choking of drainage holes; and 

b) Addition of criteria to determine the necessity of providing a 
drainage gallery. 



IS : 10135 *'^^1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code prescribes general requirements and methods of drainage 
in and around a gravity dam, its foundations and abutments. It does 
not cover drainage requirements for energy dissipation devices, chutes 
and training walls. It may be supplemented by specific requirements 
to suit the site conditions. 

2. CLASSIFICATION 

2.1 Drainage is the safe disposal of surface and seepage water in the 
abutment, foundation and the body of the dam. The drainage is thus 
classified into the following four categories: 

a) Surface drainage, 

b) Sub-surface drainage, 

c) Internal drainage of the dam, and 

d) Foundation drainage. 

Although foundation drainage forms a part of the sub-surface 
drainage, yet for the purpose of this standard, it has been covered under 
a separate sub-head due to its importance. 

3. REQJUIREMENTS AND METHODS OF DRAINAGE 

3.1 Surface Drainage — All open surfaces in the vicinity of the dam 
shall be provided with adequate drainage. For this purpose open 
surface channels shall be so designed and laid as to drain off the area 
effectively and carry away the surface run-off into the reservoir upstream 
of the dam or into the river downstream of the dam. The service roads 
and other approach roads leading to dam shall have proper camber 
and longitudinal slopes for catch water drains. The water from these 
catch drains shall be collected at suitable intervals depending on topo- 
graphy, rainfall, etc, and led away into the natural drains away from the 
dam. The roadway, the ducts for electric cable, the crane rail recesses 
and any other recesses provided at the top of the dam shall be drained 
through pipes of at least 100 mm diameter. 

3.2 Sub-surface Drainage — This shall be provided for the following 
purposes, if necessary: 

a) Protection of slopes, and 

b) Drainage of abutments. 

3.2.1 Protection of Slopes — In some river valley projects, the hill slopes 
in the vicinity of abutments need to be protected against likely slips. 
This shall be done by either providing a combination of concrete 
cladding/shotcreting and drainage holes or any other suitable 



IS : 10135 - 1985 

arrangement or by providing drainage holes only. Provision of non-return 
valvesj which allow water to flow towards the reservoir area or hill slopes 
in the vicinity of abutment only, shall be made in the drainage holes. 

3.2,2 Drainage of Abutments — The drainage gallery may be extended 
into the abutment rock, together with provision of cross tunnels, 
as drainage tunnels, if necessary, lor ensuring the stability of abutment 
blocks or the abutment. 

3.3 Internal Drainage of Dam — Internal drainage of a gravity dam 
usually comprises porous concrete drains/formed drains at the contrac- 
tion joints and in the body of the dam. 

3.3.1 Vertical drains at contraction joints shall be provided to intercept 
the seepage water through the joint and such seepage water shall ulti- 
mately be let out into the drainage gallery system. For water stops to 
be provided reference may be made to 'Indian Standard code of practice 
for water stops at transverse contraction joints in masonry and concrete 
dams' ( under preparation ). 

3.3.2 The internal drainage of concrete/masonry dam shall be provid- 
ed with 200 mm dia vertical drains or uniformly inclined ( till they 
meet the gallery ) at 3 m centre to centre. For masonry dams these 
shall be of precast porous concrete while for concrete dams these shall be 
formed drains. These shall convey the seepage water through the body 
of the masonry/concrete dam to drainage gallery system. Suitable water 
seal to prevent entry of air may be provided at the discharge end of the 
drainage pipe in the gallery. For masonry dams, the drains shall be of 
porous concrete blocks while for concrete dams, they shall be formed 
drains. 

3.3.3 A typical detail of porous concrete drain is shown in Fig. 1. The 
porous concrete drain shall conform to the following requirements: 

a) The drain shall consist of precast porous concrete blocks of size 
400 X 400 X 200 mm with a circular hole of 200 mm dia in the 
middle; 

b) The porous concrete shall be of 1 ; 5 proportion by mass, that 
is, one part of cement to 5 parts of 20 to 5 mm size aggregate 
( conforming to IS : 383-1970* ); and 

c) When tested for permeability with 200 mm thick slab of this 
concrete under a head 100 mm, the discharge shall not be less 
than 30 litres/min/m^. 

3.3.4 Formed drains for concrete dams are formed during construc- 
tion of dam by use of suitable forms. 



♦Coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete ( second revision ). 



IS : 10135 - 1985 



tTOP OF DAM 



"¥^ ---DETAIL 



AXIS OF 
DAM 




WATER STOPS 
AT JOINTS 

CONNECTION 
TO CONTRAat 
JOINT TRAP 
DRAIN 



<^ 200 mm POROUS CONCRETE 
DRAINS/FORMED DRAINS 
@ 3000 mm C/C 



VENTILATION PIPE 
(IF PROVIDED) 



-CURTAIN 
GROUT HOLE 

1A 
Fig, 1 Porous Concrete Drain/Formed Drain ( Continued ) 



IS : 10135 - 1905 



TOP OF DAM 
COUPLING. 



COUNTERSUNK 
Ct PLUG 



VARlE^i. 
(mjn. 100) 

T 

200 




CAST IN SITU 
CEMENT CONCRETE 

MASONRY 



STEEL PIPE 

6 mm THICK STEEL 
PLATE (0200 
INTERNAL, 0300 
EXTERNAL) WELDED 
TO STEEL PIPE 

POROUS CONCRETE 
BLOCK ^00X1(00 
WITH A CIRCULAR 
HOLE 0200 



POROUS CONCRETE 
DRAIN 200 



Fig. 



1 B Detail A 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
1 Porous Concrete Drain/Formed Drain 



3.4 Foundation Drainage Gallery — The main aim of a foundation 
drainage galJery is to collect seepage water from foundation and the body 
of the dam. Besides, it provides space for drilling and grouting the 
foundations and inspection of dam structure. 

3.4.1 The upstream face of the gallery shall be located at a minimum 
distance of 5 percent of the maximum reservoir head or 3 m from the 
upstream face, whichever is more. A supplementary drainage gallery is 
sometimes provided towards the toe. For layout and size of gallery, 
reference may be made to 'Indian Standard Code of practice for galleries 
and other openings in dams: Part 1 General requirements* (under 
preparation ). 

3.4.2 Various galleries in the dam and tunnels in the abutments 
receive water from drainage holes, joint drains, formed drains/porous 
concrete drains, seepage, grouting operations, washing and cleaning, fire- 
fighting, spring leaks, etc. This water should be drained away under 
gravity with a slope not flatter than 1 in 1 000. The water collected in 
the galleries/tunnels below the general downstream level shall be led into 
one or two sumps provided and pumped out. 



IS : 10135 - 1985 

3-4,3 Gallery shall invariably be provided in the body of the dam 
where height of the structure above normal foundation level is more than 
10 m ( measured up to crest level in the case of overflow portion of the 
dam ). For dams with heights below 10 m, the designer should consider 
the provision of gallery keeping in view factors like foundation condition 
and height of water retained. 

3.5 Foundation Drainage — Foundation drainage provides a means to 
relieve the uplift under the dam foundations. This drainage is accomp- 
lished by a line of holes drilled from the foundation gallery into the 
foundation rock. The size, spacing and depth of these holes are assumed 
on the basis of physical characteristics of the foundation rock, foundation 
condition and depth of storage of the reservoir. The diameter of the 
hole is generally J^X drill which is 75 mm. The spacing of the hole may 
be kept as 6 m centre to centre. The depth of the holes may be kept 
between 20 and 40 percent of the maximum reservoir depth and between 
30 and 75 percent of the curtain grouting depth for preliminary 
design. The actual spacing and depth may be determined on the basis 
of geological conditions. These should be further reviewed and holes 
provided at closer intervals or further deepened on the basis of actual 
observations after the reservoir is filled. To facilitate this, additional 
nipples/pipes shall be embedded in the gallery concrete. The drainage 
holes of 75 mm diameter are drilled through 100 mm diameter pipe 
embedded in the masonry/ concrete portion. When drainage holes are 
drilled through soft foundations for the drainage of shear zones, faults, etc, 
a perforated pipe should be placed in the drainage holes and the space 
between walls of hole and this pipe should be filled with pea gravel. This 
arrangement would avoid caving-in of walls and the holes could be 
got washed, if required. 

3.5.1 Drainage holes should be drilled after all foundation grouting 
has been completed within a minimum horizontal distance of 15 m. The 
drainage holes shall be drilled, through the drainage, gallery, through 
previously installed metal pipe extending down to the foundation rock. 
Additional drainage holes or curtain grouting shall be provided, if uplift 
pressures higher than designed values are observed. After drilling, the 
pipes shall be plugged at top and seepage water from the hole shall be 
taken off at a T-joint and let to the gutter of gallery ( see Fig. 2 ). 

3.5.2 Besides the foundation drainage gallery, the drainage holes shall 
be drilled through tunnels in the foundation and abutments. Spacing 
and depth of the holes shall depend on the geology. 

3.5.3 Where cross galleries, additional foundation galleries and drifts 
are introduced, necessary drainage arrangements should also be 
considered and provided. 

3.5.4 The seepage water from drainage holes should be monitored 
from consideration of quantity, contents of fines and chemicals and 
remedial action taken, if warranted. 

8 



IS : 10135 -1985 



<t> 200 STEEL PIPE 
(1000 LONG) 




r" 



* 100 HOSE/ 
G.I. PIPE — ^ 



<* 200 POROUS CONCRETE/ 
FORMED DRAINS (^ 3000 C/C 

200x100 REDUCER WITH. 
WATER TIGHT PACKING 




<> 200 STEEL PlPE'^i'Hf' 
(1000 LONG)^. jj 



<t) 200 POROUS CONCRETE/ 
FORMED DRAINS C5) 3000 C/C 



-200 xlOO REDUCER WITH 
WATER TIGHT PACKING 



y-0 100 HALF 
/ ROUND DRAIN 



100 PERFORATED STEEL 
PIPE <S)3000 C/C 



6 APPROX 




<t> 100 SENT PIPE 

CONNECTED TO 
REDUCER BY 
COUPLING 



VIEW AA 

(ALTERNATIVE No lJ 



WATER SEAL DETAILS 

All diraensiom in millimetres. 

2A Foundation Drainage Gallery ( in Rock ) 

Fig, 2 Foundation Drainage Gallery ■ Continued ) 



<P 200 STEEL PIPE 
(1000 LONG) 



-^200 POROUS COHCRETE/ 
FORMED DRAINS «300C C/C 



-100x100 REDUCER VVlTH 
WATER TIGHT PACKING 




VIEW A A 

^ALTERNATIVE No. 21 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS : 10135 - 1985 



-f 

S*56 BLACK SfEEL 
PIPE 
GALLERY FLOOR 

COUNTERSUNK 
'PLUG 




50<H* 



t 



FOUNDATION y 



■7/^"* — yn^ 




PEA-GRAVEL FILLING 
(WHERE NECESSARY)- 



25 PERFORATED PIPE 



DRAINAGE HOLE 



■:^ 



HOC BLACK 
STEEL PIPE 



"TTT^r- 



2B Foundation Drainage Pipe ( in Soft Foundation ) 

All dimen&iona in millimetres. 
FiQ. 2 Foundation Drainage Gallery 



11 



IS : 10135 - 1985 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Director ( T&P ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
DiHBCTOR ( Spillway & Power 
Planoi ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. K. MuLLiCK Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi 

Shei N. K.Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ramabhadban Nair Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum 

Shri M, p. Bharathan { Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer, CDO Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, 

Gandhinagar 
Unit Leader ( C ) ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Enoinebr Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

{ MD ), CDO Bombay 

Shri P. R. Tongonkar In personal capacity ( Shirsh Co-operative Housing 

Society, Veer Savarkar Marg, Bombay ) 



12 



