**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11396 (1985) : Test methods for determination of 
storability (safe storage life) of foodgrains [FAD 16: 
Foodgrains, Starches and Ready to Eat Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11396*1985 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

TEST METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF STOR ABILITY 

{ SAFE STORAGE LIFE ) OF FOODGRAINS 



UDC &31'563:633"L : 620) 




© Copyright I9Q6 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. y HAHADUH SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHJ IKIDQ2 

Or 3 March 1 986 



IS : 11396 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

TEST METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF STORABILITY 

( SAFE STORAGE LIFE ) OF FOODGRAINS 



Storage Structures and Storage Management Sectional 
Committee, AFDC 28 

Chairman Representing 

Dr K. Krishnamurtht Department of Food ( Ministry of Food & Civil 

Supplies ), New Delhi 

Members 

Dr G. K. Girish ( Alternate to 
Dr K. Krishnamurthy ) 
Dr R. A. Agarwal Indian Agricultural Research Institute { ICAR), 

New Delhi 
Dr T. D. Yadav ( Alternate ) 
Agricultural Marketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Ministry 

Adviser of Agriculture & Rural Development, 

Faridabad 
Shri A. P. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr A Alam Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New 

Delhi 
Dr A. P. Bhatnagar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Chief Engineer Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Dr C. D. Dwivedi Defence Materials & Storage Research & 

Development Establishment, Kanpur 
Shri V. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Brig V. N. Kapoor Q,MG*s Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry 

of Defence ) 
Brig R. N. Varma ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Pandithurai Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Moorjani ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Pavate Planning Commission, New Delhi 

Shri Ramesh Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Plant Protection Adviser Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & 

Storage, Faridabad 
Shri T. R. Sharma ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11396 - 1963 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. S. N. Raju National Co-operative Development Corporation, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. L. Gaur ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Vishwambhakan Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri Ajay Khera ( Alternate I ) 
Shri P. P. Mathur ( Alternate II ) 
Shri T. Pctrnanandam, Virector General, ISI {Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 
Shrimati S has hi Sarben 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Grain Storage Data Subcommittee, AFDC 28 : 10 

Convener 
Prof A. P. Bhatnagar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Members 

Prof Malvinder Singh {Alternate to 
Prof A. P. Bhatnagar) 
Prof N. G. Bhole Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 

Joint Director ( WS ) Planning Commission, New Delhi 

Shri K. V. S. Murthy Triveni Structural Ltd, Naini 

Shri M. N. Paul ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. P. Ojha Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 

Bhopal 
Shri K. Pandithurai Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri P. K. Moorjani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. T. Ramanathan Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. V. Gadekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Sharangafani Central Food Technological Research Institute, 

Mysore 
Dr B. P. N. Singh G. B. Pant University of Agriculture & 

Technology, Pantnagar 
Prof C. K. Teckchandani J. N. Krishi Vishwa Vidyalya, Jabalpur 

Shri B. K. Verma Indian Grain Storage Research Institute, Hapur 

Shri S. R. Agaewal ( Alternate ) 



IS : 11396-1985 

Indian Standard 

TEST METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF STORABILITY 

(SAFE STORAGE LIFE ) OF FOODGRAINS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 29 October 1985, after the draft finalized by the Storage 
Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 A practical means by evaluating the conditions and storability of 
given lots of grains and seeds would be of great benefit to all those 
concerned with marketing, storage and processing of grains, seeds and 
their products. 

0.3 A combination of tests involving moisture content, fat acidity, 
alcoholic acidity, temperature measurement, number and kinds of molds 
present, and viability should serve to predict storage behaviour and 
extent of actual damage. The moisture content and temperature 
measurement, indicate wheather there is present or future danger, fat 
acidity and alcoholic acidity give an indication of the actual damage 
which has already occurred, mold tests indicate whether invasion of the 
seed has already occurred,, and viability whether incipient deterioration 
has developed.! 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the test methods for determining the 
storability of foodgrains. 

2. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

2.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled water 
( see IS : 1070-1977* ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



♦Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 

3 



IS : 11396 - 1985 

3. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE 

3.0 For details of the test method see IS : 4333 ( Part 2 )-1967*. 

4. DETERMINATION OF FAT ACIDITY VALUE (FAV) 

4.0 One of the causes of increase in ( FAV ) in stored grain is due to 
storage fungi. The enzyme lipase is associated with these fungi 
and is the cause of degradation of fat into fatty acids. Therefore, if 
increase in storage fungi is regularly accompanied by increase in FAV, 
measurement of FAV in a sample should be a quick way to judge 
relative storability. FAV may also be found without development of 
storage fungi, as during prolonged storage, fats are slowly converted to 
fatty acids in presence of the enzyme lipase and the free fatty acids give 
rise to FAV. 

4.1 Apparatus 

4.1.1 Soxhlet Apparatus — with a 250-ml flat-bottom flask, 

4.2 Reagents 

4.2.1 Petroleum Ether — boiling range 40 to 60°C. 

4.2.2 Benzene, Alcohol — Phenolphthalein Stock Solution — To one litre of 
distilled benzene, and one litre of alcohol or rectified spirit and 0*4 g of 
phenolphthalein. Mix the contents well. 

4.2.3 Standard Potassium Hydroxide Solution — 0'05 N. 

4.3 Procedure — Grind the grains to pass through a 45-micron IS sieve. 
Weigh about 10 g of flour in a thimble and plug the top of the thimble 
with cotton. Extract fat in the Soxhlet apparatus for 6 hours and evaporate 
off the solvent in the flask on a water bath. Remove the traces of the 
residual solvent by keeping the flask in hot air oven at a temperature 
of 60° G for half an hour. Cool the flask and weigh a suitable quantity of 
extracted fat in a tared 250-ml flat bottomed flask and add 50 ml of 
mixed benzene-alcohol phenolphthalein reagent ( 4.2.2 ) and titrate the 
contents to a distinct pink colour with potassium hydroxide solution taken 
in a 10-ml microburette. Garry a blank determination on 50 ml 
reagent. 

4.4 Calculation — Acidity of extracted fat ( as oleic acid ), 

1-41 X (F-0 



percent by mass = 



m 



* Methods of analysis for foodgrains: Part 2 Moisture. 

4 



IS: 11396- 1985 

where 

V = volume of 0*05 N potassium hydroxide solution used in 
titration of sample; 

v = volume of 0*05 N potassium hydroxide solution used in 
blank; and 

m = mass, in g of the fat taken for test. 
5. DETERMINATION OF ALCOHOLIC ACIDITY 

5.1 Reagents 

5.1.1 Neutral Ethyl Alcohol — 90 percent ( vjv ). 

5.1.2 Standard Sodium Hydroxide Solution — approximately 0*05 N. 

5.1.3 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — Dilute 0*1 g of phenolphthalein 
in 100 ml of 60 percent ( vjv ) rectified spirit. 

5.2 Procedure — Grind the grains to pass through a45-micron IS sieve. 
Weigh about 5 g of sample into a conical stoppered flask and add 50 ml 
of neutral ethyl alcohol. Stopper, shake and allow to stand for 24 hours, 
with occasional shaking. Filter the alcoholic extract through a dry filter 
paper. Titrate the combined alcoholic extract against 0*05 N standard 
sodium hydroxide solution using phenolphthalein as indicator. Calculate 
the percentage of alcoholic acidity as sulphuric acid. 

5.3 Calculation — Alcoholic acidity ( as H 2 S0 4 ) in 90 percent alcohol, 

24*52 AN 
percent by mass = r^ — 

where 

A = volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution used 
in titration; 

N = normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution; and 

M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 

6. MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE 

6.0 If insects or fungi are developing at or near their optimum rate in 
grain, each kind of insect or fungus will raise the temperature to about the 
maximum that it can endure. In the case of insects, about 40°C and in 
case of fungi about 55°C. Different methods for measurement of 
temperature in bulk grain are available. The thermocouple rope method 
is given below. 



IS: 11396 -1985 
6.1 Instruments 

6.1*1 Thermocouple Cable ( see Fig. 1 ) -— This consists of a plastic covered 
steel core about which are closely wound an insulated constantan 
thermocouple wire, and 9, 10 or 11 insulated copper thermocouple wires. 
The thermocouple wires are covered with polyvinyl chloride ( PVC ) to 
an outside diameter of 1*2 mm. Each thermocouple wire follows a helical 
path of about 2*5 cm pitch around the steel core. Thermocouple functions 
are formed at the required intervals along the cable during the winding 
process by parting the PVC insulation on the constantan wire and on an 
adjacent copper wire, twisting the two wires (including all of them not 
yet wound ) one and a half turns and soft soldering the joint. When 
winding is continued, the constantan wire has crossed over the copper 
wire at the junction. The next function is formed between the constantan 
wire and the adjacent copper wire to which it has not yet been 
connected. Thus the constantan wire crosses over the copper wires in 
turn, making a thermocouple junction with each at a different depth. 
The uniform helical construction is maintained except where the 
insulation is pasted at the junction itself. 

PVC SHEATH- 



PVC SHEATH 



CONSTANTAN 

THERMOCOUPLE 

WIRE 




DISTANCE MARKER 

THERMOCOUPLE JUNCTION 
COPPER THERMOCOUPLE WIRES 

PVC SHEATH 

STEEL WIRE ROPE 
Fig. 1 Thermocouple Cable 

6.1.1.1 The thermocouple wires are protected and held in place by 
one or two thin plastic sheaths shrunk into place. Distances are marked 
along the cable using special PVC marking inks or by placing adhesive 
cable numbering strips under the outer clear sheath. The cable is 
terminated at one end in a brass plug carrying a transverse stainless steel 
pin, and at the other end in an aluminium bush; in each case the steel 
core, wires and covering are anchored into the fitting by an epoxyresin 
adhesive. The aluminium bush is clamped to a multicontact plug 



IS : 11396 - 1985 

which is used to connect the cable to the measuring instrument. The 
plug and receptacle are fitted with constantan contacts for the constantan 
wire in order to reduce errors resulting from temperature gradients 
which occur when a hot plug is connected to a cold receptacle or vice 
versa. Dust caps are fitted in order to keep the connector contacts clean. 

6.1.1*2 Potentiometer — Any potentiometer capable of reading to an 
accuracy of plus or minus 4 microvolts is suitable. 

€.2 Procedure — Insert themocouples into the grain by means of screwed 
chrome-plated steel rods to which they are attached by a special coupling. 
Push the rod, coupling and cable vertically down, slight tension being 
maintained on the cable to ensure that it does not slip from the coupling. 
Insert the cable to the required depth by adding rods one at a time and 
pushing them into the grain, the inserting clamp being used when hand 
pushing becomes difficult. As the cable has nine thermocouples at 60 cm 
intervals, the first cable is inserted to a depth of about 10 metres and a 
second is then inserted, in a similar manner to a depth of 5 metres. A 
delay, which will permit grain sampling to be carried out, is required 
before temperatures are read. After approximately 30 minute, connect 
the thermocouple cable in turn to the direct reading potentiometer. 
Measure each after a delay of two minutes or more which allows 
temperature gradients through the plug and receptacle to decay. 

7. MICROBIOLOGICAL EVALUATION 

7.0 Two methods for detection of presence of fungi namely the Agar 
plate method and the blotting paper method are given. A method for 
counting spores on grain surface is given in 7.4. 

7.1 Sampling — For microbiological examination, the sample should be 
handled asceptically and it should be truly representative of the lot. For 
this purpose IS : 5404-1969* shall be followed. 

7.2 Agar Plate Method 

7.2.1 Reagents 

7.2.1.1 Sodium hypochlorite solution — 1 percent. 

7.2.1.2 Potato dextrose agar medium 

7.2.2 Procedure — From a representative grain sample separate 200 
kernels and soak for 10 minutes in 25-ml of one percent sodium 
hypochlorite solution held in a 100-ml flask. Separate the kernels and 
wash in 100 ml sterile water and dry on a sheet of sterile paper. Sterilize 



♦Code of practice for handling of food samples for microbiological analysis. 

7 



IS t 11396 - 1985 

the kernels once again in sodium hypochlorite solution for 5 minutes. 
Asceptically plate 100 kernels in a petri dish containing potato dextrose 
agar media. Incubate for 8 days at 20 ± 1°C under 12 hours dark-light 
cycle with near ultraviolet light ( black light ). 

Examine under magnification, for presence and kind of fungi. 

7.3 Blotting Paper Method 

7.3.1 Procedure — From a representative grain sample separate 200 
kernels. Place 100 kernels between two blotting papers of 15-cm 
diameter, placed inside a petri dish, each kernel being at a distance 
of 20 mm from each other. Incubate at 20 ± 1°C fr * p days. Examine 
the kernels for presence of fungi. 

7.4 Counting Spores on Grain Surface — From a representative grain 
sample separate 200 kernels and shake in 25 ml of a solution of 
detergent or alcohol in a 100-ml flask. Decant the solution and 
examine 1 ml of solution under magnification and count the number of 
spores. 

8. DETERMINATION OF VIABILITY 

8.0 Viability is affected during storage due to effect of high moisture 
fungi and excessive biochemical activity. Tests on viability indicate 
general soundness of a grain lot. Viability is correlated with alcoholic 
acidity and free fat acidity. 

8.0.1 Two methods for testing viability are given. 

8.1 Method No. I 

8.1.1 From a representative grain sample separate three hundred 
kernels. Plate 100 kernels at equal distances on a water soaked 
germination towel paper sheet ( 45 x 30 cm ) placed on a butter paper 
of similar size. Cover this with another similar sheet. Roll all the sheets 
and place in a polyethylene envelope of 35 x 10 cm size. Keep these in 
an upright position in a germinator maintained at 20 to 30° C. Evaluate 
viability after 5 days and 10 days by counting kernels with emerged 
plumule and radicle. Garry out the test in triplicate and calculate the 
mean. 

8.2 Method No. II 

8.2.1 From a representative grain sample separate 300 kernels. Fit 
water-soaked filter papers on the top and bottom of a glass petri-dishes 

8 



IS : 11396 - 1985 

of 15 cm diameter. Plate 100 kernels at equal distances on bottom of 
petri-dishes. Sprinkle excess water by means of a water bottle and 
incubate in a germinator maintained at 20 to 30°C. Evaluate viability 
after 5 days and 10 days, by counting kernels with emerged plumule 
and radicle. Garry out the test in triplicate and calculate the mean. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


st e radian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N - 1 kg.m/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - lj/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb - 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


IT -1 Wb/m* 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz - 1 c/s (s- 1 ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


IS - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V - 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


I Pa - 1 N/m* 



