**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14462 (1997) : Recommendations for layout, design and 
construction of green house structures [FAD 22: 
Agricultural Systems and Management] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14462: 1997 

(Reaffirmed 2002) 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LAYOUT, 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF 

GREENHOUSE STRUCTURES 



ICS 65.040.30 



©BIS 1997 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1997 Price Group 4 



Surface Covered Cultivation Structures Sectional Committee, FAD 43 



FOREWORD 

This standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Surface 
Covered Cultivation Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 

Development of greenhouse technology in India is of recent origin. Greenhouse technology permits the 
enhancement of horticultural crop productivity particularly those of vegetables and flowers. This tech- 
nology requires a considerable energy input for environmental control. It is, therefore essential that 
adequate guidelines for the layout, design and construction of greenhouse structures and climate control 
system should be laid down. This standard has, therefore, been prepared with a view to providing necessary 
guidance in this area. 

In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ASAE EP 460 - 1995 Commercial 
Greenhouse Design and Layout, Published by American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 

The composition of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14462 : 1997 



Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LAYOUT, 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF 

GREENHOUSE STRUCTURES 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers recommendations for layout, 
design and construction of greenhouse structures. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which through references in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publica- 
tion, the editions indicated were valid. All stand- 
ards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated belo .v: 

IS No. Title 

National Building Code of India 

National Electrical Code of India 

Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earth quake) for 
buildings and structures 
Wind loads {second revision) 

Snow load {second revision) 

Low density polyethylene films 
{second revision) 

Code of practice for fire safety of 
industrial buildings: Electrical 

generating and distributing 
stations {second revision) 

Guidelines for the quality of 
irrigation water 

Methods of test for determination 
of flammability of solid electrical 
insulating materials when 
exposed to and igniting source - 

Horizontal specimen method 

Vertical specimen method 

Surface covered cultivation 
structures — Glossary of terms 
Recommendations for heating, 
ventilating and cooling of 
greenhouses 



SP7: 


1983 


SP30 


:1986 


875 




(Part 3) : 1987 


(Part 4): 1987 


2508: 


:1984 


3034: 


: 1993 



11264:1986 



11731 



(Parti): 1986 
(Part 2) : 1986 
14461 : 1997 

14485: 1997 



3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 14461 shall apply. 

4 DESIGN LOAD 

4*1 The design load includes the weight of the 
structure (dead load), loads (equipment, etc) as- 
sociated with building use (live load) and loads 
from snow and wind. 

4.1.1 Dead Load 

All fixed services equipment such as heating, ven- 
tilating, air circulation, electrical, lighting, water- 
ing, and energy conservation blankets should be 
included if supported by structural members. Long 
term crops such as tomatoes and cucumbers sup- 
ported by the structure are also considered as dead 
loads. For estimation of dead load the actual mass 
of building materials and systems shall be taken 
into account. 

4.1.2 Live Load 

Live loads are temporary loads and shall include the 
mass of repair crews and hanging plants. 

4.1.3 Snow Load 

The greenhouse should be designed as to resist the 
snow load. In area of snow, a minimum distance of 
3.0 m should be provided between greenhouses to 
allow for snow accumulation and to prevent side 
wall crushing from snow sliding off the roof. The 
snow load of greenhouse structures shall be 
estimated as prescribed in IS 875 (Part 4). 

4.1.4 Wind Load 

The greenhouse should be designed to resist the 
wind load. The wind load of the greenhouse struc- 
tures shall be estimated as prescribed in 
IS 875 (Part 3). Since the deadweight of most green- 
houses structures is very small, special attention 
should be given to ensure that enough ground may 
be there to resist the upward lift force created by 
the wind. The minimum design loads for the green- 
houses structures mainframes is given in Table 1 
and may be used for reference only. Actual design 



1 



IS 14462 : 1997 



values should be calculated for each greenhouse 
structures. 

Table 1 Minimum Design Loads for 
Greenhouse Mainframes 

Load Description Minimum Value 

N/m 2 

Dead- 

pipe frame, polyethylene cover 100 

truss frame, lapped glass 250 

supported crops-tomatoes, cucumbers, etc 200 

Live-workers, repair materials 250 

Snow— 10°C minimum greenhouse temperature 750 

Wind-load acts perpendicular to surfaces 500 



5 SITE SELECTION AND LAYOUT 

5.1 Selection of Site and Location 

The site shall be located away from industrial and 
vehicular pollution to prevent plant injury from 
possible pollutants and to ensure light levels. The 
functional and environmental operation of a green- 
house structure may be affected by the building site 
selected. Ground slope for drainage of water is 
important and maybe provided. Greenhouses shall 
be placed on gravel base 150 mm to 300 mm above 
grade. Swales between greenhouses structures ars 
necessary to direct the water from the area. A 
topographic map of the area will indicate surface 
drainage routes. The ideal greenhouse structures 
site would have a slightly southern facing slope(lcss 
than 3 percent) for good winter light and protection 
from northern winds. 

Location with respect to highways shall be con- 
sidered. Location on near a highway and residential 
area may increase business for a retail operation. 

5.2 Site Layout 

The following points should be considered in 
developing a layout for greenhouse structure: 

a) locate the head house to the north of the 
greenhouse to reduce shading; 

b) locate windbreaks at least 30 m away to the 
side of the prevailing winter winds to reduce 
energy consumption; 

c) separate supplier and customer traffic. 
Provide for convenient consumer parking ; 

d) locate and screen any residence to insure 
privacy; 

e) place the outdoor storage area where the 
area is convenient to access for materials 
delivery and movement to the work area; 

f) locate the retail sales area to keep customers 
away from the production area to reduce 
chances for disease introduction and 
prevent interruption of work routines. 



The layout of the greenhouse range will depend to 
some extent on the crop or crops to be grown. Two 
basic systems are in use. 

a) Single span greenhouse structures may be 
left separate or the end walls attached to 
central headhouse. Expansion or contrac- 
tion of the operation may be accomplished 
easily by moving each greenhouse into or 
out of production as needed. They may be 
operated with different environments 
depending on plant needs. More heat is 
required per unit of floor area than with a 
gutter-connected greenhouse. 

b) The gutter-connected keeps all growing 
space inside one building, and a central 
heating plant can easily serve all areas. A 
minimum area of 1 000 m 2 should be con- 
sidered to efficiently use materials and 
equipment. It may not be as easy to expand 
or contract space use as with single span 
greenhouses. A headhouse may be attached 
to the end or sides, or in large operations a 
central location reduces travel distances for 
plants and personnel. 

Planning process provisions shall be made for ex- 
pansion. Land shall be available for additional 
greenhouses and headhouse area. Water, electrical, 
and environment control systems shall be installed 
to allow for expansion. 

5.3 Orientation 

The ridge in either single span greenhouse struc- 
tures or gutter-connected range shall be east-west 
in areas above 40° north latitude to transmit maxi- 
mum winter sunlight to the plants. Gutter shading 
the same area during each day may result in uneven 
growth in some plants. Uneven growth in east-west 
ridge orientation is a trade off against general 
reduction in winter light, if the ridges run north- 
south. 

5.4 Headhouse and Storage Facilities 

A headhouse should be built to house the office, 
utilities, work areas, employee areas, storage, and 
dispatch. The size of the headhouse can be ap- 
proximated from Table 4. This value should be 
adjusted depending on the indoor storage needed 
and the amount of mechanization used. 

A good headhouse layout helps the system operate 
smoothly and efficiently. Materials flow should be 
such that there is minimum of handling or cross* 
traffic in moving the components through the 
system. Typical example of headhouse area 
corresponding to various greenhouse structures 
sizes is given in Table 2. 



IS 14462 : 1997 



Table 2 Sizing the Headhouse 

Greenhouse Size Approximate Headhouse Area Needed 
Per 100 m 2 of Greenhouse Area 

2 2 

m m 

1 000 to 3 999 14 

4 000 to 7 999 9 

Over 8 000 7 



Although it is often impractical to store all growing 
media under cover. It is convenient to have some of 
it protected from rain and snow. The amount of 
space needed is determined by the type of opera- 
tion, kind of media being used, and the local 
climate. Calculate space requirements based on the 
amount that is needed for one crop or a specific 
time period. 

Locate the storage area for bulk materials and truck 
loads where there is good access by all weather road. 
Allow adequate space for trucks for shunting. The 
storage should be located close to the work area to 
reduce handling time and costs. Provide drainage 
in the storage area. Materials stored without cover 
should drain quickly, provide a paved area for han- 
dling with a bucket loader or fork lift. A clear span 
storage building allows freedom of movement for 
tractors and trucks and allows arrangement of 
equipment to be easily changed. For ease in 
maneuvering tractors and trucks, a minimum width 
of 7.0 m is required. 

Once the layout within the building has been estab- 
lished, service and personnel doors can be located. 
Service doors should be a minimum of 0.5 m wider 
than the largest piece of equipment and the ceilings 
a minimum of 3.5 m or higher. Headroom should 
be a minimum of 3.5 m with higher ceilings, if 
bucket loaders are to be used. For convenience, 
iocaie a personnel door next to an overhead door. 

Concrete floors inside the building and paved areas 
outside make movement of vehicles easy in all types 
of weather. Elevate building floors at least 150 mm 
above outside grade, and slope the ground surface 
away from the walls or the doorways. Provide 
drainage for roof gutters and snow melt. 

5.5 Interior Layout 

The choice between production on the floor or on 
the benches depends on the crop and the produc- 
tion schedule. Benches are usually provided for pot 
plant production. Bedding plants are generally 
grown on the floor. Beds, either ground or raised 
are needed for cut flowers. Benches may be fabri- 
cated of wood, metal, or plastic with a either solid 
or mesh bottom. Benches should be placed at a 



convenient height above the floor, usually 500 to 
1000 mm. 

Benches improve labour efficiency, permit more 
effective'display and inspection, and assist air cir- 
culation. Bench arrangement depends on dimen- 
sions of the greenhouse, walkways, and doors and 
on materials handling and heating system type and 
location.TotaI aisle space should be less that 25 
percent of the total area. Longitudinal arrange- 
ments with benches extending the length of the 
house permits continuous runs of water lines, heat 
pipes, and plant support systems. Width of bench 
can be up to 0.9 m for tending from one side and 
2 m when aisles are on both sides. Minimum aisle 
width should be 500 mm . 

A peninsular arrangement with one main center 
aisle extending the length of the greenhouse and 
perpendicular side aisles usually results in more 
growing space. A main aisle width of 1.0 to 1.5 m 
and side aisles of about 500 mm is recommended. 

Movable benches allow the use of all the area ex- 
cept one or two work aisles. Bench tops are sup- 
ported on rollers and allowed to move sideways 500 
mm to provide a work aisle. Connections for water, 
heat, and electrical systems that are attached to the 
bench must be made flexible. 

6 CONSTRUCTION 

6.1 Foundations 

Pier foundation may be adequate for primary 
greenhouse frame, consisting of hoops spaced one 
meter or more. A curtain wall can be used to close 
the area between the piers. If primary frame mem- 
bers are spaced less than 1.2 m, a continuous 
masonry or poured concrete wall should be used. 

The footing should be set below frost level or to a 
minimum depth of 600 mm below the ground sur- 
face whichever is greater. Consult SP 7 building 
code for local requirements. It shouid rest on level, 
undisturbed soil, or adequately compacted fill. In- 
dividual pier footings should be sized to fit the load 
and soil conditions.The pier may be of reinforced 
concrete, galvanized steel, treated wood, or con- 
crete masonry. The wall between galvanized piers 
can be poured or precast concrete, masonry, fibre 
reinforced cement panels, aluminium clad insulat- 
ing board, or any moisture and decay resistant 
material. A continuous foundation wall should be 
set on a poured concrete footing. The wall can be 
concrete or masonry. A 150 mm waii is usually 
sufficient for building spans up to 7.5 m. Use a 200 
mm wall for wider building spans. Typical founda- 
tion construction are shown in Fig, 1 Pier footing 
dimensions given in Table 3. 



IS 14462 : 1997 



FRAME ANCHOR 



50mm FOIL FACED 
FOAM INSULATION 



TWO COATS 
HOT BITUMINOUS 
MATERIAL OR 
PORTLAND CEMENT 
PLASTER 



GRAVEL BACK 
FILL 



DRAIN TILE 
AROUND FOOTING 



CONCRETE MASONRY WALL ON POURED CONCRETE FOOTING 



GREENHOUSE FRAME 
FRAME ANCHOR 



GREENHOUSE FRAME 

BOLT SILL TO CONCRETE 
BLOCK FOUNDATION USE 

PT LUMBER TOP OF 
BLOCK WALL 300mm 
ABOVE GRADE 




TRANSOM- 
SILL 



WALL SILL 



•Vi 






TUBING OR 
PIPE FRAME 



-50mm FOIL FACED 
FOAM INSULATION 




PRESSURE! 
TREATED 
SKIRT 
BOARD 



-PIPE FRAME 

, Jv^-COUPLING 

1 "'^50 mm FOIL FACED 
y INSULATION 

GRADE 

y tT POST DRIVEN TO 
N> A MINIMUM 



post j ;[• 




FINISH GRADE 



CONCRETE PIER 



TUBING OR PIPE FOUNDATION 



7fi0 mm 



-CONCRETE 
CONCRETE PIER FOUNDATION 



FOOTING 



NOTE- A DRIVEN POST PROVIDES LIMITED 
WITHDRAWAL RESISTANCE TO UPLIFT 

TEMPORARY GREENHOUSE FOUNDATION 



Fig. 1 Typical Foundation for Green Houses 



Table 3 Pier Footing Diameters for Average 
Soil for Design Gravity Loads* 
(Check for Uplift due to Wind) 



Greenhouse 
Span 

(m) 






Pier 


Spacing (m) 




'l.2 


1.8 


2.4 
Pier dia 


3.0 
(mm) 


3.7 


4.6 


6.1 


150 


230 


300 


300 


300 


380 


7.3 


230 


300 


300 


300 


380 


380 


8.5 


230 


300 


300 


380 


380 


460 


9.5 


230 


300 


300 


380 


380 


460 


11.0 


230 


300 


380 


380 


460 


• • 


12.2 


300 


300 


380 


380 


460 


♦ ♦ 


14.0 


300 


380 


380 


460 


460 


•• 


18.3 


300 


460 


460 


460 


• • 


♦ * 


• 122 050 N/m 2 average bearing capacity. 






** Requires sj 


fecial design. 











6.2 Floors 

Gravel, pea stone, and trap rock make a good floor 
material. A thickness of 150 to 200 mm is needed 
for drainage and weed control. Where a hard, 



smooth surface is desired a 50 to 75 mm thickness 
of porous concrete may be used. This is made from 
uniform sized aggregate and a cement water paste. 
Aisles and heavy traffic areas should be concrete . 
/Thickness depends on the traffic load but usually 75 
to 100 mm is sufficient Concrete walks should have 
a broom finish for safety. Floors should slope to 
assure surface drainage and be sufficiently even to 
prevent puddling. 

6,3 Frame 

Wood, steel, aluminium, and reinforced concrete 
may be used to build frames for greenhouses. Some 
frames use combinations of the materials. Wood 
may be painted or otherwise preserved for protec- 
tion against decay and also to improve light condi- 
tions within the buildings. Preservatives shall be 
used to protect any wood in contact with soil against 
decay but they must be free of chemicals that are 
toxic to plants or humans. Heartwood has natural 
decay resistance. 

Woodframes include post beam and rafter systems, 
postsand trusses, glued laminated arches and rigid 



IS 14462 : 1997 



frames. Steel and aluminium are used for posts, 
beams, girts, purlins, trusses, and arches. Both 
materials shall be protected from direct contact 
with ground to prevent corrosion. White paint on 
either material will improve the light reflection in 
a greenhouse structure. The rate of heat loss 
through steel or aluminium is much higher than 
through wood, so metal frames may need special 
insulation. To avoid such heat loss through steel or 
aluminium, composite materials are sometimes 
used, such as a trussed beam of wood and steel or a 
member made of fibreglass reinforced plastic may 
be used. 

6.4 Structural Forms 

6.4.1 Gable Type 

The greenhouse structures with a straight sidewall 
and a gable roof is the most common shape and has 
advantages in framing and space utilization. Post 
and beam, post and truss, and arches are used to 
form the gable structure. 

6.4.2 Quonset Type 

In the quonset type shape, the part of the circle 
arch is easily formed from rolled sections of steel or 
aluminium or from glue laminated wood. It makes 
better structural use of frame material than a gable 
building, but in some applications there is unused 
space because of the curvature of the sidewalls. 

6.4.3 Gothic Type 

The Gothic frame may be formed from metal sec- 
tions or glue laminated wood. With proper design 
it may provide adequate sidewall height without 
loss of strength. Any of the forms may be used to 
build a single span greenhouse or a large range of 
gutter-connected units. 

6.4.4 Gutter-Connected 

The ridge and furrow or gutter-connected green- 
house structure consists of several single span 
houses connected together. The advantages include 
greater uninterrupted interior growing space and 
lower heating costs per unit area covered. Heat 
should be provided immediately below the gutter 
to prevent any snow accumulation. The structural 
forms commonly used are given in Fig. 2. 

There must be adequate fasteners at sill plate and 
ridge to resist loads from any direction. A snow load 
acts downward but a wind load may act in any 
direction. Sills should be bolted to the foundation 
and metal connectors should be used to secure the 
wall frame to the sill. Metal connectors should be 
used at the plate and ridge also. 



6.5 Covering Materials and Glazings 

Light is responsible for plant growth, therefore, 
light transmittance of glazing materials should be 
high. In most of the materials the transmitted light 
is direct, but in some materials such as fibreglass 
reinforced plastics a high percentage is diffused. 
Structural support reduce installed glazing 
transmission values. Glazing materials do not 
transmit all wavelengths equally and this can affect 
plant growth and flowering. Thermal radiation 
transmittance is important in evaluating heat loss 
from a greenhouse during cold weather. 

6.5.1 Material Selection and Glazing 

The various glazing materials to cover the green- 
house structures are recommended to be used as 
mentioned below. 

6.5.1.1 Glass 

This traditional long life material has been im- 
proved by increasing pane size and strength. Con- 
struction costs have been reduced through use of 
extruded glazing bars, bar caps and strip caulking. 
Double and triple glazing may be used to reduce 
heat loss. 

6*5*1.2 Acrylic structural sheet 

Extruded double skinned sheets contain an internal 
rib and two surfaces providing some additional 
thermal insulation. Sheet sizes of 1.2 m x 12 m 
and several thicknesses may be used. Installation is 
made by using extruded attachment components. 

6.5.1.3 Polycarbonate structured sheet 

It is similar in configuration and installation to the 
acrylic material. Sheets as wide as 2.4 m may be 
used. To resist yellowing and light transmission, 
coated or treated material is recommended. The 
coated side shall face to the outside. 

6.5.1.4 Fibreglass reinforced plastic 

Large corrugated sheets and different thicknesses 
are available. Surface erosion may require react- 
ing every 5 to 6 year to retain high light transmit- 
tance. 

6.5.1.5 Polyethylene film 

Low density polyethylene film is the most common 
covering material because of low cost and large 
sheet size. Agricultural grades are good for cover- 
ing for less than six months period. Ultraviolet 
inhibited, stronger plastic may also be used, as it has 
2 to 3 year life. 1R absorbing films reduce heal loss. 
Application generally consists of a double layer 
with air inflation between the layers from a small 



IS 14462 : 1997 



ARCH ROOF 



GABLE ROOF 
GUTTER CONNECTED GREENHOUSE 




TRUSSEO ROOF 



GABLE FRAME 





hoop gothic 

single span greenhouses 

Fig. 2 Some Typical Greenhouse Frames 



squirrel cage blower. Air pressure should be main- 
tained at 50 to 75 Pa. The polyethylene film shall 
conform to IS 2508. 

6.5.1.6 Polyvinyl fluoride film 

This is a long-life film with high light transmission 
and strength. This film may be placed over 
aluminium extruded or steel frames. 

6.6 Safety 

6.6.1 Fire Safety 

Fire safety is important in selection and use of 
glazing materials. Flammability of plastic materials 
when exposed to an igniting source shall be as 
prescribed in IS 11731 (Part 1 and 2 ). 

6.6.2 Mechanical Safety 

There shall not be any projections of sharp points 
or edges which may cause cuts/lacerations. Ade- 
quate guarding against entrapment of limbs in 



moving and stationary equipment shall be 
provided. 

6.6.3 Electrical Safety 

There shall be no breakdown of insulation and 
current leakage in from electrical fittings inside the 
greenhouse. Greenhouse frame shall be protected 
from contact with parts normally at hazardous 
voltage. 

6.6.4 Chemical Safety 

Inside the greenhouse there shall be full protection 
against potential injury or damage to health result- 
ing from inhalation, ingestation, or contact with 
harmful chemical agents. 

7 UTILITIES 

7.1 Electricity 

An adequate electrical supply and distribution sys- 
tem should be provided to serve the environment 
control and mechanization needs of the green- 



IS 14462 : 1997 



house. To determine the size of the services, the size 
and the number of motors and other electrical com- 
ponents should be known. Provisions should be 
made for an alarm system to indicate when a power 
failure has occurred or an environment control 
system has failed. An auxiliary generating system 
should be available and installed with the proper 
transfer switch to prevent feedback of power to the 
utility lines. Locate the electrical system inside or 
adjacent to the headhouse. 

Utility lines should be buried to improve ap- 
pearance, avoid damage, and reduce hazards. 
Electric, phone, and fuel lines should be buried at 
least 500 mm deep to avoid damage from surface 
traffic. Location of the utility lines should be 
recorded on a map for future reference. For 
distribution system within the greenhouse 
structure, the National Electrical Code may be 
taken in account. 

7.2 Climate Control System in Greenhouse 
Structures 

Cooling of the greenhouse is necessary wherever 
the outside temperature goes beyond 30°C and also 
when temperate crops are to be grown. Depending 
upon the glazing material and the ventilation, once 
the greenhouse structures are covered the inside 
temperature may be at least 5 to 10°C higher than 
the outside temperature, if it is not cooled. In order 
to create better growing conditions, it is necessary 
to cool the greenhouse structures. 

Heating required in places where the winter 
temperature is very low. Similarly, in places where 
the climate is extreme cold and warm, both cooling 
and heating are required at higher elevations, 
where temperatures do not normally go above 
30°C, cooling may not be necessary, only providing 
proper ventilation will serve the purpose. However, 
these places may require heating during winter for 
successful crop production. Heating, ventilating 



and the cooling of the greenhouse structures shall 
be done as prescribed in IS 14485. 

7.3 Watering 

7.3.1 The amount of water needed depends on the 
water requirement of the cultivation medium, area 
to be irrigated, crop grown, weather conditions, and 
whether the heating and/or ventilating system is 
operating. The maximum requirement during the 
summer is about 2 000 litre per 100 m 2 per watering 
(see Table 4). 

Table 4 Estimated Maximum Daily Water 
Requirements 
Crop 

Bench crops 
Bedding plants 
Pot plants 
Chrysanthenum 
Roses, tomatoes 



Water Required 

litres/m 2 

16.0 
20.0 
20.0 
41.0 
29.0 



7.3.2 The water system for the greenhouse should 
have the capacity to supply the total daily needs in 
a 6 hour application period. This allows the plants 
to be watered during the morning and early after- 
noon and with time for the foliage to dry before 
sunset. 

7.3.3 Ground water is usually the most reliable 
source of water. It is available from drilled wells, 
dug wells, etc. Surface water ponds, lakes and 
streams may also be used, but precautions shall be 
taken to insure against contamination injurious to 
the plants. For greenhouse crops p\\ of irrigation 
water shall be between 6.5 to 7.5. Irrigation water 
may contain impurities that adversely affect the 
growth of the plants. Therefore, quality of the water 
shall be ensured before irrigation. Micro irrigation 
system is the most suitable method for irrigation to 
the greenhouse groups.The quality of irrigation 
water shall conform to IS 1 1624. 



IS 14462 : 1997 



ANNEX A 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Surface Covered Cultivation Structures Sectional Committee, FAD 43 



Chairman 
Dr A. Alam 

Members 
Director 
Director 
Director 
Director (In Charge) 

[Manager (Technical)] 
Director 
Head (Depttof Soil and Water Engg) 

Dr P. P. Singh (Alternate ) 
DrB. P. Kachru 
Shrimati Khosy Shoba 
Managing Director 
Marketing Manager (Plasticulture) 
Dr G. N. Mir (Chief Scientist 

Water Management) 
Dr D. Mukherjee 
Shri Prashant Mishra 

SHRI O. P. Garg (Alternate ) 
Project Director 
DrJ, S,Panwar 

Dr Pitam Chandra (Alternate ) 
Dr M. M. Sawant 
Dr K. N. Shukla 

Dr K. K. Singh (Alternate ) 
Dr Jai Singh 

DR O. D. WANJAR1 (Alternate ) 
Dr N. S. L. Srivastava 

Dr M. Shyam (Alternate ) 
Shri Deep akSood 
Shri G. K. VaooDARiA 

Shri Deepak Sehgal (Alternate ) 
Dr I. S. Yadav 
Shri R. N. Sharma, 
Director (Food and Agri) 



Representing 
Indira Gandhi Agricultural University, Raipur 

Indian Council of Forestry Research, Dehra Dun 
Appropriate Eco-Technology Development Group, Garwal 
Defence Agriculture Research laboratories, Almora 
Jain Irrigation System Ltd, Jalgaon 

Vivekanand Parvatiya Krishi Anusandhanshala, Almora 
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Ministry of Petroleum Chemical and Fertilizers, New Delhi 

Indo American Hybrid Seeds, Bangalore 

Indian Petrochemical Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

S. fC University of Agril Science and Technology, Srinagar 

CSIR Research Complex, Palampur 

National Committee on Use of Plastic, New Delhi 

National Mushroom Research Centre, Solan 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 

NTB Bowsmith Irrigation Ltd, Pune 

G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar 

Central Institute of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Ludhiana 

Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 

Deepak Sood and Associate, New Delhi 

National Organic Chemical Industries Limited, Thane 

Indian Institute of I Iorticultural Research, Bangalore 
Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 

Member Secretary 



Shri Kaushal Kumar 
Joint Director (Food & Agri) 



