**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 15870 (2009) : Road Vehicles - Use of Compressed Natural 
Gas (CNG) Fuel System In Internal Combustion Engine 
Vehicles - Code of Practice [TED 26: Automotive vehicles on 
NCES] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 15870:2008 

PRfnr — frfcT ^^tflcrr 

Indian Standard 

ROAD VEHICLES — USE OF COMPRESSED NATURAL 

GAS (CNG) FUEL SYSTEM IN INTERNAL COMBUSTION 

ENGINE VEHICLES — CODE OF PRACTICE 



ICS 43.060.040 



© BIS 2009 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



May 2009 Price Group 12 



Automotive Vehicles Running on Non-conventional Energy Sources Sectional Committee, TED 26 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Vehicles Running on Non-conventional Energy Sources Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 

In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following standards, issued 
by Automotive Research Association of India: 

AIS-024 (Amd 4 to version 3) — Safety and procedural requirements for type approval of CNG operated 

vehicles 
AIS-028 (Version 3) — Code of practice for use of CNG fuel in internal combustion engine vehicles 

Till the time there is an Indian Standard on Analysis of Automotive Rubbers by Fourier Transform Infra-red 
Spectrometry (FTIR) and Thermogravimetry (TGA) Techniques, method prescribed in AIS-066 may be followed 
for identification of EPDM rubber (,see Note under Table 2). 

Following documents may be referred for latest update on statutory requirements related to use of CNG fuel 
system in Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles: 

Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 (CMVR) (As amended from time-to-time) 

Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (MVA) (As amended from time-to-time) 

Gas Cylinder Rules, 2(X)4 (As amended from time-to-time) 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1 960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 15870 : 2009 

Indian Standard 

ROAD VEHICLES — USE OF COMPRESSED NATURAL 

GAS (CNG) FUEL SYSTEM IN INTERNAL COMBUSTION 

ENGINE VEHICLES — CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers general safety and installation 
requirements and methods of test for checking the 
functionality of CNG onboard fuel system intended 
for use on motor vehicles defined in IS 14272 (Part 1 ), 
two wheelers, construction equipment vehicles (CEV). 
It also provides general layout guidelines for CNG 
operated vehicles and guidelines for instructions. 

1.1.1 This standard is applicable to vehicles using 
compressed natural gas (mono-fuel, bi-fuel 
applications). It is not applicable to the following: 



a) 



b) 
c) 
d) 



Liquefied natural gas (LNG) fuel system 

components located upstream of, and 

including, the vaporizer; 

Fuel containers; 

Stationary gas engines; and 

CNG fuel systems for the propulsion of 

marine craft. 



NOTE — It is not intended to cover the areas where major 
structural modifications are to be carried out to the vehicle 
(major structural modifications are those not defined in 4.13). 
Prior to commencement of such work, guidance should be 
sought from the vehicle manufacturer. 

1.2 This Standard is based upon a service pressure for 
compressed natural gas as a fuel at 20 MPa settled at 
15°C. Other service pressures could be accommodated 
by adjusting the pressure by the appropriate factor 
(ratio). For example, a 25 MPa service pressure system 
will require pressures to be multiplied by 1.25. All 
references to pressure are to be considered gauge 
pressures unless otherwise specified. 

NOTE — The fitment of aCNG (iiel system shall be prohibited 
in any vehicle with a passenger compartment heating system, 
which draws air from the engine coropattnient unless the heating 
system is nude inoperable and gas-tight to the passenger 
compartment. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 



encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

1 364 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts 

of product grades A and B: 
(Part 1) : 2002 Hexagon head bolts (Size range 

Ml .6 to M 64) (fourth revision) 
(Part 3) : 2002 Hexagon nuts, style 1 (Size range 
M 1 .6 to M 64) {fourth revision) 

2171 : 1999 Specification for portable fire 

extinguishers, dry powder (cartridge 
type) (fourth revision) 

3224 : 2002 Valve fittings for compressed gas 

cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification (third revision) 

14272 (Part 1) : Automotive vehicles — Types — 
1995 Terminology: Part 1 Three and four 

wheelers 

15710:2006 Road Vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — General 
requirements and definitions 

157 12 : 2006 Road vehicles — ComfH-essed natural 
gas (CNG) fuel system components 
— Automatic valve (solenoid valve) 

15713:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Pressure regulator 

15714:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Gas/Air mtxet 

15715 : 2008 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Conduit (ventilation 
hose) (IS under preparation) 

15716:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — CNG high pressure 
fuel line (rigid) with end connections 
[having pressure exceeding 2.15 
MPa (21 J bar)] 



I 



IS 15870 : 2009 



IS No. Title 

15717:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Petrol valve 
(automatic/manual ) 
15718:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — CNG high pressure 
fuel line (flexible hose) with end 
connections (having service pressure 
exceeding 2.15 MPa) 
15719:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Electrical wiring kit 
15720:2008 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Compartments/Sub- 
compartments 
15721:2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) — Fire retardant 
material for seat, upholstery, roof and 
side lining 
15722 : 2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — CNG low pressure 
flexible fuel line with end 
connections [CNG fuel line having 
pressure not exceeding 2.15 MPa 
(21 J bar)] 
15723 : 2006 Road vehicles — Compressed 
natural gas (CNG) fuel system 
components — Current limiting 
devices 

3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 15710 and the following shall apply 

3.1 Notified Body — Government appointed body 
mandated to approve or disapprove (for example: 
laboratories, universities and companies). 

3.2 Anthorizcd Person — A person, normally an 
automotive workshop person, authorised by the vehicle 
manufacturer or the conversion kit manufacturer/kit 
supplier specially trained for installation, maintenance 
and periodic inspection of motor vehicle converted for 
bi-fuel or dedicated operation of internal combustion 
engined vehicles. 

3J Heavy Motor Vehkk — A vehicle for either goods 
or passenger services as defined under the Central 
Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR) as applicable. 

3.4 OE Fitment — A vehicle which is manufactured 
for CNG operation by the vehicle manufacturer prior 
to their first registration. 



4 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 General Design Requirements 

4.1.1 The CNG on-board fuel system components as 
shown in Fig. I and Fig. 2 shall comply with this 
standard and the relevant component standard. 
Equipment and systems approved by the relevant 
Statutory Authority/Test Agency shall be used. 

4.1.2 The high-pressure system as defined in 1.2 shall 
be designed on the basis of the service pressure. 

4.1.3 For bi-fuel vehicles, provision shall be made to 
avoid accelerated deterioration of the non-CNG fuel 
system as a result of sustained operation on natural 
gas. Such measures shall be as recommended by the 
original vehicle manufacturer (for example, fiiel hoses). 

4.1.4 All fuel system components shall fulfil the 
following conditions: 

a) They shall withstand the environmental 
temperatures and other environmental 
conditions safely during their operational life. 

b) They shall be located with full guard for 
anticipated damage while the vehicle is being 
used safely. Such damage may be caused by 
the vehicle itself, by extraneous factors such 
as heat, road debris, automotive chemical 
splash (brake liquid, oil, petrol, cooling liquid, 
etc) or by rust. 

c) They shall be fitted so that they are not the 
outermost, highest or lowest parts of the 
vehicles; otherwise they shall be protected. 

d) They shall be fitted so as not to affect ground 
clearance, approach angle, ramp (break-over) 
angle and departure angle as defined by the 
vehicle manufacturer. 

e) They shall be located so that they will not 
suffer corrosion damage by accumulation of 
water or cargo chemicals. 

4.1.5 Gas cylinder valve shall be located with suitable 
protection in an accessible and safe place. 

4.1.6 The CNG on-board fuel system shall include: 

a) An automatic shut-off valve, and 

b) A manual or manual override valve located 
on each gas cylinder. 

4.1.7 The CNG on-board fuel system may include a 
device (excess flow valve) inside the gas cylinder or a 
functionally equivalent system to control gas leakage 
in the event of a rupture in the fuel supply system. 

4.U The automatic shut off valve shall be in closed 
position when engine is not running and only be open 
when: 



IS 15870 : 2009 



t\ 




1 . Gas/air mixer (or gas injector system) 

2. Engine 

3. Pressure regulator 

4. Automatic shut-off valve 



c 




y 



D 



5. PRV (Safety device to prevent over pressure) 

6. Gas cylinder + cylinder veUve ••■ PRD 

7. Refilling receptacle 



Fic.l Single Cyunder System 




1 . Gas/air mixer (or gas Injection system) 

2. En^ne 

3. Pressure regulator 

4. Airtomatic stujt-off valve 






5. PfW (Safety device to prevent over pressure) 

6. Manual shut-off valve 

7. Gas cylinder + cylftider valve ■•■ PRO 

8. RefWing receptacle 



Fic. 2 MuLTiPtE Cyunder System 



IS 15870 : 2009 



a) CNG operation has been selected, either 
manually or automatically, and 

b) The engine is cranking or running. 

4.2 Cylinder 

4.2.1 Design Approval 

Cylinders shall be approved/endorsed by the 
Department of Explosives as per Gas Cylinder Rules, 
2004 (as amended from time-to-time). 

4.2.2 The weight of the CNG cylinder(s) will affect 
the unladen weight of the vehicle and therefore 
consideration of the effect on the legal and 
manufacturer's rating and axle loadings should be 
considered. 

4.2J In no circumstances shall the vehicle's critical 
load distribution affecting safety considerations be 
compromised. 

4.2.4 Cylinders shall be re-tested as per Gas Cylinder 
Rules, 2004 (as amended from time-to-time). 

4.3 Fittings on Cylinders and Filling Connection 

4.3.1 Cylinder Valve 

Each cylinder shall have a manual cylinder shut off 
valve mounted directly on it capable of shutting off all 
gas flow from that cylinder. Cylinders and shut-off 
valve assemblies shall be approved/endorsed by the 
Department of Explosives, as per IS 3224 and Gas 
Cylinder Rules, 2004 (as amended from time-to-time). 

4.3.2 Filling Connection 

The filling connection shall be of the NZS/NGV-1 or 
any other type as specified by the Government of India 
from time-to-time. 

The basic dimensions for NZS type are as given in 
Fig. 3 and recommended sizes of NGV- 1 type of filling 
connection are SAE 9/16" and 7/8". However, the 
vehicle manufacturer/kit installer may seek the 
guidance from The Gas Authority of India Ltd/Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas about the use of specific 
type of NGV- 1 nozzle. 

4.33 The NZS type filling connection shall be provided 
with a captive dust plug and NGV-1 type filling 
connection shall be provided with dust protection cap. 

4.3.4 Position of Filling Connection 

The filling connection shall be located in suitably 
protected and ventilated location, usually the engine 
compartment, and shall comply with the following: 

a) The filling connection is made and filling is 
supervised from outside the vehicle. The 
filling connection may be made only if the 



method of access to it from outside does not 
result in the opening of a vapour path to the 
interior of the vehicle, thereby negating the 
effectiveness of a compartment or sub- 
compartment. 

b) The filling connection is protected by being 
located in a recess below the surface of a body 
panel, or by being located so that equivalent 
protection is provided by the construction of 
the vehicle. 

c) The filling connection shall be attached to 
motor vehicle in such a manner as to resist, 
without permanent deformation of the 
mounting attachment, a proof load of 50 kgf 
applied in the forward and reverse directions 
of travel of the vehicle. 

The proof load shall be applied by full 
engagement of the filling connection and shall 
be representative of attempted movement of 
the vehicle while refueling. 

d) The filling operation can be carried out 
without requiring the operator to lie or crawl 
under the vehicle or be otherwise subjected 
to inconvenience, discomfort or hazard. 

e) Minimum receptacle clearance (for NGV- 1): 
The minimum receptacle clearance is shown 
in Fig. 4. 

Recommended position and orientation of 
filling receptacle for 3- wheeler (ref schematic 
for'r, 'y'and'Z'inFig.4) 

1) 'X' dimension shall be 70 ± 10 mm, 
which is measured in horizontal plane 
from the internal edge of window 
provided for filling beneath the passenger 
seat 

2) 'y dimension shall be 50 ± 10 mm, 
which is measured in vertical plane from 
the internal edge of window provided for 
filling beneath the passenger seat. 

3) 'Z" dimension shall be 70 ± 1 mm, which 
is measured in horizontal plane from the 
internal edge of window provided for 
filling beneath the passenger seat. 

4) Orientation angle with respect to 
horizontal plane shall be 25° to 30° (as 
shown in the following schematic). 

5) Free space around the receptacle shall be 
minimum 40 mm radius. 

4.3.5 Refuelling Interlock Device 

Filling connections in motor vehicles shall be fitted 
with a system that prevents the engine starting when 
the dust plug or dust protection cap is removed. This 
system shall isolate the starting device of the vehicle. 




IS 15870 : 2009 



*11.11 

"10.00 

CLEARANCE TO FIT OVER 

PROBE TO SUIT 'O' RING 

SPECIFICATIONS 



FILLING CONNECTION 



DETAIL 'A' GROOVE 
FOR 'O' RINGS 



CHAMFER TO NOT GREATER 
THAN 90* INCLUDED ANGLE 



FEMALE 
FITTING ON VEHICLE 



NOTE : REFUELUNG PROBE IS 10mm 
SHORTER THAN THIS 




10.74 



4>11 'O' RING SEAL 



Fkj. 3 Filling Connection and Dust 



43£ Non-return Valve 

There shall be a non-return valve fitted on the refueling 
line to prevent the return flow of gas from the cylinder 
to the filling connection. The non-return valve shall 
be located as close to the filling connection as it is 
practicable. 

4 J.7 Excess Flow Valve 

A device may be fitted in the fuel line preferably at the 
inlet or outlet of the cylinder valve which prevents the 



total contents of the cylinder from discharging to 
atmosphere in the event of rupture to any part of the 
fiiel line or components. 

4^ Localioii, VcBtaatioa and Moimting of CyiiMkn 

4.4.1 Cylinders. Fittings and Pipe Work 

4.4.1.1 Cylinder shall be mounted in a protected 
location inside the perimeter of the vehicle. Cylinders 
shall not be located so that the vehicle driving 
characteristics are adversely affected. 



IS 15870 : 2009 



CNGCVUND6R 
WITH VALVE 




REFUEUING WINDOW 



CNG CYLINDER 



70 ±10 



FREE SPACE AROUND RECEPTACLE 
(■R* MINIMUM 40 mm) 




ELEVATION 



70 ±10 



VIEW-"M' 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 4 Position of Filling Connections 



4.4.1.2 For Externally Mounted Cylinders 

In no case shall cylinder valves be positioned less than 
200 mm from the extremities of the vehicle unless they 
are protected to minimize the possibility of damage 
due to collision, overturning or other accident. 

Where the operation of the vehicle is such, thai the 
cylinder will be subjected to impact damage from loose 
metal or other objects being thrown up from the road, 
effective shielding against these shall be provided. 

4.4.1.3 The cylinder shall be situated and vented so 
that any gas escaping due to leakage from the cylinder 
valve shall not enter the vehicle passenger compartment 
or driver space. 



4.4.1.4 The clearance between the cylinder(s) and the 
exhaust shall not be less than 75 mm. 

4.4.1.5 For Heavy Motor Vehicles Only 

In the case of heavy motor vehicles, the number of 
cylinders likely to be required will be of sufficient 
weight to affect the legal maximum vehicle weight 
constraints. The effects of the chosen position of the 
cylinders on the following criteria must be assessed, 
and if necessary, a reduction in the allowable payload 
of the vehicle under study be considered: 

a) The original manufacturer's maximum design 
axle loadings. 

b) Hie maximum allowable axle loadings. 



IS 15870 : 2009 



c) The maximum gross vehicle weight and/or 
gross combination weight allowed by the 
original manufacturer. 

A number of alternative cylinder mounting positions 
may have to be considered in order to minimize the 
effects mentioned above. The effects of removing or 
replacing existing diesel fuel tanks on weight 
distribution of the vehicle should also be taken into 
account in the above calculations. 

NOTE — Vulnerability of cylinders and flttings to damage 
during loading and unloading of the vehicle or load shift or 
spillage shall be taken into account. 

4.4.2 Fitting of Cylinders shall be such that: 

a) Cylinder shall not be fitted in any position 
behind the driver seat (seat adjusted to rear 
most position), which will hinder the driver 
seat adjustment unless specifically approved 
by the testing agency. 

b) Cylinder shall not be fitted in a position 
beneath the vehicle that decreases the 
effective ground clearance (see Fig. 5 for 4- 
wheeler below 3.5 tonne GVW). 

c) In case of heavy vehicles (bus having more 
than 3.5 tonnes GVW), for fitment of 
cylinders on roof, the strength of roof shall 
be validated by testing agency based on 
design calculation provided by vehicle 
manufacturer/kit manufacturer/kit supplier. 



4.4.3 Vehicle Mounted Cylinders 

4.4.3.1 A cylinder installed in a vehicle shall be 
permanently mounted and filled in that position. 

4.4.3.2 Cylinder location ground clearance 

Cylinders shall be located in accordance with the 
following requirements; 

a) The vehicle mass for determining ground 
clearance shall be the laden mass, including 
permanent non-standard attachments to the 
vehicle with all fuel, water and oil containers 
full. 

b) Cylinders installed between and behind axles 
shall not be lower than the lowest of the 
following points and surfaces forward of the 
cylinder (see Fig. 5 for 4-wheeler below 3.5 
tonnes and Fig. 6 for 4-wheeler and above 
exceeding 3.5 tonnes GVW and Fig. 7 for 
trailers): 

1) The lowest structural component of the 
body. 

2) The lowest structural component of the 
frame or sub-frame, if any. 

3) The lowest point of the engine. 

4) The lowest point on the transmission 
(including the clutch housing or torque 



Front 




Road 



Centre ine point of 
front wheel road conta^ 



5a2ng^-s5e 



Centre Hne point of 
rear wheel road contact 



Une of lowest structural memtter of 
chassis body 



Fig. 5 Schematic Diagram Showino Ramp Angi^e and Ground Clearance for Mounting of Cyunoers oh 

4- Wheeled Vehicles 



1515870:2009 




LOWEST POINT OF CHASIS 
OR PERMANENT FITTING 
BODYWORK OR BUMPER 



Fig. 6 Typical Position of Original Fuel Storage Tank Ground Clearance 



converter housing as applicable) but 

excluding differential housings. 

The original fuel tank or tanks and/or 

brackets. 

Approach and departure clearances shall be 

below planes defined in Hg. 6 (for 4- wheeler 

and above exceeding 3 J tonne GVW). 

NOTE — Suspension spring U bolts are not 

clasnfied as stnictural components. 

7) In any case the lowest point of the 



5) 



6) 



c) 



cylinders shall not be lower than a 
horizontal line taken at the lowest point 
of the front and rear wheel rims (line AB 
in Fig. 6) (for 4-wheeler and above 
exceeding 3.5 tonnes GVW). 

Ramp angle (for 4-wheeler below 3.5 tonne 

GVW) 

The cylinder(s) shall not be lower than a point 

defined by a ramp angle of 17° (see Table 1 

for calculation). 



Table 1 Zones of Clearance 

[Clause 4A.3.HC)] 



St No. 


WbetlBMC 


Clearance Height at 17* Ramp 
Angle (Point /lor Fig. 5) 


SI No. 


Wheel Base 


Oearance Height at 17* Ramp 
Angle (Point /4 of Fig. 5) 




mm 


nun 




fliun 


mm 


(I) 


(2) 


(3) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


1800 


134 


xviii) 


3 500 


261 


ii) 


1900 


142 


xix) 


3600 


270 


iii) 


2000 


149 


XX) 


3 700 


276 


iv) 


2 100 


157 


xxi) 


3 800 


284 


V) 


2 200 


164 


xxii) 


3900 


291 


vi) 


2 300 


172 


xxiii) 


4000 


298 


vii) 


2400 


179 


xxiv) 


4100 


306 


viii) 


2 500 


187 


XXV) 


4 200 


313 


ix) 


2600 


194 


xxvi) 


4 300 


321 


X) 


2 700 


202 


xxvii) 


4 40O 


328 


xi) 


2800 


209 


xxviii) 


4 500 


336 


xii) 


2900 


216 


xxix) 


4600 


343 


xiii) 


3000 


224 


XXX) 


4 700 


351 


XJV) 


3100 


231 


x.xxi) 


4 800 


358 


XV) 


3 200 


239 


xxxit) 


4900 


366 


xvi) 


3 300 


246 


xxxiii) 


5000 


373 


xvii) 


3400 


254 









NOTE — If wheel base measiaemem ftlls between any of the figures shown *ove then the next higher figure is to apply. 



IS 15870 : 2009 



LOWEST CHASSIS BODY WORK OF TRAILER 



t:^ 




Fig. 7 Trailer Mounting of Cylinders Ground Clearance 



d) 



To calculate ramp angle the following 
measurements shall be taken: 

1) A plane through the centre line point of 
road contact of the front wheel (point B), 
sloping upward to contact the lowest 
structural point of the vehicle midway 
between the axles (point A) (line AB in 
Fig. 5); and 

2) A plane sloping from point (A) defined 
in (1) downward to the centre line point 
of road contact of the foremost rear axle 
wheel (point Q (line AC in Fig. 5). 

Departure angle (for 4-wheeler below 3.5 
tonne GVW) 

1) 



I 



The cylinders shall lie within an area C- 
D in Fig. 5. 

2) When calculating departure angle the 
measurement shall be taken along 
angular plane tangential to the centre line 
point of road contact of the rear most axle 
wheel sloping upward and outward to the 
extremity of the permanent body work 
or original equipment bumper bar 
whichever is the lower, 
e) All clearances shall be measured to the bottom 

of the cylinder or to the lowest fitting, support 

or attachment on the cylinder or cylinder 

housing, whichever is lowest. 

4.4.4 Internal Cylinders 

Where a cylinder is located within the body shell of a 
vehicle, either: 

a) the whole body of the cylinder together with 
its attached components and fittings shall be 
enclosed in a compartment; or 

b) the valves and pipe connections associated 
with or attached to the cylinder shall be 
enclosed in a localized sub-compartment, 
which is attached to the cylinder and vented 



to the atmosphere. Provision shall be made 
for ready access to the cylinder valve in all 
installation arrangements. 

NOTE — The luggage boot of a car is not considered (o be 
acceptable as a cylinder companment under (a) above, 
because of difficulties concerning effectiveness of sealing, 
the maintenance of ventilation openings, and the presence 
of electrical equipment in most boots. 

4.5 Cylinder(s) Installation 

For construction equipment vehicles, see 4.12. 

4.5.1 Attachment to Vehicle [see also 4.5.1(e)] 

Cylinders shall be securely attached to the vehicle to 
prevent slipping; rotating and jarring loose, in 
accordance with the following requirements {see 
Fig. 8 and Fig. 9): 

a) The method of attachment shall not cause 
undue stresses or wear in the cylinder shell; 

b) The mounting method shall not significantly 
weaken the vehicle structure, and 
reinforcement shall be added where necessary 
to ensure compliance with (c) below. An air 
gap of not less than 5 mm shall be provided 
between the cylinder and vehicle structure and 
in between cylinders. 

c) The force necessary to separate the cylinder 
from the vehicle shall not be less than 20 times 
the mass of the full cylinder in any direction. 
The strength of the anchorages may be 
established by static test (forces directed 
through the centre of mass of the cylinder). 

d) In the absence of testing or where calculations 
are impracticable, the following design 
requirements shall apply: 

1) There shall be at least 4 points of 
attachment to the vehicle structure. The 
spacing between these shall be sufFicient 
to ensure the stability of the cylinder. 
These bands shall not mask the 



IS 15870 : 2009 



identification markings of the cylinder. 

2) Where a cylinder is anchored to steel 
sheet metal the sheet metal shall be 
reinforced by a plate of not less than 
3600 mm^ and a thickness of not less than 
2.5 mm or appropriate thickness 
supported by the calculation or test 
report. It is preferred that a round washer 
be used but where a square plate is fitted 
the corners shall be rounded. Any such 
reinforcement plate/washer shall be 
contoured to the shape of the sheet metal 
or chassis rail. 

3) Where anchorage bolts pass through a 
hollow section, provision shall be made 
to prevent collapse of that section under 
load. 

4) Anchorage bolts or studs shall have a 
diameter not less than that shown in 
Table 2 and shall conform to strength 
grade 8.8 of IS 1364 (Part I) and nuts 
also to IS 1364 (Part 3). 

5) Where clamping bands are used, at least 
two steel bands per cylinder shall be 
provided, the dimensions, of which shall 
not be less than those in Table 2. 

6) Where the attachment is by means of 
clamping bands there shall be a positive 
means of resisting end loads on the 
cylinder by means of providing suitable 
end stoppers. 



7) Screwed fasteners or clamping devices shall 

either be inherently resistant to loosening 

or be locked or pinned after tightening. 

e) The chassis of heavy motor vehicles can be 

subjected to considerable torsional and 

bending deflections even under normal 

operating conditions. Mounting of cylinders 

to chassis rails must take these deflections into 

account and the cylinder mounting method 

chosen must not unduly prevent these 

deflections occurring. 

In addition, many chassis manufacturers specifically 
prohibit the welding of attachment points to their 
chassis members and in some cases also prohibit the 
drilling of additional mounting holes in the chassis 
members. For any proposed chassis modification due 
consideration must be given to the particular chassis 
manufacturer's restrictions with respect to welding, 
drilling and sealing of existing holes. Advice on these 
matters can be obtained from the chassis manufacturer. 

4.5.2 Cylinder Manifolding 

Where more than one cylinder is fitted to a vehicle it 
is preferable the cylinders are connected together in 
such a way that all can be simultaneously filled from 
any fill point on the vehicle. Each cylinder shall retain 
its required individual cylinder valve. 

4.5.3 More Than One Cylinder 

Specific design may be required for the mounting 
attachment. 




a> 



b) 




Fig. 8 Unacceptable ARRANGEME^frs of Cylinder Bands (Non-exhaustive Examples) 

10 



IS 15870 : 2009 





a) 



b) 




c) 

Fig. 9 Typical Preferred Arrangement of Cylinder Bands 



Tsble 2 Band and Bolt or Stud Dimensions 

lCUiuse4.5.Hd)(4)and(5)] 



SI No. 



(I) 



CyliaderSize 

(Water Capteity) 

Over, Up to and ladadiag 

VtK 

(2) 


Baad DiBcasioas — MiaiMaai 
NomiaalSizc 

inni 
(3) 


0-30 

30-100 

100-150 

Above 150 


30x2 

30x3 

50x6 

Specific design required 



Bolt or Stod DiaaMter for Strap or 

Flaacc Moaadap MiaiaiBBi 

NoaiiaalSbe 



(4) 



i) 0-30 30x2 10 

it) 30-100 30x3 to 

iii) 100-150 50x6 12 

IV) - . 

NOTE — To prevent possibility of external corrosion where damping bands are used, check that the material of the padding/lining 
provided for inner side of cylinder mounting bam^s) is made up of EPDM rubber (hardness Shore A 60, MM as approved by the test 
agency during type approval certificsaion. Similar adequate prolectioo to the cylinder diali also be provided wherever the cylinder 
rests against other metal objects such as the mounting frame. 



11 



IS 15870 : 2009 



4.5.4 Cylinder identification markings should be 
capable of being read when in the installed position. 

4.6 Shielding 

Cylinders shall be installed to ensure that valves and 
connections on cylinders shall be protected to minimize 
ihe possibility of damage due to accidental contact with 
stationary objects or from loose objects thrown up from 
the road. Valves shall be protected to minimize the 
possibility of damage due to collision, overturning, or 
other accident. Parts of the vehicle may be used to 
provide such protection to valves and fittings. 

4.7 Construction of Compartments and Sub- 
compartments 

4.7.1 A cylinder compartment or sub-compartment 
shall comply with the following requirements and shall 
meet component test requirements as per IS 15720. 

a) Construction shall be such that any gas which 
might leak from any fittings, component or 
piping, can not pass to any other enclosed 
c(mipartment, passenger space or luggage 
space of the vehicle. 

h) It shall be possible lo operate the cylinder 
service shut-off valve in the installed position. 
The valve may be arranged so that it can be 
operated from some jnternal area of the 
vehicle provided that the sealing of the 
compartment or sub-compartment shell is 
maintained by one of the following means, 
as appropriate: 

1 ) If a valve actuating device passes through 
the shell a gas-tight seal shall be 
provided. 

2) If Ihe actuating handle is wholly within 
the shell, access shall be a gas-tight 
captive hatch. The design shall not need 
tools to open the hatch. 

c) A compartment or sub-compartment shall not 
contain ignition souacs or electrical equipment 
or wiring unless it is intrinsically safe. 

4.7.2 Ventilation 

One or more vents to the outside of the vehicle shall 
be provided, the aggregate area of which shall not be 
less than 550 mm- for vehicles other than 2 and 3 
wheelers and 250 mm- for 2 and 3 wheelers. The vent 
line shall be so located as to exhaust any gas. which 
may accumulate in the compartment or sub- 
compartment to atmosphere and shall not exit less than 
75 mm from an exhaust pipe or other heat source [see 
also 4.7.3.1 (c)|. Holes for venting shall be positioned 
not less than 40 mm from the edge of a panel or a 
welded joint or direct load tearing point. 



4.7.3 Ducting 

4.7.3.1 All piping or hoses that pass through an 
enclosed area of the vehicle shall be within a conduit 
gas-light from the vehicle interior, vented unobstructed 
to outside atmosphere and protected from external 
damage and shall meet component test requirements 
as per IS 15715 and comply with the following 
requirements: 

a) The ducting shall be as short as practicable. 

b) The connections shall be mechanically 
clamped and shall not depend on adhesives 
or sealing compounds to retain them in place. 
Protection in the fonn of a gasket shall be 
provided to prevent damage to the ducting 
material by the clamping device. 

c) The material of the conduit used for ducting 
shall be sufficiently strong to resist 
mechanical damage, preserve venting 
integrity, protect the piping or hose within it, 
shall not support combustion. 

4.7.3.2 Pliable material 

A sub-compartment may be constructed of pliable 
material attached to the cylinder so that the cylinder 
valve, piping and connections are contained within the 
sub-compartment. The pliable material shall meet the 
requirements of this clause and shall be clearly marked 
accordingly. 

4.7.3.3 Where the sub-compartment is removed to 
initiate repairs or at the periodic inspection special 
attention shall be given to the inspection of the material 
to ensure that no degradation of material has taken 
place. Any sub-compartment showing signs of 
degradation shall be replaced. 

4.7.3.4 The cylinder valve actuating device position 
shall be clearly identified and shall have provided 
adequate material to allow closing of the valve without 
damage to the sub-compartment sealing. 

4.7.3.5 The pliable sub-compartment shall be shielded 
or installed in a protected location to prevent damage, 
from unsecured objects and abrasion. The material shall 
be sufficiently strong to resist mechanical damage, 
preserve venting integrity, shall not support combustion. 

4.8 CNG Fuel Line 

4.8.1 CNG Fuel Line — Pressure Exceeding 100 kPa 
(High Pressure Fuel Line) 

4.8.1.1 Rigid piping and connections for use with 
pressures exceeding 2. 1 5 MPa shall conform to IS 1 57 1 6, 

4.8.1.2 CNG fuel line and connections for use with 
pressures exceeding 100 kPa but less than 2.15 MPa 
shall conform to IS 15722. 



n 



IS 15870 : 2009 



4.8.1.3 Flexible hose exceeding 2.15 MPa 

4.8.1.3.1 Rexible hose shall meet the requirements of 
IS 15718. Each flexible hose assembly shall be 
permanently and clearly marked with the 
manufacturer's name and trade-mark, type, size and 
design working pressure. It shall be identifiable as 
being suitable for CNG use either by marking it with 
'CNG' or with a specification mark. 

4.8.U.2 Installation 

4.8.1.3.2.1 The hose shall be supplied and fitted as a 
fiilly made up assembly. 

4.8.1.3.2.2 In addition to the requirements of 4.8.1.5, 
flexible hose shall be installed in accordance with the 
following requirements: 

a) The bend radius of the hose shall not be less 
than 35 mm or the manufacturer's 
recommended specifications. 

b) Rexible hose shall be secured to the chassis 
frame or vehicle body by clips, secured at not 
more than 300 mm apart and shall be fitted 
prior to and after each bend. 

c) Such clips shall be of sufficient resilience and 
secured to the vehicle in such a manner so as 
to prevent lateral movement and damage to 
the hose and not work loose. 

d) The hose shall be located as far away as 
practicable from the exhaust system. In no 
case shall it be closer than 100 mm. Where 
the hose is situated between 100 mm and 
200 mm from the exhaust, shielding shall be 
provided which shall take the form of one 
piece of sheet metal located midway between 
the exhaust and fuel line. 

NOTE — The exception being the flexible hose used 
between the towed and towing vehicle. 

4.8.1.3.3 Inspection 

4.8.13J.1 The hose shall be inspected for twists, kinks 
and damage or abrasions to the cover, which expose 
the wire. The hose shall be condemned on detection of 
any one of these defects. 

AAA33a. At no tinw shall flexible hose be placed 
back into service after removal from the vehicle, the 
exception being flexible hose designed for and used 
between the towed and towing vehicle. 

4.8.1.4 Joints and connections 

4.8.1.4.1 Every joint or connective filling in rigid high 
pressure fuel line shall be as per IS 15716. 

4.8.1.4Je The number of joints and connections shall 
be the minimum fat the inclusion of all components. 



4.8.1.4.3 Joints or connections in a CNG fuel line shall 
be in accessible {K>siiions for easy inspcciion. 

4.8.1.4.4 Connection means shall provide positive 
retention of the fuel line in the fitting (for example, by 
double inverted flaring of the tube end or by ferrule 
type compression fitting). 

4.8.13 Securing and location 

High pressure piping and hoses in vehicles shall 
comply with the following: 

a) No CNG fuel line inside the pari of any 
vehicle occupied by the driver or passenger 
shall be outside the sealed and vented 
enclosure (except as provided for in 4.7.3). 

b) All CNG fuel lines shall be positioned for 
protection from the possibility of damage by 
impact, accident or loose objects thrown by 
the vehicle wheels/tyres. Parts of the vehicle 
may be used to provide such protection. 

c) CNG fuel lines shall not be located inside box 
sections or in other inaccessible locations nor 
shall they be installed in any location, which 
is not iKlequately protected from sources of 
heat, abrasion, or from impact. 

d) Use of the drive shaft tunnel for fuel line 
location is not desirable or recommended. If 
such routing is the only possible practicaUe 
method of installation, the fuel line must be 
positioned along the lower ccxner of the tunnel 
with the underside of the fuel line not m«e 
than 15 mm above the intersection with the 
floor pan. The fuel line should follow this route 
for the shortest distance possible. The fuel line 
shall have a minimum clearance of 40 mm with 
the drive shaft under all operating conditions. 
This method is not applicable to vehicles where 
the open axle shaft passes through a tuntKl. 

e) Use of the wheel arch for fuel line location is 
not desirable or reconunended. 

f) Fuel lines shall foUow the shortest practical 
route taking into account the requiremeots 
of4A3.2. 

g) Rigid fuel lines shall be effectively secured 
to the chassis frame or vehicle body by clips 
spaced not more than 300 mm apart for 2 and 
3 wheeler and 600 mm apart for other 
vehicles. In order to prevent the possibility 
of fretting corrosion or erosion of the fuel line 
cushioning must be provided to protect the 
fuel line from both the chassis/body and the 
clips themselves. Suitable grommets must be 
provided where the fuel line passes through 
any body panel. 

h) Manifolds used in multi-cylind^ applications 



13 



IS 15870 : 2009 



shall be installed in a protected location. 

Alanifold branch pipelines shall be 

sufficiently flexible to prevent damage to the 

lines, valves and fittings due to vibration, 

expansion or contraction, 
j) In no case shall the clearance between the 

exhaust system and the fuel line be less than 

75 mm. 
k) Fuel lines shall not be installed where any part 

will be permanently hidden from sight or can 

not be inspected or easily replaced (except as 

provided for in 4.7.3). 

4.8.2 CNG Fuel Une — Pressure Below 100 kPa {Low 
Pressure Fuel Line) 

All CNG fuel lines for use for service pressure not 
exceeding 100 kPa (low pressure hose) shall be of 
flexible material and shall meet requirements of 
IS 15722. Joints and connections for low pressure fiiel 
lines shall be suitable for use with CNG and shall meet 
requirements of IS 15722. 

4.8J Flexibility 

4.8.3.1 Low pressure hose shall be of sufficient length 
to accommodate engine movement. 

4.8.3.2 High pressure fuel line shall be installed so as 
to accommodate any relative movement between 
chassis/body and fuel system components or 
temperature variations in the fuel line. 

4.83 J All runs of rigid fuel line piping between any 
two components shall be installed with a 'pigtail' or U 
bend to provide this essential flexibility {see 4.8.3.2). 
The dimension for U bend shall be not less than 50 mm 
radius at the bend portion of U or 100 mm diameter 
for the pig tail coil and number of coils shall not be 
more than two. 

4.8.4 Trailers and Semi-trailers 

The fuel supply line between cylinders and engine shall 
not pass between a towed and a towing vehicle unless 
the following conditions are satisfied: 

4.8.4.1 Low Pressure Transfer of CNG 

a) The cylinder pressure shall be reduced to 
2. 1 5 MPa {Max) by use of a primary regulator 
pt^ed upstream of the towing connection. All 
such equipment should be recommended for 
this application by the equipment 
manufacturer. 

b) All components downstream of the primary 
regulator must be protected against pressure 
rise due to failure of any other component by 
the use of a relief valve which will prevent 
the pressure experienced downstream of the 



primary regulator from rising above 3.3 MPa. 

c) CNG fuel line connecting the towed and 
towing vehicle shall be flexible hose and shall 
meet the requirements of IS 15718. 

d) The flexible fuel line shall be arranged and 
installed so that the free movement of the hose 
between towed vehicle and the breakaway 
coupling shall be minimum required to 
accommodate all possible movement with the 
towing coupling engaged. 

e) A breakaway coupling shall be provided 
within the connection of the flexible hose 
between towed and towing vehicle and the 
rigid fuel line installed on the towing vehicle. 
The coupling shall be attached to the towing 
vehicle in such a manner so as not to impede 
its operation and shall resist, without 
permanent deformation of the attachment, a 
proof load of 50 kgf in the forward and reverse 
direction of travel of the vehicle. 

f) Hose couplings shall be of the failsafe or dry 
type having internal valves which prevent the 
loss of fuel when breakaway occurs or when 
the coupling is undone. 

g) The fuel line upstream of the breakaway 
coupling must be protected by an accessible 
manually operated isolating valve. If cylinders 
are present on a towing vehicle an accessible 
manually operated isolating valve shall also 
be fitted on the towing vehicle. 

NOTE — The allowable amount of free moveitKnt of 
hose between the towing and lowed vehicle shall be 
such as to minimize whipping of the hose should the 
hose be severed. 

4.8.4.2 High pressure transfer of CNG {see Fig. 10) 

Where high pressure CNG is transferred between the 
towing and towed vehicle, 4.8.4.1 (c), (d), and (g) shall 
apply along with the following: 

a) A quick-connect coupling shall be provided 
within the connection of the flexible hose 
between towed and towing vehicle and the 
rigid fuel line installed on the towing 
vehicle. 

b) For any tractor unit provided with CNG 
storage cylinders, the system shall have 
installed on the tractor as close as practicable 
to the coupling a check valve to prevent flow 
of gas from the cylinders on the tractor 
through the coupling. 

c) The system shall have installed on die trailer 
downstream and as close as possible to the quick 
connect coupling, a manual venting valve, 
having 3 ports. The valve shall be fitied in such 



14 



IS 15870 : 2009 



a way that in one position the flow of gas from 
the cylinders through the excess flow valve will 
be permitted while in the other position the fijel 
line from the cylinders is isolated and the line 
through the coupling, is vented to atmosphere. 
A permanent label shall be jwovided 'MANUAL 
VENTING VALVE' in such a way as to clearly 
indicate the position and function of the valve. 

d) The manual venting valve is to be operated 
before the disconnection of the coupling thus 
releasing pressure from the coupling and fuel 
line between the check valve in the line of 
the towing vehicle and the manual venting 
valve. This venting operation is to be 
conducted in an open, well ventilated space 
at least 15 m from any naked flames or other 
source of ignition. 

e) A plate shall be permanently attached to the 
fuel line next to the coupling and shall be 
marked as follows: 'DANGER: NO 
SMOKING. PRIOR TO UNCOUPLING, 
RELEASE LINE PRESSURE AT MANUAL 
VENTING VALVE'. 

NOTE — The allowable amount of free movement 
of hose between the towing and towed vehicle shall 
be such as to minimize whipping of the hose 
should the hose be severed. 

4.9 CNG Control Equipment 

4.9.1 Definition 

4.9.1.1 The CNG fuel control equipment includes all 
the equipment necessary to convert CNG at high 
pressure at the cylinder to CNG air mixer for supply to 
the engine and shall meet requirements of IS 15712, 
IS 15713, IS 15714 and IS 15717. 

In case of heavy motor vehicle, engine control 
equipment includes all the equipment used to convert 
a compression ignition engine to run on a gaseous fuel. 
This includes devices such as fuel provision and control 
device, the ignition system (if one is used), the speed 
and/or load governing device (if any), and any engine 
protection devices such as temperature and pressure 
alarms, and knock detection systems. 

4.9.2 Control Equipment 

4.9.2.1 Ftlter 

At the termination of every CNG service fuel line 
immediately prior to any regulator component there 
shall be a propo-ly designed filter capable of removing 
all particulate matter from the fiiel that could cause 
malfunction of such regulator components. 

4.9.2.2 CNG shut-off valve 

4.9.2.2.1 This valve shall shut-off fuel supply to the 



engine when activated by the fuel change over control 
on bi-fuel operation and by the ignition switch on single 
fuel operation. Normally this is a regulator component 
but in any case it shall be located downstream of the 
filter. This valve shall automatically shut-off the fuel 
supply to the engine unless the following conditions 
are satisfied: 

a) The ignition is on; and 

b) The engine is turning. 

4.9.2.2.2 Service shut-off valve 

A service shut-off valve shall be installed in the high 
pressure line between the cylinder valve and any other 
valve or component within the engine compartment 
and as close as practicable to the regulator, however it 
is acceptable to install the valve at the refueling point. 
It shall be possible to readily operate the valve in the 
installed position at all times in particular during the 
refueling operation. A permanent label shall be 
provided 'CNG service shut-off valve' or similar 
wording to positively indicate its purpose and a positive 
indication of "Closed" and "Open" positions of the 
valve shall be clearly marked. 

4.9.23 Regulator system 

4.9.2.3.1 The regulator system shall not permit gas to 
pass after the engine has stopped turning, irrespective 
of whether the ignition is on or off. The regulator shall 
be installed so that, 

a) It is securely mounted as far as practical from 
the extremities of the vehicle. 

b) It is mounted securely and as close to the 
engine Gas Air Mixer position as convenient. 

c) It is easily accessible for routine maintenance, 
adjustment and inspection. 

d) It is situated as far from the exhaust system 
as practical. Where this distance is less than 
1 50 mm it shall be shielded from radiant heat 
and any impingement from exhaust gases due 
to exhaust system failure. 

e) It is reasonably protected from impact in a 
collision. 

f) It allows sufficient free movement of all 
hoses. 

g) The water circulating system (where required) 
is connected in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, and no flow 
control valve in the system can shut-off 
original equipment water flow. 

h) Where possible, the regulator should be at 
lower level than top of the radiator, as 
insufficient water may cause freezing (see 
also Annex A for precautions against 
freezing). 



15 



r^ 



r\ 



CYLINDER 






CYL SHUT OFF 
VALVE 



CYLINDER 



CYL SHUT OFF 
VALVE 



EXCESS FLOW 
L+ VALVE 



EXCESS FLOW 
VALVE 



ENGINE 



0-O-^ 



QUICK CONNECT 
COUPLING 

n 



SERVICE VALVE 



ISOLATING 

VALVE CHECK VALVE 




T -t>- 



3 POINT SHUT OFF VALVE 
MANUAL VENTING VALVE 
(also fuel line pressure release) 



ATTACH TO STRUCTURE 
OF TRAILER 



i 



Fig .10 Diagrammatic Arrangement of Valving in Fuel Line Between Trailer Mounted Cylinders, Tractor Mounted 

Cylinders and Engine in High Pressure Transfer 



IS 15870 : 2009 



4.9.2.3.2 The regulator assembly shall not be attached to 
the engine assembly unless otherwise specified by the 
manufacturer and then shall be fitted only in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommended instructions. 

4.9.2.4 Gas air mixer 

4.9.2.4.1 A backfire deflector to arrest backfire shall 
be installed in the air intake immediately prior to the 
mixer. The back-fire deflector shall meet the 
requirements of Annex B. 

In case of heavy motor vehicle, there shall be installed 
in the air intake prior to the mixer a backfire deflector 
(original air filter acceptable). In turbo charged 
applications where rigid piping is fitted from the turbo 
charger to the intake manifold a pressure relief valve 
shall be fitted as close as practicable to the intake 
manifold. Where a volume of gas/air mixer, due to 
turbo charging or inter/after coolers is contained 
downstream of the mixer, special precautions will need 
to be applied to avoid damage to components 
downstream of the mixer due to backfire. 

Vehicle manufacturer/kit manufacturer/kit supplier 
shall submit test report or certificate complying with 
the above requirement. It is not necessary to carry out 
the test if declaration is submitted. 

4.9.2.4.2 The mixer shall be securely mounted and 
when remotely fitted shall be suitably bracketed to 
support its own weight and applied working forces. 

4.9.2.4.3 There shall be no air filter element fitted 
downstream of the gas air mixer. 

4.9.2.5 Bi-fuel/dedicated fuel system 

4.9.2.5.1 a) Bi-fuel type — A bi-fuel system is defined 

as a system equipped to operate with 
either on CNG or some other fuel for 
example petrol. 

b) Dedicated fitel type — A dedicated system 
is defined as a system equipped to operate 
wholly on CNG. 

4.9.2.5.2 For bi-fuel type 

4.9.2.5.2.1 A shut-off device shall be installed in the 
bi-fuel fuel system. This device shall shut-off the 
optional fuel supply to the engine when this fiiel is not 
required. 

4.9.2.5.2.2 If the shut-off device is in the form of a 
solenoid operated shut-off valve it must be fitted 
between the fuel pump and the carburettor. The valve 
shall be mounted securely so that its weight is not 
transferred to any part of the carburettor or fuel lines. 

4.9.2.5.2.3 Where the shut-off device is mounted 
remotely from the engine, flexible hose shall be used 
of sufficient length to accommodate engine movemenL 



In all cases the device shall be mounted in a position 
reasonably protected from damage in a collision and 
shall be as far as practicable from high tension electrical 
equipment. 

4.9.2.5.3 Bypass relief device 

A bypass relief device shall be installed in the fuel 
pump or between the fuel pump and the automatic shut- 
off valve in the liquid fuel line to the carburettor on 
vehicles equipped with bi-fuel systems for the use of 
petrol and gaseous fuel. The relief device need not be 
installed on fuel pumps containing a bypass relief 
device as original equipment. 

4.9.2.5.4 Fuel selection control 

A fuel selection control shall be provided which shall 
have at least three positions, clearly marked for the 
selection of each of the two fuels. The selection control 
shall be placed within easy reach of the driver or 
operator. For vehicles fitted with electronic fuel 
injection, a two-position switch is acceptable. 

4.9.2.6 Installation 

The CNG control equipment shall be, 

a) installed in positions that are accessible for 
routine inspection, maintenance and 
adjustment. 

b) mounted securely and reasonably protected 
from damage in a collision. 

c) remote from the vehicle engine exhaust 
system or protected therefrom by a metal 
shield. 

d) no closer than is avoidable and practicable 
to any electrical equipment capable of 
sparking. 

4.9.3 Electrical Wiring 

4.9.3.1 All wiring shall be properly installed, taped, 
clipped or contained in a loom along its length. 

4.9.3.2 Wiring cables shall comply with the 
requirements of IS 15719. The kit supplier/kit 
manufacturer or vehicle manufacturer shall submit test 
certificate/test report complying with requirements of 
IS 15719. 

4.9.3 J The electrical circuit shall be provided with a 
current limiting device conforming to IS 15723. This 
equipment or fuse shall be dedicated to the CNG fuel 
system. 

4.9 J.4 Connectors and terminals 

Connectors and terminals shall be insulated to prevent 
accidental earthing during operations or routine 
servicing. 



17 



IS 15870 : 2009 



4.9.4 Pressure Indicator 

4.9.4.1 A pressure indicator to indicate pressure in the 
CNG gas cylinder shall be fitted in an easily visible 
position to service personnel at the regulator or fill point 
preferably within the engine compartment. 

4.9.4.2 A supplementary gauge or electronic gauge may 
be placed in the driver's compartment provided any 
gauge shall be gas isolated from the cylinder or piping 
to prevent gas leaking into the compartment. 

4.10 Compliance Plate 

The compliance plate, displaying the following 
information, shall be installed near the filling 
connection and be clearly visible to the re-fueler: 

a) CNG cylinder identification number(s), 

b) Date of installation, 

c) Water capacity (litre) of the individual 
cylinder, 

d) Water capacity (litre) of the total installation, 

e) Date of the last test, 

Vehicle registration/Identification No., 
g) Next due date of testing, and 
h) Installed by. 

NOTE — The CNG inslallation complies with the safety 
requirements of this standard. 

4.11 Labels 

4.11.1 Identification Labels 

Vehicles using a CNG system shall be labeled as 
follows: 

Labels conforming with the specification given 
in 4.11.2 and 4.11.3 shall be affixed in a vertical 
position as close to the vehicle number plate as practical 
or on the left side of the front and rear safety glass and 
shall ensure visibility from the front and rear sides. 

4.11.2 The label shall be in position at all times, shall 
be in good condition and the shape, colour and lettering 
shall be easily identifiable. 

4.11.3 Label shall be coloured white and 
sized 80 mm x 80 mm diamond shape (see Fig. 1 1 for 
drawing). Label shall have on it the text "CNG" in black 
colour, centrally positioned. The label shall have a black 
border 1 mm wide, 5 mm inside the outer edge and 
running parallel to it. The 80 mm dimension is 
measured from the outer edge. 

4.12 Construction Equipment Vehicles (Special 
Requirements) 

4.12.1 General 

4.12.1.1 This section covers the special requirements 



of construction equipment vehicles. 

4.12.1.2 CNG fuel system installation on construction 
equipment vehicles shall comply with the requirements 
of this standard subject to the allowable variation 
detailed in this section. 

4.12.1.3 Clauses of this standard which are not 
applicable to construction equipment vehicles and 
which are not clearly identifiable as such are as follows: 

a) Location, ventilation and mounting of 
cylinders {see 4.4); 

b) Construction of compartments and sub- 
compartments (for internally mounted 
cylinders see 4.4.4.1 and 4.4.4.2) {see 
also 4.7); 

c) Cylinder installation {see 4.5); and 

d) Securing and location — [except paragraphs 
(a) to (0 inclusive and (j)] {see 4.8.1.5). 

4.12.2 Cylinders and Fittings, Location and Mounting 

4.12.2.1 Location 

4.12.2.1.1 A fuel cylinder shall be so located as to 
minimize the possibility of damage to the cylinder or 
its fittings and it shall not be located so that it adversely 
affects driving characteristics of the construction 
equipment vehicles. 

4.12.2.1.2 A cylinder shall not be fitted in any internal 
location when a suitable external location is available. 

4.12.2.1.3 A cylinder and its fittings shall not extend 
beyond the platform of the vehicle. 

4.12.2.2 Clearance 

A fuel cylinder shall be installed with as much ground 
clearance as is practicable, but never less than the 
minimum ground clearance of the vehicle in the 
vicinity of the cylinder. This minimum clearance shall 
be measured to the bottom of the cylinder or the lowest 
cylinder fitting. 

4.12.2.3 Protection 

Valves and connections on cylinders shall be protected 
to minimize the possibility of damage due to accidental 
contact with stationary objects or from loose objects 
thrown up from the road. Valves shall be protected to 
minimize the possibility of damage due to collision, 
overturning or other accident. Parts of the vehicle may 
be used to provide such protection to valves and 
fittings. 

4.12.2.4 Shielding 

A fuel cylinder shall be shielded if necessary, against 
direct heat radiation from the engine and exhaust 
systems. 



18 



IS 15870 : 2009 




Fig. 11 Label 



a 

I 
S 



4.12.2.5 Mounting 

A fuel cylinder shall be secured in place on the 
Construction Equipment Vehicles so as to meet the 
requirements of a loading test. 

4.12.2.6 Load test 

4.12.2.6.1 A CNG cylinder shall be secured in place 
on the construction equipment vehicles in a manner 
capable of withstanding, without visible permanent 
deformation, loadings in any direction equal to 1 times 
the filled weight of the cylinder. 

4.12.2.6.2 For this test, the cylinder is to be empty of 
fuel and is to be secured in the manner covered by the 
manufacturer's instruction. Loadings are to be applied 



in any convenient manner capable of being measured 
by gauges or weights. 

4.12.3 Fuel System 

4.12.3.1 Components 

All fuel system components shall be fastened to the 
construction equipment vehicle to minimize the 
possibility of loosening due to vibration. 

4.12.3.2 Securing and shielding 

Fuel lines shall be supported to prevent chafing and to 
maintain at least 50 mm clearance from exhaust and 
electrical system parts [see 4.8.1.5.1(a) to (0 inclusive 
and 0)1- 



19 



IS 15870 : 2009 



4.12.4 Shielding — Temperature/Pressure Tests 

4.12.4.1 The materials employed in the construction 
of construction equipment vehicles shall not be 
damaged by the temperatures attained during normal 
operation under the conditions of maximum rated load 
and under conditions of maximum overload 
maintained for a short period of time. The maximum 
temperature rise on the surface of any combustible 
material of electrical insulation shall not exceed 
150°C. 

4.12.4.2 The test period shall be that required to 
establish equilibrium conditions for temperature rise 
and pressure determinations, but shall be continued for 
not less than 2 h; except that a tractor shall be operated 
an additional 1 minute period against a bumping post 
or other obstruction, thereby causing the wheels to slip 
and the tractor to exert maximum draw bar pull in 
effect. During this additional one minute period, the 
rise in surface temperatures shall not exceed the limits 
specified. 

4.13 Alteration or Modifications 

Any alterations or modification to any vehicle to install 
equipment shall be carried out in accordance with 
sound engineering practices and in compliance with 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central Motor Vehicles 
Rule, 1989 and their superseding amendment and 
notification issued thereafter. The following aspects 
shall be taken into consideration during alteration or 
modificadon: 

Where modifications are made to: 

a) Suspension: Mounting locations, geometry, 
ground clearance adjustment, axles and sub- 
axles, or steering mechanism. 

b) Original fuel storage: The fuel tank assembly, 
fuel tank mounting, venting or filler 
assemblies. 

NOTE — In some instances the fuel tank constitutes a 
stnictuml member of the vehicle. 

c) Vehicle structure: Holes greater than 13 mm 
shall not be located within 40 mm of the edge 
of a panel, welded joint or direct load bearing 
point (such as a belt anchor). The only holes 
permitted greater than 13 mm diameter are 
of the installation of the filling valve or for 
venting purj>oses. 

d) Braking system including the hand brake and 
components: In this aspect, design guidelines 
supplied by vehicle manufacturers, vehicle 
safety standards of Indian or relevant 
standard, wherever applicable shall be 
referred. 



NOTE — In case of the retro fitment, where 

modification types (a), (b), (c) and (d) are carried out 
to heavy motor vehicles these will require prior design 
approval from vehicle manufacturer. 

5 INSTRUCTIONS TO BE PROVIDED BY THE 
CNG KIT MANUFACTURER/SUPPLIER 

5.1 Clear, concise printed instrucfions and diagrams, 
stated in terms clearly understandable and adequate 
for proper assembly, installation, maintenance and safe 
operation, shall be made available by the manufacturer 
of the CNG kit component and component package. 

5.2 Instructions for periodic maintenance of 
components, as required, shall be provided. Parts, 
which require replacement, shall be identified. 

5.3 Printed instructions shall state that the installation 
shall be in accordance with the prevailing regulations 
of Government of India or, in the absence of which, in 
accordance with this standard. 

5.4 This information shall be in an easily understood 
form. 

5.5 An instruction manual shall be provided including 
specific instructions regarding CNG operation and 
alerting the owner to the cylinder inspection ">• 
expiration date. 



or 



6 CRITERIA TO AUTHORIZE THE KIT 
INSTALLER AND RESPONSIBILITY OF 
VEHICLE/KIT MANUFACTURER/SUPPLIER/ 
INSTALLER 

6.1 The following are the criteria to be complied by 
the kit supplier/manufacturer for conversion of in-use 
vehicles to operate on CNG fuel. 

6.1.1 The replacement of engine/retrofitment of CNG 
kit shall be type approved by any one of the testing 
agencies specified in Rule 1 26 of the Central Motor 
Vehicle Rules, 1989. The responsibility of the type 
approval and ensuring that the kits manufactured 
comply with the provisions and installation thereof 
shall be that of the vehicle/kit manufacturer/supplier 
as the case may be. 

6.1.2 Only the installer authorized by vehicle/kit 
manufacturer/supplier shall fit the kit on vehicles. For 
this purpose, the vehicle/kit manufacturer/supplier shall 
issue a certificate of authorization to the installer 
concerned duly authorizing them to fit the kit on behalf 
of manufacturer. 

6.1.3 Kit installer shall be equipped with the following 
tools and equipment: 

a) Two post lift/ramp 

b) Electric hand drill machine and H.S.S. drill 
bits 



20 



IS 15870 : 2009 



c) Tube bender 

d) Tube cutter 

e) Deburring tool for tube 

Set of 'D' ring and box spanners 

g) Set of screw driver (both flat and star) 

h) Set of alien keys 

j) H.S.S. hand saw 

k) Crimping tool for electrical cable termination 

m) Non-corrosive foaming agent 

n) Set letter and number punch 

o) Infrared pollution meter 

p) Timing gun 

q) Filler gauge 

r) Measurement tape 

s) Air compressor 

t) Flame proof inspection light 

u) Vernier caliper 

v) Multimeter 

w) Silicon seal/sealant 

x) Rre fighting equipment 

1) Dry chemical powder (DCP) type fire 
extinguisher — minimum two numbers 
of 5 kg each with ISI Mark. 

2) COj type fire extinguisher — minimum 
1 number of 5 kg with ISI Mark. 

3) Fire buckets — 2 buckets. 

6.1.4 Installer shall have trained technicians having 
minimum ITI qualification and at least two years of 
experience in the similar field. Vehicle/kit 
manufacturer/supplier to impart extensive training to 
the technicians on CNG kit installation. 

6.1.5 Installer to display in the premises, authorization 
certificate issued by vehicle manufacturer/kit 
manufacturer/supplier. Also, installer to display details 
of the facilities available in terms of equipment and 
trained manpower. 

6.1.6 After obtaining the type approval certification, 
the vehicle/kit manufacturer/supplier(s) shall authorize 
the installer to undertake CNG conversion, who meets 
the following requirements. The vehicle/kit 
manufacturer or supplier shall submit the following 
information to the regional transport authorities: 

a) Name and communication details like 
address, telephone number, etc, of the 
installer; 

b) Business profile; 

c) Qualification; 

d) Experience; 

e) Details of technical staff and equipment; and 



f) Specification of workshop/land use certificate 
from appropriate authority. 

6.1.7 Installer to carry out conversion/installation as 
per the requirements of this standard. 

6.1.8 Installer to carry out the inspection, testing, 
commissioning and garaging/repair of CNG system as 
specified in 6.2 and 6.3. 

6.1.9 Installer shall issue installation certificate as per 
Annex C to the vehicle owner, that the conversion kit 
has been fitted in safe and proper manner, in 
compliance with the requirements of this standard. 

6.1.10 The record of conversion/alteration of vehicles 
carried out by the kit installer shall be maintained and made 
available to the authorities such as MoSRT&H (Minisu^ 
of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways)/Test 
Agenciesn"ransport Authorities as and when demanded. 

6.1.11 The vehicle owner shall apply to the concerned 
registering authority within 14 days of undertaking the 
alteration, as required under Section 52 of Motor 
Vehicle Act, 1988 for endorsement of particular 
alteration in registration certificate mentioning place 
and date of installation and installation certificate 
number. This shall also be ensured by the kit installer. 

6.1.12 The vehicle/kit manufacturer or supplier shall 
impart training to installer on installation, maintenance 
and operation of CNG system and issue the training 
certificate to installer after completion of training. The 
test agency may devise the appropriate training 
programme as required. The training shall encompass 
the following; 

6.1.12.1 CNG tank 

a) Fitments on tank, 

b) Location and ventilation of tanks, 

c) Construction of compartment and sub- 
compartment, 

d) Installation of tank, and 

e) Shielding. 

6.1.12.2 CNG fuel line 

a) Testing of CNG fuel line, 

b) Flexibility, and 

c) Installation. 

6.1.12.3 CNG control equipment 

a) Installation of regulator and its functioning, 
and 

b) Installation of fuel selection switch and its 
information. 

6.1.12.4 Inspection, testing and commissioning of CNG 
system 

a) Commissioning, and 



21 



IS 15870 : 2009 



b) Leak testing. 

6.1.12.5 Garaging and repair 

a) Repair operation of CNG vehicles, and 

b) Scrapping. 

6.1.12.6 Periodic inspection 

6.1.12.7 CNG characteristics and safety aspects for 
handling and storage 

6.1.13 The kit installer shall ensure compliance to the 
emission norms of C^fV Rule 1 15 (Sub-rule 2) and 
this standard 

6.1.14 Responsibility of the vehicle/kit manufacturer/ 
supplier/installer: The owner/driver shall be instructed 
in the correct way the gas system and controls function 
along with a owners operation manual for the gas 
system outlining the following: 

a) Basic gas system explanation with a diagram; 

b) Fuel change over switch operation if bi-fuel 
system is fitted; 

c) Starting procedure for cold and hot starting; 

d) How the vehicle is refueled; 

e) In the event of back-firing check procedure; 

f) In the event ofa gas leak shut-off procedure; and 

g) Emergence or information contact numbers. 

6.2 Inspection, Testing and Commissioning (for 
Installer) 

6.2.1 Commissioning 

Prior to initial use, an inspection of the CNG system 
and components shall be carried out by, or under the 
supervision of an Authorized Person/Installer, who 
shall also carry out a complete examination to ensure 
the system complies of all relevant sections of this 
standard and any other statutory requirements as 
specified by the Central Government. 

6.2.1.1 Initial inspection and installation certificate 

The system shall be leak tested as specified in 6.2.2. 
The installation shall be inspected for compliance with 
this standard and all components shall be checked for 
operational performance. In the case of bi-fiiel fiiel 
installations, the ability for the vehicle to operate on 
the optional fuel shall also be tested. 

When the system conforms to this standard, an 
installation certificate, as per Annex C of this standard, 
signed by authorized person/installer shall be issued 
to the owner of the vehicle. 

6.2.1.2 Periodic ispection/preventive maintenance 
6.2.U.1 The cylinder, piping and all components of 



the system shall be examined by an installer for 
corrosion, deterioration and for any modification 
affecting compliance with this standard, at least once 
in a year or incase of malfunction or accident. The 
inspection shall include leak testing as per 6.2.2. 

NOTE — Every CNG bus manufacturer/insialler shall 
incorporate periodic inspection schedules in the operation and 
owner's manuals. 

6.2.1.2.2 When the system has been inspected and any 
defects remedied and the system conforms to this 
standard to the satisfaction of the installer, a checklist 
as per Annex D (in case of CNG buses) and as per 
Annex E (in case of CNG vehicles other than CNG 
buses) shall be issued to the owner of the vehicle. 

6.2.2 Leak Test 

6.2.2.1 Initial test 

At the time of commissioning, the complete pressure 
system shall be subjected to a pressure test of 
20 ± 1 MPa by using CNG or a gas inert to CNG 
such as nitrogen. 

6.2.2.2 Procedure 

a) With boot or cylinder compartment open and 
vapour sealing removed from cylinder valve 
area and cylinder valve closed, slowly 
pressurize the system. 

b) Leak test lines, fittings and components using a 
non-corrosive foaming agent and when leak free. 

c) Open cylinder valve, pressurize cylinder and 
check for leaks at valve and cylinder neck. 

d) When the system is passed leak free seal 
venting area. 

WARNING — The system must not be subjected to a shock 
loading as insecure fittings could blow out with dangerous 
tesults, and burst discs could rupture. 

6.2.2.3 Gas tightness of compartments and sub- 
compartments 

6.2.2.3.1 The compartment and sub-compartment shall 
be tested at the time of commissioning and 
subsequently at each periodic inspection to ensure that 
it is gas tight to the vehicle interior by blowing tracer 
gas into the compartment or sub-compartment and 
testing the surrounding atmosphere for gas leakage 
with a gas detector. Passages between the compartment 
and outside air, for example: ventilation provisions, or 
an access hatch or door in the case of a permanently 
in-built compartment, should be sealed during testing. 
Any leakage should be rectified, and testing repeated. 

6.2.2J.2 Should the compartment or sub-compartment 
fail the above tests, corrective action shall be taken 
and the tests repeated until they comply vkrith the test 
requirements. 



22 



NOTE — It may be permissible to check such a compaitment 
or sub-compartment before installation of the fuel system, 
provided that nothing in the subsequent installation procedure 
will negate the validity of the lest. 

6.2.2.4 Where CNG is used for testing, the following 
precautions shall be observed: 

a) Testing shall be carried out under adequately 
vented conditions. 

b) Testing shall be carried out at least 5 m from 
any open flame or other source of ignition. 

6.2.2.5 The operation of the equipment and controls 
shall also be tested with CNG under norma! working 
conditions to prove satisfactory performance of the 
entire system and a further leak test shall be carried 
out using a non-corrosive foaming agent, 

6.2.2.6 BCF fire extinguisher and dry powder fire 
extinguisher conforming to IS 2171 and each of 5 kg 
shall be kept ready within a safe distance. If ignition occurs 
the service valve should be closed and the extinguisher(s) 
used to quell any fire, which may continue. 

6.3 Garaging and Repair (for Installer) 

6.3.1 Garaging and Repairing of CNG Fuelled Vehicles 

Vehicles fueled with CNG may be stored or serviced 
and repaired inside garages provided that the following 
conditions are observed: 

a) There shall be no leaks in the fuel system, 

b) Such vehicles shall not be parked within 3 ra 
of any sources of ignition, 

c) CNG fueled vehicles being repaired in garages, 
unless the fuel is required for engine operation, 
shall have the cylinder shut-off valve closed 
and the CNG fuel in the service line exhausted 
by running the engine or depressurizing the 
line in a well- ventilated area, and 

d) Vehicles undergoing repairs involving welding 



IS 15870 : 2009 

or the application of heat, to any part within 
1 m of the cylinder, shall have the cylinder 
removed or shielded from the source of heat. 

6.3.2 Repair Operation 

6.3.2.1 Repair operation involving heat shall be carried 
out with due regard to fire safety. 

6.3.2.2 Damaged fuel lines shall not be repaired; in all 
cases they shall be replaced. 

6.3.2.3 Welding, brazing and the application of heat 
shall not be carried out on any part of the cylinder 
subsequent to manufacture. 

6.3.2.4 When a vehicle is involved in an accident 
causing damage to pan of all of the CNG fuel system 
or where any part of the system necessitates removal 
to allow for the repair of the vehicle the system shall, 
after re-assembly or repair, be tested in accordance 
with 6.2 and a checklist as per Annex D (in case of 
CNG buses) and Annex E (for vehicles other than CNG 
buses) be issued. If applicable the requirements of 
6.3.3.2 shall also be met. 

6.3.3 Scrapping 

6.3.3.1 A vehicle, which is about to be scrapped, shall 
have its cylinder removed prior to disposal. 

6.33.2 Where the cylinder has been subjected to impact 
or fire damage the cylinder shall be inspected and re- 
tested by the owner of the vehicle as per Gas Cylinder 
Rules. 2004 as amended from time-to-time. 

NOTE — There will always be combustible gas in the cylinder 
until it has been cleared of all traces of flammable vapour or gas. 

7 STATUTORY AUTHORITY APPROVAL 

The type of component in question and its use 
determine the Statutory Authority Approval in respect 
of CNG fuel system components. The statutory areas 
of responsibility are: 



Government Agency 

Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways, 
Government of India 

Petroleum and Explosive 
Safety Organization (PESO), 
Government of India 



Statutory Powers 



Scope of Application 



Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 
Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 
1989 

Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 



Ail CNG kit components [excluding 
CNG cylinder and its valve(s)] and 
systems used for the purpose of 
propelling a motor vehicle on road. 

CNG cylinder with valves and their 
accessories. 



8 MARKING 

The components shall be permanently marked with the 
manufacturer's name, trade-mark or symbol as per their 
relevant standards. 



23 



IS 15870: 2009 



ANNEX A 
[Clause 4.9.2.3.1(h)] 

FREEZING CONDITIONS AND CORROSIVE CONDITIONS 



A-1 Where regulator heat is drawn from the engine 
cooling' water, care should be taken to ensure that 
the water does not freeze in the regulator during cold 
weather. Expansion of the water on freezing can 
cause serious damage to the pressure regulator 
assembly. 

A-2 Most CNG regulators are made from non-ferrous 
alloys, which can suffer pinhole corrosion under certain 



conditions. If this is allowed to take place CNG can be 
admitted to the cooling water system where it will 
pressurize the radiator and cause a potential hazard. It 
is important, therefore, to have an effective 
anticorrosion additive present in the cooling water. 

A-3 It is imporunt to ensure that the coolant additive 
and the dilutant ratio comply fully with the engine 
manufacturer's requirements. 



ANNEXE 

(Clause 4.9.2.4.1) 

BACKFIRE — DEFLECTOR TESTS 



B-1 A backfire deflector under backfire conditions 
shall contain a visible flame front within its confines 
and shall not be displaced, physically damaged or 
distorted, or show evidence of burning or smoldering 
of internal parts. If the deflector is of the oil-bath type, 
it shall be firee of any overflow or discharge permitting 
accumulation of oil on electrical, hot-engine or exhaust 
system parts. 

B-2 A complete industrial truck/vehicle is to be used 
for this test. Tests are not required on backfire 
deflectors employed diesel engines. 

B-3 The backfire deflector (air cleaner, oil-bath or dry 
element type) and connecting hose are to be removed 
from the engine. The spark timing is to be advanced 
(approximately 8°) and the spark plug leads are to be 
interchanged to obtain sharp backfires under the 
following conditions. The engine is to be alternately 
raced and idled and the ignition switch is to be operated 
to alternately energize and de-energize the ignition 
system. During the test, the intensity of the backfire 
and the issuance and extent of the accompanying flame 
are to be noted. 

B-4 The backfire deflector (air cleai^r) is then to be 
installed on the truck in the intended location. An oil- 
bath type deflector (air cleaner) is to be filled to the 
marked "fiiH level-line" of the bowl. P^)er is to be 
placed beneath the intake orifices of an oil-bath type 



and over adjacent surfaces of parts likely to be affected 
by accumulations of oil. 

B-5 The engine is then to be operated in the several 
manners determined in the preliminary test to provide 
for the most severe backHre conditions. At least ten 
and not more than twenty backfires are to be produced. 

B-6 Observations for containment of flame are to be 
made under semi-darkened conditions by at least two 
observers. No visible flame is to be in evidence at any 
time during the tests. In the tests of an oil-bath type, 
paper is not to show evidence of oil deposits in the 
form of droplets. 

B-7 A dry-type filter element is to be tested in the above 
manner, then removed and then subjected to five 
consecutive washing and drying cycles. Washing is to 
consist of immersion in plain water together with 
sufficient agitation to remove bulk material adhering 
to the outside surface. The test element is then to be 
remounted as intended in operation, and the backfire 
test is to be repeated. 

B-8 The side of the filter media normally exposed to 
l»ckfiie is then to be subjected to a flame source of 
sufficient intensity to cause the media to bum or glow. 
The flame source is then to be removed and an 
acceptable filter media is not to continue to bum or 
smolder. 



24 



IS 15870 : 2009 



ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.\. 9) 

INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE FOR CONVERTED CNG VEfflCLE 

(To be filled in by installer) 
A. Details of Installer Approval: 

1 . Installation Certificate issued by Name and address of installer 

2. Approval of installer Name of vehicle manufacturer/kit manufacturer/kit 

supplier, who has approved the installer 

3-Wheeler/Car/LCV'HCV. etc 



3. 


Type of vehicle converted 


4. 


Approval of the CNG kit 




a) Name of the Test Agency 




b) Approval Certificate No. and Date 


a Details of Converted Vehicles 


1. 


Regn. No. and year of manufacture 


2. 


Chassis and Engine No. 


3. 


Type of Operation 


C. Details of CNG Kit 


1. 


Cylinders 




a) No. of Cylinder/s 




b) Type of Cylinder/s 




c) Cylinder No/s. 




d) Make 




e) Water Capacity (litres) 




f) Working Pressure (kg/cm") 




g) Approval reference of DOE 




h) Validity of DOE Certificate 


2. 


Cylinder Valves 




a) Make 




b) Valve No. 




c) Working Pressure (kg/cm^) 




d) Approval reference of DOE 


3. 


Refilling Valve 




a) Make 




b) Type 


4. 


Fuel Line 




a) High pressure pipe dia (ID/OD) 




b) Low pressure pipe dia (ID/OD) 


5. 


Shut-Off Valve (Solenoid Valves) 




a) Make 




b) Type 




c) Operation Voltage 


6. 


Fuel Selection Switch 




a) Make 




b) Type 



Bi-fuel/dedicated fiiel 



25 



IS 15870 : 2009 

7. Regulator 

a) Make 

b) Type 

c) SI No. 

8. Gas-Air Mixer 

a) Make 

b) Type 

NOTE — This certificate shall be filled and provided to vehicle owner for all vehicles converted for CNG operation. 

Signature & Seal of Installer 



ANNEX D 
{Clause 6.2.1.2.2) 

CHECKLIST FOR THIRD PARTY CHECKING/INSPECTION OF BUILT UP CNG BUSES 
(NEW AND CONVERTED/RETROFITTED IN-USE) BEFORE REGISTRATION 



D-1 DETAILS OF CNG BUS 


1 . a) Name and address of chassis manufacturer (applicable for new 
and converted/retrofitted in-use) 

b) Name and address of retrofitter (applicable for 
converted/retrofitted in-use) 

c) Name and address of engine manufacturer (applicable for 
converted/retrofitted in-use) 




2. Name of type approval agency 




3. Detaib of type approval certificate 




4. Name and addiess of bus Ixxfy builder 




S. Name and address of approved inspecting agency at R.T.O. 




6. Chassis and engine No. 




7. Year of manufacture 




D-2 DETAIL OF CNG SYSTEM 


D-2.1 Checking of Cylinders as per DOE/Vebide Testing Agency Approvab 


1 . Validity of DOE Certificate 

2. Safety clwcks 

a) Check for corrosion on any CNG ccwnponents/mountings of ^u 
circuit 

b) Check whetho- cylinder is securely mounted within the vehicle 
and check tightness of nuts and bolts 

c) Check whether minimum 5 mm clearance is kept between 
cylinders and vdiicle body structure 

d) Distance between cylinder valve and bus body extremities shall 
not be less than 200 mm unless valves are protected (as per the 
details provided by the kit/vehicle manufacturer/kit supplier and 
duly vetted and approved by test agencies) to minimize the 
possibility of damage due to collision, overtuming/otfier 
accident 





IS 15870:2009 



o) Check that the material of the padding/lining provided for inn, 
side of cylinder mounting band (s) is made up of EPDM rubber 
(hardness Shore A 60 min) as approved by the test agency 
during type approval certification. 

NOTES 

1 In case of doubt Inspecting agencies wlII request the OE vehicle 
manufacturer/retrotltter to supply the sample of material for padding rubber «-hich 
has been type approved by the testing agencies 

2 Rubber packing, if found damaged during inspection it should be replaced by the 
new material having revised specification. 



D-2.2 Cylinder Valves 



1. Check specific type and model approved by vehicle testing agency 
for the vehicle under inspection 

2. Check for operation 

3. Check for shield protection 

4. Check for physical damage to valves 

5. Check for burst disc with fusible plug as approved by DOE 

6. Leak test using non corrosive foaming agent (for example snoop of 
M/s Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak detector 



D-2.3 Refilling Valve 



Safety checks: 

a) Check for dust cap/plug 

b) Check that engine should not start when dust cap/plug is removed or 
open 

c) Check for proper make and type of interlocking switch as approved 
by testing agencies. 

d) Check leakage for non-return valve using non corrosive foaming 
agent (that is snoop of M/s Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak 
detector 



D-2.4 Fuel Line 



Safety checks: 

a) Check for corrosion, damage on CNG fuel line 
(In case of PVC sleeved fuel line, corrosion shall be inspected at the 
ends, wherever it is exposed. Also inspect for any damage to the 
sleeving. Sleeve should be firmly gripped to the CNG fuel line) 

b) Check whether fuel line is securely mounted 

c) Check for deformation of U and Pigtail bends provided in high 
pressure piping for flexibility as per approved layout 

d) Distance between fuel line and exhaust pipe/shield shall not be less 
than 75 mm and the fuel line should also be properly clamped and 
routed so as not to touch the engine block 

e) Check whether etTective protection is provided, as per approved 
layout, to prevent the possibility of damage due to loose objects 
from road. 

f) Check the distance between any two clips which shall not be more| 
than 600 mm 

g) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of Ms 
Swagelok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector 



27 



IS 15870 : 2009 



D-2.5 Shut-Ofr Valve (Solenoid Valve{s)| Wherever Separately Provided 


Safety checks: 




a) Verify tlie following as per type approval specification 




1 ) Make 




2) Type (if applicable) 




3) Identification No. 




b) Check whether shut off valve is securely mounted 




c) Check operation for "Close and Open" as required 




d) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 




Swagelok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector 




D-2.6 Regulator 


Safety checks: 




a) Verify the following as per type approval specification: 




1) Make 




2) Type (if applicable) 




3) Identification No. 




b) Check whether regulator is securely mounted 




c) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (this is snoop of M/s 




Swagelok. collin etc.) or methane leak detector 




D-2.7 Gas- Air Mixer 


Safety checks: 




a) Verify the following as per type approval specification 




1) Make 




2) Type (if applicable) 




3) Identification No. 




b) Check whether gas-air mixer is securely mounted 




c) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 




Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak detector 




D-2.8 Electrical Wiring (Safety Checks) 


D-2.8.1 For OE & Converted/Retrofitted In-Use Vehicles 




a) Check whether that current limiting device (fiise) is fitted as per 




manufacturer specifications and make 




b) Terminals are insulated to prevent shorting 




c) Wiring are taped and clipped with loom and mounted securely. 




d) Battery shall be securely mounted and battery terminal shall be 




locked properly by means of suitable nut and boh with washers 




e) Check installation of battery cut-off switch as per chassis 




manufacturer's recommendations. Location of Battery cut-off switch 




should be within the reach of driver in seating posture in driving seat 




Check routing of high tension cable to avoid accidental earthing and 




to be placed away from any heat source — as per chassis 




manu&cturer's recommendations/layout 




g) Check for proper make of high tension cable as per chassis 




manu^cturer's recommendation as well as check for tight fitment of 




its terminal to the spark-plug 




l>-l.i.l For OE Vehicles 




a) Check wiring harness layout under the floor and in the engine 




compaitment to be in accordance with chassis manufacturer's 




layout/specifications/approval. 





28 



IS 15870 : 2009 



b) Check wiring harness in cabin and passenger compartment to be as 
per chassis manufacturer's guidelines/approval, and 

c) Cable harness has to be as per the recommendations of OE 
chassis/vehicle manufacturers. 

D-2.83 For Converted/Retrofitted In-Use Vehicles 

Check wiring harness layout under the floor/cabin and passenger 

compartment for proper sleeving and routing in order to avoid accidental 

sparking. 



D-2.9 Service Shut-Off Valve 



Safety checks: 

a) Make and type, 

b) Check operation, 

c) Check whether service shut-off valve is securely mounted, and 

d) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak detector. 



D-2.10CNG Filter 



a) Check whether CNG filter is securely mounted, 

b) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector. 



D-2.n CNG Pressure Gauge 



a) Make and type 

b) Check whether CNG pressure indicator is securely mounted 

c) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak detector 



D-2.I2 Compliance Plate 

Installation Check 



Check for Following 



a) Cylinder identification No. 



b) Date of last testing and the name of certifying 
agency 



c) Water capacity (Itr) 



d) Next due date of testing 



e) Date of Installation 



Details for No. of Cylinders 



Water capacity (Itr) of total installation 



g) Vehicle registration/identification No. (to be 
furnished after registration) 



h) Seal/Identification of the checking/inspection 
agency (who carries out the 3rd party 
inspection) 



i) Check whether compliance plate is installed 
near filling connection and be clearly visible to 
the filling agency . 



D-2.13 Identification Label in Front and Rear 



Located on left side of the front and rear safety glass and shall ensure 
visibility from front and rear sides ^ 



29 



IS 15870 : 2009 



D-2.14 Catalytic Converter (Wherever it is Part of Kit) 



Verify make and type of the catalytic converter as per the vehicle 
manufacturer's specification and/as given in the type approval certificate as 
the case may be. 



D-2.15 Low Pressure Hose 



a) Verify' make and type of the low pressure hose as per the type 
approval specification. 

b) Check for kinks, damage or abrasion to the cover. 

NOTE — In case of douht. Inspecting Agencies will request the OE vehicle 
manulacturer/retrofitter to suppiv the sample of" material for low pressure hose which has 
been type approved hy the testing agencies 



D-2.16 Additional Checks 



Following additional points are to be complied at the time of registration/before endorsement by the competent 
authority (after conversion) of CNG vehicle for enhancement of safety of vehicle: 

a) Fire retardant material conforming to IS 15721 for seat/upholstery/roof and side lining and IS 2465 
for wiring cables shall be used. The OE/Vehicle manufacturer/retrofitter shall submit declaration with 
respect to design; manufacturing processes and material conforming to the use of fire retardant 
materials (see Notes I and 2). 

b) One number each of dry powder type fire extinguishers (2 kg) shall be provided in driver's and 
passenger's compartment. 

c) For servicing of CNG vehicle proper instructions, detail operational and service manual with Dos and 
Don'ts shall be provided by chassis manufacturer and body builder/retrofltter. Vehicle/chassis 
manufacturer/retrofitter should devise training module and impart training to drivers and technicians 
for safe operation of CNG system. 

d) Check for first-aid kit as per CMVR. 

e) Distance between the exhaust line, muffler and fuel line shall be a minimum of 75 mm. If not a 
radiant heat shield of 2mm thickness shall be welded in between. 

Safety plates/shield below the pipe joints shall be welded and proper inspection windows shall be 
provided near the cylinder joints. 

g) Minimum two copies of safety instructions shall be displayed in passengers compartment. 

h) Check for proper venting provided by louvers/holes/mesh on the side skirt so that in case of any 
leakage the entrapped gas under the floor escapes to the atmosphere. 

j) The bus body builder/retrofitter to provide at least two (total minimum area of 550 mm") vent pipes 
connecting the under floor of the bus to the rooftop for CNG gas to vent out in case of leakage. The 
vent pipes to be located close to the cylinder valves cluster as per recommendations of chassis 
manufacturer. Construction should be such that leakage into passenger compartment is avoided. 

k) Any other safety recommendations provided or advised by the chassis manufacturers to be complied 
with. 

NOTES 

1 For OE fully built vehicles, type approval Is subjected to meeting the requirements as mentioned above In case of type approval of 
drive-away chassis, declaration from chassis manufacturer for above tests shall be verified by inspection agency 

2 In case of doubt. Inspecting Agencies will request the OE vehicle manufacturer/retrofitter to supply die sample of material for 
cables/seal/upholstery/roof and side lining which has heen type approved by the testing agencies 

3 The instructions issued by OE manufacturer/retrotitter for third party evaluation, in their instruction manual, shall contain all the 
necessary details on the methodology and the procedure for earrving out these checks 



Signature & Seal with date 



30 



IS 15870 : 2009 



ANNEX E 
{Clause 6.2.1.2.2) 

CHECKLIST FOR THIRD PARTY CHECKING/INSPECTION OF CNG VEHICLES (OTHER THAN 
CNG BUSES) THAT IS TWO, THREE AND FOUR WHEELER, BEFORE REGISTRATION (NEW 

AND CONVERTED/RETROnTTED IN-USE) 



El DETAILS OF CNG VEHICLE 


E-1.1 Manufacturer's Details 

a) Name and address of OE Vehicle manufacturer, 

b) Name and address of the Drive Away Chassis Manufacturer 
/applicable for new and converted/retrofitted in-use), 

c) Name of the Retrofitter holding the type approval certificate, 

d) Name of the authorized kit installer duly authorized by the original 
retrofitter, and 

e) Name and address of Body builder (if applicable). 




E-L2 Name of Type Approval Agency 




E-L3 Reference Number of Type Approval Certificate and Validity 

Gasoline Vehicles (Converted/retrofitted in-use): 

a) CCofbase model tested 

b) Flexibility available for conversion ± 25% of the base model 

c) Period of validity, from — to — 
Diesel Vehicles (Converted/retrofitted in-use): 

a) Type and make of model 

b) Year of manufacture 

c) Period of val idity, from — to — 
In the case of OE, 

a) Validity will be for the base model and its variants given in the type 
approval certificate 

b) Period from — to — (as given in the type approval certificate) 


i 


E-L4 Name and Address of Approved Inspecting Agency at RT.O. 




E-1.5 a) Vehicle Registration No. (if applicable) 
b) Vehicle type and model 




E-1.6 Chassis and Engine No. 

■ Original as per RCTC 
or 

■ New in case of replacement of engine 




E-1.7 Year of {Manufacture 

a) Chassis in case of drive-away chassis 

b) Fully built up vehicle 

c) Month &vear of conversion 





31 



IS 15870 : 2009 



E-2 DETAIL OF CNG SYSTEM 


E-2.1 Checking of Cylinders as per DOEA'eliicle Testing Agency Approvals 




Validity of DOE Certificate 




Safety checks: 

a) Check for corrosion on any CNG components/mountings of gas 
circuit. 

b) Check whether cylinder is securely mounted within the vehicle and 
check tightness of nuts and bolts. 

c) Check whether minimum 5 mm clearance is kept between cylinder 
and vehicle body structure and also in between the cylinders, if 
applicable. 

d) Distance between cylinder valve and vehicle body extremities shall 
not be less 200 mm unless valves are protected (as per the details 
provided by the kit/vehicle manufacturer/kit supplier and duly vetted 
and approved by test agencies) to minimize the possibility of damage 
due to collision, overturning/other accident. 

e) Check for reinforcement if cylinder is mounted on floor of the vehicle 
(minimum dimension of reinforcement thickness and surface area 
shall not be less than 2.5 mm and 3 600 mm^ respectively). The 
reinforcement shall be provided on the top and bottom of the floor. 

f) Check that the material of the paddinglining provided for inner side of 
cylinder mounting band(s) is made up of EPDM rubber (hardness Shore A 
60 min) as approved by the test agency during type approval certification. 

NOTES 

1 In case of doubt. Inspecting Agencies will request the OE vehicle manufacturer/retrofitter to 
supply the sample of material for padding rubber which has been type approved by the testing 
agencies 

2 Rubber packing if found damaged during inspection it should be replaced by the new material 
having revised specification 






E-2.2 Cylinder Valves 

a) Check specific type and model approved by vehicle testing agency for 
the vehicle under inspection 

b) Check for operation 

c) Check for physical damage/distortion to valves 

d) Check for shield/protection 

e) Check for burst disc with fusible plug as approved by DOE 

f) Check for the vent pipe outlet routing away from exhaust in rase of 
cylinder fitting in the enclosed compartment. 

g) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, coUin etc) or methane leak detector 




E-2 J Refilling Valve 

Safety checks: 

a) Check for dust cap/plug 

b) Check Uiat engine should not start when dust cap/plug is removed or qjen 
• Check for proper make and type of interiocking switch as 

approved by testing agencies. 

c) Check leakage for non-return valve using non-corrosive foaming 
agent (that is snoop of M/s Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak 
detector 





32 



IS 15870 : 2009 



E-2.4 Fuel Line 

Safety checks: 

a) Check for corrosion, damage of CNG fuel line 

(In case of PVC sleeved fuel line, corrosion shall be inspected at the 
ends, wherever it is exposed. Also inspect for any damage to the 
sleeving. Sleeve should be firmly gripped to the CNG fuel line) 

b) Check whether fuel line is securely mounted 

c) Check for U and Pigtail bends provided in high pressure piping for 
flexibility as per approved layout 

d) Check whether effective protection is provided, as per approved layout, to 
prevent the possibility of damage due to loose objects from road. 

e) Distance between fuel line and exhaust pipe/shield shall not be less 
than 75 mm and the fuel line should also be properly clamped and 
routed so as not to touch the engine block 

f) Check the distance between any two clips which shall not be more than 
600 mm (500 mm and 300 mm incase of 3/2 wheeler respectively). 

g) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector 



E-2.5 Shut-off Valve | Solenoid Valve(s) Wherever Separately Provlded| 



Safety checks: 

a) Verify the following as per type approval specification: 

1) Make 

2) Type (if applicable) 

3) Identification No. 

b) Check whether shut-off valve is securely mounted 

c) Check operation for "Close & Open" as required 

d) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector ^ 



E-2.6 Regulator 

Safety checks: 

a) Verify the following as per type approval specification: 

1) Make 

2) Type (if applicable) 

3) Identification No. 

b) Check whether regulator is securely mounted 

c) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector 



E-2.7 Gas-Air Mixer 
Safety checks: 

a) Verify the following as per type approval specification: 

1) Make 

2) Type (if applicable) 

3) Identification No. 

b) Check whether gas-air mixer is securely mounted 

c) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of Ms 
Swagelok, collin etc.) or meth ane leak detector 



33 



IS 15870 : 2009 



E-2.8 Electrical Wirias 

Safety checks: 

FOR OE AND CONVERTED/Rt 1 ROFITTED IN-USE VEHICLES 

a) Check whether that current limiting device (fuse) is fitted as per 
manufacturer specifications and make 

b) Terminals are insulated to prevent shorting 

c) Wiring are taped and clipped with loom and mounted securely 

d) Battery shall be securely mounted and battery terminal shall be locked 
properly by means of suitable nut and bolt with washers 

e) Check installation of battery cut-off switch as per vehicle/chassis 
manufacturer's recommendations (if applicable). Location of battery 
cut-off switch should be within the reach of driver in seating posture 
in driving seat 

Check routing of high tension cable to avoid accidental earthing and 
to be placed away from any heat source — as per vehicle/chassis 
manufacturer's recommendations/layout or as approved by Test 
Agency 

g) Check for proper make of high tension cable connected to spark plug 
as per vehicle/chassis manufacturer's recommendation. Check for 
tight fitment of iu terminal to the spark-plug 




FOR OE VEHICLES 

a) Check wiring harness layout under the floor and in the engine 
compartment to be in accordance with vehicle/chassis manufacturer's 
layout/specifications/ approval 

b) Check wiring harness in cabin and passenger compartment to be as 
pa- vehicle/chassis manufacturer's guideiines/approval 

c) Cable harness has to be as per the recommendations of OE 
chassis/vehicle manufacturers 

FOR CONVERTED/RETROFITTED IN-USE VEHICLES 

Check wiring harness layout under the floor/cabin and passenger compartment 
for proper sleeving and routing in order to avoid accidental sparking. 




E-2.9 Service Shat-OfT Valve 
Safety checks: 

a) Make and type 

b) Chetk operation 

c) Check whether service shu-ofT valve is securely mounted 

d) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is siwop of M/s 
Swagdok. collin etc) or methane leak detector 




E-2.10 CNG Flhcr (Wherever Separately Provided) 

a) Check whether CNG filter is securely mounted 

b) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming a^nt (tfutt is snoop of M/s 
Swagclok, collin etc.) or methane leak detector 




E-2.1 1 CNG PrcsMre Gaafc 

a) Make and type 

b) Check whether CNG pressure indicator is securely mounted 

c) Leak test using non-corrosive foaming agent (that is snoop of M/s 
Swagelok, collin etc) or methane leak ctetcctor 





34 



IS 15870:2009 



E-2.12 Compliance Plate 

Installation Check 


Check for FolloPwing 


Details for No. of Cylinders 


1 


2 


3 


4 






a) Cylinder identification No. 














b) Date of last testing and the name of certifying 
agency 














c) Water capacity (Itr) 














d) Next due date of testing 




i 








e) Water capacity (Itr) of total installation 




Vehicle registration/identification No. (to be 
furnished after registration) 




g) Seal/Identification of the checking/inspection 
agency (who carries out the 3rd party inspection) 




h) Check whether compliance plate is installed near 
filling connection & be clearly visible to the 
filling agency 




E-2.I3 Identification Label in Front and Rear 

Located on left side of the front and rear safety glass and shall ensure visibility 
from front and rear sides 




E-2.14 Compartment/Sub-Compartment/Cas Tight Housing (for 
Internally Mounted Cylinder/s) 

a) Check whether Compartment/Sub-compartment/Gas tight housing is 
in good condition that is shall not show any crack/damage. 

b) Check whether it is firmly clamped to the conduit/vent hose ducting 




E-2.15 Conduits/DuctingA'ent Hose (for Internally Mounted Cylinder/s) 

Check whether Conduits/ducting is in good condition that is shall not show any 
crack/damage 




E-2.I6 Petrol Shut-off Valve (Solenoid) (if Applicable that is Gasoline 
Injection Vehicle does not Require such Solenoid Valve) 

a) Check operation 

b) Check whether Petrol shut-off valve is securely mounted 

c) Leak test (visual inspection) 

d) Verify the make and type as per the Type Approval specification 




E-2.17 Fuel Selection Switch (for Bi-fuel Mode) 

• Check operation 




E-2.18 Catalytic Converter (Wherever it is Part of Kit) 

Verify make and type of the catalytic converter as per the vehicle manufacturer's 
specification and'as aiven in the type approval certificate as the case may iye. 




E-2.19 Low Pressure Hose 

a) Verify make and type of the low pressure hose as per the Type 
Approval specification 

b) Check for kinks, damage or abrasion to the cover 

NOTb - in case of doubt. .nspe.n,„g Agenc.e. «,l, re,u.., '''^^,^f^J^^%™l""i 
nnromter to supply the sample ol matenal for lo« pressu.^ hose «h,ch has been t,pe appm . 
by the t«tmp :if>encres i 





35 



IS 15870 : 2009 



£-2.20 Following additional points are to be complied at the time of registration/before endorsement by the 
competent authority (after conversion) of CNG vehicle for enhancement of safety of vehicle. 

a) Fire retardant material confotming to IS 15721 for seat/upholstery/roof and side lining and IS 2465 
for wiring cables shall be used. The OEA'ehicle manufacturer/retrofitter shall submit declaiation 
with respect to design, manu&cturing processes and material conforming the use of fire retardant 
materials (see Notes I and 2). 

b) One number each of diy powder type/COj type fire extinguishers (1 kg), for 4 wheelers (car, LCV, 
etc) only, shall be provided in driver's and passenger's compartment. In case of 3 wheeler where the 
driver and passengers compartments are not isolated one number of dry powder type/COj type fire 
extinguisher (1 kg) shall be provided. 

c) For servicing of CNG vehicle proper instructiwB, detailed operational and service manual with Dos 
and Donts shall be provided by kit/vehicle manu&cturers. Vehicle/kit manufacturer/kit supplier 
should devise training module and impart training to drivers and technicians for safe operation of 
CNG system. 

d) Check for First-Aid kit as per CMVR. 

e) Safety plates/shield below the pipe joints shall be welded and proper inspection windows shall be 
provid^ near the cylinder joints. 

Minimum two copies of safety instructions shall be displayed in passenger's compartment. 

g) Check the following for the vehicles other than Ml category; fitted with multi CNG cylinders not 
incorporating the independent venting system. 

1 ) Check for proper venting provided by louvers/hotes/mesh on the side skirt so that in case of any 
leakage the entrapped gas under the floor escapes to the atmosphere. 

2) The Vehicle/kit manu&ctiscr/kit supplier to provide at least two (total minimum area of 550 sq. 
mm) vent pipes connecting the under floor of the vehicle to the rooftop for CNG gas to vent out 
in case of leak^e. The vent pipes to be located close to the cylinder valves cluster as per 
recommendations of chassis manufacturer. Construction should be such that leakage into 
passenger compalment is avoided. 

h) Any other safety reconunendatioas provided or advised by the Vehide/kit manu&cturer/kit supplier 

to be complied with. 
NOTES 

1 For C« <Uly Imilt vehicki. type tpiwowrf i« Mrfqecled U) iw«nif the requiri^^ 

of drive-«w^r chMss; decimtian from chasM manu&clurer fiir il»ve tett riitf be v^ 

2 In cate of doubc. Inspecting Agencies will request the OE vehicle manufiKtURr/refrofitter to supply the sample of maieriai (or 
cMei/tctt/tifMUay/Toofmd side lining which has been type approved by the Itstmt a^ncics. 

The instructions issued by OE manufacturer/retrofitter for third party evaluation, in dieir instniction manual, shall contam all the 
necessary details on the methodology and die procedure for cwiyii^ Old these checks. 



Signature &. Seal with date. 



36 



1515870:2009 



ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Automotive Vehicles Running on Non-conventional Energy Sources Sectional Committee, TED 26 



Organization 
Automotive Reiearch Association of India. Pune 
Atttomotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Ashok Leyland Ltd, Cbennai 

Bajaj Auto Ud. Pune 

Batra Associates Limited. Faridabad 
Bharat Heavy Electicals Lid. Bangalore 

Bharal Petroleum Corporation Ltd. Mumbai 

Bombay Environmental Action Croup. Mumbai 
Central Institute of Road Transpon, Pune 

Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi 

Centre for Science and Environment. New Delhi 

Petroleum & Explosives Safety Organization, Nagpur 

Force Motors Ltd. Pune 

GAIL (India) Limited. New Delhi 

Gujarat Gas Company Limited, Surat 

Hindustan Motors Ud. Sagore 

Indian Institute of Petroleum. Dehradun 

Indraprastha Gas Ltd, New Delhi 

Mahanagar Gat Ltd, Mumbai 

Mahindta & Mahindra Ud, Nashik 

Minda Impco Ud, New Delhi 

Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources. New Delhi 
Reliance Industries Limited. Navi Mumbai 

Reva Electric Car Co (Pvt) Ltd. Bangalore 
Rutu Auto Gas Pvt Ltd. Ahmedabad 
Sagas Auiotech Pvt Ud. Mysore 



Rtprt$tntativt(s) 

Shm Shmkant R. Marathe (Chabmuui) 

Shm M. K. Choudham 

Shm a. B. Komawar (Alternate) 

Shu Nuumal Kumar 

Smu G. Viswanathan (Allemalt) 

Smu Tatan Basu 

Smi T. M. Balaraman (Aliemate) 

Shri N. K. Sawhnhy 

Shki J. B. D'Sou/A 

Shri P S. Chopra (Alternate) 

Shri R. N. Das 

Shri N. Damu'Ita (Altemaie) 

Shri Dim Gihcnka 

Shri G. K. Sharma 

Shri D. P SAfn; (Alternate) 

Shri T. Venuoopai. 

Shri Rajesh Di-broy (Alternate) 

Smumati ANUMtrA Rinr 

Shri Chirac. Shah (Alternate) 

Shri A. N. Bbwas 

Shri C. R. Suri»id«anathan (Alternate) 

Shri S. B. Pbihr 

Shri S. V. Viuhwans (Alternate) 

Shri S, P. Sharma 

Shri RAN>i;rR Sinoh (Alternate) 

Shri M. I. Vakhakwai a 

Shki B, D. Jcwhi (Alternate) 

Shri S. Y. Rao 

RTV-ENGC (Gi;nf.rai.) (Aliematt) 

Dr Muki.ih Saxi na 

Shri A. K. Aioai. (Allemaie) 

Shri P S, Bharoava 

Shri B. K. Naih (Alternate) 

Shri R. S. Prabhu 

Shri A. Udey Kiran (Alternate) 

Shri Z. A. Muiawar 

Shri K. V. N. Prasad (Alternate) 

Shri Shbhir Acfc>wAL 

Smd Gaoan Aohawal (Aliemate) 

DiRinxni 

Shri N. S. MuRrnv 

Shri Ravi V. Desai (Alternate) 

Shri CmrrAN Maini 

Shri Raji-IH KtTtHARi 

Shri SANiiea" S P 

Shki Sanjay Shyamawr P (Alternate) 



37 



IS 15870 : 2009 

Organizalion 
Scoolen India Ltd, Lucknow > 

Shri Shakti LPO Lid. Hyednbad 

Society for Alternate Fuels Aftemurfcel Conversion, New Delhi 

Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers. New Delhi 

Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 

Trantenergy Ltd. Chennai 

TVS Suzuki Ltd. Hoiur 
Vana2 Engineers Ltd, Pane 

Vehicle Research & Development Establishment. Ahmednagar 

In personal capacity (£> 606. Vashi Plaio, Sector 17. Vashi, 
Navi Mumbai 400705) 

BIS Directorate General 



Represenmtive(s) 

Shri N. K. TmvciJi 

Shri B. K. Maitin (Aliernate) 

Shw Java Prakash Ramapi-a 

Shri Chaiapathy Rao (AlUnute) 

Shri Sanjay Gambhir 

Shri R P. Khurana (Mtenuiie) 

Shri K. K. Gandhi 

Ms Pameia Tikku (Allernule) 

Dr Krishna Iyengar 

Shri P. K. Banerjff (Alleiniiie) 

Dr K. Sridhara 

Shri A. Gopai akrishnan (Alternate) 

Capt N. S. Mohan Ram 

Shri S. R. Sarvaie 

Shri S. J. Visputk (Alternate) 

Shri K. Kamraj 

Shri K. S. Jain (Alternate) 

Shri Alok Chandra Guffa 

Shri Rakesh Kumar. Scientist 'F & Head (TED) 
[Repiesenting Director General (Ex-officio)] 



Member Secretary 

Shri P S. Muirai. 

Scientist 'E' (TED). BIS 



38 



GMGIPN— 1ia BIS/NtM0»-300 C«piM 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institdtion established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 26 (633). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones : nii 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 

Regional Oflices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg J" 2323 7617 

NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 \^ 2323 384 1 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi / 2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 \ 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 3843 

60 9285 



{ 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 / 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

!_ 2254 25 19, 2254 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) / 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 \ 2832 789 1 , 2832 7892 

Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR, LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER. GOVT OF INDIA PRESS. NASHIK^2? 0O6 



