**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10235-2 (1982) : Glossary of terms in orthopaedics. Part 
2: Mechanics and materials for implants [MHD 2: Orthopaedic 
Instruments, Implants and Accessories] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: IOIl£(Fart II )- 1982 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard ,.^^ .egg- 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN ORTHOPAEDICS 

PART II MECHANICS AND MATEAJAL5 FOR LMPLANT& 



UDC 615-465 : 6ie-71 - 0&9 843 : 0014 




© Copyright iyS3 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
UANAC BHAVAN> 9 BAHAIltJK SHAH ZAPAK MAUG 

NEW DELHI nOfiOJ 

Or 7 ^^y 1^8^ 



tS t 10:^35 { f»art It ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN ORTHOPAEDICS 

PART II MECHANICS AND MATERIALS FOR IMPLANTS 

Orthopaedic Tnstruments and Accessories Sectional 
Committee, GPDG 24 

Chairman 

Db K. S. Masalawaia 

Bombay Mutual Terrace Building 

534, Sandhurst Bridge 

Bombay 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. G. Bhaxtachaeya Indian Drugs & Pharmaceutical Limited, New 

Dei^i 
Shbi P. R. T. Thulasingam ( Alternate ) 
Col a. S, Ghahal Ministry of Defence ( DGAFMS ) 

Lt-Gol D, J. MookhbbJeb ( Alternate ) 
Db G. G. Das Delhi administration, New Delhi 

Db S. K, Dutta Department of Health & Family W elfare, Govern- 

ment of West Bengal, Calcutta 
Shbi K. K. Ghai Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Goi, I. A. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. L. Gupta Punjab Surgical Instruments Manufacturers & 

Suppliers Association, Jullundur 
Shbi R. D. Gupta National Metallurgical Laboratory (GSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi B. M. KauShik Vikas Orthopaedic Corporation, New Delhi 

Smt Vimal Pitbb Sushrut Surgicals Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi V. R. Gobe ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. L. Saigal The Metropolitan Surgical Works, Delhi 

Shbi Ashok Kumab ( Alternate ) 
De T. K, SHANMuaASUNDABAM Health & Family Welfare Department, Govern- 

ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Db R. p. Singh Directorate of Health Services, Government of 

Bihar, Patna 
Shbi R. N. Via Imperial Surgical Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

De A. S. Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Gonsr Prods &. Med Instrs ) 

Secretary 

Shbi D. K. Agbawal 

Deputy Director ( Gonsr Prods & Med Insirs ), ISI 



(g) Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



is i 102^5 ( ^art il ) - ld32 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN ORTHOPAEDICS 

PART II MECHANICS AND MATERIALS FOR IMPLANTS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 17 May 1982, after the draft finalized by the Orthopaedic 
Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 The definition of an item is very important as it provides information 
on its technical aspects. Uniformity in definition will also eliminate 
different interpretations and disputes. 

0.3 This Indian Standard is based on ISO/DP 601 7/1 1-2 — ' Implants for 
surgery — Terminology Part II — Mechanics and materials for implants', 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies definitions relating to terms in mechanics and 
materials relevant to surgical implants. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Basic Mechanical Terms: 

Term Definition 

Force Force is that which tends to accelerate a body. In 

the living human body the forces are generally 
developed by muscles and will relate to the external 
effects of gravity and the accelerations which the 
human body undergoes (N ). 

Resultant force Where a system offerees acts on a body or part of a 

body, their total effect can be represented by a single 
resultant force or a couple. 

Mass Quaniity of matter in a body (kg). 

Weight Gravitational force exerted on a body (N). 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term Definition 

Load Any action applied to a body which 

deformation or fracture — especially 
moment. 



may cause 
force and 



Free body diagram When the loading on a body component is analysed, 
a single part or any group of parts may be studied 
and the equations of equilibrium must be satisfied 
for each part or group of parts. Attention must be 
paid to all the loads transmitted to them by the 
external environment and by the remainder of the 
body at the section joining this part or group of 
parts to the rest of the body. The illustration of 
such a system Is called a free body diagram. 



Pressure 



Moment 



Torque 
Bending moment 

Couple 



Where a force F is uniformly distributed over a 
surface area ^ of a body the pressure is given by FjA 
( pa, N/mm2 ) . 

Turning effect of a force about an axis is given by the 
product of the force F and the distance h measured 
perpendicularly from the axis to the line of action of 
the force ( Nm ) . 

Moment about the long axis of a body tending to 
produce twisting ( torsion ) (Nm). 

Moment acting about an axis perpendicular to the 
long axis of a body; generally producing lateral 
deflection (Nm), 

Moment produced by two equal forces having 
parallel lines of action. The value of the couple is 
F X h where F is the value of each force and h the 
distance between their lines of action (Nm). 



Cross-sectional area When the section is taken perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the body, the area exposed by 
the cut is termed the cross-sectional area (m^). 



Gentroid 



The centroid of an area is its effective geometric 
centre. If a thin sheet is cut into the shape of an 
area it will balance in any position only when 
supported on an axis passing through the centroid. 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term Definition 

Second moment of Property of a section related to its area and the 

area distribution of the area relative to its centroid — not 

to be confused with mass moment inertia Used in 

the calculation of stresses due to bending in the 

elastic region (m*) . 

Used in the calculation of shear stresses due to torsion 
of a circular section (ni*). 

Force whose line of action coincides with the line 
joining the centroids of successive cross sections of a 
part of a body. 

Tensile force Normal force tending to increase the length of a 

EXTENSIONAL part of a body. 
FORCE 



Polar moment of 
area 

Normal force 



Compressive force 



Shear force 
TANGENTIAL 
FORCE 

Work 



Energy 



Power 

Instantaneous 
centre 



Normal force tending to produce shortening of the 
length of a part of a body. 

That component of the resultant force acting on one 
side of a section of a body having a line of action 
perpendicular to the axis of that body. 

Work is done when movement occurs at the point of 
application of a force to a body. The amount of 
work is given by the product of the force and the 
distance moved by the point of application along the 
line of action of the force (J) ( 1 kWh = 3*6 lO^J ). 

Capacity for doing work. In mechanical systems 
this will be in the form of potential energy ( relating 
to the possibility of work being done by gravity ); 
kinetic energy ( corresponding to the instantaneous 
linear and/or angular velocity of the body ); or strain 
energy corresponding to the energy stored and 
available for release in a deformed body { J ). 

Rate of doing work or supplying energy (W). 

If two bodies A and B are so connected that relative 
angular movement between them is possible, then, 
for a particular configuration there exists an axis 
such that small angular movements from this position 
may be taken to be pure rotations about an axis 
through a point C. 



I& i loads ( Part tl ) . 1962 



Term 



Fluid 



Gas 



Liquid 



Turbulent flow 



Laminar flow 
STREAMLINE 

FLOW 



Definition 

C is the instantaneous centre of B relative to A and 
of A relative to B. Generally, as finite rotations 
occur between A and B the instantaneous centre will 
trace a curve which may be drawn relative to either 
A or B. 

Substance which flows. It differs from a solid in 
that it can offer no permanent resistance to change 
of shape. 

State of matter in which molecules move freelyi 
thereby causing matter to expand indefinitely occupy- 
ing the total volume of any vessel in which it is 
contained. 

State of matter in which the shape of a given mass 
depends on the containing vessel, but the volume is 
independent thereof. A liquid may frequently be 
assumed to be incompressible. 

Fluid flow in which the particle motion at any fK)int 
varies rapidly in magnitude and direction. Gives 
rise to high drag in the boundary layer. 

Fluid flow in which adjacent layers do not mix, 
except on a molecular scale. 



2.2 Mechanics of Materials 



Stress 



Normal stress 
DIRECT 

STRESS 

Tensile stress 



Stress at a point in the cross-section of a body is 
defined as the resultant of all forces acting on the 
body to one side of the section divided by the cross- 
sectional area. Loads in the material at the cross- 
section are transmitted by appropriate inter-molecu- 
lar forces ( MPa = MN/ras = N/mm* ). 

Generally a uniform distribution of stress exists only 
in the case of tensile or compressive forces whose 
line of action intersects the centroid. 

If the line of action of the resultant force is perpendi- 
cular to the cross-section the stress is defined as 
normal. 

Normal stress tending to increase the length of a 
body. 



!$ 1 10235 ( Part It ) - 1982 



Term 
Compressive stress 

Shear stress 
TANGENTIAL 
STRESS 

Bending stresses 



Shear stress due to 
torsion 
TORSION 
STRESS 

Resultant stress 



Stress raiser 



Stress concentration 



Stress concentration 
factor 

Thermal stress 



Residual stress 

Deformation 
Strain 

Normal strain 



Definition 

Normal stress tending to decrease the length of a 
body. 

If the line of action of the resultant force at a section 
of a member is parallel to the cross section, the stress 
is defined as shear or tangential stress. 

Tensile and compressive stresses developed on 
opposite sides of a body due to the application of a 
bending moment. 

Shear stresses produced in a body on the application 
of a torque. 



Where several load systems act on a body the stresses 
at a point due to each load can be combined by 
appropriate analysis to give a single resultant stress 
system. 

Scratch, crack, notch, void, inclusion change in cross 
section or change in contour causing stress concen- 
tration. 

Increased value of stress existing in the region of a 
stress raiser compared with that occurring in a 
similarly loaded uniform body. 

Ratio of the stress at a stress concentration to the 
value occurring at the corresponding point in a 
uniform body subject to the same loading. 

Stress developed within a body when free thermal 
expansion or contraction is restrained or the distri- 
bution of temperature throughout a body is non- 
uniform. 

Stress remaining in a body after removal of any 
system of external loads or temperature gradient. 

Change in dimensions or shape of a body. 

Ratio of the deformation of a body or part of a body 
to its original dimensions. 

Ratio of the change of length of a member to its 
original length. Normal strain may be tensile or 
compressive. 



Term 

Shear strain 
TAN CENTAL 
STRAIN 



IS 1 10235 ( Part 11 ) - 1982 

Definition 

Where an element of a body of shape ABDC deforms 
as shown in Fig 1 the shear strain is defined as angle 
G ( radians). 




Volumetric strain 
Strain ga^ige 

Stress/strain curve 

Elastic deformation 



Plastic deformation 
PERMANENT 
DEFORMATION 

Visco-elastic 
deformation 

Elastic modulus 



Fig. 1. Shear Strain Diagram 

Ratio of change in volume to original volume. 

Device affixed usually to the surface of a body to 
measure the average normal strain in a specified 
direction over the area of attachment. 

For any material there is generally a continuous 
relationship between stress and strain, for example a^ 
shown in Fig. 2. 

Deformation due to load which diminishes to zero 
on removal of that load. 

Deformation due to load which does not come to 
zero on removal of that load. 



Young's modulus 

Shear modulus 
RIGIDITY 
MODULUS 



Deformation which comprises elastic, plastic and fluid 
flow components. 

Ratio of stress to corresponding strain within the 

initial linear fcgion of the stressjstrain curve for a 

material. 

Elastic modulus relating normal stress to strain. 

Elastic modulus relating shear stress to shear strain. 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 

Term 
Bulk modulus 



Poisson's ratio (r) 



Definition 

Elastic modulus relating volumetric strees to volu- 
metric strain. 

Ratio of lateral strain to longitudinal strain in a 
body loaded by a tensile force only { see Fig. 3 ). 




STRAIN 
Fig. 2. Typical Stress/Strain Curve 




£ = Original length, x = Elongation, and 

b = Original thickness, y = Contraction 

Lateral strain = Tjb 

Longitudinal strain = xjL 

rib 

Poisson's ratio = xjL 

Fig, 3 Diagram Illustrating Poisson's Ratio 

8 



tk : 10235 ( Part 11 } - 1982 



Term 

Load elongation 
curve 



Proportional limit 



Proportional limit 
stress 

Elastic limit 



Eleastic limit stress 
Proof stress 

Yield 

Yield stress 

Ultimate tensile 
stress 

True stress 
Hysteresis' 



Creep 



Definition 

In a tensile test of a standard test piece simultaneous 
measurements are made of the axis load F and the 
elongation X on a specified gauge length. 

The graph of F to Z is the load/elongation curve 
with appropriate change of scale. This may be used 
as a stress/strain curve. 

Point in a stress /strain curve at which there is signifi- 
cant deviation from the initial linear region ( see 
point PL in Fig. 2 ). 

Stress at the proportional limit. 

Point in a stress/strain curve at which the material 
ceases to behave in an elastic manner ( see point EL 
of Fig. 2 ) . 

Stress at the elastic limit. 

The stress in a material corresponding to a permanent 
strain of a prescribed amount, for example, 0"1 %. 

That part of the stress/strain curve which is essenti- 
ally parallel to the strain axis. 

Load at yield divided by the original cross-sectional 
area. 

Maximum load in a tensile test divided by the 
original cross-sectional area. 

At any stage in a tensile test the true stress is the 
load divided by the actual cross-sectional area at 
that stage. 

Phenomenon whereby the loading curve differs from 
the unloading curve for any point in a stress/strain 
diagram. In Fig. 2, if the test is conducted up to 
point ifiTand unloading takes place along line KLM, 
the typical curve representing reloading follows path 
MNK. The area KLMN represents mechanical 
energy loss. 

Continuous deformation of a material when sub- 
jected to stress over an extended period. Generally, 
the higher the stress and the temperature, the higher 
will be the rate of deformation. A typical creep curve 
is shown in Fig. 4. 



1 S I i0235 ( Part il ) -198^ 



Ruptur< 







TIME 
Fig. 4 Typical Creep Curve 



Term 

Creep limit 
CREEP 
STRENGTH 

Creep rate 



Ductility 



Definition 

Highest stress at a given temperature which a material 
can withstand without excessive deformation. 



Rate of strain corresponding to particular load and 
temperature conditions as given by the slope of the 
second stage of the creep curve shown in Fig. 4. 

Ductility is the capacity of a material to undergo 
permanent ( plastic ) deformation. In a ductile 
fracture a cup and cone shape or 'ears' together 
with a fine textured surface appearance correspond- 
ing to large amounts of local deformation is fre- 
quently evident. 



10 



IS t 10233 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term 
Brittleness 



Gauge length 

Extensometer 
Compression test 

Reduction in area 
Elongation 



Ultimate shear 
stress 



Fatigue failure 



S/N curve 



Fatigue limit 
ENDURANCE 
LIMIT 



Definition 

Showing no significant deformation before fracture. 
Some materials may exhibit a transition from ductile 
to brittle behaviour, depending on the temperature, 
the speed of application of load and the stress distri- 
bution. In a brittle fracture there is no significant 
reduction in area and the surface may have a 
bright crystalline appearance. 

A length within the uniform diameter portion of a 
test specimen on which deformation measurements 
will be made (m). 

An instrument for measuring the average extension 
on the gauge length of a tensile test specimen. 

A compression test is conducted generally on a shore 
specimen of cylindrical form ( maximum length/ 
diameter ratio 2 0). The load is uniformly applied 
to the end faces. 

Reduction of cross-sectional area of a tensile test 
piece measured after fracture and expressed as a 
percentage of original cross-sectional area. 

Increase in gauge length of a tensile test piece 
measured after fracture and expressed as a percent- 
age of the original gauge length. Generally this 
value is accepted only if the fracture has occurred 
within the middle third of the gauge length. 

The maximum stress occurring during a test in pure 
shear. This can only be obtained accurately from 
a torsional test on a thin tube ( MPa = MN/m^ = 
N/mm« ). 

Failure of a test piece or component under repeated 
cycles of load, each less than its ultimate load is 
referred to as fatigue. 

Graph of stress to the number of load cycles to 
failure is known as the S/N curve. 

Highest stress which will not cause failure regardless 
of the number of load cycles. This limit is only found 
in ferrous metals in non-corrosive environments 
( MPa = MN/m8 = N/mm^ ). 



u 



IS f 10233 ( Part II )- 1982 



Term 
Corrosion fatigue 

Impact test 



Notch sensitivity 
Toughness 
Hardness 
Hardness testing 



Photoelasticity 



Definition 

Failure due to repeated cycles of load in a corrosive 
environment. Generally, in a corrosive environ- 
ment, the number of load cycles to failure at a given 
stress is recorded. 

Test in which a bar is dynamically loaded to fracture. 
Generally, the bar is loaded in bending and notched 
at the region of maximum stress. Measurement is 
made of the minimum energy required to fracture 
the bar. This energy cannot be directly related to 
other mechanical properties. 

Reduction of the strength of certain materials in the 
presence of stress raisers. 

Characteristics of a material requiring high energy 
to fracture. 

Capacity of a material to resist indentation. It may 
correlate with wear resistance and yield stress- 
Usually determined by the use of an indentation 
type of machine such as Vickers ( diamond pyramid 
hardness ) ( HV ), Brinell { HB ) or Rockwell ( HR). 
In each case a dimensionless number is obtained 
which must be reported relative to the test condi- 
tions, for example, Vickers ( at stated load ), Brinell 
(at stated P/D^ value), Rockwell (using stated 
scale ) . 

Phenomenon in which the transmission of light 
through certain transparent materials is dependent 
on local strain. In suitable cases using plane polarized 
light with calibrated materials the stress at a point 
in a model can be inferred from the optical fringe 
patterns produced. 

If a thin photoelastic coating ( stress coat ) is applied 
to a component, an analysis of the fringes allows 
the determination of the surface strain when the 
component is loaded. Numerical method of analysis 
of the stress finite element stress analysis wear 
in a component obtained by dividing it into a 
finite number of small elements. Using this tech- 
nique the behaviour of a complicated two or three 



n 



tS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term 



Friction coefficient 



Lubrication 



Dejimtion 

dimensional component can be predicted under 
any assumed system of loads. Removal or trans- 
fer of material from contacting surfaces due to their 
relative movement under load. Wear may be meas- 
ured by mass change, volume measurement or by the 
depth of the wear tracks. 

Ratio between the tangential friction force and thfe 
normal force between two surfaces when relative 






irring or ak/Oub vv> vv>uj^j.i\ 



I'l- <-n nnr 



Fretting 



Interposition between two surfaces of solid liquid or 
gaseous material to reduce the friction or wear 
occurring on relative movement. 

Wear occurring between two close fitting surfaces 
corresponding to repeated small relative movements. 



2.3 Metals — General 



Metal 

Alloy 

Alloying element 

Alloying 

Inclusions 
Phase 

Phase diagram 
Matrix 



and thermal conductivity, opacity, lustre, hardness, 
ductility, malleability, high melting and boiling 
points. 

Any metal other than a pure metallic element. Metal 
prepared by adding other metals or non-metals to a 
basic metal to secure desirable properties. 

Element deliberately added for the purpose of modify- 

jnnr tjip rironprties of a metal. 

Addition of one or more elements to a metallic 
product to form an alloy. 

Particles of impurities contained by a material. 

Region in a material differing from another in com- 
position or structure, or both. 

Diagram showing phases present in a material, their 
compositions and their relative amounts as functions 
of temperature, pressure and overall composition. 
When each phase is at equilibrium with its surround- 
ings the diagram is known as an equilibrium diagram. 

Major structural constituent of a material, that is 
enveloping phase in which another phase is embedded. 



13 



tSt 10233 (Part II) -19$:^ 



Term 
Eutcctic 

Eutectic point 
Eutectic structure 
Eutectoid 
Eutectoid point 
Eutectoid structure 
Eutectoid steel 

Transformation 
range 

Grain 

Grain boundary 
Grain growth 
Grain refining 



Definition 

That mixture of two or more constituents which has 
the lowest freezing and melting points- 
Point in the equilibrium diagram indicating the 
composition of the eutectic and its freezing temper- 
ature. 

Structure, frequently lamellar, produced by the 
simultaneous solidification of the components of the 
eutectic. 

That mixture of two or more constituents which 
forms on cooling from a solid solution and transforms 
on heating at a constant minimum temperature. 

Point in the equilibrium diagram indicating the 
composition of the eutectoid and its temperature of 
transformation. 

Structure, frequently lamellar, produced by the 
simultaneous precipitation of the components of the 
eutectoid from the solid solution. 

Steel which consists entirely of eutectoid. In the 
iron/carbon system, the eutectoid occurs at approxi- 
mately 9 % carbon and, after cooling at a suitable 
rate, consists entirely of pearlite. 

Temperature range over which a significant change 
in phase structure occurs. 

Crystalline structure of a metal; the individual crystals 
in a poly crystalline material. 

Crystal boundary; transition zone between crystalline 
alignments in two adjacent grains. 

Coarsening of crystal structure (increase in grain 
size ) under certain conditions of heating. 

Decreasing of grain size brought about by heating 
above the transformation range ( recrystallization 
temperature ), followed by cooling at a suitable rate. 
The temperature is related to the time of heating 
and to the prior cold-work the sample has received. 
Hot working and cold working, followed by anne- 
aling, are used for grain refining. 



14 



t$ : 10235 (Part II )• 1962 



Term 

Recrystallization 
temperature 



Ferrite 

ALPHA IRON 
— IRON 



Ferrite 
DELTA 
RITE 



Austenite 
GAMMA 
Y - IRON 



Definition 

Temperature at which recrystallization takes place 
to more stable strain-free crystal form. Characterized 
by softening. The heat treatment process is called 
annealing. 

Crystal structure of pure iron stable at room temper- 
ature having a body-centred cubic crystal lattice. 
Soft ductile. Solubility of carbon is very low in 
ferrite (below 0'02% ). Carbon steels up to 0'8% 
carbon have ferrite as matrix phase; slow cooling 
from austenitic produces pearlite. 

Crystal form of pure iron stable above 1 390*'G, 
having a body-centred cubic lattice. Alloying with 
certain elements ( for example, chromium ) can 
modify the temperature range of stability of delta 
ferrite which can, under some circumstances, persist 
to normal ambient temperature and below. 

Grystallographic state of iron in which the unit cell 
IRON has a face-centred cubic form. This state in pure 
iron is stable between 9lO°G and I 390°G. The 
range of stability can be changed markedly by 
alloying and in austenitic stainless steel stability is 
maintained at normal ambient temperature. 



FER. 



Iron carbide 
CEMENTITE 



Pearlite 



Bainite 



Second phase formed when carbon is present in 
excess of solubility limits, 

Orthorhombic lattice with 3 : 1 iron to carbon ratio 
(FeaC). 

A mixture of two phases formed by transforming 
austenite of eutectoid composition to ferrite and 
carbide by heat treatment. Microspically a lamellar 
structure. Transformation begins at grain bounda- 
ries. 

Carbon steels having 0*02% to 08% carbon shown 
a ferrite matrix with carbide ( FegC ) m lamellar 
structure but between 08% and 2*0% the matrix is 
carbide. 

Formed when austenite is quenched to a tempera- 
ture between 200°C and 400°C. 



15 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) . 19&2 



Term 
Martensite 



Dendrite 



Stainless steel 



Austenitic stainless 
steel 



Definition 

Formed when austenite is quenched below the tem- 
perature for bainite formation. The face centred 
lattice changes to a body centred lattice but since 
the carbon remains in solution it is a tetragonal 
structure rather than cubic. Harder than pearlite. 
With sufficient time, transformation to ferrite plus 
carbide occurs at low temperatures, but not to a 
pearlite structure. 

( Adj. dendritic. ) 

Crystal with a fir tree structure, formed by the 
initial freezing from a nucleus of primary branches 
followed by the formation of secondary branches 
from these at intervals forming a crystal skeleton^ 

Corrosion resisting alloy steel containing substantial 
quantities of chromium, usually with nickel and 
other elements. 

Stainless steel in which the crystalline structure 
substantially one phase austenite. 



2.4 Metals — Technology and Processing 



Quenching 



Normalizing 



Solution treatment 
SOLUTIONI- 
ZING 

Precipitation har- 
dening 



( Adj. quenched. ) 

Process of rapid cooling to prevent formation of 
equilibrium crystal forms. Carried out over any 
temperature range to achieve desired structure. 

Process of slow cooling to produce the low tempera- 
ture equilibrium forms of ferrite and carbide. 
Diffusion-controlled process and thus extent of equi- 
librium is time-dependent. 

Process of putting minor components into solid 
solution by holding the alloy at a suitable tempera- 
ture, usually just below eutectic temperature. 

Process by which alloy is solution treated, then 
quenched to retain the solid solution followed by 
heating to a suitable temperature to nucleate preci- 
pitation of the minor component which has lower 
solubility at the reduced temperature. Resultant 
strain in the matrix produces hardening and increa- 
sed strength. 



16 



tSt 10235 (Part II) -1982 



Term Definition 

Stress relief anneal- Process of heating to temperatures just below the 
ing eutectoid to relieve stresses. 



Annealing 



Transformation 
hardening 



Cold-work 



Strain hardening 

Hot-work 

Forging 

Extrusion 
Sintering 

Welding 
Weld decay 



Process of heat treatment comprising heating above 
recrystallization temperature and cooling at control- 
led rate to produce recrystallization and softening. 
For steel, heating is into the austenite range. 

Achieved by cooling from above the critical range 
at a rate that prevents the formation of ferrite and 
pearlite and results in the formation of martensite. 
Cooling may be in water, oil or air. 

Deformation occurring below recrystallization tem- 
perature. Metals become harder and less ductile 
( strain hardening ) with additional mechanical 
working. Hardening results from deformation of 
crystal and entanglements of imperfections ( disloca- 
tions ) in the crystalline lattices. 

Hardening caused by deformation at some tempera- 
ture below the recrystalization temperature and 
usually at ambient temperature. 

Deformation occurring above recrystallization tem- 
perature. Hardening does not occur since recrysta- 
llization accompanies the deformation. 

Process of hammering or pressing between dies. 
Also used as a noun to denote the product of a 
forging process. 

Process of forcing through a die, for example, to form 
cylindrical pipes. 

Process of heating powder at temperature below 
melting point under pressure so that solid state diffu- 
sion occurs between particles to produce inter- 
particle bonding. 

Joining operation involving the melting of the joined 
metals at the interface between them. 

Intercrystalline corrosion of an austenitic stainless 
steel in the neighbourhood of a weld, the susceptibi- 
lity having been caused by the welding heat. 



17 



IS: 10235 (Part II) -1982 



Term 
Weld decay test 

Casting 

Investment casting 



2.5 Metals — 
Corrosion 

Corrosion 



Definition 

Test to determine the susceptibility of the steel to 
weld decay. 

Means of producing a component by allowing mol- 
ten metal to solidify in a mould. 

Process of forming metal by casting molten alloy into 
a mould produced by the use of an expendable 
pattern. 



Progressive electro-chemical action 
promoting destruction. 



on a metal 



Corrosion resistance Ability of metal to withstand electro-chemical attack 
under specified environmental conditions. 



Intergranular 
corrosion 
INTERCRYS- 
TALLINE 
CORROSION, 
GRAIN BOUN- 
DARY COR- 
ROSION 

Fretting corrosion 



Stress corrosion 

Stress corrosion 
cracking 

Corrosion fatigue 



Sensitization 
steel ) 



of 



Corrosion which occurs along grain boundaries bet- 
ween adjacent grains resulting from differences in ele- 
ctropotential between atoms in the boundaries and in 
the grains. Susceptibility to attack at the grain 
boundaries is associated with the formation of chro- 
mium-rich carbides which denude the adjacent 
zones of chromium. 



Simultaneous action of the processes of fretting and 

corrosion. 

Enhancement of the effect of a corrosive environ- 
ment on a metallic component by stress. 

Brittle or quasi-brittle rupture of a material under 
the joint action of static stress and corrosive attack, 
neither of which would have caused cracking while 
acting alone. 

Simultaneous action of fatigue ( resulting from 
cyclic loading ) enhancing corrosion. 

Condition of stainless steel resulting from incorrect 
heat treatment which renders it susceptible to inter- 
granular corrosion and caused by an excess of car- 
bide in the grain boundary. 



18 



li : 10233 ( Part II ) - 1^82 



Term 
De-sensitization 



Upsetting test 



Passivation 



2.6 Plastics — 
General 

Plastics materials 



Plastic 
Resin 

Synthetic resin 



Definition 

Process of reducing the sensitization of austenitic 
stainless steel by heat treatment either by heating 
to a temperature high enough to give solution of the 
carbides ( usually 1 050 °C ) followed by cooling at 
a sufficiently rapid rate to prevent their reformation 
or by heating at a temperature in the region of 
850° G — 900*'G for a time sufficient to give homo- 
genization of the chromium in solid solution. 

Test for the detection of surface defects, used to 
determine the suitability of billets, bars, wire, etc, 
for hot or cold forging. A specimen is taken, heated 
or not, and hammered on end until it is reduced by 
a specified amount. 

Production of a passive film on the surface of a 
metal in order to resist corrosion, usually by the 
production of an oxide film, for example, by 
treatment with nitric acid. 



( Adj. plastics, ) 

Wide group of materials which are largely organic 
and of high molecular weight and which at some 
stage during manufacture or processing into finished 
articles can be shaped by flow, 

( Adj, ) Susceptibility of a material to plastic defor- 
mation. 

Member of the group of glassy, amorphous, organic 
solids, secreted by certain plants and insects, insolu- 
ble in water but soluble in many organic solvents 
and softening under heat; now often referred to as 
natural resins, for example, colophony. 

Originally applied to members of a group of 
synthetic substances which resemble and share some 
of the properties of natural resins, but now applied 
in a wider sense to include materials which bear 
little resemblance to natural resins. Referred 
generally to the products of step growth polymeriza- 
tion used for example, as surface coatings ( for 
example alkyd resins, epoxy resins etc ). 



19 



is : 10235 ( Part II ) - iM 



Term 
Thermoplastic 

Thermoplastic 

X*€SIIX 

Thermosetting 

Thermosetting 
resin 
THERMOSET 

Grosslinking 



Elastomer 



Definition 

( Adj. ) Having the property of softening repeatedly 
on the repeated application of heat and of harden- 
ing when cooled. 
Synthetic resin which will soften when heated and 

/^on +Vi»Ti K*a t-ifi^fgaoprl \-i\7 pvtrncir^ri ri-r HlOuldin*^. 

( Adj. ) Having the property of hardening and be- 
coming permanently infusible and insoluble. 

Synthetic resin which usually, after initially soften- 
ing, will then harden and become permanently 
infusible and insoluble when heated. 
Formation of networks of bonds between linear 
polymers. Grosslinking results in decreased solubi- 
lity and increased softening temperature and ulti- 
mately Complete msoiuuiiity anu imusiuiiity. 



Fibre-forming 
polymer 



( Adj. elastomeric. ) 

Synthetic rubbers and rubber-like polymers. 

Polymer from which continuous filaments can be 
formed and comprising a regular chain structure 
permitting close alignment of cumulatively strong 
intermolecular forces. 

Crystalline polymer Polymer in which regularity of structure permits 
alignment of neighbouring chain molecules into 
regions of high structural regularity or crystallinity, 
for example polyethylene is a crystallizing polymer 
and mechanical and physical properties are very 
dependent on the amount of crystallinity present. 

Combination of two materials in such a way that the 
properties are more useful in particular application 
than those of the individual components. Typical 
composites containing a strong fibre, ( for example 
glass, Carbon, ceramic ) in a soft matrix ( for 



Composites 

REINFORCED 
PLASTICS 



iT^T*i r^*^Tt7 ^et^T* 






1 f h*at 1/^ t^i^ 



Inert plastics 



(a) Chemical : Non-reactive in a given chemical 
situation; 

(b) Medical : Do not react with the tissue in any way 
after implantation and are themselves unaffected. 
A theoretical concept used in reference to levels of 
tissues acceptance or tolerance. The only true test 
is complete tissue tolerance by the host tissues over 
the lifetime of the recipient. 



20 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term 

Benign reactivity 
{ BENIGNLY 
REACTIVE ) 



Definition 

Reaction or interaction with the tissues may occur, 
but does not have any adverse effect. Such a 
material may react strongly and play an active part 
in healing processes. 



NontnromDogenic Plastics materials wnicn proviae a non-uiottiug uou- 
plastics materials haemolysing blood/plastic interface. 

2.7 Plastics — Polymer Chemistry 

Macromolecule 



Manomer 



Polymer 

High polymer 
Homopolymer 

Copolymer 



Polymerization 
Polycbndensation 



Step growth poly- 
merization 

Addition polymeri- 
zation 



Very large molecule usually comprising recurring 
structural units. 

( Adj. monomeric. ) 

Substance composed of molecules which are capa- 
ble of reacting with like or unlike molecules to form 
polymers. 

Molecules which consist essentially of recurring 
structural units. 

Polymer consisting of very large molecules. 

Polymer containing one structural unit only prepa- 
red by the polomerization of one monomer. 

Polymer containing more than one structural unit 
nrenared bv the Dolvmerization of a mixture of two 
or more monomers, or of a monomer and a polymer 
of low molecular weight. Copolymers have entirely 
different properties from those of a mechanical 
mixture of their homopolymers. 

Formation of polymers from simpler molecules. 

Formation of polymers from simpler molecules by 
their chemical combination with the elimination of 
simple by-products such as water. 

Incorporation of molecules step-by-step into a chain 
of progressively increasing size. Has largely repla- 
ced the term polycondensation. 

Involves addition to a double bond by a free radical 
or ionic mechanism to produce polymers in which 
the molecular weight is the sum of that of the com- 
ponent monomers^ and the repeating unit contains 
the same atoms as the monomer. 



21 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term 

Chain growth poly- 
merization 



Initiator 



Catalyst 



Accelerator 
PROMOTOR 

Hardener 



Inhibitor 



Definition 

Rapid formulation of large molecules by radical or 
ionic mechanisna usually from monomers containing 
ethylenic double bonds. 

Chemical compound added to monomer to start 
polymerization is usually by formation of free radi- 
cals or ions. Initiators are degraded or incorporated 
into the polymer ( contrast with catalyst ). 

Substance which hastens polymerization or cure 
when added in relatively small quantities compared 
to the amounts of primary reactants, and which does 
not become a component part of the chain. 

Added to polymerization system ( monomer + initi- 
ator ) to hasten the process, for example amine used 
in cold-curing acrylic cement. 

Chemical compound added to the synthetic resin to 
bring about crosslinking and network formation, for 
example amines and polyamides used with expoxy 
resins. 

Added to ethylenic monomers to prevent polymeri- 
zation during storage, for example quionones. Act 
by removal of free radicals. 



2.8 Plastics ~- Technology 

Compounding 



Milling 



Anti-oxidant 



Ultra-violet stabili- 
zer 



Incorporation of ingredients to modify specific 
polymer properties and improve resistance to degra- 
dation. 

Process used to soften polymers in which the mate- 
rial is passed between rollers rotating at different 
speeds usually heated. Additives may be incorpora- 
ted during the process. 

Substances added to plastics materials or rubbers to 
prevent oxidative degradation during processing or 
in-service lifetime. 

Substance added to plastics materials to inhibit 
ultra-violet-induced degradation. Acts either by 
chemical action on initial products of degradation, 
or as a selective absorber of radiation. 



22 



IS : 16235 ( Part it ) - 198^ 



Term 
Anti-static agent 



Definition 

Material added to rubbers and plastics to make them 
electrically conductive and thus to reduce hazards 
arising from build-up of static electricity, for example 
fine particles of carbon are incorporated into rubbers 
intended for anaesthetic use. Anti-static properties 
may deteriorate within a few months of usage. 

Liquid or solid of low vapour pressure at ordinary 
temperatures used to modify the flow properties of 
a synthetic resin or of a composition based on a syn- 
thetic resin, particularly to increase the flexibility. 

Stabilized dispersion of polymer powder in a plasti- 
cizing liquid. When heated, the polymer absorbs 
the liquid and swells to produce a coherent solid 
mass. 

Filler Inert solid substance ( for example woodflour, china 

REINFORCING clay ), added to a synthetic resin to improve 
FILLER mechanical properties. 



Plasticizer 



Plastisol 



Stock 

Encapsulation 
POTTING 



Casting 
Calendering 

Dip coating 
Dipping 

Mandrel coating 



Uncured rubber. 

Covering a device with a monomer or low molecu- 
lar weight polymer coating, subsequently polymeri- 
zed or crosslinked. 

Polymerization of a polymer /monomer syrup usually 
in a mould to provide a soild shaped device or an 
encapsulation. 

Preparation of sheet rubber or plastics of predeter- 
mined thickness by passing between rollers usually 
revolving at the same rate. May be used to coat 
cloth or other backing material. 

Coating of substrate with rubber or plastics from 
solution. 

Coating of a mould by dipping it into a solution or 
latex of rubber or plastics. Used for making gloves, 
balloons, etc. 

Application of polymer solution to a slowly rotating 
solid rod or former { mandrel ) followed by solvent 
evaporation. Used for making tubing of non-extrud- 
able materials. 



23 



I& : l02^^ ( j^art l! ) - 198^ 



Definition 

Surface coating from a latex by applying an electric 
charge to the surface to be coated to make it the 
anode in a suitable cell. 

Heating a granular polymer in a mould while pres- 
sure is applied. Used for thermosets. 

Forcing a molten thermoplastic polymer into a 
mould under pressure used for syringes, etc. 

Molten polymer is forced by a ram into a hot mould 
cavity for curing. 

Formation of hollow articles by adding powdered or 
plastisol polymer to a mould which is rotated simul- 
taneously in two planes perpendicular to each other 
while being heated. 

Hollow tube of plastics materia] is expanded into a 
mould in which it is enclosed by applications of 
high pressure air inside the tube. 

Mould release agent Lubricant, for example wax, silicone oil, used to coat 
PARTING a mould cavity to prevent the moulded piece from 

AGENT sticking to it and thus to facilitate its removal from 

the mould. 



Term 
Electrodeposition 



Compression 
moulding 

Injection 
moulding 

Transfer 
moulding 

Rotational 
moulding 



Blow moulding 



Lubricant 

Blowing 

Thermoforming 
VACUUM 
FORMING 

Extrusion 
Die 

Sintering 



Curing 

HARDENING 



( In plastics ) used to prevent sticking of thermo- 
plastic during processing. 

Process of forming sponge rubber. 

Heated plastics sheet is made to conform to a shape 
by applying vacuum or pressure. 

Process of forcing softened polymer through a die. 

Device through which polymer is extruded to give 
long lengths of uniform cross-section. 

Granules of polymer are heated under pressure 
until fusion occurs. 

Process of transforming unpolymerized or partly 
polymerized material to a fully polymerized condi- 
tion often associated with crosslinking and network 
formation. 



E4 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term 
Pot life 

Dough time 
Setting time 

Spinning 

Cold drawing 
Platen 

Runner 
Gate 



Sprue 



Flash 



Grazing 

Dimensional 
stability 



Definition 

Time during which the mixture is suitable for inten- 
ded use following addition of catalyst to a polymeri- 
zable system. 

Time required from commencement of mixing to 
form a coherent dough, for example of acrylic bone 
cement. 

Time required from commencement of mixing to 
the hardened condition at which point the material is 
no longer mouldable. Not necessarily representative 
of complete curing. 

Process of producing high polymeric fibres by the 
production of filaments from molten polymer or from 
solution. 

Stretching of filament to produce intermolecular 
alignment and consequent increase in tensile strength. 

One of a number of steel plates which serve to heat 
and to transmit pressure to the mould assembly. 
A platen may be fixed in position relative to the 
moving table or to the head of the press, or may be 
floating. 

In injection moulding, the portion of the feed with 
runs between the gate and the stalk. 

In injection moulding and in transfer moulding; 

(a) Narrow orifice through which material is injected 
into a mould cavity from the feed. 

(b) Moulded material removed from the orifice in 
the process of extracting the moulding. 

In injection moulding, that part of the feed immedi- 
ately adjacent to the nozzle of the injection cylinder 
and connecting the nozzle to the runner. 

Moulding material which escapes from a mould at a 
space between its relatively moving parts. 

Surface cracking. 

Ability to retain original dimensions. 



25 



IS : 10235 ( Part II ) - 1982 



Term 
Shrinkage 



Permeability 

Porosity 
2.9 Plastics 



Definition 

Difference in linear dimensions per unit length bet- 
ween a moulding and the mould cavity in which it 
was moulded, both the mould and the moulding 
being at normal room temperature when measured. 

Ability to permit passage of gases or of small mole- 
cules in solution. 

Ability to permit passage of liquids. 

Types 



Natural rubber Natural cis-polyisoprene. Obtained as a latex from 

HEVEA RUBBER the rubber tree Hevea brasiliensis. 



Silicone 

POLYS- 
ILOXANE 

SILICONE 
FLUID 

SILICONE GEL 

SILICONE 
RUBBER 

POLYDI ME- 
THYL 
SILOXANE 



Polyurethane 



Family of polymeric materials in which the recurring 
chemical group contains silicon and oxygen atoms 
as links in the main chain. 



Note — Commercial products may be toxic and 
should not be used in medicine. Medical grade rubbers 
are prepared with non-toxic vulcanizers. 

Synthetic rubbers typically prepared by reaction of 
a difunctional alcohol and a di-isocyanate. 



Synthetic rubber Synthetic elastomeric material. 



Neoprene 

POLYCHLORO- 
PRENE 

Polyisoprene 
ISOPRENE 
RUBBER 

Tissue adhesives 



GRF adhesive 



Synthetic rubber comprising polymers of 2-chloro 
1 : 3-butadiene ( chloroprene ). 

Synthetic rubber comprising synthetic c»-polyiso- 
prene prepared by stereoregular polymerization of 
isoprene. 

Adhesive used primarily as an alternative to sutures 
for blood vessels and soft tissues. 

An adhesive based on a combination of gelatin with 
a resorcinol formaldehyde resin. 



26 



i^ X I0l3^ ( f>art tt ) . 198:^ 



Term Definition 

Acrylics Synthetic polymers of acrylic acid, its esters and 

other derivatives. 

Thermoplastic material composed of polymers of 
methylmethacryiate. 

Acrylic cement Two component room temperature hardening 

BONE CEMENT cement. The liquid component is usually methyl- 
methacryiate monomer containing an amine or 
other activator. The solid component is a fine 
powder of polymethylemethacrylate copolymer con- 
taining a polymerization initiator. 



Polymethylmetha- 
crylate 



Cyanoacrylate 
adhesives 



Vinyl polymers 
VINYL 



Polyvinyl chloride 



Polyvinylidene 
chloride 

Polystyrene 



Polyvinyl alcohol 



Polyolefins 
Polyethylene 



Liquid monomers of alkyl oc-cyanoacrylate esters 
characterized by very rapid polymerization initiated 
by moisture. Sensitive to hydrolytic breakdown, 
giving formaldehyde and therefore tissue toxic to 
varying degree. 

Synthetic resin formed by the polymerization of 
chemical compounds containing the group CHg = 
CH_. 

Thermoplastic composed of polymers of vinyl 
chloride. 

Thermoplastic composed of polymers of vinylidene 
chloride ( 1, 1-dischlorethylene ) 

Thermoplastic produced by the polymerization of 
styrene ( vinyl benzene ). 

Thermoplastic composed of polymers of the hypothe- 
tical vinyl alcohol, soluble in water when the content 
of hydroxyl groups in the polymer is sufficiently high. 
Obtained by partial or complete hydrolysis of poly- 
vinyl esters, usually by complete hydrolysis of poly- 
vinyl acetate. 

Prepared by polymerization of olefins, the most 
common being polyethylene and polypropylene. 

Thermoplastic polymer of ethylene, normally trans- 
lucent, tough waxy solid which is unaffected by 
water and by a large range of chemicals. 



27 



i^ t i0233 ( Part II ) - 198^ 



Term 

Low density 
polyethylene 
LDPE 



High density 
polyethylene 
HDPE 

Ultra high 

molecular weight 

polyethylene 

UHMWPE 

Polypropylene 



Polyester linear 



Definition 

Lower molecular weight polyethylene made by high 
pressure process in which the chains carry short 
branches. Closeness of packing is reduced and thus 
the density. Chains ( crystaUinity ) still occur giving 
toughness and chemical resistance. 

High molecular weight polyethylene in which the 
molecules are sterically very regular, and unbranched, 
thus permitting close packing. 

Very high molecular weight product preferred for 
surgical use. 



Thermoplastic polyolefin resin prepared by the con- 
trolled polymerization of propylene. 
Axial orientation of the molecules is an important 
factor when the material is to be used as hinges, for 
example in finger joints. 



Fluoropolymers Polymers containing fluorine. 

Polytetrafluore- Obtained from polymerization of tetrafiuorethylene 

thylene in an aqueous medium to give a granular powder or 

PTFE aqueous dispersion. 

Polyester Polymer in which the structural units are linked by 

ester groupings obtained by condensation of one or 
more polycarboxylic acid with one or more poly- 
hydric alcohols ( alcohols containing more than one 
hydroxyl-OH group ) and if desired a minor propor- 
tion of a monocarboxylic acid. 

Usually refers to polyethylene terephthalate but 
may also include propylene and hexylene terep- 
hthalate. Linear polymers of this class are represe- 
nted by strong fibres and monofilaments, and 
tough high-gloss biaxially orientated unsupported 
films. 

Polyester resin contain unsaturation ( double bonds ) in the polymer 

chain. from the use of unsaturated carboxyjic acid. 
Dissolved in a polymerizable solvent, usually styrene, 
and hardens when a polymerization initiator is 
added. Widely used for glass fibre reinforced plastics. 



2$ 



i^t 10235 (^artU]-i98^ 



Term 
Polyamide 



Polyethylenetereph- 
thalate 



Nylon 



Polyimide 



Epoxy resin 



Polyacetal 



Polycarbonate 

Hydrophilic 
polymer 
HYDROGEL 

PolyglycoHc add 



Carbon fibre 

2.10 Bioplasts 

Bioplast 



Definition 

Polymer in which the structural units are linked by 
amide or thio-amide groupings. Many polyamides 
are fibre forming, generally known as nylons. 

Fibre-forming polyester from ethylene glycol and 
dimethylterephthalate. Also film forming. 

Generic name for all synthetic fibre-forming poly- 
amides; they can be formed into monofilaments and 
yarns characterized by great toughness, strength 
and elasticity, high melting point and good resistance 
to water and chemicals. 

Polymer containing cyclic structures in the macro- 
molecular chain prepared from reaction between a 
diamine and an anhydride. Aromatic diamines 
impart good high temperature properties. 

Typical resins formed by reaction of epichlorhydrin 
with diphenylol propane to give a diglycidyl ether. 
The epoxide groups in these react further usually 
with amines to give unfusible insoluble products. 

Polymer derived from formaldehyde with general 
formula ( HO-GHs^O~CHa-0 )nH prepared from 
reaction of difunctional alcohols with aldehydes. 

Thermoplastic^pojymer prepared from reaction bet- 
ween phosgene and diphenylol propane. 

Typically crosslinked polymers of hydroxyethyl- 
methacrylate. These materials swell in water to 
become soft and pliable. 

Linear polymer of glycolic acid. May be extruded 
into continuous filaments for use as sutures. Hydro- 
lyses in vivo and is completely absorbable. 

Fibre produced from organic fibre by pyrolysis under 
controlled conditions. 



Plastics material prepared from high molecular 
weight materials of biological origin. These materi- 
als, after chemical treatment, have temporary use 
in surgery since they are progressively absorbed. 
They may or may not produce an undesirable tissue 
reaction. 



39 



i§ ; 10235 ( ^art II ) - 198!^ 

Term 



Definition 



Fibrin 

Collagen 

Bone 

Lybphilized bone 
Alginates 
Gelatin 

Starch sponge 
Catgut 



Protein formed during blood clotting from fibrinogen 
in the presence of thrombin. Plasticized with water, 
it may be moulded into shaped articles and cross- 
linked with .formaldehyde. 

Major protein of skin, connective tissue and bone. 
It is used for surgical processes when treated with 
chemical agents. 

Protein-depleted dried bone ( bovine ), non-antigcnic, 
used as bone replacement. 

Substantially protein- free dried bone ( bovine ), non- 
antigenic since residual protein has been denatured. 

Calcium and sodium salts of aliginic acid obtained 
from seaweed. 

Degradation product of collagen following hydrolysis. 
Obtained from bones and hides by soaking in lime 
water followed by regorous purification. 

Prepared from starch by slow freezing followed by 
freeze drying. 

Bioplast suture material prepared from the serosa of 
sheep — a non-vascular collagenous tissue. 



55 



