**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1815222:2002 

SIFT ^ W^m c^ feT^ 3iR^^HH c^ ^]'£^^ c^ ^^^ ^ 

Indian Standard 

CARBON DIOXIDE AS FIRE EXTINGUISHESfG MEDIA 
FOR FIRE PROTECTION — SPECIFICATION 



ICS 13.220.10 



© BIS 2002 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



December 2002 Price Group 6 



Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fire 
Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

This standard is one of the series giving specifications for fire extinguishing media in common use and which 
are in need of specification for fire fighting purposes. These specifications are designed to establish that the 
medium in question has at least a minimum useful fire extinguishing capability and can, therefore, be reasonably 
used for fire extinguishing purposes. 

Annexes A to C of this standard specify methods for determining, respectively, water, oil and total sulphur 
compounds contents. Annexes D to G provide important information on and give recommendations relating to 
the safety and use of carbon dioxide, and they should be read carefully by all concerned with this medium. 

The composition of the Committee for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex H. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



Indian Standard 

CARBON DIOXIDE AS FIRE EXTINGUISHING MEDIA 
FOR FIRE PROTECTION — SPE<ilFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down requirements for carbon 
dioxide for use as a fire extinguishing medium. 

2 REFERENCES 

The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



IS No. 
460 

(Part 1) : 1985 
(Part 2) : 1985 

1117: 1975 
1997 : 1982 
4152: 1989 



7285 : 1988 



Title 
Test sieves 

Wire cloth test sieves {third revision) 
Perforated plate test sieves {third 
revision) 

One-mark pipettes {first revision) 
Burettes {second revision) 
Carbon dioxide cylinders for fire 
fighting purposes on boardship 
{second revision) 

Seamless steel cylinders for 
permanent and high pressure 
liquefiable gases {second revision) 



3 DEFINITION 

For the purposes of this standard, the following 
definition shall apply. 

3.1 Carbon Dioxide 

The chemical compound COj used as a fire exting- 
uishing medium. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

Carbon dioxide shall comply with the requirements 
of Table 1, when tested by the appropriate method of 
test specified in 5. 

5 METHODS OF TEST 

5.1 Safety Warning 

Attention is drawn to the need to design equipment 
for handling carbon dioxide such that it is either 
capable of withstanding the pressures involved or 
protected from them. 



Table 1 Requirements 

{Clause 4) 



Property Requirements" 

Purity, percent {v/v), Min 99.5 

Water content, percent {m/m). Max 0.0 15 

Oil content, ppm by mass. Max 5 

Total sulphur compounds content, 5.0 

Expressed as sulphur, ppm by mass, Max 
"Carbon dioxide obtained by converting dry ice to liquid will not 
usually comply with these requirements unless it has been properly 
processed to remove excess water and oil. 

5.2 Purity 

Determine the purity by gas-liquid chromatography 
using generally accepted laboratory techniques or use 
a volumetric analyser. 

The method used shall be capable of determining the 
purity with an accuracy of at least 0.1 percent. 

The sample shall not constitute more than 10 percent 
of the original quantity of carbon dioxide contained 
in the sample container. 

5.3 Water Content 

Determine the water content by the method specified 
in Annex A. 

5.4 Oil Content 

Determine the oil content by the method specified in 
Annex B. 

5.5 Total Sulphur Compounds Content 

Determine the total sulphur compounds content by the 
method specified in Annex G. 

6 PACKING 

6.1 Carbon dioxide shall be packed in gas cylinder 
conforming to IS 7285 or IS 4152. 

7 MARKING 

7.1 Each container shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked on the outside with the following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, if any; 

b) Month and year of manufacture; 

c) 'Carbon Dioxide' ; 



IS 15222 : 2002 



d) Source, year of manufacture of cylinder and 
its test pressure; 

e) Empty mass of the cylinder; and 

f) Filled mass of the cylinder. 

7.1.1 Carbon dioxide conforming to this standard may 
also be marked with BIS Standard Mark. 

7.1.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
Details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 

8 SAMPLING 

8.1 General 

Samples of carbon dioxide needed to perform all the 
tests required by this standard shall be taken from the 
same manufacturing lot, using identical sampling 
procedures. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to design equipment for 
handling carbon dioxide such that it is either capable of 
withstanding the pressures involved or protected from them, 

8.2 Sampling Equipment 

Rigid metal connections or flexible reinforced nylon 
hose should be used throughout the sampling 
equipment and shall be kept as short as possible. All 
components shall have a design pressure of not less 
than 137 bar. 

8.3 Procedure 

8.3.1 General 

Two methods of sampling are specified as follows: 

a) Direct sampling, in which the sample is 
passed to an evaporator and then directly to 
the analytical apparatus; and 

b) Sampling in cylinders, in which case the 
sample is transferred in a cylinder to a 
laboratory. 

Other methods may be used provided that they are 
shown to give equally representative samples on 
analysis (see Annexes A to C). 

8.3.2 Direct Sampling 

Connect the sampling valve by means of suitable 
connections (see 8.2) to an evaporating device and 
then via a T-piece (the free leg of which is connected 
to the dip-tube of a Drechsel bottle containing 50 mm 
of mercury covered by a layer of water on the carbon 
dioxide side) to the analytical apparatus. Thoroughly 



flush the connections, valves and the evaporating 
device with carbon dioxide before starting to take the 
sample. 

8.3.3 Sampling in Cylinders 

Use a cylinder of water capacity 1.4 kg or 2.0 kg, 
complying with the requirements of IS 7285 and with 
a valve at each end. 

An internal copper dip-tube of diameter at least 5 mm 
and of length equal to one-third of the length of the 
cylinder shall be brazed to the base of one valve, which 
shall be clearly identified. The cylinder shall be coated 
internally with tin [containing 1 percent (m/m) of lead] 
applied by hot dipping the cylinder after the walls have 
been descaled. 

First clean the sampling cylinder by removing both 
valves and washing the inside of the cylinder with 
carbon tetrachloride. Purge with a current of dry 
filtered air. Wash with methanol and repeat the 
purging. Degrease the valves using carbon 
tetrachloride, then refit them. The methanol and 
carbon tetrachloride used shall comply with the 
requirements specified in B-2. 

Support the cylinder vertically with its dip-tube valve 
uppermost. Before taking the sample, thoroughly flush 
the cylinder with a small quantity of liquid carbon 
dioxide, first through the top valve and then through 
the bottom valve. Repeat this flushing procedure, and 
leave the cylinder connected to the liquid carbon 
dioxide source via its lower valve. Then, with the upper 
valve closed, open the lower valve to admit liquid 
carbon dioxide to the cylinder. Partly open the upper 
(dip-tube) valve and continue filling until carbon 
dioxide snow is discharged from this valve. Close both 
valves. Open the top valve several times for brief 
intervals until only carbon dioxide gas is discharged 
from it. The free end of the dip-tube inside the cylinder 
will then be just above the liquid carbon dioxide level 
in the cylinder. 

Samples shall be analyzed as soon as reasonably 
practicable after collection. To withdraw the sample 
for analysis, support the sampling cylinder vertically 
with the dip-tube valve at the top. Connect the bottom 
valve of the sampling cylinder (liquid carbon dioxide) 
to an evaporating device and then via a T-piece, the 
free leg of which is connected to a tube as described 
in 8.3.2 to the analytical apparatus. Thoroughly flush 
the connections, valves and the evaporating device 
with carbon dioxide before starting the analysis. 

When sampling for the determination of water content, 
the connections to be above the dew-point to prevent 
condensation during purging. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



A-1 PRINCIPLE 



Gravimetric determination of the water content by 
passing a sample of the gas over phosphorous 
pentoxide. 

A -2 APPARATUS AND MATERIAL 

A -2.1 Two Absorption Tribes 

U-shape, the length of the limbs being 100 mm and 
the diameter of the lubes being 12 mm, fitted with 
side arms and ground-glass drilled stoppers. The tubes 
shall be filled with the desiccant {A-2.5) which shall 
be held in position by small pads of cotton wool. 

A-2.2 Flow Meter 

Float type, suitable for measuring a carbon dioxide 
flow of 200 ml/min to 2 000 ml/min. 

A-2.3 Gas Meter 

Calibrated for 1 or 2.5 litres per revolution. 

A-2.4 Test Sieves 

Of aperture sizes 425 jum and 600 nm, complying with 
the requirements of IS 460 (Part 1). 

A-2.5 Desiccant 

Sift powdered glass or clean, dry, washed sand and 
retain the portion that passes through a test sieve 
of aperture size 600 ^m but is retained on a test 
sieve of aperture size 425 (im 

In general, follow the applicable recommendations and 
requirements of IS 460 (Part 1) and IS 460 (Part 2). 

Quickly transfer to a stoppered container (a large 
weighing bottle or small stoppered jar is suitable) a 
volume of fresh phosphorus pentoxide and add about 
half as much by volume of the prepared powdered glass 
or sand. Vigorously shake the container to mix the 
components and fill the U-tubes (A-2.1) as quickly as 
possible with the mixture. 

If it is prepared in this way, it should be easy to fill the 
tube with the desiccant. If it is not easy, it is probable 
that the phosphorus pentoxide was moist before 
addition of the powdered glass or sand. 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 5.3) 

DETERMINATION OF WATER CONTENT 

Prepare the desiccant in small quantities, as required. 

A-3 SAMPLING 



Take the sample in a cylinder by the method described 
in 8.3.3. About 120 g of carbon dioxide is required 
for each determination. 

A-4 DETERMINATION 

After the evaporating device, connect the exit side of 
the T-piece to the absorption tubes (A-2.1), the flow 
meter (A-2.2), and the gas meter (A-2.3) in series, in 
that order. 

Carefully open the regulating valve and absorption 
tube taps and allow the gas to flow at a rate of about 
500 ml/min for 10 min; the carbon dioxide displaces 
the air in the absorption tubes. Close all taps, 
disconnect the absorption tubes and wipe the tubes 
surfaces with a dry, soft cloth. Place the absorption 
tubes in the balance case, leave for 20 min, then weigh 
them to the nearest 0.5 mg. 

Reconnect the absorption tubes. Note the reading of 
the gas meter then allow the gas to pass at a steady 
rate of 500 ml/min to 1 000 ml/min for 1 h. 

Close the taps and reducing valve. Note the gas meter 
reading. 

Place the absorption tubes in the balance case, leave 
for 20 min, then weigh them to the nearest 0.5 mg. 

A-5 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 

The water content, expressed as a percentage by mass, 
is given by the formula: 

54.29 (mj-m,) 



where 
m 



/n, = 



V = 



V 



initial mass, in grams, of the absorption 

tubes; 

final mass, in grams, of the absorption 

tubes; and 

volume, in litres, at 20 °C and 760 mmHg 

of gas passed, read from the gas meter. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



B-1 PRINCIPLE 



Vapourization of a liquid sample and removal of any 
oil by passing the gas through carbon tetrachloride. 
Removal of residual oil in the cylinder by washing 
with more carbon tetrachloride and combination of 
the two carbon tetrachloride solutions. Spectrometric 
measurement of the oil content at 3 460 nm (the C-H 
stretching frequency) by means of an infra-red 
spectrometer. 

B-2 REAGENTS 

All reagents shall be of recognized analytical grade. 

B-2,1 Carbon Tetrachloride, Distilled 

The reagent shall not show an infra-red absorption 
peak s( 3 460 nm. 

B-2.2 Standard Oil Solution 

Dissolve 0.020 g of liquid paraffin in carbon 
tetrachloride, transfer quantitatively to a 100 ml one- 
mark volumetric flask and dilute to the mark with 
carbon tetrachloride. 

One ml of this solution contains 200 ng of oil. 

B-3 APPARATUS 

B-3.1 Two bubblers as shown in Fig. 1. 

B-3. 2 Drechsel bottle of capacity 250 ml. 

B-3.3 Flow meter, float type, suitable for measuring 
carbon dioxide flow of 200 ml/min to 2 000 ml/min. 

B-3.4 Gas meter, calibrated for 1 litre or 2.5 litres per 
revolution. 

B-3.5 Infra-red spectrometer and accessories, suitable 
for making measurements at 3 460 nm. 

B-4 SAMPLING 

Take the sample by the method described in 8.3.3. About 
700 g to 1 000 g is required for each determination. 

NOTE — A set of cylinders should preferably be retained for 
sampling for the determination of oil content and should not be 
used for other purposes. 

B-5 PROCEDURE 

B-5.1 Preparation of Test Solution 

Place 100 ml of the carbon tetrachloride (B-2,1) in 
the Drechsel bottle (B-3. 2) and 25 ml in each 
bubbler (B-3.1). Support the weighed sampling 
cylinder with the dip-tube valve at the top, connect 
the bottom valve of the weighed cylinder to theT-piece 



ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.4) 

DETERMINATION OF OIL CONTENT 

of the evaporating device and then to the Drechsel 
bottle, the two bubblers, the flow meter and the gas 
meter in series, in that order, using short rubber 
connections. 



No carbon dioxide shall be allowed to pass to the 
atmosphere through the outlet of the T-piece. 

Weigh the cylinder, totally expand the contents of the 
cylinder through the ab.sorption train at a flow rate of 
about 1 000 ml/min, and read the volume of gas passed 
(this serves as a check on the amount of carbon dioxide 
used for the test). 

NOTES 

1 Some evaporation of the carbon tetrachloride will take place. If 
this is excessive, stop the flow of gas and refill the absorption 
bottles, noting the volume of carbon tetrachloride. 

2 In view of the toxic nature of carbon tetrachloride, the effluent 
gas from this determination should be discharged to the outside 
air. 

Reweigh the sampling cylinder, taking care to use the 
same valve fittings as at the first weighing. Remove 
the valve not attached to the dip-tube and wash the 
inside of the cylinder with 25 ml of the carbon 
tetrachloride. Wash the interior of the evaporating 
device and valves with carbon tetrachloride and 
combine this solution with the cylinder washings and 
the contents of the bubblers. Make up the combined 
solutions to some suitable, definite volume, 

B-5.2 Preparation of Blank Test Solution 

Evaporate a volume of carbon tetrachloride, equal to 
the total volume (including any additions) of carbon 
tetrachloride used in the absorption train plus 
washings, to the volume of the combined solution 
(see B-5.1) and subsequently treat it in the same way 
as the test solution. 

B-5.3 Spectrometric Measurements 

Following the manufacturer's instructions for the 
operation of the instrument, determine the absorbances 
of the test solution and of the blank test solution at 
the wavelength of maximum absorption (approxi- 
mately 3 460 nm). From the calibration graph (B-5.4), 
deduce the masses of oil corresponding to the measured 
absorbances. 

B-5.4 Preparation of the Calibration Graph 

Prepare suitable dilutions of the standard solution (B-2.2) 
to cover the range within which the mass of oil in the 
sample is expected to be found. Measure the absorbance 
of each of these solutions as described in B-5.3. Prepare 
a calibration graph by plotting the masses of oil against 
the corresponding absorbances. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



DIRECTION OF GAS FLOW 




ORIFICE JET 
5 + 0-5 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Bubbler for the Determination of Oil Content 



B-6 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 

The oil content, expressed in parts per million by mass, 
is given by the formula: 



where 



Wj = mass, in micrograms, of oil in test solution; 

m^ = mass, in micrograms, of oil in blank test 

solution; and 

Wj = mass, in grams, of sample taken. 

NOTE — The mass, nij can be checked by calculation from the 
mass of 1 litre of carbon dioxide at 20°C and 1013 mbar 
(760 mm Hg), which is 1 .84 g. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.5) 
DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SULPHUR COMPOUNDS CONTENT 
C-1 PRINCIPLE 



Reduction of any sulphur compounds present by 
passing equal volumes of the sample and purified 
hydrogen over silica wool at 900°C. Removal of the 
hydrogen sulphide thus produced by passing the gases 
through neutral cadmium chloride solution. Deter- 
mination of sulphur by adding a known amount of 
iodine solution and determining the excess iodine by 
titration with standard volumetric sodium thiosulphate 
solution. 

C-2 REAGENTS 

All reagents shall be of recognized analytical grade 
and the water used shall be distilled water or water of 
equivalent purity. 

C-2.1 Hydrogen 

Gas produced electrolytically. 

C-2.2 Hydrochloric Acid 

With concentration of 1.18 g/ml. 

C-2.3 Soda Lime 

In lumps which pass a test sieve of aperture size 2 mm 
but retained on a test sieve of aperture size 1.8 mm, 

NOTE — The soda lime should not have been used in other 
determinations where oxygen has been used, as explosions may occur. 

C-2.4 Cadmium Chloride 

50 g/1 neutral solution. 

Dissolves g of cadmium chloride in 100 ml of water 
and add, drop by drop, approximately 1 mol/1 
solution hydroxide solution until the first cloudiness 
appears. 

C-2.5 Sodium Thiosulphate 

Standard volumetric solution, c (Na^ 8203) = 0.02 
mol/1 solution! Hitherto expressed as 0.02 N standard 
volumetric solution. 

C-2.6 Iodine 

Standard volumetric solution cH^l = 0.01 mol/1 
solution". 

C-2.7 Starch Indicator Solution 

Make a paste of I g of soluble starch with a little water, 



0.02 N standard volumetric solution. 



pour the paste with constant stirring into 100 ml of 
boiling water and boil for 1 min. Allow to cool. 

C-3 APPARATUS 

The apparatus is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2. 

C-3.1 Flow Meter 

Float type, suitable for measuring hydrogen flow of 
200 ml/min to 2 000 ml/min. 

C-3.2 Flow Meter 

Float type, suitable for measuring carbon dioxide flow 
of 200 ml/min to 2 000 ml/min. 

C-3.3 Two Furnace 'Ribes 

Made of transparent silica, each 500 mm long, of 
internal diameter 16 mm with one end reduced to 
3 mm internal diameter. 

Place a loose packing of silica wool not less than 
200 mm long in the tube with a small plug of silica 
wool near the wide end to reduce radiation heating of 
the polyvinyl chloride connection. 

C-3.4 Furnace and Control 

A twin-tube furnace, about 460 mm long, to operate 
at 900°C, and fitted with a thermocouple and 
temperature indicator. 

C-3.5 Soda Lime Tower 

Or suitable absorption tube. 

C-3.6 'Y' l\ibe 
C-3.7 Bubbler 

As shown in Fig. 1. 

C-3.8 Burette 

Of capacity 10 ml, complying with the requirements 
of IS 1997. 

C-3.9 Pipette 

Of capacity 2 ml, complying with the requirements of 
IS 1117. 

C-3.10 Test Sieves 

Of aperture size 2 mm and 1.8 mm, complying with 
the requirements of IS 460 (Part 1). 

C-4 SAMPLING 

Take the sample in a cylinder by the method described 
in 8.3.3. About 120 g is required for each determination. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



-FLOW METER 



CO2 
SUPPLY 



-SILICA WOOL PACKING 



SODA LIME 




SILICA WOOL 




FLOW METER- 



-AeSORBER 



HYDROGEN 
SUPPLY 



Fig. 2 Apparatus for the Determination of Total Sulphur Compound Content 



Connect the outlet of the evaporating device to the 
apparatus shown in Fig. 2. All connections shall be 
as short as possible and shall be made of polyethylene 
or polyvinyl chloride. 

C-5 PROCEDURE 

Place 25 ml of the neutral cadmium chloride 
solution (C-2.4) in the absorber and connect it to the 
apparatus. Pass the hydrogen (C-2.1) at a flow rate 
of 500 ml/min through the cold furnace tubes for 
about 5 min to purge the system of air before heating 
is commenced. Then raise the temperature of the 
furnace to 900°C. 

Pass carbon dioxide and hydrogen into the system 
at an accurately known and steady flow rate (500 
ml/min for each gas) for about 2 h with the furnace 
maintained at 900"C ± 10°C. Note the times at 
which the determination was begun and ended or 
expand a known mass of carbon dioxide through 
the apparatus. 

Disconnect the bubbler and close the hydrogen 
cylinder. Remove the jet of the absorber and wash it 
with a small volume of water, adding the washings 
to the remainder of the cadmium chloride solution. 
By means of the pipette (C-3.9), add 2 ml of the 



standard volumetric iodine solution (C-2.6) to the 
bubbler, followed by 2 ml of the concentrated 
hydrochloric acid (C-2.?). Back titrate the excess 
iodine with the standard volumetric sodium 
thiosulphate solution (C-2.5), using the starch 
solution (C-2.7) as indicator. 

C-6 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 

The total sulphur compounds content, expressed as 
sulphur in parts per million by mass, is given by the 
formula: 

320 (2.00 -V) 



m^ 



where 



V = volume, in millimetres, of sodium thio- 
sulphate solution used; and 

m^ = mass, in grams, of sample taken. 

NOTE — The mass, m^ may be obtained by weighing or by 
calculation using the formula: 



m^ = 0.001 MxAxt 



where 



A = flow rate, in mm/min, at 20°C and 1013 mbar (760 

mm Hg), of carbon dioxide; and 
r = time offlow, in minutes. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



ANNEX D 

{Foreword) 

GENERAL PROPERTIES 

D-1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES sparks which can be hazardous in an explosive 

A number of the important physical properties of 

Table 2 Physical Properties of Carbon Dioxide 



carbon dioxide are given in Table 2. 



D-2 ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY 

Carbon dioxide complying with the requirements for 
purity specified in this standard has a very low 
electrical conductivity and can be used to extinguish 
fires involving live electrical equipment. 

D-3 EFFECTS ON MATERIALS 

Carbon dioxide is stable and inert to most common 
materials. 

D-4 STATIC ELECTRICITY 

In some circumstances, the discharge of carbon dioxide 
can cause a build-up of static electricity. This can cause 



{Clause D-1) 



Property 


Value 


Relative molecular mass 


44 


Sublimation point at atmospheric pressure, °C 


-78.5 


Critical temperature, °C 


31 


Critical pressure, bar 


73.8 


Critical volume, m'/kg 


0.002 15 


Critical density, kg/m' 


466.1 


Equilibrium vapour pressure at 20°C, bar 


57.3 


Vapour density at 20° C and 1 bar, kg/m' 


1.84 


Equilibrium vapour density at 20°C, kg/m' 


774 


Triple point, °C 


-56.6 


Bar 


5.19 



D-S TOXICOLOGY 

Information on the toxicology of carbon dioxide is 
given in Annex G. 



ANNEX E 

{Foreword) 

SAFETY PRECAUTIONS FOR HANDLING 



E-1 Carbon dioxide is shipped/transported from the 
manufacturer as a liquefied gas in bulk under pressure 
at low temperature; and in cylinders under higher 
pressure at ambient temperatures. All precautions 
pertaining to the safe handling and operation of 
containers, piping and equipment under pressure 
should be observed when filling fire fighting 
equipment with the medium. 

E-2 During the discharge of containers of carbon dioxide, 
low temperatures can arise through expansion of the 



liquid to gas and solid. This can present a hazard of frost 
bum. Gloves and eye protection should be worn when 
transferring carbon dioxide from one container to another. 

E-3 Transfer of carbon dioxide should be carried out 
in a well-ventilated area or in the open air. 

E-4 Carbon dioxide is much heavier than air and can 
collect in pits, cellars and low lying areas. Care should 
be taken when entering such areas on sites where 
carbon dioxide has been used. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



ANNEX F 

(Foreword) 

COMPATIBILITY 



Carbon dioxide may be used simultaneously with other 
types of fire extinguishing media for fire fighting 



purposes, with no known indications that 
extinguishing efficiency is affected. 



ANNEX G 

(Foreword) 

TOXICOLOGY 



G-1 GENERAL 



The principal action of carbon dioxide is to cause 
suffocation, although it is mildly toxic in its own right. 

At concentrations of 3 percent to 4 percent (v/v) in 
air, the respiration rate is increased and headaches 
can be caused. 

At concentrations of 9 percent (v/v), personnel can 
lose consciousness within minutes, this being preceded 
by disorientation, visual disturbance, ringing in the 
ears, tremors, etc. 

At a concentration of about 20 percent (v/v), death 
will follow in 20 min to 30 rain. 



G-2 PRECAUTIONS AND TREATMENT 

In practice, concentrations of 30 percent (v/v) or 
more are employed for total flooding systems. 
Similarly, high concentrations could be encountered 
near to the nozzles of hand extinguishers or local 
application systems. Such concentrations are highly 
hazardous for persons and special precautions 
should be taken depending upon the specific 
conditions of use. 

Persons suffering from exposure to carbon dioxide 
should immediately move or be moved to fresh air. 
Medical aid should always be sought in the event of 
such over-exposure. 



IS 15222 : 2002 



ANNEX H 

{Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 



Organization 

Minisiry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Aiipori Authority of India, New Delhi 

Andlira Pradesh Fire Services, Hyderabad 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Bombay Fire Brigade, Mumbai 

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Centre for Environment and Explosive Safety, Delhi 

Concord Arai Pvt Limited, Chennai 
Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Fire), Pune 
Defence Research and Development Organization, Delhi 

Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, Hyderabad 

Engincer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarter, New Delhi 

Fire and Safety Appliances Company, Kolkata 
Home (Police Department), Hyderabad 
flome Department (Fire Service), Chennai 

In persona! capacity (3i/2965-A, Vennala High School, Vennala, Cochin) 
In personal capacity (29/25, Rajendra Nagar, New Delhi ) 
Insiiiuiion of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 

Kooveiji Devshi & Co (P) Limited, Mumbai 

K.V. Fire Chemicals, Navi Mumbai 

Loss Prevention Association of India, Mumbai 

Mather and Plait (India) Limited, New Delhi 
MECON Limited, Ranchi 

Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Ncwagc Industries, Muinbai 

Northern Railway, New Delhi 

Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 



Representative(s) 
Shri Om Prakash (Chairman) 
Shri L. C. Guita 

Shri H. S, Rawat {Alternate) 
Shri SwARANjrr Sen 
Chief FiRi: Officer 
Chief Fire Officer 

Shri G. S. Sawant (Alternate) 
DrT. RSharma 

Dr A. K. Gupta (Alternate) 
Deplity Inspector General (Fire) 

Shri S. L. Nagarkar (Alternate) 
Chief Engineer (E) I 
Shri A. K. Kapoor 

Shri H. S. Kaparwan (Alternate) 
Shri R. Ramakrishnan 
Col G. p. Krishnamukthy 
Director (Fire Safety) 

Deputy Director (Fire Safety) (Alternate) 
Shri R. C. Sharma 

Shri Surinder Kumar (Alternate) 

Shri M. Ganqaraju 

Shri V. K. Verma (Alternate) 
ShriR. A. DUBEY 

Shri Ajay Shankar (Alternate) 

Shri S. N. Kundu 

Deputy Director (Fire Safety) 

Director 

Deputy Director (Alternate) 
ShriG. B.Menon 
Shri S. K. Dheri 
President 

General Secretary (Alternate) 

Shri P. H. Sethna 

Shri N. T. Panjwani (Alternate) 

Shri H. M. Sabadra 
Managing Director 

Shri D. K. Sarkar (Alternate) 

Shri Deepak Agarwal 
Shri R. N. Chachra 

Shri Sunil Das (Alternate) 
Shri D, K. Shami 
Shri B. J. Shah 

Shri A. M. Shah (Alternate) 
Shri 1. M. Mansoori 
Shri R. P. Saxena 

Shri Neeraj Sharma (Alternate) 



(Continued on page 11) 



10 



IS 15222 : 2002 



(Conniiued from page 10) 

Organization 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 
Real Value Appliances Limited, New Delhi 
Sale)!. Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 

State Bank of India, Mumbai 
State Fire Training Centre, Mumbai 
Steel Authority of India, Rorukela 

Steel Authority of India, Bokaro 

Steelage Industries Limited, New Delhi 

Surex Production and Sales (P) Limited, Kolkata 

Tariff Advisory Committee, Chennai 

Tariff Advisory Committee, Mumbai 

Vijay Fire Protection Systems Pvt Limited, Mumbai 

West Bengal Fire Service, Kolkata 

BIS Directorate General 



Representative(s) 
Joint Director (Process) 
Shri Ashutosh Mangal 
Shri IrrENDRA Shah 

Shri Sandip Shah (Alternate) 
Shri J. S. Gahlaut 
Dr Navinchandra Jain 

Shri B. N. Das 

Shri B. R Das {Alternate) 
Shri A. Rautel^ 

Shri C. P Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Shiv Nath 

Shri V. Kamalanatha (Alternate) 
ShriTaritSur 

Shri D. Neogi (Alternate) 
ShriAMukherjee 

Shri H. C. Mahesh Kumar (Alternate) 
ShriT. R. A. Krishnanl 
Shri Harish Salgt 
Shri B. Pathak 

Shri S. K. Jain, Director & Head {Civ Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 



Member Secretary 

Shri S. Chaturvedi 

Joint Director (Civ Engg), BIS 



11 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed tO' the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. CED 22 (5951). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STAND i\RDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 



Central 



Eastern 



Nortliern 



Southern 



Western 



Branches 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 

SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
C.I T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17, 323 38 41 



f337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 
f 254 12 16, 254 14 42 
1254 25 19, 254 13 15 

f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD, 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



