**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10642 (1983) : General guidelines for consumer sensory 
evaluation of foods and beverages [FAD 14: Drinks and 
Carbonated Beverages] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1 0642 - 1 983 

(Reaffirmed 2005) 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL GUIDELJNES FOR 

CONSUMER SENSORY EVALUATION OF 

FOODS AND BEVERAGES 



tJDC 663/604 : 543 92 ( 026 ) 




(D Cspynght Hf83 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MAS^^K. BHAVAN, ^ HAHADUR SHAM ZAiAR MARG 

Cf 2 J'ftiftmbtr 1983 



IS : 10642 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR 

CONSUMER SENSORY EVALUATION OF 

FOODS AND BEVERAGES 

Sensory Evaluation Sectional Committee, AFDC 38 

Chairman Representing 

♦Dr G. Sadasivan Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute 

( ICAR ), New Delhi 

Members 

Agbicultural Maukktikg- Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 

Abviser to the Goverkment of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

OF India 

Shri T. V, Mathew ■( Alternate ) 
Dr a. S. Aiyar Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Associa- 

tion of India, Bombay 
Dr Brahma Singh Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 

SHRt N. Srinivasalu ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Ghadha Central Committee for Food Standards, NewX)elhi 

Assistant Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri Om P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Director of Research Coffee Board, Bangalore 

Guptaster ( Alternate ) 
Smt HARSiMaAT Kaur Gill The Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd, 

Chandigarh 

Shri B. M. L. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Govindarajan In personal capacity ( 2701 First Main Road^ Mysore ) 

Shri K. L. Gupta Tea Board, Calcutta 

Dr S. K. Gupta National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Dr B. N. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Dr E. K. Jayanarayanan Mohan Meakin Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Dr B. K. Jha Yezdi Distilleries, Mysore 

Shri ViTTAL Mallya United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. J. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Mansingh Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri N. J. Menon McDowell & Co Ltd, Shertally 

Dr a. G. Naik Kurade Suman Food Consultants, New Delhi 



*Dr. G. Sadasivan was the Chairman elected for the meeting in which this standard 
was finalized. 

( Continued on pa^e 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian -Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10642 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shki S. N. Pakdey ah India Distillers' Association, New Delhi 

Shki B. L. Khanna ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Smt ) P. PtJSHPAMMA College of Home Science, Andhra Pradesh Agricul- 

tural University, Hyderabad 
Dr ( Smt ) P. Gkervani ( Alternate ) 
Db K. G. Ragisuveer Central Food Technological Research Institvite 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Brig P. G. S. Sagema Technical Standardization Committee ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Deputy Technioai. Adviser ( Alternate ) 
Sum S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Y. G. Vaidya ( Alternate ) 
Brig R. N. Varma Quartermaster Generals' Branch, Army Headquar- 

ters, New Delhi 
Lt-Col S. Kapoou ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Walter Food Specialities Ltd, Moga 

Shri A. K. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. PuiiNANAisroAM, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojfficio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K. Das Gupta 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Sensory Evaluation of Basic Standards Subcommittee, AFDG 38 : 1 

Convener 

Shri V. S. Govindarajan 
2701 F'irst Main Road, Mysore 

Members 
Agriccltuiial Marketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 

Adviser to the Government Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

OF India 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, K. Gupta National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Dr E. K. Jayan akayanan Mohan Meakin Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Shri Vittal \\ allya United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shrt N. J. Ml NGN ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Manstngh Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr K. G. Raghuveeb Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Dr G. Sadaswan Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, 

( ICAR), New Delhi 
Brig P. G, S. Sagera Technical Standardization Committee ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Deputy Tiiichnioal Adviser ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10642 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR 

CONSUMER SENSORY EVALUATION OF 

FOODS AND BEVERAGES 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 August 1983, after the draft finahzed by the Sensory 
Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Most of consumer products in general ard specially foods are 
produced to satisfy consumer needs and specifications. Therefore, there 
is a need for ascertaining the degree of satisfaction of consumer with a 
product. The methods of assessment known as the consumer sensory 
evaluation or consumer test in the food field should be designed 
to get a realistic picture of consumer reaction expectation and is essential 
before the final or national test marketing, can be taken up with 
confidence. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes guidelines for consumer testing of foods 
and beverages in general. It is expected to provide an insight into 
consumer reactions, expectations and market potentials with regard to 
the product under study. 

Note ~~ These guidelines will have to be tailored to the individual objective of 
enquiry and type of product. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10642 - 1983 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply, 

2.1 Consumer Sensory Evaluation/Consumer Test — is a planned 
research study in which consumers are asked to evaluate the product for 
acceptance optimum quality or desned quality variation. Consumers 
are current or potential users of a product or of a proposed product 
( target population ). 

2.2 Focus Group — consists of representatives of typical consumers 
who are trend setters and leaders of specific population groups 
who can define and describle the sensory responses to a prototype 
or production sample on changes for improvement as well as project 
concept for newer desirable products for future. 

2.3 Central Location Tests — are an extension of small scale 
acceptance preference tests in lesser time and expense. 

2.4 In-home tests are testing the product in the homes of the consu- 
mers under normal or near-normal family use conditions, 

3. PRINCIPLE 

3.1 Consumer tests, to be most effective should be based on a systems 
approach. In a product development system the consumer concepts 
of a product in the beginning and consumer reaction to the product 
at the end are very important and are directly based on consumer tests. 
The builiding of the R&D prototype is mainly based on laboratory 
sensory evaluation or trained panel evaluations and require to be related 
to consumer concept and consumer response at appropriate stages. 

Decisions on future direction of product development efforts are 
often based on consumer tests. Hence it is important that these tests 
should be conducted by adequate and standardized methods for full 
and meaningful utilization of their results. 

4. METHODS 

4.1 Concept Identification — The concept of individual foods required 
by the consumer, feasibility studies on a product achieving sensory 
reality, improvements or modifications to be made to existing foods, 
checking on marketing groups projection and management desires are 
necessary for concept identification. These are to be undertaken by a 
survey of focus groups of consumers who are trend setters, innovators, 
outgoing and capable of communicating ideas. 

A clear understanding of the product's concept, requirements and 
the origin of those requirements should be obtained in this study on the 
following lines. 



IS : 10642 - 1983 

4*2 Concept Viability — This assesses consumer interest, intent to 
purchase , expected frequency of use, etc, about the product. The 
information is used to determine whether the concept is worth further 
expenditure in terms of development. This type of enquiry is familiar 
in marketing studies. 

4.3 Consumer's Ideal Product Concept Identification — Concept 
generation and refinement with a clear and concise description of the 
proposed product in terms of its sensory and functional properties is 
carried out with focus groups. Sensory attribute descriptions should be 
precise and concrete like sweet, bitter, tough, mushy, viscous, etc. They 
should not be vague and conceptual like soft texture, rich taste, natural 
flavour, etc. The focus group could be introduced in a preliminary 
session to the precise terms and meanings before the regular tests are 
started. 

4.4 Product development/modification is carried out in the laboratory 
and sensory quality attributes checked by laboratory panel trained for 
evaluation ( IS : 8140-1976* ) for consumer product concept conformity, 
shelf-life and packaging parameters. 

4.5 Consumer testing requires careful planning based on well defined 
objectives to yield reliable and valid information of importance. 

4.6 The methodology to be followed in conducting a meaningful 
consumer test is as follows: 

a) Definition of the clear objectives — A clear statement of specifications 
and objectives based on the consumer concepts defined by focus 
group is formulated. The objective should necessarily be the 
assessment of consumer reaction/preference with respect to 
product development, reformulation and ingredient replacement 
which should be clearly spelt out before starting the study. 

b) Identification of Target Population — To obtain valid results 
and generalize them with greater confidence identification 
of target population based on the product and the objective 
is critical. The choice is made based on apriori information 
-available such as food habits, ethnic groups, income groups, 
sales information of a similar product, etc. If no such information 
is available, alternative sampling procedures based on general 
sampling principles are to be made use of. Periodic updating is 
necessary to account for shifts in consumer attitudes. 



*Guide for selection of panel for sensory evaluation of foods and beverages. 

5 



IS : 10642 - 19B3 

5. PERIOD OF STUDY 

5,1 The study should be conducted within a stipulated fixed time 
interval which is decided based on constraints of resources ( time and 
money ) of testing, test method season and so on. 

6. REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE PREPARATION 

6.1 It is necessary to make sure that the test samples are truly represen- 
tative and batch to batch variation is minimum. Consumer tests should 
be done with sample turned out under typical production conditions 
or at least on pilot scale; but not on samples from laboratory scale. The 
samples are to be evaluated under reasonably representative conditions 
of normal consumption pattern which can never be achieved under 
laboratory scale or central location tests. 

?• TEST PROCEDURES 

7.1 Initial focus group tests are conducted as concept rating tests with 
prototype products produced on a small scale. 

7.2 A variety of approaches are in vogue in consumer product testing 
which have to be chosen individually and adjusted to particular 
problems and situations. The most popular are central location and 
home-use or in-house testing procedures. Central location tests are 
conducted in one or two limited centres. They are ideal with respect to 
sample preparation, screening procedures, questionnaire design, tryout 
of data analysis, psychological environment, instructions, freedom 
from interferences and possible discussion of vague answers given. 
The primary difference from laboratory tests in related to the respon- 
dents. The number of respondents in this case is large ( > 100 ),, 
usually several hundreds and they are users of the product type but not 
trained specially for product or methods. 

7.3 There are two common procedures used to recruit panelists for 
testing — intercept and pre-recruitment. Intercept is done in shopping 
malls, stores, public gatherings, etc, where a large number of appropriate 
consumers, representative of target population are expected. Samples 
and questions should be kept few in number for such tests. 

7.4 Pre-recruitment through groups, clubs, telephone surveys and 
advertisements are used to reach the identified target population. Testing 
is done in few locations where arrangements can be made for establish- 
ing satisfactory testing facilities. 

7.5 The central location testing is a valuable link between the sensory 
evaluation laboratory and consumer testing. This desired continuity 
should be maintained taking care not to introduce contradicting factors, 
in the test. 



IS : 10642 ~ 1983 

Home-use tests enable the product to be tested under near-normal 
conditions. The survey of the area, door to door, to establish back- 
ground and qualification of the panelist is done and the recruitment is 
made on the spot. Samples along with instructions cards are personally 
delivered or sent by post and the appointment for return of the card 
fixed. The method is eflfective in obtaining high percentage of response 
and possibility of clearing up vague answers exist but is expensive in 
terms of cost for repeated visits. 

Telephone and mailed product and questionnaire are substituted 
for personal contact. But it is harder to obtain significant co-operation 
from the subjects within a stipulated time, 

S. QUESTIONNAIRE DRAFTING 

8.1 The questionnaire is prepared based on the objective and the design 
of the study. It is screened with few test subjects for clarity and possible 
completion in reasonable time for a test. Case should be taken to see 
that the questionnaire is not very long and confusing. The most 
important questions are asked first to avoid the bias due to boredom and 
other environmental and psychological factors. 

Pretesting for understanding of the sample presentation and testing 
instructions of samples and questionnaire is done in a complete briefing 
programme and general information on the project that can be safely 
divulged is decided. Pretesting is normally done with select groups of 
15-20 subjects to ensure uniform conditions of testing. 

9. SAMPLING 

9.1 Number of Saxnples to be Tested 

9.1.1 More than 3 samples should jaot be tested in a single sitting by 
consumers. Consumers are generally good at relative judgements but 
are very poor at absolute judgements. Hence including a reference 
sample along with one or two experimental samples will be the most 
effective. Single sample that is monadic tests no doubt simplify the 
experimental design; but are not as efficient as two or three sample tests 
since each of the consumers will have his own concepts of the equalities 
for fair or good product with which he compares any single sample 
presented to him. Increasing the number of samples beyond 3 is also not 
advisable as it will create more confusion from sensory fatigue to subjects, 
necessitate increase in the number of consumers required for testing and 
induce complexity of design. 

9.1.2 Number of Res pomes per Sample — to be collected depends on the 
specific sensory attribute being evaluated, representativeness of the 
panels selected, type of information desired, experimental design used 
and avilable budget. Usually consumer tests are not done for less than 



IS : 10642 - 1983 

100 independent reponses per product; the number may be as large as 500 
depending on the importance of the product and the attribute being 
evaluated. 

9.1.3 Sample Coding — normally accepted three digit coding procedures 
should be used as far as possible. Random letter coding can be done 
where the design is simple and large samples are involved. 

10. DATA ANALYSIS AND PROCESSSING 

10.1 They are fixed prior to the start of the testing programme in 
consultation with specialists, statisticians and data processors. 

The reporting schedule should include: 

a) objectives, 

b) population and sampling details, 

c) test methods, 

d) analysis and interpretation, and 

e) recommendations. 

11. REPORT 

11.1 The report shall include general observations and any problems^, 
encountered that are to be taken care of in such studies at later dates. 



