**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 1851 (1997) : Single Operator type arc welding 
transformers [ETD 21: Electric Welding Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1851 : 1997 
,, n ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

( ^tmi^m ) 

Indian Standard 

SINGLE OPERATOR TYPE ARC WELDING 
TRANSFORMERS — SPECIFICATION 

( Third Revision ) 



ICS 25.160.30:29.180 



©BIS 1997 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1997 Price Group 4 



Electric Welding Equipment Sectional Committee, ETD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Rotating Machineiy Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrolechnical 
Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1961. In the first revision the scope had been enlarged to cover 
automatic and semi-automatic applications and, testing for performance characteristics on the basis of 
test load factor had been discontinued. In addition, the duty cycle had been revised in order to line up 
with the developments taking place at the International level. 

In the second revision sequences of type tests and routine tests were specified, and test for maximum 
welding current had been substituted by load characteristic tests. Temperature-rise tests and high voltage 
tests were also revised. 

In this revision, the requirement for no load primary current has been added and to make specifications 
up to date, all the amendments have been incorporated. 

Inthe preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following standards : 

ISO 700 : 1982 Power sources for manual metal arc welding with covered electrodes and for the 
TIG process. International Organization for Standardization. 

BS 638 (Part 10) : 1990 Arc welding power source equipment and accessories: Part 10 Specification 
for safety requirements for arc welding equipment : Welding power sources. British Standards 
Institution. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particukir requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, obscrx^ed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
iS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {rcvised)\ The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



18 1851:1997 



Indian Standard 

SINGLE OPERATOR TYPE ARC WELDING 
TRANSFORMERS — SPECIFICATION 



( Third Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard lays down requirements and tests 
for air-cooled and oil-cooled arc welding equip- 
ment of the single operator transformer type, for 
manual, semi-automatic and automatic welding. 

1.1.1 This standard applies to welding trans- 
formers suitable for supply voltages specified in 4.1. 

NOTE — This standard does not necessarily fully cover llie 
requirements for transformers forgas-sliielded arc welding. 

1.2 This standard does not cover rectifier type 
welding equipment. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standards listed below are the 
necessary adjuncts to this standard: 

Title 

Specification for new insulating 
oil for transformers and 
switchgear (fourih revision) 
Thermal evaluation and classi- 
fication of electrical insulation 
(first revision) 

Specification for shunt capacitors 
for power systems (second 
revision) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Load Characteristics 

The specified relationship between welding load 
voltage and load current of a welding power source. 

3.2 Manual Metal-Arc Welding (Hand Welding) 

Metal-arc welding with consumable electrodes not 
exceeding 460 mm in length and applied by the 
operator without automatic or semi-autoinatic 
means of replacement. 

3.3 Senii-Aiitomatic Arc Welding 

Metal-arc welding in which the arc length is auto- 
matically controlled but the positioning of the arc 
is manual. 



IS No. 


335: 


1993 


1271 


:1985 


2834 


: 1986 



3.4 Automatic Arc Welding 

Metal-arc welding in which the arc length and the 
travel of the electrodes or the workpieces are auto- 
matically controlled. 

3.5 Duty Cycle 

The ratio of time during which the output side of 
the welding transformer is loaded, to the total 
elapsed time, the primary winding being energized 
throughout. 

3.i6 Maxinuini Continuoiislland Welding Current 

The maximum welding <:urrent which the trans- 
former is capable of delivering when engaged con- 
tinuously for manual metal-arc welding, at the 
specified voltage and duty cycle without exceeding 
the specified temperature-rise. 

3.7 Maximum Hand Welding Current 

The maximum welding current for which thetrans- 
tbrmer is calibrated for manual mcial-arc welding 
at the duty cycle specified by the manufacturer. 

3.8 Minimum Hand Welding Current 

The minimum welding current for which the trans- 
former is calibrated for manual metal-arc welding. 

3.9 Mininuim Automatic Welding Current 

The minimum welding current for which the trans- 
former is calibrated for automatic or semi-auto- 
matic metal-arc welding. 

3.10 Maximum Continuous Automatic Welding 
Current 

The maximum welding current which may be sup- 
plied by the transformer for continuous operation 
on automatic or semi-automatic arc welding at 
specified voltage and duty cycle without exceeding 
the specified temperature-rise. 

3. 11 Open-Circuit Voltage 

The voltage between the output terminals (that is, 
those to which ihc electrode and return leads are 
connected) of a welding transformer ready to weld 
but carr)'ing no welding current. 



1 



IS 1851 : 1997 



3.12 Rating 

A statement of the operating characteristics as- 
signed to the transformer by the manufacturer 
when tested under specified conditions. 

3.13 Welding Load Voltage 

The voltage between output terminals of a welding 
transformer when a specified current is flowing 
through a resistance load. 

3.14 Type Tests 

Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
standard. These are intended to prove the general 
qualities and design of a transformer. 

3.15 Routine Tests 

Tests carried out on each transformer to check 
requirements which are likely to vary during 
production. 

4 RATING 

4.1 Rated Input Voltage 

The preferred rated input voltage shall be 240 V or 
415 V. 

NOTE — In case of welding transformer suitahic for 415 V 
the supply should be taken eitlicr from 2 lines or 3 lines of 
3-phase supply depending upon whether the transformer is 
designed for connection to 2 or 3 lines of a 3-phase system. 

4.2 Rated Open-Circuit VoItaj»e 

The open-circuit voltageof the welding transformer 
should not normally exceed 80 V (rms) {see 4.6). 

4.2. L In special cases, it is permissible for the open- 
circuit voltage to be up to 100 V (rms) {see 4.6). 

NOTE — Where it is required to control the open-circuit 
voltages for safety purposes, suitable safety devices may be 
incorporated to bring down voltage to the desired value. 

4.3 Rated Frequency 

The rated frequency shall be 50 Hz. 

4.4 Rated Current 

The transformers shall be rated at current and duty 
cycles corresponding to maximum continuous 
hand-welding current. 

150, 200, 250, 300, 400. 500, 600, and 900 A 

4.4.1 Minimum Hand Welding Curreni 

The minimum hand welding curreni shall be not 
more than 20 percent of the rated current, 

NOTE — It is intended that name-plate of the welding 
transformer shall indicate the current not less than 20 per- 
cent of the rated curreni but while checking the conformity 
of iliis clause, the tolerance of curreni calibration in 9.2 
should be taken into account. 



4.4,2 Maximum Hand Welding Current 

The maximum hand welding current shall not 
exceed 1.35 times the rated current. 

4.5 Duty Cycle 

4.5.1 The rated duty cycle at maximum continuous 
hand welding curreni shall be taken as 60 percent; 
the total duration of each cycle shall be 5 min 
comprising a period of 3 min of welding load fol- 
lowed by a period of 2 min of no-load operation. 

4.5.2 The raied duty cycle at maximum continuous 
automaiic welding current shall be taken as 100 
percent. 

4.5.3 The rated duty cycle at maximum continuous 
semi-automatic welding current shall be a matter of 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.6 The permissible tolerance for the open-cir- 
cuit voltage shall be ±5 percent. 

5 NORMAL SERVICE CONDITIONS 

5A This standard applies to welding transformers 
operating under the following normal service 
conditions: 



a) Ambient temperature 



b) Altitude 



Not exceeding 
40^'C 

Not exceeding 
1 000 m 



5.1.1 For altitudes exceeding 1 000 m above sea 
level, an adjustment in permissible temperature- 
rise may be necessajy in accordance with 1 1.6.3. 

6 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCriON 

6.1 The arc welding transformer shall be double 
wound and the (nilput terminals shall not be ear- 
thed. The materials employed in its manufacture 
shall conform to relevant Indian Standards. It shall 
be finished with a high degree of uniformity and 
workmanship. 

6.2 Frame and Enelosure.s 

The welding transformer shall be so manufactured 
that it should have the strength and rigidity neces- 
sary to withstand rough usage. It shall be provided 
with a case or cabinet which shall enclose all live 
meial parts other than a llexible supply cord or 
cable and output terminals. 

6.2.1 Where the situation is specified as one in 
which ihere is possibility of dropping or falling 
water entering the transformer, it shall be 
prevenied liy the use of suitable drip-proof covers. 



IS 1851 : 1997 



6.2.2 The enclosure or the tank, as the case may be, 
shall be provided with lifting lugs, earthing ter- 
minals and terminal box. In the case of oil-im- 
mersed transformers, an oil level indicator and 
drain plug shall also be provided. 

6.2.3 In case of portable arc welding, the wheels 
used shall be either of cast iron, solid rubber tyre of 
UHMWPE (Ultra High Molecular Weight 
Polyethylene). 

6.3 Terminals 

An arc welding transformer which is not provided 
with an attached flexible cord or cable shall have 
terminals of a high conductivity non-ferrous metal. 
The size of the terminals shall be such as not to 
allow overheating when operating at the maximum 
continuous hand welding current. 

6.3.1 The output terminals shall be suitably 
shrouded against accidental or inadvertent 
contact. 

6.4 Wiring 

The wireway shall be smooth and entirely free from 
sharp edges, burrs, fins, moving parts, etc which 
might cause abrasion of the insulation on conduc- 
tors. The hole in the sheet-metal wall through 
which insulated wires pass or are intended to pass 
shall be provided with a smoothly rounded bushing 
or shall have a smooth, well-rounded surface upon 
which the wires may rest. All joints and connections 
shall be mechanically secured and shall provide 
adequate and reliable electrical contact without 
strain on any connection or terminal. 

6.4.1 Portable welding transformer should be 
provided with gripping glands for incoming cables 
to avoid damage to terminals caused by strain. A 
poratable transformer weighing above 50 kg shall 
be provided with wheels. 

6.5 The insulating parts of the arc welding trans- 
former and bases or supports for the mounting of 
uninsulated live metal parts shall be made of sub- 
stantially non-hygroscopic materials which arc not 
affected by the temperature to which they may be 
subjected under conditions of actual use. 

6.5.1 Natural rubber, wood, hot moulded shellac 
and tar compositions shall not be used for the 
construction of bases or supports for mounting of 
uninsulated live parts. 

6.5.2 The coils shall be suitably treated to exclude 
mositure. 

6»5,3 Liquids 

6.5.3.1 Mineral oils shall comply with IS 335 : 1993. 



6.5.3.2 Synthetic liquids 

In the absence of a standard covering synthetic 
insulating liquids, the provision of such liquids 
shall be a matter of agreement between the supplier 
and the purchaser. 

NOTE — Oil and synthetic liquids shall not be inter- 
changed. 

6.6 Earthing 

6.6.1 Two earthing terminals shall be provided for 
two separate and distinct connections to earth of all 
metallic parts which are not intended to carry cur- 
rent. Earthing terminals shall be suitably protected 
against corrosion and shall be metallically clean. 
Earthing terminals shall be indelibly marked with 
symbol i . 

6.7 Protection against Corrosion 

All matallic parts and surface of the assembly shall 
be suitably protected against corrosion. 

7 CAPACITOR 

7.1 A capacitor may be used to improve the power 
factor to approximately 0.8 lagging at 50 percent of 
the maximum continuous hand welding current and 
the corresponding load voltage (see Table 1). 

7.2 The capacitor, if provided as part of an arc 
welding transformer, shall conform to IS 2834 : 
1986. 

7.3 The capacitor shall be so connected that it is 
switched off with the transformer. 

8 CONTROL AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES 

8.1 If a switch, controller or circuit-breaker is 
employed in an arc welding transformer, it shall be 
suitable for the particular application and shall 
conform to the relevant Indian Standard(s). 

8.2 Contacts of all regulating taps, if provided, 
shall be such as to make positive contact between 
moving and stationary contacts. Visual indicator 
shall be provided to indicate the current output at 
each tap or setting on the output side. 

9 PERFORMANCE 

9.1 The arc welding transformer shall be capable 
of operating continuously at maximum continuous 
hand welding current at the specified duty cycle 
without overheating. The relation between the 
weldingloadvollageandwelding current within the 
range of the welding transformer shall be in accord- 
ance with Table 1. 

9.2 Method of Calibration and Accuracy of 
Graduations 

The relation between the welding load voltage and 
the welding current within the range of the welding 



3 



IS 1851 : 1997 



power source shall be in accordance with Table 1. 
The accuracy of the current calibration should be 
^^ percent up to the maximum continuous auto- 
matic welding current and ± 10 percent for currents 
above that. 

Table 1 Welding Current and Welding 
Load Voltage 

(Clauses 7.1, 9.1, 92 and 10.1.1) 



Welding Current 




Welding Lx>ad Voltage 


A 






V 


150 






26 


200 






28 


300 






32 


400 






36 


500 






40 


600 and above 






44 


NOTE — The above load voltages 


are based on the formula 


U=20-h 0.04 /where Uis the load voltage 


and /is the load 


current, this formula is 


applicable 


to weldin 


g currents up to 


and including 600 A. 









9.2.1 The no load primary current of the welding 
transformer shall not exceed 2,5 percent of the 
maximum continuous hand welding current at the 
specified duty cycle (60 percent) of rated output 
current of the transformer, when the output ter- 
minals are not connected to any external load 
without any energy saving device and/or without 
any power factor correction capacitors connected 
with the welding transformer. 

9.2.2 If any welding transformer is provided with 
energy saving device then the current drawn from 
the electric supply source should not exceed 10 
percent of the above mentioned no load current, 

9.2.3 The no load power loss of the welding trans- 
former shall not exceed 3 percent of the kVA at 0.8 
power factor, 

10 MARKING 

10.1 The following information shall be given on 
the rating plate : 

a) Source of manufacture; 

b) Reference to this standard (Ref IS 1851); 

c) Manufacturer's type or designation and 
serial number; 

d) Range of welding current (minimum and 
maximum); 

e) Maximum continuous hand welding current; 

f) Maximum continuous automatic welding 
current; 

g) Input (primary) current at rated output; 

h) Input voltage, frequency and number of 

phases; 
j) Open-circuit voltages (range); 



k) Type of cooling; 

m) Total weight; 

n) Class of insulation; 

p) Country of manufacture; and 

q) A warning worded as follows : 

WARNING : Current in excess of the fol- 
lowing are for intermittent use only : 

For hand welding Amperes 

For automatic welding Amperes, and 

r) Rated output of the transformer. 

10.1.1 The manufacturer shall also provide a 
diagram or table of connections indicating current 
output at the voltage regulating and current 
regulating tap positions as provided. In the case of 
non-tap changing output current regulators, a 
calibrated output current indicating device shall be 
provided. In all cases the currents indicated shall 
comply with requirements of Table 1. 

10.2 BIS Certification Mark 

10.2.1 The transformers may also be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 

10.2.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed 
by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the rules and regulations made there- 
under. The details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be 
granted to manufacturers or producers may be ob- 
tained from the Bureau of Indian Standard. 

11 TESTS 

11.1 Tests shall be made to prove compliance with 
all the requirements of this standard. 

11.1.1 Type Tests 

These tests may be made by mutual agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier and if the 
records of type test on an arc welding transformer 
which in essential details is representative of the 
one being purchased are furnished, the purchaser 
may accept these as evidence of 'type test' instead 
of actual test. Type tests and their sequence shall be 
as follows : 

a) Insulation resistance test (see 11.2), 

b) No load and open-circuit voltage test (see 
11.3), 

c) Load characteristic test (see 11.4), 

d) Short-circuit test (see 11.5), 

e) Temperature-rise test (see 11.6), 

f) High voltage test (see 11.7) (see Note), and 

g) Insulation resistance test (repeated) (see 

11.2). 

NOTE — llie high voltage shall be done only once, if the 
manufacturer had carried out this test at his works, this shall 
not be repeated by the testing authority. 



IS 1851 : 1997 



11.1.2 Routine Tests 

The tests and their sequence shall be as follows ; 

a) Insulation resistance test (see 11.2), 

b) No load and open circuit voltage test (see 
113), 

c) Load characteristic test (see 11.4), 

d) Short-circuit test {see 11.5), 

e) High voltage test (see 11.7), and 

f) Insulation resistance test (repeated) (see 
11.2). 

11.1.2.1 A certificate of routine tests shall be fur^ 
nished by the manufacturer which shall show that 
each of the welding set has been subjected in the 
tests specified in 11.1.2 and that it complies with the 
requirements specified in this standard for these 
tests and that each of the welding set has been found 
to be sound electrically and mechanically and is in 
working order in all particulars. 

11.2 Insulation Resistance Test 

The insulation resistancebefore and after high volt- 
age test shall be not less than two megohms. The 
insulation resistance shall be measured with dc 
voltage of about 500 V applied for a sufficient time 
for the reading of the indicator to become parcti- 
cally steady, such voltage being taken from an inde- 
pendent source or generated in the measuring 
instruments. 

1 1.3 No Load and Open-Circuit Voltage Test 

With the inputsicfc connected to the supply voltage 
and output side open-circuited, the open-circuit 
voltage and no load current shall be measured. 

11.4 Load Characteristic Test 

The transformer shall be connected to the rated 
input voltage. The output terminals shall be con- 
nected to a variable resistive load. On each setting, 
the load current shall be within the limits specified 
in 9.2 corresponding to the load voltages given 
thereunder. 

11.5 Short-CircuitTest 

Steady short-circuit current at any setting within 
the specified range shall be not more than 200 
percent of the welding current corresponding to 
this setting. Under short-circuit condition the volt- 
age between terminals shall not exceed 3 V. 

NOTE — Care shall be taken lo ensure that tlie test shall not 
take more than 10 s. 

11.6 Temperature-Rise Test 

1 1 .6. 1 Test Conditions 

11.6.L1 The load should be a non-inductive resis- 
tance at the appropriate load voltage. A tolerance 



± 10 percent should be allowed on the value of this 
load voltage. 

11.6.1.2 Test shallbe made using the input winding 
tap corresponding to the voltage being applied. 

11.6.1.3 Welding transformers suitable for hand 
welding shall be tested for temperature-rise (see 
Annex A) at a current equal to the maximum con- 
tinuous hand welding current and at the duly cycle 
equal to 60 percent in a duration of 5 min. 

11.6.1.4 Welding transformers suitable for both 
semi-automatic and automatic welding shall be 
tested for temperature-rise (see Annex A) at a cur- 
rent equal to the maximum continuous automatic 
v/elding current and at a duty cycle equal to 100 
percent. 

11.6.1.5 The tcmpcrature-rise shall continue until 
steady maximum temperature is obtained. If the 
temperature-rise does not vary by more than 2^'C 
per hour it is considered that steady temperature 
has been achieved. 

11.6.2 The temperature-rise shall not exceed the 
limit specified in Table 2. 

11.6.3 Reduced Temperature-Rises for 
Transformers Desi^^med for Hii^li Aliitudes 

For transformers designed for operation at an al- 
titude greater than 1 000 m, but tested at normal 
altitudes, the limiis of temperature-rise given in 
Table 2 are reduced by the following amounts for 
each 500 m by which the intended working altitude 
exceeds 1 000 m. 

a) Oil-immersed, natural 2.0 percent 
air-cooled transformers 

b) Dry-type, natural 2.5 percent 
air-cooled transformers 

c) Oil-immersed, forced 3,0 percent 
air-cooled transformers 

d) Dry-type, forced 5.0 percent 
air-cooled transformers 

NO'i'E — These reductions in temperatiire-risc limits are 
not applicable to water cooled transformers. 

11.7 Supplementary High Volta<;e Test 

The transformer windings shall be capable of 
withstanding, without breakdown, the high voltage 
test. 

11.7.1 The high voltage test shall be applied once 
and to a new machine only. It shall be carried out 
at the manufacturers works at the conclusion of the 
temperature-rise test, if conducted. 

NOTE — Protective or tilter devices, or capacitors or fans 
shall l-^e disconnected or short-circuited as desired. 



IS 1851 : 1997 



Table 2 Limits of Permissible Temperature-Rise 

{Clauses 11.6.2, 11.6.3 ^/ic/A-1.2.3) 



SI 


Pari 


Class A 


CUsK E 




Class 


B 


Class 


F 


Class II 


No. 




Insulation 


InsiiUli 


ion 




Insula! 


ion 


Insulai 


lion 


Insulation 




T 




R 


T 


R 


T 


R 


T 


R 


T 


R 






°C 




°C 


°C 


°C 




°C 


X 


°C 


""C 


X 


X 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 




(4) 


(5) 


(<i) 




(7) 


(8) 


{'>) 


(10) 


(11) 


(12) 


i) 


Windings 


55 




60 


65 


IS 




70 


80 


85 


100 


105 


125 


») 


Oil 


50 




— 


— 


— 




— 


— 


— 


— 


— 


— 


iii) 


Insulated parts 






The 


tetnpcrature-nse shall 


in no case reach such 


avalueth^j 


It there is risk of injury 


to any 




including cores not 
contact with insulai 


in 
ted 




insLi 


lating material on ; 


ndjacent parts ( 


3r to the welding plant in any 


respect. 






windings. 




























T = by thermomet' 


er 

























R = by resistance 

NOTES i 

1 Tlienumericalvalues quoted forclassesFandH should be considered as tentative only and may be revised when rnore practical 
experience is avaiable. If class C insulation is used, the temperature-rise shall be a matter of agreement between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 

2 For details of classes of insulation {stx IS 1271 : 1985). 



11.7.2 The test shall be made with a single-phase 
alternating voltage as nearly as possible of sine- 
wave form and of any convenient frequency be- 
tween 40 and 60 Hz. 

11.7.3 The rms or peak value of the applied voltage 
shall be measured. The rms value shall be 2 000 
volts. 

11.7.4 The appropriate voltage, obtained from a 
separate source, shall be applied for 60 s to each 



winding in turn, between the winding under test and 
the remaining windings, core, frame and tank or 
casing of the transformer, connected together and 
to earth. 

11,7.5 The test shall be connected at a voltage not 
greater than one-third of the test value, and shall be 
increased to the specified value as rapidly as is 
consistentvvithilsmagnitudebcing indicated by the 
measuring instrument. At the end of the test the 
voltage shall be reduced rapidly to less than one- 
third of its full value before switching off. 



IS 1851 : 1997 



ANNEX A 

(Clauses 11.6.L3 and 11.6.1.4) 

TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS 



A-l METHODS 

A-l.I Two methods of measuring temperature are 
recognized, namely : 

a) Resistance method, and 

b) Thermometer method. 

A-1.2 Resistance Method 

In this method, the temperature-rise of the winding 
shall be determined by the increase in the resistance 
of the windings. However, if desired, a check may 
be made by thermometers applied to the accessible 
surfaces of the windings and the temperature-rise 
thus determined shall not exceed the permissible 
limit specified for the resistance method. 

A-1.2.1 The temperature of the windings as 
measured by thermometer before commencing the 
test shall not differ from that of the ambient. The 
initial resistance and initial temperature of the 
windings shall be measured at the same time. 

A-1.2.2 Since the resistance over the range of 
temperature referred to in this standard varies in 
direct proportion to the temperature above a par- 
ticular value, the hot temperature is obtained from 
the following equation: 



t2=-(R2/Ri) (ti+X)-X 



where 



t2 - temperature of windings (hot) in *^C, 

/?2= resistance of winding (hot), 

R\ == resistance of winding (cold), 

ti - temperature of windings (cold) in *^C, 

and 
X = 234.5 for copper and 229.8 for 

aluminium. 

NOTE — The value of 229.8 for aluminium is based on 3/4M 
condilions and conductivity of 60.6 percent International 
Ancaled Copper Standard. If the conductivity is different, 
lilts nijy have to be altered. 

A-1,2.3 If the variation of resistance method is not 
applicable (for example, in the case of a low resis- 
tance winding where the resistance of the joints and 
connections constitute a considerable part of the 
total resistance) as far as possible use is made of 
thermometer set up during the test on the external 
face of the windings and the temperature-rise limit 
given m Table 2 is retained- 

A-L3 Thermometer Method 

When using this method, the temperature shall be 
measured by thermometers applied to the hottest 



accessible surfaces^^ of transformer during the test 
period. 

A-1.3.1 The term *thermometer' means mercury or 
alcohol bulb thermomter. In measuring tempera- 
ture, thermocouples or resistance thermometers 
maybe substituted for liquid-in glass thermometers 
provided such instruments were inserted in narrow 
interstices which would be accessible to the bulb of 
normal thermometer not less than 5 mm in 
diameter. 

A-1.3.2 The bulb of the thermometer, except at the 
point of contact, shall be covered with a pad of felt, 
cotton wool or other non-conducting material 
3 mm thick extending at least 20 mm in every direc- 
tion from the bulb and pressed into contact with the 
surfaces to which this is applied, to prevent loss of 
heat by radiation and convection from the bulb. 

A-2 PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN 
MAKING RESISTANCE MEASUREMENTS 

A-2.1 Special care should be taken when measur- 
ing the temperature of windings by this method to 
ensure that apparatus and method of adequate 
accuracy are used. 

A-2.2 To determine temperatures of the windings 
when hot an accurate measurement of resistance 
and associated temperature should be taken when 
the windings are cold. 

A-3 MEASUREMENT OF AMBIENT 
TEMPEIUTURE 

A-3.1 In general, the temperalure of the ambient 
shall be measured by means of several ther- 
mometers placed at dilfcrent points around and 



^^ The tcrnVaccessible surfaces' is intended to convey that the 
established limits of temperature-rise of windings measured by 
thermometer are based on the use of thermometers placed on 
the external surface of the windings or iron cores with which the 
windings may be in contact. The measurements arc not intended 
to cover readings which might be obtained by inserting ther- 
mometers into narrow interstices between coil, or between in- 
sulating flanges and coils. In such locations the temperature may 
be higher and allowance is made for this in fUing the permissible 
temperature-rises measured at the surface. 

The fact that the type of construction renders a winding difficult 
of access ts not to be taken as permission to operate such wind- 
mgs at higher temperatures than are allowed on those windings 
or portions of windings on wiiich the temperature can be more 
easily placed, and the standard limits of temperature-rise should 
not be exceeded on any winding surface. If a reasonable proposi- 
tion of the windings is readily accessible to thermometer, 
temperature-riseshould bedetermincd by a thermometer placed 
on these portions of the windings. 



IS 1851 : 1997 



halfway up the transformer and at a distance of 1 to 
2 m away from it. These thermometers shall be so 
placed as to indicate the temperature of the current 
of air flowing towards the transformer and shall be 
protected from heat radiation and stray draughts. 

A-3.2 Where temperature tests are carried out 
under such conditions that parts of a transformer 
are in a position in which ventilation may be im- 
peded, for example, in a pit, the temperature, in 
such a restricted area shall be deemed to be the 
ambient temperature. 

A-3.3 If the air is admitted into the transformer 
through a definite inlet opening or openings, the 
temperature of the ambient shall be measured by 
means of thermometers placed in the current of 
incoming air near the place it enters the trans- 
former. 

A-3.4 The value to be adopted for the temperature 
of the ambient during the tcmpcrature-rise test 
shall be the average of the reading of the ther- 
mometers mentioned above, taken at the beginning 
and the end of the last half an hour of the test. 



A-3.5 To avoid errors due to the time lag between 
the temperatures of a large transformer and the 
aeration in the temperatures of the ambient, all 
reasonable precautions shall be taken to reduce 
those variations and the errors arising from them. 

A.4 TIME AT WIIICJI lEMPERATURE ARE 
TO RETAKEN 

A-4.1 The temperature of transformer shall, when- 
ever possible, be taken during working as well as 
after shutting off the transformers. The highest 
temperature thus obtained shall be adopted. When 
successive measurements show increasing 
temperature after shut-down, the highest value 
shall betaken. 

A-5 TEMPERA! URE-RISE 

A-5.1 The temperature-rise shall be the difference 
between the highest temperature measured 
under A-4 and the mean temperature measures 

under A-3. 



liiireuu oP.Indiaii Standards 

BIS is a statutory inslituiion established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of ihe activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these pi^lications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are Issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed wheti such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes arc needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and ^Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ETD 21 ( 3694 ). 



Amendments Issred Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



.BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



Telephone 



323 76 17 
323 38 41 



/ 337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1,337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

"t 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

r 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

\ 832 78 91, 832 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE.THIR' ^VANANTHAPURAM. 



Piiiiced at Piintograph. New Delhi (INDIA). 



