**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^T^gai ra^gg fr ^Hft & fr^ 



IS 13861 (1993) : Instant tea in solid form 
6: Stimulant Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Sampling [FAD 



&&&i f /n^sb^s^ rs^arn^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13861 : 1993 

ISO 7S1R - 10«d 



^TT^q- qT^sp ( Reaff irmed 1 " 8 > 

star ^q- # ^rre ^tt — ?T*r# ^ptt 



Indian Standard 
INSTANT TEA IN SOLID FORM — SAMPLING 



UDC 66395: 620113 



id RI.«n 1QQT 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

September 1993 Price Group 3 



Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee, FAD 23 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 7516 : 1984 'instant tea in solid form— Sampling' 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of 
Indian Stancards on the recommendation ot the Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee ( FAD 23 ), 
and approval of the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those used in 
Indian Standards; attention is drawn specially to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'; and 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standard the current 
practice is to use point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with the standard, if the final value, 
observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules 
for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ 



IS 13*61 : 1993 
ISO 7516 - 1994 



Indian Standard 



INSTANT TEA IN SOLID FORM — SAMPLING 



Introduction 

Being a natural product, instant tea may 
exhibit variable characteristics associated with 
the season of manufacture and/or the source 
of leaf material. In addition, variable manufac- 
turing characteristics, such as bulk density, 
powder flowability and particle size, are criti- 
cally important. For these reasons, it is 
desirable that a sample of any lot or consign- 
ment is prepared at the factory and forwarded 
to the customer for approval prior to the 
instant tea being despatched from the factory. 
In order to confirm that a given consignment of 
instant tea conforms to a contract specifica- 
tion, a buyer may wish to sample a represen- 
tative number of boxes on arrival at his 
premises. However, instant tea in solid form 
is generally packed and transported in bulk in 
sealed bags of moisture-resistant material 
{ i. e. an immediate container ), protected by 
an outer container. Owing to the hygroscopic 
nature and friability of the product, special 
precautions need to be taken in order to ensure 
that the taking of samples does not adversely 
affect the sample itself or the remainder of the 
tot. 

1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies methods 
of sampling instant tea in solid form ( herein- 
after referred to as "instant tea" ) 

It applies to sampling from containers of ail 

sizes. 

Separate methods are described for sampling 
at the point of manufacture, samping atsubse- 
quent stages in the distribution chain and 
sampling of retail packs. 

In addition, for sampling at some of these 
locations, different procedures or special pre- 
cautions are specified depending on whether 
the samples are to be used for examination of 
particle characteristics ( for example bulk 
density, flowability, particle size ) or compo- 
sitional characteristics ( for example moisture 
content, ash ). 

2 Definitions 

For the purpose of this International Standard 
the following definitions shall apply. ^ 



2.1 consignment : The quantity of instant tea 
despatched or received at one time and cover- 
ed by a particular contract or shipping docu- 
ment The consignment may be made up of 
one or more lots or parts of lots. 

2.2 lot; break : A defined quantity of instant 
tea, presumed to be of uniform characteristics, 
taken from a consignment and allowing the 
quality to be assessed. 

2.3 primary sample 2 ' : A small quantity of 
instant tea, taken at one time from one point 
in a single immediate container, or f where 
appropriate, the whole contents of one imme- 
diate container In the lot [ in the case of 
containers containing less than 1 kg of instant 
tea ( see 4.3.5 ) ]. 

NOTE — A series of primary samples is taken from 
different positions i(\ the lot. 

2.4 bulk sample : The quantify of instant tea 
obtained by bringing together the primary 
samples taken from different positions in the 
lot and which is representative of the quality 
of the lot 

2.5 laboratory sample : A prescribed quantity 
of instant tea taken from the bulk sample, 
representative of the quality of the lot and 
intended for analysis or other examination. 

2.6 point of manufacture : The point in the 
factory at which the instant tea is being poured 
into its first immediate container up to the 
time when the immediate container is sealed. 

2.7 immediate container : The container that 
is in contact with the instant tea; \t may be 
surrounded by an outer container or outer 
containers. 

Examples of immediate containers are: 

a) a sealed bag In which tea is transported 
in bulk, protected by an outer container 
such as a fibreboard box; and 

b) a glass jar or sealed bag in a box in 
which the instant tea is packed usually for 
retail sale. 

2.8 retail pack : Any package in which the 
immediate container contains less than 1 kg of 
instant tea. 



1 The terms and definitions in this clause take cognizance of but are not identical with those in ISO 3534 
Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols. 

£ ) In ISO 3534 the term increment is used lor this concept but this term is not used in sampling in the tea trade. 



1 



IS 13861 
ISO 7516 



1993 
1984 



3 General conditions of sampling 

3.1 Sampling shall be carried out by persons 
appointed by buyers and/or sellers and, if 
desired, in the presence of the buyer ( or his 
representatives ) and the seller ( or his repre- 
sentatives ). 

3.2 Sampling shall be carried out in a covered 
place, in such a manner that the samples of 
instant tea, the sampling apparatus and the 
sample containers are protected from adventi- 
tious contamination and other factors likely to 
affect the samples, for example moisture, 
dust, etc. 

Special care \s necessary to ensure that the 
sampling instruments are ciean and dry. and 
do not impart any taint or contamination to 
the sample. 

3.3 Handling of the sample ( for example 
combining of primary samples into the bulk 
sample, packaging of the sample) shall be 
carried out with care in order to avoid chang- 
ing the original characteristics of the instant 
tea. 

3.4 if it is obvious from the visual appearance 
of the primary samples that the lot is not 
uniform within tne definition of "lot" 
( see 2.2 ), the sampling shall be discontinued 
and reference made back to the person who 
ordered the sampling to be carried out. 

4 Sampling from immediate containers 

4.1 Number of immediate containers to be 
sampled 

Unless otherwise specified in 4.3 or in a con- 
tract, the number of immediate containers to 
be sampled shall be as given in 4.1.1 to 4.1.3. 

4.1.1 Immediate containers containing more 
than 20 kg of instant tea 

in the case of immediate containers contain- 
ing more than 2 kg of loose instant tea, the 
minimum number of containers to be sampled 
1rom a lot shall be as snown in table 1. 

Table 1 



Number of immediate 


Number of immediate 


containers in iot 


container to be sampled 


2 to 10 


2 


11 to 25 


3 


26 to 100 


5 


101 and over 


7 



4.1.2 Immediate containers containing not 
more than 1 kg of instant tea 

In the case of immediate containers contain- 
ing not more than 1 kg of loose instant tea, 
the minimum number of containers to be 
sampled from a lot shall be as shown in 
table 2, provided that the mass specified for 
each laboratory sample is obtained. 

Table 2 



Number of immediate 
containers in lot 


Number of immediate 
containers to be sampled 


Up to 25 


3 


26 to 100 


5 


101 to 300 


7 


301 to 500 


10 


501 to 1 000 


15 


1 001 to 3 000 


20 


3 001 and over 


» 25 ■ 



4.1.3 Immediate containers containing l.tp 
20 kg of instant tea 

The minimum number of immediate containers 
to be sampled from a lot shall be that shown 
in table 1 or table 2, according to agreement 
between the interested parties. 

4.2 Procedure for random sampling 

The containers to be sampled shall be taken 
at random, and, for this purpose, use should 
be made of random number tables, if such 
tables are not available, the foiiowing proce- 
dure may be used; 

Let N be the number of immediate containers 
in the lot and n be the number of immediate 
containers to be taken. Starting from any 
immediate container, count the immediate 
containers in order as 1, 2, etc., up to r, where 
r =z /v//7 ( If N\n is not a whole number, take 
r as the integral part of it) Select the rth 
immediate container, until the required number 
of immediate containers has been taken. 

in the case of immediate containers containing 
not more than 1 kg of instant tea, if the con- 
tainers are packed in outer cases, cartons or 
crates containing a convenient number of 
units, approximately 20% ( but, not fewer than 
two ) of these outer pacnages shall be taken 
at random. From these, immediate containers 
shall betaken in equal numbers, at random, 



so as to make up the required number of 
immediate containers to be sampled, as speci- 
fied in 4 1.2. 

4.3 Primary samples 

4.3.1 General 

The method of taking primary samples depends 
on the point in the manufacturing and distri- 
bution chain at which sampling is to be under- 
taken and can depend on the methods of 
analysis that will be made on the samples. 

When sampling at the point of manufacture, 
method A (see 4.3.2) shall be used. The 
samples so obtained may be used for any 
determination. 

When sampling at any point after the point of 
manufacture, provided that the instant tea is 
not packed la retail packages. 

— method B ( see 4.3.3 ) shall be used 
when the samples are required for deter- 
minations of bulk density, flowabillty and 
particle size. The samples shall not be 
used for the determination of moisture 
content but may be used for any other 
determinations. 

— method C ( see 4.3.4 ) shall be used 
when the samples are required for the 
determination of moisture content. The 
samples shall not be used for determina- 
tions of bulk density, flowability and 
particle size but may be used for any other 
determinations. 

When sampling retail packs, method D 
( see 4.3.5 ) shall be used. The samples so 
obtained may be used for any determination. 

4.3.2 Method A 

4.3.2.1 Apparatus 

The following apparatus is required: 

— powder scoop 

— polyethylene bag ( large enough to hold 
all primary samples ) 

4.3.2.2 Procedure 

Using the scoop, take a primary sample from 
each immediate container ( in the lot ) as \t is 
being filled or when filled but before it "is seal- 
ed. Place the primary samples in the poly- 
ethylene bag, 

Minimize the risk of take up or loss of mois- 
ture by keeping the polyethylene bag holding 
the primary samp'es closed except when 
inserting further samples, and with as little 
air inside as possible. 



IS 13861 :1993 
ISO 7516 - 1984 

Use the primary samples to obtain a bulk 
sample ( see 4.4). 

4,3.3 Method B 

4.3.3.1 Apparatus 

The following apparatus is required: 

— polyethylene bags at least equal in 
volume to those in which the instant tea is 
received from the manufacturer 

— powder scoop 

— polyethylene bag ( large enough to hold 
all the primary samples ) 

— polyethylene heat sealer ( optional ) 

4.3.3.2 Procedure 

The number of immediate containers to be 
sampled from a given lot orconsignment shall 
either be subject to prior agreement between 
the interested parties, or, in the absence of 
such agreement, in accordance with 4.1. 

The required number of immediate containers 
shall be withdrawn from the lot or consign- 
ment according to a system of random num- 
bers. 

Operating preferably in an air-conditioned 
room, open completely one of the outer con- 
tainers and the immediate container inside it 
Gently pour at full flow the entire contents of 
the immediete container into a polyethylene 
bag so that the contents are mixed and any 
layers destroyed. 

Using the scoop, take a primary sample from 
the top surface of this bag and place it in 
another polyethylene bag ( i e. the bag which 
will contain the bulk sample ). Place the filled 
bag in its outer container and sea! it using 
the heat sealer or other effective method of 
sealing. 

Repeat the procedure on all the other imme- 
diate containers to be sampled. 



Use the primary samples 
sample ( see 4.4 ). 

4.3.4 Method C 



to obtain a bulk 



4.3.4.1 Apparatus 

The following apparatus is required: 

— a suitable trier 

— polyethylene bag ( large enough to hold 
all the primary samples ) 

— polyethylene heat sealer ( optional ) 



IS 13861 : 1993 
ISO 7516-1984 



4.3.4.2 Procedure 

The number of immediate containers to be 
sampled from a given lot or consignment shall 
either be subject to prior agreement between 
the interested parties, or, in the absence of 
such agreement, in accordance with 4.1. 

The required number of immediate containers 
shall be withdrawn from the lot or consign- 
ment according to a system of random num- 
bers. 

Open each outer container and its immediate 
container, causing as little damage as possible. 
Using the trier, take a primary sample from 
the immediate container and place it in the 
polyethylene bag. Resea! the immediate con- 
tainer usmg the heat sealer or other effective 
method of sealing and reseal the outer 
container. 

Minimize the risk of take up or loss of mois- 
ture by keeping the polyethylene bag holding 
the primary samples closed except when 
inserting further samples, and with as little air 
inside as possible. 

Repeat the procedure on all the other imme- 
diate containers to be sampled. 

Use the primary samples to obtain a bulk 
sample ( see 4.4 ). 

4.3.5 Method D 

4.3.5.1 Apparatus 

The following apparatus is required: 

— polyethylene bag ( large enough to hold 
all the primary samples ) 

4.3.5.2 Procedure 

The number of immediate containers to be 
sampled from a given lot orconsignment shall 
be subject to prior agreement between the 
interested parties, or, in the absence of such 
agreement, in accordance with 4.1. 

The required number of immediate containers 
shall be withdrawn from the lot or consign- 
ment according to a system of random 

numbers. 

[f the amount of instant tea in each immediate 
container does not exceed 50 g, each container 
shall constitute a primary sample. ( The con- 
tainers shall be opened and their contents 
collected together and treated as the bulk 
sample ). 

If the amount of instant tea in each immediate 
container exceed 50 g, invert the container 
several times to mix the contents. Open the 



container and pour out about 50 g of instant 
tea into the polyethylene bag. Minimize the 
risk of take up or loss of moisture by keeping 
the polyethylene bag holding the primary 
samples closed except when inserting further 
samples, and with as little air inside as 
possible. 

Repeat the procedure on all other immediate 
containers to be sampled. 

Use the primary samples to obtain a bulk 
sample ( see 4.4) . 

4.4 Bulk sample and laboratory samples 

4.4.1 The bulk sample, formed by combining 
primary samples of loose material, shall be 
well mixed and shall then je divided rapidly 
into the required number of laboratory sam- 
ples, taking precautions to avoid Mechanical 
damage to, and take up or loss of moisture by, 
the samples. 

NOTE — Replicate samples will be often required, for 
example as duplicate or reference samples, and, in 
general, the number and size of tlrs laboratory samples, 
to be taken forexamination and arbitration should con- 
form to recognized trade practices, unless otherwise- 
agreed. * 

4.4.2 The size of each laboratory sampie shaH 
be not less than 1 litre, unless otherwise 
agreed. 

NOTE — 1 litre of low density instant tea weighs about 
100 g and 1 litre of high density instant tea weighs 
about 500 g. 

4.4.3 Each laboratory sample shall be packed 
in a polyethylene bag which shall be sealed 
using a heat sealer or other effective method 
of sealing, with as little air inside as possible 

NOTE — Owing to the hygroscopic character of instarc 
tea as well as its abHify to pick up taint, it is essential 
that the laboratory samples be transferred to their 
polyethylene bags as prompt, as possible. 

5 Packaging and labelling of laboratory 
sample 

5.1 Packaging of samples 

The laboratory samples contained in sealed 
polyethylene bags shall be packed in clean, 
dry, odour-free, opaque, rigid moisture- 
resistant containers with close-fitting lids, of 
such a size that they are almost completely 
filled by the sample. 

5.2 Labelling of samples 

Each sample container shall carry a label 
marked with full details of the place and date 
of sampling, the name of the manufacturer or 
marketer, the invoice and lot number, the name 
of the sampler and any other important parti- 
culars relating to the consignment, together 



IS 13861 : 1993 
ISO 7516 -1984 



with a statement of the sampling method ( A ? 
B, CorD), 

6 Despatch of laboratory samples 

Samples shall be despatched as soon as 
possible and only in exceptional circumstances 
more than 48 h after sampling has been 
completed, non-business days excluded. 

7 Sampling report 

if a sampling report is prepared, it is recom- 
mended that reference should be made to any 
unusual appearance of the containers of 
product, and ail the circumstances that may 
have influenced sampling, it shall include the 
following details: i 

a) p!ac <f sampling; 

b) date of sampling; 

c) time of sampling, and time of subse- 
quent sealing of sample containers; 



d) names and descriptions of sampling 
personnel and witnesses; 

e) identification of the method used ( L e, 
A, B, C or D ), and any modifications to the 
technique described; together with a note 
of any restrictions concerning any deter- 
minations which shall not be made on the 
sample; 

f) nature and number of units constituting 
the lot and reference to relevant documents 
and details of marking; 

g) number of samples and their identifica- 
tion ( markings, batch number, etc ); 

h) destination of samples; 

j) condition of packages and surroundings; 
and 

k) whether the premises were air-condi- 
tioned during sampling and, if required, 
the atmospheric conditions during 
sampling, including relative humidity. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS, This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook* and 'Standards Monthly Additions* 
Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. FAD 23 ( 342 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central ; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ( 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 j 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1 /14 C. T. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola < 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 j 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 ( 53 38 43, 53 16 40 

I 53 23 84 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 ( 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

I 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \ 6 32 78 9l! 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Preo. IChuria. ln*»« 



