**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13122-1 (1993) : Transmitters for Use in 
Industrial-Process Control Systems, Part 1: Methods for 
Evaluating the Performance [ETD 18: Industrial Process 
Measurement and Control] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vf iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13122 ( Part 1 ): 1993 

mr^ m^ ^ Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

TRANSMITTERS FOR USE IN INDUSTRIAL- 
PROCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS -SPECIFICATION 

PART 1 METHODS FOR EVALUATING THE PERFORMANCE 



UDC 621-396-61 : 65-011-56 : 621-523 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OFINDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

•^«»« 1993 p,ice Group 7 



Industrial Process Measurement and Control Sectional Committee, ETD 18 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Industrial Process Measurement and Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The methods of evaluation specified in this standard are intended for use by manufacturers to 
determine the performance of their products and by users or independent testing esiablishments to 
verify manufacturers' performance specifications. 

This standard ( Part 1 ) is intended to specify uniform methods of test for the evaluation of the 
perfprmance of transmitters with pneumatic or electric output signals. 

Part 2 of this standard provides guidance for installation, inspection and routine testing of these 
transmitters. 

The test conditions in this standard, for example, the range of ambient temperatures and power 
supply, represent those which commonly arise in use. Consequently, the values specified herein shall be 
used where no other vahies are specified by the manufacturer. 

The tests specified in this standard are not necessarily sufficient for instruments specifically designed 
for unusually arduous duties; conversely, a restricted series of tests may be suitable for instruments 
designed to perform witriin a more limited range of conditions. 

It will be appreciated that the closest communication should be maintained between the manufacturer 
and the evaluating body while deciding the test programmes. Note shall be taken of the manufacturer's 
specifications for the instrument and the manufacturer should be invited to comment on both the test 
programmes and the results. 

When a full evaluation in accordance with this standard is not required those tests which are required 
shall be performed and the results reported in accordance with those parts of the standard which ar-e 
relevant ( see Part 2 ) of this standard. 

While preparing this standard, assistance was derived from lEC Publication 770:1984 'Methods of 
evaluating the performance of transmitters for use in industrial-process control systems % issued by the 
International Electrotechnical Commission ( lEC). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : I960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)\ The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in 
this standard. 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 

Indian Standard 

TRANSMITTERS FOR USE IN INDUSTRIAL- 
PROCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS — SPECIFICATION 

PART 1 METHODS FOR EVALUATING THE PERFORMANCE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This stfuidiird is applicable lo iransmiUers which 
have cither a standard electric current output signal as 
per IS 7728 : 1984 or a standard pneumalic output 
signal in accordance with IS 7722 : 1975, or a standard 
voltage output signal as per IS 8493 ; 1977. 

1.2 The tests detailed herein may be applied to traivs- 
mitters which have other output signals, provided that 
due allowance is made tor such difference. 

1.3 Transmitters for the measurement of electrochemi- 
cal properties, such as/;H transmitters, are not covered 
by this standard. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Conformity of a curve, the closeness to which it 
approximates a specified curve (for example, linear, 
logarithmic, parabolic, cubic, square root, etc). 

3.1.1 Conformiiyy Independent 

The maximum deviation of the actual characteristic 
(average of upscale and dowascale readings) from a 
specified curve, so positioned as to minimize the 
maximum deviation. 

3.1.2 Conformity, Tennimil-Based 

The maximum deviation of the actual characteristic 
(average of upscale and downscaie readings) from a 
specified curve coinciding with the actual charac- 
teristic at upper and lower range-values. 

3.1.3 Conformity, Zero-Based 

The maximum deviation of the actual characteristic 
(average of upscale and downscaie readings) from a 
specified curve so positioned as to coincide with the 
actual characteristic at the lower range-value and to 
minimize the maximum deviation. 

3.2 Deadliand 

The largest cha ngc in input that can be effected without 
causing a detectable change in output. 

3.3 Hysteresis 

That property of an element evidenced by the depend- 
ence of the values of the output, for a given excursion 
of the input, upon the history of prior excursion the 
direction of the current traverse. 



3.3.1 Hysteresis Error 

That portion of hysteresis due to energy absorption in 
the elements of a measuring instrument. Unless other- 
wise specified it should be determined by subtracting 
the effect of the dead band from the maximum 
measured separation between upscale-going and 
downscale-going indications of the measured variable 
during a full range traverse. 

3.4 Ran^e 

The region between the limits within which a quantity 
is measured, received or transmitted; limits are given 
by stating the lower and upper range-values. 

Example : Pa, 20 Pa, or 4 niA, 20 iiiA. 

NOTE - TnuismiUers may be supplied with tiianual or 
automatic means of adjusting the range. As used in this 
standard the term "range" and the definitions below apply 
lo the characteristics of the transmitter tbr a specified 
setting of the adjustment means. 

3.4.1 Elevated Zero Range 

A range in which the zero value of the measured vari- 
iMc is greater than the lower range-value. 

Example : - lO^C to +3Q^C. 

3.4.2 Lower Range-Value 

The lowest value of the measured variable that a device 
is adjusted to measure. 

3.4.3 Upper Range-Value 

The highest value of the measured variable that a 
device is adjusted to uieasure. 

3.4.4 Span 

The algebra tic difference between the upper and lower 
range-values, for example : 16 niA when the range is 4 
m A to 20 niA or 20 Pa when the ra nge is Pa to 20 Pa . 

3.4.5 Suppressed Zero Range 

A range in which the zero value of the measured vari- 
able is less than the iower-range-value, for example 
200''C to SOO'^C. 

3.5 Repeatability 

The closeness of agreement among a numlier of coasecu- 
live measurements of the output for the same value of the 
input under the same operating conditions, approaching 
from the same direction, far full range traverses. 

3.6 Transmitter 

A device which responds to a measured variable to 
produce a standard output signal for transmission 
which has a prescribed continuous relationship to the 
value of the measured variable. 



1 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 



3.7 Zero Adjustnient 

A means provided in an instauuent to cause a parallel 
shift in the input-output curve. 

4 GENERAL TESTING PROCEDHKES 

4.1 Selection <»f Ranges for Test 

Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer where 
the span is adjustable other than to take up manufactur- 
ing tolerances, the tests shall be carried out with the 
span adjustment set approximately at the 
manufacturer's stated minimum and maximum and at 
an intermediate value. 

4.1.1 Unless otherwise specilled by the manufacturer, 
where the zero adjustment is adjustable other than to 
take up manufacturing tolerance, such as devices 
equipped with means for suppression or elevation of 
zero, the tests shall be carried out with the eleva- 
tion/suppression adjustment set for its minimal effect, 
then at its extremes. 

If the extent of adjustment is more than twice the 
maximum span, tests shall also be carried out with the 
adjustment set approximately at the arithmetic mean of 
the two extreme values of elevation aud/or suppression. 

4.1.2 Testing of a traasniitter with provision for sub- 
stantial adjustment of both span and zero in accordance 
with 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 may require an impractically large 
number of tests. Preliminary tests should be conducted 
to determine the effect of changing span and zero 
adjustments on the characteristic being measured so 
that redundant tests can be eliminated from the test 
programme in cases where the characteristic can be 
inferred reliably fntm fewer tests. For example, 
hysteresis and dead band may not be significantly 
affected by selection of the lower and upper range value 
if the span is held constant, and often may be calculated 
tor diO'erent spans from measurements at a single span 
setting. In any case the report should clearly indicate 
relevant values of the measured parameters for each 
setting of the adjustments so that the values of 
measured error, hysteresis, dead band, etc, are all ref- 
erenced to the same adjustnient of the transmitter. 

4.2 Zero and span should be adjusted to make the 
actual characteristic conform closely to ideal values at 
the upper and lower range limits before the tests 
specified in each clause of this standard. When this is 
done the [\\v{ shall be stated in the evaluation report. 

4.3 Unless otherwise stated, the test results shall be 
expressed as percentages of output span. 

4.4 When performance characteristics are specified, 
they shall be t^ibulated beside the actual test results. 

4.5 The limit of error of the measuring systems used 
for the test shall be stated in the test report and should 
be smaller tha n or equal to one-fourth of the stated limit 
of error of the instrument tested {see 5.5.1). 

4.6 An adequate time, as specified by the manufacturer, 
shall be allowed after switching on the power supply in 
order to allow temperature within the transmitter to stabi- 
lize. In the absence of manufacturerspecification, a period 
of at least 15 min should Ik allowed. 



4.7 Errors shall be expressed as dei)arture from the 
input/output relationship specified by the manufric- 
turer. 

For example : A ^temperature transmitter' may have an 
output intended to be linear with respect to input emf 
or incoq)orate a network intended to linearize the out- 
put with respect to temperature. To determine the error 
in the first example, the input/output relationship 
would be emf to output; in thesecond example, it would 
be temperature to output. Although the sattie test pro- 
cedure may be applied, the errors shall be assessed 
differently. 

5 ENVIRONMENTAL TEST C:ONI)niONS 

5.1 Standard Retei-ence Atmosphere 

Tempera lu re 27"C 

Relativii humidity 65 percent 

Atmospheric pressure 1 1 .3 kPa 

This standard reference atmosphere is that atmosphere 
to which values measured under aity other atnvospheric 
conditions are corrected by calculation. 

It is recognized that in many cases a correction factor 
for humidity is not possible. In such cases the standard 
reference atmosphere takes account of temperature and 
pressure only. 

This atmosphere is equivalent to the normal reference 
operating conditions usually identified by the manufac- 
turer. 

5.2 Recommended Range of Ambient Conditions 
for Test Measurements 

LS^CtoSS'^C 

45 percent to 75 

percent 

S6 kPa to 106 kPa 

Value to be stated, if 

relevant 



Temperature 
Relative humidity 

Atomospheric pressure 
Electromagnetic field 



The maximum rate of temperature change permissible 
duringany test shall be l^Cin 10 min. These conditions 
may be equivalent to nomial operating conditions. 

5,3 Reference Conditions During Tests 

5.3.1 Electrical Supply 

a) Rated voltage 
± 1 percent 

b) Rated frequency 

± 1 percent 

c) Harmonic distortion (ac supply) 

Less than 5 percent 

d) Ripple (dc supply) 

Less than 0.1 percent. 
NOTF. - Tolerances are not applicalile to transmitters 
with seit'-contained power supplies. 

5.3.2 Pneumatic Supply 
a) Rated pressure 

± 1 percent 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 



b) Supply air Icinperature 

AinbieiU temperature ± 2"C 

c) Supply air humidity 

Dew-point at least 10"C below transmitter body 
temperature 

d) Oil and dusl tree 

NOTE - An oil ainteiit not greater Uian one pari per 
million and absence of dust particles greater than 3 |.ini is 
considered to t:)C an "oi! and dust free' supply. 

5.4 lAnul Impedance ^ 

The value given by the manutaeturer shall be used 
lor electric transmitters. If the manufacturer gives a 
range of values, the load impedance taken shall be 
equal to: 

a) the minimujn value specified l^y the manufac- 
turer for transmitter with direct voltage output 
signal; and 

b) the maximum value specified by the manufac- 
turer for a transmitter with direct current output 
signal, 

U nless ot he rw i se s 1 a \ e d by \ he n\a nn la etii re r, far 
pneumatic transmitters an 8 m length of 4 mm internal 
diameter rigid pipe followed by a 20 cnr capacity shall 
be used, 

NO'fE - Care should he taken tct ensure that pneumatic 
connections are leak-tight. 

5.5 Other Conditions 

Spurious induced voltage or pressure tluctualion shall 
have negligible etfecl ou the uieasurement. 

Transmitter position during the lest shall be any normal 
operating position specified by the manufacturer. Only 
one of the permitted positions shall tx: used throughout 
the tests. 

External mechanical coi\straints shall be negligible. 

When normal operatiou requires a (low of process 
fluid through the measuring element, the flow rate 
shall be adjusted to the mean of the maximum and 
minimum values specified by the manufacturer. The 
temperature of the fluid shall t)e maintained within 
± 2°C of a valtjje within the range specified by the 
manufacturer. The composition of the Huid shall be 
such that it will not have an adverse effect on the 
instrument under lest. 

5.5,1 Accuracy of Mciliod of Measurement 

The result of a measurement should t>e recorded in a 
measurement report. The method of measurement 
should be two class indices better than the accuracy 
class given in the instrument manual. 

The maximum resultant error of the instru- 
ments/standards which measure the inputs 
(measurands) and the output should be below the 
value indicated ia the table. 



Class Index of the 

Transmitted to he 

Measured 


Maximum 
Possible Error 
of the Instruments/ 
Standards 


0.16 


±0.04 


0,25 


±0.06 


0.4 


±0.1 


0.6 


±0.15 


I.O 


±0.25 


1.6 


±0.1 


2.3 


±0.6 



6 SAMPLE CALCIII^TIONS 

6.0 Sample measurement tabulation and tlie deviation 
curves are given in Table 1 and Fig. 1. 

6.1 From col 9 in Table 1, we observe Ihat the greatest 
positive deviation from an (tverage occurs at 20 percent 
and 30 percent input on the downscale measurements 
and is 0.25 percent. 

From col 8 in Table 1 we find that the greatest negative 
deviation from an average occurs at 70 percent input 
on the upscale measurements and is 0.3 percent. 

6.2 Conformity 

6.2.1 It is usually measured in terms of non-conformity 
and expressed as conformity; for example, the maxi- 
mum deviation between an average curve and a 
specified curve. The average curve is determined after 
making two or more full-range travenies in each direc- 
tion. The value of conformity is reterred to the output 
span unless otherwise stated. 

6.2.2 As a performance specification, conformity may 
be expressed as independent conformity, terminal- 
based conformity, or zero-based conformity. 

6.2.3 Linearity is a specific, but often used, case of 
conformity where the specified curve is a straight line. 

6.2.4 The terminal-based straight line has a slope of 
0.001 5 and a value of 0.05 at percent input. The 
largest average negative deviation occurs at 70 percent 
inputand is-0.225.The intercept of the terminal based 
straight line at 70 percent input is +0.55. Therefore, the 
negative value of conformity is -0.280. 

The largest average positive deviation occurs at 20 
percent input and is +0,175. The intercept of the ter- 
mii\al based straight line at 20 percent input is -0.020. 
Therefore, the positive value of conformity is +0.195. 

6.3 Hysteresis (Hysteresis ErrorFUis Etfeetof Dead 
IJand) 

6,3.1 The largest difference between the average values 
for upscale and downscale measurements occurs at 40 
percent input and is 0.20 percent, 

6.4 Repeatability 

It is usually measured in terms of non-repeatability, but 
expressed as repeatabijity. 

6.4,1 The formula for calculating repeatability is : 
[{x,-^xf/N^ 



Table 1 Sample Measurement Tabulation 

(Clauses 6.0 and 6A) 









Error (Percentage of Output Span) 

Input (percent) Dp Actual Down Actual Up Actual Down Actual Up Actual Down Actual 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 







10 



20 



30 



40 



50 



60 



70 



80 



90 



4-0.06 



+0.13 



fO.ll 



-0.04 



-0.18 



-0.27 



'0.32 



-0.27 



-0.16 



-0.04 



f0.14 



+0.23 



+0.24 



+0.13 



• 0.02 



-0-.12 



-0.17 



-0.17 



-0.06 



+0.04 



+0.0S 



+0.09 



-0.07 



-0.16 



-0.25 



-0.30 



-0.26 



-0.05 



-0.05 



+0.15 



+0.26 



+0.25 



+0.15 



+0.01 



-0.10 



-0.16 



-0.15 



-0.05 



0.05 



+0.09 



+0.10 



-0.04 



-0.13 



-0.23 



-0.28 



-0.22 



-0.14 



-0.06 



+0.16 



+0.26 



+0.26 



+0.17 



+0.01 



-0.08 



-0.12 



-0.13 



-0.04 



Up Average 

(8) 

+0.05 
+0.10 
+0.10 
+0.15 
-0.16 



Down Average Average Error ^ 



-0.25 



-0.30 



-0.25 



-0.15 



(9) 



-0.05 



-0.15 



+0.25 



+0.25 



+0.45 



0.00 



-O.IO 



-0.15 



-0.1: 



-0.05 



(10) 



-0.05 



+0.10 



+0.175 



+0.175 



+0.05 



-0.08 



-0.175 



-0.225 



-0.20 



-0.10 



100 



+0.09 



+0.11 



+0.10 



+0.10 



+0.10 



LS 13122 (Fart 1) : 1993 



0-3 






















,/ 




\J 


/-DOWN SCALE CURVES 




iO-2 




f 






/ ^ 




s^ 


\ 


r-TERMlNAL-BASeO 
\ STRAIGHT LINE 




I/) 

I"" 

i 

z 


/; 




/^ 






^ 


i^ 


X 


1 






'^ 




' 




\ 


V 


\ 






/ 


U 


a: 










\ 


^ 


s. 




7/ 


1 


a. 
i-O-2 

S 

UJ-0'3 






UP 


SCALt 


I CUR 


VES-^ 


^> 


x 


^ 


/ 

























10 20 30 ^0 BO 60 70 
PERCENT INPUT 

Fig. 1 Di^'iAiioN Ojrvhs 



80 



90 100 



By inspection of Table 1 it can be dclcnnined that the 
greatest deviation between actual error values (xj) and 
the average upscale error (x) or average downscale 
error occurs at 20 percent input, relative to the upscale 
values. Thererore, the sample calculation is provided 
for these values. 



For 20 percent upscale input, x •• 



+0.13 
+0.08 
+0.09 



+0.03 
-0.02 
-0.01 



0.10 and N 

0.000 9 
0,000 4 
0.000 1 
0.0014 



■ 3. 



should be consistent with the degree of exactness 
desired and the characteristic being evaluated. 

Prior to recording obser\^ations, the device under test 
shall be exercised by three full-range traverses in each 
direction. 

At each point being oliserved, the input shall Ixi held 
steady until tlie output of the device under test becomes 
stabilized at its apparent final value. 

Tapping or vibrating the instrument under test is not 
allowed unless the performance characteristic under 
study requires such action. 



Repeatability - (0.001 4/3)2 - (0.000 47)2 = 0.021 6 

This calculation shall be performed for all input values 
and the largest chosen as the assigned repeatability for 
those test cycles. 

7 STATIC BEHAVIOUR 

7.1 Accuracy Related Terms 

7 AA General 

The device under test and the associated test equipment 
shall be allowed to stabilize under steady-state environ- 
mentiil conditions. All testing shall be done under these 
conditions. Environmental conditions which may in- 
fluence test resultCshall be observed and recorded. 

The number of test points to delenuine the performance 
characteristics of a device should be distributed over 
the range. They shouU include points at or near (within 
10 percent of span) the lower and upper range-values. 
There should l>e not less than five pointsand preferably 
more. The number and location of these test points 




INPUT 



(t - Hysteresis (hysteresis error plus dead band) 
b ~ Dead hand only 

Fig. 2 Hysteresis 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 



7.1.2 Measurement Cycle 

Maintain lest conditions and pre-condition the device 
under test as indicated in 7,1.1. Ol^serve and record 
output values for each input value lor at least three, but 
preferably five, lull range traverses in each direction. 

7.1-2.1 Error tabulation 

The difference between each observed output value a nd 
its corresponding ideal oulpul value shall be deter- 
mined. This diiference is the error and shall be ex- 
pressed as a percent of output span, A positive error 
denotes that the observed output value is greater than 
the ideal output value. 

The following shall be computed : 

a) Average upscale error - The arithmetic mean 
of the errors ni each value of input for the 
upscale readings of each measurement cycle; 

b) Average downscale error - The arithmetic 
mean of the errors at each value of input for the 
downscale readings of each measurement 
cycle; and 

c) Average error - The arithmetic mean of all 
upscale and downscale readings at each value 
of input. 

Record error values, average upscale error values, 
average downscale error values, and average error 
values in a table such as illustrated in Table L 

7.1.2.2 Error curve 

Plot the following error curves versus per input (see 
Fig, 1) shall be plotted. 

a) Average upscale error, 

b) Average downscale error, and 

c) Average error. 

7.1.3 Conformily, Terminal-Based 

Terminal-based conformity may be determined direct- 
ly from the error curve (see Fig. 1). 

A straight reference line or other reference curve shall 
be drawn such that it coincides with the average error 
curve at the upper range-value and the lower range 
values. 

Tenninal-based conformity is the maximum deviation 
between the average error curve and the straight line or 
reference curve. It is expressed as a plus or minus 
percent of ideal oulput span (see Table 1). 
NOTFS 

1 ll\c graphical mclhods described in this standard ii- 
luslnitc the nature of the coinputation to he made. Other 
methods, for example compulei reduction ot data, may 
be used. 

2 From the measurements taken it is also possible to 
compute "hideperidenl coarormity' and 'zero-based am- 
formity'. If contbrmity is presented according to these 
bases the tact should be slnled clearly in the report. 

3 It* the instrument has a ('-shaped curve a statement of 
terminal conforniity will yield a larger value than if the 
instrument has an S-shaped curve. 

If the use of the instrument permits adjustments to 
minhnize conformity errors, the value of independent 



confonnity is a useful figure. 

7.1.4 Hysteresis 

Hysteresis is the difference l>cVwcen the vaWies of the 
average upscale error and the average downscale error 
at each value of input. 

Report as the value of hysteresis the largest difference 
as determined above. 

7.1.5 Repeatability 

Repeatability can be determined directly from the error 
values of a number of test cycles. Repeatability shall 
be computed as the root mean square of the deviations 
from the average of a numl>er of observations. 

Repeatability shall be expressed as a percentage of the 
output span using the worst value obtained above. (See 
Table I, and 5 for illustrative examples.) 

NCriES 

1 In some cases determination of the point at which the 
value of repeatability is greatest will ^x^ aided by ploUing 
all the error values for the measurement cycles on the 
error curve. 

2 The value of repeatability determined in accordance 
with this subclause is intended for comparison of the 
performance of similar devices. It is not intended to be a 
statistiailly valid measure of repeatability which may be 
observed in service. 

7.1.6 Dead Band 

Dead band shall be measured at the upper and lower 
range -values and at a point midway between these 
values by proceeding as follows: 

a) Slowly vary (increase or decrease) the input 
until a detectable output change is observed; 

b) Observe the input value; 

c) Slowly vary the input in the opposite direction 
until a detectable output change is observed; 
and 

d) Observe the input value. 

The increment through which the input signal is varied 
(difference between steps 2 and 4) is the dead band. It 
is determined from a mininuim of three cycles and 
preferably five cycles (steps 1 to 4). The maximum 
value shall be reported. 

Dead band shall be expressed in percent of input span. 
It is unnecessary in most cases to continue the test if 
the dead band is less than O.I percent. 

If measurement at upper and lower range-values is 
impractical the measurement may be made at other 
values, for example 10 percent and 90 percent of 
range. 

7.2 ElTecis of Influence Quantities 

Unless otherwise stated, these effects shall be assessed 
by determining the change in the lower range -value and 
the span due to the following changes in conditions of 
use taken mdividually. The other conditions of use 
remain constant at the reference values. Rates of 
change ofintluencequantitiesshall be sufficiently slow 
to ensure that no overshoot occurs at any location in the 
transmitter under test. 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 



NOTE — If necessary measurement of output should be 
made at several input values to permit assessment or any 
signitlcant etTect of intluence quantities on conformity, 
hysteresis, etc. 

7.2.1 Electrical Power Supply Aberrations 

7.2J.1 Mains power supply variations 

This test shall be carried out by measurement of the 
changes in lower range-value and span caused by the 
following variations in the power supply in combina- 
tion (that is, nine sets of measurement forac supplies 
and three sets of nieasurenicnts for dc supplies), the 
load resistance being as specified in 5.4. 

a) Voltage 

i) nominal value, 

ii) +10 perceni or the manufaeiurer's limii, if 

less, and 
iii) -15 percent or the manufacturer's limit, if 
less 

b) Frequency 

i) Nominal value, and 

ii) +2 percent - 10 percent or the manufacturer's 
lituil, if narrower. 

Under low voltage/low frequency conditions, a check 
shall be made to establish that with the input at the 
upper range-value, the output does not limit below its 
upper range-value. 

7.2.1.2 Power supply interruptions 

The purpose of this test is vo determine the behaviour 
of the transmitter when switching to a standby supply. 
The input shall Ik held constant al 50 percent of span. 

Short interruption (electric transmitter only). 

The power supply shall be iutcrrapled for 5 uis, 20 ms, 
100 ms, 200 ms and 500 ms for dc supply or 1, 5, 10 
and 25 cycles at the crossover point ac for supply. 

The following values shall be recorded: 

a) The maximum transient negative and positive 
change in output; 

b) The time takes for the output to reach 99 percent 
of its steady-state value following reapplica- 
tions of power; and 



c) Any permanent change in output. 

If switching occurs at randoin phase this test should be 
repeated ten times, the period of time between any two 
tests being ut least equal to ten times the duration of the 
test. If switching is at the crossover point only three 
tests are necessary. 

7.2.1.3 Power supply depression 

With the transmitter set at output upper range-value, the 
power supply voltage shall be reduced to 75 percent of 
nominal value for a period of 5 s. The change in output 
and the amplitude and duration of any transient shall 
be recorded. 

7.2.1.4 Mains power supply transient over voltages 
(see Fig. 3 ) 

Voltage spikes shall be superimposed on the mains 
supply. The spike energy shall be 0.1 J, and the spike 
amplitudes shall be 100 percent, 200 percent and 500 
percent overvoltage (percentage of nominal mains rnis 
voltage). The spokes may be generated by capacitor or 
by any means giving an equivalent wavcfonn. 

The power supply lines shall be protected by a fvuitahlc 
suppression filter, consisting at least of a check of 500 
f,iH, capable of carrying the line current. 

The pulse of each amplitude phased to mains peak 
voltage shall be applied, or alternatively, at least ten 
pulses randomly phased with respect to the main supp- 
ly. Any transients or dc output changes appearing at the 
ouipui of ihc iasirument shaii be recorded. 

7.2.2 Pneumatic Supply Variations 

This test shall be carried out at 100 percent output by 
measuring the effect of a variation of ± 10 percent 
about the nominal reference supply pressure to the 
transmitter. 

7.2.3 Reverse Supply Voltage Protection 

For transniitlers incorporating protection against 
power supply reversal, the maximum allowed reverse 
power supply voltage shall be applied. 

7.2.4 Electrical Interference (Applicable to Transmit' 
ters with Electrical Input) 





ilNE PRO- 
TECTION 
FILTER 














TRANSMITTER 


50 Hr/60 Hz 






MAINS SUPPLY 
























TRANSIENT 
PULSE 

GENERATOR 





Fic;. 3 ScuEMAiic DiA(rRAM or Power Supply fuANSiiiNT Overvoltages 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 



7.2.4.1 Common mode interference^ see Fig. 4 ) 

This test is only applicable to transmilters with ter- 
minals which are isolated torn earth. 

It shall be carried outby hieasuremenl of changes in the 
lower range-value and spaii caus.^d by the superj^josi- 
tion of an ac signal of 250 V rnis at mains frequency 
between earth and each input and output terminal in 
turn. If the manufacturer specifics a value less than 
250 V then this lower value shall be used instead. The 
phase of the iiUerfering signal shall be varied over 360" 
with respect to "the phase of.the mains input to transmit- 
ter power supply. 



INPUT 
SOURCE 



^ 



lx)th input or both output terminals simultiineously. If the 
impedance between terminals is low relative to im- 
pedance to earth both test methods yield equivalent 
results. The method descritxid alx)ve has been chosen to 
promote consistency of method and result among testing 
agencies Tor a wide range of devices. 

7.2.4.2 Series mode interference ( see Fig. 5 ) 

This test is used to determine the influence on the 
output of an ac signal (series mode signal) at mains 
frequency superimposed on the input signal. 

The superimposed voltage is obtained across the secon- 
dary of a transformer shuiUed with a parallel resistance 



TRANS- 
MITTER 




T 



TRANSMITTER 

ENCLOSURE EARTH 

50 Hz/60 Hz ALTER- 
NATING VOLTAGE UNIT^ 
ADJUSTABLE FOR 
PHASE AND AMPLITUDE 



a) Common Mode ac Generator 



INPUT 
SOURCE 



TRANS- 
MITTER 




TRANSMITTER 
ENCLOSURE EaRTh 



DC VOLTAGE UNIT 
ADJUSTABLE 



b) Common Mode dc Generator 
Fkj. 4 Common Mode lNi^Rn^.RENCE 



The test shall then be repeated using a direct instead of 
an alternating voltage. A potential of 50 V dc or 1 000 
limes the input span, whichever is less, shall be used, 
both positive and negative potentials being supplied. If 
the manufacturer specifies a value less than 50 V, this 
lower value shall be used. As previously, the voltage 
shall only be applied to output terminals that are iso- 
lated from earth. 

During the common mode interference tests, the traivs- 
mitter shall be applied from an input signal source 
which is not affected by the common mode signal. For 
current-input transmitters the signal source shall be a 
current source with not less than 10 i^F capacitance 
connected across its output tenuinals. For voltage- 
input transmitters the signal source shall be a voltage 
source with an output impedance no greater than 100 
ohms at mains frequency. 

NOTC — Coiiiinoii mode interference tests are also 
commonly conducted tiy connecting the lest signal to 



of 10 ohms maximum and connected in series with the 
input. 

The side of the parallel connection of the transformer 
secondary and leading resistor not directly connected 
to the transmitters should be earthed. For instruments 
with isolation between input and output, the output 
should be earthed when iitput is being measured. Meas- 
urements should be carried out for output values of 10 
percent and 90 percent. 

By adjusting the primary voltage the series made volt- 
age across the loading resistor shall be set to 1 V, peak 
value, with connection to the transmitter open-ciruited. 
The transmitter is then connected into the circuit, and 
the change in the mean value of the output signal is 
measured. The phas0 of the transformer voltage shall 
be set so that the chJinge of the output current has its 
uiaximum value. Tht; change of the mean dc value of 
the output signal is' noted, if small or less than 0.5 
percent of the actual span. Jf the measured change is 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 



INPUT 
SOURCE 



rGh 



TRANS- 

MITT6R 



TRANSFORMER WITH 



5CREENE0 5E 



1 



AC POWER 

SUPPLY 

CARTH 



gOr^PABY 



TRANSMITTER 
ENCLOSURE EARTH 



SO Hz/60 Hz ALTER- 
NATING VOLTAGE UNIT, 
ADJUSTABLE FOR 
PHASE AND AMPLITUDE 



FicK 5 Series Mode iN'iiiRniRENCE 



greater than 0.5 of span, llic series mode voltage is 
reduced by reducing the primary vohage until the 
change in the output signal equals 0.5 percent of span. 
The corresponding value of the series mode voltage 
shall be staled. 

7.2.5 Earthing 

This lest is applicable only to transmitters with electri- 
cal inputs and outputs isolated Irom earth. 

The test shall be carried out by measurement ot the 

steady-state change of the lower range value and span 

caused by earthing each input and output terminal in 

turn. 

Any transient changes shall be noted. 

Care should be taken to ciminate any effect due to 

earthing of the lest signal source. 

7.2.6 Output Load 

7.2.6.1 Evaluation of the complementary error due to 
electric load variation 

Alter setting the rated supply voltage, read the output 
change at the values of the load for Riojidimm Rioadmax 
and (Riorid mm + Ruxid miix)/^ Measurements musl be 
made at least three limes in every point. The two wire 
transmitler must be examined for the full range of 
permissible supply voltage. The highest output change 
expressed in percent of the output range is the com- 
plementary error of the transmitter due to load varia- 
tion. 

7.2.6.2 Output load (electrical) 

This test shall be applied to trans mi tiers with electrical 
ouput signals, ll shall be carried out by measurement 
of the changes in lower range -value and span caused 
by variations of load resistance from the minimum to 
the maximum value specified by the manufacturer. The 
output changes shall be expressed in percent of output 
span. 

7.2.6.3 Output loud (pneumatic) 

This test shall be carried out with the input set at 10 
percem, 50 percent and 90 percent of span. Varying 
amounts of airshall l:>e bled frontthe transmitter output 
connection and the output pressure ineasured for each 
delivered How rate. Varying amounts of air shall then 
be bled into the transmitter output connection and the 
output pressure measured for each exhausted t1ow rate. 



The pressure shall then be plotted against (low in accord- 
ance with Fig. 6. From the graph will be detennined : 

a ) M a xi mu m d e 1 i ve re d il o w ra te (20 kPa ou tp u t) ; 

b) Maximum exhausted flow rate (100 kPa output); 

c) Output pressure change when delivering 0.2 
m /h and 0.4 m /h of air (at reference condi- 
tions) ; and 

d) Output pressure change when exhausting 0.2 m /h 

and 0.4 m /h of air (at reference conditions). 

Air supply pressure shall be maintained at its nominal 
level throughout the test. 

A discontinuity in the flow characteristic is termed "the 
output relay dead space" (Fig. 6) and the height of the 
step of this discontinuity shall be expressed as a percent 
of span. The corresponding air flow (delivered or ex- 
hausted) shall also be recorded. 

7.2.7 Source Impedance Lead Resistance 

On transmitters, the input to which is an electrical 
voltage, the change in output caused by varying the 
resistance the input circuit from the minim uai value 
specified by the manufacturer to the maximum value 
shall be mca^sured. The resistance shall be distributed 
equally in each line. 

7 .2 .8 R adio Interference 

Tests of the effect on the output of radio Trequency 
interference shall be the subject of specific agreement 
between manufacturer and user. 

7.2.9 Magnetic-Field Interference 

The purpose of this test is to determine the effect of a 
mains frequency alternating field on tlie output of a 
traiismitter. It is not applied to instruments using 
pneumatic sigiials only. 

The instmment shall be exposed to magnetic field of 
400 A/m (rms) which is directed along the major axis 
of the instrument. 

The effect of the field on the mean dc level and on the 
ripple content of the output shall be detennined for 
output signals of 10 percent and 90 percent span. The 
test shall be repeated with the magnetic field directed 
along two additional axis mutually perpendicular to the 
first. 



IS 13122 (Parti): 1993 




I OELIVEREO 
FLOW 



Fig. 6 Flow Cuakacierisiics of a PNEiiMAncTRANSMiTrcR 



NCTFE — A magnetic Helcl of approximately 4{)() A/m 
wilt !ie obtained at or near the centre of a circular coj! of 
1 m diameter, having 80 turns and airrying 5 A. 

7.2. J Ambient Temperatures 

[see IS 9000 (P:.irt 2/Sec I to 4) : 1977 and IS 9000 (Part 
3/Scc I to 5) : 1977 and IS 9000 (Pari 14/Sec 1 to 3) : 
198S]. 

The changes in the value of the lower range-value and 
span shall be measured at the niaxinuini and niiniuiuni 
operating teniperalure specified by the nianufacturer, 
and, if Ihey are included in this operating raitgc.ateach 
of the following ambient temperatures : 

+20*^C. +4^^C, +55^C, +20"C, O^^Q -UPC, -25^^C, 
+20^^C. 

The temperature shall )k^ changed step by step, in the 
order given, and witltout any adjustment of the trans- 
mitter. A second temperature cycle, identical to the 
first, shall be performed without readjustment of the 
Iraitsmiltei. 

The tolerance for each temperature is ± 2"C. Sufficient 
time shall be allowed for stabilization of the tem|x^ra- 
ture at all parts of the transmitter. For transmitters with 
a pneumatic output the air supply temperature shall be 
the same as the transmitter temperature, 

7.2.11 Humidity 

[see IS 9000 (Part 4) : 1979 and IS 9000 (Part 5/Scc 1 
and 2) : 1981]. 

The transmitter shall be maintained at ambient test 
conditions for 24 h. A set of reference measurements 
shall be taken at intervals of 20 percent of the output 
span. The transmitter shall then be maintained for a 
period of at least 48 h in a chamber at atmospheric 
pressure at a temperature of 40i9 ''C, and a relative 



humidity of 91 percent. The transmitter shall be 
switched on for the final 4 h of the abovie period and 
measurements shall be taken immediately following 
this period at intervals of 20 percent of the output span. 
With the transmitter still in operation, the temperature 
shall be allowed to fall below 25''C in not less than 1 h. 
The chamber shall remain closed so that saturation 
shall lake place during this period. The maximum 
change in lower range-value and span due to this con- 
dition shall be determined and recorded. 

After this lest, a visual inspection shall be conducted to 
c hec k lb r s i g us o f n a s ho v e r, a c cu m u 1 a t i o ns o f co nd e n- 
sate, deterioration of components, etc. 

Immediately after a further period of 24 h at ambient 
conditions, the transmitter error shall be determined at 
intervals of approximately 20 percent span for upscale 
and downscale signals. Changes in error from those 
measured initially under ambient conditions shall be 
recorded. 

7.2.12 Mounting Position 

The change in knver range-value and span caused by 
± 10" inclinatioi\s from the position(s) specified by the 
manufacturer shall be measured and recorded. Four 
measurements shall be made with lilt applied in two 
planes at right angles to each other. 

Where a ± 10'^ inclination is excessive due to the design 
of the Iransmitter, the maxiimim inclination specified 
by the manufacturer shall be used. 

7.2.13 Shock 

This test shall be made according to the test procedure 
given in IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 3 ) : 1979. Before the test 
reference measurenifints of lower range-value and span 
shall be recorded. 



10 



IS 13122 (Parti): 1993 



The object of this test is: 

a) to represent knocks aud jo lis likely lo occur 
during tninsporlation repair work or rough 
handling in use; and 

b) to verify the niininiuui degree of mechanical 
rugged ness. 

The procedure ol 'dropping on to a face' sha]) be 
applied as follows : 

The transmitter standing in its normal position of 
use on a smooth, hard, rigid surface of concrete or 
steel, is tilted about one bottom edge so that the 
distance between the opposite edge and the test 
surface is 25 mm, 50 mm or 100 mm (value chosen 
by agreement between manufacturer and user), or 
so that the angle made by the bottom and the test 
surface is 30'\ whichever condition is the less 
severe. Iv is then al UAved to fall freely onto the lest 
surface. 

The trausiuilter shall be subjecVed to one drop about 
e a c h o f t he fo u r bo t to ni e d gcs . 

After this test, the lransn\iUer shall be examined for 
damage. Any change in lower range -value and span 
shall be recorded. It shall he verified that the transntit- 
ter can be readjusted to the initial performance. 

7.2.14 Mechanical Vibration 

This test shall be performed according to IS 9000 
( Part 8 ) : 19S1 or according to the following rules, 
except when otherwise stated by the manufacturer. 
The object is first to measure the changes in lower 
range- value and span induced by meachanical vibra- 
tions likely to be met in service, secondly to ensure 
that the transmitter is satisfactorily robust for these 
conditions. 

The vibration tests are performed on tlie transmitter 
with normal supply and 50 percent input. 

The transmitter shall be mounted, in accordance with 
the nianufaclurer's instructions for normal installa- 
tions, on a vibration table and subjected to sinusoidal 
vibrations in three mutually perpendicular axis, one of 
which shall be the vertical direction. The rigidity of the 
vibration tabic, of the mounting plate, of any mounting 



brackets used for supporting the instrument, shall be 
such that the impulse is transferred to the instrument 
with the minimum of loss. 

There are three distinct stages in this test: 

First stage - Initial resonance search. 

The objeeV of this stage is to investigate the transmitter 
response to vibrations, to determine resonance frequen- 
cies find (o collect information which is necessary for 
final resonance search and for endurance conditioning 
at resonance frequencies, if necessary. 

During the frequency sweepijtg, frequencies shall be 
noted which causes : 

a) significant changes in the output signal, and 

b) mechanical resonances. 

All the amplitudes and frequencies at which these 
effects occur shall be noted in order to be compared 
with those found during the final resonance rscarch 
specified in Table 2. 

Frequency sweeping shall be continuous and logarith- 
mic. The sweep rale shall be approximately 0.5 octave 
per minute. The frequency range to l)e used for the 
evaluation of industrial-process control transmitters 
should be taken from the table below and selected 
according to the type of operating conditions and kind 
of installation. 

Second stage — End u ra ncc co nd i ti o ni ng. 

The transmitter shall be subjected to vibration for 
1.5 h each in three mutually perpendicular planes, one 
of which shall be the vertical direction. In each plane 
the test shall be run at that frequency which resulted in 
the largest mechanical resonance during the initial 
resonance search, or if no resonances were detected, at 
the maximum frequency specified for the type of 
operating conditions and installation. 

Third stage — Fi na 1 reso na nee sea rch. 

The final resonance search shall be made in the same 
way as the initial resonance search ai\d with the san>e 
vibration characteristics. The resonance frequencies, 
and the frequencies which cause significant changes in 
the output signal, found in the initial resonance search 



Table 2 Operating Conditions 

{Clause 12M) 



hisliillatioa 



(1) 



i) Conlrol rooiii ( (ieneval application ) 
ii) Field ( Low vitiration k'-vcl ) 
iii) I'icid ( CictK'vnl applicalion ) 
i V ) f ' i ]i cl i nc ( Lo vv v i h ra t i o n i e v e 1 ) 
v) Pipeline ( (iencral application ) 
vt) lixtreme vibralioii levels 



Vi brut ion 
frequeucy 

(2) 
UU06O 
60 10 J 50 
10 to 60 
60 to 500 
10 to 60 
60 to 2 m) 



Peak 
lilmk (mm) 


Peak 

Ac eel era li on ( m /s" ) 


(3) 


(4) 



0.07 



0. 14 



0.21 



0.8 



19.6 



29.4 



NOTC — The crossover l'ref[uency between coiislaiil amplitude and constant acceleration is nominally 60 Hz. 



11 



IS 13122 (I»ait I) : |9i>3 



(ind iinnl resonance search shall be compared. Din'eren- 
ces can Ik caused by noii-claslic derornuilioji which 
may in liirn cause cracks in the mechanical construc- 
tion. 

Final weasuremenis 

The salislactory mechanical condition of the transmit- 
ter shall be verified at the end of the lest. Any change 
of calibration shall be recorded. 

7.2.15 Over-Ranf^Q 

This test shall be carried out by measuring the changes 
in lower rangC'Value and span which result from over- 
ranging at the minimum and maximum span. 

The input shall be increased gradually from the lower 
range-value to the maximum over-range specified by 
the manufacturer. 

After the over-range has been Jtpplicd for 1 min, the 
input shall be reduced to the nominal lower range- 
value. After a further 5 min have elai)sed, the tower 
range-value and the span shall be determined. 
If the transmitter is to be tested for over-range effect in 
both direction as with differential pressure transmiUcrs 
and transmitters whose input may Ix^ both below the 
lower range-value and above the upper range-value, it 
shall be tested as described aliove, first over-ranging 
above the upper range -value, it shall be tested as 
descril)ed above, first over-ranging above the upper 
range-value, and then over-ranging below the lower 
range-value. The values of lower range-value and span 

determined afterover-ranging in each direction shall be 
recorded. 

For certain types of transmitters the testing procedure 
shall be defined in agreement with the manufacturer. 

NOTH — n* over-ranging produces siguiHaml thernici! 

effects, the duration of application should be increased 

until steady-stale is achieved. 

7.2.16 Static (Process) Pressure 

This test shall be carried out, as specified by the 
manufacturer, on transiuiiters other than pressure trans- 
mitters which in normal operation are subjected to 
process pressure.The changes in lower range-vaiueand 
span caused by changing static pressure in the measur- 
ing element shall Ix; measured and recorded. The pres- 
sure shall be changed in four equal steps from 
atmospheric to the full working pressure of the instru- 
ment. For some transmitters, this test is also carried out 
below atmospheric pressure. 

NCyfE — Due attention should be given to the etfect of 

changes in pressure in a closed system aiused l:>y changes 

in ambient temperature and the ditficulty of measuring 

the change of span at high static pressure. 

7.2.16.1 Static process pressure 

This test shall l)e carried out, as specified by the 

tnanufactnrer, as transmitters. Other than pressure 

transmitters, which in normal operation are subjected 

to process pressure. In case of a test performed with 

liquid, the measuring chamber must be filled as far as 

possible without air bubbles. Adjust the zero, the trans- 



mitter at atmospheric pressure ajid there, after slowly 
increase the static pressure in bath measuring cham- 
bers. Read the value of the out|)ut after waiting for a 
time of mijumum 10 seconds at the values of 0, 20, 40, 
60, 80 and 100 percent of the rated static pressure. 
Calculate arithmetic mean of the output/signal output 
for each measuring points. The arithmetic inean of the 
highest and lowest expressed in percent of the output 
range in the complementary error of pressure dif- 
ference transmitter due to static pressure change. This 
must be related to either to the total range or lo the 10 
percent value thereof. 

7.2.17 Temperature of Process Fluid 
If the process Huid is in contact with the measuring 
clement in normal use and the temperature of the 
process fluid may inlluence the transmitter perfor- 
mance, then this test shall be carried out. It shall be 
performed by measuring the steady-state changes in 
lower range-value and span which result from changes 
in fluid temperature in four equal steps. The details of 
the test shall be agreed with the manufacturer. While 
the temperature is changing, the transmitter shall be 
energized, and an input signal shall be applied lo main- 
tain the output within the normal operating range. 
Changes in the output measured during the test shall be 
recorded. 

7.2. IX Flow of Process Fluid Through the Instrument 
This test shall be carried out on transmitters (other than 
ilow-meters) which require for normal operation, that 
process tluid [lows through some part of them. 
It shall be carried out by measuremetit of the change in 
lower range-value and span caused by alteratioti of the 
How rate through the transmitter from the minimum to 
the maximum specified by the manufacturer. The test 
(luid shall be subject to agreement between the userand 
the manufacturer. 

7,2.19 Flow of Purge Gas Through the Transmitter 
If purge gas, such as air or nitrogen, is applied lo the 
case of a transmitter in a mamicr that creates a slight 
positive pressure within the case to ensure a gas How 
from inside to outside of the transmitter, changes in 
lower range-value and span caused by an alteration of 
the How rale of purge gas shall Ix^ measured with the 
now adjusted to percent, 50 percent and 100 percent 
of the maximum specified by the manufacturer. 

Each measurement shall be taken 30 min afterthe purge 
gas How has been set. 

7.3 Stability 

7.3.1 Start-up Drift 

This test shall lie carried out by measurement of the 
changes which occur in the output in the period imme- 
diately following application of the pneumatic or 
electrical power supply to the transmitter. Prior to the 
test, the transmitter shall be subjected to ambient en- 
vironmental conditions or as advised by the manufac- 
turer for a period of 24 h, but shall not have been 
energized. 



12 



IS 13122 (Parti): 1993 



Wilh a 10 percent input signnJ applied lo the transmit- 
ters, it sliall lie switched on and the output noted after 
5 min, 1 h, and 4 h. The transmitters shall then be 
switched off, and after at least 24 h under ambient 
environmental conditions, the test shall be repeated 
with a 90 percent input signal. The measurements 
obtained shall be recorded to sliow the short-term drift 
characteristic of the transmitter. 

7.3.2 Loni^^Temi Drift 

The transmitter shall be operated lor 30 days with a 
steady input signal corresponding to 90 percent of span. 
The inpnt and output shall be measured each day and 
the output drift determined, corrected l)y calculation for 
any small variation of input. Care should be taken that 
changes due to amlMcnt environmental conditions, 
other than lime, do not mask the effects of long-term 
drift. The lower range-value and span shall be 
measured and recorded immediately before and after 
the 30 days test period. 

The transmitter should be kept in environmental cham- 
l>er at controlled temperature and relative humidity. 
Stabilized supply should be used for the test. These 
parameters should also be continuously recorded 
during the test period. 

7.3.3 Accelerated Operational Life Test 

Transmitters incorporating machanical or electro- 
machanicai parts shall be connected as for normal 
operation. An initial alternating input with peak-to- 
peakamplitiide equal lo half the span and centred at the 
mean of the upper and lower range-values shall be 
applied. The frequency shall be such that gain is not 
reduced below 0.8 unless otherwise agreed with the 
manufacturer, the transmitter shall be subjected to 100 
000 measurement cycles. Lower range value, span and 
hysteresis at mid-span shall be measured Ix'fore and after 
tlie lest and any changes shall be recorded. 

7.4 Other Tests 

7.4.1 Ripple Content of Electrical Output 

The peak-lo-peak values and the principal frequency 
component of any ripple content of the output shall l>e 
measured and recorded witli 10 percent, 50 percent and 
90 percent input signals at mininmm and maxinuim lead, 

7.4.2 Insulation Resistatwe 

This test shall be carried out by agreement wilh the 
manufacturer in accordance wilh local requirements. 

7.4.3 Dielectric Sirengdt Measurement 

This test shall be carried out by agreement with the 
manufacturer in accordance with local requirements. 

7.4.4 Power Consumption 

7.4.4.1 Electrical power consumption 

Wilh the inj)ut adjusted so thai power consumption is 
at its maximum value, the walls and voll-amperes 
consumed shall be measured and recorded. The meas- 
urement shall be made at the nominal specified by the 
manufacturer for the supply. 

7.4.4.2 Pneumatic power consumption 

The maximum airc(tnsumption of the Ira nsmiller shall 
lie measured and recorded. 



7.5 Effect of ()|HMi-Circuited and Short-Chruited bipiit 

Bich electrical input connection shall be interrupted in 
turn for 5 min and the ultimate stead-state outputs 
recorded. The times taken to reach these values shall 
also be recorded. Asimilar test shall be performed with 
the electrical input connection shorted together. 

7.6 Effect of Opeii-Ciix-iiited and Short-Circuited 
Output 

Each electrical output connection shall be internipted 
in turn tor 5 min and the steady-state voltage across the 
output terminals shall be recorded. The limes taken lo 
reach these values shall also be recorded. Asimilar test 
shall be performed with the electrical output connec- 
tions shorted together. After the short-circuit test, the 
calibration of the transmitlershall be checked to deter- 
mine whether any permanent change in calibration or 
damage has occurred. 

S DYNAMIC BEHAVlOirR 

8.0 General 

Testing shall lie carried out with the span adjusted to 
the approximate mean of the maxinuim and minimum 
span and with the lower range-value set approximately 
at the mid-point of its permissible range of adjutviment. 

If there are other adjustments which modify the 
dynamic l)eliaviour of the transmitter, tests shall be 
carried out with the adjustments set to have their 
niininuim and maxinuim effects. 

The load impedance value specified by the manufac- 
turer shall be used, [f no-value is specified, a 0.1 yi¥ 
capacitor in parallel wilh the reference load resistance 
shall be used for transmitters with electrical output. For 
pneumatic transmitters, a test load consisting of an 8 m 
length of 4 mm internal diameter rigid pipe followed 
by a 20 cnv^ capacity shall be used. 

8.1 Step Response 

Aseries of step changes shall l>e applied to the input of 
the transmitters as specitied below. The rise time of the 
step input shall be small compared with the transmitter 
response time, both being recorded for the following: 

a) Step corresponding to 80 percent of output span 
from 10 percent to 90 percent, then irom 90 
percent to 10 percent; and 

b) Steps corresponding to 10 percent of output 
spaa up and down as lollows : 

5 percent lo 15 percent; 45 percent to 55 percent 
and 85 percent to 95 percent. 

The time for the output to reach and remain within 1 
percent of the span of its steady value shall be measured 
for each test condition. 

The amount of dead time and overshoot, if any, shall 
be slated. 

NO IT — If response is exponcntiril, the limes which 
correspond to 63 percent and 95 percent of the input step 
may also lie useful. 

8.2 Fi'equency Response 

The peak-lo-peak amplitude of the sinusoidal signal 
applied to the input shall be sufficient to allow a valid 



13 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1993 

ineasureaicnt whiie keeping a relatively low value (not 
exceeding 20 percent ol' span). The frequency ot* the 
input signal shall be increased in incrcnienls froni an 
initial value sufficiently low to approximate zero fre- 
quency cf)nditions (not above 0.005 Hz) to a higher 
frequency at which the output is attenuated to 
approximately one-half of its initial amplitude. 

At least one complete cycleof the input and output shall 
be recorded at each frequency step. 

The results of these tests shall be presented graphically 
(see Fig. 7 ) in the following form: 

a) the gain relative to zero frequency gain shall he 
plotted against frequency on a logarithmic 
scale; and 



b) the phase lag between the output and input shall 
be plotted against frequency on a logarithitiic 
scale. 

Front the graphs, the following shall be determined: 
i) tlie frequency at which the relative gain is 0.7; 
ii) the frequency at which the phase lag is 45*^; and 
iii) the maximum relative gain and the correspond- 
ing frequency and phase angle. 

9 SUMMARY Ol TESTS 

9.1 The following tests as given in Table 3 irre suitable 
tor industrial process transmitters. In general each 
applicable test should be conducted on a given trans- 
mitter if a full evaluation report is planned. 



Table 3 Test Schedule and Information 



lk>si;;;ll;Uion 



t) All transmitters 
a) Measured error 



b) Conformity 

c) Hysteresis 
d)Repeal;ibiIity 

e) bttVcl ot" dead band 

t) Ainbieut temperature 

g) Humidity 

h) Mounting position 

j) Sliock 

k) Vibration 

ni) Over-range 



ii) Drift 

a) Slart-up 

b) l^ng-lerm 

c) Accelerated bfe 



Illl 


rnrin;i1 


IttMl )tr 


I)c Kc| 


M>i lid 


kercreiicc 
to (/Clause or 


• 






Siilf-Cliiiisc 


Units 








Remarks 




(2) 








(3) 


(4) 


Percent ot output span 








'i'hrec to five upscale 


7,1.2 



l*erccnt of output span 
Percent of output span 
IVrcent of output span 
Percent of output span 

Percent of output span 

l^erceiU of output span 
l*ercent of output span 
Percent of output span after procedure 

Percent of output span 

Percent of output span 



Percent of output span 

[^M'cent of output span 
Percent of output span 



and downscalc full range 
traverses, full range traverses, 
measuring at least five points. 
Cotiipute errors and plot 
error curves 



Vf>ry input to obtain detectable 
output change at 0.5 percent, 
IfXi percent output 

Two cycles at +2(f(\ +41. fC. 

-ZSX, +2(fC 

Saturation induced 

± \if inclination in two planes 

'Drop and topple' procedure 
in accordance with IS ^CKX) 
( [>art7/Sec3 ): J979 

Initial resonance search, 

1.5 h endurance conditioning 

and final resonance search 

Over-range for I min. Measure 
5 nun after return to lower 
range-value. Carried out in 
both directions if a differential 
pressure transmitter 

At 5 min. 1 h, and4 h after 
power is switched oji 

30 days at 90 percent of span 

tfK) 000 cycles of amplitude 
e()uai to half the span. Measure 
lower range-value, span, and 
hysteresis 



7.1.3 
7.1,4 
7.1.5 
7.1.6 

7.2.10 

7.2.11 
7.2.12 
7.2.13 

7.2.14 

7.2.15 



7.3.1 

7.3.2 
7.3.3 



IS 13122 (Fart 1): 1993 



Table 3 ( concluded ) 



Uesij^iiution 



(1) 



luloritiiitioii to be Reported 

. JW_^^»*<— - 



Ke fere lice 
to Clause or 
Sub-Clause 



iii) Electric transmitters 
a) Power supply 
i) Mains variations 



ii) Short interruption 
iii) Depression 
iv) TransitiMl over voltages 



b) Bleclrical imerference 
i) Common mode 



ii) Series mode 

c) Earthing 

d) Output load 

e) Source impedance 

n Radio interference 

g) Magnetic-Held Interl'erence 

h) Ripple 

j) Power consumption 

k) Open and short circuits input 
m) Open and shori circuits-output 

i\>) Pneumatic hutnsmitters 

a) Supply variations 

b) Output load 

c) Power 00 nsuiuplioii 



v) Dynamic behaviour 

a) Slep response 

b) Frequency response 



Units 

a) 

Percent of output span 



Peak positive and negative percent of 
output span; time to stabilize 

Percent of output span; duration of 
output transient 

RecOvd any oul)>ut transients 



Percent of output span 

Percent of output span 

Record transients 
Percent of output span 

Percent of output span 
Percent of output span 

Maximum watts and volt-amperes 

Time to stabilize 
'Inne to stabilize 
Percent of output span 

See Fig- 6 



Record time for response to withm I 
percent of output span of final value 

See Fig. 7 



Remark 
(3) (4) 

Nine sets of measurements 7,2/1. J 

for variations in ac voltage 
and frequency; three sets for dc 

Nine related interruptions at 7.2. 1.2 

.crossover point of 1 , 5. 10, 25 cycles 

At 75 percent of nominal supply 7.2.1.3 

voltage for 5 s 

Iwo pulses of KM) percent, im 7,2.1.4 

percent and 500 [X'-rccnt of 
mains rms voltage 

For transmitters with terminals 7.2.4.1 

isolated from earth 250 V rms. 
ac superimposed on isolated 
terminals at mains frctpiency 
then positive and negative 50 V 
superimposed on isolated tertnitials 

IV or less, at mains fret|uency 7.2.4.2 

and 10 percent and 90 percent 
of output span 

Only for transmitters with 7.2.5 

isolated terminals 

Vary load resistance from 7.2.6. 1 

minimum to maximum as 
siX'cified by manufacturers 

Vary input circuit resistance 7.2.7 

from minimum to maximum 
values specil'ied by manufacturer 

As specified by manufacturer 7.2.8 

4fK) A/m at 10 percent and 7.2.9 

90 percent of output span 

Peak-to-peak values and 7.4.1 

principle frequency components 

At maximum supply voltage 7.4.4.1 

and minimum frequency 
specified by the manufacluver 

Interrupt each input connection 7.5 

and then short together 

Interrupt each output connection 7.6 

and then short together 

Nominal reference supply 7.2.2 

pressure varied 10 [jcrcent 

with output at 100 percent of span 

Air bied from/into transmitter . 7.2.6.2 

with input set at 10 percent. 

5f > )XM'cent and 90 percent of i9pan 

Recorded for minimum and 7.4.4.2 

maximum input and maximum 
air consumption 

Input steps corresponding to 8.1 

80 percent and 10 percent of 
output span 

Apply peak-to-peak amplitude 8.2 

of 20 percent of input span at 
fret|uencies necessary to vary 
dynamic gain from 1 to 0.7 



15 



IS 13122 (Part 1) : 1V93 



IS No. 

7722 : 1975 









1 

mn* 


1 

BAIN 




o 








n 


V 




UJ 

< < 

-J CD 
UJ 




GAlN.O^n^ 


\ 




0: N 

X 

? o 










\ 








1 






\ 





< ^ 

**• UJ 
UJ O 



< 5 

















PHASE ^*1 
AT GAtN=0-7 


1 


ASe AT 
. max, 

Vgain 












V 












\> 





FREQUENCY IN HERTZ 

Fig. 7 FkhorENo RiispoNsr, Ti^si Rj:si i it 

ANNEX A 
{Clause 2.1) 

US I Ol REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



Title 



Analogue pneumatic sig- 
nals for process control 
systems 

7728 : 1984 Analogue dc current sig- 

nals for process control 
. systems (fust revision) 

8493 : 1977 Analogue dc vollage signals 

for industrial pmcess n\eas- 
uiTemenls and control systems 

9000 Basic environmental testing 

procedures for electronic 
and electrical items 

(Part 2/Sec 1 to 4) : 1977 Cold test, Section 1 

General, Section 2 Cold 
test fornon heat dissipating 
items with sudden change 
of temperature, Section 3 
Cold test for non-heat dis- 
sipating item with gnidual 
change of tempera lure. Sec- 
tion 4 Cold test for heat dis- 
sipating items with gradual 
change of temperature 

Dry heat test, Section 1 
General, Section 2 and Sec- 
tion 3 Dry heat test for non- 
heat dissipating items with 
sudden change of teu\pera- 
ture 



JSNo. 
(Part 4): 1979 



(Part5/Secl and 2): 
1981 



(Part7/Sec3): 1979 



Part 8): 1981 



Title 
Damp heat (steady state) 

Damp heat (cyclic) test 
Section 1 16 + 8 h cycle, 
Section 2 12+ 12 h cycle 

Impact test, Section 3 
Drop and topple 

Vibration (sinusoidal) test 



(Part3/Sec I to 3) : 1988 



Part i4/Sec 1 to 3) : 1988 Test N : Change of 
temperature, Section 1 Test 
Na : Rapid change of 
temperature (thermal 

shock) with prescribed 
time of transition-two 
cha mber method (first 
revision), Section 2 Test 
Nb: Change of temperature 
(temperature cycling) with 
specified rate of change- 
one chamber method, Sec- 
tion 3 Test Nc: Rapid 
change of temperature 
(thennal shock) - Two 
fluid bath method (first 
revision) 



16 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act^ 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or ^producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



