**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10816 (1984) : Methods of sampling zinc and lead 
concentrates [MTD 13: Ores and Raw Materials] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10316- 1984 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING 
ZINC AND LEAD CONCENTRATES 



UDC 622 344"5/ 6-15 : 620J13 




© Copyright 1934 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DFll-ll II0OCQ 

fir 3 MW W >J 



IS : 10816 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING 
ZINC AND LEAD CONCENTRATES 

Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee, SMDC 4 
Chairman Representing 

Dr K. G. Ramamurthy Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri R. J. Pandey ( Alternate to 
Dr K. G. Ramamurthy ) 
Shri R. K. Abrol Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur ( Haryana ) 

Shri K. J. Singh Arora ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Agarwal Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Bagchi Steei Authority of India Ltd ( Kourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Shri M. G. Bhade Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri H. L. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. M. Chakraborty The Indian Iron & Steei Co Ltd, Burnpur 

Shri A. W. Chawathe Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) 

Shri D. B. Ghosh Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri C. N. Harman Ferro Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shreeramnagar 

Shri A. Sangameswara Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Honavar Italab Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. P. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. B. Khanna Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Krishnamoorthy Ministry of Railways 

Shri R. K. Dasgupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri K . S . M ah ap atr a In d i an Bu r eau o f M i nes , N agpu r 

Shri U. N. Sarkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. N. Mitra Mitra S. K. Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Mukherjee Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steet 

Plant ), Bhilai 

Shri M. Bhaduri ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Pain National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. R. Patel Therapeutics Chemical Research Corporation, 

Bombay 

Shri M. V. Vaidya ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with writtenjpermission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 10816 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr Prem Narain Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, 

New Delhi 
Dr K. G. Aneja ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. Rajaram Essen & Co, Bangalore 

Shri V. Shankarnarayan ( Alternate I ) 
Shri K. N. Gururajachar ( Alternate II ) 
Dr M. Ranga Rao Steel Authority of India Ltd, (R&D Organi- 

zation ), Ranchi 
Shri A. K. Satsangi ( Alternate ) 
1>r B. R. L. Row Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur 

Shri G. L. Jethwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. M. Sengupta Directorate General of Inspection, Ministry of 

Defence 
Shri T. K. Bhattacharjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Vidyarathi Bharat Aluminium Co Ltd 

Shri S. D. Jha ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Ahluwaua, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Stat ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. Sankar 

Senior Deputy Director ( Stat ), ISI 



IS : 10816 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING 
ZINC AND LEAD CONCENTRATES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 10 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Methods of 
Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 For all materials, sampling plays an important role in arriving at 
the estimate of quality in a scientific manner. The sampling techniques 
should be such as to give a part or portion which represents the whole 
lot and gives a complete picture of the materials with regard to all the 
characteristics. It is also necessary to see that while sampling no 
constituent of the material is lost because of errors of sampling. 

0.3 In the case of zinc/lead concentrates when obtained from the mill, 
the important constituents looked for is zinc/lead and moisture. The 
concentrates will have normally particle size of — 150 /^m ( 70% ) with 
contents of zinc/lead and moisture varying with different batches of 
concentrates. Hence, the variation will have to be considered while 
formulating a suitable sampling procedure. Generally at manufactur- 
ing end zinc/lead concentrates may occur as a heap from the dryer 
through conveyor or loaded in trucks or wagons for despatch. Usually, 
lump formation does not occur but in case there is any, the lumps can 
be easily crushed to powder without much difficulty. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis, if the final value, 
observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard describes the methods of sampling at manufacturing 
site and also from bags, wagons, trucks barges or ships of a consignment 
of zinc/lead concentrates for estimating zinc/lead and moisture content. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10816 - 1984 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.0 For the purpose of brevity the term zinc concentrate in this stan- 
dard will mean lead concentrate also. 

2.1 Lot — Consignment or portion thereof comprising zinc concentrates 
obtained from a single source and same process of manufacture. 

2.2 Increment — The amount of material taken by a sampling device 
at one time. 

2.3 Gross Sample — The quantity of sample obtained by blending all 
the increments from one lot. 

2.4 Moisture Sample — The sample to be used for determining moisture 
content of a lot. 

2.5 Laboratory Sample — A quantity of sample obtained from a hom- 
ogenized sampled by reducing it by coning and quartering or by any 
division method in successive stages. 

3. GENERAL RULES FOR SAMPLING 

3.1 Lot — When a consignment of zinc concentrate is offered for 
sampling it is necessary to verify that the entire quantity is from the 
same source and preferably from the same batch of manufacture. If 
not, then it is necessary to constitute two or more lots depending on 
the source and batch number. Each lot shall be sampled separately 
and assessed for moisture and zinc content. A lot satisfying the 
above conditions shall not however exceed 500 tonnes by mass. 

3.2 Generally zinc concentrates are to be sampled from (a) trucks/ 
wagons (b) heaps (c) bags (d) ships (e) barges and (f) pipeline 
system. The last situation is not dealt with in this standard because of 
its specialized nature. 

3.3 Zinc concentrates will be in the form of a slurry if the moisture 
content is beyond 10 percent. When it is transported on truck or 
wagon, the concentrate settles down and moisture comes to the top 
collected as water and will continue on the top of the bed of concent- 
rate in the truck. This happens certainly if the concentrates are shifted 
from the site to the trucks within a period of 12 hours. Due to exposure 
to atmospheric conditions, the zinc concentrate loses moisture and 
consequently moisture content decreases. Hence, for proper estimation 
of moisture at different stages, care should be taken to see that samples 
are sealed as quickly as possible and should be representative to 
avoid, possible errors. 



IS : 10816 - 1984 



4. SAMPLING PROCEDURES 
4.1 Sampling from Trucks/Wagons 

4.1.0 When a lot is transported to a truck or wagon, the moist*** 
concentrate generally doss not flow. But if the moisture is less than 
two percent it may get blown away by the wind. 

4.1.1 In a lot, the number of wagons and trucks are to be ascertained 
first. Samples have to be drawn from each wagon or truck in a number 
of increments. For taking increments suitable sampling device known 
as sampling pipe as shown in Fig. 1 could be used. For a truck having 
the dimensions 3'5X 2*5 metre with depth around 0*6— 0'7 metre, the 
samples may be distributed as follows. The length of the truck as well 
as the width can be divided into 4 and 3 equal parts respectively. There 
will be then 12 rectangles and from the centre portion of each of the 
rectangle an increment of 0"5 kg can be drawn reaching to a depth of 
300 mm. A typical distribution of such points is shown in Fig. 2. In the 
case of wagons also a similar scheme can be followed. 




Fig. 1 Sampling Pipe 

4,1.2 The increments gathered from each wagon/truck by using the 
sampling pipe shall be collected on a non-absorbent cloth ( plastic or 
rubber ) and this may be successively subjected to coning and quarter- 
ing so that at every stage the quantity is halved and ultimately a final 
sample of minimum 500 ml ( 2 kg ) is arrived. This sample shall be kept 
in a well stoppered bottle or polythene bags with necessary details 
(truck/wagon number, date and time of sampling, etc). There will be as 
many sample containers as the number of trucks/wagons in the lot. 
This procedure is applicable with moisture content around 2 percent or 



IS : 10816 - 1984 

rubber 
less otherwise the sample is to be spread on the cloth and by 

increment division method final representative sample can be prepared. 



*« 


LENGTH 


^ »~ 




o 


O 


o 


o 


w 

—J 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 



Fig. 2 Sampling Spots for Drawing Samples 
from Trucks/ Wagons 

4.1.3 The gross sample representing each lot may be obtained by mix- 
ing the materials from all the bottles/bags representing different wagons/ 
trucks. The mixing and homogenizing shall be carried out on a rubber 
or plastic sheet of sufficient area. This gross sample shall be reduced 
successively to give ultimately 500 ml ( 2 kg ) or laboratory sample. One 
portion of this may be used for moisture determination and the remain- 
ing for determination of zinc content. Moisture determination shall 
be done as quickly as possible, immediately after sample reduction. The 
laboratory samples shall be kept in a well stoppered bottle/polythene 
bag. 

4.2 Sampling from Heaps 

4.2.1 Zinc concentrates from the processing mill is normally collected 
as heap from which it is necessary to draw the samples before they 
are packed for despatch. The zinc concentrate obtained from each 
batch constituted into one or more heaps will form at lot. From each 
heap sampling spots shall be selected at random ( at least 10 ) taking 
care that they are at least 600 mm apart. For taking increment, sampl- 
ing pipe ( Fig. 1 ) shall be inserted at the spots selected as above. 
Each increment shall be not less than 0*5 kg. 

4.2.2 The increments collected from each heap shall be placed on a 
non-absorbent cloth and the collection of all such samples from 
different heaps in a lot shall be the gross sample representative of the 
lot. 

4.2.3 The material in the gross sample shall be thoroughly mixed 
and be subjected to reduction by successive coning and quartering 
method ( see 4.1.3 ) to give ultimately minimum 500 ml ( 2 kg ) of 
laboratory sample which shall be used for determining moisture content 
and zinc content. 



IS : 10816 - 1984 



4.3 Sampling from Bags 



4.3.1 Zinc concentrate is generally supplied in bags ( 45 kg approxi- 
mately ). The number of bags in the consignment and also the indivi- 
dual batch number have to be ascertained first. Lots have to be formed 
on the basis of batch number. Each lot shall be sampled separately 
and assessed for moisture and zinc content. The number of bags in 
the lot and the number of bags to be sampled are given in Table 1. 
The bags shall be selected at random by using random number tables 
as per IS : 4905 - 1968*. Each of the selected bag shall be opened and 
an increment of minimum 0*5 kg shall be drawn by using sampling 
pipe ( Fig. 1 ). The increment from each bag is kept separately in a 
well stoppered bottle/polythene bags. 

TABLE 1 MINIMUM NUMBER OF BAGS TO BE SAMPLED 

No. of Bags to be 
Sampled 

(2) 
10 
20 
25 
30 

4.3.2 All the increments from the sampled bags from a lot shall be 
mixed together to form a gross sample as in 4.1.2. 

4.3.3 The gross sample shall be reduced successively to give a 
laboratory sample of minimum 500 ml ( 2 kg ) as in 4.1.3. 

4.4 Sampling from Ships 

4.4.1 It is not advisable to sample zinc concentrates from shiphold 
directly. When the material is transferred to shore, increments of 
approximately 1 kg shall be collected by using appropriate shovel 
( Fig. 3 ) every half an hour. These increments shall be kept in separate 
well-stoppered bottles/polythene bags. 

4.4.2 All the increments collected from the material transferred 
during a shift shall be combined to give a gross sample. 

4.4.3 From each gross sample, laboratory sample shall be prepared 
as in 4.1.3. 



No. 


oe Bags 


in the Lot 




0) 


Up 


to 100 


101 


200 


201 


300 


301 and above 



•Methods for random sampling. 



IS : 10816 - 1984 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 3 Increment Shovel 

4.5 Sampling from Barges 

4.5.1 When the zinc concentrate is received in barges it is preferable 
to sample the material when it is loaded or unloaded as described in 
4.4.1. However, if it becomes necessary to draw samples from barges, 
the following procedure may be adopted. 

4.5.2 The total number of barges containing 500 tonnes or less of 
zinc concentrate shall constitute a lot. From each barge one increment 
each at 10 different points shall be collected with the help of sampling 
pipe of 40 mm diameter and suitable length with tapered end. 
A hammer of suitable mass may be used to drive the sampling pipe 
to the bottom of the cargo if need -be. The amount of sample, not 
less than 10 kg in mass, from each barge shall be kept separately in 
a polythene bag with suitable identification marks. 

4.5.3 All such samples collected from a lot shall be combined toge- 
ther to form a gross sample. The gross sample shall be thoroughly 
mixed together and successively reduced by coning and quartering to 
give a laboratory sample of 2 kg. 

5. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE 

5.1 Moisture may be determined by the use of moisture meter of 
sufficient accuracy. In case better accuracy is desired or if agreed to by 
purchaser and supplier the following procedure may be adopted. 

5.2 Moisture samples of 1 kg in duplicate shall be collected separately 
from gross sample and shall be dried for 3 hours at 105°C. After 3 
hours the mass of the sample shall be determined. The drying shall 
continue for one hour and again the mass be determined. This proce- 
dure of drying and weighing shall continue till the difference between 
two successive weighing becomes less than 0*5 g ( 0*05 percent of the 

8 



IS : 10816 - 1984 

mass of the moisture sample ). At this point, the mass of the dried 
sample shall be taken as final and moisture content shall be computed 
using this figure. The results of the two moisture samples shall be 
reported individually. 

5.3 From each laboratory sample two determinations of zinc content 
shall be made and individual as well as the average of the two values 
shall be reported. 



