**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  13424  (2001) :  Safety  Evaluation  of  Bathing  Bars  and 
Toilet  Soaps  -  Methods  of  Test  [CHD  25:  Soaps  and  other 
Surface  Active  Agents] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


18  13424:2001 

f^TFeTT  ^^mr ) 

Indian  Standard 

SAFETY  EVALUATION  OF  BATHING  BARS  AND 
TOILET  SOAPS  —  METHODS  OF  TEST 

(  First  Revision  ) 

ICS  71.100.40 


©BIS  2001 

BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9    BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI!  10002 

October  200\  Price  Group 4 


Soaps  and  Other  Surface  Active  Agents  Sectional  Committee,  CHD  25 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  ( First  Revision )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by 
the  Soaps  and  Other  Surface  Active  Agents  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Chemical  Division 
Council. 

Toilet  soaps  and  bathing  bars  are  applied  on  the  skin  many  times  a  day  by  most  people,  taking  their  safety  'in  use' 
for  granted.  In  order  to  make  sure  that  such  products  do  not  endanger  the  normal  health  and  well  being  of  the 
consumer  by  way  of  the  two  frequently  observed  hazards,  namely,  skin  irritation  and  skin  sensitization,  their  safety 
evaluation  is  carried  out  through  animal  testing  and  on  human  subjects.  Based  on  the  experience  gained  over  the 
years  and  to  keep  in  line  with  the  strong  international  movement  of  reduction  of  animals  for  experimental  purposes, 
the  technical  committee  responsible  for  formulation  of  this  standard  decided  to  revise  it. 

Hence  in  the  present  (  first )  revision  two  test  methods,  namely,  a  simple  skin  irritancy  test  involving  human  subjects 
( the  species  of  concern )  is  introduced  by  replacing  the  primary  skin  irritation  test  on  animal  and  a  skin  sensitization 
test  on  guniea  pigs  (  Buehler  test  and  Magnusson  and  Kligman  test  )  have  been  incorporated  for  assuring  safety 
of  toilet  soaps  and  bathing  bars.  For  assessing  skin  sensitization  potential  animals  cannot  be  avoided  since,  such 
a  test  on  humans,  would  run  the  risk  of  subjecting  them  to  long  lasting  adverse  sensitization  effects.  Ethical  considerations 
prevent  testing  of  new  formulations  directly  on  human  subjects,  unless  one  is  sure  of  the  innocuousness  of  formulations. 
If  the  formulation  happens  to  be  a  sensitizer,  it  would  cause  irreparable  damage  and  misery  to  the  volunteer,  unlike 
the  short  duration  skin  irritancy  test.  The  latter  would  only  have  a  reversible  transient  effect. 

The  rationale  of  the  choice  of  guinea  pigs  for  skin  sensitization  method  is  that  guinea  pigs  are  the  most  sensitive 
species  for  the  type  of  testing.  Skin  sensitization  test  can  be  performed  by  any  of  the  two  methods,  namely,  Buehler 
test  or  Magnusson  and  Kligman  guinea  pig  maximization  test.  The  latter  method  is  the  most  sensitive  and  stringent 
one  and  is  described  in  detail  in  IS  1 1 60 1  and  also  in  this  standard  along  with  the  Buehler  test  for  the  sake  of  completeness. 
While  it  is  recognized  that  Buehler  test  is  not  as  sensitive  as  the  Magnusson  and  Kligman  guinea  pig  maximization 
test,  regulatory  agencies,  such  as,  US  FDA,  OECD,  EPA,  etc,  have  approved  of  this  test  for  the  purpose  of  substantiation 
of  safety  of  chemicals. 

It  is  further  recommended  that  formulations  which  are  made  conforming  to  IS  4707  ( Part  I  )  :  1 988  'Classification  of 
cosmetic  raw  materials  and  adjuncts:  Part  I  Dyes,  colours  and  pigments  {first  revision )'  and  IS  4707  ( Part  2 ) :  1993 
'Classification  of  cosmetic  raw  materials  and  adjuncts:  Part  2  List  of  raw  materials  generally  not  recognized  as  safe 
for  use  in  cosmetics  {first  revision  )',  guidelines  of  CTFA  (  Cosmetics,  Toiletries  and  Fragrance  Association  ),  EEC 
(  European  Economic  Community )  directive  and  guidelines  of  IFRA  ( International  Fragrance  Association  )  are 
likely  to  be  safe  and  such  products  may  not  warrant  any  safety  testing.  However,  if  the  manufacturer  feels  it  necessary 
to  generate  data  on  such  formulations,  he  may  do  so.  Whereas,  products  which  contain  novel  ingredients  which 
are  not  under  the  purview  of  the  above  documents  would  require  safety  assessment  using  the  methods  as  given  in 
this  standard. 

All  animal  tests  should  comply  with  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals  Act^  1 960  and  Breeding  of  and  Experiments 
on  Animals  (Control  and  Supervision  )  Rules,  1998  as  updated  from  time  to  time.  Any  studies  involving  human 
subjects  should  be  as  per  the  'Ethical  Guidelines  for  Biomedical  Research  on  Human  Subjects'  published  by 
ICMR  ( Indian  Council  for  Medical  Research,  New  Delhi )  and  as  revised  fi*om  time  to  time. 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  responsible  for  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  A. 

In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is 
to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values 
{revised)'. 


IS  13424  :  2001 


Indian  Standard 

SAFETY  EVALUATION  OF  BATHING  BARS  AND 
TOILET  SOAPS  —  METHODS  OF  TEST 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  prescribes  a  short  duration  skin  irritancy 
test  on  human  subjects  and  skin  sensitization  tests 
on  guinea  pigs. 

2  SKIN  IRRITANCY  TEST  ON  HUMAN 
SUBJECTS 

2.1  Outline  of  the  Method 

The  test  involves  patch  testing  of  toilet  soaps  and 
bathing  bars  on  human  subjects  and  assessing  the 
reaction  in  comparison  to  a  positive  control  patch  tested 
simultaneously. 

2.2  Procedure 

Apply  a  solution  of  the  bathing  bar/soap  topically  on 
the  upper  arm  of  human  subjects,  under  occlusive  patch 
for  a  duration  of  24  h  and  assess  the  skin  reactions 
subjectively  using  the  Draize  Scale,  24  h  after  removal 
of  the  patches.  Follow  up  the  reactions,  if  any,  at  72  h 
and  one  week  thereafter  to  confirm  recovery. 

2J1 A  Human  Subjects 

Select  twenty  four  healthy  adult  human  subjects, 
preferably  equal  number  of  males  and  females  who 
do  not  have  any  previous  history  of  adverse  skin 
conditions  and  are  not  under  any  medication  likely 
to  interfere  with  the  results.  Pregnant  ladies  and  breast 
feeding  mothers  should  be  excluded.  Explain  the  test 
procedure  to  each  volunteer  and  obtain  a  signed 
informed  consent  from  each  of  them. 

2.2.2  Test  Patches  for  Topical  Treatment 

Ideally  use  ready-made  standard  test  patches  measuring 
about  1  cm  diameter.  Fix  three  such  test  patches  on  a 
transparent  porous  surgical  adhesive  tape  of  sufficient 
length  ( approximately  14  cm  )  and  breadth.  Alternatively 
if  such  patches  are  not  available,  use  1  cm  diameter 
discs  made  out  of  chromatography  paper  (  Whatman 
No.  3  )  taken  on  a  slightly  bigger  polythene  sheet  having 
about  0.25  cm  hole  punched  at  the  centre  and  fixed  on 
the  adhesive  tape.  Keep  about2.5  cm  distance  between 
the  two  adjacent  test  patches  (  filter  paper  discs  ). 

2.2.3  Samples 

Store  samples  for  the  test  appropriately  to  prevent 
any  contamination  or  spoilage.  Do  not  use  any  spoiled 


or  deteriorated  sample.  Preserve  adequate  quantity 
of  the  sample  which  is  used  for  the  testing  for  at  least 

2  years  for  any  retesting.  Identify  each  sample  with  a 
unique  code  number  and  make  appropriate  entry  in 
the  records. 

2.2.4  Preparation  of  the  Sample 

Prepare  8  percent  (  mass/mass  )  solution/suspension 
of  the  sample  to  be  tested  in  distilled  water.  Use  a 
mechanical  agitator  and  heat  (  not  more  than  38°C )  if 
needed. 

2.2.5  Positive  Control 

Use  sodium  lauryl  sulphate  (  SLS ),  analytical  grade, 
at  a  concentration  of  3  percent  (  w/w )  in  distilled  water 
as  the  positive  control. 

2.2.6  Patch  Testing 

Use  inside  of  any  one  of  the  upper  arms  of  the  volunteer 
for  the  test.  A  maximum  of  6  samples  in  2  rows  of 

3  each  can  be  tested  on  each  upper  arm.  Dispense 
40  ml  solution  of  each  of  the  sample  individually  on 
separate  patches  using  a  micro  pipette.  Take  3  samples 
on  one  strip  of  adhesive  tape  and  two  samples  on  the 
other  along  with  the  positive  control.  Place  the  two 
strips  containing  the  patches  on  the  upper  arm  vertically 
one  parallel  to  the  other  and  reinforce  them  by  cross 
bands  of  adhesive  tape  placed  over  the  patches. 
Remove  the  patches  after  a  contact  period  of  24  h  and 
rinse  the  treated  sites  with  water  to  remove  any  residue. 
However,  if  the  volunteer  experiences  unbearable 
discomfort  with  any  of  the  patches,  the  volunteer  is 
instructed  to  remove  such  patches  any  time  prior  to 
the  targeted  24  h  contact.  Mark  such  sites  with  a  blue/ 
black  marker  to  facilitate  evaluation  later.  The  volunteer 
is  also  requested  to  note  down  the  signs  and  symptoms 
of  the  discomfort  and  the  time  of  removal  of  the  patch 
and  hand  it  over  to  the  investigator. 

2.2.7  Observation  and  Scoring 

Assess  the  skin  reaction  under  a  constant  artificial 
daylight  source,  24  h  after  the  removal  of  the  patches. 
Score  the  reactions,  namely,  erythema,  dryness  and 
wrinkling  on  a  0-4  point  scale  and  oedema  on  another 
0-4  point  scale  as  per  the  Draize  Scale  given  in  Table  1 , 
with  a  maximum  combined  scoreof  8.  Compare  the 
average  score  produced  by  each  of  the  test  sample 
with  that  produced  by  the  positive  control.  Toilet  soaps 


IS  13424  :  2001 


and  bathing  bars  showing  an  average  score  of  4  and 
above,  a  score  which  would  be  produced  by  3  percent 
SLS,  out  of  the  possible  maximum  score  of  8,  are  irritant. 
In  case,  the  average  score  produced  by  SLS  is  lower 
than  3,  then  repeat  the  test  using  another  set  of 
volunteers. 

Table  1  Draize  Scale  for  Scoring  the 
Treatment  Sites 

(C/aw^e  2.2.7) 

Score     for         Reaction        Score  for      Reaction 
Erythema/  Oedema 

Dryness  and 
Wrinkling 


(1)  (2) 

0  No  reaction 


(3)  (4) 

0        No  reaction 


1  Very  slight  eryth-        1         Very  slight  oedema 
ema/dryness  with 

shiny  appearance 

2  Slight    erythema/       2        Slight  oedema 
dryness/wrinkling 

3  Moderate  erythema/     3        Moderate  oedema 

dryness/wrinkling 

4  Severe  erythema/        4        Severe  oedema 
wrinkling  /scales 

2.2.8  Analysis  of  Data 

Analyse  the  data  statistically  using  Student's  Mest 
(paired /-test). 

2.2.9  Reporting 

The  test  report  shall  contain  the  following  information: 

a)  Location  of  the  study  and  date, 

b)  Identification  of  the  sample, 

c)  Number  of  volunteers  used, 

d)  Procedure  followed  and  any  deviation, 

e)  Result  of  the  test  in  a  tabular  form  and  statistical 
analyses, 

f)  Any  unusual  findings, 

g)  Conclusion,  and 

h)    Name  of  the  investigator. 

3  SKIN  SENSITIZATION  TEST  ON  GUINEA 
PIGS— BUEHLERTEST 

3.1  Outline  of  the  Method 

Apply  the  material  at  a  suitable  concentration  topically 
on  the  clipped  skin  of  guinea  pigs  under  covered  patch 
for  6  h,  once  a  week  for  three  consecutive  weeks  for 


inducing  sensitization.  Challenge  the  animals  topically 
two  weeks  later  with  the  highest  non-irritant 
concentration  of  the  test  material  in  an  identical  manner 
as  was  done  for  sensitization  induction.  Assess  the 
resulting  skin  reactions  24  and  48  h  after  removal  of 
the  patch  and  compare  them  with  the  reactions  produced 
on  the  control  group  of  animals  treated  simultaneously. 

3.2  Procedure 

The  test  is  carried  out  in  two  phases: 

a)  Preliminary  Irritancy  Test  —  To  determine 
the  suitable  concentrations  of  the  test  material 
for  sensitization  induction  and  challenge 
treatments. 

b)  Main  Test — Carry  out  induction  and  challenge 
treatments  with  the  test  substance  using  the 
concentrations  determined  in  the  preliminary 
irritancy  test. 

3,2A  Animals 

Use  equal  number  of  male  and  non-pregnant  female 
healthy  albino  guinea  pigs,  weighing  about  300-400  g 
each.  Use  4  animals  for  the  preliminary  irritancy  test 
and  30  animals  (  20  for  the  test  substance  and  10  as 
control )  for  the  main  test.  Select  a  few  more,  two  days 
prior  to  the  treatment,  to  replace  the  ones  which  may 
be  found  unsuitable  due  to  skin  blemishes,  at  the  start 
of  the  test.  Keep  the  animals  individually  in  cages 
located  in  a  room  maintained  at  23  ±  3°C,  relative 
humidity  40-70  percent,  light  dark  cycle  of  12  h  in  24  h 
with  adequate  ventilation  and  air  changes.  Animals 
should  have  access  to  standard  feed  and  water  all  the 
time.  Prior  to  each  treatment  remove  hair  from  the  flanks 
by  clipping  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  treatment. 
Assess  sensitivity  of  the  animal  stock  every  six  months 
by  the  use  of  any  one  of  the  positive  control  substances, 
for  example,  Dinitrofluorobenzene  (  DNFB  ), 
Dinitrochlorobenzene  (  DNCB  ),  hexylcinnamic 
aldehyde  (  HC  ),  etc,  which  are  strong  to  moderate 
sensitizers.  These  compounds  should  give  a  response 
in  15  percent  or  more  of  the  animals.  For  such 
confirmation  use  the  same  method  described  in  this 
standard.  In  the  event,  the  animals  are  sourced  from 
an  outside  agency,  where  the  sensitivity  monitoring 
is  not  conducted,  carry  out  sensitivity  test  using  the 
same  stock  ideally  before  carrying  out  the  actual  test 
or  in  parallel  with  the  test  on  another  group  of  animals. 
A  test  carried  out  on  an  insensitive  stock  is  invalid. 

3.2.2  Test  Patches  for  Topical  Treatment 

2.5  cm  wide  surgical  cotton  gauze,  is  folded  into 
12  ply  of  2.5cm  x  2.5cm  dimension.  Place  this  on  a 
2cm  X  2cm  thin  polythene  sheet  which  is  stuck  at  the 
centre  of  a  2.5  cm  wide  and  6-7  cm  long  surgical  adhesive 
plaster. 


IS  13424  :  2001 


3.2.2.1  Samples 

Store,  preserve  and  identify  the  samples  as  described 
under  2.2.3. 

3.2.2.2  Preparation  of  sample 

Prepare  solutions/suspension  on  a  weight-to-weight 
basis  using  distilled  water.  For  water  insoluble  material, 
(  some  of  the  positive  controls  )  use  either  refined 
groundnut  oil  or  pharmaceutical  grade  paraffin  oil  or 
propylene  glycol. 

Prepare  adequate  quantity  of  the  solution/suspension 
to  complete  all  treatments  of  the  day  with  a  single  aliquot 
of  solution.  When  a  very  low  concentration  is  required, 
it  is  best  to  prepare  a  concentrated  stock  solution/ 
suspension  and  dilute  a  quantity  of  the  stock  to  the 
required  concentration  for  treatment.  Use  a  mechanical 
agitator  and  heat  (  not  more  than  38°C  )  to  facilitate 
solution  preparation,  if  required. 

3.2.3  Preliminary  Irritancy  Test 

Select  four  treatment  sites  —  two  on  the  right  and  two 
on  the  left  flanks — each  approximately  2.5cm  x  2.5cm, 
fi-om  the  clipped  area  of  each  animal.  Take  0.5  ml  each 
of  4  serial  concentrations  ( for  example,  0.5,  1.0, 2.0, 
5.0  percent  and  so  on  )  of  the  test  substance  on  4 
different  patches  supported  by  polythene  sheets 
and  apply  on  the  four  selected  sites  of  each  animal. 
Cover  the  patches  and  hold  them  tightly  by  the  aid  of 
cloth  bandage  and  return  the  animals  to  their  respective 
cages.  6  h  later,  remove  the  patches  and  mark  the  four 
corners  of  each  test  sites  with  indelible  ink.  Assess 
the  sites  for  skin  irritancy  response  24  h  after  the 
removal  of  the  patches  (  30  h  after  the  application  of 
the  patch ).  Select  the  concentration  which  produces 
a  mild  irritation  (  score  1  on  a  scale  of  0  to  3  as  described 
in  3.2.4,3,  based  on  the  mean  of  readings  from  four 
animals)  for  topical  induction  and  select  the  highest 
concentration  (  based  on  the  mean  of  readings  fi^om 
four  animals  )  which  does  not  produce  any  irritancy 
response  as  the  challenge  concentration. 

3.2.4  Main  Test 

3.2.4.1  Induction 

As  mentioned  in  3.2.1,  use  20  animals  for  inducing 
sensitization  with  the  test  sample  and  10  as  control. 
Induction  treatment  is  given  once  a  week  for  3  weeks. 
Take  0.5  ml  of  the  solution/suspension  of  the  test  sample 
at  the  selected  concentration  on  a  single  patch  (  3.2.2 ), 
apply  on  the  left  fiank  of  the  animal  of  the  test  group, 
bandage  as  described  earlier  (  3.2.3  )  and  allow  a 
contact  period  of  6  h.  Give  the  control  group  a  similar 
treatment  but  with  vehicle  (  distilled  water )  in  place 
of  the  test  substance.  At  the  end  of  the  contact  period 
remove  the  patches  and  any  substance  sticking  to  the 
treatment  site  with  moistened  tissue  paper.  Repeat  the 


application  7  days  and  14  days  later  on  the  very  same 
treatment  site  on  each  animal. 

3.2.4.2  Challenge 

Fourteen  days  after  the  last  induction  treatment,  give 
the  untreated  flank  of  all  the  animals  ( including  that 
of  the  control  group )  a  challenge  treatment,  using  the 
highest  non-irritant  concentration  of  the  test  substance 
in  the  same  manner  as  described  earlier  (  3.2.3  ).  6  h 
later  remove  the  patches,  clean  the  area  with  moistened 
tissue  paper  and  mark  with  indelible  ink.  21  h  after  the 
removal  of  the  patches,  examine  the  area  and  clip  the 
hair,  if  necessary.  Approximately  3  h  later  assess  the 
skin  reactions  ( double  blind )  under  a  constant  artificial 
day  light  source  and  grade  them  as  per  Table  2.  Assess 
the  reaction  again  24  h  later,  that  is,  48  h  after  the  patch 
removal.  If  the  response  in  the  first  challenge  is  not 
conclusive,  then  a  second  challenge  treatment  may 
be  given  one  week  later  using  a  new  set  of  control 
animals. 

3.2.4.3  Scale  for  evaluation 

Scale  for  evaluation  is  given  in  Table  2. 

Table  2  Scale  for  Evaluation 

(Clauses  3.2, 4.2  and  3.2.43) 

Scale  Observation  Reaction 

(1)  (2)  (3) 

0  No  visible  change  No  reaction 

1  Discrete  or  patchy  erythema  Mild 

2  Moderate  and  confluent  erythema  Moderate 

3  Intense  erythema  and  swelling  Severe 

NOTE — If  1 5  percent  or  more  of  the  animals  are  showing 
definite  positive  response  as  compared  to  that  of  control 
animals,  the  product  could  be  considered  as  a  sensitizer. 

3.2.5   Reporting 

The  test  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  Location  of  the  study  and  date; 

b)  Identification  of  the  sample; 

c)  Guinea  pigs:  Strain,  source,  number,  age,  sex, 
housing  conditions,diet.  Date  and  results  of 
the  last  sensitivity  check  including  the 
substance  and  vehicle  used.  Individual  weight 
of  animals  at  the  start  and  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  test; 

d)  Procedure  followed  and  any  deviation; 

e)  Result  of  the  preliminary  irritancy  study  with 
conclusion  on  induction  challenge 
concentration  to  be  used  in  the  test; 


IS  13424  :  2001 


f)  Result  of  the  main  test  should  be  summarized 
in  tabular  form,  giving  skin  reactions  of  each 
animal  at  each  observation  along  with  any 
narrative  description  of  the  nature  and  degree 
of  effects  observed; 

g)  Any  unusual  findings; 
h)    Conclusion;  and 

j)     Name  of  investigators. 

4  SKIN  SENSITIZATION  TEST  ON  GUINEA 
PIGS— GUINEAPIGMAXIMIZATIONTEST— 
MAGNUSSON  AND  KLIGMAN 

4.1  Outline  of  the  Method 

Test  material  along  with  Freund's  Complete  Adjuvant 
(  FCA  )  is  injected  intradermally  for  inducing 
sensitization  on  guinea  pigs.  FCA  enhances  the 
sensitivity  of  the  immune  system  of  the  animals.  The 
induction  treatment,  thus  given,  is  further  boosted  with 
the  help  of  a  closed  patch  application  of  the  test  material 
on  the  injected  sites  after  a  week.  This  is  followed  by 
topical  challenge  treatments  with  the  test  material  a 
fortnight  later  to  finally  assess  the  allergenicity  potential. 
Necessary  concentrations  of  the  test  materials  for  the 
above  mentioned  treatments  are  determined  through 
preliminary  irritancy  studies. 

4.2  Procedure 

Carry  out  the  test  in  two  phases  as  described  below: 

a)  Preliminary  Irritancy  Test  —  To  determine 
suitable  concentrations  of  the  test  material 
for  sensitization  induction  and  challenge 
treatments. 

b)  Main  Test —  hiduction,  boosting  and  challenge 
treatments  with  the  test  substance  using  the 
concentrations  determined  in  the  preliminary 
irritancy  test. 

4.2.1  Animals 

Use  a  total  of  26  Albino  guinea  pigs  (8  for  preliminary 
irritancy  test,  1 0  for  the  test  material,  4  for  treated  control 
and  4  for  untreated  control  )  of  either  sex  bred  from  a 
stock  which  is  disease-free  as  well  as  showing  positive 
sensitization  response  with  any  of  the  well  known  skin 
sensitizers.  Select  a  few  more,  two  days  prior  to  the 
treatment,  to  replace  the  ones,  which  may  be  found 
unsuitable  due  to  skin  blemishes,  at  the  start  of  the 
test.  House  the  animals  and  look  after  them  as  described 
earlier  (3.2.1 ).  Follow  the  currently  described  procedure 
to  assess  the  sensitivity  of  the  animal  stock  and 
30  percent  or  more  animals  should  show  a  positive 
response  in  the  sensitivity  test.  Prior  to  each  treatment 
hair  from  the  flanks/shoulder  is  removed  by  clipping 
depending  on  the  nature  of  the  treatment. 


4.2.2  Samples 

Store,  preserve  and  identify  the  samples  as  described 
under  2.2.3. 

4.2.3  Preparation  of  Sample 

Prepare  solutions/suspension  on  a  weight-to-weight 
basis  using  distilled  water/normal  saline.  Prepare 
adequate  quantity  of  the  solution/suspension  to 
complete  all  treatments  of  the  day  with  a  single  aliquot 
of  solution.  When  a  very  low  concentration  is  required, 
it  is  best  to  prepare  a  concentrated  stock  solution/ 
suspension  and  dilute  a  quantity  of  the  stock  to  the 
required  concentration  for  treatment.  Use  a  mechanical 
agitator  and  heat  (  not  more  than  38°C  )  to  facilitate 
solution  preparation,  if  required. 

4.2.4  Preliminary  Irritancy  Test 

4.2.4.1  Intradermal  irritancy  test 

This  is  carried  out  to  find  out  the  suitable  intradermal 
induction  injection  concentration  which  will  be  used 
for  sensitizing  the  animals.  Inject  intradermally  ( at  least 
1  cm  apart  on  the  clipped  and  shaved  flank  of  4  guinea 
pigs  of  the  same  sex  and  weighing  around  300  g  each) 
with  0.1  ml  each  of  0.25, 0.5, 1  percent  or  more  of  toilet 
soap/bathing  bar  in  normal  saline  (  0.9  percent  sodium 
chloride  )  using  a  sterilized  tuberculin  or  disposable 
syringe  fitted  with  26  gauge  needle.  Place  the  animals 
in  their  individual  cages.  24  h  later  examine  the  intensity 
and  extent  of  reactions  by  size  in  millimetres  ( length 
and  breadth  )  for  erythema  (  redness  )  and  oedema 
(  swelling  ).  Select  the  concentration  which  produces 
a  slightly  irritant  reaction,  namely,  7mm  x  Tmm  erythema 
and  oedema  (  mean  from  4  animals )  for  intradermal 
induction  injection  concentration. 

4.2.4.2  Topical  irritancy  test 

Saturate  an  8  mm  diameter  chromatography  paper 
(  Whatman  No.  3  )  discs  with  a  range  of  concentrations, 
for  example,  0.5,  1,  2,  5,  10  percent  and  so  on  toilet 
soap/bathing  bar  in  distilled  water/suitable  solvents 
and  hold  them  in  place  using  1 0  mm  diameter  aluminium 
discs/cup.  Place  these  at  least  one  cm  apart  on  the 
clipped  and  shaved  flank  of  four  guinea  pigs,  each 
weighing  about  400  g.  Hold  the  patch  test  discs/cups 
containing  the  paper  in  position  with  surgical  adhesive 
plaster  tapes  and  cloth  bandage.  Leave  the  animals  in 
their  individual  cages  and  look  after  them  as  described 
in  3.2.1.  Remove  the  patches  24  h  after  application. 
Examine  the  treated  sites  24  and  48  h  after  the  removal 
of  patches.  Score  the  resulting  reactions  for  irritation 
on  a  0-3  scale  as  described  under  3.2.4.3.  For  boosting 
the  sensitization  response  through  topical  application, 
select  a  concentration  giving  a  slightly  irritant 
(  score  1 )  reaction.  Select  the  highest  concentration 
which  causes  no  visible  reaction  (  score  0  )  for  challenge 
treatment  ( final  treatment ). 


IS  13424  :  2001 


4.2.5  The  Main  Sensitization  Test 

Select  10  guinea  pigs  weighing  about  300  g  each  from 
the  stock  as  described  under  4.2.1. 

4.2.5.1  Sensitization  treatment  —  Induction 

Carry  out  the  sensitization  treatment  in  two  stages 
—  intradermal  injection  followed  one  week  later  by 
topical  application. 


a) 


Intradermal  injection  —  Clip  the  hair  from 
a  2  cm  X  4  cm  area  of  skin  on  the  dorsal  shoulder 
region  and  give  3  pairs  of  intradermal  injections 
within  the  clipped  area  (  see  Fig.  1  )  using  a 
sterilized  tuberculin  or  disposable  syringe 
fitted  with  a  26  gauge  needle  in  the  following 
manner: 


\J  \) 


Fig.  1  Guinea  Pig  Viewed  From  Above  Showing  THE 
SrrES  OF  Intradermal  IwDUcrnoN  Injections 

1 )  Two  0. 1  -ml  injections  of  50  percent  FCA 
in  normal  saline  on  sites  marked '  T . 

2)  Two  0. 1  -ml  injections  on  sites  marked  '2' 
of  toilet  soap/bathing  bar  in  normal  saline  at 
the  concentration  selected  for  sensitization 
induction  from  the  intradermal  irritancy  test 
{seei.lAA). 

3)  Two  0. 1-ml  injections  on  sites  marked  '3' 
of  toilet  soap/bathing  bar  in  normal  saline  mbced 
with  1 : 1  FCA,  such  that  the  fmal  concentration 
of  test  substance  injected  is  the  same  as  in 
that  (2)  above. 

b)  Topical  treatment-boosting  —  One  week 
after  the  injection,  clip  and  shave  the  same 
2  cm  X  4  cm  treated  area.  Saturate  a  2  cm  x  3  cm 
chromatography  paper  (  Whatman  No.  3  ) 
with  toilet  soap/bathing  bar  at  selected 
concentration  as  determined  under  4.2.4.2 
and  place  over  the  shaved  site.  Cover  this 
by  4  cm  X  6  cm  piece  of  thin  polyethylene 


sheet.  Hold  the  paper  saturated  with  test 
substance  covered  by  polyethylene  sheet  in 
place  for  48  h  by  surgical  adhesive  plaster 
tape  and  cloth  bandage.  Remove  the  patches 
at  the  end  of  48  h. 

4.2.5.2  Topical  challenge 

Fourteen  days  after  the  boosting  treatment,  challenge 
(  final  treatment  to  determine  sensitization )  the  guinea 
pigs  by  occluded  patch.  For  each  animal,  saturate  an 
8  mm  diameter  chromatography  paper  (  Whatman 
No.  3 )  disc  with  the  toilet  soap/bathing  bar  at  the  selected 
challenge  concentration  [  highest  topical  non-irritant 
concentration  (  4.2.4.2  )  ]  and  place  it  in  a  10  mm 
diameter  aluminium  patch  test  disc/cup.  Apply  this 
on  to  the  clipped  and  shaved  flank  ( see  Fig.  2  )  and 
hold  in  position  using  surgical  adhesive  plaster  tape 
and  cloth  bandage  for  24  h.  Examine  the  challenged 
site  for  inflammatory  response-redness  ( erythema ), 
swelling  ( oedema )  24  and  48  h  after  removal  of  the 
patch  using  the  scoring  system  described  under  4.2,7. 
One  week  after  the  first  challenge,  a  fiirther  challenge 
on  the  opposite  flank  may  be  given  exactly  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  first.  Provide  a  third  challenge  one  week 
later  on  the  opposites  flank  if  the  earlier  challenge  results 
are  inconclusive. 


Fig.  2  SrrE  of  Topical  Challenge  on  Guinea  Pig 

4.2.6  Treated  and  Untreated  Controls 

4.2.6.1  Treated  controls 

At  the  same  time  as  the  main  test,  select  4  guinea  pigs 
of  the  same  weight  range  as  treated  controls.  Give  them 
mock  sensitization  treatment  at  the  same  time  and  in 
the  same  way  as  for  the  main  test  animals  except  that 
the  test  substance  is  omitted  from  the  intradermal 
injection  induction  and  topical  application  boosting. 
But  treat  them  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  test  animals 
at  every  challenge  with  the  test  material. 

4.2.6.2  Untreated  controls 

Challenge  4  animals  which  did  not  receive  any  treatment 
previously  but  are  of  the  same  weight  range  as  the 
main  test  animals,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
test  and  treated  control  animals. 


IS  13424  :  2001 


4.2.7  Scale  for  Evaluation 

Score  the  skin  reactions  resulting  from  treatment  using 
the  scale  given  in  Table  3. 

Table  3  Scale  for  Evaluation 


Scale 

(1) 
0 
I 
2 

3 


Observation 

(2) 
No  visible  change 
Discrete  or  patchy  erythema 


Reaction 

(3) 

No  reaction 

Mild 


Moderate  and  confluent  erythema       Moderate 
Intense  erythema  and  swelling  Severe 


NOTE  —  If  30  percent  or  more  of  the  animals  are  showing 
definite  positive  response  as  compared  to  that  of  control 
animals,  the  product  could  be  considered  as  a  sensitizer. 


4.2.8  Conclusion 

Consider  a  reaction  in  a  test  animal  as  positive  response 
if  it  is  significantly  greater  than  the  response  on  treated 
and  untreated  control  animals.  When  there  is  no  reaction 
on  treated  and  untreated  control  animals,  a  reaction 
score  of  1  or  more  in  any  of  the  test  animals  is  considered 
to  be  a  positive  sensitization  response.  Toilet  soaps/ 
bathing  bars  producing  a  positive  sensitization  response 
in  30  percent  of  the  animals  in  this  test  pose  a  risk  to 
the  consumer. 

4.2.9  Reporting 

The  test  report  must  include  the  information  as  required 
under  3.2.5. 


18  13424:2001 


ANNEX A 

(  Foreword) 

COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Soaps  and  Other  Surface  Active  Agents  Sectional  Committee,  CHD  25 


Representativeis) 

Dr  p.  Dasgupta  (Chairman) 

Shri  B.  R.Wadhawan  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  Yogesh  Kamdar 

Shri  N.  G.  Wagle  ( Alternate  ) 

Chief  Chemist 

Deputy  Chief  Chemist  ( Alternate  ) 

Dr  S.  K.  Ghosh 

Shri  N.  G.Wagle 

Smt  R.  Talwani  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  C.  J.  Shishoo 

Shri  Santosh  Yellore  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  Shaish  Kumar 

Shri  B.  B.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  J.  S.  Rekhi 

Shri  R  Jayakumaran 

Shri  M.  A.  Khan  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  Santosh  Kumar 

Shri  R.  C.  Doshi  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  Rangarajan 

Shri  S.  A.  Patel 

Shri  Mahendra  Vyas  ( Alternate  ) 

Dr  A.  N.  Bhat 

Dr  V.  R.  Dhanuka  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  V.  R  Menon 

Dr  K.  B.  Patil 

Shri  M.  P.  Naik  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  A.  Warsi 

Shri  K.  S.  Krishnan 

Shri  S.  Krishnan  (Alternate  ) 

Shri  M.  S.  Sultania 

Shri  S.  S.  Shukla  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  Bhimrao  Bagalkote 

Smt  Vasudha  Chachad  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  P.  P.  Khanna 

Shri  A.  C.  Khanna  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  K.  Chakravorty 

Shri  P.  K.  Chakraborty  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  K.  K,  Patel 

Shri  M.  A.Bhatt  ( Alternate  ) 

Dr  B.  R.  Gaikwad 

Shri  P.  K.  Tiwari  ( Alternate  ) 

Procter  and  Gamble  Hygiene  and  Healthcare  India  Limited,  Mumbai       Dr  Arun  Vishwanath 

Smt  Shweta  Purandre  ( Alternate  ) 

Reliance  Industries  Ltd,  Mumbai  Representative 

Resarch,  Design  and  Standards  Organization  (Ministry  of  Railways),        Shri  A.  K.  Choudhuri 
Lucknow 


Organization 
Directorate  General  of  Health  Services,  New  Delhi 

Association  for  Consumer  Action  on  Safety  and  Health  (ACASH), 

Mumbai 

Central  Board  of  Excise  and  Customs,  Ministry  of  Finance, 
New  Delhi 

Central  Pollution  Control  Board,  Delhi 

Consumer  Guidance  Society  of  India  (  Regd  ),  Mumbai 

Consumer  Education  and  Research  Centre,  Ahmedabad 

Department  of  Industrial  Development,  Ministry  of  Industry, 
New  Delhi 

Development  Commissioner,  Small  Scale  Industries,  New  Delhi 

Directorate  General  of  Supplies  and  Disposals  ( Inspection  Wing), 
New  Delhi 

Federation  of  Associations  of  Small  Scale  Soap  and  Detergent 
Manufacturers  of  India,  Delhi 

Godrej  Soaps  Limited,  Mumbai 

Gujarat  Detergent  Manufacturers  Association,  Ahmedabad 

Hindustan  Lever  Limited,  Mumbai 

Indian  Soaps  and  Toiletries  Manufacturers  Association,  Mumbai 
Karnataka  Soaps  and  Detergents  Limited,  Bangalore 

Khadi  and  Village  Industries  Commission,  Mumbai 
K.  S.  Krishnan  Associates  (P)  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGQA  ),  Kanpur 

Mumbai  Grahak  Panchayat,  Mumbai 

Nand  Kishore  Khanna  and  Sons,  Mumbai 

National  Test  House,  Kolkata 

Nirma  Limited,  Ahmedabad 

Oil  Technologists  Association  of  India,  Kanpur 


(  Continued  on  page  8  ) 


IS  13424  :  2001 


(  Contenued  from  page  7  ) 

Organization 
The  Non-Power  Soap  Manufacturers  Association,  Mumbai 

Tata  Chemicals,  Pithampur 
BIS  Directorate  General 


Representative(s) 

Shri  R.  C.  Doshi 

Shri  Y.  R.  Doshi  ( Alternate  ) 

Representative 

Shri  Lajinder  Singh, 
Director  &  Head  (  Chem  ) 
[  Representing  Director  General  (  Ex-officio 
Member  )  ] 


Member-Secretary 

Shrimati  Chitra  Gupta 

Deputy  Director  (  Chem  ),  BIS 


Panel  for  Toxicological  Evaluation  of  Soaps  and  Detergents,  CHD  25  :P  1 


Hindustan  Lever  Limited,  Mumbai 

All  India  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences,  New  Delhi 

Consumer  Education  and  Research  Centre,  Ahmedabad 

Consumer  Guidance  Society  of  India  (  Regd  ),  Mumbai 

Federation  of  Associations  of  Small  Scale  Soap  and  Detergent 
Manufacturers  of  India,  Delhi 

Haffkine  Institute  for  Training  Research  and  Testing,  Mumbai 

Industrial  Toxicological  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ),  Lucknow 

KEM  Hospital,  Mumbai 

Lokmanya  Tilak  Municipal  Medical  Hospital,  Mumbai 

Nand  Kishore  Khanna  and  Sons,  Mumbai 

Nirma  Limited,  Ahmedabad 

Rallis  India  Limited,  Bangalore 

Seth  G.  S.  Medical  College,  Mumbai 

Shriram  Institute  for  Industrial  Research,  Delhi 


Dr  K.  M.  Cherian  (  Convener  ) 

DrJ.  S.  Pasricha 

Shri  S.  H.  Clerk 

Dr  R.  C.  Trivedi  { Alternate  ) 

Shri  N.  G.  Wagle 

Dr  S.  G.  Bhat  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  Santosh  Kumar 

Shri  R.  C.  Doshi  ( Alternate  ) 

Dr  V.  Ramakrishna  Rao 

Dr  P.  B.  ViSWANATHAN 

Dr  Virendra  Misra  (  Alternate  ) 

Prof  Rui  Fernandes 

Dr  H.  R.  Jerajani 

Shri  P.  P.  Khanna 

Shri  A.  C.  Khanna  (Alternate  ) 

Representative 

Dr  K.  Sundraraja  Rao 

Dr  (  Ms  )  N.  A.  Kshirsagar 

Shri  K.  K.  Juneja 

Shri  S.  K.  Checker  ( Alternate  ) 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and 
attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  w^ithout 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  *BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.    CHD  25  (  854  ) 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Pubiication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 1 0  002  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

Telephones :  323  0 1  3 1 ,  323  33  75, 323  94  02  ( Common  to  all  offices  ) 

Regional  Offices :  Telephone 

Central :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  J  323  76 17 

NEW  DELHI  110002  \323  3841 

Eastern:  1/14C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VIIM,V.  LP.  Road,  Kankurgachi  /  337  8499,337  85  61 

KOLKATA700054  1337  8626,3379120 

Northern:  SC0335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  1603843 


Southern  :  C.  L  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI 600  1 13 


1602025 

f  2541216,2541442 

12542519,2541315 


Western  :  Manakalaya,E9MIDC,Marol,Andheri(East)  f  832  9295,83278  58 

MUMBAI400093  18327891,8327892 

Branches :  AHMADABAD,  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD,  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  NALAGARH.PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurja,  India 


