**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10643 (1983) : Sensory evaluation procedure to establish 
guidelines for open dating processed food products [FAD 16: 
Foodgrains, Starches and Ready to Eat Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; 1€643- 1983 

(Reaffirmed 2005) 

Indian Standard 

SENSORY EVALUATION PROCEDURE TO 

ESTABLISH GUJDELINES I OR OPEN DATING 

PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS 



UDC 064-8/9:543 92 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAl^ BHAVAN, S BAHADUa SHAH ZAFAft MARG 

NEW LJELHI Minima 

Cf 3 AvBemier 10B3 



IS : 10643 • 1983 

Indian Standard 

SENSORY EVALUATION PROCEDURE TO 

ESTABLISH GUIDELINES FOR OPEN DATING 

PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS 

Sensory Evaluation Sectional Committee, AFDC 38 

Chairman Representing 

♦Dr G. Sadasivak Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute 

( IGAR ), New Delhi 

Members 
AdRiCTJiiTTTBAt. MARKETING Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 

Adv SBR TO THE GOVERNMENT of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

OF India 
Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. AiYAB Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Associa- 

tion of India, Bombay 
Dr Brahma Singh Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 
Shri N. Srinivasalu ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Ghadha Gentral Gommittee for Food Standards, New Delhi 

A sistant Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri Om P. Dhamija Export Inspection Gouncil of India, Calcutta 

Director of Research Goffee Board, Bangalore 

GtJP TASTER ( Alternate ) 
Smt Harsimrat Kaur Gill The Punjab Dairy Development Gorporation Ltd, 

Chandigarh 
Shri B. M. L. Gabg ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Govinpabajan In personal capacity ( 2701 First Main Road, Mysore ) 

Shrt K. L. Gupta Tea Board, Calcutta 

Db S. K. Gupta National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Dr B. N. Mathub ( Alternate ) 
Dr E. K. Jayanarayanan Mohan Meakin Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Dr B. K. Jha Yezdi Distilleries, Mysore 

Shri Vittal Mallya United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. J. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Mansingh Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri N. J. Menon McDowell & Go Ltd, Shertally 

Dr a. G. Naik Kurade Suman Food Consultants, New Delhi 

*Dr. G. Sadasivan was the Chairman elected for the meeting in which this standard 
was finalized. 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10643 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. N. Pandey All India Distillers' Association, New Delhi 

Shri B, L. Khanna ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Smt ) P. Pltshpamma College of Home Science, Andhra Pradesh Agricul- 

tural University, Hyderabad 
Dr ( Smt ) P. Geervani ( Alternate ) 
Db K. G. Ragbtjveer Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Brig P. G. S. Sagera Technical Standardization Committee ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Deputy Technical Adviser ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Sule Naarden ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Y. G. Vaidya ( Alternate ) 
B»iG R. N. Varma Quartermaster Generals' Branch, Army Headquar- 

ters, New Delhi 
Lt-Col S. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Walter Food Specialities Ltd, Moga 

Shri A. K. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnak^ndam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K. Das Gupta 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Sensory Evaluation of Basic Standards Subcommittee, AFDC 38 : 1 

Convener 

Shht V. S. Govindarajan 
2701 First Main Road, Mysore 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 

Adviser to the Government Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

OF India 

Shui T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Gupj a National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Dr E. K. Jayanarayanan Mohan Meakin Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Shri Vittal Mallya United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shrt N. J. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Mansingh Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr K. G. Raghuveer Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Dr G. Sadasivan Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, 

( ICAR), New Delhi 
Brig P. G. S. Sagera Technical Standardization Committee ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ),-New Delhi 
Deputy Technical Adviser ( Alternate) 



IS ! 10643 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

SENSORY EVALUATION PROCEDURE TO 

ESTABLISH GUIDELINES FOR OPEN DATING 

PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS 



0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 August 1983, after the draft finalized by the Sensory 
Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0,2 Guidelines for open dating processed food products are important 
because (a) there will be changes in the quality of such a product over a 
period of time after the date of processing; (b) for some unknown 
interval of time immediately after the processing date the product 
quality will remain at the same level; (c) after this interval the 
product quality will continue to deteriorate at rates specific for different 
products; and (d) when the deterioration in quality is beyond a certain 
level, the product will be unacceptable to the consumer. 

0.3 It is recognized that the precise dates by which deterioration sets in 
a specified product cannot be given exactly, since, the tests with 
panelists are influenced by experimental factors pertaining to sample 
presentation, psychophysical factors involved in the assessment of the 
product by the panelists and factors due to the insufficient training of 
panelists in conducting the test. 

0.4 The relevant committee felt that an Indian Standard method for 
evaluating the changes in processed food products over a period of time 
would help in achieving uniformity in such determinations. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



"*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10643 - 1983 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard describes recommended methods for evakiating 
quality changes in processed food products over a period of time for 
establishing guidelines for open-dating them for consumer use. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.0,1 Open-dating is used to mean differently in different food 
industries; the most common ones are defined below. 

2.1 Sell-by-Date — The sell-by-date is the last date of offer for sale to 
the consumer after which there remains a reasonable storage period in 
the home. 

2.2 Expiration Date — The last day the product is recommended for 
use at full quality level. 

2.3 Date of Minimum Durability ( Best Before ) — The date which 
signifies the end of the period under any stated storage condition during 
which the product will remain fully marketable and will retain any 
specific qualities for which tacit or express claims have been made. 
However, beyond that date the food may still be perfectly satisfactory. 

3. OPTIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Optimum requirements for conducting sensory evaluation and 
training of panel and conducting consumer acceptance/preference 
studies are given in IS : 6273 ( Part 1 )-l97l*. 

4. PRINCIPLE 

4.1 The product quality just after processing is established through 
physico-chemical and sensory analysis. This provides the base line 
data. 

4.2 Decision regarding the storage life obtained during laboratory 
trials/previous factory trials are made use of for projecting the length of 
storage time and testing intervals. 

4.3 Depending on the number of withdrawals and the quantity required 
for testing at the end of each interval, sufficient samples of the products 
are drawn and stored. 



♦Guide for sensory evaluation of foods: Part 1 Optimum requirements. 

4 



18:10643-1983 

4«4 Initial tests conducted for assessing product quality using represen- 
tative product samples are repeated at the end of each interval of storage 
until significant decline in product quality occurs at any particular stage 
after which the open date is assigned by the producer. 

5/ METHODS 

5.1 The product is processed and packaged in a marketing manner. 

5.2 Physico-chemical tests at each stage are carried out by the follov^ing 
standard methods of analysis. 

5.3 Sensory analysis is done at each stage according to selected 
experimental designs depending on the test method used, number of 
product variables to be evaluated and the number of panelists available 
so as to obtain maximum information with the available resources 
[ IS : 6273 ( Part 2 )-197l* and IS : 6273 ( Part 3 )-1975* ]. 

5.4 A representative sample from the product for establishing this 
guidelines is dravv-n using standard sampling methods ( IS : 1548-1969| ). 
The quantity to be drawn is decided by the number of intervals at which 
tests are to be conducted, as well as the quantity required for each 
test. 

5.5 All production information such as dates^ lot numbers and codes are 
documented and separate laboratory codes are assigned to each sample. 

5.6 The samples drawn are subjected to simulated distribution and 
storage conditions so as to reflect the market conditions of handling and 
purchase. The market conditions are determined on the basis of 
apriori knowledge of the temperature, light, environment and display 
method encountered in the market. Accelerated storage conditions can 
be used if they are validated against non-accelerated conditions. 

5.7 For sensory analysis train a panel ( IS : 8140-1976J ) which has been 
earlier screened for capacity to discriminate differences in and repeat 
judgements for the main quality attributes of the product to be evalua- 
ted. Familiarize the panel \vith the test method and ranges of quality 
differences in the attributes they are to evaluate so that uniformity among 
panelists in understanding the quality attributes of the product is 
achieved. 



♦Guide for sensory evaluation of foods; 

Part 2 Methods and evaluation cards. 

Part 3 Statistical analysis of data. 
fManual on basic principles of lot sampling {first revision ). 
JGuide for selection of panel for sensory evalution of foods and beverages. 



IS ! 10643 - 1983 

5.8 Determine the attributes of the product to be assessed based on 
consumer concepts as well as on the knowledge about the composition, 
anticipated changes, processing methods, packaging and storage 
conditions. 

5.9 The quality descriptions are developed reflecting the selected impact 
attributes-colour and appearance, aroma, taste and/or texture. 

5.10 The consistency in the performance of the panel is continuously 
mentioned during evaluations as recommended in IS : 8140-1976*. 

5.11 Based on the appropriate design selected, present coded samples to 
the panelists under minimal bias generating conditions [ IS : 6273 (Part 
3)-1975t]. 

5.12 The scale for each quality attribute is chosen to conform with 
the corresponding physico-chemical measurement, 

5.13 The data are collected and coJated. 

6. ANALYSIS OF DATA 

6.1 The appropriate analysis and interpretation of data are carried out 
as -recommended in IS : 6273 ( Part 3 )-1975t. 

7. TEST REPORT 

7.1 Based on the results and interpretation the ^open dates', that is, the 
sell-by-date, 'the expiry-date' and the *date of minimum durability' are 
fixed for each product. 



♦Guide for selection of panel for sensory evaluation of foods and beverages. 
tGuide for sensory evaluation of foods; Part 3 Statistical analysis of data. 



