**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mrjsssss^^ft^: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

NETWORK SERVICE DEFINITION IN DATA 

COMMUNICATIONS FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 



UDC 68V327-801 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1993 Price Group 10 



Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee, LTD 36 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8348 : 1987 'Information processing systems — 
Data communications — Network service definition', issued by the International Organization 
for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommen- 
dation of the Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee ( LTD 36 ) and 
approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council- 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

In this Indian Standard, the following international standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following: 

International Standard Indian Standard 

ISO 7498 Information processing systems — IS 12373 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 » Basic reference 
Open systems interconnection — Basic model of open systems interconnection for 

reference model information processing systems : Part 1 

( Identical ) 

ISO 8073 : 1988 Information processing IS 13919 : 1993 Connection oriented transport 
systems — Open systems interconnec- protocol specification in open systems 

tion — Connection oriented transport interconnection for information processing 

protocol specification sytems ( Under print ) 

( Identical ) 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following ISO Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in 
conjunction with this standard: 

ISO/TR 8509:1987 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnection — 

Service conventions 
CCITT Recommendation X '200 Reference model of open systems interconnection for CCITT 

applications 
CCITT Recommendation X '210 OSI layer service definition conventions 

CCITT Recommendation X'21 3 Network service definition for open systems interconnection 
for CCITT applications 

CCITT Recommendation X'224 Transport protocol specification for open systems intercon- 
nection for CCITT applications 

The text of technical corrigendum 1 ( 1991 ) to ISO 8348 : 1987 is given at the end of this 
standard. 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting 
it in this Standard. 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Indian Standard 

NETWORK SERVICE DEFINITION IN DATA 

COMMUNICATIONS FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 



Introduction 

This International Standard is one of a set of International Stan- 
dards produced to facilitate the interconnection of computer 
systems. It is related to other International Standards in the set 
as defined by the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Basic 
Reference Model. The OSI Reference Model subdivides the 
area of standardization for interconnection into a series of 
layers of specification, each of a manageable size. 

This International Standard defines the Service provided by the 
Network Layer to the Transport Layer at the boundary between 
the Network and Transport Layers of the Reference Model. It 
provides for the designers of Transport Protocols a definition of 
the Network Service existing to support the Transport Protocol 
and ror the designers of Network Protocols a definition of the 
services to be made available through the action of the Network 
Protocol over the underlying service. This relationship is 
illustrated in figure 1. 



Transport Protocol 



Network Protocol 



Transport 
Layer 



Network 
Layer 



uses Service - 



Network Service 



provides Service 



Figure 1 — Relationship of the Network Service in this 

International Standard to the protocols specified in 

other OSI Standards 

The use of the word "Network" to name the "Network" Layer 
of the OSI Reference Model should be distinguished from the 
use of the word "network" to denote a communications 
network as conventionally understood. To facilitate this dis- 
tinction, the term "subnetwork" is used for a collection of 
physical equipment, commonly called a "network" (see 
ISO 7498). Subnetworks may be either public networks or 
privately supplied networks. In the case of public networks, 
their properties may be determined by separate CCITT Recom- 
mendations such as CCITT Recommendation X.21 for a circuit- 
switched network or CCITT Recommendation X.25 for a 
packet-switched network. 



Throughout the set of OSI Standards the term "Service" refers 
to the abstract capability provided by one layer of the OSI 
Reference Model to the layer above it. Thus, the Network Ser- 
vice defined in this International Standard is a conceptual 
architectural Service, independent of administrative divisions. 

NOTE — It is important to distinguish the specialized use of the term 
"Service" within the set of OSI Standards from its use elsewhere to 
describe the provision of a service by an organization Isuch as the pro- 
vision of a service, as defined in other CCITT Recommendations, by an 
Administration). 

Any particular subnetwork may or may not support the OSI 
Network Service. The OSI Network Service may be provided 
by a combination of one or more subnetworks and optional 
additional functions between or outside these subnetworks. 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard defines the OSI Network Service in 
terms of 

a) the primitive actions and events of the Service; 

b) the parameters associated with each primitive action 
and event, and the form which they take; 

c) the interrelationship between, and the valid sequences 
of, these actions and events. 

The principal objectives of this International Standard are 

a) to specify the characteristics of a conceptual Network 
Service and thus supplement the Reference Model in 
guiding the development of Network Layer protocols; 

b) to encourage convergence of the capabilities offered by 
providers of subnetworks; 

c) to provide a basis for the individual enhancement 
of existing heterogeneous subnetworks to a common 
subnetwork-independent Network Service to enable them 
to be concatenated for the purpose of providing global com- 
munication. (Such concatenation may involve optional 
additional functions which are not defined in this Inter- 
national Standard.) A definition of the quality of service is 
an important element of this International Standard; 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



d) to provide a basis for the development and implemen- 
tation of subnetwork-independent Transport Layer proto- 
cols decoupled from the variability of underlying public and 
private subnetworks and their specific interface 
requirements. 

This International Standard does not specify individual im- 
plementations or products nor does it constrain the implemen- 
tation of entities and interfaces within a system. 

There is no conformance of equipment to this International 
Standard. Instead, conformance is achieved through im- 
plementation of conforming OS I Network protocols which 
fulfill the Network Service defined in this International 
Standard. 



2 References 

ISO 7498, Information processing systems 
Interconnection — Basic Reference Model. 



Open Systems 



NOTE - See also CCITT Recommendation X.200, Reference Model of 
Open Systems Interconnection for CCITT Applications. 

ISO 8073, Information processing systems — Open Systems 
Interconnection — Connection oriented transport protocol 
specification. 

NOTE — See also CCITT Recommendation X.224, Transport Protocol 
Specification for Open Systems Interconnection for CCITT Appli- 
cations. 

ISO/TR 8509, Information processing systems — Open 
Systems Interconnection — Service conventions. 

NOTE - See also CCITT Recommendation X.210, OSI Layer Service 
definition conventions. 



CCITT Recommendation X.213, Network Service Definition for 
Open Systems Interconnection for CCITT Applications. 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Section one : General 



3 Definitions 

NOTE — The definitions contained in this clause make use of abbrevi- 
ations defined in clause 4. 

3.1 Reference Model definitions 

This international Standard is based on the concepts developed 
in ISO 7498, and makes use of the following terms defined in it : 

a) expedited Network-Service-data-unit 

b) Network- Connection 

c) Network Layer 

d) Network Service 

e) Network-Service-access-point 

f) Network-Service-access-point-address 

g) Network-Service-data-unit 
h) subnetwork 

3.2 Service conventions definitions 

This International Standard also makes use of the following 
terms defined in ISO/TR 8509, as they apply to the Network 
Layer : 

a) Network Service user 

b) Network Service provider 

c) primitive 

d) request 

e) indication 

f) response 

g) confirm 

3.3 Network Service definitions 

For the purpose of this International Standard, the following 
definitions also apply. 

3.3.1 Calling NS user: An NS user that initiates an NC 
Establishment request. 



3.3.2 Called NS user : An NS user with whom a calling NS 
user wishes to establish an NC. 

NOTE — Calling NS users and called NS users are defined with respect 
to a single NC. An NS user can be both a calling and a called NS user 
simultaneously. 



3.3.3 Generic address : An address which identifies a set of 
NSAPs rather than a single specific NSAP. 

4 Abbreviations 

COR Confirmation of Receipt 

ENSDU Expedited Network-Service-Data-Unit 

N Network 

NC Network-connection 

NL Network Layer 

NS Network Service 

NSAP Network-Service-access-point 

NSDU Network-Service-data-unit 

05 I Open Systems Interconnection 
QOS Quality of service , 

5 Conventions 

5.1 General conventions 

This International Standard uses the descriptive conventions 
defined in ISO/TR 8509. 

The layer service model, service primitives, and time-sequence 
diagrams taken from those conventions are entirely abstract 
descriptions; they do not represent a specification for im- 
plementation. 

5.2 Parameters 

Service primitives, used to represent service-user/service- 
provider interactions (see ISO/TR 8509), convey parameters 
which indicate information available in the user/provider 
interaction. 

The parameters which apply to each group of Network Service 
primitives are set out in tables in clauses 12 to 14. Each "X" in 
the tables indicates that the primitive labelling the column in 
which it falls may carry the paiameter labelling the row in which 
it falls. 

Some entries are further qualified by items in brackets. These 
may be 

a) an indication that the parameter is conditional in some 
way: 

(C) indicates that the parameter is not present on the 
primitive for every NC; the parameter definition 
describes the conditions under which the parameter is 
present or absent. 

b) a parameter specific constraint : 

( = ) indicates that the value supplied in an indication or 
confirm primitive is always identical to that supplied in 
the corresponding request or response primitive occur- 
ring at the peer NSAP. 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



c) indication that some note applies to the entry : 

(Note x) indicates that the referenced note contains ad- 
ditional information pertaining to the parameter and its use. 

In any particular interface, not all parameters need be explicitly 
stated. Some may be implicitly associated with the NSAP at 
which the primitive is issued. 



5.3 NC endpoint identification convention 

If an NS user needs to distinguish among several NCs at the 
same NSAP, then a local NC endpoint identification mechan- 
ism must be provided. All primitives issued at such an NSAP 
would be required to use this mechanism to identify NCs. Such 
an implicit identification is not described as a parameter of the 
service primitives in this International Standard. 

NOTE — The implicit NC endpoint identification must not be confused 
with the address parameters of the N-CONNECT primitives (see 12.2). 



6 Overview and general characteristics 

The Network Service provides for the transparent transfer of 
data (i.e. NS-user-data) between NS users. It makes invisible to 
these NS users the way in which supporting communications 
resources are utilized to achieve this transfer. 

In particular, the Network Service provides for the following : 

a) Independence of underlying transmission media — The 
Network Service relieves NS users from all concerns regard- 
ing how various subnetworks are used to provide the Net- 
work Service. The Network Service hides from the NS user 
differences in the transfer of data over heterogeneous 
subnetworks, other than quality of service. 

b) End-to-end transfer — The Network Service provides 
for transfer of NS-user-data between NS users in end 
systems . All routing and relaying functions are performed 
by the NS provider including the case where several similar 
or dissimilar transmission resources are used in tandem or in 
parallel. 

c) Transparency of transferred information — The Net- 
work Service provides for the transparent transfer of octet- 
aligned NS-user-data and/or control information, It does 
not restrict the content, format or coding of the infor- 
mation, nor does it ever need to interpret its structure or 
meaning. 

d) Quality of service selection — The Network Service 
makes available to NS users a means to request and to 
agree to the quality of service for the transfer of NS-user- 
data. Quality of service is specified by means of QOS- 
parameters representing characteristics such as 
throughput, transit delay, accuracy, and reliability. 

e) NS-user-addressing — The Network Service utilizes a 
system of addressing (NSAP addressing) which allows NS 
users to refer unambiguously to one another. 



7 Features of the Network Service 

The Network Service offers the following features to an NS 
user: 

a) The means to establish an NC with another NS user for 
the purpose of transferring NS-user-data in the form of 
NSDUs. More than one NC may exist between the same 
pair of NS users. 

b) The establishment of an agreement between the two 
NS users and the NS provider for a certain QOS associated 
with each NC. 

c) The means of transferring NSDUs in sequence on an 
NC. The transfer of NSDUs, which consist of an integer 
number of octets, is transparent, in that the boundaries of 
NSDUs and the contents of NSDUs are preserved un- 
changed by the Network Service, and there are no 
constraints on the NSDU content imposed by the Network 
Service. 

d) The means by which 4he receiving NS user may flow 
control the rate at which the sending NS user may send 
NSDUs. 

e) In some circumstances, the means of transferring 
separate expedited NSDUs in sequence (see clauses). 
Expedited NSDUs are limited in length and their transmis- 
sion is subject to a different flow control from normal data 
across the NSAP. 

f) The means by which the NC can be returned to a de- 
fined state and the activities of the two NS users syn- 
chronized by use of a Reset service. 

g) In some circumstances, the means for the NS user to 
confirm the receipt of an NSDU (see clause 8). 

h) The unconditional, and therefore possibly destructive, 
release of an NC by either of the NS users or by the NS 
provider. 



8 Classes of Network Service 

No distinct classes of Network Service are defined. However, 
two Network Layer services, Receipt Confirmation and 
Expedited Data Transfer, are NS provider-options. 

A service which is an NS provider-option is one which an NS 
provider can choose either to provide or not to provide for a 
particular NC. In circumstances where the NS provider chooses 
not to provide a provider-option service, it will not be available 
in the Network Service. If the provider-option Receipt Confir- 
mation or Expedited Data Transfer is provided, it shall be pro- 
vided as defined in this International Standard (see clauses 14.1 
to 14.3). 

All other Network services are mandatory in the Network 
Service. Mandatory services shall be provided by every NS 
provider and are therefore always available. 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



9 Model of the Network Service 

9.1 Model of the Network Layer Service 

This International Standard uses the abstract model for a layer 
service defined in clause 4 of ISO/TR 8509. The model defines 
the interactions between the NS users and the NS provider 
which take pit"- 1 * at the two NSAPs. Information is passed 
between the IMS user a."i the NS provider by service primitives, 
which may convey parameters 

There are two types of OS I Network Service: 

a) a connection-mode Service (defined in section two). 
The connection-mode Service is characterized by the 
features a) to h) given in clause 7. 

b) a connectionless-mode Service (defined in addendum 1 
to this International Standard). 

When making reference to the Network Service, an NS user or 
NS provider shall state which types of Network Service it 
expects to use or provide. 



9.2 Model of a Network Connection 

Between the two endpoints of an NC, there exists a flow con- 
trol function which relates the behaviour of the NS user at one 
end receiving NS-user-data to the ability of the NS user at the 
other end to send NS-user-data. As a means of specifying this 
flow control feature and its relationship with other capabilities 
provided by the Network Service, the queue model of an NC, 
described in the following clauses, is used. 

This queue model of an NC is discussed only to aid in the 
understanding of the end-to-end service features perceived by 
users of the Network Service. It is not intended to serve as a 
substitute for a precise, formal description of the Network Ser- 
vice, nor as a complete specification of all allowable sequences 
of NS primitives, (Allowable primitive sequences are specified in 
clause 11 — also, see the note.) In addition, this model does not 
attempt to describe all the functions or operations of Network 
Layer entities (including relay entities) which are used to 



provide the Network Service. No attempt to specify or 
constrain Network Service implementations is implied. 

In interpreting this International Standard, statements in 
clauses 12 to 14 concerning the properties of individual primi- 
tives have precedence over the general statements in this 
clause. 

NOTE — In addition to the interaction between service primitives 
described by this model, there may be constraints applied locally on the 
ability to invoke primitives, as well as service procedures defining par- 
ticular sequencing constraints on some primitives. 

9.2.1 Queue model concepts 

The queue model represents the operation of an NC in the 
abstract by a pair of queues linking the two NSAPs. There is 
one queue for each direction of information flow (see figure 2). 

Each queue represents a flow control function in one direction 
of transfer. The ability of an NS user to add objects to a queue 
will be determined by the behaviour of the NS user removing 
objects from that queue and the state of the queue. Objects are 
entered or removed from the queue, either as the result of 
interactions at the two NSAPs, or as the'result of NS provider 
initiatives. 

The pair of queues is considered to be available for each poten- 
tial NC. 

The objects which may be placed in a queue as a result of 
interactions at an NSAP (see clauses 12 to 14) are 

a) connect objects (associated with N-CONNECT 
primitives and all of their parameters); 

b) octets of normal NS-user-data (associated with an 
N-DATA primitive); 

c) indications of end-of-'NSDU (associated with com- 
pletion of an N-OATA primitive); 

d) expedited NSDUs (associated with N-EXPEDITED- 
DATA primitives and all their parameters); 

e) data acknowledgment objects (associated with 
N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE primitives); 



NS user A 



NSAP 



Queue from A to B 



NS user B 



{. 



NSAP 



Queue from B to A 



NS provider 



Figure 2 — Queue model of a Network Connection 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



f) reset objects (associated with N-RESET primitives and 
their parameters); 

g) disconnect objects {associated with N-DISCONNECT 
primitives and all their parameters). 

NOTE — The description of flow control (see 9.2.3) requires a less 
abstract description than that used for describing sequences of 
primitives in clauses 11 to 14. While primitives are defined to be indi- 
visible, for purposes of this queue model, information associated with 
N-DATA primitives is conceptually subdivided into a sequence of 
octets of NS-user-data followed by an end-of-NSDU indication. This 
does not imply any particular subdivision in any real interface. 

The objects which may be placed in a queue as a result of NS 
provider initiatives (see clauses 12 to 14) are 

1) reset objects (associated with N-RESET primitives and 
all their parameters); 

2) synchronization mark objects (see 9.2.4); 

3) disconnect objects (associated with N-DISCONNECT 
primitives and all their parameters). 

The queues are defined to have the following general proper- 
ties: 

i) A queue is empty until a connect object has been 
entered and can be returned to this state, with loss of its 
contents, by the NS provider (see 9.2.4 and 9.2.5). 

ii) Objects may be entered into a queue as a result of the 
actions of the source NS user, subject to control by the NS 
provider; objects may also be entered into a queue by the 
NS provider. 

iii) Objects are removed from the queue under the control 
of the receiving NS user. 

iv) Objects are normally removed under the control of the 
NS user in the same order that they were entered (however 
see 9.2.3). 

v) A queue has a limited capacity, but this capacity is not 
necessarily either fixed or determinable. 



9.2.2 NC establishment 

A pair of queues is associated with an NC between two NSAPs 
when the NS provider receives an N-CONNECT lequest primi- 
tive at one of the NSAPs and a connect object is entered into 
one of the queues. From the standpoint of one of the NS users 
of the NC, the queues remain associated with the NC until 
a disconnect object (associated with an N-DISCONNECT 
primitive) is either entered or removed from a queue at that 
NSAP. 

If NS user A denotes the NS user who initiates NC Establish- 
ment (resulting in a connect object being entered into the 
queue from NS user A to NS user B) then no object other than 
a disconnect object may be entered into the queue from A to B 
until after the connect object associated with the N-CONNECT 
confirm has been removed. In the queue from NS user B to NS 
user A, objects can be entered only after a connect object 
associated with an N-CONNECT response from NS user B has 
been entered; it is possible for a disconnect object to be placed 
in the queue from B to A, instead of a connect object, to 
release the NC. 

The properties exhibited by the queues while the NC exists 
represent the agreements reached among the NS users and the 
NS provider during the NC Establishment procedure concern- 
ing quality of -service and the use of the Receipt Confirmation 
and Expedited Data Transfer services. 



9.2.3 Data transfer operations 

Flow control on the NC is represented in this queue model by 
the -management of the queue capacity, allowing objects of 
certain types to be added to the queues. The conditions affect- 
ing entry of reset and disconnect objects are described in item 
b) below and in 9.2.4 and 9.2.5. The flow control relationship 
between the other types of objects is summarized by table 1 . 

Once in the queue, the NS provider may manipulate pairs of 
adjacent objects, resulting in 

a) change of order; the order of any pair of objects may be 
reversed if, and only if, the following object is of a type 
defined to be able to advance ahead of the preceding 
object. No object is defined to be able to advance ahead of 
another object of the same type. 



Table 1 — . Flow control relationships between queue model objects 



^\^^ The addition 
may ^^"^^^ of object x 
prevent ^^"\^^ 
further addition ^^--^^ 
of object y ^^^^^^ 


Octets of 

NS-user-data 

or end-of-NSDU 


Expedited 
NSDU 


Data 
acknowledgement 


Octets of normal 
NS-user-data or 
end-of-NSDU 


Yes 


Yes 


No 


Expedited NSOU 


No 


Yes 


No 


Data acknowledgement 


No 


No 


No 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



b) deletion; any object may be deleted if, and only if, the 
following object is defined to be destructive with respect to 
the preceding ohject. If necessary, the last object in the 
queue will be deleted to allow a destructive object to be 
entered. Destructive objects may therefore always be added 
to the queue. Disconnect objects are defined to be destruc- 
tive with respect to all other objects. Reset objects are 
defined to be destructive with respect to all other objects 
except connect, J^connect, and other reset objects. 

The relationships between objects which may be manipulated 
as described in a) and b) are summarized in table 2. 

Whether the IMS provider performs actions resulting in change 
of order and deletion or not will depend upon the behaviour of 
the NS users and the agreed QOS for the NC. In general, if an 
N5 user does not cause objects to be removed from a queue, 
the NS provider shall, after some unspecified period of time, 
perform all permitted actions of types a) and b). 



9.2.4 Reset operations 

The invocation of a Reset procedure is represented in the two 
queues as follows: 

a) invocation of a Reset procedure by the NS provider is 
represented by the introduction into each queue of a reset 
object followed by a synchronization mark object. 

b) A Reset procedure invoked by an NS user is rep- 
resented by the addition of a reset object to one queue. In 
this case, the NS provider will insert a reset object followed 
by a synchronization mark object into the other queue 



The completion of a Reset procedure by the issuance of an 
N-RESET response by an NS user results in a reset object being 
placed in the queue from the responding NS user 

A synchronization mark object cannot be removed from a 
queue by an NS user; a queue appears empty to an NS user 
when a synchronization mark object is the next object in it. 
Unless destroyed by a disconnect object, a synchronization 
mark object remains in the queue until the next object following 
it in the queue is a reset object. Both the synchronization mark 
object and the following reset object are then deleted by the NS 
provider 

NOTE - Associated with the invocation of a Reset procedure are 
restrictions on the issuance of certain other types of primitives. These 
restrictions will result in restrictions on the entry of certain object types 
into the queue until the Reset procedure is complete. 

9.2.5 NC Release 

The insertion into a queue of a disconnect object, which may 
occur at any time, represents the initiation of an NC Release 
procedure. The Release procedure may be destructive with 
respect to other objects in the two queues and eventually 
results in the emptying of the queues and the disassociation of 
the queues with the NC. 

The insertion of a disconnect object may also represent the re 
jection of an NC Establishment attempt or the failure to com 
plete NC Establishment. In such cases, if a connect object 
representing an N-CONNECT request primitive is deleted by a 
disconnect object, then the disconnect object is also deleted- 
The disconnect object is not deleted when it deletes any other 
object, including the case where it deletes a connect object 
representing an N CONNECT response. 



Table 2 — Ordering relationships between queue model objects 



^\ Following 


















witri\. object x 
respect ^"*~\J S defined 
to preceding ^^-^^ 
object y \. 


Connect 


Octets 

of normal 

NS-user-data 


End of-NSDU 


Expedited 
NSDU 


Data 
acknow- 
ledgement 


Reset 


Synchroni- 
zation mark 


Disconnect 


Connect 


N/A 


_ 


- 


- 






- 


DES 


Octets of normal 


N'A 






AA 


AA 


DES 




DES 


N3-user data 


















End of NSDU 


N'A 


- 




AA 


AA 


DES 




DES 


Expedited NSDU 


N/A 


_ 


- 




AA 


DES 




DES 


Data acknowledgement 


N A 


_ 


_ 


AA 




DES 




DES 


Reset 


N/A 




- 


- 








DES 


Synchronization mark 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


DES 


N/A 


DES 


Disconnect 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


DES 



AA indicates that obiect x is defined to he able to advance ahead of the preceding object y 
DES indicates that object x is defined to be destructive with respect to the preceding obiect y. 

indicates thai object x is neither destructive with ruspect to object y nor able to advance ahead of object y 
N/A indicates that object x will not occur in a position succeeding object y in a valid state of a queue. 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



10 Quality of Network Service 

The term Quality of Service (QOS) refers to certain 
characteristics of an NC as observed between the NC end- 
points. QOS describes aspects of an NC which are attributable 
solely to the NS provider; it can only be properly determined in 
the absence of NS user behaviour (which is beyond the control 
of the NS provider) which specifically constrains or impairs the 
performance of the Network Service. 

A value of QOS applies to an entire NC. When determined or 
measured at both ends of an NC, the QOS observed by the NS 
users at the two ends of the NC is the same. This is true even in 
the case of an NC spanning several subnetworks where each 
subnetwork offers different services. 



10.1 Determination erf QOS 

QOS is described by means of QOS-parameters . The definition 
of each of these QOS-parameters specifies the way in which 
the QOS-parameter's value is measured or determined, making 
reference, where appropriate, to primitive events of the NS. 

NOTES 

1 It is important to distinguish the use of the term QOS-parameters 
from the more general term "parameters" as defined in 5.2 and used 
throughout this International Standard. A "QOS-parameter" refers to 
a specific aspect or component of the QOS for an NC. As described 
below, a particular QOS-parameter may or may not be related to a 
parameter defined as part of a Network Service primitive. 

2 For purposes of accuracy and/or convenience, the definition and 
measurement formula for some QOS-parameters includes a compo- 
nent attributable to the NS user(s). In such cases, to evaluate the QOS 
attributable solely to the NS provider, this NS user-dependent compo- 
nent must be factored out. 

3 The definition of NS QOS-parameters in terms which provide a 
means for measurement should not be understood to imply that QOS 
monitoring or that verification of stated QOS values is, or must be, per- 
formed by the NS provider or by the NS users. 

It is in terms of the NS QOS-parameters that information about 
QOS is exchanged among the NS provider and NS users. 

Information about the QOS requirements of the NS users may 
be used by the NS provider for purposes such as protocol 
selection, route determination, and allocation of resources. 
Information about the QOS available from the NS provider may 
be used by NS users for purposes such as selecting QOS 
enhancement mechanisms and determining the QOS values 
provided to NS users at higher layers. 

The NS QOS-parameters can be divided into two categories as 
follows : 

a) those whose values are "conveyed" between peer NS 
users by means of the NS during the establishment phase of 
an NC. As part of this conveyance, a three-party "nego- 
tiation" among the NS users and the NS provider for the 
purpose of agreeing upon a particular QOS-parameter yalue 
may take place; and 

b) those whose values are not "conveyed" or "nego- 
tiated" among the NS users and the NS provider. For 



these QOS-parameters, however, information about the 
values which is useful to the NS provider and each NS user 
may be made known by local means. 

The NS QOS-parameters are defined in 10.2.1 to 10.2.12. 

The set of NS QOS-parameters that belong to the first 
category, and the procedures and constraints that apply to 
conveying and negotiating those QOS-parameters, are 
specified in 12.2.7. Once the NC is established, and throughout 
the lifetime of the NC, the agreed values for these two QOS- 
parameters are not "renegotiated" at any point, and there is no 
guarantee that the originally negotiated values will be main- 
tained. The NS user should also be aware that, once an NC is 
established, changes in QOS on the NC are not explicitly 
signalled in the NS. 

For QOS-parameters in the second category, the values for a 
particular NC are not negotiated, nor are they directly conveyed 
from NS user to NS user. As a local matter, however, there 
may be means by which the values of one or more of these 
QOS-parameters are known and utilized by the NS provider 
and each NS user. Despite the local nature of particular NS 
user/NS provider interactions which may occur for the pur- 
poses of exchanging QOS-parameter information, the charac- 
teristics of an NC which the QOS-parameters describe are 
applicable and can be observed on a complete NC, end-to-end 
basis. Thus, in order To give a full characterization of the 
properties of NCs, the definitions of the entire set of QOS- 
parameters which apply to the NS, including those classified in 
category 2, are included in this Network Service Definition. 
Other aspects related to category 2 parameters, such as the cir- 
cumstances of their availability and use, as well as other QOS 
issues, such as the relationship to OSI management, and multi- 
layer QOS relationships, are the subjects of other OSI QOS- 
related specifications. 

NOTE - For non-negotiated QOS-parameters associated with the 
Data Transfer phase of an NC, when specified, a value of such a QOS- 
parameter applies to both directions of transfer on the NC. 

10.2 Definition of QOS-parameters 

QOS-parameters can be classified as 

a) QOS-parameters which express Network Service per- 
formance, as shown in table 3, 

Table 3 — Classification of performance QOS-parameters 



Phase 


Performance criterion 


Speed 


Accuracy/reliability 


NC 

establishment 


NC 

establishment 
delay 


NC establishment failure 
probability 
(misconnection/NC refusal) 


Data transfer 


Throughput 
Transit delay 


Residual error rate 
(corruption, duplication/loss) 
NC resilience 

Transfer failure probability 


NC 
release 


NC 

release delay 


NC release failure 
probability 



IS 13868; 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



b) QOS-pararneters that express other Network Service 
characteristics, as shown in table 4. 

Table 4 — QOS-pararneters not associated 
with performance 



NC protection 
NC priority 
Maximum acceptable cost 



NOTE — Some QOS-parameters are defined in terms of the issuance 
of Network Service primitives. Reference to a primitive in 10.2.1 to 
10.2.12 refers to the complete execution of that service primitive at the 
appropriate NSAP. 



10.2.1 NC establishment delay 

NC establishment delay is the maximum acceptable delay 
between an N-CONNECT request and the corresponding 
N-CONNECT confirm primitive. 

NOTE — This delay includes a component, attributable to the called 
NS user, which is the time between the N-CONNECT indication 
primitive and the N CONNECT response. 



10.2.2 NC establishment failure probability 

NC establishment failure probability is the ratio of total NC 
establishment failures to total NC establishment attempts in a 
measurement sample. 

NC establishment failure is defined to occur when a requested 
NC is not established within the specified maximum acceptable 
time period as a result of NS provider behaviour such as 
misconnection, NC refusal, or excessive delay. NC establish- 
ment attempts which fail as a result of NS user behaviour such 
as error, NC refusal, or excessive delay are excluded in 
calculating NC establishment failure probability. 

10.2.3 Throughput 

Throughput is defined, for each direction of transfer, in terms 
of a sequence of at least two successfully transferred NSDUs 
presented continuously to the NS provider at the maximum 
rate the NS provider can continuously sustain, and un- 
constrained by flow control applied by the receiving NS user. 

Given such a sequence of n NSDUs, where n is greater than or 
equal to 2, the Throughput is defined to be the smaller of 

a) the number of NS-user-data octets contained in the last 
n- 1 NSDUs divided by the time between the first and last 
N-DATA requests in the sequence; and 

b) the number of NS-user-data octets contained in the last 
n - 1 NSDUs divided by the time between the first and last 
N-DATA indications in the sequence. 

Successful transfer of the octets in a transmitted NSDU is 
defined to occur when the octets are delivered to the intended 
receiving NS user without error, in the proper sequence, prior 
to release of the NC by the receiving NS user. 



Throughput is specified separately for each direction of 
transfer. Each Throughput specification will specify both the 
desired "target" value and the minimum acceptable value (i.e., 
the "lowest quality acceptable") for the NC. (See also 12.2.7.) 

10. 2. 4 Transit delay 

Transit delay is the elapsed time between an N-DATA request 
and the corresponding N-DATA indication. Elapsed time values 
are calculated only on NSDUs that are successfully transferred. 

Successful transfer of an NSDU is defined to occur when the 
NSDU is transferred from the sending NS user to the intended 
receiving NS user without error, in the proper sequence, prior 
to release of the NC by the receiving NS user. 

Specification of transit delay will define a pair of values : the 
desired "target" value and the maximum acceptable (i.e. the 
"lowest quality acceptable") value. (See also 12.2.7.) The 
specified values will be averages and will be based on an NSDU 
size of 128 octets. 

The pair of transit delay values specified for an NC applies to 
both directions of transfer. That is, the transit delay in each 
direction is expected to be no worse than that specified. 

The transit delay for an individual NSDU may be increased if 
the receiving NS user exercises flow control. Such occurrences 
are excluded in calculating both average and maximum transit 
delay values. 



10.2.5 Residual error rate 

Residual error rate is the ratio of total incorrect, lost, and 
duplicate NSDUs to total NDSUs transferred across the NS 
boundary during a measurement period. The relationship 
among these quantities is defined, for a particular NS user pair, 
as shown in figure 3. 



10.2.6 Transfer failure probability 

Transfer failure probability is the ratio of total transfer failures 
to total transfer samples observed during a performance 
measurement. 

A transfer sample is a discrete observation of NS provider per- 
formance in transferring NSDUs between a specified sending 
and receiving NS user. A transfer sample begins on input of a 
selected NSDU at the sending NS user boundary, and con- 
tinues until the outcome of a given number of NSDU transfer 
requests has been determined. A transfer sample will normally 
correspond to the duration of an individual NC. 

A transfer failure is a transfer sample in which the observed per- 
formance is worse than a specified minimum acceptable level. 
Transfer failures are identified by comparing the measured 
values for the supported performance parameters with 
specified transfer failure thresholds. The three supported per- 
formance parameters are throughput, transit delay, and 
residual error rate. 

In systems where Network Service QOS is reliably monitored 
by the NS provider, transfer failure probability can be estimated 
by the probability of an NS provider invoked N-DISCONNECT 
during a transfer sample. 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



NSDUs sent 



NSDUs received 



Lost 
NSDUs 

[N(1)l 



1 



Successfully 

transferred 

NSDUs 

IN(sl) 



T' 
I 
I 
I 



~l 



Incorrect 
NSDUs 

IN(eM 



Total NSDUs transferred INI 



Extra 

NSDUs 

1NU1I 



I 



RER 



N(e) + N(1) - N(x) 



Figure 3 — Components of residual error rate 



10.2.7 NC resilience 

NC resilience parameters specify the probability of 

a) an NS provider invoked NC release (i.e. issuance of an 
N-DISCONNECT indication with no prior N-DISCONNECT 
request); and 

b> an IMS provider invoked reset (i.e., issuance of an 
N-RESET indication with no prior N-RESET request); 

during a specified time interval on an established NC. 

10.2.8 NC release delay 

NC release delay is the maximum acceptable delay between an 
NS user invoked N-DISCONNECT request and the successful 
release of the NC at the peer NS user. NC release delay is nor- 
mally specified independently for each NS user. NC release 
delay does not apply in cases where NC release is invoked by 



Issuance of an N-DISCONNECT request by either NS user 
starts the counting of NC release delay for the other NS user. 
Successful NC release is signalled to the NS user not initiating 
the N-DISCONNECT request by an N-DISCONNECT indi- 
cation. 



10.2.9 NC release failure probability 

NC release failure probability is the ratio of total NC release re- 
quests resulting in release failure to total NC release requests 
included in a measurement sample. NC release failure prob- 
ability is normally specified independently for each NS user 

A release failure is defined to occur, for a particular NS user, if 
that user does not receive an N-DISCONNECT indication 



within the specified maximum NC release delay of the NS user 
issuing the N-DISCONNECT request (given that the former NS 
user has not issued an N-DISCONNECT request). 

10.2.10 NC protection 

NC protection is the extent to which an NS provider attempts 
to prevent unauthorized masquerading or monitoring or 
manipuiation of NS-user-data. NC protection for an NC is 
specified by selecting any combination of the following 
features : 

a) confidentiality of an entire NSDU sequence on the NC; 

b) detection of modification, deletion, replay, or insertion 
of data within the NSDU sequence on an NC; 

c) peer entity authentication. The NS user may request 
that the NS provider should confirm the identity of the 
remote NSAP such that there is protection against mas- 
querading by T-entities; 

d) authentication of the origin of an NSDU such that there 
is protection against the unauthorized insertion or replay of 
the NSDU. 



10.2.11 NC priority 

NC priority specifies independently the relative importance of 
an NC with respect to the following : 

a) priority to gain an NC; 

b) priority to keep an NC; 

c) priority of data on the NC. 

NC priority QOS-parameters a) and b) together define the order 
in which NCs are to be broken to recover resources if 



10 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



necessary. The NS provider is required to accept new requests 
for NCs with a high priority type a) if it can, even if NCs with a 
lower priority type b) have to be released to do so. 

NC priority QOS-parameter c) defines the order in which NCs 
are to have their QOS degraded. The NCs with a high priority 
type c) are to have their requests serviced within the required 
QOS first and remaining resources are then used to attempt to 
satisfy requests on lower priority NCs. 

NOTE — The use or abuse of 1he NC priority QOS-pararneters can be 
controlled by one or more of the following : 

- user discipline within a closed group of NS users; 

differential tariffs; 



— management facilities within the Network Layer such that re- 
quests for'NC priority are policed and regulated. 



10.2.12 Maximum acceptable cost 

The maximum acceptable cost QOS-parameter specifies the 
maximum acceptable cost for an NC, The cost may be specified 
in absolute or relative cost units. The cost of an NC is com- 
posed of communications and end-system resource costs. 



NOTE — The possible actions of the NS provider in the event that the 
maximum acceptable cost for an NC is exceeded are not specified in 
this International Standard. 



11 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Section two: Definition of the connection-mode primitives 



11 Sequence of primitives 

This clause defines the constraints on the sequences in which 
the primitives defined in clauses 12 to 14 may occur. The con- 
straints determine the order in which primitives occur, but do 
not fully specify when they may occur. Other constraints, such 
as flow control of tlata, will affect the ability of an NS user or an 
NS provider to issue a primitive at any particular time. 

Table 5 is a summary of the NS primitives and their parameters. 



11.1 Relation of primitives at the two NC endpoints 

A primitive issued at one NC endpoint will, in general, have 
consequences at the other NC endpoint. The relations of 
primitives of each type to primitives at the other NC endpoint 
are defined in the appropriate clauses 12 to 14; all these 
relations are summarized in the diagrams in figure 4. 

However, an N-DISCONNECT request or indication primitive 
may terminate any of the other sequences before completion. 



Table 5 — Summary of Network Service primitives and parameters 



Phase 


Service 


Primitive 


Parameters 


NC establishment 


NC establishment 


N-CONNECT 
request 


(Called address, calling address, receipt 
confirmation selection, expedited data 
selection, QOS-parameter Set, NS-user- 
data) 






N-CONNECT 
indication 


(Called address, calling address, receipt 
confirmation selection, expedited data 
selection, QOS-parameter set, NS-user- 
data) 






N-CONNECT 
response 


(Responding address, receipt confirmation 
selection, expedited data selection, 
QOS-parameter set, NS-user-data) 






N-CONNECT 
confirm 


(Responding address, receipt confirmation 
selection, expedited data selection, 
QOS-parameter set, NS-user-data) 


Data transfer 


Data transfer 


N-DATA request 


(NS-user-data, confirmation request) 






N-DATA 
indication 


(NS-user-data, confirmation request) 




Receipt 
confirmation 
(see the note) 


N-DATA- 

ACKNOWLEDGE 

request 








N-DATA- 

ACKNOWLEDGE 

indication 






Expedited 
data transfer 
(see the note) 


N-EXPEDITED- 
DATA request 


(NS-user-data) 






N-EXPEDITED- 
DATA indication 


(NS-user-data) 




Reset 


N-RESET request 


(Reason) 






N-RESET 
indication 


(Originator, reason) 






N-RESET 


— 






response 








N-RESET confirm 


- 


NC release 


NC release 


N-DISCONNECT 
request 


(Reason, NS-user-data, responding 
address) 






N-DISCONNECT 
indication 


(Originator, reason, NS-user-data, 
responding address) 



NOTE — An NS provider-option service; it may not be provided in every Network Service. 



12 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Successful NC 
establishment 



NS user invoked 
NC release 



Simultaneous NS user invoked 
NC release 



N-CONNECT 
request 



N-CONNECT 
confirm 




N-CONNECT 
indication 

N-CONNECT 
response 



N-DISCONNECT 

request 



N-DISCONNECT 
request 



•N-DISCONNECT 
indication 



N-DISCONNECT 
request 



NS provider invoked 
NC release 



Simultaneous NS user and 
NS provider invoked NC release 



NS user rejection of an 
NC establishment attempt 



N DISCONNECT^ 
indication 



N-DISCONNECT 
request 



N-DISCONNECT 
indication 



N-CONNECT 
request ' 



N-DISCONNECT 
indication 



N DISCONNECT- 
indication 




N-CONNECT 
indication 

N-DISCONNECT 
request 



NS provider rejection of an 
NC establishment attempt 



Normal data 
transfer 



N CONNECT 
request 

N-DISCONNECT 
indication 




N-DATA 
request 



Normal date transfer 
with acknowledgement 



N-DATA request 

w/confirmation 

request set 

N-DATA 
ACKNOWLEDGE 
indication 




N-DATA indication 

w/confirmation 

request set 

N-DATA- 

ACKNOWLEDGE 

request 



N-EXPECTED- 
DATA request ' 



Expedited data 
transfer 



NS user invoked 
reset 



N-RESET 

request ^--^ 



N-EXPEDITED- 
DATA indication 



N-RESET- 

confirm 



N-RESET 
indication 
N-RESET 
response 



Simultaneous NS user 
invoked reset 



N-RESET 
request 



N-RESET 
confirm ' 



N-RESET 
request 



N-RESET 

confirm 



NS provider invoked 
reset 



N-RESET 
indication 
N-RESET 
response 



^>^ 



N-RESET 

indication 

N-RESET 

response 



Simultaneous NS user and 
NS provider invoked reset 



N-RESET 
request 



N-RESET. 
confirm 



N-RESET 
indication 
N-RESET 
response 



Figure 4 — Summary of Network Service primitive time sequence diagrams 



13 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



An N-RESET request or indication may terminate a data 
transfer, expedited data transfer, or receipt confirmation 
sequence before completion. 

11.2 Sequence of primitives at one NC endpoint 

The possible overall sequences of primitives at an NC endpoint 
are defined in the state transition diagram, figure 5. In the 
diagram 

a) a primitive which is not shown as resulting in a tran- 
sition (from one state to the same state, or from one state 
to a different state) is not permitted in that state (however, 
see 11.1 concerning the effect of N-DISCONNECT and 
N-RESET primitives); 



b) N-DISCONNECT stands for either the request or the 
indication form of the primitive in all cases; 

c) the labelling of the states NS user invoked reset pend- 
ing (state 5) and NS provider invoked reset pending 
(state 6) indicates the party which started the local inter- 
action, and does not necessarily reflect the value of the 
originator parameter in the associated N-RESET primitive; 

d) the Idle (state 1) reflects the absence of an NC. It is the 
initial and final state of any sequence, and once it has been 
re-entered, the NC is released; 

e) the use of a state transition diagram to describe the 
allowable sequences of service primitives does not impose 
any requirements or constraints on the internal organization 
of any implementations of the Network Service. 




Figure 5 — State transition diagram for sequences of primitives at an NC endpoint 



14 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



12 Network Connection establishment phase 12.2.2 Called address parameter 



12.1 Function 

The NC establishment service primitives can be used to 
establish an NC, provided the NS users exist and are known to 
the NS provider. 

Simultaneous N-CONNECT requests at the two NSAPs are 
handled independently by the NS provider; they may result in 
two, one or zero NCs. 



12.2 Types of primitives and parameters 

Table 6 indicates the types of primitives and the parameters 
needed for NC establishment. 



12.2.1 Addresses 

The parameters which take addresses as values (12.2.2 to 
12.2.4) all refer to NSAP addresses. The NSAP address 
parameters will accommodate variable length addresses up to a 
defined maximum of 40 decimal digits (when expressed in 
decimal digit syntax). 

The values of these addresses as supplied by the NS user are 
not necessarily checked or authenticated by the NS provider. 
An NS user receiving these addresses in N-CONNECT indi- 
cation or confirm primitives can only rely on their validity if the 
NS user has knowledge that the NS provider guarantees 
address correctness. 

NOTE — Mechanisms operating within the NS provider, such as call 
redirection or resolution of generic addresses, may result in address 
parameters in corresponding primitives not being identical in the 
following cases : 

a) the responding address parameter on the N-CONNECT 
response may not necessarily be the same as the called address 
parameter on the N-CONNECT indication; 

b) the responding address parameter on the N-CONNECT con- 
firm may not necessarily be the same as the called address 
parameter on the N-CONNECT request. 



The called address parameter conveys an address identify- 
ing the NSAP to which the NC is to be established. 
Where explicitly supplied, the addresses in corresponding 
N-CONNECT request and indication primitives are identical. 

12.2.3 Calling address parameter 

The calling address parameter conveys the address of the 
NSAP from which the NC has been requested. Where explicitly 
supplied, the addresses in corresponding N-CONNECT request 
and indication primitives are identical. 

12.2.4 Responding address parameter 

The responding address parameter conveys the address of the 
NSAP to which the NC has been established. Where explicitly 
supplied, the addresses in corresponding N-CONNECT re- 
sponse and confirm primitives are identical. This parameter 
always conveys a specific NSAP address and not* a generic 
NSAP address. 

* 

12.2.5 Receipt confirmation selection parameter 

The receipt confirmation selection parameter indicates the 
use/availability of the receipt confirmation service on the NC. If 
the receipt confirmation service is not provided in the Network 
Service, then it cannot be used on the NC (see clause 8). The 
value of this parameter is either "use of receipt confirmation" 
or "no use of receipt confirmation". The values on the various 
primitives are related such that 

a) on the N-CONNECT request, either of the defined 
values may occur; 

b) on the N-CONNECT indication, the value is either equal 
to the value on tne request primitive, or is "no use of receipt 
confirmation"; 

c> on the N-CONNECT response, the value is either equal 
to the value on the indication primitive or is "no use of 
receipt confirmation"; 

d) on the N-CONNECT confirm, the value is equal to the 
value on the response primitive. 



Table 6 — NC establishment primitives and parameters 



' ' ___^ Primitive 

Parameter -______^ 


N-CONNECT 
request 


N-CONNECT 
indication 


N-CONNECT 
response 


N-CONNECT 
confirm 


Called address 


X 


X( = ) 
(see the note) 






Calling address 


X 

(see the note) 


X( = ) 






Responding address 






X 
(see the note) 


X( = ) 


Receipt confirmation selection 


X 


X 


X 


X( = ) 


Expedited data selection 


X 


X 


X 


X( = ) 


QOS-parameter set 


X 


X 


X 


X( = ) 


NS-user-data 


X 


X( = ) 


X 


X( = ) 



NOTE — This parameter may be implicitly associated with the NSAP at which the primitive is issued. 



15 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Since receipt confirmation may not be provided in the Network 
Service and since, when it is available, both NS users and the 
NS provider must agree to its use, there are four possible cases 
of negotiation of receipt confirmation on an NC : 

a) the calling NS user does not request it — it is not used; 

b) the calling NS user requests it but the NS provider does 
not provide it — it is not used; 

c! the calling NS user requests it and the NS provider 
agrees to provide it, but the called NS user does not agree 
to its use — it is not used; 

d) the calling NS user requests it, the NS provider agrees 
to provide it, and the called NS user agrees to its use — it 
can be used. 

12.2.6 Expedited data selection parameter 

The expedited data selection parameter indicates the use/avail- 
ability of the expedited data transfer service on the NC. If the 
expedited data transfer service is not available from the NS pro- 
vider (see clause 8), then it cannot be used on the NC. The 
value of this parameter is either "use of expedited data" or "no 
use of expedited data". The values on the various primitives are 
related such that 

a) on the N-CONNECT request, either of the defined 
values may occur; 

b) on the N-CONNECT indication, the value is either equal 
to the value on the request primitive, or is "no use of 
expedited data"; 

c) on the N-CONNECT response, the value is either equal 
to the value on the indication primitive or is "no use of 
expedited data"; 

d) on the N-CONNECT confirm, the value is equal to the 
value on the response primitive. 



12.2.7 QOS parameter set 

For each QOS-parameter which is 
establishment, a set of "subparameters' 
the following possibilities : 



conveyed during NC 
is defined from among 



a} a "target" value which is the QOS value desired by the 
calling NS user; 

b) the "lowest quality acceptable" value which is the 
lowest QOS value agreeable to the calling NS user; 

c) an "available" value which is the QOS value the NS 
provider is willing to provide; and 

d) a "selected" value which is the QOS value to which the 
called NS user agrees. 

The set of values which can be specified for each subparameter 
is defined in every Network Service. Each set of values includes 
the value "unspecified". It may also include a value defined to 
be a "default value", which is mutually understood by the NS 
provider and the NS user between which it is conveyed. 

NOTE — "Default" values are defined between a particular NS user 
and the NS provider. Different "defaults" may exist for different NS 
users and thus^ value which is understood as a "default" at one end of 
an NC may not be the "default" value at the other end. 



In those cases where both the subparameters "target" and 
"lowest quality acceptable" are specified by the calling NS 
user, they are boundary parameters defining a "range" of QOS 
values to which the calling NS user will agree. Similarly, where 
both the subparameters "available" and "lowest quality 
acceptable" are specified by the NS provider, they are bound- 
ary parameters defining a "range" of QOS values which the NS 
provider is willing to provide. These "ranges" are defined to 
include the values of both of the boundary subparameters, plus 
any values allowed for these subparameters which lie between 
the boundary subparameters. In the case where the "target" 
(or the "available") subparameter has a specified value but the 
"lowest quality acceptable" value is "unspecified", the range is 
defined to consist ot the "target" value plus all other values 
which are allowed for these subparameters and which are lower 
(in QOS terms) than the target. If the value for both the 
"target" and "lowest quality acceptable" is "unspecified", 
then no range of values is defined. 

NOTE — For othei value assignments (for example "target" is 
"unspecified" but "lowest quality acceptable" has a specified value), 
the "range" is not defined since these assignments are not allowed in 
the negotiation procedures described in 12.2.7.1 and 12.2.7.2. 

12.2.7.1 Throughput 

Table 7 indicates the presence of the QOS-subparameters for 
the throughput QOS-parameters in the N-CONNECT primi- 
tives. 

The negotiation and conveyance of each of the two throughput 
QOS-parameters are conducted as follows: 

a) In the N-CONNECT request primitive, the calling NS 
user specifies values for the "target" and "lowest quality 
acceptable" (i.e. lowest throughput) subparameters. Per- 
mitted value assignments are 



Case 1 : both the 
are "unspecified" 



'target" and "lowest quality acceptable" 



Case 2: values other than "unspecified" are specified for 
both "target" and "lowest quality acceptable"; 

Case 3 : a value other than "unspecified" is specified for the 
"target" and the "lowest quality acceptable" is "unspeci- 
fied". 

NOTE — The case where "target" is "unspecified" and the 
"lowest quality acceptable" has a value other than "unspecified" is 
not permitted; logically, this case can be represented by the per- 
mitted assignment where an identical value is specified for both the 
"target" and "lowest quality acceptable" (case 2). 

b) If the value assignments of the "target" and "lowest 
quality acceptable" subparameters are as defined in case 1, 
then the NS provider determines the highest QOS through- 
put value which is to be offered on the NC. This value 
(which may be the "default" value understood by the NS 
provider and the called NS user) is specified as the 
"available" subparameter in the N-CONNECT indication 
while the "lowest quality acceptable" subparameter value is 
"unspecified". If the requested QOS value assignments are 
as defined in case 2 or case 3, then, if the NS provider does 
not agree to provide a QOS in the requested range, the NC 
establishment attempt is rejected as described in 13.5. If the 
NS provider does agree to provide a QOS in the requested 
range, then in the N-CONNECT indication, the "available" 



16 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8648: 1987 



subparameter specifies the highest QOS value within the 
range which the NS provider is willing to provide and the 
"lowest quality acceptable" subparameter value is identical 
to that of the "lowest quality acceptable" subparameter in 
the N-CONNECT request. 

c) If the called NS user does not agree to a QOS in the 
range between the "available" and the "lowest quality 
acceptable" subparameters of the N-CONNECT indication 
then the NS user rejects the NC establishment attempt as 
described in 13.4. 



d) If the called NS user does agree to a QOS in the 
specified range, then the NS user specifies the agreed to 
value in the "selected" parameter of the N-CONNECT 
response. 

e) In the N-CONNECT confirm, the "selected" subpar- 
ameter has a value identical to that of "selected" in the 
N-CONNECT indication. 

A summary of the negotiation procedures for the throughput 
QOS-subparameters is contained in table 8. 



Table 7 — Negotiated QOS-subparameters for throughput QOS-parameters 



" ""■ — -— -— _______^ Primitive 


N CONNECT 


N-CONNECT 


N-CONNECT 


N-CONNECT 


Parameter " — — — _______^ 


request 


indication 


response 


confirm 


Throughput 1 "target" (calling 
to called) 


X 








Throughput 1 "lowest quality 
acceptable" (calling to called) 


X 


X( = ) 




# 


Throughput 2 "target" (called 
to calling) 


X 








Throughput 2 "lowest quality 
acceptable" (called to calling) 


X 


X( = ) 






Throughput 1 "available" (calling 
to called) 




X 






Throughput 2 "available" (called 
to calling) 




X 






Throughput 1 "selected" (calling 
to called) 






X 


X( = ) 


Throughput 2 "selected" (called 






X 


X( = ) 


to calling) 











Table 8 — Negotiation of throughput QOS-subparameters 





Calling NS user specifies 
in N-CONNECT request 


"NS provider specifies 
in N-CONNECT indication 


Called NS user 

specifies in 

N-CONNECT 

response 


NS provider 

specifies in 

N-CONNECT 

confirm 


Notes 




"Target" 


"Lowest quality 
acceptable" 


"Available" 


"Lowest quality 
acceptable" 


"Selected" 


"Selected" 


Case 
1 


"Unspecified" 


"Unspecified" 


Z 


"Unspecified" 


A 


A 


Z may be a "default" 

value; 

Z > A > 


Case 
2 


X 


Y 


z 


Y 


A 


A 


X and /or Y may be 
defined to be the 
"default" value at the 
calling NS user end, 
called NS user end, or 
both; 

X > Z > Y; 
Z > A > Y 


Case 
3 


X 


"Unspecified" 


_z 


"Unspecified" 


A 


A 


X may be a "default" 

value; 

X > Z > 

Z > A > 



17 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



12.2.7.2 Transit delay 

Table 9 indicates the presence of the QOS-subparameters for 
the transit delay QOS-parameter in the N-CONNECT primitives. 

The negotiation and conveyance of the transit delay QOS- 
parameter are conducted as follows : 

a) In the N-CONNECT request primitive, the calling NS 
user specifies values for the "target" and "lowest quality 
acceptable" (i.e. highest acceptable transit delay) sub- 
parameters. Permitted value assignments are 

Case 1 : both the "target" and "lowest quality acceptable" 
are "unspecified"; 

Case 2 : values other than "unspecified" are specified for 
both "target" and "lowest quality acceptable"; 

Case 3 : a value other than "unspecified" is specified for the 
"target" and the "lowest quality acceptable" is "un- 
specified". 

NOTE — The case where "target" is "unspecified" and the 
"lowest Quality acceptable" has a value other than "unspecified" is 
not permitted; logically, this case can be represented by the per- 
mitted assignment where an identical value is specified for both the 
"target" and "lowest quality acceptable". 

b) If the value assignments of the "target" and "lowest 
quality acceptable" subparameters are as defined in case 1 , 
then the NS provider determines the transit delay value to 
be offered on the NC and specifies it as the "available" 



subparameter in the N-CONNECT indication. If the value 
assignments are as defined in case 2 or case 3, then if the 
NS provider does not agree to provide a QOS in the re- 
quested range, the NC establishment attempt is rejected as 
described in 13.5. If the NS provider does agree to provide a 
QOS in the requested range, the "available" subparameter 
in the N-CONNECT indication specifies the value of QOS 
which is offered. 

c) If the called NS user does not agree to the QOS 
specified as "available", then the NS user rejects the NC 
establishment attempt as described in 13.4. 

d) If the called NS user does agree to the "available" 
QOS, then the NS user issues an N-CONNECT response 
(the N-CONNECT response does not convey any transit 
delay QOS-subparameters). 

e) In the N-CONNECT confirm the "selected" sub- 
parameter value is identical to that specified as "available" 
in the N-CONNECT indication. 

A summary of the negotiation procedures for the transit delay 
QOS-subparameters is contained in table 10. 

12.2.8 NS user-data parameter 

The NS-user-data parameter allows the transfer of NS-user- 
data between NS users, without modification by the NS pro- 
vider. The NS user may send any integer number of octets of 
NS-user-data between zero and 128 octets inclusive. 



Table 9 — Negotiated QOS-subparameters for transit delay QOS-parameter 



~~ —- — -— _____^ Primitive 

Parameter ~ — -~__^_^ 


N-CONNECT 
request 


N-CONNECT 
indication 


N CONNECT 
response 


N-CONNECT 
confirm 


Transit delay "target" 


X 








Transit delay "lowest quality 
acceptable" 


X 








Transit delay "available" 




X 






Transit delay selected 








X 



Table 10 — Negotiation of transit delay QOS-subparameters 





Calling NS user specifies 
in N-CONNECT request 


NS provider 

specifies in 

N-CONNECT 

indication 


Called NS user 

specifies in 

N-CONNECT 

response 


NS provider 

specifies in 

N-CONNECT 

confirm 


Notes 




"Target" 


"Lowest quality 
acceptable" 


"Available" 




"Selected" 


Case 
1 


"Unspecified" 


, "Unspecified" 


Z 




Z 




Case 
2 


X 


Y 


z 




z 


X and/or Y may be a 

default value; 
X < Z < Y 


Case 
3 


X 


"Unspecified" 


z 




z 


X may be a default 

value; 

X < Z < co 



18 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



12.3 Sequence of primitives 

The sequence of primitives in a successful NC establishment is 
defined by the time sequence diagram in figure 6. 



Table 11 — IMC release primitives and parameters 



N-CONNECT 
request 



N-CONNECT 
confirm 

Figure 6 



, N-CONNECT 
indication 



N-CONNECT 
response 



Sequence of primitives in successful NC 
establishment 



The NC establishment procedure may fail either due to the 
inability of the NS provider to establish an NC or due to the 
unwillingness of the called NS user to accept an N-CONNECT 
indication (for these cases, see NC release service, 13.4 and 
13.5). In addition, the NC establishment attempt may be 
aborted by the NS provider or either of the NS users at any 
other time before the issuing of the N-CONNECT confirm. 



13 Network Connection release phase 

13.1 Function 

The NC release service primitives are used to release an NC. 
The NC release may be performed 

a) by either or both of the NS users to release an estab- 
lished NC; 

b) by the NS provider to release an established NC. All 
failures to maintain an NC are indicated in this way; 

c) by the called NS user to reject an N-CONNECT indi- 
cation; 

d) by the NS provider to indicate its inability to establish a 
requested NC. 

NC release is permitted at any time regardless of the current 
phase of the NC. Once an NC release procedure has been in- 
voked, the NC will be released; a request for NC release cannot 
be rejected. After NC release has been invoked at one NC end- 
point, the NS provider may discard any normal or expedited 
NS-user-data that has not yet been delivered at the other NC 
endpoint and may cause any uncompleted sequence of primi- 
tives for NC establishment, receipt confirmation, or reset to 
remain uncompleted. 



13.2 Types of primitives and parameters 

Table 11 indicates the types of primitives and the parameters 
needed for NC release. 



^~^~~~—-~-^__^^ Primitive 


N-DISCONNECT 


IM-DISCONNECT 


Para mete r~"""~ _^^ 


request 


indication 


Originator 




X 


Reason 


X 


X 


NS-user-data 


X 


X(C-) 


Responding address 


X(C) 
(see the note) 


X(C = ) 



NOTE — This parameter may be implicitly associated with the NSAP at 
which the primitive is issued. 



13.2.1 Originator parameter 

The originator parameter indicates the source of the NC 
release. Its value indicates either the "NS user", "NS 
provider", or "undefined". 

NOTE — The value "undefined" is not permitted when an 
N-DISCONNECT indication is issued by an NS user or an NS provider 
in order to reject an NC establishment atterflpt (see 13.4 and 13.5). 



13.2.2 Reason parameter 

The reason parameter gives information about the cause of the 
NC release. The value conveyed in this parameter will be as 
follows : 

a) when the originator parameter indicates an NS provider 
invoked release, the value is one of : 

1) disconnection — permanent condition; 

2) disconnection— transient condition; 

3! connection rejection— NSAP address unknown 
(permanent condition); 

4) connection rejection — NSAP unreachable/transient 
condition; 

5) connection rejection — NSAP unreachable/perma- 
nent condition; 

6) connection rejection— QOS not available/perma- 
nent condition; 

7) connection rejection— QOS not available/transient 
condition; 

8) connection rejection — reason unspecified/perma- 
nent condition; 

9) connection rejection — reason unspecified/transient 
condition. 

b) When the originator parameter indicates an NS user in- 
voked release, the value is one of 

1) disconnection — normal condition; 

2) disconnection— abnormal condition; 

3) connection rejection— permanent condition; 

4) connection rejection — transient condition; 



19 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



5) connection rejection — QOS not available/transient 
condition; 

6) connection rejection — QOS not available/permanent 
condition; 

7) connection rejection — incompatible information in 
NS-user-data. 

c) When the originator parameter value is "undefined", 
then the value of the reason parameter shall also be "un- 
defined". 



N-DISCONNECT 
request 



Figure 7 



N-DISCONNECT 
indication 



Sequence of primitives in NS user invoked 
NC release 



13.2.3 IMS-user-data parameter 

The NS -user data parameter allows the transfer of NS-user- 
data between NS users, without modification by the NS pro- 
vider. An NS user invoking NC release may send any integer 
number of octets of NS-user-data between zero and 128 
inclusive. In an N-DISCONNECT indication, this parameter can 
have a non-zero number of octets of NS-user-data only if the 
originator parameter has the value "NS user". 

The NS-user-data sent is- lost if NC release is simultaneously 
invoked by either the NS provider or the intended receiving NS 
user (13.3). 



N-DISCONNECT 
request 




N-DISCONNECT 

request 



Figure 8 — Sequence of primitives in simultaneous 
NS user invoked NC release 



13.2.4 Responding address parameter 

The responding address parameter is present in this primitive 
only in the case where the primitive is used to indicate rejection 
of an NC establishment attempt by an NS user (see 13.4). The 
parameter conveys the address of the NSAP from which the 
N-DISCONNECT request was issued and, where explicitly sup- 
plied, the addresses in the corresponding request and indi- 
cation primitives are identical. Under certain circumstances (for 
example, call redirection, generic addressing, etc.) this address 
may be different from the "called address" in the correspond- 
ing N-CONNECT request primitive. 



N-DISCONNECT 
indication 




N-DISCONNECT 

indication 



13.3 Sequence of primitives when releasing an 
established NC 

The sequence of primitives depends on the origin or origins of 
the NC release action. The sequence may be 

a) invoked by one NS user, with a request from that NS 
user leading to an indication to the other NS user; 

b) invoked by both NS users, with a request from each of 
the NS users; 

c) invoked by the NS provider, with an indication to each 
of the NS users; 

d) invoked independently by one NS user and the NS pro- 
vider, with a request from the originating NS user and ^in 
indication to the other NS user. 



Figure 9 — Sequence of primitives in NS provider invoked 
NC release 



N-DISCONNECT 
request 




N-DISCONNECT 
indication 



The sequences of primitives in these four cases are expressed in 
the time sequence diagrams in figures 7 to 10. 



Figure 10 — Sequence of primitives in simultaneous 
NS user and NS provider invoked NC release 



20 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



13.4 Sequence of primitives in an NS user 
rejection of an NC establishment attempt 

An NS user may reject an NC establishment attempt by an 
N-DISCONNECT request. The originator parameter in the 
N-DISCONNECT primitives will indicate NS user invoked NC 
release. The sequence of events is defined in the time sequence 
diagram in figure 11. 



N-CONNECT 
■equest 



N-CONNECT 
indication 
N-DISCONNECT 

request 



N-DISCONNECT 
indication 

Figure 11 — Sequence of primitives in NS user rejection 
of an NC establishment attempt 

13.5 Sequence of primitives in an IMS provider 
rejection of an NC establishment attempt 

If the NS provider is unable to establish an NC, it indicates this 
to the requestor by an N-DISCONNECT indication. The 
originator parameter in this primitive indicates an NS provider 
invoked NC release. The sequence of events is defined in the 
time sequence diagram in figure 12. 



N-CONNECT 
request 



N-DISCONNECT 
indication 



Figure 12 — Sequence of primitives in NS provider 
rejection of an NC establishment attempt 



14 Data transfer phase 
14.1 Data transfer 

14.1.1 Function 

The data transfer service primitives provide for an exchange of 
NS-user-data called Network-Service-data-units (NSDUs), in 
either direction or in both directions simultaneously on an NC. 
The Network Service preserves both the sequence and the 
boundaries of the NSDUs. 

NOTE — Designers of higher layer protocols using the Network Service 
should realize that the requested QOS applies to complete NSDUs, and 



that divisions of available NS-user-data into small NSDUs may have 
cost implications because of the impact on cost optimization mechan- 
isms operated by the NS provider. 



14.1.2 Types of primitives and parameters 

Table 12 indicates the types of primitives and the parameters 
needed for data transfer. 



Table 12 — Data transfer primitives and parameters 



-^_^^ Primitive 
• Parameter -~_^__^ 


N-DATA 
request 


N-DATA 
indication 


NS-user-data 
Confirmation request 


X 

X(C) 


XI = > 
X(C = ) 



14.1.2.1 NS-user-data parameter 

The NS-user-data parameter allows the transfer of an NSDU 
between NS users, without modification by the NS provider. 
The NS user may send any integer number of octets, one or 
greater, of NS-user-data that forms the WSDU. 



14.1.2.2 Confirmation request parameter 

The receipt confirmation of an NSDU transferred by means of 
an N-DATA primitive can be requested by setting the confir- 
mation request parameter on the N-DATA request. The con- 
firmation of receipt (COR) is provided by the N-DATA- 
ACKNOWLEDGE primitives (see 14.2). The value of the confir- 
mation request parameter may indicate either that a COR is re- 
quested or that it is not requested. The parameter may only be 
present if use of the receipt confirmation service was agreed by 
both NS users and the NS provider during the establishment of 
the NC. 



14.1.3 Sequence of primitives 

The operation of the Network Service in tranferring NSDUs can 
be modelled as a queue of unknown size within the NS provider 
(see clause 9). The ability of an NS user to issue an N-DATA re- 
quest or of the NS provider to issue an N-DATA indication 
depends on the behaviour of the receiving NS user and the 
resulting state of the queue. 

The sequence of primitives in a successful data transfer is 
defined in the time sequence diagram in figure 13. 



N-DATA 
request 



N-DATA 
indication 



Figure 13 — Sequence of primitives in data transfer 

The sequence of primitives in figure 13 may remain 
uncompleted if an N-RESET or an N-DISCONNECT primitive 
occurs. 



21 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: t987 



14.2 Receipt confirmation service 

14.2.1 Function 

The receipt confirmation service is requested by the confir- 
mation request parameter on the N-DATA primitives. For each 
and every NSDU transferred with the confirmation request 
parameter set, the receiving NS user, should return a con- 
firmation of receipt (COR) by issuing an N-DATA- 
ACKNOWLEDGE request. Such CORs should be issued in the 
same sequence as the corresponding N-DATA indications were 
received, and will be conveyed by the NS provider so as to 
preserve them distinct from any previous or subsequent CORs. 
The NS user may thus correlate them with the original N-DATA 
primitives (with "Confirmation Requests" set) by counting. 

N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE requests wilt not be subject to the 
flow control affecting N-DATA requests at the same NC end- 
point; N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE indications will not be sub- 
ject to the flow control affecting N-DATA indications at the 
same NC endpoint. 

The use of the receipt confirmation service shall be agreed by 
the two NS users of the NC and the NS provider during NC 
establishment by use of the receipt confirmation selection 
parameter on the N-CONNECT primitives. The service need not 
be provided by all NS providers. 

14.2.2 Types of primitives and parameters 

The receipt confirmation service involves two primitives : 

- N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE request; 

- N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE indication. 

These primitives do not convey any parameters. 



14.2.3 Sequence of primitives 

quence of primitives in a successful data transfer with 
confirmation is defined in the time sequence diagram in 
14 



The sequence of primitives in a 
receipt co~ x: — * : — : ~ J ~' t: — ' : " 
figure 14. 



N-DATA request 
with "confir- 
mation request" 
set 



N-DATA- 
ACKNOWLEDGE 
indication 



N-DATA indication 
with "confirmation 
request" set 

-N-DATA- 
"ACKNOWLEDGE 
request 



Figure 14 — Sequence of primitives in successful data 
transfer with receipt confirmation 

The sequence of primitives in figure 14 may remain un- 
completed if an N-RESET or an N-DISCONNECT primitive 
occurs. 



An NS user must not issue an N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE 
request if no N-DATA indication with "confirmation request" set 
has been received or if a COR has already been issued for all such 
N-DATA indications. Following a reset procedure, signalled by 
means of an N-RESET indication or N-RESET confirm, an NS 
user must not issue an N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE request in 
response to an N-DATA indication (with "confirmation request" 
set) which was received before the reset procedure was signalled. 

NOTES 

1 The withholding of COR by an NS user can have an effect on the 
throughput attainable on the NC. 

2 The use of receipt confirmation on an NC may have an effect on the 
flow control of normal data on the NC. For example, the issuing of a 
COR may result in the relaxation of flow control on NS -user-data flow- 
ing in the opposite direction from the COR. 

3 Receipt confirmation is included in the Network Service only to 
support existing features of CCITT Recommendation X.25. 

14.3 Expedited data transfer service 

14.3.1 Function 

The expedited data transfer service provides a further means of 
information exchange on an NC in both directions simul- 
taneously. The transfer of expedited Network-Service-data- 
units (ENSDUs) is subject to different QOS and separate flow 
control from that applying to NS-user-data of the data transfer 
service. It is not intended to provide a qualified data transfer 
facility. 

The NS preserves both the sequence and boundaries of the 
ENSDUs. The NS provider guarantees that an ENSDU will not 
be delivered after any subsequently issued NSDU or ENSDU on 
that NC. 

The relationship between normal and expedited NS-user-data 
is modelled by the operation of changing of order within 
queues as described in 9.2.3. In particular, expedited NS-user- 
data can still be delivered when the receiving NS user is not 
accepting normal NS-user-data. However, the amount of nor- 
mal NS-user-data bypassed by such changing of order cannot 
be predicted or guaranteed. Expedited data transfer cannot be 
guaranteed to bypass blockages in normal data flow where 
these blockages are occurring in lower layers. 

The expedited data transfer service is a provider-option which 
may not be available in the Network Service. Its use shall be 
agreed to by the two NS users of the NC and the NS provider 
during NC establishment by means of the expedited data selec- 
tion parameter on the N-CONNECT primitives (12.2.6). 

14.3.2 Types of primitives and parameters 

Table 13 indicates the types of primitives and the parameters 
needed for expedited data transfer. 

Table 13 — Expedited data transfer primitives 
and parameters 



" ~~-~-^^_^ Primitive 

Pa ra m ete r "~~~- -^_^_^ 


N-EXPED1TED- 
DATA request 


N EXPEDITED 
DATA indication 


NS-user-data 


X 


X( = ) 



22 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



14 3.2.1 NS-user-data parameter 

The NS-user-data parameter allows the transfer of expedited 
NS-user-data between NS users, without modification by the 
NS provider. The NS user may send any integer number of 
octets of expedited NS-user-data between 1 and 32 inclusive. 

14.3.3 Sequence of primitives 

The sequence of primitives in a successful expedited data 
transfer is defined in the time sequence diagram in figure 15. 



N EXPEDITED- 
DATA request 



N-EXPEDITED- 
DATA indication 



Figure 15 — Sequence of primitives in expedited 
data transfer 

The sequence of primitives in figure 15 may remain 
uncompleted if an N-RESET or an N-DISCONNECT primitive 
occurs. 



14.4 Reset service 



14.4.1 Function 



The reset service may be used 

a) by the NS user to resynchronize the use of the NC; or 

b) by the NS provider to report detected loss of NS-user- 
data unrecoverable within the Network Service. All loss of 
NS-user-data which does not involve loss of the NC is 
reported in this way. 

invocation of the reset service will unblock the flow of NSDUs 
and ENSDUs in case of congestion of the NC; it will cause the 
NS provider to discard NSDUs, ENSDUs, or CORs associated 
with the NC, and to notify any NS user or users that did not 
invoke reset that a reset has occurred. The service will be com- 
pleted in a finite time, irrespective of the acceptance of NSDUs, 
ENSDUs, and CORs by the NS users. Any NSDUs, ENSDUs, 
or CORs not delivered to the NS users before completion of the 
service will be discarded by the NS provider. 



14.4.2 Types of primitives and parameters 

Table 14 indicates the types of primitives and the parameters 
needed for the reset service. 



14.4.2.1 Originator parameter 

The originator parameter indicates the source of the reset. 
value indicates either the "NS user", "NS provider", 
"undefined". 



Its 
or 



14.4.2.2 Reason parameter 

The reason parameter gives information indicating the cause of 
the reset. The value conveyed in this parameter will be as 
follows : 

a) When the originator parameter indicates an NS pro- 
vider invoked reset, the value is one of 

1) "congestion"; 

2) "reason unspecified". 

b) When the originator parameter indicates an NS user 
invoked reset, the value is "user ^synchronization" . 

c) When the originator parameter has the value "un- 
defined", then the value of the reason parameter is also 
"undefined". 



14.4.3 Sequence of primitives 

The interactions between each NS user and the NS provider 
will be an exchange of these primitives, namely either 

a) an N-RESET request from the NS user, followed by an 
N-RESET confirm from the NS provider; or 

b) an N-RESET indication from the NS provider, followed 
by an N-RESET response from the NS user. 

The N-RESET request acts as a synchronization mark in the 
stream of NSDUs, ENSDUs, and CORs transmitted by the 
issuing NS user. The N-RESET indication likewise acts as a 
synchronization mark in the stream of NSDUs, ENSDUs, and 
CORs received by the receiving NS user. Similarly, the 
N-RESET response acts as a synchronizing mark in the stream 
of NSDUs, ENSDUs, and CORs transmitted by the responding 
NS user, while the N-RESET confirm acts as a synchronization 
mark in the stream of NSDUs, ENSDUs, and CORs received by 
the NS user which originally invoked the reset. 

The resynchronizing properties of the reset service are that 

1) No NSDU, ENSDU, or COR transmitted by the NS user 
before the synchronization mark in that transmitted stream 
will be delivered to the other NS user after the synchro- 
nization mark in that received stream. 



Table 14 — Reset primitives and parameters 



~- -_ Primitive 

Parameter ~^ 


N-RESET 
request 


N-RESET 
indication 


N-RESET 
response 


N-RESET 
confirm 


Originator 

Reason 


X 


X 
X 







23 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



The NS provider wilt discard all NSDUs, ENSDUs, and 
CORs submitted before the issuing of the N-RESET request 
which have not been delivered to the receiving NS user 
when the NS provider issues the N-RESET indication. 

Also, the NS provider will discard all NSDUs, ENSDUs, and 
CORs submitted before the issuing of the N-RESET response 
which have not been delivered to the initiator of the N-RESET 
when the NS provider issues the N-RESET confirm. 

2) No NSDU, ENSDU, or COR transmitted by an NS user 
after the synchronization mark in that transmitted stream 
will be delivered to the other NS user before the syn- 
chronization mark in that received stream. 

The N-RESET confirm may be issued to the initiator of the reset 
before the N-RESET indication is issued to the other NS user. 
The complete sequence of primitives depends upon the origin 
xjf the reset action and the occurrence or otherwise of resets 
with conflicting origins. Thus the reset service may be: 

i> invoked by one NS user, leading to interaction a) with 
that NS user and interaction b) with the peer NS user; 

ii) invoked by both NS users, leading to interaction a) with 
both NS users; 

iii) invoked by the NS provider, leading to interaction b) 
with both NS users; 

iv) invoked by one NS user and the NS provider, leading 
to interaction a) with the originating NS user and b) with the 
peer NS user. 

The sequence of primitives in these four cases is defined in the 
time sequence diagrams in figures 16 to 19. 



N-RESET 
request 



N-RESET 
' indication 

N-RESET 
response 



N-RESET 
confirm 




Figure 16 



Sequence of primitives in NS user 
invoked reset 



N-RESET 
request - 



N-RESET 
confirm < 




N-RESET 
request 



N-RESET 
confirm 



Figure 17 



Sequence of primitives in simultaneous 
NS user invoked reset 



N-RESET 
indication 





.N-RESET 
indication 



N-RESET 
response 



Figure 18 — Sequence of primitives in NS provider 
invoked reset 



N-RESET 
request 





, N-RESET 
indication 

■N-RESET 
response 



N-RESET 

confirm 



Figure 19 — Sequence of primitives in simultaneous 
NS user and NS provider invoked reset 

Further, there may be circumstances of reset "collision" which 
result in the number of reset procedures observed at one NC end- 
point being different from the number of reset procedures ob- 
served at the other NC endpoint. Such circumstances result in two 
additional cases which may occur, where the reset service may be 

v) invoked by one NS user while a previous reset pro- 
cedure is still incomplete at the other NS user, leading to 
additional interaction a) with the NS user invoking the sub- 
sequent reset, only; 

vi) invoked by the NS provider at one NC endpoint, while 
a previous reset procedure is still incomplete at the other, 
leading to additional interaction b) with the NS user at the 
first NC endpoint, only. 

There are many possible sequences of reset primitives for the 
two NC endpoints which may occur for cases v) and vi). These 
are not illustrated here by time sequence diagrams, but may be 
derived using the constraints on the allowed sequence of 
primitives for each NC endpoint, and the reset sequences illus- 
trated in figures 18 to T9. The synchronizing properties 
associated with the issuance of the N-RESET primitives are the 
same for all of the six cases outlined. 

NOTE — Situations in which the number of reset procedures at the 
two ends of a NC are not the same are not described by the operation 
of the queue model in 9.2. 

Any sequence of reset primitives may remain uncompleted if an 
N-DISCONNECT primitive occurs. Once a reset procedure has 
been invoked at an NC endpoint (by means of an N-RESET 
request or N-RESET indication primitive), no further N-DATA, 
N-EXPEDITED-DATA, or N-DATA-ACKNOWLEDGE primitive 
can be issued by either the NS user or the NS provider until the 
reset procedure has been completed (by means of an N-RESET 
confirm or N-RESET response). 



24 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Annex 
Differences between ISO 8348 and CCITT Recommendation X.213-1986 

(This annex does not form part of the standard.) 

The following differences between this International Standard and CCITT Recommendation X.213 should be noted. 

A.1 The following note, which is contained in paragraph 12.2.7.2 of CCITT Recommendation X.213, does not appear in ISO 8348. 

"NOTE — The implementation of the transit delay negotiation requires urgent further study in order to have a harmonized realization in different types 
of subnetworks. Special attention is required as regards routing and charging consequences." 

A.2 The following note, which is contained in paragraph 12.2.8 of CCITT Recommendation X.213, does not appear in ISO 8348. 

"NOTE — The objective is to make this parameter a mandatory parameter to be supported by all subnetworks in the future. However, a number of 
existing subnetworks cannot support it now. During the interim period, while these subnetworks exist and are not modified to provide this parameter, 
it is considered as a provider-option. No negotiation mechanism is needed in the Network Service. * 

Limiting, in some subnetworks, the length of NS-user-data to be provided to a value lower than 128 octets (for example 16 to 32 octets) for an interim 
period would imply fewer changes to existing interfaces and signalling systems and would simplify the introduction of such a service in existing 
subnetworks." 

In addition, in table 6/X.213 the IMS-user-data parameters are marked as "conditional", whereas these parameters are not marked as 
"conditional" in ISO 8348. 

A. 3 The following note, which is contained in paragraph 13.2.3 of CCITT Recommendation X.213, does not appear in ISO 8348. 

"NOTE — The objective is to make this parameter a mandatory parameter to be supported by all subnetworks in the future. However, a number of 
existing subnetworks cannot support it now. During the interim period, while these subnetworks exist and are not modified to provide this parameter, 
it is considered as a provider-option. No negotiation mechanism is needed in the Network Service." 

In addition, in table 11 /X.213 the "NS-user-data" parameters are marked as "conditional", whereas these parameters are not marked 
as "conditional" in ISO 8348. 



25 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS 13868: 1993 
ISO 8348: 1987 



Technical corrigendum 1 to International Standard ISO 8348 : 1987 was prepared by ISO/IEC JTC 1, Information technology. 



Page 7 

Table 2 

Replace table 2 with the following : 

Table 2 — Ordering relationships between queue model objects 



^-v. Following 


















witli\. object x 
respect ^^\J S defined 
to preceding ^\^^ 


Connect 


Octets 

of normal 

NS-user-data 


End-of-NSDU 


Expedited 
NSDU 


Data 
acknow- 
ledgement 


Reset 


Synchroniz- 
ation mark 


Disconnect 


object y ^^-^ 


















Connect 


N/A 


— 


N/A 


— 


— 


— 


N/A 


DES 


Octets of normal 


N/A 


— 


— 


AA 


AA 


DES 


N/A 


DES 


NS-user-data 


















End of NSDU 


N/A 


- 


N/A 


AA 


AA 


DES 


N/A 


DES 


Expedited NSDU 


N/A 


- 


- 


- 


AA 


DES 


N/A 


DES 


Data acknowledgement 


N/A 


- 


- 


AA 


— 


DES 


N/A 


DES 


Reset 


N/A 


- 


N/A 


- 


— 


DES 


— 


DES 


Synchronization mark 


N/A 


- 


- 


- 


- 


DES 


N/A 


DES 


Disconnect 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


N/A 


DES 



AA indicates that object x is defined to be able to advance ahead of the preceding object y. 

DES indicates that object x is defined to be destructive with respect to the preceding object y. 

— indicates that object x is neither destructive with respect to object y nor able to advance ahead of object y. 

N/A indicates that object x will not occur in a position succeeding object y in a valid state of a queue. 



27 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by tbje producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards, 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. LTD 36 ( 1558 ) 

Amendment! Issued Since Publication , 

Amend No Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C331-01 31 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 J 33 1 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola C37 84 99, 37 85 ©1 

CALCUTTA 700054 J 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 I ^ ™ H' * $ *' *° 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 [?* ^ Jf* HI °j 42 

{235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) J632 92 95, 632 78 58 

D\J±VlDt\l. tU\J\J7J [OJ^ I0 71, OJ£ Id »X 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE; 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD; JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



