**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  11401-2  (1990) :  General  requirements  for  slow  sand 
filters,  Part  2:  Design,  construction,  operation  and 
maintenance  [CED  24:  Public  Health  Engineering.] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


IS  11401  (  Part  2 )  :  1990 

(  Reaffirmed  2004 ) 


GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS  FOR 
SLOW  SAND  FILTERS 

PART  2    DESIGN,  CONSTRUCTION,  OPERATION  AND  MAINTENANCE 


UDC    628-16-0671 


®  BIS  1990 

BUREAU     OF  INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,  9   BAHADUR   SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

October  1990  Price  Group  3 


Public  Health  Engineering  Equipment  Sectional  Committee,  CED  40 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  24  January  1990,  after 
the  draft  finalized  by  the  Public  Health  Engineering  Equipment  Sectional  Committee  had  been 
approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering  Division  Council. 

A  safe  and  convenient  water  supply  is  paramount  importance  to  human  health  and  well  being 
of  a  society  as  a  whole*  Although  the  field  of  water  treatment  offers  a  variety  of  technological 
choices,  only  a  few  of  them  fully  meet  the  specific  requirement  of  rural  area.  One  such  method 
is  slow  sand  filtration  —  a  simple,  efficient  and  reliable  technique  for  the  treatment  of  water.  In 
the  construction  of  the  plant,  locally  available  material  is  generally  used  and  the  skills  for 
construction,  operation  and  maintenance  are  usually  available  locally.  This  standard  is  intended 
to  give  guidance  for  design,  construction  and  operation  of  slow  sand  filters. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with, 
the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded 
off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  I960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)9.  The 
number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the 
specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  11401  (Part2):1990 


Indian  Standard 


GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS  FOR 
SLOW  SAND  FILTERS 

PART  2     DESIGN,  CONSTRUCTION,  OPERATION  AND  MAINTENANCE 


1  SCOPE 

LI  This  standard  (Part  2)  covers  plant 
location  design  criteria,  construction,  operation 
and  maintenance  of  slow  sand  filters. 

2  REFERENCES 

2,1  The  following  Indian  Standard  is  a 
necessary  adjunct  to  this  standard: 


IS  No. 


Title 


8419  Requirements     for     filtration 

(Parti);  1977     equipment    (Part    1)   Fiitera- 

tion  media  —  sand  and  gravel 

3  SUITABILITY  OF  SLOW  SAND 
FILTRATION 

3.1  Slow  sand  filtration  can  be  applied  as  a 
single  step  treatment  when  raw  water  turbidity 
does  not  exceed  30  NTU  except  occasionally 
for  a  few  days.  When  higher  turbidities  are 
encountered  suitable  pre-treatment  should  be 
provided, 

4  PLANT  LOCATION  AND  LAY-OUT 

4.1  Wherever  possible,  the  plants  should  be  so 
located  that  the  raw  water  can  be  gravitated 
to  the  filters. 

4.2  The  location  of  the  plant  and  its  ruling 
levels  should  be  fixed  taking  into  account  the 
following: 

a)  Flood  level 

Filter  should  not  be  subject  to  flooding; 

b)  Ground  water  table 

Filter  box  foundations  should  be  well  above 
low  ground  water  table  and  preferably  also 
above  high  water  table.  In  case  this  is  not 
possible  special  attention  is  required  to  ensure 
water  lightness  of  the  filter  box;  and 

c)  Nature  of  subsoil 

Excavation  in  rock  and  other  hard  strata  may 
be  difficult  and  costly  and  should  be  avoided 
where  possible. 


4*3  Plant  lay-out  should  be  compact  to  facilitate 

operator's  tasks, 

4.4  The    lay-out    should    permit    easy     future 
expansion* 

5  ANNOTATED  DESIGN  CRITERIA 

5.1  General  design  criteria  for  slow  sand  filter 
is  given  in  Table  1. 

Table  1     Genera!  Design  Criteria  for 
Slow  Sand  Filters  in  Rural  Water  Supply 


Design  Criteria 

Design  period 
Period  of  operation 
Water  demand 

Filtration  rate 
Filter  bed  area 

Depth  of  filter  sand: 

a)  Initial 

b)  Minimum 
Specification  of  sand: 

a)  Effective  size 

b)  Uniformity  coefficient 

Height  of  underdrain 
including  gravel  layer 

Height  of  supernatant  water 


Recommended  Value 

15  to  30  years 
24  hours  per  day 
40  litre  per  capita  per  day 
for  rural  water  supply 

0*1— 0'2m/h 
200  ms  per  niter, 
minimum  of  2  units 

0*8  -  0*9  m 

0'5-0"6m 

0M5  —  0-30  mm 

Max  5,  preferably  below  3 

0*3  — 0'5  m 

lm 


5.2  Design  Period 

As  there  is  hardly  any  economy  of  scale  in  the 
costs  of  SSF  plants,  they  may  be  designed  for  a 
short  period  of  10-15  years  in  the  first  instance 
and  expanded  later  on  as  the  need  arises. 

5.3  Filtration  Rate 

The  design  rate  of  filtration  may  generally  be 
01  m/hour,  however,  if  raw  water  is  of 
comparatively  good  quality  with  turbidity  less 
than  5  NTU  and  coliform  MPN  count  less  than 
100/100  ml,  a  higher  filtration  rate,  say  0*15 
to  0420  m/hour,  can  be  adopted  for  design. 

5.4  Period  of  Operation 

Slow  sand  filters  shall  be  designed  for  24-hours 
o  f   operation    at    constant    rale.        Intermittent 


1 


IS  11401  (  Part  2 ):  1990 


operation,  that  is  operation  of  the  niters  for 
only  part  of  the  day  is  not  acceptable  as  it  will 
impair  bacteriological  purification. 

There  will  be   no   difficulty   in   providing    for 

continuous  ( 24  hours ),  constant  rate  filtration 

when  raw  water  is  to  be  gravitated  to  the 
filters. 

When  raw  water  has  to  be  pumped  to  the  filters 
and  the  plant  is.  large*  24-hours  pumping  should 
be  provided  to  enable  continuous,  constant  rate 
filtration. 

When  the  raw  water  is  to  be  pumped  and  the 
plant  is  small  it  may  not  be  practicable  to 
provide  for  24-hours  of  pumping.  In  such 
cases,  there  is  need  for  providing  high  level 
storage  of  raw  water  before  the  filters.  The 
storage  capacity  may  be  designed  to  balance 
the  intermittent  pumping  and  the  continuous 
constant-rate  feed  to  the  filters.  A  float  valve 
arrangement  shall  be  provided  o«  the  influent 
header  to  the  filters  to  ensure  constant  rate  of 
flow. 

Declining  rate  filtration  will  no  doubt  enable 
continuous  operation  of  the  filters  though 
pumping  may  be  intermittent;  but  this 
alternative  will  require  larger  filter  area. 

5.5  When  underdrains  are  formed  of  bricks,  the 
overlying  gravel  layers  may  be  of  size  and 
thickness  as  follows: 


Bottom  layer 

Next  higher 
layer 

Next  higher 
layer 

Top  layer 


18  —  33  mm  size,  13  cm  thick 
6—22  mm  size,  6  cm  thick 

2  —  4  mm  size,  6  cm  thick 

07  —  1  mm  size,  6  cm  thick 


The  gravel  layers  may  be  of  river  bed  pebbles 
or  broken  stone  whichever  is  cheaper.  If  of 
broken  stone,  special  sieving  may  be  dispensed 
with  if  commercial  sizes  are  available  approxi- 
mately to  the  specified  sizes, 

If  underdrains  are  of  special  design  such  as 
perforated  pipe  laterals,  drains  covered  by 
porous  concrete  slabs  or  laterals  fitted  with 
permeable  capsules,  the  coarse  gravel  layers 
may  be  dispensed  with,  reducing  gravel 
requirements  and  also  the  depth  of  filter  box. 

The  lateral  and  main  underdrains  should  be 
so  sized  that  the  maximum  head  loss  in 
the  underdrains  will  not  exceed  25  percent 
of  the  head  loss  in  the  sand  media  with  the 
sand  being  dean  and  the  bed  being  at  its 
minimum  thickness  after  repeated  scrapings. 
(The  specification  is  intended  to  ensure  that  the 
rate  of  lilt  ration  is  fairly  uniform  over  the 
entire  filter  bed.) 


The  main  drain  may  be  provided  with  a 
nominal  slope  of  about  1/200  towards  the  filter 
drain-out  end  to  help  in  cleaning  out  the  filter 
box  after  construction.  The  floor  of  the  filter 
box  may  be  given  a  nominal  slope  (say  1/100  ) 
towards  the  main  drain. 

It  is  neither  necessary  nor  desirable  to  vent  the 
underdrains.  It  does  not  have  any  beneficial 
effect  and  may  even  result  in  contamination  of 
the  effluent. 

5.6  Filtration-rate  Regulation 

Filtration  rate  may  be  regulated  either  at  the 
inlet  (inlet  control)  or  at  the  outlet  ( outlet 
control).  Inlet  control  may  be  used  in  the 
case  of  small,  gravity-flow  systems  having  filters 
in  remote  locations  where  daily  flow  regulation 
will  be  difficult.  Outlet  control  may  be  adopted 
where  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  provide  daily 
flow  regulation. 

5.7  Inlet  Arrangements 

In  the  case  of  inlet  control*  there  should  be 
provision  for  measuring  and  regulating  the 
total  flow  to  the  plant  and  for  splitting  it 
equally  between  the  different  filter  beds. 

The  inlet  structures  for  individual  filter  beds 
should  be  designed  to  avoid  any  scouring  of 
sand.  They  should  incorporate  provision  for 
closure  of  flow  and  for  rapid  draining  of 
supernatant  water  up  to  sand  level, 

5.8  Outlet  Arrangements 

The  outlet  arrangement  for  each  filter  bed 
(  whether  of  inlet  control  or  outlet  control  type  ) 
should  incorporate  a  filter  drain-out,  a  means 
for  back-filling  with  filtered  water  after 
cleaning,  by  making  an  interconnection  with 
the  outlet  pipe  of  the  adjacent  filter,  a 
regulating  valve  on  the  filter  outlet  pipe,  a  weir 
with  free  fall  having  its  crest  fixed  3  cm  above 
maximum  level  of  sand  to  prevent  'below 
atmospheric  pressure'  in  the  niter,  a  drain  pipe 
after  the  weir  for  filtering  to  waste  and  a  valve 
for  closing  the  flow  to  the  filtered  water  tank 
during  filtering  to  waste. 

5.9  Filter  Area 

Filter  area  requirement  (  m'~  )  will  he  given  by 
daily  supply  required  (  m3/day  )  at  the  end  of 
the  design  period  divided  by  filtration  rate 
(m/h)  X  24  hours.  No  additional  area  is  to  be 
provided  as  standby. 

5.10  Number  of  Filter  Beds 

Tn  small  plants  there  shall  be  at  least  two  filter 
bods.  In  larger  plants,  the  number  of  beds  may 
be  increased  to  facilitalt:  maintenance.    A  rough 


IS  11401  (Part  2):  1990 


indication  of  suitable  number  (n)  is  given  by  the 
formula  n  =  O'b^A  where  A  ~  total  area  of  the 
filters  beds  in  nv.  No  additional  bed  need  to 
be  provided  as  standby.  When  any  of  the  beds 
need  to  be  cleaned,  the  rate  of  filtration  in  the 
other  bed(s)  may  be  increased.  A  temporary 
increase  of  the  rate  of  filtration  up  to  0*3  m3/m2/h 
does  not  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  effluent 
quality. 

5.11  Maximum  Filter  Bed  Area 

In  rural  plants,  the  area  of  individual  beds 
should  be  kept  under  200  m3  so  as  to  facilitate 
quick  cleaning  of  filters. 

5.12  Filter  Shape  and  Dimensions 

When  filter  beds  are  of  an  area  less  than  about 
125  m2  and  they  are  to  be  constructed  fully  or 
almost  fully  below  ground,  circular  shape  may 
be  more  economical  than  rectangular  shape. 
For  larger  installations  or  when  small  filters  are 
fully  or  partly  above  ground,  rectangular  beds 
in  a  battery  may  be  more  economical. 

The  economical  length  (L)  and  width  (B)  of 
rectangular  filters  in  a  battery  are  given  by  the 
formulae: 

L^y/UhTTl  and   B  =  AjL±^LL 

where 

A  —  total  area  of  filter  beds,  and 

n  =  number  of  filter  beds  in  the  battery. 

Small  filters  above  ground  may  also  be 
constructed   in  ferrow-cement  in  which  case  a 

circular  shape  should  be  adopted. 

5.13  Height  of  Supernatant  Water 

It  should  be  1  metre  minimum  to  allow  for 
sufficiently  long  filter  runs, 

5.14  Filter  Media 

The  media  may  be  river  sand,  pit  sand  or 
crushed  stone.  Filter  sand  should  be  relatively 
fine  with  effective  size  (e.s.)  of  0*15  to  030  mm 
and  uniformity  coefficient  (u.c.)  preferably 
below  3  and  not  exceeding  5.  The  quality  of 
sand  shall  conform  to  3.1  of  IS  8419  (  Part  1  )  : 
1977. 

Local  sand  should  be  used  as  filter  sand 
wherever  possible  as  it  will  cut  down  costs 
considerably.  A  simple  field  check  for 
suitability  of  local  sand  is  to  test  whether  most 
of  the  sample  will  pass  through  a  sieve  of 
about  10  inni  opening  and  most  of  it  will  be 
retained  on  a  sieve  of  about  01  r>  mm  opening 
with  not  more  than  10  percent  passing  through. 


If  the  sand  contains  excess  silt  ( more  than 
1  percent)  it  should  be  washed  before  use. 
Sampling  of  sand  shall  conform  to  3,3  of 
IS  8419  (Part  1)  :  1977. 

The  minimum  depth  of  sand  ( that  is,  depth 
before  re-sanding )  should  be  0*5-0*6  m.  Selec- 
ting a  minimum  depth  of  0*6  m  is  advisable  if 
slow  sand  filtration  is  the  only  treatment  and 
the  effective  grain  size  is  in  the  higher  range. 

5.15  Underdrainage 

In  case  of  village  plants,  the  lateral  underdrains 
may  best  be  formed  of  bricks  laid  on  edge 
covered  over  with  bricks  laid  flat  with  open 
joints  of  5-8  mm  size.  In  the  case  of  the  'outlet 
control'  the  weir  in  the  outlet  chamber  should 
also  serve  as  a  flow-measuring  device.  The 
measuring  weir  may  be  a  V-notch  for  small 
flows  and  a  trapezoidal  weir  for  large  flows.  A 
float-operated  rate-of-flow  indicator  should  be 
provided  on  the  upstream  side  of  the  weir.  It 
is  also  desireable  to  provide  a  loss  of  head 
guage  on  the  outlet  pipe  of  each  filter  bed. 

The  outlet  chamber  should  always  be  covered 
properly  and  also  vented.  Manhole  covers  over 
outlet  chambers  should  be  of  overlapping  type. 

5.16  Filter  Box 

The  total  height  of  the  filter  box  will 
be  25-2*7  m,  inclusive  of  0'2  m  free  board. 
The  top  of  filter  walls  should  be  at  least  0"5  m 
above  formation  ground  level.  An  overflow 
arrangement  should  be  provided  in  each  filter 
box  to  help  remove  scum  and  prevent  flooding. 

6.  CONSTRUCTION 

6.1  Relevant  Indian  Standard  Specifications 
should  be  followed  for  the  construction  of  all 

water  retaining  structures, 

6.2  Water  tightness  of  all  structures  should  be 
checked  and  ensured  before  placing  gravel  and 
sand  in  the  filter  box. 

6.3  To  prevent  short-circuiting  of  raw  water 
along  the  walls  of  the  filters,  the  inside 
plastering  of  the  walls  may  be  made  rough 
from  maximum  level  of  sand  up  to  floor  level. 

6.4  The  alternative  of  ferro-cement  construc- 
tion should  be  considered  for  circular  filters  as 
it  may  often  be  cheaper  than  brick  or  R.C.C. 
construction. 

6.5  The  outlet  valve  of  the  filter  bed,  the  inter- 
connecting valve  with  the  adjacent  bed  and  the 
filter  drain-out  valve  (if  placed  before  outlet 
valve) j  should  be  fixed  in  dry  sluice  valve 
chambers  to  enable  easy  maintenance.  Other 
valves  should  also  preferably  be  installed  in  dry 


IS  11401  (  Part  2  )  :  1990 


chambers  rather  than  in  wet  chambers.  Valves 
in  dry  pits  require  frequent  operation  as  also 
valves  placed  in  wet  chambers  should  be 
provided  with  extension  spindles  and  capstan 
heads  for  convenient  operation. 

7  OPERATION  AND  MAINTENANCE 

7.1  Slow  sand  filters  should  be  operated 
continuously  24  hours  of  the  day  as  intermittent 
operation  will  impair  filtered  water  quality.  In 
case  there  is  any  interruption  in  raw  water 
flow,  the  filters  should  not  be  shut  down,  but 
allowed  to  filter  at  a  declining  rate. 

7.2  Generally,  all  the  filter  beds  of  a  plant 
should  be  kept  operating  and  no  bed  should  be 
kept  idle,  as  standby  and  idle  units  will  take 
several  days  after  they  nre  started  to  reach  full 
efficiency. 

7.3  Filter  bed  should  be  cleaned  one  at  a  time. 
When  one  bed  is  being  cleaned,  other  beds 
may  be  overloaded  to  maintain  total  plant 
output.  Overloading  for  short  periods  will  not 
affect  filtration  efficiency. 

7.4  Cleaning  of  a  filter  bed  should  be  completed 


as  quickly  as  possible  and  the  bed  recom- 
missioned  within  18  hours  of  initial  shut-down 
to  limit  the  adverse  effect  on  the  biological  flora 
in  the  filter. 

7.5  Resanding 

When  the  sand  level  in  a  filter  has  been 
reduced  to  the  minimum  permissible  level 
of  0*5  to  0  6  m,  the  filter  bed  should  be 
resanded.  In  resanding,  the  'throwing  over 
method'  should  be  followed  (see  Annex  A). 

7.6  Filters  which  have  been  drained  down 
below  the  sand  level  should  first  be  back-filled 
with  filtered  water  from  adjacent  filters  before 
top-filling  with  raw  water.  New  filters  should 
be  back-filled  with  as  clean  water  as  possible 
before  top-filling. 

7.7  New  filters  and  resanded  filters  should  be 
run  to  waste  until  the  bacteriological  quality  is 
satisfactory  which  may  take  several  days. 

7.7.1  When  filtering  to  waste  is  not  feasible, 
special  care  should  be  taken  to  chlorinate  the 
filtrate  before  supply. 


ANNEX  A 

(  Clause  7,5  ) 

THROWING  OVER  METHOD  OF  RESANDING 


When,  after  repeated  scrapings,  the  sand  depth 
in  a  filter  bed  has  fallen  to  its  minimum  design 
level  ( 0"  5-0*6  m  above  gravel )  resanding  has  to 
be  done  and  the  sand  depth  restored  to  its 
design  level  (  0*8- 1*0  m  ). 

If,  in  resanding,  new  sand  is  placed  directly 
over  the  old  sand  left  in  the  bed  there  would  be 
cumulative  fouling  of  the  latter  as  some  of  the 
raw  water  impurities  and  products  of  biological 
growth  do  penetrate  to  these  layers  also. 
Cumulative  fouling  is  indicted  by  progressive 
increase  in  initial  head  loss  ( head  loss 
immediately  after  filter  scraping  )  and  will  lead 
to  shorter  and  shorter  filter  runs. 

Cumulative  fouling  can  be  avoided  by  adopting 
the  throwing  over  process  of  resanding.  In  this 
process,  the  bottom  layer  of  sand  is  moved  to 
one  side,  new  sand  is  placed  to  make    up    the 


level  and  the  old  sand  is  then  put  back  on  top 
of  the  new  sand.  Throwing  over  ensures  that 
the  bottom  sand  layer  is  also  subjected  to 
scraping  in  due  course.  It  also  ensures  the 
presence  of  biologically  active  sand  at  the  top 
after  resanding  which  will  help  in  quick 
re-ripening  of  the  filter. 

Throwing  over  is  carried  out  in  strips. 
Excavation  is  carried  out  on  each  strip  in  turn, 
making  sure  that  it  is  not  dug  as  to  disturb  the 
gravel  layers  below.  The  removed  material 
from  first  strip  is  stacked  to  one  side  in  a  long 
ridge;  the  excavated  trench  is  filled  with  new 
sand  and  the  adjacent  strip  is  excavated, 
throwing  the  removed  material  from  the  second 
trench  to  cover  the  new  sand  in  the  first.  When 
the  whole  of  the  bed  has  been  resanded,  the 
material  in  the  ridge  from  the  first  trench  is 
used  to  cover  the  new  sand  in  the  last  strip. 


IS  11401  (Part  2):  1990 


?0"ZXC50 

GRAVEL 


DRAIN 

Fig.   1     Throwing-Over  Method  of  Resanding 


Standard  Mark 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 
Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on  products 
covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply  with 
the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection,  testing  and  quality 
control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the  producer.  Standard  marked 
products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity  to  that  standard  as  a  further  safe- 
guard. Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted 
to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained  from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification 
of  goods  and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  us  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in 
any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in 
the  course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or 
grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (  Publications  ), 
BIS. 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any, 
are  issued  from  time  to  time.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in 
possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition.  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent 
to  BIS  giving  the  following  reference: 

Doc:  No.  CED40(4540) 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 

Telephones  :  331  01  31,  331  13  75  Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 

(  Common  to  all  Offices  ) 

Regional  Offices; 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  T331  01  31 

NEW  DELHI  110002  1331  13  75 

Eastern  :  1/14  G.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.LP.  Road,  ManiktoU  37  86  62 

CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036  2  18  43 

Southern  :  G.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600113  41  29  16 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  6  32  92  95 

BOMBAY  400093 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD    JAIPUR.   KANPUR.   PATNA.   THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, 


Printed  at  Arcee  Press,  New  Delhi,  India 


