**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13021-2 (1991) : ac Supplied Electronic Ballasts for 
Tubular Fluorescent Lamps^ Part 2: Performance Requirements 
[ETD 23: Electric Lamps and their Auxiliaries] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13021 ( Part 2): 1991 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

ac SUPPLIED ELECTRONIC BALLASTS FOR 

TUBULAR FLUORESCENT LAMPS — 

SPECIFICATION 

PART 2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

(First Reprint NOVEMBER 1992) 

UDC 62l-327-534-15'032-4 : 620-16 



® BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1991 R-ice Group 8 



Electric Lamps and Their Auxiliaries Sectional Committee, ETD 23 

CONTENTS 

Page 

1 Scope .„ ... ••• 1 

2 References ... ... ••- 1 

3 Definitions ... --. ••• 1 

4 General Notes on Tests ... ... ... 2 

5 Marking ... ••* ... 2 

6 General Statement ... ... -.. 2 

7 Starting Conditions ... ... ... 2 

8 Operating Conditions ... ... — 5 

9 Circuit Power Factor ... ... -.. 5 

10 Supply Current „. ... ... 6 

11 Maximum Current in Any Lead to a Cathode .-- ... 6 

12 Current Wavaform ... ... ... 6 

13 Magnetic Screening .•• ••• -• 6 

14 Impedance of Audio-Frequencies ... ... ... 7 

1 5 Mains Transient Over voltage ... ... ... 7 

16 Operational Tests For Abnormal Conditions ... ... 7 

17 Endurance ... — ••• 7 
Annex A Methods of Tests ... ... ... 8 

Annex B Reference Ballasts ... ... -•• 12 

Annex C Reference Lamps ... ... •-• 13 

Annex D Explanation of Starting Conditions ... ... 14 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Electric Lamps and their Auxiliaries Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
technical Division Council. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been taken from the follov/ing: 

lEC Doc : 34 C ( Central Office ) 173 *ac supplied electronic ballasts for tubular fluorescent lamps; 
Performance Requirements'; and 

lEC Pub 555-2 : ( 1982 ) *Disiurbances in supply system caused by household and similar electrical 
equipment, Part 2 : Harmonics', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( lEC ), 

Part I of this standard deals with general requirements of ac supplied electronic ballasts for tubular 
fluorescent lamp. 



IS 13021 ( Part2):199I 



Indian Standard 



ac SUPPLIED ELECTRONIC BALLASTS FOR 

TUBULAR FLUORESCENT LAMPS - 

SPECIFICATION 



PART 2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies performance 
requirements for electronic ballasts for use on ac 
supplies up to I 000 V at 50 Hz with operating 
frequencies deviating from the supply frequency, 
associated with tubular fluorescent lamps as speci- 
fied in IS 2418 ( Parts I and 2 ) : 1977 Tubular 
fluorescent lamps for general lighting services 
Part 1 Requirements and tests {first revision) 
Part 2 Standard lamp data sheets {first revi- 
sion ) for high frequency operation. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 



2418 ( Part I ) 
1977 



2418 ( Part 2 ) 
1977 



3 DEFINITIONS 



Tubuleir fluorescent lamps 
for general lighting service: 
Part 1 Requirements and 
tests {first revision ) 

Tubular fluorescent lamps 
for generar lighting service: 
Part 2 Standard lamp data 
sheets {first revision ) 



3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Starting aid 

A starting aid may be either a conductive strips 
affixed to the outer surface of a lamp, or a con- 
ductive plate which is spaced within an appro- 
priate distance from a lamp. 

3.1.1 A starting aid may only be effective when 
it has an adequate potential difference from one 
ot the lamp. 

3.2 Ballast Lumen Factor 

The ratio of the light output of the lamp when 
the ballast under test is operated at its rated 
voU^^e, compared with the light output of the 
sai s rip operated with the appropriate reference 
bat; suppHed at its rated voltage and frequency. 



3.3 Reference Ballast 

A special ballast designed for the purposes of 
providing comparison standards for testing ballasts 
and for selecting reference lamps. It is essentially 
characterized by the fact that at its rated 
frequency, it has a stable voltage/current ratio 
which is relatively uninfluenced by variations in 
cunent, temperature and the magnetic surround- 
ings, as outlined in this standard. 

3.4 Reference Lamp 

A lamp selected for testing ballasts which, when 
associated with a reference ballast under specified 
conditions, has electrical characteristics which 
are close to the nominal values as stated in the 
relevant lamp standard for that particular type of 
lamp. 



3.5 Calibration 
Ballast 



Current of a Reference 



The value of the current on which are based the 
calibration and control of the ballast. 

3.6 Total Circuit Power 

The total power consumed by ballast and lamp in 
combination, at rated voltage and frequency of 
the ballast. 

3.7 Circuit Power Factor i Symbol A 

The power factor of the combination of a ballast 
and the lamp or lamps for which the ballast is 
designed. 

3.8 High Power Factor Ballast 

A ballast having a circuit power factor of at 
least 85. 

NOTE — The value 085 takes into account the effect 
on the power factor of the distortion of the current 

waveform. 

For North America, high power factor is defined as a 
power factor of at least 0'9. 

3.9 High Audio-Frequency Impedance 
Ballast 

A ballast of which the impedance in the frequency 
range 250 Hz to 2 000 Hz exceeds the values 
specified in 14 of this standard* 



1 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) x 1991 



3.10 Low*Distortion Type Ballast 

A ballast of which the harmonic content complies 
with the more severe requirements of 12.1 of this 
standard. 

3.11 Preheat Starting 

Type of circuit in which the lamp electrodes are 
brought to emission temperature before the lamp 
actually ignites. 

3.12 Non-preheat Starting 

Type of circuit which utilizes a high open-circuit 
voltage causing field emission from electrodes, 

3.13 Pre-8tart Time 

For ballasts according to 3.12 the period after 
switching on the supply voltage during which the 
lamp current is ^ 10 mA. 

4 GENERAL NOTES ON TESTS 

4.1 The tests arc carried out in the order of 
clauses, unless otherwise specified. 

4.2 For carrying out type test, one specimen is 
submitted to all tests. 

4.3 In general, all tests are made on each type of 
ballast or, where a range of similar ballast is 
involved, for each rated wattage arc in the range 
or on a representative selection from the range as 
agreed witJti the manufacturer. 

4.4 The tests arc made under the conditions 
specified in Annex A. 

4.4.1 Lamp data sheets not published in an Indian 
Standard shall be made available by the lamp 
manufacturer. 

4.5 All ballasts specified in this standard shall 
comply with the requirements of Part 1 of this 
standard. 

5 MARKING 

5.1 Ballasts shall be clearly marked with the 
following mandatory markings: 

a) Circuit power factor, for example, 0*85. 

If the power factor is less than 0'95 leading, it 
shall be followed by the letter *C*, for example, 

0-85 a 

The following marking shall be added, if appro- 
priate: 

i) The symbol Z which indicates that the 
ballast is designed to comply with the 
conditions for audio-frequency impedance; 
and 

ii) The symbol H which indicates that the 
ballast is not of the low distortion type. 

S«2 In addition to the above mentioned manda- 
tory marking, the following information shall be 



given either on the ballast or be made available 
in the manufacturer's catalogue or the like ( see 
also Annex B ), 

a) A clear indication regarding the type of 
starting, namely, preheat of non-preheat; 

b) Indication whether a ballast needs a start- 
ing aid; and 

c) Ballast lumen factor and total circuit power 
in combination, 

5.3 Non-mandatory information which may be 
made available by the manufacturer, 

a) Rated output frequency at rated voltage, 
with and without lamp operating; and 

b) Limits of the ambient temperature range ' 
within which the ballast shall operate 
satisfactorily at the declared voltage 

( range ). 

5.4 The ballasts may also be marked with BIS 
Standard Mark. 

6 GENERAL STATEMENT 

6.1 It may be expected that ballast complying 
with this standard, when associated with lamps 
which comply for high-frequency operation, shall 
provide satisfactory starting of the lamp at an air 
temperature immediately around the lamp bet- 
ween 10**G and 35*'G and operation between 
10°C and 50°C at voltages within 92 percent and 
106 percent of the rated voltage. 

NOTE — The nominal electrical characterutics as 
given on the lamp data sheets of IS 2418 ( Part 2 ) : 
1977 and applying to operation on a reference ballast 
at rated voltage with a frequency of 50 Hz may deviate 
when operating on a high frequency ballast and the 
conditions of 5.3 (b) above. 

7 STARTING CONDITIONS 

7.0 Ballasts shall start lamps, without adversely 
affecting the performance of the lamp when 
operated according to intended use. An expla- 
nation of the starting conditions is given in 
Annex D. 

Compliance is checked by the tests according to 7.1 
to 7.4, as appropriate, with the ballast operating 
at any supply voltage between 92 percent and 
106 percent of its rated value. 

7.1 Ballast for Gurrent-Controllcd Preheat 
Starting Mode 

For ballasts of this category, the following require- 
ments apply: 

The test is carried out in accordance with the 
requirement of A-4 of Annex A. 

7.1 •! With a non-inductive substitution resistor 
of the value specified on the relevant lamp data, 
sheet, substituted for each lamp electrode, the 
ballast shall deliver a minimuni total effective 
heating current according to the time/current 
limits specified on the relevant lamp data sheets 
( see Fig. 1 ). 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) t 1991 







t 

1 
(A) 








Ik: 


'^.- 


m2 


,0-5 


ik 


AT 






^ 


V 


;^^ 


•ip 






im 









1 

— 1 — 


— 


r:rr 



ik=(^^*;m2j0* 




0-is te t(s) 

Example 1 



O-^s te t(s)' 

Example 2 



Example 3 



The total heating effect of the varying heating current to time <e shall not be less than the equivalent of the steady 
state rms current I'k ( at /e ) for the same heating effect. 

Possible instances are shown in the three examples: 

Example 1 Ballast complies with sub-clause 7.1,1. Varying rms current ip never falls below steady state rms currrent ik 

/e <e 

( at /e ), therefore, the rms envelope of current ip can be used to show 1 ip' «// > I ik* dt. 

* 

Example 2 Ballast does not comply with sub-clause 7.1.1. Varying rms current ip only reaches the level of steady 
state rms current it ( at ie ) just before time le> therefore, the rms envelope of current ip can be used to- 

te te 



show I «y dt < I ik" dt. 



Example 3 Ballast may or may not comply with sub-clause 7.1.1. The varying rms current ip only exceeds the steady 
state rms current ik for part of the time period to ^e. Energy measurements or calculation are necessary to 



/e 



te 



determine whether I ip' tf< > I tk' dt. 





Fig. 1 Intbrprbtation of Effective Heating Current 



7.1.1*1 The absolute miaimum preheat time shall 
be at least 0*4 s unless otherwise specified oo the 
relevant lamp data sheet. 

7.1.1.2 The maximum effective heating current 
shall not exceed the limits specified on the rele- 
vant lamp data sheet at any time t* 

7.1.2 The open circuit voltage across any pairs of 
substitution resistors representing a lamp shall not 
exceed the maximum values specified on the lamp 
data sheets, during the preheat period. After the 
preheating period it shall be, or rise to a value, 
not less than the minimum value for lamp starting, 
as specified on the lamp data sheet. 

7.1.2.1 If the current through the substitution 
resistor, as specified in 7.1.1, is interrupted before 
the minimum specified voltage for lamp starting 
has been reached, the voltage rise to minimum 
starting voltage shall take place within not more 
than 0- 1 s ( w* Fig. 2A ) 

7.1.2.2 If the voltage rise takes more than 0*1 s, 
the current through the substitution resistor shall 
not fall below the absolute minimum value speci- 
fied (see Fig, 2B ). 



7.1.2.3 The crest factor of the open circuit voltage 
shall not exceed I "8. £ven very narrow voltage 
peaks which do not influence the xms value shall 
not occur during the minimum preheat period. 

7.2 Ballasts for Voltage<U>ntrolled Preheat 
Starting Mode 

Ballasts of this type shall provide proper cathode 
preheating voltage, cathode operating voltage, 
and lamp starting voltages. Limiting values and 
appropriate substitution resistors are specified on 
the relevant lamp data sheets in IS 2418 (Part 2) : 
1977. 

Lamps with either low resistance cathodes or 
high resistance cathodes may be operated by this 
method. 

7.2.1 Ballasts shall deliver rms cathode heating 
voltage, within the limits specified on the relevant 
lamp data sheet, to^ the specified substitution 
resistors, when rated supply voltage is applied. 

7.2.1.1 It is permitted to exceed the maximum 
cathode voltage limit provided the maximum 
cathode current is in accordance with the require- 
ments for current controlled preheating. 



IS 13021 ( Part 2): 1991 



UJ 

< 

ov AFTER te — 

t— 

u 

5v BEFORE te— 

e 

UJ 
CL 

o 






/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 




TRANSITION TIME 
(t5)= 100ms mox 






te (1e*ts) 




o 
< 

UJ 

^ ik TO te - 

UJ 

o 
o 

X 


t (SECONDS) 


CATHODE HEATING 
REMOVED AT te 




<J 


te (te^ts) 




o 


t (SECONDS) 



2A Ballasts, which remove preheating current when D-2.1 open circuit voltages are elevated. 



UJ 

< 

gV AFTER te - 

> 



^V BEFORE te — 
u 

UJ 
CL 
O 



TRANSITION TfME (ts) > lOO ms 

, A , 



te 



{te*ts) • 

t(SECONDS) 



!k TO te - 



o 



^ 5im TO 

ujl amp START 

Q 

O 

X 

►— 

< 
o 



te 



(te^ts) ■ 

t(S£CONDS) 



2B BallastSi which have open circuit voltage transition times >100 ms. 

Fig. 2 Open Circuit Voltage Requirements for Ballasts with Current 

Controlled Preheating 



7.2«1<2 The minimum application time of the 
cathode heating voltage shall be 0*4 s. 

7.2.1.3 Depending upon lamp data sheet require- 
ments, the cath de heating voltage after 0*4 s 
may be: 

a) Applied continuously during operation; 

b) Reduced to a lower level; and 

c) Reduced to 0. 

7.2.2 Ballasts shall provide the lamp starting 
voltages specified on the relevant lamp data sheet 
for: 

a) rms voltage across the lamp; and 

b) Peak voltage to starting aid, if required. 

7.2.2.1 Starting requirements for various series 
circuits may be specified . For operation of lamp 
in parallel circuits, the relevant single lamp 
requirement shall be provided for each lamp. 



7.2.2.2 The starting voltages may be available 
simultaneously with the cathode preheating vol- 
tage or they may be elevated to those levels after 
0*4 s elapsed time. Any voltage applied before 0*4 s 
shall be lower than the level that would cause 
starting of the lamp or shall be in accordance 
with the values given for current controlled 
preheating. 

7.3 Ballast for Non*prelieat Starting Mode 

Ballasts in accordance with definition 3.12 shall be 
so designed that the cumulative glow discharge 
periods during starting do not exceed 100 ms 
when measured with a reference lamp and with- 
out any earthed metal parts close by which might 
act as starting aid. The flow discharge period is 
deemed to have finished if the lamp current is at 
least 80 percent of the nominal lamp current. 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) s 1911 



Measurement is made with an oscilloscope ( see 

Fig. 3 ). 

A ballast is deemed to conform with the require- 
ments when the following conditions arc fulfilled. 

BALLAST 
UNDER TEST 




3A Test circuit for open-circuit voitage 

BALLAST 
UNDER TEST 



SUPPLY 



1 



Re 



1 



o 

> 

Ui 

o 
o 



R)^' 



3B Test circuit for ballast impedance 



BALLAST 
UNDER TEST 




SUPPLY 



3C Test circuit for cathode current 

Fig. 3 Test Circuit for Non-prbheat 
Starting Mode 

7.3.1 Open Circuit Voltage 

The open circuit voltage shall comply with the 
value as specified on the relevant lamp data 
sheet. 

NOTE — In case of additional cathode heating during 
the starting process, lower values may be sufficient 
provided the glow discharge period does not exceed 
100 njs. 



7.3 J! Ballast Impedance Test 

With a non-inductive substitution resistor of the 
value on the relevant lamp data sheet 
substituted for the lamp, and at 92 percent of the 
rated voltage, the ballast shall deliver a current 
not less than the minimum value specified on 
that data sheet. 

7.3.3 Cathode Current 

Ballasts of the non-preheat start type may supply 
some cathode healing during the starting. 

7.3.3.1 The cathode current, if any, shall not 
exceed the maximum value as specified on the 
relevant lamp data sheet. The measurement is 
carried out with a substitution resistor the value 
of which shall be calculated as follows: 

/?o- 11 (2-1 4 p 
where 

/n = Nominal value of the lamp operating 
current. 

7.4 Starting Aid and Distances 

Lamps operated with electronic ballasts complying 
with this standard may require a starting aid as 
IS 2418 (Part 2 ) :. 1977. 

7.4,1 The open circuit voltage and voltage to 
starting aid \ if required ), during preheat and 
starting, shall be within the limits specified in the 
information for ballast design on the relevant 
lamp data sheet. 

8 OPERATING CONDITIONS 

8.1 At rated voltage, the ballast lumen factor 
shall be not less than 95 percent of the value 
declared by the manufacturer, 

8.1.1 If the declared lumen factor of the ballast 
is less than 09, evidence shall be given that the 
performance of lamps operated on that ballast is 
not impaired. A lelcvant test is under considera- 
tion. 

8.2 At rated voltage, the total circuit power shall 
be not more than i 1 percent of the value declar- 
ed by the manufacturer, when the ballast is 
operated with a reference ISlmp, 

8.3 Requirements for dimming are under conside- 
ration. Provisionally, when operating lamps of 
lower lumen levels than the optimum design points* 
care shall be taken that the ballast provides 
cathode heating continuously to the lamp(s) so 
that lamp life is not degraded. 

8.3.1 The requirements for maximum current in 
any lead to a cathode should be observed. 

9 CIRCUIT POWER FACTOR 

9.1 The measured circuit power factor shall not 
differ from the marked value by more than 005^ 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) t 1991 



when the ballast is operated with one or more 
reference lainp(s) and the whole combination is 
supplied at its rated voltage and frequency. 

10 SUPPLY CURRENT 

10.1 At rated vohage, the supply current shall 
not differ by more than ±10 percent from the 
value marked on the ballast or declared in the 
manufacturer's literature, when the ballast is 
operated with a reference lamp, 

11 MAXIMUM CURRENT IN ANY LEAD 
TO A CATHODE 

11.1 In normal operation at any supply voltage 
between 92 percent and 106 percent of the rated 
value, the current flowing in any one of the 
cathode terminations shall not exceed the value 
given on the relevant lamp data sheet. 

11.2 The measurmcnt is made with an oscilloscope 
or another suitable device. The measurements 
shall be made with a reference lamp at all contact 
to the cathodes. 

12 CURRENT WAVEFORM 

12.1 Supply Current Waveform 

The requirements and limits specified in this 
clause are applicable to electronic ballast intended 
to be connected to ac supplies up to and including 
1 100 volts at 50 Hz. 

The harmonics of the input current for self- 
ballasted lamps, semi'iuminaires and luminaires 
measured shall not exceed the limits given in 
Table 1 with the following exceptions. 

Table 1 Limits of Harmonics Current 

( Clauses 12.1, 12.1.1, 12.1.4 and 12.1.5 ) 



12.1.2 Where these components have not been 
approved separately or do not comply, the lumi- 
naire itself shall be tested and shall comply. 

12.1.3 The test is carried out in accordance with 
the requirements of A-2 of Annex A. 

12.1.4 For luminaires, where the ballasts of the 
H-mark category are permitted, the harmonics 
shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 1 or 
Table 2, as appropriate. 

Table 2 Limits of Harmonics Current 



Hftrmonic Order 

n 


Mazimnin Value Expressed 

»s a % of the Funilamentsl 

Gnrrent of the Lnxninaire 


2 


5 


3 


30 X* 


5 


7 


7 


4 


9 


3 


n < n < 39t 


2 



Harmonic Order 

n 




Maximum Value Expressed 

as a % of the Fundamental 

Current of the Luminaire 


2 




5 


3 




37 X* 


> 5 




Not limited 


♦X is the circuit 


power 


factor. 



•X is the circuit power factor. 

fFor luminaires having a non-electronic ballast, the 
harmonics of these orders need not be checked. 

12.1.i If separate tests with reference lamps have 
proved that ballasts for fluorescent lamps comply 
with the requirements as given in Table 1, the 
luminaire is deemed to comply with these require- 
ments and need not be checked. Manufacturers 
should indicate whether or not the ballast under 
test should be subjected to the following test. 



12.1.5 The ballast shall be operated at its rated 
voltage with a reference lamp or lamps. After 
lamp stabilization, the waveform of the supply 
current shall be such that the harmonic shall 
not exceed the limits given in Table 1. 

12.2 Lamp Operating Current Waveform 

The test is carried out in accordance with the 
requirements of A-2 of Annex A. 

12.2*1 The ballast shall be operated with a refe- 
rence lamp or lamps at its rated voltage. After 
lamp stabilization, the waveform of the lamp 
current shall comply with the following condi- 
tions: 

a) In every successive half-cycle, the envelop- 
ing wave of the lamp current shall not 
differ by more than 4 percent at the same 
time after phase zero passage of the mains 
supply voltage. 

NOTE — The purpose of this requirement is to 
avoid the inconsistency of the wave shape of the 
enveloping wave from half mains cycle to half 
mains cycle; and 

b) The maximum ratio of peak value to rms 
value shall not exceed 97 individual high- 
frequency crest factor, 

12.2.2 In the case where the high-frequency is 
modulated at mains frequency, the maximum 
lamp current crest factor for the modulated enve- 
lope should not exceed 1*7. 

NOTE — High frequency current crest factor is equal 
to peak current of the modulated or unmodulated 
envelope divided by the effective rms current. 

13 MAGNETIC SCREENING 

13.1 Ballasts shall be efTcctively screened against 
magnetic influence of adjacent ferromagnetic 
materials* 



IS 13021 ( Part 9 ) 1 199X 



13.2 Compliance is checked by the following test: 

The ballast is operated at rated voltage with an 
appropriate lamp. After stabilization, a steel plate 

1 mm thick and of length and breadth greater 
than those of the ballast under test is successively 
placed in direct contact with the bottom plate of 
the ballast and at a distance of 1 mm from each 
face of the latter. During this operation, the lamp 
current is measured and this shall not change by 
more than 2 percent due to the presence of the 
steel plate. 

14 IMPEDANCE OF AUDIO-FREQ^UENCIES 

14.1 Ballasts marked with the audio-frequency 
symbol ( see 5,1 ) is tested using one of the circuits 
shown in A-3 of Annex A. 

14.2 For every signal frequency between 400 Hz 
and 2 000 Hz, and with a signal voltage equal to 
3 '5 percent of the rated supply voltage of the 
ballast, the impedance of the ballast, when ope- 
rated with a reference lamp supplied at its rated 
voltage and frequency, shall be inductive and at 
least equal to value to the resistance which would 
dissipate the same power as the lamp/ballast 
combination in question when it is supplied at its 
rated voltage and frequency. 

14.3 Between 250 Hz and 400 Hz, the impedance 
shall be at least equal to half the minimum value 
required for frequencies between 400 Hz and 

2 000 Hz. 

NOTE — Radio interference suppressors consisting of 
capacitors of less than 0'2 ^F ( total value ) which 
may be incorporated in the ballast may be disconnected 
for this test, 

15 MAINS TRANSIENT OVERVOLTAGE 

15.1 Mains transients of either polarity, randomly 
phased and superimposed on the mains voltage, 
as specified below, shall not disturb the intended 
functioning of the equipment or lead to damage. 
Direct influence of lighting on the mains distribu- 
tion has not been taken into account. 



15.2 The test is carried out in accordance with 
the requirements of A-5 of Annex A. 

15.3 Voltages apply to the unloaded generator. 

15.4 Pulses to be applied in symmetrical, different 
tial or series mode ( that is, from phase to neutral 
or from phase to phase ) and in asymmetrical or 
common mode ( that is, from phase and neutral 
or phase to system ground and/or protective 
earth ), 

16 OPERATIONAL TESTS FOR ABNORMAL^ 
CONDITIONS 

16.1 Removal of Lamp(s) 

During operation of the ballast at rated voltage 
+ 10 percent and in association with the appro- 
priate lamp(s), the lamp(s) is(are) disconnected 
for 1 h from the ballast without switching off the 
supply voltage. At the end of this period the 
lamp(s) is (are) reconnected and shall start and 
operate normally at least after line re-switch on. 

16.2 Lamp Fails to Start 

With an appropriate dummy cathode resistor 
specified on the relevant data sheet connected in 
place of each lamp cathode, the ballast shall be 
operated at rated voltage +10 percent for 1 h. 
At the end of this period, the resistor is removed 
and the appropriate lamp(s) is (are) connected 
and shall start and operate normally at least after 
line re-switch on. 

17 ENDURANCE 

17.1 Before the test, the ballast shall be subjected' 
to a temperature cycling and open-circuit switch- 
ing test, as follows: 

a) The ballast shall be stored first at the 
lower limit of the ambient temperature for 
1 h. The temperature is then raised to t^ 
for 1 h. Five such temperature cycles shall 
be carried out; and 

b) At rated supply voltage, the ballast shall 
be switched on and off each for 30 s. This 
cycle shall be repeated 1 000 times with 
the output terminals open. 



Amplitude 


Rise 
Time 


Pulse 

Width 


Source 
Impedance 


Reception 
Rate 


Energy 
Max 


Slow high energy 












Asymmetric 

3 000 V 


300 ns 


50^8 


45 Q 


160 m» 
( 1/8 mains* frequency ) 


2J 


Symmetric 
I 000 V 


500 ns 


SOitiS 


5Q 


160 ms 
( 1/8 mains* frequency ) 


2J 


Fast low energy 












Asymmetric 
2 500 V 


5 ns 


100 ns 


50 Q 


1/5 mains frequency 


2mJ 


^Minimum puli 


se repetition 


rate 1/10 Hz. 









IS 13021 ( Pmrt 2 ) I 1991 



17*2 The ballast shall than be operated with an 

Svpropriate lamp at rated supply voltage and at 
c ambient temperature which produce t^ until 
a test period of 200 h has passed. At the end of 
this time, and after cooling down to room tem- 
perature, the ballast shall start and .operate 



correctly an appropriate lamp for 15 min. 

17.2.1 During this test, the lamps are placed 
outside the test enclosure at an ambient tempera- 
ture of 25**C ± 5°C. 



ANNEX A 
( Clauses 4.4, 7.1, 12-1-3, 12.2, 14.1 and 15.2 ) 

METHODS OF TESTS 



A-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Tests according to this standard are type tests. 
One sample shall be submitted to all tests. 

NOTE — The requirements and tolerances permitted 
by this standard are related to testing of a type test 
sample submitted for that purpose. In principle this 
type test sample should consist of units having charac- 
teristics typical of the manufacturers production and 
be as close to the production centre point as possible. 

It may be expected that with the tolerances given in 
the standard, products manufactured in accordance 
with the type test sample will ensure compliance with 
the standard for the majority of the production. Due to 
the production spread, it is inevitable, however, that 
there may be products outside the specified tolerances. 
For guidance of sampling plans and procedures for 
inspections by attributes. 

A-1.1 Ambient Temperature 

Tests shall be made in a draught free room and 
at an ambient temperature within the range 20*^0 
to 27°C. 

A-1. 1.1 For those tests which require constant lamp 
performance the ambient temperature around 
the lamp shall be within the range 23°G to 27°G 
and shall not vary be more than l^'G during the 
test. 

A-1.2 Supply Voltage and Frequency 

a) Test Voltage and Frequency — Unless otherwise 
specified, the ballast to be tested shall be 
operated at its design voltage and the 
reference ballast at its rated voltage and 
frequency. 

When a ballast is marked for use on a 
range of supply voltages or has different 
separate rated supply voltages, any voltage 
for which it is intended may be chosen as 
the rated voltage. 

b) Stability of Supply and Frequency — For the 
majority of the tests, the supply voltage 
and, where appropriate for the reference 
ballasts, the frequency shall be maintained 
constant within ±0*5 percent. However, 
during the actual measurement, the voltage 
shall be adjusted to within ±0*2 percent 
of the specified testing value. 



c) Supply Voltage Waveform — The total harmo- 
nic content of the supply voltage shall not 
exceed 3 percent. Harmonic contact being 
defined as the rms summation of the 
individual components using the funda- 
mental as 100 percent. 

A-1.3 Magnetic Effects 

Unless otherwise specified, no magnetic object 
shall be allowed within 25 mm of the face of the 
reference ballast or the ballast under test. 

A-1.4 Mounting and Connection of Reference 
LanEips 

In order to make the reference lamps repeat their 
electrical values with the greatest consistency, it 
is recommended that the lamps be mounted 
horizontally and allowed to remain permanently 
in their test lampholders. So far as the identifica- 
tion of ballast termmal shall permit, reference 
lamps should be connected in circuit maintaining 
the polarity of the connections used during ageing. 

A-1.5 Reference Lamp Stability 

a) A lamp shall be brought to a condition of 
stable operation before carrying out mea- 
surements. No swirling shall be present; and 

b) The characteristics of a lamp shall be 
checked immediately before and immedia- 
tely after each series of tests in accordance 
with Annex G. 

A- 1.6 Reference Ballast 

The reference ballast used shall be that indicated 
on the relevant lamp data sheet, 

A-1.7 Instrument Characteristics 

a) Potential Circuits — Potential circuits of ins- 
truments connected across the lamp shall 
not pass more than 3 percent of the 
nominal running current; 

b) Current Circuits — Instruments connected to 
series with the lamp shall have a sufficiently 
low impedance such that the voltage drop 
shall not exceed 2 percent of the objective 
lamp voltage. 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



Where measuring instruments are inserted 
into parallel heating circuits, the total 
impedance of the instruments shall not 
exceed 0'5 Q; and 

c) rms Measurements — Instruments shall be 
essentially free from errors due to waveform 
distortion alid shall be suitable for the 
operating frequencies. Care shall be taken 
to ensure that the earth capacitance of 
instruments docs not disturb the operation 
of the unit under test. It may be necessary 
to ensure that the measuring point of the 
circuit under test is at earth potential. 

A-2 MEASUREMENT OF THE CURRENT 
WAVEFORM 

A-2.1 The harmonic components in the mains 
current shall be determined by means of a selec- 
tive voltmeter or wave analyzer and the resister R 
introduced in the circuit shall be in accordance 
with A-1,7. 

A-2.2 The selective voltmeter or wave analyzer 
should ensure that measurements being made on 
any given harmonic are not significantly affected 
by other harmonics. 

A-2.3 The supply voltage distortion of maximum 
3 percent ( see A-1.2 ), shall be taken into account 
when evaluating the test results, in case of doubt 
a distortion-free supply shall be used. 

A-2.4 The peak value of lamp current shall be 
determined by means of a calibrated oscilloscope 
( see Fig. 4 ), 

A.3 MEASUREMENT OF IMPEDANCE AT 
AUDIO-FREQUENCIES 

A-3.1 The circuit in Fig. 5 illustrates a bridge for 
the determination of the audio-frequency impe- 
dance ^ of the lamp/ballast assembly. 

A-3.2 Let R' and i?" represent the values of the 
resistors shown in the circuit diagram by the 
values of 5 Q and 200 000 ii respectively ( the 
latter at least not being critical ), When by 
adjustments ofR and C, a balance is obtained for 
a given audio-frequeney selected on the wave 
analyzer ( or any other suitable selective director ) 
we have, in general: 

If the resistors R' and R" have precisely the indi- 
cated values, the equation becomes: 



^= io«(^+>c) 



where : 



A == Supply transformer 50 Hz to 60 Hz 
( seeFig. 5 ); 



B = Larop-ballast assembly under test ( see 
Fig. 5 ); 

^i = Impedance of value sufficiently high for 
50 Hz to 60 Hz sufficiently low for 250 
Hz to 2 000 Hz ( for example, resistance 
15 Q + capacitance 16 yt^F ); and 

^f «= Impedance of value sufficiently low for 
50 Hz to 60 Hz sufficiently high for 250 
Hz to 2 000 ( for example, inductance 

20 mH ). 

NOTE — The impedance Z2 and/oT Zi are not 
necessary if the corresponding source has a low 
internal impedance for the .currents, of the 
other. 

A-4 MEASUREMENT OF CURRENT 
CONTROLLED PREHEAT STARTING 

A'4«l Test Equipment 

The test circuit shall be arranged containing the 
ballast under test, the electrode substitution resis- 
tors ( Ro ) specified on the relevant lamp data 
sheet and a measuring device, 

A-4.2 The measuring device could be an oscillo- 
scope provided with a voltage and/or current 
probe I see Fig. 6 ). 

A-4. 3 If a ballast is intended for operating more 
than one lamp, in parallel circuit electrode substi- 
tution resistors shall be connected to all relevant 
contacts and measurements shall be taken at each 
substitution resistor respectively at each pair of 
substitution resistor representing a lamp succes- 
sively. If a ballast is intended for . operating two 
lamps in series circuits the measurement is carried 
out with the lamp cathodes of both lamps being 
replaced by cathode substitution resistors. If 
applicable connect the secondary output winding 
of the isolating transformer is included in the 
ballast, then an isolating transformer shall be 
inserted at the input side. The total open circuit 
voltage is then measured across both lamps. 

During preheat the open circuit voltage shall be 
equal or less than the specified voltage for one 
lamp. During ignition the open circuit voltage 
shall be geater than the minimum voltage specified 
on the lamp data sheet for two lamps in series. 
The voltage to the starting aid if any, shall comply 
with the specified voltage. 

A-4.4 Measurement 

With the aid or the measuring device, the heating 
current and open circuit voltage are determined 
in relation to time. 

A«4.4.1 For a steady state rms current, the effec- 
tive values of the heating current is determined 
by observation of one single HF period from 
which the effective value and the crest factor is 
determined. 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



BALLAST 
UNDER TEST 







O 



Q 



-CURRENT 
PROBE 



SELECTIVE VOLTMETER 
OR WAVE ANALYZER 

NOTE— The measuring device is connected to that output which is nearest to earth potential. Earthing of any 
output circuit is not necessary. 



Fig. 4 Measurement of Current Waveform 





SELECTIVE VOLTMETER 
OR WAVE ANALYZER 

NOTE — The value of 200 000 Q for one branch of the bridge is not critical. 

Fig. 5 Measurement of Impedance at Audio-Frequencies 



10 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



BALLAST 
UNDER TEST 




SUPPLY 



Fig. 6 Tjest Circuit Ballasts for Current- 
Controlled Preheat Starting Mode 

A-4.4.2 A direct measurement of the effective 
value might be possible with suitable instrumenta- 
tion. 

A-4.4.3 For a varying current, the effective value 
of the heating current is defined as such value 
which is equivalent to a steady state rms current 
of the some heating effect ( see Fig. 1 ). 

A«4.4.4 With the aid of the formula given on the 
lamp data sheets, the time to emission is calculat- 
ed ( j-e^ D-5.1.1.1 ). 

A*4.4.5 The determination of the effective value 
of the open circuit voltage is current out on 
analogy with the determination of the effective 
value of the current. 

A-5 TEST TRANSIENT OVERVOLTAGES 

A-5a An example of suitable equipment is Schaff- 
ner NSG 223 for the slow high energy pulses, 
NSG 222A for the fast low energy pulses, NSG 
200G ( for 220 V to 240 V and 50 Hz ) or NSG 
200D ( for 1 10 V to 120 V and 60 Hz ) ( dated 
1983 ) or equivalent equpment. 

A-5.1.1 For application, consult the manuals of 
the test equipment. 

A-5.2 Test of Slow High Energy Pulses 

a) Pulse Amplitude — 3 000 V in the asym- 
metrical mode and 1 000 V in the sym- 
metrical mode; 

b) Pulse Rise Time — 300 ns asymmetrical 
mode 150 ns symmetrical mode, pulse 
width approximately 50 s; 



c) Pulse phase position ; Pulse phase is con- 
tinuously changed from 80'' to 460** by 
slowly moving the knob from one extreme 
phase position to the other and slowly 
back during 1 min; 

d) Pulse Polarity — *+' and '-'; 

e) Pulse Repetition Time — Minimum 150 ms 
and maximum 1 s; 

f ) Equipment to be tested with most unfa- 
vourable control setting; and 

g) If possible, automatic pragrammes to be 
assisted. 

Check : On proper functions and the integrity of 
the components of the mains part of the 
equipment like the mains filter and the 
mains transformer. 

NOTES 

1 As a fast succession of high energy pulses 
may overload components in the ^mains part of 
the equipment, it is sometimes expedient to 
enlarge the pulse repetition time to at most 
10 &. 

2 As this test may degrade some components, 
for example, VDRs used as mains transients 
suppressors and triacs. the test report shall 
state the repetition time used and the number 
of pulses actually applied. The components of 
which is known that they are affected by this 
test shall be replaced. 

A-5.3 Test of Fast Low Energy Pulse 

a) Pulse Amplitude — 2 500 V in the asym- 
metrical mode; 

b) Pulse Rise Time — 5 ns, pulse width approxi- 
mately 100 ns; 

c) Pulse Phase Position — Pulse phase is conti- 
nuously changed from 80® to 460° by slowly 
moving the knob from one extreme phase 
position to the other and slowly back 
during 1 min; 

d) Pulse Polarity — ' + * and *— *; and 

e) Pulse Repetition Frequency — Approximately 
1/5 mains frequency. 

Check : On proper functioning and the integrity 
of the components of the mains part of 
the equipment like the mains filter and 
the mains transformer. 



11 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



ANNEX B 

( Clause 5.2 ) 

REFERENCE BALLASTS 



B-1 MARKING 

B-1.1 The reference ballast shall be provided 
with durable and legible marking as follows: 

a) The words 'reference ballast' or *HF 
reference ballast', as applicable in full; 

b) Identification of the responsible vendor; 

c) Serial number; 

d) Rate lamp wattage and calibration current; 
and 

e) Rated supply voltage and frequency. 



B-2 DESIGN GHARAGTERISTIGS 

B-2.1 General Design for Frequencies 
50 Hz to 60 Hz 



of 



A reference ballast is a self-inductive coil, with or 
without an additional resistor, designed to give 
the operating characteristics of B-3. 

B-2.1«l It may be used either in a circuit employ- 
ing a starter or, where applicable, in a circuit 
including separate power sources to heat the lamp 
cathode. 

B*2.2 HF Reference Ballast for Frequencies 
of 25 kHz 

An HF reference ballast is a resistor designed to 
give the operating characteristics of B-4. 

B-2.2.1 Since the type of HF reference ballast is 
intended to serve as a permanent baseline of 
reference, it is vitally important that the ballast 
be so constructed as to provide permanence of 
resistance under normal conditions of use. For 
this purpose, it may be provided with suitable 
means of resorting the reference resistance. 

B-2.2.2 A HF reference ballast shall be enclosed 
in a case for mechanical and electrical protection. 
Care should, however, be taken for proper con- 
duction of the dissipated wattage losses. 

B-2.3 Protection 

The ballast shall be protected, for example, by 
means of a suitable steel case, against magnetic 
influence in such a way that its ratio of voltage to 
current for the calibration current shall not be 
changed by more than 0*2 percent when a 
12'5 mm thick plate of ordinary mild steel is 
placed at 25 mm from any face of the ballast 
enclosure. 

B-2.3.1 Moreover, the ballast shall be protected 
against mechanicaj damage. 



B.3 OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS FOR 
FREQUENCIES OF 50 Hz 

B-3.1 Rated Supply Voltage and Frequency 

The rated supply voltage and frequency of a 
reference ballast shall be in accordance with the 
values given in IS 2418 ( Part 2 ) : 1977, on the 
relevant lamp data sheet, 

B-3.2 Ratio of Voltage to Current 

The ratio of voltage to current of a reference 
ballast shall have the value given in IS 2418 
( Part 2 ) : IS 77, on the relevant lamp data sheet 
subject to the following tolerances: 

a) ±0*5 percent at the calibration current 
value; and 

t>) ±3 percent at any other value of current 
from 50 percent to 115 percent of the 
calibrating current. 

B-3.3 Power Factor 

The power factor of the reference ballast deter- 
mined at the calibration current shall be as shown 
in IS 2418 ( Part 2 ) : 1977, on the relevant lamp 
data sheet, subject to tolerance of ±0*005. 

B-3.4 Temperature-Rise 

When the reference ballast is operated in an 
ambient air temperature of between 20°C and 
27 °G, calibration current at rated frequency, and 
after thermal stabilization, the temperature-rise 
of the ballast winding shall not exceed 25°C, 
when measured by the 'change in resistance' 
method. 

B-4 OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS FOR 
FREQUENCIES OF 25 kHz 

B-4.1 General 

The following specifications apply to nieasurements 
made at rated input voltage and rated frequency 
of the HF reference ballast and with a room 
temperature of 25° C ± 5''C and with stabilized 
temperature of the reference ballast. 

B-4.2 Impedance 

The impedance of a HF reference ballast shall 
have the value given on the relevant lamp data 
sheet in IS 2418 ( Part 2 ) : 1977, subjecttothe 
following tolerances: 

a) ±05 percent at the calibration current 
value; and 



12 



b) 1 percent at any other value of current 
from 50 percent to 115 percent of the 
calibration current. 

B-4.3 Series Inductance and Parallel Capaci- 
tance 

The series inductance of the reference resistor 
shall be less than 0*1 mH and its parallel capaci- 
tance shall be less than 1 nF, 

B-5 CIRCUIT FOR FREQUENCIES 

OF 25 kHz { Je^ Fig. 7 ) 

B-5.1 Cathode Heating 

HF reference ballast may be used in a circuit 
employing separate power sources to heat the 
lamp cathodes for proper starting of the lamp. 

.B>5.1.1 These power sources shall be disconnected 
^hen measuring a lamp. 



IS 13021 (Part 2): 1991 

B-5.2 Power Supply 

The HF voltage supply used for the adjustment of 
or test with the HF reference ballast shall be such 
that at full load the rms summation of the har- 
monic contents shall not exceed 3 percent of the 
fundamental component. 

B-5.2.1 It shall be as steady and free from sudden 
charges as possible. For test results, the voltage 
should be regulated to within 0*2 percent. The 
frequency shall be within 2 percent. 

B-5.3 Instruments 

All instruments used in HF reference ballast 
measurements should be suitable for high fre- 
quency operation. Details are under consideration. 

B.5.4 Wiring 

Connecting cables shall be as short and as straight 
as possible to avoid parasitic capacitance. 

B-5.4»l The parasitic capacitance parallel to the 
lamp shall be less than 1 nF. 



SINE 
GENERATOR 

r 

I 

I 



POWER 

AMPLIFIER: 




REFERENCE 
RESISTOR 

lEZT 



SUPPLY 



ISOLATING \ 

TRANSFORMER-^ 



T 




STARTING SWITCH- 



FiG. 7 HF Refemnce Circuit 

ANNEX G 

( Clause A-1.5 ) 

REFERENCE LAMPS 



•C-1 A lamp which has b^cn aged for at least 
100 h is considered to be a reference lamp if when 
associated with a reference ballast under the 
conditions as defined in Annex A and operating 
in an ambient temperature of 25**C, the lamp 
wattage, voltage at lamp terminals or lamp run- 
ning current do not deviate by more than 2'5 
percent from the corresponding objective or 
nominal values, as appropriate, given in IS 2418 
-( Part 2 ) : 1977. 

C.2 For lamps operated wirhom starter, it is also 
required that the resistance of the cathodes shall 
jaot differ from the objective values for the type 



of lamp by more than 10 percent. If the resistance 
is higher, it may be reduced by using a shunt 
resistor. 

C-3 A reference lamp of a type suitable for the 
ballast under test shall always be used, 

C-4 The waveform of the current passed by a 
stabilized reference lamp associated with a refe- 
rence ballast shall show substantially the same 
waveform in successive half-cycles. 

NOTE ^- This limits the possible generation of even 
harmonics by any rectifying efTect. 



13 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) i 1991 

ANNEX D 

( Clause 7.0 ) 

EXPLANATION OF STARTING CONDITIONS 



D.1 INTRODUCTION 

D-1.1 The requirements for starting conditions 
given in 7 and the associated data given in lamp 
data sheets in corresponding Indian Standards 
have been specified to encompass the different 
lamp starting methods v^rhich may be employed 
by electronic ballasts. 

D-1.2 As these starting methods may be more 
complex than those* of conventional 50 Hz to 
60 Hz circuits, this Annex is provided to assist the 
interpretation of the requirements of this publica- 
tion and of the data specified on lamp data sheets, 

D-2 CHARACTERISTICS WHICH AFF£CT 
LAMP STARTING 

D-^,0 There are five main physical characteristics 
which influence the starting mechanism of a 
fluorescent lamp: 

D-2.1 Cathode H^Ating 

Preheat current and time of application. 
D-2.2 Open Circuit Voltage 

Voltage across lamp and to starting aid both 
during preheating and at the moment of lamp 
ignition. 

D-2.3 Environmental Conditions 

Ambient temperature, relative humidity. 
D-2.4 Lamp Physical Conditions 

Type of filling gas and its pressure, lamp dimen- 
sions, the inclusion of an internal conducting film. 

D-2.5 Supply and Lnminaire Conditions 

Operating frequency, starting aid dimensions and 
spacing. 

All of these characteristics interact with each other 
in a complex manner and if the current combina- 
tion is not obtained for a chosen method of 
starting, poor lamp performance may result ( for 
example, reduced lamp life, reduced number of 
starting Cycles for a given lamp life, excessive end 
blackening of the lamp ) , 

D-3 PRINCIPAL METHODS OF LAMP 
STARTING 

D-*3.I Traditionally, there have been two princi- 
pal methods of starting fluorescent lamp associated 
with 50 H z to 60 Hz ballasts, preheated cathode 
starting and non-preheated cathode starting. 

D-3.2 Both of these methods may be used with 
electronic ballasts, but due to the higher techno- 
logical feature that may be built into electronic 



ballasts revised methods of specifying, measuring, 
and assessing the starting characteristics often 
have to be adopted. 

D-3.3 Although electronic ballasts may produce 
lamp starting conditions in a more complex way 
than coventional 50 Hz to 60 Hz ballasts, the 
same principles still apply if good lamp perfor- 
mance is to be obtained, 

D"4 PARTICULAR METHODS OF LAMP 
STARTING 

D-4.1 Preheat Starting 

Two basic methods of providing preheat cathode 
lamp starting are normally used, these being 
either: 

a) Cathode current control of preheating, or 

b) Cathode voltage control of preheating. 

D-4.2 With both of these methods, the following 
requirements shall be satisfied during the starting 
period if satisfactory lamp performance is to be 
obtained: 

a) Prior to cathodes reaching emission, open 
circuit voltages across the lamp and/or from 
lamp to starting aid shall be kept below 
the level which causes cathode damaging 
lamp glow currents; 

b) After cathodes have reached emission, 
open circuit voltages shall be adequate to 
start the lamp quickly and without repeat- 
ed starting attempts; 

c) If open circuit voltages have to be elevated 
to achieve lamp starting, once cathodes 
have reached emission, the transition from 
low to high open circuit voltage shall occur 
while the cathodes are still at emission 
temperature; and 

d) During the cathode preheating period, the 
heating current or voltage shall not be so 
excessive that the emissive material on the 
cathodes is damaged by overheating. 

D-4.3 As the required open circuit voltages for 
preheat starting arc relatively low, multi-lamp 
series circuits may be utilized for some type of 
lamps. 

D-4.4 In such a scheme, starting capacitor(s) are 
sometimes employed to shunt part of the combi- 
nation of lamps while full open circuit voltage is 
applied to the unshunted lamp. The size of the 
starting capacitor relates to the potentially 
troublesome glow current during the initial phase 
of starting. Attention must be paid to balance 



14 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) : 1^91 



starting capacitor size with ease of starting and 
other lamp and ballast performance attributes. 

D-4.5 Non-preheat Starting 

This method of lamp starting takes advantage of 
the field emission that occurs at the unhealed 
cathodes of a lamp when a high open circuit 
voltage is instantaneously applied across the 
lamp. 

D-4.6 The level of open circuit voltage and the 
source impedance of the ballast determines the 
time, it takes for the lamp to pass through the 
glow current stage of the discharge to the lull arc 
state, 

D-4.7 One of the major reasons for excessive lamp 
and blackening and subsequent early lamp failure 
is due to unduly high and/or long lasting glow 
discharge current during the starting process. To 
minimise the damaging effects of the glow dis- 
charge current, it is necessary to ensure that a 
minimum value of open circuit voltage is provided 
and that the ballast has the ability to 'drive' the 
lamp rapidly through this phase without making 
repeated attempts at lamp starting which extend 
for greater than 100 ms. 

D-4*8 Some ballasts may make use of currents in 
the lamp cathodes for purpose other than ade- 
quate cathode heating ( for example, for support- 
ing starting with reduced starting voltages). In 
these instances, the limitations on maximum 
cathode current shall be observed to avoid cathode 
over heating. 

D.5 INTERPRETATION OF THE 
REQUIREMENTS OF 6 AND THE 
INFORMATION GIVEN ON LAMP DATA 
SHEETS 

D-5.1 Preheat Starting 

D-5.1.1 Ballasts Using Current Controlled Preheating 

D-5.1.1.1 Effective heating current and emission time 

(te) 

The amount of heat necessary to bring a given 
cathode type to the minimum emission tempera- 
ture may be stated in terms of time, current and 
a constant which is determined by the physical 
properties of that given cathode type. 

This relationship may be expressed by the 
following equation: 

'*" ( in* - «m' ) 

where 

te •= Time to emission { seconds ) == > 0*4s*; 
a = Constant for specific cathode type; 

* Emission times lesg than 0*4 s are normally not 
acceptable because experience has shown that satisfac- 
tory cathode preheating is not always achievable in 
practice. 



fjc = Minimum effective heating current neces- 
sary to time te (A); and 

im ■= Absolute minimum value of effective 
heating current (A) to achieve emission 
if application time is of a sufficiently long 
duration { for example, > 30 s from 
cold ). 

The values of constant a and the absolute 
minimum current ( t'm ) arc given on each relevant 
lamp data sheet, together with the value of the 
cathode substitution resistor. 

The minimum value of effective heating current 
( ifc ) may be calculated by substituting the 
measured value of t^ into the equation given on 
each lamp data sheet. 

Maximum Value of Effective Heating Current 

Empirical evidence has shown that a relatively 
high effective heating current may be applied for 
a short time ( < 0*4 s ) without cathode damage 
occurring, but that this high level of current shall 
be progressively reduced for times greater than 
04 s, until at 20 s and longer the level should 
not exceed a value which is significantly different 
from those values already established for 50 Hz 
glow starter circuit practice. 

Maximum levels of effective heating current are 
given on relevant lamp data sheet together with 
the value of substitution resistor required for the 
test. 

A schematic representation of these requirements 
is given in Fig, 8. 

D-5.1.1.2 Open circuit voltages and transition time 

it.) 

The data in the relevant lamp data sheets is 
given for systems that require the use of a starting 
aid for systems that do not require a starting aid. 

It is essential that the correct system is identified 
before testing comments. 

When open circuit voltages are elevated at time 
te, the transition time { te) shall be kept below 
100 ms if cathode heating is terminated at time te- 
Transition time of greater than 100 ms are accep- 
table provided cathode are kept at emission during 
the transition time. 

As the lamp cathodes shall have been brought to 
emission during time te, it is only necessary to 
ensure that the effective heating current does not 
fall below the absolute minimum value ( i^ ) 
during the transition ( lamp ) starting phase. 

The maximum value of open circuit voltage prior 
to time te being reached, and the minimum value 
of open circuit voltage after te is reached are 
specified on the relevant lamp data sheets. 



IS 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ): 1991 



t max- 

EFFECTIVE 

HEATING 

CURRENT 

ik WHEN 




\ MAXIMUM EFFECTIVE HEATING 
\ CURRENT TO ANY TIME I 


te=0-^s 
ABSOLUTE 


^s^ MINIMUM EFFECTIVE HEATING 
^*^^;;i£URRENT LIMIT TO TIME te 


MINIMUM 1m 






0-A 


t(SECONDS)— ^ 



Fig. 8 Cathode Heating Current Requirements for Current Controlled Ballasts 



For some lamp types, the relevant lamp data 
sheets specify values of maximum open circuit 
voltage prior to time ^e being reached which are 
higher than, or the same as, the minimum values 
of open circuit voltage specified after time te has 
been reached. Ballast designed for these lamp 
types do not necessarily have to elevate the open 
circuit voltage to start these lamps correctly. 

A schematic representation of these requirements 
is given in Fig. 2. 

D-5«1.2 Ballast Using Voltage Controlled Preheating 

D-5.1.2.1 rms voltage and application time 

Although the control of current is the fundamen- 
tal method of controlling cathode preheating 
conditions, the voltage method is simple to specify 
and easy to measure. 

For the voltage control method appropriate 
cathode voltages, but to achieve emission tempe- 
rature and to avoid excessive temperature may be 
determined empirically. 

It has been shown that the emission temperature 
of a cathode occurs when cathode voltage levels 
exceed the following and are applied for a mini- 
mum time of 0*4 s: 



a) Low resistance cathodes 

b) High resistance cathodes 



3-0 V rms, and 
6-0 V rms. 



To avoid excessive cathode temperature, other 
limits are imposed. 

Transverse arcing occurs across all cathodes when 
the applied voltage exceeds 10 V rms and for low 
resistance cathodes a limit on the maximum 
applied voltage has been determined experimen- 
tally in relation to other lamp performance 
criteria. This limiting value is usually set below 
the transverse arcing level, but it is permissible to 
allow transverse arcing if precautions are taken to 
ensure that excessive currents do not flow in the 



cathode heating circuits which shall damage the 
cathode or ballast . 

There are different lamp operating modes for lamps 
usin^ low resistance cathodes. It is permissible to 
use a value of preheating cathodes voltage which 
is maintained during lamp operation, however, 
alternative systems may reduce this voltage after 
lamp starting. 

Data which cover all of these requirements, are 
given on the relevant lamp data sheets. 

D-5. 1.2.2 Open circuit voltages 

If the value of the lamp open circuit voltage, 
before the time of cathode thermal emission is 
reached, is lower than the value where cold start- 
ing is possible, then simultaneous application of 
cathode preheat and lamp voltage is allowable. 
Although electronic ballast circuits may offer 
several voltage control options, the principle of 
keeping lamp voltage below the cold starting level 
until thermal emission is achieved still applies. 

For these ballasts only the maximum and mini- 
mum values of open circuit voltage shall be 
observed. These values are shown on the relevant 
lamp data sheet under 'Pre-starting conditions 
— voltage preheating of cathodes\ 

For ballasts where open circuit voltages are elevat- 
ed after cathode emission is attained, the values 
of open circuit voltage shown on the relevant 
data sheet under *Prc-starting condition — Current 
preheating of cathodes' shall be observed. In this 
case te has been taken as 0*4 s. 

Starung by this method usually requires the 
presence of an electrical earth ( grounds ) plane, 
the starting aid for all lamps except the internal 
starting aid lamp>s. A minimum value of peak 
voltage ( Fp ) shall be developed between the 
cathode and the starting aid as well as the neces- 
sary voltage across the lamp ( V^). Circuit 



1( 



IS 13021 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



operating frequency affects these voltage values as 
increasing frequency lowers the Vp requirement 
and increases the Fa requirement in most cases. 
Use of an internal conductive coating on the lamp 
may significantly increase the V^ value at high 
frequency. The proximity of the external starting 
aid dis^^ance increases starting voltage require- 
ments. A minimum starting aid distance should 
be observed to avoid high starting aid currents. 

D-5.2 Non-preheat Starting 

D-5.2.1 Open circuit voltage measurement alone 
does not necessarily ensure that a ballast shall 
start a lamp cleanly and with the required mini- 
mal glow current period. Some ballasts are 
initially unable to supply the current necessary to 
drive the lamp quickly through the glow state and 
into the arc state. 

D-5.2.2 To avoid this situation, a ballast impe- 
dance test is made with a lamp substitution 
resistors. 



D-5.2.3 Values of lamp substitution resistor and 
the minimum current level which shall be obtained 
in this resistor are shown on the relevant lamp 
data sheet. 

D-6 MEASUREMENT REQUIREMENTS 

D-6,1 As the present and starting characteristics 
of electronic ballasts do not necessarily provide 
steady state voltages and currents, it is necessary 
to apply measuring devices and techniques which 
shall cope with these conditions. 

D-6.2 The term ^effective heating current' has 
been used to describe the heating effect to time t 
which should result from a varying current and 
which is equivalent to a steady state rms current 
of the same heating effect ( see Fig. 1 ). 

D-6.3 Specialized measuring equipment is now 
readily available which shall give instant read-out 
of the required information, or more conventional 
equipment may be used together with manual 
computation of the data. 



17 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Boreau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote^ harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods ^nd attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
^nt to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. ETD 23 (3219) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Ofl&cesj 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zdfar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35.C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T, Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

(311 01 31 
(331 13 75 

37 86 62 

53 38 43 

235 02 16 

6 32 92 95 



Branches lAHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD. JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
PATNA, SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, 



Printed at Doc lUy Printers, New Delhi. Indi* 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 1993 

TO 

IS 13021 (Part 2) .1991 AC SUPPLIED ELECTRONIC 

BALLASTS FOR TUBULAR FLUORESCENT LAMPS — 

SPECIFICATION 

PART 2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

( Page 10, Fig. 5 ) — Substitute 'Za' for 'Zi' against the impedance shown 
for generator circuit. 



(ETD23) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 APRIL 1994 

TO 

IS 13021(Part2): 1991 ac SUPPLIED ELECTRONIC 

BALLASTS FOR TUBULAR FLUORESCENT LAMPS — 

SPECIFICATION 

PART 2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

( Second cover page. Foreword, para 1 ) — Inserl the loiiowing addlional 
paras alter para 1: 

'The ballasts covered under this standard are intended to operate lamps at 
xarious trequencies including high frequencies. Attention is drawn to the fact 
that operating frequencies below 20 kHz may cause audio noise disturbances, 
whereas frequencies above 50 kHz may increase radio interference problems. 

Some lamps may be specifically designed for high frequency operation on high 
frequency ballasis. The starting modes, preheat and non preheat are described. 

Non - The i\)ssibiiil\ exists for operallon of lamps designed for perfect starting on 
circuits of the non preheat type. Lamps specified for otx-ration on both types of circuits 
may appear in IS 2418 (Part l):l977andIS 24lS(Part 2):1977 or lamp manufacturer wili 
ha\ e to authorize such operation of (heir lamps. 

In order to obtain satisfactory performance of fluorescent lamps and electronic 
ballast, it is necessary that certain features of their design be properly 
coordinated. It is essenliaj[, therefore, that specifications for these be written in 
terms ol ineasurement made against some common baseline of reference, which 
must be reasonable, permanent and reproducible. 

These conditions may be fulfilled by reference ballasts. Moreover the testing of 
ballasts t(tr lluorescent lamps will, in general, be made with reference lamps, and 
in particular, \}y comparing results obtained on such lamps with ballasts to be 
tested and with a reference ballast. 

Whereas the reference ballast for frequencies of 50 Hz is a self inductive coil, the 
high frequency reference ballast is a resistor because of the impedance of 
frequency and the back of influence of parasitic capacitance.' 

( Puge 1, clause 2.1 ) — Inset the following at the end: 

IS No. Title 

10321 (Pan Ijiiy*^)! ac Supplied electronic ballast fortubular fluorescent 

lamps: Part 1 general and safety requirements 

1 



[ Page 2, clause 5.2 (a) line 2 ) — Substitute 'or' for 'of. 

( Page 2, clause 6, T/z/e ) — Replace the title with 'General Requirem 
in place of 'General Statement'. 

( Page 5, clause 73.1, para 1 ) — Insert the following para after the first 
para. 

Tor lamps not covered by IS 2418 (Part 2) :1977, the peak value of open circuit 
voltage shall not exceed 700 V.' 

( Page 5, clause 132, para 1 ) — Insert the following para at the end: 

Tor lamps not covered by IS 2418 (Part 2) :1977, the value of substitution 
resistor declared by the manufacturer shall be used.' 

( Page 5, clause 7.3.3.1 ) — Insert the following at the end: 

'For lamps not covered by IS 2418(Part 2) :1977, the value of substitution 
resistor declared by the manufacturer shall be used.' 

( Page 5, clause 73.3.1, line 6, formula ) — Substitute '/?i' for 'i?o'. 

( Page 7, clause 15.1, Informal Table ) — Insert the following note in this 
table at the end: 

'In case of equipment schaffners NSG 223 A the rise time for slow high energy 
transient type/level mav be taken as 500 ns for ASY 3 000 V and 100 ns for 
SYMIOOO V.' 

( Page 7, clause 16.2 ) — Insert the following para at the end. 

'For lamps not covered by IS 2418 (Part 2) :1977, the value of dummy cathode 
resistor declared by the manufacturer shall be used.' 

( Page 8, clause 17.2.1 ) — Insert the following new clause after this clause: 

' 18 SAFETY KEQUIKEMEN IS 

18.1 The ballast shall meet the safety requirements as given in 7 to 19 of IS 
13021 (Part 1) : 1991.' 



( ETD 23 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



