**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088 : 1985 

WR^f)W HM4> ^ Reaffirmed 2004 ) 






Indian Standard 

LIQUID FLOW MEASUREMENT IN OPEN 

CHANNELS — VELOCITY-AREA METHODS — 

COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF DATA FOR 

DETERMINATION OF ERRORS IN 

MEASUREMENT 



ICS 17.120.20 



© BIS 1998 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1998 Price Group 9 



Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee, RVD 1 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 1088 : 1985 'Liquid flow measurement in open channels 
— Velocity-area methods — Collection and processing of data for determination of errors in measurement' 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on the recommendation of Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Coimmitee (RVD 1) and approval 
of the River Valley Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as 'Indian 
Standard' . 

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standard, the current practice is to use 
a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 



CROSS REFERENCES 

In this standard the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective places the 
following: 



International Standard 

ISO 748 : 1979 Liquid flow 
measurement in open channels — 
Velocity area methods 

ISO 772 : 1988 Liquid flow 
measurement in open channels — 
Vocabulary and symbols 



ISO 4363 : 1993 Liquid flow 
measurement in open channels 
Methods for measurement of 
suspended sediment 



Indian Standard 

IS 1192 : 1981 Velocity area 
methods for measurement of 
flow of water in open channels 
(first revision) 

IS 1191 : 1971 Glossary of terms 
and symbols used in connection 
with the measurement of liquid 
flow with a free surface 
(first revision) 

IS 4890 : 1968 Method for 
measurement of suspended 
sediment in open channels 



Degree of Correspondence 

Identical with some 
elucidations in Indian 
Standard 



Based on earlier version of 
ISO 772 



Not identical 



The following International Standards have also been referred to for which there are no corresponding Indian 
Standards but they may be acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 



ISO 4364; 1977 
ISO 5 1 68 : 1978 



Liquid flow measurement in open channels — Bed material sampling 
Measurement of fluid flow — Estimation of uncertainty of a flow-rate measurement 



ISO/TR 7 1 78 : 1 983 Liquid flow measurement in open channels 
of total error 



Velocity-area methods — Investigation 



IS 14573 :1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



Indian Standard 

LIQUID FLOW MEASUREMENT IN OPEN 

CHANNELS — VELOCITY-AREA METHODS — 

COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF DATA FOR 

DETERMINATION OF ERRORS IN 

MEASUREMENT 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies a standard basis for the 
collection and processing of data for the determination of in- 
dividual components of the total error in the measurement of 
liquid flow in open channels by velocity-area methods. 

For determining the discharge in open channels by the velocity- 
area method, components of the flow need to be measured. 
The total uncertainty in discharge is a combination of the 
uncertainties in these components. This International Standard 
specifies a standard basis for collecting and processing the data 
required to compute the component uncertainties for determin- 
ing the total uncertainty in discharge.. This International 
Standard may be used when carrying out an investigation of 
component uncertainties from data taken from a large sample 
of rivers in a basin or in a country or for international investi- 
gations. 



2 References 

ISO 748, Liquid flow measuramant in open channafs — 
Velocity-area methods. 

ISO 772, Liquid flow measuramant in open channels — 
Vocabulary and symbols. 

ISO 4363, Liquid flow measurement in open channels — 
Methods for measurement of suspended sediment. 

ISO 4364, Liquid flow measurement in open channels — Bed 
material sampling. 

ISO 5168, Measurement of fluid flow — Estimation of un- 
certainty of a flow-rate measurement. 

ISO/TR 7178, Liquid flow measurement in open channels — 
Velocity-area methods — Investigation of total error. 



3 General 

3.1 Principle 

The prkiciple of the vetocfty-area method consists in determin- 
ing from measurements the distribution of the flow velocity in 
the cross-section and the cross-sectional area, and using these 
observations for the computation of the discharge. 

The measurements of the flow velocity are made in a number of 
verticals. In each vertical the mean velocity is determined from 
measurements at a selected number of points. The discharge 
p0r unit widthmay be found by multiplying the mean velocity 
by the depth in the vertical considered. 

Each vertical is assumed to be representative of a segment of 
the cross-sectional area. The selection of the number and 
location of the verticals determines the width of these 
segnwnts. Assuming that the discharge has remained constant 
during the measurements, summation of the discharge in the 
various segments gives the total discharge through the section. 

3.2 Occurrence of error 

When measuring w'Idth, depth and flow velocity, errors occur. 
The application of certain computational methods also intro- 
duces errors depending on the assumptions made. 

A distinction shall be made between random and systematic 
errors, resulting from the instruments used, the measuring 
procedures and the processing of data. Random errors are also 
influenced by the nature of turbulent flow. The magnitude of 
random errors can be Influenced favourably by the proper 
selection of instruments and methods. Systematic errors may 
be constant or variable and they cannot be eliminated by 
repeating the measurements or by increasing the duration of a 
measurement. There are, in addition, mistakes due to 
misreading an instrument or to instrument malfunction. 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



3.3 Sources of error (see figure 1) 
Theoretically the discharge 

q = \ \ v{x,y)dxdy 
where 

q Is the unobservable true discharge; 

A is the cross-sectiorul area; 

V {x, y) is the velocity field over width, x, and depth, y 
In practice, the integral is approximated by the summation 



(1) 



G = 2 *''''''' 



(2J 



im 1 

where 

Q is the calculated discharge; 

bi is the width of the i^ section; 

df is the depth of the i^ section; 

Vj is the mean velocity In the /th vertical; 

m Is the number of sections. 
The error in Q is due to 

a) «rrors in the nrteasurement of the quantities bj, dj and of 
the individual measurements of the flow velocity necessary 
for the determination of Vj, and 

b) the approximation of the integral (1) by t^ie sum- 
mation (2). 



3.4 Determination of tlie individual coniponents 
of the error 

3.4.1 Errors in width 

The measurement of the width between verticals is normally 
made by measuring distances from a reference point on the 
bark. When a tape or tag-line is used, or the movement of the 
wire attached to a trolley is oktserved, the error depends on the 
distance but is usually negligible. Where optical means are 
used, the errors also depend on the distance measured but may 
be greater. 

Where the distance is measured by electronic means, a con- 
stant error and an error depending on the distance measured 
occur. 

The errors are mainly instrument errors. 

3.4.2 Errors in depth 

In ISO 748, clause 10, a number of sources of error in the 
measurement of depth is mentioned. 

Some errors depend on the type and use of the instruments 
applied. Such errors vt not included in this International 
Standard. 

Errors arise due to the interpolation of the depth between the 
verticals at which depths are measured. These are included in 

3.4.3 c) as "error-type III". 

3.4.3 Errors In determination of ttie mean velocity 

These errors consist of three components : 

a) The error due to the restricted measuring time of the 
local point-velocity in each vertical. Because of turbulence 
the velocity fluctuates continuously over the wet cross- 
section. The mean velocity at any point, determined from a 



y 




Figure 1 — Definition slcetch 



IS 14573 : 1MB 
ISO 1088:19BS 



measurement during a certain time interval, is an approxi- 
mation of the tnja mean velocity at that particular point. In 
this International Standard, errors of this nature are referred 
to as "error-type i"''. 

b) The error arising from the use of a limited number of 
sampling points in a vertical. Computation of the mean 
velocity in a vertical as an average or a weighted average of 
a number of point velocities results in an approximation of 
the true mean velocity in the vertical considered. In this 
International Standard, errors of this nature are referred to 
as "error-type 11" T. 

c) The error arising from the restricted number of verticals 
in which velocities are measured. The horizontal velocity 
profile between two verticals has to be determined by inter- 
polation which introduces an error. 

The values of depth dj and the mean velocity Vj in the 
vertjcat are used to determine the discharge per unit width 
and the discharge through the section /. Summation of the 
discharges through each section according to equation (2) 
results in an approximation of the true total discharge. 
Errors of this nature are referred to as "error-type III" ". 

3.4.4 Symbols 

The symbols used are given in the table below. 



where 



ausntity 


Pereentage uncertainty^' | 


random 


systemeticzi 


Width 
Depth 
Mean velocity 







\S All tha uncartaintias uaad In This International Standard are In 
terms of percentages axpressed at the 95 % confidence limits. In this 
International Standard, X with a subscript refers to percentage un- 
certainty, X' refers to percentage random uncertainty and X" refers to 
percentage systematic uncertainty. 

'i\ Tk«. M«BMr Mn..H.n A# vl^A A. M.*.-.... nAl « ii..HHi.«H:_*.. Ih *Um .^aI^.Ix.. III 

m.1 lilt, iiwjwt awwiw» wi bus arafcsiiiBitiv. ui IMVI lail ll]r lit HID YDIUbiiy YYIil 

arise from errors in the calibration of the current-meters. 



X\ is the percentage uncertainty due to random sam- 

' _ii__ ..«» .^ *k. .t^^ik .nnAi. !...<.. 4._>. nil. 



^5. 



|#fiii^ oiivt VI lira uvpui i^iwihq loiiwi-wyyo lllf, 

is the percentage uncertainty due to the random 
sampling error of the horizonta) vetocity profile (error- 
type 111); 

is the percentage uncertainty of ttie mean velocity 
due to the random instrumental error; 



X'ff, is the percentage uncertainty due to the random fluc- 
tuation in velocity error (error-type 1); 

X'^ is the percentage uncertainty due to the random 
' sampling error of the mean velocity in the vertical 
(error-type It); 

X,i^ is the percentage uncertainty due to the random 
instrumental error determining the depth of section; 

X'f,^ is the percentage uncertainty due to the random 
instrumental error determining the width of section; 

bf is the width of section i; 

</; is the depth of section /; 

v} is the mean velocity in section i; 

Q is the total discharge. 

Thn tntnl B\MtnmatlR iinritrniintv la aa fnllnu/a • 



t/2 



The total uncertainty in the discharge is given by 

/ .s1/2 



(4) 



(5) 



3.5 Description of the uncertainty 

For the determination of the influence on the total uncertainty, 
the individual components are sufficiently described by their 
relative mean and relative standard deviations. 

3.6 Total uncertainty in discharge 

It can be shown (see ISO/TR 7178) that the total percentage 
random uncertainty in discharge, X' q, may be found from the 

following 



^g= ± 



^■^/""-^V^Z '*''^''^»'''e 



/ = 1 



x;f + x;^ + x;^^ + x-,J + X\f 



1/2 



. (3) 



If it is assumed that the discharge in the respective sections are 
almost equal, then equation (3) simplifies with certain 
approximations (see ISO/TR 7178 and ISO 748) to ; 



^G=± L^m'^^(^*' + ^7 + ^'/ 



^X'^^X 



n 



\n 



(6) 



where 



X Q is the total random uncertainty in discharge at 95 % 
confidence level; 

X' „ is the percentage random uncertainty due to the 
restricted number of verticals used; 



II Error-types I, II and III used in this International Standard have no connection with the statistical type I and type II errors. 



rS 14573 : IMS 
ISO 1088:1985 



X\ is the percentage random uncertainty in the width 
measurement; 

X'^ is the percentage random uncertainty in the depth 
maasurement; 

X'^ is the percentage random uncertaihty due to the 
restricted time of exposure used; 

X' is the percentage random uncertainty due to the 
restricted number of velocity points talcen in the vertical; 

X' is the percentage random uncertainty in the current 
meter rating of velocity. 



NOTE — Frpm equation (3) or (61, It can be seen that in order to reduce 
the total random uncertainty the number of verticals would need to be 
increased or an improvement made in the nr)ea»urement of the in- 
dividual components, or both. 



3.7 Evaluation of the error in the individual 
components 

The evaluation of the uncertainty in the individual components 
of the total uncertainty can be obtained by a statistical analysis 
of a large number of observations for a particular component 
under operating conditions. Incorporating this procedure into 
the normal routine measurement is not feasible, therefore cen- 
tralized processing of Collected data according to standardized 
programmes, as irrdicsted in this Interna^onai Standard, is 
recommended with a view to providing a general standard on 
the uncertainties of the components within the practical range 
of measurements. 



4 Data on the local point velocity^' 

To judge the value of a single velocity measurement the follow- 
ing procedure is required. 

At each point of measurement on a vertical, an uninterrupted 
observation of the velocity over a period of 2 000 s, or for a 
period during which the discharge does not change by more 
than 5 % of the initial value, whichever is the less, shall be 
nnade with a current-meter. Every 10 s a reading of the Instru- 
ment should be taken, thus giving 200 readings altogether. 
When pulses are emitted by the current-meter, the number of 
pulses should be recorded every 10 s; or, when the time is 
measured at a fixed number of pulses, this time interval should 
average 10 s. When a continuous record is produced, the conn- 
plete record should be given and the response characteristics of 
the electronic instrument stated. 

The verticals to be taken for this measurement should be the 
vertical situated at the deepest point and the verticals situated 
at places where the depths are 0,6 and 0,3 times the maximum 
depth, both located on the side of the greater segment of the 
width from the deepest point. 



In each vertical this procedure should be carried out at 0,2 — 
0,6 — 0,8 and, where possible, 0,9 times the depth measured 
from the surface. Where possible the data should be obtained 
during the same 2 000 s period. 

The measurements should be repeated for different discharges. 

The data thus obtained should be indicated in the report form 
given in annex A. In the case of a continuous recorder, the 
values at intervals of 10 s should be given, indicating the 
method of determination. 



5 Data on the average velocity^* 

The average velocity in a vertical may be obtained in various 
ways. The velocity distribution method is, however, taken as a 
basis for comparison with the results of other methods gener- 
ally used or special methods adopted owing to special circum- 
stances. 

The following procedure is required. 

5.1 Location of the vertical 

The vertical chosen for this measurement shall normally be 
determined from the known velocity distributions in the gaug- 
ing cross-section, so as to give velocities which are represen- 
tative of the whole cross-section. 

When the velocity distributions in the gauging cross-section are 
not known, the vertical taken for this measurement shall be 
that at maximum depth in the cross-section and at places 
where the depths are 0,6 and 0,3 times the maximum depth 
respectively, at the side of the greater segment and not too 
close to the bank. 

5.2 Distribution of measuring points 

The velocity should be measured at the following points in the 
vertical r 

1 ) immediately below the surface; 

2) at 0,2 times the depth; 

3) at 0,3 times the depth; 

4) at 0,4 times the depth; 

5) at 0,5 times the depth; 

6) at 0,6 times the depth; 

7) at 0,7 times the depth; 

8) at 0,8 times the depth; 

9) at 0,9 times the depth; 
10) near the bed. 



1) Reference may also be made to ISO 748 and ISO/TR 7178. 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



In channels containing weed growth great care shall be taken 
to ensure that measurements made in the vicinity of the bed are 
not affected by weed fouling the current-meter. 

5.3 Period of measurement of local point 
velocities 

The period of nneasurement of local point velocity at any point 
should be 60 s, or the number of pulses should be that 
observed in GO s at 0,6 times the depth. 

5.4 Number of measurements 

The measurements In each of the verticals should be made at 
least five times, preferably consecutively. Measurements 
affected by navigation should be indicated. 

These sets of ob^rvations should be made for various 
discharges. 

6.5 Presentation of data 

The mean velocity should be determined with the use of a 
planinwter from an adequately large graphical plot (preferably 
not less than 300 cm^). The type and accuracy of the 
planimeter should be given, together with the scale of the 
discharge. The accuracy of the graph paper should be checked. 

The velocity profiles should be drawn to a scale in such a way 
that the maximum velocity and the depth are represented by 
0,10 m and 0,20 m respectively. 

Compilation of data should be made in the form shown in 
annex B. 



6 Data on the velocity-area method ^' 

There are two possible ways of determining the accuracy of the 
velocity-area method, one requiring special measurements, the 
other mainly using routine measurements. 

Wherever possible, data for both should be produced. 



6.1 Measurement at 0,6 times the depth 

In this method, the continuous profile of the cross-section at 
the measuring site is required. This can be obtained by echo- 
sounder measurements or by measuring the depth with a rod at 
intervals in wide rivers of not more than 1 /50 of the total width. 

The horizontal velocity distribution shall be observed by taking 
velocity readings at 0,6 times the depth at intervals in wide 
rivers of 1/50 of the total width. The readings of the current- 
meter shall be made over a period of 120 s. 

In addition, readings shall be taken from a reference current- 
meter at a fixed point, preferably at 0,6 times the depth in the 
vertical at maximum depth. It shall be read every 60 s. 



6.2 Velocity-distribution method 

In this method, the normal procedure for discharge measure- 
ment may be used provided the velocity-distribution method or 
integration method is used for the determination of the average 
velocity in the vertical. 

Readings shall be taken every 60 s, from a reference current- 
meter at a fixed point, preferably at 0,6 times the depth in the 
vertical at maximum depth. 

In addition to the data on the depth obtained by the normal 
disct\srge measurement, a continuous profile of the cross- 
section at the measuring site shall be provided, as indicated 
in 6.1. 

6.3 Presentation of data 

For the compilation of data, the form shown in annex C should 
be used. Correction factors in the table on velocity at the 
reference point can best be based on the average value of 
velocity at the reference point. It) this table, the factors are set 
as a function of time. To obtain the corrected velocity in the 
table "Mean velocity at verticals", the velocity column shall be 
multiplied by this correction factor. 

A graphical representation of the cross-section shall be drawn 
to an adequate scale; the width of the river on the drawing shall . 
be not less than 0,5 m. The representation shall indicate the 
numerical values of depth at the measuring points when a rod 
has been used, and shall show the location of the verticals and 
of the reference current-mater. 

A graphical representation of the measured velocity profiles 
should also be given. This should indicate the numerical values 
of the velocities at the measuring points. 

6.4 General data 

To facilitate the interpretation of deviations from ttie normal 
pattern of the various errors, relevant information on the 
geometry and morphology of the river concerned is required, 
for example a map of scale 1/10 000 of the river approximately 
50 times the width of the river upstream and downstream of the 
measuring site. 



7 Integration nnethod 

To determine the standard error in the mean velocity in the ver- 
ticals obtained by the integration method, a sufficient number 
of measurements (for example, 50) should be carried out at 
steady stage in three verticals and the results should be 
tabulated. 

The verticals to be taken for this measurement should be the 
vertical situated at the maximum depth and the verticals 
situated at places where the depths are 0,6 and 0,3 times the 
maximum depth, both located on the side of the greater seg- 
ment of the width from the deepest point. 

The measurements should be repeated for different discharges. 
Data of a general character can be compiled in a report form 
similar to that given in annex A. 



1) Reference may also be made to ISO 748. 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



8 Calibration curves 

In connection with the study of the instrument enror, calibration 
curves together with all calibration points should be given, 
especially data of successive calibrations of a representative 
current-meter with dates and years of calibration and the inten- 
sity of use. 



9 Distance measurements 

No generally applicable method of determining the accuracy of 
distance measurements can be given at present. Detailed 
description of the method of distance measurement should be 
given, together with the distances involved, and other relevant 
factors should be given for theoretical examination. 

Electronic distance measuring devices give an almost absol- 
utely accurate standard of comparison for distance measure- 
ments. Where these instruments are available, independent 
research programmes, concerning the uncertainty of different 
methods of distance measurement, may be carried out and the 
results stated. 

The conditions under which the study is carried out should be 
similar to normal operating conditions in the field. 



10 Depth measurements 

The accuracy of depth meaturenrient is dependent on the chan- 
nel conditions and the ntethod of measurement. In the case of 
lined channels the bed conditions are not likely to influence the 
accuracy of the measurement. 

In natural channels, for example rivers, the configuration of the 
bed varies in longitudinal as well as transverse directions. 

In relation to the measuring procedure, it is important to know 
whether the measurement is carried out from a rigid position or 
from an anchored launch. In the latter case the influence of the 
irregularity of the bed may result in a greater contribution to the 
total error of the depth measurement. 

Owing to the complex nature of the depth measurements, 
general directives cannot be given. In carrying out a study, the 
followir>g considerations may give guidance. 

10.1 In a river with a shifting bed, consecutive measurements 
at one point should be avoided. 



10.5 Sounding lines (including suspended current-meters) 
yield errors due to 

a) penetration into the bed; 

b) deviations from the ideal conditions for which the cor- 
rection for downstream drift has been calculated; 

c) shape and suspension point of the lead. 

10.6 Echo-sounders yield errors due to 

a) beam width of the transmitted pulse at the bottom; 

b) penetration of the pulse into the bed, which is a func- 
tion of the frequency of the pulse and of bed consistency. 



11 Data processing 

11.1 General 

The method of data processing for the determination of the 
total random error in the discharge measurement by velocity- 
area methods is given. Although the availability of computers is 
assumed, it is posaMMe to perform the computation process 
with less advanced nwans. Some of these alternatives are 
indicated. 

Whan processing the data, steady-flow conditions are 
assumed, which means that the true mean value of each of 
the various quantities remains constant with time. Non-steady 
trends shall be removed from the data before processing 
(see 11.2.2). 



11.2 Error-type I 

11.2.1 Finite meaauring time and distribution of results 

The standard deviation of the fluctuation error due to a finite 
measuring time is calculated. 

It is assumed that the means found from the actual measure- 
ments are equal to the hypothetical means over infinite measur- 
ing time and that the distribution of the results is of normal 
(Gaussian) nature. 

11.2.2 Correction for non-steady conditions 

The mean velocity is calculated from 



10.2 It is advisable to study the bed configuration in the 
vicinity of the actual measuring point by determining 
longitudinal and transverse sections. 

10.3 For all Instruments the accuracy of the reading in 
.relation to the scale intervals should be determined. 

10.4 Sounding rods yield errors due to 

a) penetration into the bed; 

b) deviation from the vertical position; 

c) built-up head due to velocity. 



- 1 
V = 



=vi: 



.(7) 



where 

V is the mean velocity during the time interval of 
measurements; 

Vj is the observed instantaneous velocity; 

n is the number of observations. 

When the velocity K, is plotted against time tj, it can be seen 
from the graph whether the magnitude of V^ shows a certain 



6 



IS 14573 :ig98 
ISO 1088:1985 



trend which indicates that the conditions during the measure- 
ments were not steady. If so, the observed velocities shall be 
corrected using 



Vi=a{ti- t) + b 



. (8) 



where r, is the time when the velocity is Vj and in which the 
constants a and b are determined from the following equations ; 



-7E^.= 



(9) 



i = 1 



and 



^V^Ui-t) J^V,ti-ntV 



(= 1 



/« 1 



<10) 



E ".-''' I '.-HE" 



/ ■= 1 =1 V ' = 1 / - 

The observed instantaneous velocity Vf is thus corrected : 

''corr,- V'/-^-^^) ••■til) 

where Vgoni <s the corrected velocity assuming a linear trend in 
the observed velocities (in the following equations Vj denotes 
Vcorti '^ correction has been applied). 



1 1 .2.3 Standard deviation 1 * of velocity fluctuations 

The standard deviation of the velocity fluctuations is calculated 
by using 



/J^ (K,-n' 



n - 1 



(12) 



The computation procedure can be simplified by using the 
equation 



11.2.4 Autocorrelation function 

The autocorrelation function can be determined from the 
equation 



^ (Vj-V){Vi^,-V) 



^(*-) = 



/■= 1 



. . (14) 



m2 



£(K,-n 



1 

where 

iik) is the autocorrelation f unction; 
k is the tinne displacement of function; 



y ( Vj -V)^ is already known from previous calculations 

)■= 1 

(see equation (12)1. 

The autocorrelation function is used for the calculation of the 
standard deviation, as described in 1 1 .2.6. 

11.2.5 Effect of measuring time on standard 
deviation (1) 

If no computer is available, the influence of the measuring time 
for the interval kt^, in which t^ is the initial measuring time and 
k is an integer, the standard deviation can be determined. For 
that purpose the mean velocity over an interval kt„ is calculated 
from : 



»'2/ + *-1 Vi+Vu^ 



+ I^/ + 



* - 1 



. (15) 



The magnitudes of 



'2( + A - 1 



are used to calculate the stan- 



dard deviation [see equation (12)1. 

This method is less common than the procedure described in 
11.2.6. 



Sr^ 







K' -'^. 



1= 1 



n - 1 



(13) 



11.2.6 Effect of measuring time on standard 
deviation (2) 

Using the standard deviation S Uq) for an initial measuring time 
t^ (see 11.2.3) and the autocorrelation function &(fr) (see 
11.2.4), the standard deviation of the velocity fluctuations can 
be calculated from : 



E". 



(= n V ] is already known from previous 



calculations (see equation (7)1. 



S^lnU = 



S^tJ 



t = 1 



Q^k) 



(16) 



In this equation, the influence of the measuring time on the 
accuracy of the point velocity is characteri2ed. 



1) For the relationship between standard deviation and uncertainty, see ISO 5168. (n general, uncertainties are expressed at the 95 % confidence 
level and usually as pereentages. For large values of n, standard deviations should be multiplied by 2 and by 100 to obtain percentage uncertainties. 
The factor is greater than 2 for small samples. 



IS 14573 11998 
ISO 1088:1985 



11.2.7 Compilation of results 

The results of the calculations should be compiled in a table 
(see the table below) which gives an impression of the in- 
fluence of the measuring time on the accuracy of the point 
velocities by a comparison of the various standard deviations. 
Uncertainties should be calculated in accordance with 
ISO 5168. 

The percentage standard deviations are found by dividing the 
standard deviation by the average value of the variable and 
multiplying by 2 (95 % level) and by 100 (see ISO 5168). 



11.3 Error- type II 



11.3.1 Approximation of mean velocity in the vertical 

The relative standard deviation due to the approximation of the 
mean velocity in the vertical caused by applying a finite number 
of point velocities is calculated. 



11.3.2 Determination of the standard mean velocity in 
the vertical 

As described in clause 5, the standard mean velocity In the ver- 
tical is found by determining the area of the vertical velocity 
profile with the use of a planimeter and taking the depth into 
account. 

As a rule the mean velocity can be calculated with the use of 
the trapezium rule applied on ten point velocities : 

Vi = (l^surf + 2 Fo,2 + 2 Ko,3 + 2 Vo.4 + 2 Ko.5 + 2 Ko.6 + 
-h2Fo,7 + 2Fo,8 + 2>'o,9+ Kb«i)-f^ ■••(17) 
where i is a sequence in the series of measurements. 

11.3.3 Computation methods 

By the application of computation rules the mean velocity in 
the vertical can be approximated by calculation. 

Comparison of this approximate mean velocity with the stan- 
dard mean velocity makes it possible to determine the sampling 



error for each of the computation methods. Some common 
formulae are (see also ISO 748) : 

a) v= Vqp 

b) 7 = 0,5 (vo2 + Vqb) 

c) V = 0,25 1^0,2 + 0,5 Vqq + 0,25 Vqq 

d) V= -^(vq2 + Vo,6+ vo,8> 

e) V = 0,1 Vj^rf + 0,3 Vo,2 + 0,3 Vq^ + 0,2 Vqq + 0,1 v^ed 

f) w = 0,1 v,urf + 0,2 Vo,2 + 0,2 Vo_4 + 0,2 vq^ + 

+ 0,2 Vo,8 + 0,1 Vbed 

The calculated mean velocity is standardized by dividing it by 
the standard mean velocity obtained according to 1 1 .3.2. 

11.3.4 Sampling error due to velocity fluctuations and 
computation rule 

From the results of ten measurements under identical con- 
ditions of the standardized velocities, the mean and the stan- 
dard deviation are calculated assuming 






i = 1 



5rB|2=7^J^ l^-reL-^-rel)' 



.(18) 



. (19) 



/■ -= 1 

where 

J is the number of observations in a series; 

Kfgi is the mean relative velocity in a series; 

Vjgi is the mean relative velocity in a vertical; 

S^ei is the standard deviation of the mean relative 
velocities. 

The sampling error, S,, due to the computation rule Is equal to 
(1 - y,g\)I if a series of / sets of measurements are con- 
sidered. 



Table — Compilation of results 



Location of 
measuring 
point /ifgi 


V 

m/s 


^abs 

m/s 


% 


^(1) 


^(2) 




^(k) 


% 


Xs (2 f„) 
% 




Xsiki^) 
% 


0,2 
0,3 
0,4 
0,5 
0,6 
0,7 
0,8 
0,9 

























IS 14573 :1998 
rSO 1088:1985 



The systematic part of the sampling error can be estimated by 
/ 



(20) 



/- 1 



where ii, represents the standard deviation of the sampling 
error due to the velocity fluctuations under steady conditions. 

The mean standard deviation of all sets of measurements due 
to velocity fluctuations can be determined from 



if 



' jZL ^"»i^ 



. . (21) 



I = 1 



11.3.5 Sampling error due to computation rule 

Of a series of / sets of measurements the standard deviation of 
the sampling error due to the computation rule can be 
calculated : 



1 S^ 

.'^-TTT L «^,-/i,)2--^ ...(22) 

f- 1 



where 



S^^ is the standard deviation of the sampling error due to 
the computation rule; 

Sj is the sampling error in mean velocity in vertical due to 
the computation rule per series: 

(i^ is the mean sampling error for all series together; 

Sp is the mean standard deviation of all series together due 
to velocity fluctuations; 



/ Is the number of sets of measurements in a series; 
J is the number of measurements in a series. 



For the purpose of determination of error-type IK, this 
discharge is assumed to be the true discharge. 

11.4.3 Omission of vsrtloais 

Omitting verticals from use for the calculation of the discharge, 
the absolute error can be determined by comparison with the 
true discharge. 

The calculation of the discharge shall be based either on the 
mid-section method or on the mean-section method, as 
described in ISO 748. As is proved in ISO/TR 7178, the results 
obtained by use of these methods show differences which are 
negligible. The mid-section method, hovt«ver, shows a time 
saving arKl cost saving over the mean-section method. 

The error is standardized by dividing the absolute error by the 
true discharge. 



11.4.4 Mean and stendard deviations of error 

The relative nnean error and its standard deviation due to the 
omission of verticals are determined from a number of series of 
measurements in tiie same cross-section. 



fiim) 



lyirOii!!!!.;" 

'hi °' J 



(23) 



and 



'sj'-^ = 




(24) 



where 



iHm) is the relative mean error in the discharge due to the 
restricted number of verticals; 

m is the number of verticals considered for the determi- 
nation of discharge; 



11.4 Error-type ill 



Q, (/n) is the calculated discharge applying m verticals 
using the i^^ measurement; 



11.4.1 Restricted number of verticals 

The standard deviation of the error of the discharge due to 
measurement in a restricted number of verticals is calculated. 



11.4.2 True discharge 

Using velocities, from which non-steady trends have been 
removed, and the corresponding depths and applying the mid- 
section method, the discharge in a cross-section is calculated 
according to ISO 748. 



Qi is the approximated true discharge using the /* 
measurement; 



S, im) is the relative standard deviation of error due to 
error-type III, applying m verticals Sj 2 = 5^ 2 + s^ 2; 

/ is the number of measurements. 

The mean error or its standard deviation is plotted against the 
number of verticals or the mean of groups of verticals con- 
sidered. From these graphs the relation between the uncer- 
tainty and the number of verticals applied may be deduced. 



IS 14573 :1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



11.4.5 Criteria applied in choosing the verticals 

The distances between adjacent verticals on a cross-section 
may tie 

a) equal; 

b) varied, to make the area of all segments equal; 

c) varied, to make the discharge through all segments 
similar; 

d) varied, to minimize the influence on the discharge of 
changes in velocity and depth. 

Items a) and b) need no explanation. 

Item c) can be explained as follows : The true total discharge 

100 

being 100 %, the discharge per segment will be % when 

m 

m segments are considered. The cumulative discharge is 

plotted against the percentage of total discharge, as shown in 

figure 2, to establish the position of successive verticals. 

As soon as the location of the i^ vertical is fixed, and the 
number of verticals to be applied and therefore also the percen- 
tage of the discharge which should flow through each segment 
are determined, the location of the (/ + ^)^ vertical may be 
found. In figure 2 an example is given for a discharge of 8,5 % . 

Item d) can be explained as follows : Based on the equation for 
the total discharge according to the mid-section method 






biAdiiiVi 



... (25) 



where 



A</,' is the difference in depth in the verticals i and / + 1 
respectively; 

A Vy is the difference in velocity in the verticals i and / + 1 
respectively. 

The optimal selection of the verticals as affected by differences 
in velocity is based on the product b/ dj A v,, and as affected by 
differences in depth on the product 6,- vj Ad,. 

In the first case the depth in all verticals is used in the calcu- 
lation of the discharge. In that way the error due to interp- 
olation of the velocity between the verticals can be estimated. 
In the second case, the error due to interpolation of the depth 
between the verticals can be determined. 

The magnitude of the product indicates the influence on the 
total discharge of differences in velocity and depth respectively. 

Verticals are omitted, starting with the smallest, depending on 
the magnitude of the product. 



12 List of symbols 

a coefficient of linear regression; 

coefficient of linear regression; 
unobservable true width of section i; 
unobservable true depth in vertical of section i; 





s, 



number of series of measurements (error-types II 
and III); 

number of measurements per series (error-type II); 

time displacement autocorrelation function (of time 
interval, Btc); 

number of Nwrticals or sections per cross-section; 

number of time intervals of measured velocities (error- 
type I); 

total discharge; 

discharge of section i; 

stochastic sampling error of mean velocity in vertical 
(error-type II); 



time i; 

initial measuring time (basic time interval); 

velocity at time / or in section /'; 

actual velocity at time i or in section i; 

V^fy„, actual velocity from which trend is removed; 

bf width of the i^ section; 

dj depth of the i^ section; 

Vj calculated mean velocity; 

Vj unobservable true mean velocity; 

SVj unobservable random instrumental error of mean 
velocity; 

Fj total unobservable random fluctuation error of mean 
velocity (error- type I); 

5^ unobservable random sampling error of mean velocity 
(error-type II); 

M^ mean sampling error (error-type II); 

fi (m) mean error when rn verticals are applied (error-type III); 



10 



IS 14573 
ISO 1068; 



1998 
1985 



il (k) autocorrelation function with time displacement k; 

X percentage uncertainty (general); 

X' percentage random uncertainty; 

X" percentage systematic uncertainty; 

X'p percentage uncertainty due to the random fluctuation in 
velocity error (error-type I); 

^"5 percentage uncertainty due to the random sampling 
error of the depth profile (error-type III); 



X's percentage uncertainty due to the random sampling 
error of the horizontal velocity profile (error-type III); 

X'g^ percentage uncertainty due to the random sampling 
' error of the mean velocity in the vertical (error-type II). 

NOTE — Due to the statiMical nature of this International Standard, It 
is necatsary to have symbols representing observed values and true 
values of variat>las. The symbols may therefore not conform to 
ISO 772. 

Obsenntiom or results of calculations using observations are indicated 
by a capital lettw. Statistical quantities obtained from obsen/ations are 
indicated by a small letter with caret. A mean value is indicated by 
a bar. 



11 



IS 14573 :1998 
ISO 1088:1985 







10 15 20 25 

Number of the vertical from initial point 
Figure 2 a — Kd curve 



30 



35 



100 



75 



•o 

I 



1 1 ^^.^^--^^ 


\\ / 1 


"11/ 1 

« ' 1 / ' 


^>^ ' 1 1 

\^^ U 1 1 1 t 1 1 



50 



25.»r= 



10 15 20 25 

Number of the vertical from initial point 

Figure 2b — Cumulative discharge curve 

Figure 2 — Computation of discharge 



30 



35 



12 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



Annex A 
Local point velocity measurements — Report form 

(See clause 4) 
NOTE — All values should be converted If necessary to metres and seconds, where appropriate. 



Measurements carried out 
under the responsibility of . 



Address 



Please refer Inquiries to : 

River concerned : at (location) 

Country : 

1 General data on the river during measuring period 



Discharge 

Area of cross-section of stream 

Average velocity 

Water surface width 

Maximum depth 

Average depth (area/width) 

Slope of stage-discharge curve 

(sensitivity in steady-stage corulition) 
Water temperature 


m3/s 


m2 

m/s 




m 


rn 


m^/s-m 

*>Q 





2 General data on measuring verticals 



Mwsuring verticals 


Average 
velocity 


Depth 
at vertical 


Distance from 

right/left 

bank 


m/s 


m 


m 


A Maximum depth 

B 0,6 times maximum depth 

C 0.3 times maximum depth 









3 Method of velocity measurement (Please tick as appropriate) 



D 
D 



D 
D 



a) Numlser of pulses, counted every 10 s. 

b) Time (average 10 s) for a constant number of pulses, being for 



pulses, 
pulses. 



c) Continuous velocity record : 

Speed of paper at recorder : 

Response characteristics of the electronic instrumentation 

d) integration method. 



mm/s 



13 



IS 14573 :1998 

a«%«i^ ^ AAA . -a.MM^ 



4 Measuring apparatus 

Type of current-meter (Please give details, such as diameter of propeller and 
pitch or size of cup, cup distance and number of cups) : 

Serial number : 

Type of suspension : 

Date of calibration (Please add rating-curve and equations for calculation of 
velocity and indicate whether group calibration or direct calibration is in- 
ter>ded. Check whether the water temperature during calibration has been 
indicated on the rating-curve.) 

Method of timing and associated uncertainty 

5 Measurements at verticals 
5.1 Vertical at maximum depth 
6.1.1 General data 





Depth 


Unitt 




0,2 


0,6 


0,8 


0,9 


Date of measurament 














— 


Hour of measurament (local time) 














— 


Water-level at start (local units) 














— 


Water-level at end (local units) 














— 


Water-depth during measurement 














m 


Depth of instrument under surface 














m 


Average velocity over a period of 2000 s 














m/s 


Minimum velocity 














m/s 


Maximum velocity 














m/s 


Method of velocity measurement : a) or c) 
















(see clause 3 of this annex) 
















Time interval of readings 


10 


10 






10 


10 


s 


Method b) 
















Number of pulses 














— 


Average time Interval of readings 














s 



6.1.2 DMcription of bad conditions 

Bed material (size, shape, density) i' : 

Bed form (smooth, ripples, dunes) : 

Sediment transport : yes/no; if yes, type of transport : bed load /suspended load. 

D^j .».._i.„~.„ /_.-<».-i.i.. _„_._-_„^ :„ ^i.«.„. „A,v«:„:»n* <^\ • 



c = 



where 

C is the Chezy coefficient; 
V is the mean velocity; 

/?h is the hydraulic mean depth (area of cross-section of stream over wetted perimeter); 
S is the energy slope. 
Remarks : 



1) See ISO 4363 and 4364. 



14 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



5.1.3 Velocity observations 

a) Velocity at 0,2 depth every 10 s. 



Serial 
No. 



Reading 



Velocity 



Serial 
No. 



Reading 



Velocity 



Serial 
No. 



Reading 



Velocity 



Serial 
No. 



Reading 



Velocity 



51 



101 



151 



50 



100 



150 



200 



Average velocity 
Maximum velocity 
Minimum velocity 



Average velocity 
Maximum velocity 
Minimum velocity 



Average velocity 
Maximum velocity 
Minimum velocity 



Average velocity 
Maximum velocity 
Minimum velocity 



NOTE - Pleaw Indicate special circumstances influencing the measurements, such as passing of ships, 
b) For measurements at 0,6 - 0,8 and 0,9 depths, give details in the form shown at a) above. 

5.2 Vertical at 0,6 times the maximum depth 

Give details in the form showm under 5.1. 

5.3 Vertical at 0,3 times the maximum depth 

Give details ir> the form shown under 5.1. 



15 



IS 14573 :1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



Annex B 
Average velocity measurements — Report form 

(See 5.5) 
NOTE — All values should be converted if necessary to metres and seconds, where appropriate. 



Measurements carried out 
under the responsibility of . 



Address 



Please refer inqgiries to : 

River concerned : at (location) 

Country : 



1 General data on the river during nteasuring period 



Discharge 

Area of croes-section of stream 

Average velocity 

Water surface width 

Maximum depth 

Average depth (area/width> 

Slope of stage-discharge curve 

(sensitivity in steady-stage condition) 
Depth at vertical 
Average velocity on vertical 
Distance of vertical from right t>ank 
Water temperature 




2 Method of velocity measurement (Please tick as appropriate) 

I I a) Number of pulses counted every 60 s. 

I I b) Time (average 60 s at 0,6 depth) for a constant number of pulses, i.e pulses. 

I I c) Continuous velocity record : 

Speed of paper at recorder : mm/s 

Response characteristics of the electronic instrumentation ; 

I 1 d) Integration method. 



16 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



3 Measuring apparatus 

Type of current-meter ( Please give detaHs, such as diameter of propeller and 
pitch or size of cup, cup distance and number of cups) : 

Serial number : 

Type of suspension : 

Date of calibration (Please add rating-curve and equations for calculation of 
velocity and indicate whether group calibration or direct calibration is in- 
tended. Check whether the water temperature during calibration has been 
indicated on the rating-curve.) 



4 Measurements at verticals 
4.1 Vertical at (Maximum depth 
4.1.1 General data 





1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


Units 


Date of measurement 












— 


Hour of measurement (local time) 












— 


Water-level at start (local units) 












— 


Water level at end (local units) 












— 


Water-depth during measurement 












m 


Duration of the local point velocity measurements 














using method a) or c) (see clause 2 of this annex) 


60 


60 


60 


60 


60 


s 


Number of pulses using method b) based on s 














duration of 60 s at 0,6 depth of the local point 












„ 


velocity measurements 















4.1.2 Description of bed conditions 

Bed material (size, shape, density) n : 

Bed form (smooth, ripples, dunes) : 

Sediment transport : yes/no; if yes, type of transjaOrt : bed load/ suspended load. 
Bed roughness (preferably expressed in Chezy coefficient, C) : 



C = 



where 

C is the Chezy coefficient; 

V is the mean velocity; 

Ry, is the hydraulic mean depth (area of cross-section of stream over wetted perimeter); 

S is the energy slope. 

Remarks ; 



1) See ISO 4363 and 4364. 



17 



IS 14573 :1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



4.1.3 Velocity observations 



Velocities 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


Reading 


Velocity 


Reading 


Velocity 


Reading 


Velocity 


Reading 


Velocity 


Reading 


Velocity 


1) near surface'" 






















2) 0,2 depth 






















3) 0,3 depth 






















4) 0,4 depth 






















5) 0,5 depth 






















6) 0,6 depth 






















71 0,7 depth 






















8) 0,8 depth 






















9) 0,9 depth 






















10) near bed2> 






















Average velocity 

determined 

graphically 


X 




X 




X 




X 




X 





1) The observation near the surface has been taken m below the surface. 

2) The observation near the bed has been taken m above the bed. 

NOTE — Please Indicate special circumstances influencing the measurements, such as passing of ships. 

4.2 Vertical at 0,6 times the maximum depth 

Give details in the form shown under 4.1 . 

4.3 Vertical at 0,3 times the maximum depth 

Give details In the form shown under 4.1. 



18 



Annex C 
Velocity-area method — Report form 

(See 6.3.) 
NOTE — All values should be converted If necessary to metres and seconds, where appropriate. 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



Measurennents carried out 
under the responsibity of .. 



Address 



Please refer inquiries to ; 

River concerned : at (location) 

Country : 



1 General data on the river during measuring p«fiod 



Discharge 

Area of cross-section of stream 

Average velocity 

Water surface width 

Maximum depth 

Average depth (area /width) 

Slope of stage-discharge curve 

(sensitivity In steady-stage condition) 
Water tomparaturo 


ni3/s 

m2 

m/s 


m 


m 


m 


m3/8'm 

"C 





2 Method of velocity measurement (Please ticic as appropriate) 

I I a) Number of pulses counted every 60 or 120 s. 

I I b) Time (average 60 or 120 s at 0,6 depth) for a constant number of pulses, i.e. 

I 1 c) Continuous velocity record : 



D 



or 



Speed of paper at recorder : 

Response characteristics of the electronic instrumentation 



mm/s 



d) Integration method. 



3 Measuring apparatus 

Type of current-meter (Please give details, such as diameter of propeller and 
pitch or size of cup, cup distance and number of cups) : 

Special number : 

Type of suspension : 

Date of calibration (Please add rating-curve and equations for calculation of 
velocity and indicate whether group calibration or direct calibration is in- 
tended. Check whether the water temperature during calibration has been 
indicated on the rating-curve. I 



19 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



4 General data on velocity measurement 
4.1 Velocity observations 





Units 


Date of measurement 




- 


Water-level at start < local units) 




- 


Water-level at end (local units) 




- 


Number of verticals 




- 


Number of points per vertical 




- 


Duration of the local point velocity measurement using nwthod a) or c) 






(see clause 2 of this annex) : 






at 0,6 depth measurement 


120 


s 


at reference point 


60 


s 


by velocity distribution method 




s 


Number of pulses using method b), based on ; 






duration of 120 s for the 0,6 depth measurement 




- 


duration of 60 s for the referenct point 




- 


velocity distribution method 




- 


Profile of cross-section measured by echo-sounder/ rod at intervals of 




m 



4.2 Description of bed conditions 

Bed material (siza, shape, density) D : 

Bed form (smooth, ripples, dunes) : 

Sediment transport : yes/ no; if y^, type of transport : bed load/suspended load. 
Bed roughness (preferably expressed in Chezy coefficient, C) : 



C = 



where 

C is the Chezy coefficient; 

V is the mean velocity; 

R^ is the hydraulic mean depth (area of cross-section of stream over wetted perimeter); 

5 is the energy slope. 
Remarks : 



5 Method of measurement of mean velocity at verticals (Please tick as appropriate) 

I I 0,6 depth measurement. 

(Duration of individual velocity measurements 120 s.) 
I I Velocity-distribution method. 

(Normal practice; please add procedure.) 



1) See ISO 4363 and ISO 4364. 



20 



IS 14573 : 1998 
ISO 1088:1985 



Mean velocity at verticals 



Serial No. 



25 



Time 



Velocity 



Corrected 
velocity 



Depth II 



Serial No. 



26 



50 



"nme 



Velocity 



Corrected 
velocity 



Depth 1 



1) To be filled in when the velocity-distribution method has been applied 



Velocity at reference point 



T]mei> 


Velocity 


Correction 
factorZ) 


Time 


Velocity 


Correction 
factor2> 


Time 


Velocity 


Correction 
fectorZ) 





















1) Intervals of 60 s. 

2) CoriBction has been made with resptect to the velocity at h. 



21 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the counUy. 

Cbpyright 

BJS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the bsisis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. RVD 1 <189). 

Amendments Issued Since Pulillcation 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11 0002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 7^, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksan.stha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

3237617,3233841 



r337 84 9.9,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



f2350216,235 04 42 
123515 19,235 2315 

r832 92 95,832 78 58 
183278 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Pren, Delhi, Jaiit 



