**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  10641  (1983)  :  Recommended  methods  for  determination  of 
aroma  and  taste  thresholds  [FAD  16:  Foodgrains,  Starches 
and  Ready  to  Eat  Foods] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


IS\  10641  -  1983 

(Reaffirmed  2005) 


RECOMMENDED  METHODS  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  AROMA  AND 

TASTE  THRESHOLDS 


UDC    66  V  :  5iy  f>2  :  54 1  ■  M:  ]  3 


©  Copyright  1983 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MAMAK     UHAV.VN.     ^     nrUUDUK     SHAH  ZAFAR     MARO 

NKW  OELiil  110002 

Of  2  A'fvfiijber  1963 


IS  :  10641  •  1983 

Indian  Standard 

REGOMMENDED  METHODS  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  AROMA  AND 

TASTE  THRESHOLDS 

Sensory  Evaluation  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  38 

Chairman  Representing 

*Dk  G.  Sabasivan  Indian    Agricultural    Statistics     Research   Institute 

(  ICAR  ),  New  Delhi 

Members 

AGRiCTJLTTrKAL  MARKETING    Directorate   of  Marketing   &   Inspection  (  Ministry 

Adviser  to  the  Government  of  Agriculture  &  Irrigation  ),  Faridabad 

or  India 

Shri  T.  V.  Mathew  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  a.  S.  Aiyar  Protein  Foods  and  Nutrition  Development  Associa- 

tion of  India,  Bombay 
Dr  Brahma  Singh  Defence   Food   Research   Laboratory   (  Ministry   of 

Defence  ),  Mysore 

Shri  N.  Srinivasalu  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  S.  Chadha  Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards,  New  Delhi 

Assistant  Secretary  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Om  P.  Dhamija  Export  Inspection  Council  of  India,  Calcutta 

Director  of  Research  Coffee  Board,  Bangalore 

Cuptaster  (  Alternate ) 
Smt  Harsimrat  Katjr  Gill  The  Punjab  Dairy  Development   Corporation   Ltd, 

Chandigarh 

Shri  B.  M.  L.  Gabg  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  S.  Govindarajan  In  personal  capacity  (  270}  First  Main  Road^   Mysore  ) 

Shri  K.  L.  Gupta  Tea  Board,  Calcutta 

Dr  S.  K.  Gupta  National  Dairy  Research  Institute,  Karnal 

Dr  B.  N.  Mathur  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  E.  K.  JayanarayaNan  Mohan  Moakin  Ltd,  Ghaziabad 

Dr  B.  K.  Jha  Yezdi  Distilleries,  Mysore 

Shri  Vittal  Mallya  United  Breweries  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Shri  N.  J.  Menon  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Mansingh  Brooke  Bond  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  N.  J.  Menon  McDowell  &  Co  Ltd,  Shertally 

Dr  a.  G.  Naik  Kurade  Suman  Food  Consultants,  New  Delhi 


*Dr.  G.  Sadasivan  was  the  Chairman  elected  for  the  meeting  in   which  this  standard 
was  finalized. 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1983 
INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSIITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement   of  copyright  under  the  said  Act, 


IS  :  10641  -  1983 

(  Continued  from  page  I  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  S.  N.  Pakdey  AI!  India  Distillers*  Association,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  B.  L.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  (  Smt  )  P,  PasHPAMMA  College  of  Home  Science,  Andhra  Pradesh  Agricul- 

tural University,  Hyderabad 
Da  (  Smt  )  P.  Geervani  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  G.  Raghuveer  Central    Food    Technological    Research     Institute 

(  CSIR  ),  Mysore 
Brig  P.  G,  S.  Sagera  Technical  Standardization  Cojnmittee  (  Ministry  of 

Agriculture  &  Irrigation  )-,  New  Delhi 
Deputy  Technical  Adviser  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  B.  Sule  Naarden  (  India  )  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  Y.  G.  VAidya  (  Alternate  ) 
Brig  R.  N.  Varma  Qjnartermaster  Generals*  Branch,  Army  Headquar- 

ters, New  Delhi 
Lt-Col  S.  Kapoor  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Walter  Food  Specialities  Ltd,  Moga 

Shri  A.  K.  Roy  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  PurnaNandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 


Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 


Secretary 

Shbi  S.  K.  Das  Gupta 
Deputy  Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ),  ISI 


Sensory  Evaluation  of  Basic  Standards  Subcommittee,  AFDC  38  :  1 

Convener 

Shri  V.  S.  Govikdarajan 

2701  First  Main  Road,  Mysore 

Members 
Agricultural  Marketing    Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection  (  Ministry  of 

Adviser  to  the  Government  Agriculture  &  Irrigation  ),  Faridabad 

OF  India 
Shri  T.  V.  Mathew  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Gupta  National  Dairy  Research  Institute,  Karnal 

Dr  E.  K.  Jayanarayanan  Mohan  Meakin  Ltd,  Ghaziabad 

Shri  Vittal  Mallya  United  Breweries  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Shrt  N.  J.  Mfnon  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  MaKsingh  Brooke  Bond  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Dr  K  G.  R\GHUVEER  Central   Food     Technological     Research     Institute 

(  CSIR),  Mysore 
Dr  G   Sadasivan  Indian  Agricultural    Statistics    Research   Institute, 

(IGAR),  New  Delhi 
^RiQ  P.  G.  S.  Sagera  Technical  Standardization  Committee   (  Ministry  of 

Agriculture  &  Irrigation  ),  New  Delhi 
Deputy  Technical  Adviser  (  Alternate  ) 


IS  t  10641  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDED  METHODS  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  AROMA  AND 

TASTE  THRESHOLDS 

a    FOREWORD 

0,1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  30  August  1983,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Sensory 
Evaluation  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0,2  Threshold  determinations^  are  of  value  to  (a)  characterize  paneling 
individually  and  form  groups  of  homogenous  sensitivity;  (b)  determine 
the  threshold  of  a  stimulus  in  the  selected  media;  (c)  determine  the 
relative  importance  of  component  stimuli  in  a  mixture;  and  (d)  develop 
correlations  between  coacentration  of  specific  stimuli  and  the  magnitude 
of  the  perceived  sensory  effect. 

0.3  It  is  recognized  that  precise  values  for  thresholds  for  a  given  stimulus 
cannot  be  given  (  in  the  same  sense  as  any  of  physico-chemical  measures  ) 
being  influenced  by  a  number  of  external  factors  as  sample  presentation 
parameters  and  internal  factors  as  the  panelists  physiological  and 
psychological  effects  and  training.  However,  usable  concentration 
ranges  for  thresholds  for  individual  and  groups  can  be  determined  for 
stimuli  alone  and  in  mixtures  as  per  situations  in  use, 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of 
this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places 
retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the 
specified  value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard    prescribes  a  method  for  determination  of  aroma  and/ 
or  taste  thresholds  of  any  stimulus  in  a  chosen  medium. 


*Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  rtvised), 

3 


IS  :  10641  -  1983 

l.l^l  The  recommendations  are  limited  to  overall  selection  of  a 
suitable  range  of  concentrations  of  test  solutions,  selected  method  of 
testing  and  analysis  of  data. 

1.1.2  Details  of  choice  of  sensorily  neutral  medium,  use  of  compounds 
for  dispersal  of  stimuli,  equipment  for  preparation  and  presentation  of 
stimuli  and  odourous  compounds,  which  are  individualistic  are  not 
discussed  here.  They  should  be  given  in  any  report  as  thresholds  may 
vary  with  these  parameters, 

1.1.3  It  is  recognized  that  the  threshold  value  for  any  stimulus  for  a 
group  of  panelists  may  require  revision  as  the  sensitivity  is  known  to 
improve  with  training  and  lower  the  value  of  threshold  concentration, 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  terms  given  in  the  glossary  of 
terms,  IS  :  5126  '(  Parts  1  and  2  )-1969*  shall  apply.  Additionally,  'the 
definitions  of  the  following  terms,  shall  apply. 

2.1  Medium  —  Any  material,  liquid  or  solid,  used  to  dissolve  or  disperse 
or  absorb  odour  or  taste  stimuli  whose  threshold  is  to  be  determined. 

2.2  Blanck  Sample  —  A  selected  medium  containing  no  stimulus  and 
considered  neutral  in  respects  of  odour  and  taste. 

2.3  Test  Sample — A  quantity  of  the  medium  similar  to  the  blank 
sample  to  which  stipulated  concentration  of  the  stimulus  under  exami- 
nation dispersed  in  the  medium  are  added. 

2.4  Detection  Threshold  —  The  lowest  concentration  of  a  stimulus 
in  a  medium  which  records  a  perceivable  difference  from  the  blank 
sample  as  determined  by  the  maximum  likelihood  criterion. 

2.5  Recognition  Threshold  —  The  lowest  concentration  of  a  stimulus 
in  a  medium  which  records  a  perceivable  difference  from  the  blank 
sample  and  additionally  'recognised'  as  a  particular  stimulus. 

2.6  Maximum  Likelihood  Threshold  (  Individual  )  (  MLT  )  —  An 

interpolated  value  (  of  concentration  )  but  not  necessarily  a  concent- 
ration value  actually  presented;  this  is  obtained  as  the  geometric  mean 
of  the  la^t  rniised  concentration  and  the  next  higher  concentration. 

2.7  Maximum  Likelihood  Threshold  (  Group  )  —  The  geometric 
mean  of  the  individual  MLT's. 


*Giossary  of  general  terms  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods: 
Part  1    Methodology. 
Part  2   Quality  characteristics. 


IS  :  10641  -  1983 

2.8  Ascending  Scale  of  Concentration  —  A  series  of  increasing 
concentrations  of  an  aromatic  or  tasteful  substance  in  a  chosen  neutral 
medium, 

3.  PRINCIPLE 

3.1  By  using  the  .multiple  ascending  concentrations  presented  in 
geometric  series,  and  forced  choice  triangle  test,  the  thresholds  of 
groups  of  panelists  are  determined. 

3.2  The  panelists  are  then  grouped  into  sub-groups: 

a)  a  more  sensitive  subgroup  whose  threshold  of  the  stimulus  is  at  a 
concentration  lower  than  the  group  MLT;  and 

b)  a  less  sensitive  subgroup  whose  threshold  of  the  stimulus  is  at  a 
concentration  higher  than  the  group  MLT  so  that  they  can  be 
used  to  evaluate  the  different  stimuli  to  required  accuracy  using 
an  ascending  series  with  closer  concentration  differences. 

4.  PREPARATION  OF  CONCENTRATION  SERIES  AND  OTHER 
ASPECTS  FOR  DETERMINING  GROUP  THRESHOLD 

4.1  The  test  series  should  contain  range  of  concentration  levels  of  the 
test  substance  in  the  medium,  beginning  with  below  the  level  at  which 
the  most  sensitive  panelist  is  able  to  recognize  the  added  stimulus  and 
end  at  (  or  above  )  the  concentration  at  which  all  panelists  will  give  the 
correct  response. 

4.2  For  preliminary  testing  for  the  group  threshold  a  geometric  series 
with  a  concentration  difference  factor  which  will  allow  the  correct 
responses  of  a  group  often  to  fifteen  panelists  to  distribute  over  three 
concentration  steps  is  used.  The  geometric  mean  of  the  individual 
panelists  MLT's  gives  the  group  threshold  value. 

4.3  The  increase  in  concentration  maybe  1 '5  to  2*5  times  the  previous 
concentration  for  sapid  substances  and  2  to  3  times  for  aromatic 
substances.  Thus  if  a:  represents  the  approximate  threshold  concent- 
ration, then  a  concentration  series  will  be  Ar/27,  x/9,  a:/3,  x,  3x,  9x,  21x  for 
aromatic  substances. 

4.4  At  each  concentration  (  or  dilution  ),  a  triangle  test  set  is  set  up  with 
one  test  and  two  blank  (medium)  samples  [  .y^^  4.1.3  of  IS  :  6273 
(Part2)-197l*]. 

4.5  For  triangle  tests,  the  recommended  practice  for  minimizing  bias  by 
optimal  set  ups,  coding  with  3-digit  random  numbers,  rotating  the  positions 

♦Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods: 
Part  2    Methods  and  evaluation  cards. 


IS  :  10641  -  I9S3 

of  the  test  and  blank  sample,  such  that  they  occupy  the  three  possible 
positions  equal  number  of  times  during^  presentations,  should  be  carefully 
followed  [  IS  :  6273  (  Part  1  )-1971*  ].  Further  special  care  should  be 
taken  for  palate  clearance  to  avoid  carryover  effects. 

5.  TESTING  PROCEDURE 

5.1  The  panelists,  ten  to  fifteen  begin  the  series  with  the  triangle  contain- 
ing the  lowest  concentration  (  highest  dilution  )  of  the  test  stimulus  and 
progressively  proceed  to  higher  concentrations  (  ascending  series  ). 

5.2  The  panelist  has  to  identify  (  or  guess  in  case  of  doubtful  discrimi- 
nation )  in  each  triangle  set,  the  sample  that  is  different  (  odd  )  for 
detection  threshold  (  forced  choice  ). 

5.3  The  panelist  also  indicates  the  set  where  he  can  identify  the 
different  aroma  or  taste  response  to  the  stimulus  for  recognition  threshold. 
The  testing  is  terminated  after  testing  one  higher  concentration  set 
when  recognition  is  confirmed  (  since  a  correct  answer  wiil  occur  by 
chance  ). 

6.  PRESENTATION  OF  DATA  AND  ANALYSIS 

6.1  Each  panelist's  judgement  is  written  as  *0'  for  an  incorrect  answer  or 
*-h'  for  a  correct  judgement  against  the  samples  arranged  in  increasing 
concentration.  The  tabulation  is  terminated  with  two  or  more  con- 
secutive '  +'  signs. 

6.2  The  maximum  likelihood  threshold  for  each  panelist  is  the  geometric 
mean  of  the  concentrations  at  which  the  last  incorrect  decision  marked 
by  ^0'  and  the  next  higher  concentration  marked  by  '  +  '  occurred. 

6.3  The  group  threshold  is  the  geometric  mean  of  the  MLT's  of 
individuals. 

6.4  For  more  accurate  work,  the  panelists,  are  grouped  into  those  whose 
thresholds  for  a  particular  flavour  response  is  at  concentrations  lower 
than  the  group  mean  concentration  (  more  sensitive  )  and  those  whose 
thresholds  are  at  concentrations  higher  than  the  group  means  (  less 
sensitive ). 

7.  PREPARATION        OF      CONCENTRATION       SERIES       TO 
CLASSIFIED  GROUPS  OF  PANELISTST 

7.1  Since  the  dosage-response  curve  is  sigmoid,  for  more  accurate 
threshold  values,  the  experiment  is  repeated  with  a  series  of  concent- 
rations in  arithmetic  progression  and  differing  in  concentrations  by  a 
'jnd'  (  just  noticeable  difference  )  which  is  nearly  10  percent  of  the  thres- 
hold value. 

♦Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods: 
Part  1  Optimum  requirements. 

6 


IS:  1^41- 1983 

7.2  The  arithmetic  series  of  concentrations  is  established  by  dilution,  or 
strengthening  from  a  concentration  at  which  all  panelists  are  expected 
to  identify  and  recognise  correctly  the  sensory  response.  For  example,  if 
X  is  the  expected  threshold  the  series  is  set  up  as: 

(  ;c  -.  -3;^  ),  (  X  —  •2a:  ),  (  a:  —  -1^  ),  x,{  x  + -\x),  {  x  +  '2x),  {  x  •\-  ^Zx  ) 

maintaining  a  difference  of  10  percent  of  x,  the  'jnd'.  Separate  concent- 
ration series  are  set  up  for  the  more  sensitive  and  less  sensitive  groups 
obtained  from  preliminary  tests, 

7.3  The  samples  are  presented  in  ascending  order  of  concentrations. 
There  should  be  one  or  more  blank  medium  with  similar  composition 
except  for  the  component  whose  threshold  for  response  is  being  tested. 
These  serve  as  a  check  on  the  alertness  of  the  panelist,  and  bias  from 
association. 

7.4  The  testing  is  done  under  the  conditions  recommended  for  bias  free 
judgements  [  IS  :  6273  (Parti  )-1971*  ].  Additionally  special  care 
should  be  taken  for  palate  clearing  to  avoid  carry  over  effects. 

7.5  Each  panelist  tastes  the  dilutions  from  the  lowest  concentration  (  or 
blank  )  and  identifies  the  sample  at  which  there  is  a  definite  change  from 
the  medium  (  detection  threshold  )  and  continues  the  series  to  determine 
the  sample  at  which  the  response  (  aroma  or  taste  )  is  definitely 
recognized. 

7.6  The  testing  is  terminated  when  recognition  of  the  response  is 
confirmed  or  higher  intensity  felt. 

8.  TEST  REPORT 

8.1  The  report  shall  include  the  method  used  and  the  threshold  values 
given  as: 

a)  Geometric  mean  as  a  group  threshold,  and 

b)  Arithmetic  mean  ±  Standard  deviation  specifying   sensitivity   of 
the  group. 


♦Guide  for  sensory  evaluation  of  foods:     Part  1  Optimum  requirements. 

7 


INTERNATIONAL  SYSTEM  OF  UNITS  (  SI  UNITS  ) 
Base  Unita 


QlTANTTTT 

Unit 

Symbol 

Length 

metre 

ra 

Mass 

kilogram 

kg 

Time 

second 

s 

Electric  current 

ampere 

A 

Therm  ody  na  m  ic 

kelvin 

K 

temperature 

Luminous  intensity 

candela 

cd 

Amount  of  substance 

mole 

mol 

Supplementary  Units 

Quantity 

Unit 

SymboIi 

Plane  angle 

radian 

rad 

Solid  angle 

iteradian 

sr 

Derived  Unite 

QlJAHTiTT 

Unit 

Symbol 

Force 

newton 

N 

Energy 

joule 

J 

Power 

watt 

W 

Flux 

weber 

Wb 

Flux  density 

tesla 

T 

Frequency 

hertz 

Hz 

Electric  conductance 

Siemens 

S 

Electromotive  force 

volt 

V 

Pressure,  stress 

pascal 

Pa 

Definition 

I      N  =  1  kg.m/s» 
1      J  =  I  N.m 
1    W-  I  J/s 
1  Wb  ==.  1  V.S 
1     T  -  1  Wb/m» 
I   Hz  =  1  c/s  (s-^>) 
I      S  -  1  A/V 
1     V  -  1  W/A 
1    Pa  -  1  N/m» 


