**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12730 (1989) : Internal fuses and internal overpressure 
disconnectors for capacitors for inductive heat generating 
plants [ETD 29: Power Capacitors] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 12730 : 1989 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



INTERNAL FUSES AND INTERNAL 

OVERPRESSURE DISCONNECTORS FOR 

CAPACITORS FOR INDUCTIVE HEAT 

GENERATING PLANTS 

^x ^\^^x% s^ftrar^r fiiot^^ 



UDC 621*316*923 : 62r316-545 : 621*319-4 



c; Bib 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN SIANDARDS 

MANAK ISIIAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG. 
NhW DELHI I] 0002 

April \<)9^ Price Group 3 



Power Capacitors Sectional Committee, ETD 29 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 21 June 1989, after the 
draft finalized by the Power Capacitors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
technical Division Council. 

This standard would help in specifying uniform requirements regarding performance, tests and 
guidance for coordination of internal fuses and internal disconnector protection of the capacitors for 
inductive heat generating plants covered in IS 9251 : 1979. 

The fuses and disconnectors conforming to this standard are designed to isolate faulted capacitor 
elements or capacitor units to allow operation of the remaining parts of the capacitor unit and the 
bank in which the capacitor unit is connected. Such fuses and disconnectors are not a substitute for 
the switching device such as circuit breaker or external protection of the capacitor bank or part 
thereof. 

This standard is based on the following publication/document issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( lEC ): 

lEC Pub 594 ( 1977 ) and Amendment No. 1 ( April 1980 ) Internal fuses and internal over- 
pressure disconnectors for capacitors for inductive heat generating plants. 

Doc : 33 ( Central Office ) 72 Draft Amendment No. 2 to lEC Pub 594 ( 1977 ). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values { revised Y. The number of significant 
places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



IS 12730 : 1989 



Indian Standard 



INTERNAL FUSES AND INTERNAL 

OVERPRESSURE DISCONNECTORS FOR 

CAPACITORS FOR INDUCTIVE HEAT 

GENERATING PLANTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requiremeats, tests 
and the guidance for coordination of internal 
fuses used to protect capacitors for inductive 
heat generating plants operating at frequencies 
between 40 Hz and 60 Hz in accordance with 
IS 9251 : 1979. 

1.2 This standard also applies to internal over- 
pressure disconnectors used to protect self-healing 
metallized dielectric capacitors. 

1.3 This standard does not apply to fuses and 
disconnectors for which service conditions, in 
general, are incompatible with the requirements 
of this standard, unless otherwise agreed between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

1.4 The guidance for coordination of fuse and 
disconnector protection is given in Annex A. 

2 REFERENCES 

2,1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex B are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 The following detinitioas in addition to those 
given in IS 1885 ( Part 42 ) : 1985 shall apply. 

NOTE — The word 'element* in this standard is used in 
accordance with the definitions contained in IS 1885 
(Part 42): 1985 and not in accordance with IS 9224, 
IS 9926 or IS 9385. 

3.1 Internal Fuse 

A fuse connected inside a capacitor unit in scries 
with an element or group of elements. 

3.2 Internal Overpressure Disconnector 

A disconnecting device inside a capacitor, 
designed to interrupt the current path in cases of 
excessive rising pressure. 

NOTES 

1 This overpressure disconnector is nol a current 
hmiting fuse. 

2 rhls type of diconnector can aha be placed outside 
the capacitor unit but it IS still considered an integral 
part of the cipaciior unit and shall fulfil the same 
requirements and pass the same tests as the internal 
overpressure disconnector. 

3 This device is normally used in capacitors of the 
self-healing type. 



2.3 Bank Protection 

A general term for all protective equipment for a 
capacitor bank, or part thereof, 

2.4 Unbalanced Protection 

A device sensitive to capacitance difference 
between branches of the bank normally in balance 
with each other. The capacitance difference may 
be due to a blown fuse( s ) or operation of a 
disconnector or insulation failure within the 
bank. 

NOTE — Other protective devices, such as overcurrent 
and earth fault protection, are self-explanatory, since 
they are commonly used for other applications. 

4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 The fuse is connected in series to the 
element(s) . The fuse is intended to isolate if 
the element(s) becomes faulty. The range of 
currents and voltages for the fuse is, therefore, 
dependent on the capacitor design, and in some 
cases also on the bank in which the fuse is 
connected, 

4.1,1 The operation of an internal fuse is in 
general determined by one or both of the follow- 
ing factors: 

a) The discharge energy from elements or 
units connected in parallel with the faulty 
element or unit, and 

b) The power-frequency fault current. 

4.2 The disconnector is intended to interrupt the 
current to all elements of the capacitor. The 
proper operation of the disconnector is dependent 
on the leak-tightness of the container during the 
life of the capacitor, 

5 DISCONNECTING REQTLJIREMENTS 

5.1 The fuse shall enable the faulty element to be 
disconnected when electrical breakdown of 
elements occurs in a voltage range, in which ^^'x 
is the lowest, and (/g the highest ( instantaneous ) 
value of the voltage between the terminals of Ihc 
unit at the instant of fault, 

5,L1 The recommended value;, tni IJy and //. arc 
the followmg: 

C/, - 08 V 2 /^N 



1 



IS 12730 : 1989 



NOTES 

1 The Ui and Uz values above are based on the 
voltage that may normally occur across the capacitor 
unit terminals at the instant of electrical breakdown of 
the element. 

The t/a values are of a transient nature. 

The purchaser shall specify if the Ui and U^ values 
differ from the stated ones. If so, the values stated in 
10.1 and 10.4 shall be changed accordingly. 

2 The requirements are valid for capacitors switched 
by a restrike-free circuit-breaker. If the breakers are 
not restrike-free, other requirements shall be agreed 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

5.2 The disconnector shall enable the faulty 
capacitor unit to be disconnected for voltage up 
to and including Ug. 
5,2.1 The recommended rms value is: 

NOTE — The purchaser shall specify if this voltage will 
be exceeded. 

6 WITHSTAND REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 After operation, the fuse assembly and the 
disconnector shall withstand full element voltage 
and full voltage between the terminals of the 
disconnected capacitor respectively, plus any 
unbalance voltage due to fuse or disconnector 
action, and any short time transient overvoitages 
normally experienced during the life of the 
capacitor. 

6.2 Throughout the life of the capacitor, the 
disconnector shall be capable of carrying conti- 
nuously a current equal to or greater than 11 
times the maximum permissible unit current, and 
the fuses capable of carrying continuously a 
current equal to or greater than the maximum 
permissible unit current divided by the number 
of parallel fused paths. 

NOTE— The requirements are valid if the capacitors 
are switched by a restrjke-frec circuit-breaker. If the 
breakers are not restrikc-free, other requirements are to 
be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

6.3 The fuse and the disconnector shall be capable 
of withstanding the inrush currents due to the 
switching operation expected during the life of 
the capacitor. 

h\ addition, the fuse shall be able to withstand 
continuously 100 switching operations daily as 
specified in 5.5.6,2 of IS 9251 : 1979. 
6*4 The fuse connected to the undamaged ele- 
ment(s) must be able to carry the discharge 
currents due to the breakdown of clcment(s). 

6.S The fuses and disconnectors must be able to 
carry the currents due to short-circuit faults 
external to the unit(s) on the bank occurring 
within the voltage range in accordance with 5-1. 

7 MARKING 

7.1 The marking regarding the presence of 
internal fuse and internal overpressure discon- 
nector shall be provided on the rating plate of 



the capacitor for inductive heat generating 

plants. 

8 TESTS 

8.1 Type Tests 

The following shall constitute type tests; 

a) Discharge test ( .see 9 ), 

b) Disconnecting test on fuses ( see 10 ), and 

c ) Disconnecting test on disconnector 
( see 11 ). 

In addition, the fuses and disconnectors shall be 
able to withstand all type tests of the capacitor 
units in accordance with IS 9251 ; 1979. 

8.L1 Type tests of fuses are performed either on 
the complete capacitor unit or, at the choice of 
the manufacturer, on two units, one unit being 
tested at the lower voltage limit, in accordance 
with 10.1 and one unit at the upper voltage limit. 
The nnit(s) shall have passed all routine tests 
stated in IS 9251 : 1979. 

NOTE — Due to testing, measuring and safety circums- 
tances it may be necessary to make modiiBcations to the 
unir(s; under test; for example, those indicated in 
Annex C {see also the different test methods given in 
Annex C). 

8.1.2 Type tests of disconnectors are performed 
on a capacitor unit that shall have passed all 
routine tests stated in IS 9251 : 1979. 

8.1.3 Type tests are considered valid if they arc 
performed on capacitors of a design identical 
with that of the capacitor offered, or on a 
capacitor of a design that does not dilfer from it 
in any way that might affect the properties to be 
checked by the type tests. 

8.2 Routine Tests 

No routine tests are required. 

9 DISCHARGE TEST 

9.1 The fuses and disconnectors shall be subjected 
to hvc discharges within 10 minutes from a dc 
voltage equal to 2'5 6^n through a gap situated as 
close as possible to the capacitor, without any 
additional impedance in the circuit. 

9.2 To prove that the fuses or disconnectors have 
not operated, a capacitance measurement shall be 
made before and after the test, measuring method 
shall be used that is sufficiently sensitive to detect 
the capacitance change caused by one blown 
fuse. 

10 DISCONNECTING TEST ON FUSES 

10. 1 Tests Procedure 

The disconnecting tost on fuses is peifornicd hfot 
at the lower ac test voltage of 0'8 6A\ and then, as 
soon as possible after the blowing of one fuse, at 
the upper ac test volta^H^ of 2.2 Ui^-, until the 
blowing of another fuse. 



IS 12730 : 1989 



10.1.1 Certain test methods are iadicalcd in 

Annex C. 

NOTE — If the test is carried out with do, the test 

voltage shall be /2 times the corresponding ac test 
voltage. 

10.2 Capacitance Measurement 

After the tost, capacitance shall be measured to 
prove that the fuse(s) has ( have ) blown. 

10.2.1 A measuring method shall be used that is 
sufficiently sensitive to detect the capacitance 
change by one blown fuse. 
10*3 Inspection of the Unit 

Before opening, no significaat deformation of the 
container shall be apparent. 

After opening the container, a check should be 
made to ensure that: 

a) no significant deformation of sound fuses 
is apparent; and 

b) not more than one additional fuse ( or one- 
tenth of fused elements directly in parallel ) 
has been damaged (see G-i, Note 1 ). If 
method given in C-3 is used a small amount 
of blackening of the impTegnant will not 
affect the quality of the capacitor. 

10.4 Voltage Test After Opening the 
Container 

A voltage test shall be carried out by applying for 
10 seconds a dc test voltage equal to 3*5 times the 
rated voltage of the elements across the broken- 
down element and the gap in its blown fuse. 
During the test, the gap shall be in the impreg- 
nant. No breakdown over the fuse gap is 
allowed. 

NOTE — For use with all elements in parallel and for 
all units if test procedure indicated in C-2 or C-3 or 
C-4 or C-5 is used, this test can be replaced by an ac 
test before the opening of the unit. The test voltage 
between the terminals is selected through calculations 
using capacitance ratio such that the voltage across the 
breakdown eleinent and the_gap in its blown fuse is the 
above value divided by 'Z 2. 



11 DISCONNECTING TEST ON 
DISCONNECTOR 

11. 1 Test Procedure 

The capacitor is preheated in a chamber before 
applying the test voltage until all parts reach a 
temperature of OO'^C. An ac test voltage of 1*6 C/n 
shall be applied until the disconnector interrupts 
the current through the capacitor. If the discon- 
nector does not operate within 8 hours, the test 
voltage is raised to J*75 t/x. 

11.1,1 If, after a further 8 hours, the disconnector 
still has not operated, the test voltage should 
finally be raised to 2 t/N, until the current is 
interrupted. If no interruption is achieved, the 
temperature may be further raised at the option 
of the manufacturer. 

NOTE — Precautions shall be taken when performing 
this test against the possible explosion of a capacitor 

unit. 

11.2 Capacitance Measurement 

After the test, capacitance shall be measured to 
prove that the disconnector has operated. 

11.3 Inspection of the Unit 

Only slight traces of impregnant on the outside 
of the capacitor are allowed. 

11.4 Voltage Tests 

A voltage test between terminals shall be carried 
out by applying, for iO seconds, an ac voltage 
equal to 2*15 U^ or a dc voltage equal to 4*3 U.S, 

In addition, a voltage test between terminals and 
container shall be made by applying for 10 
seconds the test voltage given in IS 9251 ; 1979. 

The test voltage shall be applied after the capa- 
citor has cooled down to room temperature. 

11.4.1 No internal breakdown is allowed. 

NOTE — The cuirent shall be recorded durini: tlic 
test. 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 14 ) 

GUIDE FOR COORDINATION OF FUSE AND DISCONNECTOR PROTECTION 



A-1 GENERAL 

A-M The fuse is connected jn series v/ith the 
clement that the fuse is designed to isolate, if the 
clement becomes faulty. After the breakdown of 
an clement, the fuse connected to it will blow, 
and isolate it from the remaining part of the 
capaciLor, which allows the unit to continue in 
service. The blowiug ol one or more fuses will 
caubc voltage changes wnhin the bank, when 
series comicciioo is used. 

A-I.2 The voltag : across sound unit(s) must not 
cAcced the value given in JS 9251 : i 979» 



A-1.3 Depending on the internal coniicction of 
the units, the blowing of one or more fuses may 
also cause a change of voltage within the unit. 

The remaining elements in a series group will 
have an increased working voltage, and the manu- 
facturer shall, on request, give details of the 
voltage rise catised by blown fuses. 

A- 1.4 A typical arrangement ut interna! uvir- 
pro^sure discouncctuis in a tbrcc-pliasc Uiiii (.att 
be seen in Fig. 1 . 

in Fig. 2, the operational principle of the internal 
overpressure di.bConnector can be seen. 



IS 12730 : 1989 




APACITOR UNIT 



Fig. 1 Typical Layout of a Three-Phase Delta-Connected Capacitor 
Unit, with Two Internal Overpressurb Disconnectors ( D, and D^ ) 



RESILIENT CASE 
WALL 



NOTCHED 
COPPER STRIP 

INSULATED 



TUBE 




PULL STRAP 



1 




2A Disconnector Before Operation 2B DisconnGCtor After Operation 

NOTE — In the event of rising pressure, a resilient wall of the container bulges out. By niovenient t>f the 
pull strap, the notched copper strip is torn into two sections. By the action of the tension spring, the 
current is interrupted and the arc is extinguished very quickly, because the disconnector is installed in an oil- 
filled insulating tube, 

Fig. 2 Principle of Design for an Overpressure Disconnector for Self- 
Healing Medium Voltage Power Capacitors 



IS 12730 : 1989 



Because of the self-healing properties of the 
capacitor, breakdowns are not dangerous and do 
not increase the current significantly. But, in the 
event of rising pressure ( for example, caused by 
thermal instability, which may occur at the end 
of the life of the capacitor, or, in some cases, by 
an excessive number of self-healing breakdowns, 
caused by extreme overloads ) the self-healing 
power capacitor should be protected by an 
internal overpressure disconnector. 

A-2 PROTECTION SEQUENCE 

A-2.1 The protection of a capacitor bank must 
operate selectively. The first step is the fusing of 



the elemeni(s) or the operation of the discon- 
nector. The second step is the relay protection 
of the bank (for example, overciirrent or un- 
balance protection ). The third step is network 
or plant protection. 

NOTES 

1 Depending on the output of the bank, the design 
of the relay protection, etc, all the three steps are not 
necessarily used in all capacitor banks. 

2 In large banks, an alarm stage may also be used. 

3 Unless the fuse always blows as a result of 
discharge energy within the voltage range in 5.1, the 
manufacturer shall provide the current/time charac- 
teristic and tolerances of the fuse. 



ANNEX B 

( Clause 2.1 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. 



Title 



IS No. 



IS 1885 ( Fart 42 ) : 1985 Electrotechnical voca- is 9385 

bulary: Part 42 Power 
capacitors (first revi- 
sion ) 

Specification for low 
voltage fuses 

Part I General require- 
nients 

Part 2 Supplementary 
requirements for fuses 
for industrial applica- 
tions ( superseding IS : 
2208 ) 

Part 4 Supplementary 
requirements for fuse- 
links for the protection 
of semiconductor 

devices 

Specification for capa- 
citors for inductive heat JS 9926 : 1981 
generating plants operat- 
ing at frequencies bet- 
ween 40 and 24 000 Hz 



IS 9224 

(Part I ): 1979 
( Pari 2 ) : 1979 

( Part 4) : 1980 

IS 9251 : 1979 



( Part 1 ) : 1979 
( Part 2) : 1980 
( Part 3) : 1980 
( Part 4) : 1983 

{ Part 5 ) : 1983 



Title 

Specification for high 
voltage fuses 

Part 1 Current limiting 
fuses 

Part 2 Expulsion and 
similar fuses 

Part 3 Application guide 
for high voltage fuses 

Part 4 Determination of 
short - circuit power 
factor for testing of high 
voltage fuses 

Part 5 Types and di- 
mensions of fuse-links 
for current - limiting 
fuses 

Specification for fuse- 
wire used in rewirabic 
type electric fuses up to 
650 volts 



ANNEX C 
[ Clauses 8.M, lai.l, 103(b) and 104 ( Note ) 1 
TEST PROCEDURES FOR THE DISCONNECTING TEST ON INTERNAL FUSES 



C-1 GENERAL 

C-1.1 One or tlie test procedure given in C-2, 
C-3, C-4, G-5i C-6, or an alternative method, 
shall be used. 

C-L2 If no agreement has been reached, the 

choice is left to the manufacturer ( s<e also Note 
under 8. M). 



NOTES 

1 At the upprr voltage limit, tnie additional iii&e ( or 
one-tenth of the fused elcinenis directly in parallel ) 
connected to a sound clement (s) is allowed to be 
damaged. 

2 The test voltage shall be maintained ior few 
seconds after a breakdown, to ensure that the fuse has 
disconnected correctly, unaided by disflwincction of the 
power supply. 



IS 12730 : 1989 



3 III special cases, it may be necessary to extend the 
tests unlil two or more breakdowns of cap^jcitor e!c- 
ments have occurred. The number of breakdowns at 
each vohage iimii shall in such cases be subjeci to 
agreement between ihe manufacturer and the puixliascr. 
If !he number of breakdowns is exceeded, the volt:^)ges 
stated in tO.4 may have to be increased. 

4 To verify the current limiting b^^haviour of the 
fuses when fesied at the upper voltage limit, the voltage 
drop, excluding transient, across the blown fuse must 
not exceed 30 percent. 

5 If Uie fuse docs not fulfil the requiremcni ef Nr.tc 
4, precauiions must be taken to make certain (InH JlfC 
parallel stored energy, and the power frequency fiiuh 
current available from the system, are represcnunive of 
service conditions. 

A test sliall then bo made to demonstrate satisfacuny 
operation of the fuse. 

6 Precaulit)ns shall be taken when performing tliis 
lest against the possible explosion of a capacitor unit 
and the explosive projection o\' the naii. 

C-2 CAPACITOR PREHEATING 

C-2. 1 The oapucitor unit is preheated in a 
chamber before applying the ae test vollafe at the 
lower iiniii. Preheating temperature ( JOOC'to 
150''C ) is eiio:^eu by the niantifacturer \o ae!-le\e 
a]>raetical short time ( tew minutes to lew hour^ ) 
to the first breakdown. 

C-2.2 A lower preheating temperature shonki he 
trsed when apj^lyin/.' the test voltage at the higher 
voltage limit, to avoid breakdowns before reaching 
the test voltage. 

C-2. 3 Capacitor current is to be recorded during 
the test. 

NOTE — To prevent excessive internal liquid pressure 
due to high temperature, the unit may be equipped wlih 
a relief tube including a valve which must be closed at 
the nistant of applying the test voltage. 

C-3 MECHANICAL PUNCTURE OF THE 
ELEMENT 

C-3J Mechanical puncture oi' the element is inade 
hy a naii, which is Ibrccd into th.' eiemejit 
through a prc-drilled hole in the container. 1 he 
test voilagc may he dc or ac, the choice being left 
to the manufacturer. 

C-3*2 If ac voltage is used, capacitor current )S 
to be recorded during the test and timing' of 
puncture should be made, to asecrt.iin tJK^t the 
breakdown is triggered to take place at the instant 
of the feakofthcac test voltage, or very near 
to it. 

NOTHS 

1 Puncture of only one element cannot be guaran- 
teed. 

2 In order to Imnt the possibiliiy v\' a tl:!slio\fr i.^ 
the coniainer along the nail, or through ihc hole caused 



by the nail, the punctures may be performed in the 

elenvMi's ct.)pnec ed, pemuinciilly vr durini', ihe lest, 
to ihe coiita^ncr. 

3 DC vv)itai;c i-^ especially suitable for capacitors 

having :\\\ ci'^MU iiis in par.iPol. 

C-4 ELECriUCAL BREAKDOWN OF THE 
ELEMENT ( FIRST SOLUTION ) 

C-4.! Some c-^ih^'jUs m tlu: le^t imit are each 

vr>\Mi: J u^i'h. ^\m' v\:iiy\- U:, a \:\\\ mscrled bct- 
\wci; t ' ■■■ ti^'-'. . 1 ; V ::;;^r-. \ ^[c\\ [dl- IS connected 

t .^ a ^C ai :.itr tL^'MinUi:. 

C-4*2 I 1^0 tcsi V >!t;i 'c m;iv he ac or dc, the choice 
hoiiig : -ii 10 ill..: !n;iM^:iaLi;.,rer. 

C-4. 3 io oi t.un t : .:ikdu\. II of an element tlms 
^x\[ii : cd. :i s: r.^e \o;Lige oi' siiilicient amplitude 
is ;i p^i-d ix-lwccii ti.e tab and one of the fulls of 
tlie tU' ditled ciement. 

C-4. 4 In tlto case olae voltage, tlie surge Jiiust be 

tiig-cred at tiic instant ol the ]>ccik or very near 
lo iL 

C4.5 Capacitor current is lo be recorded during 

t II .' iC^t. 

Co ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN OF THE 
ELEMENT ( SECOND SOLUTION ) 

C-5.1 Some elcTi). nts m tlie test uiiit are each 

rrcv. :d. d v\ !th, lor example, a short fuse wire 
coriMccied to two cxum tabs and inserted t>etueen 
the d)0:e-;tr:c hi\er.s. Lach tab js connected lo its 
own buslnn:'. 

C-5.2 The test voltage nia\ l)e dc or ac, the choice 

being Ici't to the maiuiiaeiur».-r. 

C-5*3 fo u!>ta!n 'nreakdowi) oi^ an elenierit 
equi; , cd wii!i iliis shod !i:se wire, a capacitor 
eha : o at a stiiheicni xnitaye is connected to the 
tvsc) !v>,L[iii N coiuicered to it m order to explode 
iltc wire. 

C~5.4 h) the e:ise o{^ ac volt^i^'c, tiie connection of 

tltc Lii.,r ed cjr*.ie-or *.iinsing the wire cx[d^lsion 
niiist i^c M-L'^:cicd at the instant o! tiie peak voU- 
age or very near to it. 

G-5.5 Cap icitor current i^ to l^e lecoided during 

the test. 

C.6 ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN OF THE 
ELEMENT ( THIRD SOLUTION ) 

C-6, 1 A small jait ot an clement ( or some ele- 
ments ' in a unit iS at i lie time oimannlacture 
removcvl and re -accd With a weaktn' dielecn'ie for 
ex.im|"i;e. ^t i^ _]o cHi-^ oi a liini-naS'Cr him 
dici.'varic i^ f'unr/.c:' i^nay aiKl the lose is cosercd 
w iiti two iii^! . a^ cj ■^. 

■rhi:> 'ni ii'i>i: wi.: [■\pj:>: experience Oii lu)w to 
make a smlai./.e d!(.;eeii'ie strLiigtii reduction. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions ot the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 19S6 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Derails of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act. 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may he reproduced m 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
urade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they arc in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be seat to BIS giving 
the following reference : 

Doc : No. ETD 29 ( 2977 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



Headquarters: 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Offices) 

Regional Oltices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg J 331 ()| 31 



1331 01 
1331 13 



NEW DELHI 110002 (331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. L T, Scheme VII VI. V. I. P. Road. Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus^ IV Cross Koad, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri (East) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. HHUHANESWAK. COIMBATORt 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR KANPIJR 
PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 

I'rinted at Saini Printers^ Delhi, India 



