**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10149 (1982) : Positive list of constituent of styrene 
polymers in contact with foodstuffs^ pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water [PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 1(1149 -19B2 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 

Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF 

CONSTITUENTS OF STY RENE POLYMERS 

IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



UDC 678 74fi 32 ; 621 ^Sfl : 663/664 + 6i5l/-4 : 614 8 




INDIAN STAPtfDARPS INSTITUTION 

VAVAi^ RHAVAX. 9 R\HAEllm SKaH ZaFAH MART. 

Price RsT^ Jjfti^ 1^B2 



IS : 10149 - 1982 



Indian Standard 



POSITIVE LIST OF 

CONSTITUENTS OF STYRENE POLYMERS 

IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCDC 12 

Chairman 

Dr K. J. Balakbishna 
A-10, Shantinagar, Cantonment, Kanpur 

Members Representing 

Db p. C. Antony Indian Plastics Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi N. L. Birla { Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Athalye All India Plastics Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 

Secbetaby ( AIPMA ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. K. Banebjee Polyolefins Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi A. T. Basae: Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shbi B. B. Rai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K.J. Bhatt State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New 

Delhi 

Shbi Bhagwan Daswaki ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. T. Bhojwani Bright Brothers Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi A. H. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Sjh'BI T, S. Biddapa National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shbi J. K. Vadodaria ( Alternate ) 
Db R. p. Dambal Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri G. V. Kko {Alternate) 
Db S. p. Singh Dhakarey Ministry of Defence (DGI) 

Shbi N. C. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shbi M. K. Unnikbishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Dion Ferkanbes Plastics & Linoleum Export Promotion Council, 

Bombay 

Shri K. Ramani ( Alternate ) 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

( Continued from page \ ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi M. S. Fbanois Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 

Tools, Madras 
Shri Chandbakant B. Gabwakb Garware Synthetics Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi H. S. Sitri ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi S. M. Lahibi ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K.Jain Hoechst Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi K. A. T. Vabghksb ( Alternate ) 
Db S. P. Manik Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways) 

Shbi N. Krishnanpfa ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Mahalingam Chemicals & Plastics ( India ) Ltd, Madras 

Shbi S. S. Gattani ( Alternate } 
Shbi P. R, Malhan Development Commissioner, Small Scale Indus- 

tries, New Delhi 
Shbi S. R. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. C. Mishba Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shbi G. L. Anand ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Mitba Calico Chemicals ( Plastics and Fibres Division ), 

Bombay 
Db B. R. C. An AND ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. R. Nabasimhan Metal Box Ltd, Calcutta 

Db S. Lakshmanan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. Nijhawan Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Gtjpta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. S. Ramamitbthi Polychem Limited, Bombay 

Shbi C. XJ. Khandhebia ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. P, Ratra National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shbi D. A. Rebs Kosmek Plastics Manufacturing Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi O. P. Banebjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Santhanam The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India 

Limited, Calcutta 
Shbi D.Jain { Alternate ) 
Dr p. R. Sbshan Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Shbi A. K. Ray ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P, P. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri N. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Db J. Vaid Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Pune 

Db S. p. Bhide ( Alternate ) 
Db S. p. Vohba Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shbi Y. V. Chittal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. S. Saxena, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( P&C ) ( Secretary ) 

( Continued on page 13 ) 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF 

CONSTITUENTS OF STYRENE POLYMERS 

IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 13 May 1982, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Goal and 
Related Products Division Council. 

0.2 Plastics are now being used on a large scale for packaging of foodstuffs 
and pharmaceuticals. Where direct contact occurs between the packed 
commodity and the plastics, the high- molecular-mass polymer itself does 
not pose a toxic hazard being inert and essentially insoluble in food. 
There is, however, a likelihood that some transfer will occur of polymer 
additives, adventitious impurities, such as monomers, catalyst remnants 
and residual polymerisation solvents and of low molecular mass polymer 
fractions from the plastics into the packaged material with consequent 
toxic hazard to the consumers. The occurrence of acute toxicity due to 
plastics materials in contact with food is most unlikely, since only trace 
quantities of potentially toxic materials are likely to migrate. However, 
the accumulation of these toxic materials with time may lead to hazards 
which may be serious, 

0.3 Initially the Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of 
this standard had prepared three codes of practice for safe use of 
polyvinyl chloride ( IS: 7288-1974* ), polyethylene ( IS : 7277-1 974t ) 
and styrene polymers ( IS : 7961-1976J ) in contact with foodstufiPs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. Taking cognizance of the pressing 
need to monitor the quality of plastics intended to come in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water which could not be done 
on the basis of standard codes of practice, the Committee decided to 



♦Code of practice for safe use of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its copolymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

fCode of practice for safe use of polyethylene in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceu- 
tical and drinking water. 

JGode of practice for safe use of styrene polymers in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 



IS : 10149 - 19B2 

prepare the following series of Indian Standards dealing with various 
aspects of plastics for food contact applications: 

IS : 9833-1981 List of pigments and colourants for use in plastics in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water; 

IS : 9845-1981 Method of analysis for the determination of specific 
and/or overall migration of constituents of plastics 
materials and articles intended to come into 
contact with foodstuffs; 

IS : 10141-1982 Positive list of constituents of polyethylene in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water; 

IS : 10142-1982 Specification for styrene polymers for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water; 

IS: 10146-1982 Specification for polyethylene for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water; 

IS : 10148-1982 Positive list of constituents of polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) and its copolymers in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water; 

IS : 10149-1982 Positive list of constituents of styrene polymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water; 

IS: 10151-1982 Specification for polyvinyl chloride ( PVC ) and its 
copolymers for its safe use in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water; and 

IS : 10171-1982 Guide on suitability of plastics for food packaging. 

Eventually the three codes of practice would be withdrawn with the 
publication of the product specification along with the corresponding 
positive list for the three plastics. Standards for other plastics for food 
contact applications like polypropylene and unsaturated polyester resins 
which are under preparation are expected to follow the same pattern, 
namely, a product specification with a corresponding positive list. It is 
hoped that this set of Indian Standards for plastics considered safe for 
food contact applications would help the statutory bodies to effectively 
monitor the quality of plastics for this end use. 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

0.4 This list of additives prescribed in these positive lists are based on the 
Information available through published literature like British Plastics 
Federation Reports, London (English); FDA Regulations, USA; and other 
national legislation reports. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers positive list of constituents of styrene polymers, 
namely, the polymers, residual monomers, catalysts, emulsifying agents, 
suspension agents, miscellaneous polymerization additives like process 
oxidants, and chain transfer agents, polymerization ingredients and 
auxiliary items for working which may be regarded as safe for use, when 
properly processed, in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water and when present in the prescribed limits of concentration. 

1.2 The positive list does not purport to establish the suitability of the 
ingredient singly in a particular foodstuff from other than toxicological 
considerations. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Styrene polymers shall mean: 

a) Homopolymers of styrene; 

b) Copolymers of styrene with one or more of the following 
monomers. The copolymers shall contain at least 50 percent by 
mass of styrene or substituted styrene ( styrene substituted in the 
benzene ring or the vinyl group by halogens or alkyl groups ): 

1) Acrylonitrile; 

2) Acrylic, fumaric, itaconic, maleic or methacrylic acid; 

3) Esters of the acids given in 2.1(b)(2) above with saturated 
monohydric aliphatic alcohols ( Ci to Cg ); 

4) Vinyl esters of monobasic aliphatic acids; 

5) Butadiene; 

6) Divinyl benzene; 

7) Ethylene, propylene, butene or isohutene; 

8) Vinyl esters of saturated monohydric aliphatic alcohols; 

9) *A''-vinyl carbazole; and 
10) Acenaphthalene 

5 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

c) Mixtures of the products listed in 2.1(a) and 2,l(b); and 

d) Mixtures of the products listed in 2.1(a) and 2.1(b) with one or 
more of the following to any level of not more than 50 percent 
of the finished polymer. The term 'mixture' in this context 
refers solely to the two phase nature of the final composition and 
not to the method of its manufacture: 

1) Polybutadiene; 

2) Butadiene copolymer rubbers ( for example, copolymers with 
styrene, acrylonitrile, ethylene or isoprene ); 

3) Polyuoprene; 

4) Ethylene/propylene copolymer rubbers; 

5) Ethylene/propylene/non-conjugated diene terpolymer rubber; 

6) Homo or copolymer rubbers of acrylic acid esters with 
monohydric saturated aliphatic alcohols; 

7) Ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer rubbers; and 

8) lyobutene/woprene copolymer rubbers. 

3. REQjUlREMENTS 

3.1 Basic Resin — To comply with this standard, the styrene polymers 
defined in 2.1 shall be made in such a way that they contain no 
ingredients or residues of ingredients other than those listed in the 
following clauses. 

3.2 Residual Monotners — The total residual monomers, when present, 
shall not exceed 0'2 percent by mass of the polymer when tested 
according to the method prescribed in IS : 10142-1982*. 

3.3 Catalyst — The total residue of catalyst and their decomposition 
products unbound to polymer shall constitute less than 0'2 percent by 
mass of the plymer polymer. The residue of the following catalysts may 
be present: 

a) Benzoyl peroxide; 

b) Aliphatic acid peroxides ( C^ to Ci^ ); 

c) /^r/-Butyl perbenzoate; 

d) Cumene hydroperoxide; 



♦Specification for styrene polymers for its safe us^ in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 



IS 1 10149 - 1982 

e) tert'Butyl hydroperoxide; 

f ) Dicumyl peroxide; 

g) Di-/^r/-butyl peroxide; 

h) ^^r/-butyl peroxy diethyl acetate; 
j ) Azo-bis-uobutyronitrile; 
k) Potassium persulphate; 
m) ^«r/-Butyl peracetate; 
n) 2, 2-Bis-( ^^r^butyl peroxy ) butane; 
p) 2, 2-Bis-( ^^r/-butyl peroxy ) hexane; and 
q) Azo-bis-cyclohexanyl carbonitrile. 

3.4 Emulsifying Agents — The total emulsifying agents shall constitute 
less than 0*2 percent by mass of the finished polymer. The residue of the 
following emulsifying agents may be present: 

a) Aikyl and alkylarylsulphates of sodium, potassium and 
ammonium, the alkyl group containing Ciq to Ggo; 

b) Alkyl and alkylaryl sulphonates of sodium, potassium and 
ammonium , the alkyl group containing Ciq to GgoJ 

c) Products of condensation of ethylene oxide and mono aliphatic 

acids ( Cio to C^o ) and their sodium and ammonium sulphates; 

/ 

d) Products of condensation of ethylene oxide and mono aliphatic 
acid alcohols ( Cio to Cgo ) and their sodium and ammonium 
sulphates; 

e) Products of condensation of ethylene oxide with phenols having 
alkyl groups G^ and above and their sodium and ammonium 
sulphates; 

f ) Polyethylene glycol ( molecular mass at least 300, free of ethylene 
glycol and diethylene glycol ); 

g) Polyethylene glycol mono-oleate; 

h) Sodium stearate [ and t\ie correspoTidmg acidV, and 

j) Sodium salt of naphthalene sulphonic acid/formaldehyde 
condensate. 



IS: 10149 r 1982 

3.5 Suspension Agents — The total residue of suspension agents shall 
constitute less than 0*2 percent by mass of the finished polymer. The 
residue of the following suspension agents may be present: 

a) Polyvinyl alcohol ( having a viscosity of at least 4 centipoise at 
20°C in 4 percent aqueous solution ), 

b) Calcium and sodium phosphates, 
c) Phosphoric acids, 

d) Calcium chloride, 

e) Dicalcium hydrogen phosphate, 

f ) Tricalcium phosphate, 

g) Potassium chloride, 
h) Sodium chloride, 
j) Acetic acid, 

k) Sodium acetate, 
m) Bentonite, 
n) Gelatine, 

p) Poly-jV-vinyl pyrrolidone, 
q) Polyacrylic acids and their sodium salts, 

r) Hydroxyethyl cellulose, 

s) Sodium nonyl phosphate, 

t) Sodium dioctyl sulpho-succinate, 
u) Magnesium sulphate, and 

v) Sodium sulphate. 

3.6 Miscellaneous Polymerization Additives — The total residues, 
unbound to the polymer, of inhibitors, process antioxidants and chain 
transfer asrents shall constitute less than 0*4 percent by mass of the 
finished polymer. The residues of the following may be present. 

3.6.1 Inhibitors 

4-/^r^Butyl catechol ( maximum 0*001 percent ) 

3.6.2 Process Antioxidants 

a) Tri-( nonylphenyl ) phosphite; 

8 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

b) Di'tert'hutyl-p'Cresol; and 

c) 2, 2'-Methylene-bis-( 4 methyl-6-^^r/-butyl phenol ). 

3«6,3 Chain Transfer Agents 

a) Terpinolene, 

b) Alpha-methyl styrene dimer, and 

c) Alkyl mercaptans. 

3.7 Other Ingredients 

3,7»1 Polymerization Ingredients — Olher polymerization ingredients may 
be present provided that the manufacturer has obtained specific approval 
for their use from the concerned statutory authority and used within any 
limitation imposed by such authority. 

3.8 Auxiliary Items for Working — These include the following 
lubricants, antioxidants and other additives: 

a) Lubricants: 

1) Aliphatic fatty acids, saturated or unsaturated, higher than 

2) Amides of aliphatic fatty acids, saturated or unsaturated, 
higher than Cg ( maximum 0'3 percent ); 

3) Aliphatic fatty alcohols higher than Cg; 

4) N, N'-Bis-stcaryl ( and/or palmityl ) ethylene diamine 

( maximum 2 percent ); 

5) Microcrystalline waxes, paraffins or paraffin oil, containing 
less than O'l ppm of noxious polycyclic aromatic hydro- 
carbons; 

6) Natural waxes ( carnauba wax, beeswax, japan wax ); 

7) Esters of montanic acid with ethane dihydric alcohol and 
1, 3-butane dihydric alcohol; 

8) Esters of diethylene glycol with a oleic, palmitic, ricinoleic 
and stearic acids; 

9) Esters of glycol with fatty aliphatic acids, saturated or not, 
higher than C^; 

10) Esters of fatty aliphatic acids, saturated or not, higher than 
Cg with alcohol from C4 to Cg; 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

11) Esters of sorbitol and/or sorbitan with fatty aliphatic acids, 
saturated or not, higher than Cg; 

12) Oils and fats of bones, refined with a maximum of 1 percent 
non-saponifiable matter; 

13) Vegetable oils, edible grade; 

14) Octoate, oleate, palmitate and stearate of zinc ( maximum 
2 percent on the whole of these products ); 

15) Organo polysiloxanes with methyl and/or phenol groups 
( silicon oil ) the viscosity of which at 20°C is at least 100 
centipoises; 

16) Polyethylene glycol of molecular mass at least 300 and the 
monoethylene glycol content of which is less than O'l percent; 

17) Poly ( 1, 2-propyIene glycol ) of molecular mass greater than 
300 and the 1 , 3-propylene glycol content of which is less 
than 0' I percent; 

1 8) Polyoxyethylene (20) monooleate of sorbitan; 

19) Salts of calcium, sodium, aluminium, magnesium, lithium, 
ammonium { NH4 ) and aliphatic fatty acids, saturated or 
not, higher than Cg; 

20) Salts of calcium, sodium, potassium and magnesium of 
phosphoric acids; 

21) 2-Hydroxyethyl-ester of amides of aliphatic fatty acids, 
saturated or not, Cg and above; 

22) Morpholine and its salts of fatty aliphatic acids, saturated or 
not, superior to Cg; 

23) Phthalates of manovalent alcohols Cg to Cig (maximum 
2 percent ); 

24) Ketones obtained from aliphatic acids Cg to C12 or from 
stearic acids; and 

25) Dibutyl dithiocarbamate of zinc 

b) Antioxidants: 

1) Thiodipropionic acid; 

2) Dicetyl thiodipropionate; 

3) Dilauryl thiodipropionate or distearyl thiodipropionate; 

10 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

4) 2, 2'-Dihydroxy-3, S'-di ( a-xnethyicyclohexyl 5, 5' dimethyl 
diphenyl ) methane; 

5) 2, 6-/tfr/-Butyl-4-methyIphenol; 

6) 2 and/or 3 ?tfr/-butyl-4-hydroxyanisol; 

7) 4, 4'-Butyiidene-bis-(6-/^r^butyl-m-c^esol ); 

8) Gallates-dodecyl, octyl and propyl; 

9) 2, 2'-Methylene-bis-( 4-ethyl-6-/^r/-butyl phenol ); 

10) 2, 2'-Methylene-bis-(4-methyl-6-/«r/-butyl phenol ); 

11) 4, 4'-Methylene-bis-( 2-6-di-<^r/-butyl phenol ); 

12) 2, 6-Di-ftfr-f"butyl-4-methoxy methylphenol; 

13) «-Octadecyl-( 4'-hydroxy-3', 5'-di-/«r/-butyl phenyl) pro- 
pionate; 

14) 2-w-Octyl-thio-4, 6-di-( 4'-hydroxy-3', 5'-di-/^r/-butyl ) 
phenoxy triazine; 

15) Thio-bis-di-j^c-amyl phenol; 

16) Thio-bis-( 2-methyl-5-/^r/-butyl phenol ); 

17) 4, 4'-Thio-bis-( 6-/fr/-butyl-3-methyl phenol ); 

18) 2, 4, 5,-Trihydroxy butyrophenone; 

19) 1,3, 5,-Trimethyl-2-4-6-tns-(3-5-di-^<?r^butyl-4 hydroxy- 
benzyl ) benzene; 

20) 1, 1, 3-Tris-(2-methyl-4-hydroxy-5-/«r^butylphenyl) butane; 

21) 2-4-Dinonylphenyl-di-(4-mono-nonylphenyl ) phosphite, with 
a maximum 20 percent content of di-wo-octyl-nonyl-phenyl 
phosphite and products of oxidation; 

22) Phenol and/or cresols condensed with styrene and/or I'-l'- 
methylstyrene and/or olefins ( C3 to C12 ); and 

23) Octadecyl-3 ( 3, 5-di-/^r/-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl ) propionate. 

Note — Whatever be the number of antioxidants used, the total content 
of antioxidants is limited to 1*5 percent maximum. 

c) Other additives: 

1) Barium sulphate, without soluble barium; 

2) Aluminium sulphate; 

11 



IS : 10149 - 1982 

3) Calcium, sodium, potassium and magnesium chlorides; 

4) Calcium carbonate; 

5) Aluminium and magnesium sulphates; 

6) Sodium sulphate; 

7) Sodium phosphate, ortho and pyrophosphate of calcium and 
sodium and the corresponding salts of potassium and 
magnesium; 

8) Citric, tartaric, acetic and phosphoric acids; 

9) Sodium and magnesium formates; 

10) Zinc oxide; 

11) Zinc sulphide; 

12) 2-ethylhexoate of zinc; 

13) Aliphatic alcohols Cg to C20; 

14) Carboxymethyl cellulose; 

15) Methyl cellulose; 

16) Hydroxyethyl cellulose; and 

17) Methyl hydroxypropyl cellulose. 

Note — The total zinc content in the material shall be less than 
1 percent. 



12 



IS X 10149 * 1982 

{ Continued from page 2 ) 

Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries Subcommittee, 
PCDC 12 : 12 

Convener Representing 

Shri D. S. Chabha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Director- 

ate General of Health Services ), New Delhi 

Members 
Shri B. Anandaswamy Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Db p. K. Banerjee Polyolefins Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. Doraibaj ( Alternate ) 
Seri S. T. Bhojwani ' Bright Brothers Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. H. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Biddapa National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. V. Datar Polychem Ltd, Bombay 

Shri G. U. Khandheria ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. S. Gothoskar Drugs Controller ( India ), New Delhi 

Shri D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Jain The Alkali & Chemicals Corporation of India 

Ltd, Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Jain Hoechst Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K, A. T. Varghese ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Kalidas Chemicals & Plastics ( India ) Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. S. Gattani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Narasimhan Metal Box India Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr S. Lakshmanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. V. Narayanan Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri G. S. Purushothaman ( Alternate ) 
Db N. p. Rao Defence Institute of Food Preservation & Storage, 

New Delhi 

Shri V. K. Mathttr ( Alternate ) 
Representative Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Db B. R. Roy Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Shei K. C. Sah Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi V. Nijhawan ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. Sen Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Dr p. R. Seshan Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri A. K. Ray ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. P. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri N. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. Sheth Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shbi G. K. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. P. Sbivastava Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri A. N. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 FEBRUARY 2000 

TO 

IS 10149:1982 POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF 

STYRENE POLYMERS IN CONTACT WITH 

FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING 

WATER 

(Cover pages 1 and 3, Title ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

TOSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF 

POLYSTYRENE (CRYSTAL AND HIGH IMPACT) IN 

CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS 

AND DRINKING WATER' 

( Page 5, Scope, Vine 1 ) — Substitute 'polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
material* /or *styrene polymers'. 

( Pages 5 and 6, clause 2.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

Tor the purpose of this standard, the definitions of polystyrene materials 

shall mean: 

a) Homo polymers of slyrene produced by the polymerization of slyrene; 

b) Rubl>er modified polystyrene consisting of basic polymers produced by 
combining slyrcne-buiadiene copolymers and/or poly-buladicne with 
polystyrene either during or after polymerization of the polystyrene, 
such that the finished basic polymers contain not less than 75 percent by 
mass of total polymer units derived from styrene monomer. 

c) Mixtures of the products listed in (a) and (b) above,' 

( Page 6, clause 3.1, line 1 ) — Substitute 'polystyrene materials' for 
'styrene polymers'. 

( Page 6, clause 3.2, line 2 ) — Substitute *0.1' for '0.2'. 
( PCD 12 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



