**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISf IOO»>lfftl 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR NUMBER PRTNTrNfi 
MACHINES. HAND-OPERATED 



UDC eei 626 




© Ctipytighi 1982 

INDIiLN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MA-^AK iiHAVAN, y ti,\HADUR SKAH ZAfAR MARG 

NEW DELHI IlKXH 

Cr 3 Sfpkmhr 19S2 



IS : 10039 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR NUMBER PRINTING 
MACHINES, HAND-OPERATED 

Fasteners for Consumer Goods Sectional Committee, CPDC 22 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. Majumdar Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Members 

Lt-Col Ashok Coomer Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Maj p. N. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Bhatnagar M/s Bengal Waterproof Works ( 1940 ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri B. Dutt ( Alternate ) 
Shri T, A, Devagnanam Needle Industries ( India ) Ltd, Nilgiris 

Shri G. V. Mohan Rangaraj ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. K. Jhaver Zip Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri A. C. Bhaskaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. T. Mathai M/s A. T. Industries, Delhi 

Shri B. K. Mehan Federation of Association of Small Industries of 

India, New Delhi 
Shri S. T. Notani Associated Apparel Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. V. Patel Velcro India Ltd, Bombay 

Wg Gdr K. Rajan Aero-Bio Engineering Unit, New Delhi 

Shri Swadesh Kumar Sett ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ranjft H. Malkani M/s Fleet Fasteners Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. S. Peswani ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Samtani M. S. Patel & Go, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Samtani ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. L. Sanghavi Fixoclips, Nasik 

Shri S. L. Sanghavi ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. R. Sehgal Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Shroff Nylo Plast Industries ( P ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri H. J. Thacker ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. N. Sinha Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, 

Kanpur 

Shri N. R. Bose ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10039 - 1981 

( Continuedfrom page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri G. p. Sinha Additioaal Director General of Ordnance Factory, 

Kanpur 
Dr a. S. Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Consr Prod & Med Instrs ) 

Secretary 

Shri B. K. Mahata 
Deputy Director ( Consr Prod & Med Instrs ), ISI 

Paper Fasteners Subcommitteej GPDC 22 : 4 

Convener 
Shri H. Mitra Office of the Controller of Stationery, Calcutta 

Members 
Shri J. P.Jain Instruments & Apparatvis Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri A. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. V. Ramanathan Sara Fasteners and Grip Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri N. R. Rajarathinam ( Alternate ) 
Shri Shirish R. Mithani Ofipin Private Ltd, Bombay 



IS : 10039 . 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR NUMBER PRINTING 
MACHINES, HAND-OPERATED 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 10 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Fasteners for Consu- 
mer Goods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer 
Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 This standard specifies two types of number printing machines, namely, 
Type 1, having automatic number advancing, and Type 2, having manual 
number advancing. 

0.3 While formulating this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from GG-N-775C 'Numbering Machines, Office Type, Hand- 
operated,' issued by the Federal Supply Service, U.S.A. 

0.4 This standard contains clauses which call for agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier and which permit the purchaser to 
use his option for selection to suit his requirements. The relevant clause 
are 3.1.1.1, 4.2, 4.3 and 7.1. 

0.5 For the purpose of decidi^ng whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS ; 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off" 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the functional requirements and performance 
tests of hand-operated number printing machines for use in printing presses, 
binding houses, offices, etc. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the nomenclature as indicated in 
Fig. 1 shall apply. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10039 - 1981 

3. TYPES 

3.1 The number printing machines shall be of the following types. 

3.1.1 Type 1 Automatic Number Advancing 

3.1.1.1 The number setting device shall contain zero-setting and at least 
one or more than one of the settings, as defined in Table 1 or as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. However minimum consecutive 
number advancing shall not be less than 9 999. If any other number advan- 
cing ( not mentioned in Table 1 ) is required, this may also be made as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

TABLE 1 MOVEMENT OF TYPE 1 MACHINE 

Setting Number Movement 

When the same number is repeated any number of times, 

1 When consecutive numbers are printed. 

2 When any pre-set number is repeated twice and then the machine 

advances to the next consecutive number. 

3 When any pre-set number is repeated thrice and then the 

machine advances to the next consecutive number. 

4 When any pre-set number is repeated four times and then the 

machine advances to the next consecutive number. 

3.1.2 Type 2 Manual Number Advancing [Lever-operated) 

3.1.2.1 In this machine, advancing of number is done manually or 
by a lever. 

4. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

4.1 The shape and nominal dimensions of Type 1 number printing machines 
shall be as shown in Fig. 1. 

4.2 The number printing machine Type 1 may also be manufactured to 
the shape and dimensions other than those mentioned in Fig. 1, subject 
to the agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.3 Type 2 number printing machines may be manufactured to any shape 
and dimension as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



IS : 10039 - 1981 



KNOB 




LOOSE 

PAWL 






"^■1 Hill II iiiiininn 

i6-5 



61 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Number Printing Machine, Type 1 



IS : 10039 - 1981 

5. MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The number printing machine shall generally consist of a frame, 
housing base plate, numbering wheels, operating mechanism, handle and 
inking pad. The machine shall function properly, when tested as specified 
in 6. AH machines shall print legible impressions for life cycle without 
mechanical or structural failure, when tested as specified in 6.6. The design 
of Type 2 machine shall enable user to operate the machine by hand 
movement. 

5.2 The frame, housing and base plate shall be manufactured from sheet 
steel, cast metal or a combination of the two. Alternatively, the frame 
may be made of suitable plastics or any other suitable material. The parts 
shall be of such design^ construction and strength as to ensure that the 
assembled parts will securely hold together and the plastics part shall not 
break or crack, when tested as specified in 6. The machine shall be of such 
design as to permit an unobstructed view of the printing opening in the 
base plate when the machine is in operating condition with the plu nger 
raised. The printing opening in the base plate shall be equipped with a 
guide to indicate the printing line. 

5.3 The type wheels shall be made of metal, alloy or any other suitable 
material, so as to ensure compliance with performance requirements and 
tests given in this standard. Each wheel shall contain the digits to 9. 
Digit faces shall be unbroken, of uniform thickness of line, free from dents 
and burrs, and shall not be knife-edged. The wheels shall permit adjust- 
ments to print the desired figure. 

5.4 For Type 1 machines, a mechanical setting device to obtain the desired 
movements shall be provided. The selected or set movements shall be 
manually set and the setting shall not change when tested for performance 
as specified in 6. The setting shall be permanently indicated and visible 
with the machine in printing. 

5.5 The plunger handle shall be made of smoothly finished steel or suitable 
hardwood or plastics or any other suitable material and shall be provided 
with a holding knob. 

5.6 The inking pad shall be made of one-piece feh or any other suitable 
materia], which shall be readily accessible for inking and shall be replace- 
able. 

5.7 Each machine shall be furnished with a stylus or other appropriate 
device for manual advancing of individual wheel. 



IS : 10039 • 1981 

5.8 For Type 2 machines, the operating mechanism shall be manual or 
lever-operated to advance the wheels. When the machine plunger handle 
is in the released position, the lever { in case of lever-operated machines ) 
shall advance the wheels in proper consecutive order, that is one numeral 
for each operation of the lever, when tested as specified in 6.4. The number 
to be printed in any one operation shall automatically come in contact 
with the ink pad, immediately preceding each stroke of the machine. 
The lever shall be smoothly finished and shaped to permit comfortable 
operation. 

6. PERFORMANCE TEST 

6.1 Samples of number printing machines shall be subjected to the tests 
specified in 6.2 to 6.6 The inking pad of each sample shall be inked in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instruction. The printing shall be 
performed on a cream laid and cream wove paper or white printing paper 
conforming to IS : 1848-1971*. The pressure required for operating the 
number printing machine shall not be more than 15 N. 

6.2 Legibility of Printing, Type 1 and Type 2 Machines — The 

machines shall be operated to print 10 impressions within a period of 10 
seconds. Ten, such operations shall be carried out with different permu- 
tations and combinations of number of digits in the wheels. All such im- 
pressions shall be sharp, of uniform density, free from impressions other 

line. 

6.3 Consecutive Number Printing, Type 1 Machine Only — The 

machine shall be set at 'Consecutive' movement and operated to print 
the numbers 1 through 10, and thereafter the unit shall be operated and 
set so that each wheel is indexed by the previous wheel through each 
numeral on the wheel. Advancing may be accomplished by setting the wheel 
preceding the wheel to be advanced on the numeral 8 and advancing it 
by operating the machine to the numeral 1. For example, in testing the 
'tens' wheel, the first two wheels shall be set at the following numbers: 
18, 28, 38, 48, 58, 68, 78, 88 and 98, and the machine operated until the 
following numbers appear, in respective order: 21, 31, 41, 51, 61, 71, 81, 
91 and 101. The numbers set for testing the 'hundreds' wheel would 
likewise be 198, 298, 398, etc, and the remaining wheels shall be tested 
in a similar manner. 

6.4 Manual Number Advancing, Type 2 Machine Only — A Type 2 
machine shall be tested in the same way as a Type 1 machine ( see 6.3 ) 
except that number advancing shall be accomplished by manual or hand 
movement. Sufiicient numbers shall be repeated to determine that advance- 
ment is accomplished only by operation of the lever, or by hand movement. 



♦Specification, for writing and printing papers [first revision). 

7 



IS : 10039 - 1981 

6.5 Movement Test, Type 1 Machine Only — The machine shall be 
tested for following cycles as specified in Table 2 for each setting to check 
proper advancement of numbers according to adjustment in setting device 
( see 3.1.1.1 ) . A cycle shall consist of moving the handle down to the position 
where the number is printed legibly and has returned to the original, 
position. 

TABLE 2 MOVEMENT TEST CYCLES FOR DIFFERENT SETTINGS 

Setting No. No. of Cycles 

(1) (2) 

5 

1 10 

2 20 

3 30 

4 40 



6.6 Life Test — The number printing machines shall be put into operation 
to print legible number of cycles specified in Table 3. A cycle shall consist 
of moving the handle down once to the position where the number is 
printed legibly, and returned to the original position. Total time taken 
for one cycle shall not exceed 2 seconds, but the testing may not be con- 
tinuous. 

TABLE 3 LIFE CYCLES OF NUMBER PRINTING MACHINE 
AT DIFFERENT SETTINGS 

Type of Machine No. or SETTI^fa 

Type 1 

1 
2 
3 

4 

Type 2 Repeat same number 20 000 

After completion of life cycle, the machine shall again satisfy the require- 
ment as specified in 6.2. 

7. SAMPLING 

7.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, 
the sampling procedure as given in Appendix A shall be followed, 

S 



No. 


OF Cycles 




5 000 




10 000 




20 000 




30 000 




40 000 



IS : 10039 - 1981 

8. MARKING AND PACKING 

8.1 Each number printing machine shall be legibly and permanently 
marked with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name or initials or registered trade-mark; 

b) Model number to denote type, setting device and number of 
wheels; and 

c) Serial number of machine. 

8.1.1 No marking shall come on top of knob of the handle. 

8.1.2 The number printing machine may also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer. ISI Marked products are also continuously checked by ISI 
for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under 
which a licence for the use of ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manu- 
facturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8.2 Each machine shall be packed in close fitting box, containing spare 
ink pad, stylus, ink and manufacturer's instruction for use and proper 
maintenance of the machine. Each box shall be duly wrapped and sealed 
in polyethylene cover. The box shall be legibly and permanently printed 
giving all the necessary informations as specified in 8.1 and also the date 
or month and year of manufacture. Each box shall be secured to prevent 
accidental opening. 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 7.1 ) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY OF NUMBER 
PRINTING MACHINES, HAND-OPERATED 

A-1. LOT 

A-1.1 In a consignment all the hand-operated number printing machines 
of the same type manufactured in the same factory under similar conditions 
of manufacture shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

A-1,2 The number of hand-operated number printing machines to be 
selected from each lot shall depend upon the size of the lot and shall be in 
accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 4. 



IS : 10039 - 1981 



TABLE 4 


SAMPLE 


SIZE AND ACCEPTANCE 


NUMBER 






{Clauses A-l. 2 and A-2.2 ) 




Lot Size 






Sample Size 


Acceptance Number 


(1) 






(2) 


(3) 


Up to 


100 




8 





101 to 


300 




13 





301 to 


500 




20 


1 


501 to 1 


000 




32 


2 


1 001 and 


, above 




50 


3 



A-1.2.1 These machines shall be selected from the lot at random. In 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, procedures given in IS : 4905- 
1969* may be followed. 

A-2. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-2.1 All the hand-operated machines in the lot shall be examined for 
workmanship and finish and the defectives may be removed. 

A-2.2 All the hand-operated machines selected from the lot at random 
according to col 1 and 2 of Table 4 shall be examined for the performance 
tests given in 6,2 to 6.5. A machine failing to satisfy any of the requirements 
shall be termed as defective. The lot shall be considered as conforming to 
the requirements if the number of defectives is less than or equal to the 
corresponding acceptance number ( see col 3 of Table 4 ) ; otherwise the 
lot shall be rejected. 

A-2.3 The lot which has been found as conforming to the performance 
requirements given in 6.2 to 6.5 shall then be tested for life test ( see 6.6 ) . 
For this purpose, 5 hand-operated machines shall be selected from the lot 
at random and subjected to this test. The lot shall be considered as con- 
forming to the life test requirement if all the machines pass in this require- 
ment. 

A-2.4 The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements 
if A-2.2 and A-2.3 are satisfied. 



•Methods for random sampling. 

10 



