**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11082 (1984) : Technical requirements of agricultural 
tractors for wet land cultivation [FAD 11: Agricultural 
Tractors and Power Tillers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS OF 

AGRJCULTURAL TRACTORS FOR 
WET LAND CULTIVATION 



isnia82 - 1984 

(Reaffirmed 201 2) 



UDG G29'l]42: 631 372 : 631-51 




© CQpyright BS5 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK HHAVAN. 9 HAHAIWR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHr w^yoei 
Gr2 JamaryXmS 



IS : 11082 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS OF 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS FOR 

WET LAND CULTIVATION 



Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, 

AFDC 52 

Chairman Representing 

PjioF M, M, Me]ita Escorts Limited, Faridabad; and Indian Society of 

Agricultural Engineers, New Delhi 

Members 

Shxii a. K, Raman Escorts Limited, Faridabad 

( Alternate I to Prof M. M. Mehta ) 

Dr K. N. Stngh Indian Society of Agricultural Engineers, New Delhi 

( Alternate II to Prof M. M. Mchta ) 
Dri A. At. AM Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Shri A. V. Alexander Escorts Tractors Limited, Faridabad 

Shri K. P.Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shhi S. S. BABUuiiKAR Kirloskar Tractors Limited, Nasik 

Shri P. N. Baloude ( Alternate ) 
Shri Bhupendha National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing 

Federation of India Limited, New Delhi 

SiiRi Y. K.Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shhi A. K. Ghakravokty National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Develop- 

ment, Bombay 
Shri Cuanora Mouan Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar 

Shhi G, S. Rijial ( Alternate I ) 

Shhi S. S. GjiewaT^ ( Alternate II ) 
Shri G. B. Ghuoh Indian Investment Centre, New Delhi 

DrRECTOit Gentnil Institute of Agricultural F^ngineering 

( ICAR ), Bhopal 

Dk R. G. Maheswaiu ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Gltpta Auto Tractors Ltd, Partapgarh 

Sjuu R. K. Gt;pTA State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

SiiRi M. L. Garg ( Alternate ) 
SifKi S. C. Gupta Harsha 'I'ractors Limited, Ghaziabad 

Shri M. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
SiiRi S. G.Jain Central Farm Machinery Training and 'Jesting 

Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Budni 

Shri J. Prasad ( Alternate I ) 

ShrTr. S. Dash ( Alternate II ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1 985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XlV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11082 - 1984 

{ Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shki V. K. Jain" Directorate General of Technical Development 

( Ministry of Industries ), New Delhi 
SiiKi T. K. B. Vauma ( Alternate ) 
Siiiii G. N. Mhuta Gujarat Tractors Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

SiiKi G. G. PATJ5L ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. K. MiT'PAL Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Dit R. H. Ram ( Alternate ) 
ShrtJ. S. MrjDHAR HMT Limited ( Tractor Division ), Pinjore 

Shri G. B. Lal ( Alternate ) 
Siiui H. M. MuTTA Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd (International Tractor 

Division ). Bombay 
SiiRi M. V. Vekkateswap.aK ( Alternate I ) 
Sniu A. R. SoNALKAR ( Alternate II ) 
Shrt a. T. Naht:ndek VST Tillers Tractors Limited, Bangalore 

Shut V. P. Mahendra ( Alternate I ) 
Shrt K. Giiander Sekhar Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Dr S. T. Narayanaswamy Bharat Earthmovers Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri S. B. Pandya National Farmers Organization, New Delhi 

Shri R. N. Patit. Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agriculture 

& Co-operation ), New Delhi 
SiiRi V. V. PATir> Bharat Krishak Samaj, New Delhi 

Shri K. Ramkumau Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation Limited, 

Krnakulam 
Shut M. K. Cu andhamokanan 
Nair ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. Rama Swamy Tractors and Farm Equipment Ltd, Madras 

SjrRi S. Ranganathan ( Alternate I ) 
Shrt G. Venkatraman ( Alternate II ) 
Shri B. Roy Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Industries ) 

( Ministry of Industries ), New Delhi 
Dr S. Satyamtjhty Eicher Goodearth Limited, New Delhi 

Shri P. J. Zaohariaji ( Alternate I ) 
Dr J. Bhattacharyya ( Alternate II ) 
Shrt N. C. Saxena J. K. Satoh Agricultural Machines Limited, Kanpur 

Skri R. K. Bajpai ( Alternate) 
Shri V. P. Shrivastava Department of Agriculture, Government of Bihar, 

Patna 
Sum R. K. Vekma Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shrt T, Purkanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Dirrctor ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri R. N. SjfARMA 
Senior Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



IS : 11082 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS OF 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS FOR 

WET LAND CULTIVATION 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adoptedby the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 November 1984, after the draft finalized by the ^gricuhural 
Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved by 
tlie Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0,2 Wet land cultivation, popularly known as puddling is an important 
tillage operation in the cultivation of transplanted paddy. The agri- 
cultural tractors are increasingly being used for wet land cultivation. 
The success of mechanized paddy cultivation with the agricultural 
tractors depend upon how efficiently it can be operated in wet paddy fields. 
A need was, therefore, Mi to formulate an Indian Standard on this 
subject for the guidance of the manufacturers and users. 

0,3 In the formulation of this Indian Standard, assistance has been 
derived from the Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute, 
Budni. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the technical requirements for use of agricultural 
tractors for wet land cultivation ( puddling operation ). 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 



♦Rules for rounding ofT numerical values ( revised ] 

3 



IS : 11082 - 1984 

2.1 Agricultural Tractors — See 11.1 of IS : 9939-1981*. 

2.2 Cage Wheel — See 2.3 of IS : 9939-1981*. 

2.2.1 Half Cage Wheel — See 2.4 of IS : 9939-1981*. 

2.2.2 Full Cage Wheel — The cage wheel used in place of pneumaiic 
wheels ( tyres ). 

2.3 Puddling — The mechanical manipulation of soil in presence of 
standing water in the field to create an impervious hard pan below the 
puddle zone so as to prevent loss of water through leaching and 
facilitate the transplanting of paddy seedlings by making the soil softer. 

3. CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 As the tractor is required to be operated under wet conditions, y)re- 
treatment to sheet metal should be adequate to prevent corrosion. 

3.2 The tractor should have independent braking system. 

3.3 The tractor may be equipped with differential lock. 

3.4 Adequate provision should be made for the drainage of water near 
foot rest and operator's work place, 

3.5 Outside part should be such that they are not affected during the 
water cleaning of the tractor as normally tractor requires thorough 
cleaning with water after puddling operation. 

3.6 Where choice for fitting tyre is available, it is advisable to use tyres 
having broader contact area. 

3.7 Exhaust system of the tractor should be appropriately positioned to 
prevent ingress of water and mud during operation. 

3.8 Provision for fitting half cage wheel and full cage wheel shali be 
made. The half cage wheel may conform to the requirements given 
in IS : 11081-1984t. 

ISSoTK — Indian Standard on fuJ] cage wheel i.v uiitJer formulaiicn. 7 ill the publi- 
cation of the standard, requirements shah be as agreed to between the purclia&er and 
the manufacturer. 

3.9 The sealing of the critical components should be effective. The 
following critical compone^nts and systems should be free from cniry of 
water and dust, mud: 

a) Lubricating oil in the engine sump, transmission, hydraulic 
housings, final drive housings and steering box. 



♦Glossary of terms relating to agricultural tractors and power tillers. 
tSpecification for half cage wheel for agricultural tractors. 



IS : 11032 - 1984 

b) Brake assembly. 

c) Clutch assembly. 

cl) Rear axle assembly. 

e) Front axle assembly including stub axle, front wlieel hubs, king 
pin and centre ( pivot ) pin assembly, 

f ) Starter motor and dynamo. 

g) Electrical components, sucli as magneto, battery, and cut out. 

3,10 Provision should be made to plug various weep holes or inspection 

Jioles provided in the transmission housing, clutch housing, rear axle 
housing, etc. 

4. OPERATING REQIJIREMENTS 

4.1 All the necessary instructions of the manufacturers for preparing 
tlie tractor for wet land operation should be strictly followed. 

4.2 Necessary servicing and periodic maintenance during and after the 
use for wet land operation should be conducted in accordance with the 
printed hterature of manufacturers. 

4.3 1 apcr plugs used for plugging the weep holes or inspection holes 
should be opened to allow the water to drain out at suitable intervals as 
recommended by the manufacturers. 

4.4 While using cage wheels, for reasons of safety and obtaining good 
quality puddle, a suitable implement like puddler, disc harrow, 
rota valor may be used. 

5. LITERATURE 

5.1 The operator's manual or other printed literature supplied with 
tractor should include necessary instructions for preparation, safe 
operation and the maintenance of the tractor for wet land operation. 

5.2 TJie manufacturers should also provide the information witii 
respect to front axle reaction in terms of the front mass for various usage 
of the wet land cultivation, that is for half cage wheel or full cage wheel 
to ensure stability and steerability of the tractor. The mass can be 
varied by the user depending upon the need. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS 

Base Units 

QiJANTiT'i' Unit Svmuol 

Length metre m 

Mass kilogram kg 

Time second s 

Electric current ampere A 

Thermodynamic kelvin K 
temperature 

Luminous intensity candeia cd 

Amount of substance mole mol 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity Unit SyMiioL 

Plane angle radian rad 

Solid angle steradian sr 

Derived Units 

Quantity Unit Symbol 

Force newton N 

Energy joule J 

power watt \V 

Flux weber Wb 

Flux density tesla T 

Frequency hertz Hz 

Electric conductance Siemens S 

Electromotive force volt V 

Pressure, stress pascal Pa 



Definition 
1 N = 1 kg,m/s* 
1 . J =- ] N.m 
1 W - 1 J's 

1 Wb - 1 V.s 
I T - 1 VVh/m=^ 
1 Hz = I c/s (s~») 
1 S = 1 A/V 
I V =: I W/A 
1 Pa -^ 1 N/m^ 



