**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13394 (1992) : Guidelines for the documentation of 
computer based application systems for information 
processing [LITD 14: Software and System Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13394:1992 
180 6592:1985 

^ ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

^r^r ^r^FFT cf^ ^ %t ^rprq^T sTTtTTft^ snrsnft^ 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR THE DOCUMENTATION OF 

COMPUTER-BASED APPLICATION SYSTEMS 

FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING 



UDC 681-3066:002 



©BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 , 

April 1992 Price Group 8 



IS 13394:1992 
ISO 6592: 1985 



Indian Standard 



GUIDELINES FOR THE DOCUMENTATION OF 

COMPUTER-BASED APPLICATION SYSTEMS 

FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING 

NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 6592 : 1985 'information processing — 
Guidelines for the documentation of computer-based application systems' issued by the 
Internationa! Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on the recommendation of Information Systems and Software Sectional Committee 
( LTD 33 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards, Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard', 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS 13394 
ISO 6592 



1992 
1985 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard establishes guidelines for the 
documentation of computer-based application systems. It also 
contains checklists with the aim of supporting effective 
activities throughout the system life cycle. 

The guidelines given in this Internationa! Standard have been 
developed with the aim of 

a) obtaining the necessary commitment of the parties 
involved with the development of the computer-based ap- 
plication system; 

b) contributing to the production of a well-planned, stan- 
dardized system documentation; 

c) enabling the successive production of system 
documentation in parallel with system development. 

Well-defined rules for documentation during the process of 
system development will facilitate 

a) the preparation of the documentation Itself; 

b) estimation of the time and resources required for the 
achievement of a project; 

c) exchange of Information between the parties con- 
cerned, resulting in 

— selection of attainable objectives for a system; 

— a more complete and well-considered functional 
design ; 

d) making decisions and briefing of personnel during work 
on system development. 

The system documentation produced in accordance with these 
guicielines 

a) enables the management to exercise control over the 
development process; 

b) enables users of the system to use it efficiently and cor- 
rectly; 

c) enables computer operators to schedule and run the 
system; 

d) aids diagnosis and correction of errors or faults; 

e) provides information about the system as support for 
system maintenance. 



This International Standard does not cover the requirements 
for documenting the hardware design of a computer-based 
application system. 



2 Principles of documentation 

2.1 General considerations 

Despite the diversity of applications of computer-based 
systems, there are fundamental similarities, for example, the 
obvious feature that a computer is always subject to input, pro- 
cessing and output phases. There should always be a need to 
establish and justify the resources such as personnel, materials 
and finance necessary to develop and implement a computer 
project, however large or small, and to document adequately all 
aspects of the proposed system. 

It Is in this context that the guidelines established in this Inter- 
national Standard have been formulated; the aim being to 
establish a basic framework of documentation that would act 
as a solid base for any project and enable effective development 
and implementation through proper progress and control 
machinery, permitting the development to proceed in a planned 
and authorized manner. 

The application of these recommendations will vary according 
to the type of system being introduced: as an example, 
methods of operating might assume greater importance in a 
process control environment than In, for example, a commer- 
cial batch processing system. 

A particular document or piece of Information may have no 
relevance to or»e system and yet be important to another. The 
checklists given in this International Standard should be used to 
ensure that, if infornrwtion is omitted from the documentation, the 
omission is the result of a positive decision and not an oversight. 

The gradual change in the level of detail in the development 
process may necessitate revision of documentation from earlier 
stages. 

2.2 Types of information 

Two basic types of Information are identified in this Inter- 
national Standard, I.e. administrative and technical. 

Administrative information is project control and management 
information which records what has been aSthorized and what 
has been done. This information should be retained but it may 
r>ot be necessary to update it once implementation is complete. 



IS 13394:1992 
ISO 6592: 1985 



Technical information includes an up-to-date description of all 
aspects of the system, including hardware, ^ftware, and data, 
it is essential that it is constantly updated during the system life 
cycle. 

Both types of information may be included In some documents, 
but these guidelines recommend that they be kept in separate 
sections so that the technical information may be more easily 
maintained. 



2.3 Relationship between project stages and 
documentation 

The guidelines given in this International Standard are struc- 
tured to relate project development stages to the documenta- 
tion which they generate. Generally, each stage is initiated and 
concluded by a document. Although the main stages take place 
ir sequence, some stages and the preparation of some 
documents overlap each other, for example preparation of 
system support manuals should be started during the system 
design and development stage. The number of stages and the 
number of documents may vary for different applications; 
these guidelines list the elements of documentation which 
would usually appear in the documents generated by each 
stage of the development process. 



3 Feasibility study 

3.1 Objectives 

The objectives of the feasibility study are 

a) to identify exactly what is needed following a 
preliminary study; 

b) to work out possible solutions and identify a preferred 
solution ; 

c) to document the requirements and constraints for the 
new system. 

3.2 Feasibility study request 

Tnis document authorizes the use of resources to investigate a 
specific requirenr^nt, design aim or problem and to suggest a 
possible solution. It is produced by or for the user before work 
commences on the project. 

Prepare iion of this docunr>ent may entail the assistance of a 
specialist in determining, for example, the time and cost targets 
for the feasibility study. 

Authorization of this feasibility study request leads to a feasi- 
bility study and the writing of a feasibility study report. 

3.3 Feasibility study report 

3.3.1 Objective 

The feasibility study report should enable the user to decide 
whether or not to continue to the next stage of system design. 



3,3.2 System problem and information analysts: 

a) system problems: 

1) definition, including background and present situa- 
tion ; 

2) constraints, technical and financial; 

bl system objectives: 

1} definition and description; 

2) delimitation; 

3) summary; 

c) system Information : 

1) definition and description; 

2) relations; 

3) specifications; 

d) system processing: 

1) description; 

2) input, stored data, and output; 

3) relations between data; 

4) periodicir/; 

5) volume of data. 



3.3.3 


Project organization and requirements 


a) 


staff requirements; 


b) 


training and education ; 


c) 


timetable of main activities; 


d) 


manpower; 


e) 


hardware; 


f) 


software; 


g) 


accommodation. 


3.3.4 


Costs and benefits: 


a) 


financial costs; 


b) 


benefits. 


3.3.5 


Proposed system : 


a) 


functional description; 


b) 


controls to ensure accuracy; 


c) 


security; 


d) 


interfaces; 


e) 


data flow; 



IS 13394 : 1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



Stages 



Feasibility study 
(see clause 3} 



and the 



Documents produced 



Feasibility 
study request 



Feasibility 
study report 



System design study 
(see clause 4) 



System design and 
development (see clause 5) 



System support 
(see clause 61 



System implementation 
(clause 7) 



Post implementation 
reviews (see clause 81 



System 
design study 
request (see 4.2} 



System 
design study 

report (see 4.3) 



System design 
documentation: 
general system 
and component 
documentation 
(see 5.3, 5.4 and 
annexes A, B and C) 

Implementation 
documentation: 
plan and tests 
(see 7.2.1 and 7.2.2) 

i 

System support 
documentation: 
user, operations, 
program, data, system 
technical and modifications 
manuals (see 6.2) 



Acceptance report 
(see 7.2.3) 



Evaluation refiorts 
(see 8,2) 



Alternative starting points in cases where a separate feasibility study is not required. 



Figure — Summary of the relationship between project development 



1813394:1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



f) allowance for growth: volume of data, new functions; 

g) scheduling/timing ; 

h) non computer functions; 

j) manpower; 

k) hardware; 

m) software; 

n) accomodation. 

3.3.6 implementation, quality and acceptance 
considerations : 

a) system testing; 

b) file creation/conversion; 

c) integration with existing systems; 

d) user education and training; 

e) emulation; 

f) proposed changeover methods; 

g) modifications to service; 

h) quality assurance requirements; 
j) product liability requirements; 
k) system acceptance criteria. 

3.3.7 Support facilities: 

a) recovery from failure; 

b) maintenance; 

c) availability of spares. 

3.3.8 Glossary: explanation of new or unusual terms. 

3.3.9 Conclusions and recommendations: 

a) system requirements: 

1 ) needs of the user ; 

2) how they will be met. 

b) alternatives : 

1) describe alternatives considered; 
2} state reasons for rejection. 



4 System aesign study 

4.1 Objective 

The objective of this stage is to define, in detail, the chosen 
design. 



4.2 System design study request 

This document states the action that the initiator requires to be 
taken after considering the feasibility study report. In its 
simplest form, it will merely accept the recommendations in 
this report and authorize the system design study. 



4.3 System design study report 



4.3.1 Gbjectlves 

The system design study report should be sufficiently detailed 
in order that 

a) the user has a clear description of what the system will 
do (input, processing, output information stored, timing, 
etc.); 

b) the user knows exactly what to do to operate the 
system ; 

c) the organizational changes or adaptations necessary to 
implement the system and operate it are defined, and can be 
commenced as separate tasks; 

d) the functional requirements for the system are suf- 
ficiently unambiguous for the system design documentation 
to be worked out in the next phase. 

4.3.2 Plans: 

a) organization; 

b) timetable; 

c) major resource requirements; 

d) quality assurance; 

e) standards to be used. 

4.3.3 Costs and benefits: 

a) development costs; 

b) installation costs; 

cl training and education costs; 

d) running costs; 

e) benefits, tangible and intangible. 

4.3.4 System description: 

a) functional overview of the application of the system; 

b) hardware requirements ; 

c) communication requirements, for example terminals 
lines, modems, concentrators; 

d) software requirements for languages, data base 
operating system, etc. ; 

ei data description; 



IS 13394: 1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



f) data flow, including the normal and maximum volume 
of data ; 

g) allowance for change in data volume; 

h) controls to ensure the accuracy of the data; 

j) security, system integrity, data protection, physical 
security, availability; 

k) environmental and power requirements (including any 
stand-by arrangements) ; 

ml interfaces with other systems, either existing or pro- 
posed ; 

n) scheduling requirements; 

p) allowance for additional functions; 

q) non-computer procedures. 

4.3.5 Implementation, quality and acceptance plans: 

a) user education/training; 

b) file creation/conversion; 

c) system testing and performance assessments; 

d) emulation; 

e) modifications to service; 

f) integration with existing systems; 

g) changeover methods; 

h) quality assurance requirements; 

j) extent of product liability; 

k) system acceptance criteria. 

4.3.6 Support facilities: 

a) recovery from failures; 

b) responsibility and liability for maintenance; 

c) availability of spares and back-up. 

4.3.7 Summary of application system: 

a) problem definition and solution; 
bl recommendation ; 
c) system operation; 

II manpower; 

21 hardware; 

31 software; 

4) accommodation ; 



5) financial estimates; 
61 security; 
7) scheduling/timing; 
dl glossary of new or unusual terms used. 

4.3.8 Summary for management: 

a) manpower; 
bl hardware; 

c) quality assurance requirements; 
dl accommodation requirements; 
el cost estimates: 

II next stage of project; 

21 total project; 
f| benefit estimates; 
g) timetable. 

5 System design and development 

5.1 Objectives 

The objectives are as follows: 

al specify, in detail, automated and manual processing 
procedures and establish their boundaries; 

bl produce documentation to enable the writing of pro- 
grams; 

cl provide the information necessary to carry out work on 
testing and implementation of the new system; 

dl make a detailed plan of all activities to be performed in 
the implementation stage; 

e) give consideration to the preparation of system support 
manuals, 

5.2 System design documentation 

The purpose of this documentation is to provide a complete 
design record of the system based on the following principles: 

al that every part of the system has a function whtch 
should be described; 

b) that all the functions of a complete system can be fuHy 
described by breaking the system down into its subordinate 
parts and also by describing these and their interftctions and 
relationships. 

The documentation should normally contain at least two levels 
of detail, namely: ^ 

- general system documentation (see 5.31; 

and component documentation (see 5.4). 



18 13394:1992 
180 6592:1985 



5.3 General system documentation 

!n the genera! documentation, the !eve! of detail of which the 
system should be described depends on the requirements of 
the system. This documentation may be required to form the 
basis for system support manuals. 

The general system documentation should detail 

a) project title; 

b) objectives; 

c) description {both textual and diagrammatic); 

— identification of subsystems; 

— interfaces with other systems; 

d) security; 

el controls (including audit requirements); 

f) operating environment; 

g) recovery from failure; 

h) support facilities necessary to operate the system; 
j) data requirements; 
k) test procedures; 
m) change procedures. 

5.4 Component documentation 

This documentation should give detailed specifications of pro- 
grams, files and manual operations. It may be required to form 
the basis for system support manuals. 

5.4.1 Progrann speclflGatlon 

See annex A. 

5.4.2 File and database specification 

See annex B. 

5.4.3 Manual routines specification 

See annex C. 



6 System support 

6.1 Objective 

The objective of this stage is to support the system once it has 
been accepted by the user. It embraces the following aspects: 

a) normal use of the system; 

b) detection and correction of errors; 

c) possible modifications and enhancements. 

(t should be understood ihat this activity may not be carried out 
by the same staff who developed the system. 



6.2 System support documentation 

Support documentation should be formed from documents 
produced during the system design and development stage. 
Any changes made to the documents produced during that 
stage should be reflected in the documents for system support. 

What is actually provided will depend on the particular system 
requirements, maintenance policy and documentation stan- 
dards. However, in order to meet the system support objective 
it is recommended that the documentation be provided under 
the following headings: 

a) User manual 

This should describe, in a clear and concise way, the rights 
and responsibilities of both the user and the supplier of the 
system. 

The following are examples of what these rights and 
responsibilities may be: 

1) The rights of the user may include: 

— the right to information about the usage of the 
system ; 

— the right to information about the system results 
and the correction of errors in data. 

2) The responsibilities of the user may include: 

— the correct preparation of input data; 

— informing the supplier of any errors detected in 
the system. 

3) The rights of the supplier may include: 

— the right to revise the system, as supplied; 

— the right to perform continuous testing to ensure 
that the system continues to function correctly. 

4) The responsiblities of the supplier may include: 

— the maintenance of accurate and up-to-date 
documentation; 

— the distribution of accumulated user experience 
with the system. 

All these rights and responsibilities will be subject to agree- 
ment between the supplier and the customer and may be in- 
fluenced by national and international legislation and/or 
standards. Information applicable to legislation on aspects 
of quality assurance and product liability should be included 
In this manual. 



b) Operations manual 

This should describe how to operate the system using the 
computer and associated equipment in all its operational 
modes. 



IS 13394 : 1992 
ISO 6592 :1985 



c) Program manuals 

These should describe the purpose of each program and 
provide information such as mathematical formulae and 
algorithms used, error handling facilities and timing. They 
should include listings of the program, with comments, 
useful for modifications and enhancements, test data and 
results. 

d) Data manual 

This should describe the system data structure down to the 
level of detail specified by system requirements. 

8) System technsca! manual 

This should enable technical staff to understand the way the 
system works, assist them in error detection and correction 
and in making modifications and enhancements. Where 
appropriate, it should make reference to hardware descrip- 
tions. 

f) System change record 

This should riecord what, when, how, why and by whom 
changes were made and authorized to any part of the 
system. 



7 System implementation 

7.1 Objective 

The objective of this stage is to carry out full acceptance tests 
of the system under all aspects of its operational environment 
and demonstrate that all the specified requirements have been 
met. 

7.2 Dccumentaticn requirenrients 

The input documentation to this stage should consist of an 
implementation plan and the acceptance tests for the system. 
The output documentation from this stage should be an accep- 
tance report. 

7.2.1 Implementation plan 

Although implementation takes place at the end of project 
development, planning should begin at an early stage and the 
plan should be updated as necessary during the development 
of the system. 

The plan should detail, for example: 
a} accommodation and environment; 

b) staff organization; 

c) user education and training; 

d) file set up; 

e) update, assembly and distribution of documents; 



f) verification of maintenance procedures; 

g) timing and method of implementation; 
h) system changeover procedures; 

j) recovery procedures. 

7.2.2 Acceptance tests 

The documentation should specify how the tests will be con 
ducted within the defined operational environments. It should 
also provide a check list of the results to be expected and give 
tolerances where necessary. 



7.2.3 Acceptance report 

This should be a document embodying the results of the accep 
tance tests signed by and duplicated to all relevant authorities. 

If acceptance is to be qualified in any way, an official statement 
of deficiencies and suggested remedies, if possible, should be 
provided. 



8 Post implementation reviews 

8.1 Objectives 

The objectives of this stage are periodically to 

a} investigate the system's fulfilment of objectives; 

b) follow up the distribution of resources and the cost 
estimates; 

c) specify the intangible positive and negative effects of 
the system; 

d) analyse and record the experience gained during work 
on the systems development. 

8.2 Evaluation reports 

Evaluation reports 

a) assess whether the original system objectives were cor- 
rect and how far they have been met in practice; 

b) pinpoint matters capable of improvements; 

c) endorse good practices; 

d) identify and assess operational problems encountered, 
if any; 

e) state whether the claimed benefits have been achieved; 

f) document the experiences which will assist future 
systems development projects. 



IS 13394: 
ISO 6592 



1992 
:1985 



9 Management of documents 



It is recommended that a loose-ieaf format is adopted. 



9.1 Production and handling of documents 

An important aspect of all work on documentation is the crea- 
tion of documents to fulfil the needs of the user of the 
documents. It is essential that such needs be clearly defined 
and that the content of a document be presented in a manner 
which makes it easy for the reader to access and understand. 

Each individual document created in conjunction with a stage 
in the system development shall be allocated a unique iden- 
tification number or code to facilitate its storage and subse- 
quent retrievai. The identifying number or code shall clearly 
show the system or project and category of documentation to 

uuHiVh ttio rlrtr^iimont Kolrtnnc Tho nr!nr«inloc nrwtaminrt tKa 

identification of systems and subsystems may vary from 
organization to organization but should be described in the in- 
dividual company's own instructions. 

it is vital for ease of reference and control of amendments or 
updates that a clear and unambiguous method of page referen- 

Experience shows that there is positive advantage in intro- 
ducing a documentation system that ensures that 

a} each page is uniquely identified to the system, section, 
page within section, issue number and date of origination ; 

b) each section is identified as complete; 

c) insertions and deletions are clearly identified. 



Procedures to be followed for amendments to the system 
documentation should be agreed and clearly defined. It is 

c^oaici iitai iiidi. ail fjiyj 

correct procedures. 



9.2 Principles of central documentation 

The central documentation should contain all the information 

This information is permanently valid as it is updated when 
each decision, achievement, modification, etc, is approved. 

To facilitate this updating, each item of information should nor- 
mally only appear once. 



9.3 Advice on documentation distribution 

It is important to distinguish clearly between the total 
documentation collection, normally stored centrally, and the 
assembled subsets required by different departments and per- 
sonnel. 

Subsets usually contain documents copied and complied from 
different sections of the total documentation collection. A cir- 
culation list, based on an individual organization's require- 
ments, should be drawn up for each document, noting the 
name or departmental code of the recipient of the docu- 
mentation. 



IQ 



18 13394:1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



Annex A 
Program documentation guidelines 

(This annex forms part of the standard.) 



A.1 Introduction 

This annex gives guidance on the level of documentation 
required for program documentation. 

The level of detail required for component documentation is 
greater than that necessary for the other items in the body of 
this International Standard. The requirements have, therefore, 
been published in the form of an annex. 



A.2 identification 

A.2.1 Program name 

Provide the title or name which identifies the program and a 
subtitle which briefly indicates its function. 

A.2.2 Variants 

Describe the names used for identifying any co-existing 
variants of the program, 

A.2.3 Version 

In addition to the program name and variant names, provide 
identification for the version that requires identifying among 
the several program versions that evolved after being modified 
over a period of time. The documentation shall reflect changes 
in the current version, and be kept up-to-date. 

A.2.4 Date 

Provide the date of release of the original and the current ver- 
sion of the program. 

A.2.5 History 

For every modification, specify 

— variant name; 

— version name; 

— reference to the reason for and contents of modi- 
fication ; 

— date of release; 

— date of first use. 



A.3 General items 

A.3.1 Responsibilities 

Provide addresses of organizations or persons responsible for 

— development; 

— operation; 

— maintenance; 

— further development of the program. 

A. 3.2 Contractual items 

Provide sufficient information about contractual items, 
including costs as applicable, for example 

— legal conditions such as copyright, privacy, security, 
etc.; 

— modules supplied and corresponding purchase/rental 
price; 

— installation; 

— training; 

— maintenance; 

— quality assurance. 

A. 3.3 Scope and field of application 

A. 3.3.1 Describe briefly the objectives which can be achieved 
by use of the program. 

A.3.3.2 Describe the functions of the program in a way that 
enables the user to decide whether, and within what limits, the 
program can be used. 

A. 3.3.3 Describe the design philosophy and method, 
outstanding and distinguishing features of the program, 
planned future revisions, etc. 

A.3.4 Program specifications 

A.3.4.1 Problem 

A.3.4.1. 1 Problem description 

Present the problem to be solved by means of the program in a 
generally comprehensible form. 



11 



IS 13394:1992 
180 6592:1985 



A. 3.4.1. 2 Supplementary information 

State the theoretical principles, methods and literature 
references. 

A. 3. 4.2 Problem solution 

A. 3.4.2.1 Conventions and terminology 

Provide details of the form of presentation and rules which are 
to be used in the following parts of the documentation for 
example, special interpretation of characters/signs or combina- 
tions applicable to the solution of the problem; especially con- 
cerning: prefixes, signs, accuracy, roundlng-off, coordinate 
systems, value ranges, tables of abbreviations used and their 
meanings, technical regulations of data processing. 

A.3.4.2.2 Solution principles and algorithms 

Describe the methods of solution and algorithms presented in 
connection with the specified functions and with the structural 
organization of the program. 

A. 3. 4. 3 Functional specification 

A.3.4.3.1 Function 

Describe in detail, in non=technic3! language, all of the func- 
tions of the program with an explanation of the data required 
and results produced. 

A,3.4.3.2 Characteristics 

Provide quantitative information for typical examples, such as 
performance data, level of accuracy, storage requirements, etc. 

A.3.4.3.3 Restrictions 

Specify any restrictions on the use of the program. 



A.3.6 Operational specification 



A.3.6.1 Language 

Specify the programming language used, by reference to the 
appropriate International Standard. Also, provide the name, 
variant, version and supplier of the compiler or interpreter. 



A. 3. 6. 2 Software requirements 

Provide the names, variants, versions of other programs 
needed to run the program (for example operating system, 
subroutines), with reference to the corresponding documenta- 
tion of this software. 



A.3.6.3 Hardware requirements 

Provide the specifications of the hardware configuration 
necessary for running the program, with references to cor- 
responding documentation and diagrams. 

A. 3.6. 4 Mode of operation 

Describe the mode of operation, for example batch, interactive, 
realtime. 

A.3.? Application example 

Provide typical examples to help users understand the pro- 
gram, including listings of data and results. 

A.3.8 Associated documentation 

Provide a list of references to available documents which pro- 
vide information on the program, (for example programmers' 
guide, installation guide), with references to supplier and order 
number of the documents. 



A.3.4.3.4 Error handling 

Describe error handling by the program. 

A.3.4.4 Data protection and security 

Describe the data protection and security functions and 
facilities. 

A. 3.5 Application data description 

Describe the application-oriented data (for example input/out- 
put data, permanently stored data) with attributes relevant to 
their use. 

The data shall be described according to annex B. 

This da^B description may be given in a separate document, 
with appropriate cross-references. 



A. 4 Technical documentation 



A.4.1 Technical program description 



A. 4. 1.1 Terminology and conventions 

Describe the terms and conventions including all names and 
other internal data used within the program. 



A. 4. 1.2 Program structure 

Describe the organization of the program units (for example 
sub-programs, modules, segments, common storage areas) in 
accordance with the specified problem solution. 

The presentation which can be made graphically, for example 
by a tree-structure diagram, or by an appropriately structured 
textual description, shall contain the unit names, their entry 
points, and interfaces, as we!! as their inter-relationships. 



12 



IS 13394: 1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



A.4.1.3 Program listing 

Provide a source program listing containing sufficiently detailed 
comments, 

A.4.2 Technical data description 

Provide a technical description of the data, including names, 
meanings, representations, contents, access, responsibilities, 
data security, and inter-relationships. This information should 
be provided for both application-oriented data {see A. 3. 5) and 
for other tnterna} data. 

The data should be described according to annex B. This 
description may be contained in a separate document, in which 
case appropriate cross-references shall be made. 

A. 4.3 Operation 

A.43.1 Control instructions 

Provide an appropriate commented list of alt required operating 
system control instructions. 

A.4.3.2 Methods of operation 

Describe or reference the methods to start, stop, pause, inter- 
rupt, and restart the program for the possible operation modes, 
including special operations and the operational rules for data 
files. 



The procedures to be followed in operating the program should 
be provided in accordance with annex C. 

A.4.3.3 Messages 

Provide a list and description of all messages, including instruc- 
tions for any necessary operational actions. 

A.4.4 Installation and support 

A.4.4.1 Installation 

Provide technical information for the installation of the 
program. 

A.4.4.2 Adaptation 

Provide sufficient information for users who need to adapt the 
program, for example for other environments, other uses. 

A.4.4.3 Test 

Describe the methods used to test the program, with input and 
expected results. 

A.4,4.4 Support 

Provide additional technical information for the continuing sup- 
port and development of the program. 



13 



IS 13394: 1992 
ISO 6592: 1985 



Annex B 



Data documentation guidelines 

(This annex forms part of the standard.) 



B.I Introduction 

This annex gives guidance on the level of documentation 
required for data documentation. 

The level of detail required for component documentation Is 
greater than that necessary for the other items in the body of 
this International Standard. The requirements have, therefore, 
been published in the form of an annex. 



B.2.5.2 Validity 

Detail the chronological validity of this documentation 
(from . . . to . . .) and supply pertinent identification of the 
version and, if required, indication of the variant. (A VERSION 
characterizes the validity as a function of time; a VARIANT is a 
co-existing alternative.) 



B.3 Description of the data 



B.2 Identification 

B.2.1 Technical identification 

Describe the technical identification of the data in program and 
database definitions. 

Other technical identifications required should also be indicated 
{see B.4.2). 



B.3.1 Purpose 

Give the application-oriented description of the data and their 
purpose of application, differentiating with respect to other 
data as required. 

B.3.2 Descriptors 

List the keywords, headings, and search words characterizing 
the application-oriented references in association with details 
of descriptor catalogues, as applicable. 



B.2.2 Application-oriented identification 

Describe the application-oriented identification for the data, for 
example in working instructions or application-oriented 
documents. 

Where synonyms have been used in application-oriented 
documents, these should also be specified here. 

B.2.3 Category 

Define the data by naming or describing their category, for 
example data field, record, file, segment, page, database. 



B.3.3 Sensitivity 

Indicate the sensitive properties of the data with respect to 
legal and operational requirements, for example data protec- 
tion, confidentiality, classification (see clause B.6). 



B.4 Representation 

B.4.1 Structure (not applicable to data elements) 

List the data objects forming the data entity being described, 
with their Inter-relatlonships, for example position, <?rrange- 
ment, repetition factor. 



B.2.4 Status 

Describe the status of the data, for example test, production. 

B.2.5 Applicability of the documentation 

B.2.5.1 Scope and field of application 

Indicate the scope and field of application of the documenta- 
tion concerned, for example the organizational unit of an enter- 
prise, range of application. 



B.4,2 Format 

Describe the formats in which the data may occur. It may be 
sufficient to use such standard format descriptors as: 

- PICTURE S9V99 COMPUTATIONAL (COBOL according 
to ISO 1989) 

— blocked records of variable length (according to ISO 1289) 

If data occur in several formats, all forgnats with their applica- 
tions shall be indicated, for example program, file, database, 
print mask, input fields on screen, forms. If qualifying names 
are used, they should be stated. 



14 



IS 13394 : 1992 
ISO 6592 :1985 



B.4.3 Size 

Indicate the physical size of the data entity in a custonnary or 
previously defined unit (for example byte, word); size may be 
indicated absolutely or by means of a formula. If required, 
upper and lower^iimits should be shown. 



B.5.5 Encoding 

Describe any encoding applied to the data in the context of the 
application, indicate the rules for allocating codes, or reference 
a key list. 



B.4.4 Medium (not applicable to data etements) 

Indicate the medium on which the data resides, for example 
paper, magnetic tape, data link, network. 

B.4.5 Compression 

Detail the type and method of compression applicable to the 
data. 

B.4.6 Code 

Name the code used to represent the data, for example 
ISO 7-bit code, if it differs from the code defined at a higher 
iogica* level. 

B.4.7 Character set 

Define the valid character set for the data, especially with 
respect to special characters. 



B.6 Access 

B.6.1 Authorization 

Authorities such as organizational units, agencies, persons, 
data processing procedures and programs, together with their 
legal basis and any other conditions are given in the following 
sub-clauses. 

B.6.1. 1 Origination 

Indicate the authorities permitted to generate the data and to 
introduce it into the operational data and information system. 

B.6. 1.2 Read access 

Indicate the authorities permitted to read the data. 

B.6. 1.3 Amendment 

Indicate the authorities permitted to update or delete the con- 
tents of the data. 



B.5 Content 



B,5.1 Data type 



Describe the type of data, for example integer, alphabetic, 
pointer, vector, table, clock time. 



B.5.2 Units of measurement 

Name the standard units of 'measurement applicable to the 
data, for example kilogram, mjHinnetre. 

B.5.3 Range of values 

Indicate the ranges of values defined for the data, for example 
by enumeration of valid values, by indication of lower and 
upper bounds, or by reference to the range of values of data 
contained in the data entity being described. 

B.5.4 Checking conditions 

Detail the checking conditions required for the data unless they 
are already described by format, character set, data type and 
range of values; also give further details on any checking con- 
ditions connected with other data entities, for example check 
character, plausibility checks. 



B.6. 1.4 Communication 

Indicate the authbrities permitted to communicate the contents 
of the data to a third party without restriction. List the 
authorities authorized to receive such a communication. 

B.6.2 Access regulations 

Describe the measures or procedures which regulate access to 
the data by persons or programs according to their authoriza- 
tion. 



B.7 Responsiblities 

B.7.1 Application-oriented responsibility 

Indicate the authorities having application-oriented respon- 
sibility for the data. 

B.7.2 Organizational responsibility 

Indicate the authorities having organizational responsibility for 
the data and its documentation. 

B.7. 3 Technical responsibility 

Indicate the authorities having technica! responsibility for the 
data, for example software development. 



15 



1813394:1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



B.7.4 Custodial responsibility 

Indicate the authorities and their locations where data is stored, 
for example the branch office of an enterprise. 



B.8 Data security 

B.8.1 Archiving 

Detail the requirements for archiving the data, for example 
method, place, purpose, retention period, frequency. 

B.8.2 Recovery 



Indicate the procedures and the effort required to recover the 
archived data. 



B.8.3 Encryption 

Indicate the procedures for encrypting/decrypting the data, for 
example the relevant national standard. 



B.9 Associations 

B.9.1 Occurrence 

List the data entities which contain the data being described. 

B.9.2 Dependencies 

List the other data entities on which this data Is dependent and 
indicate the type or name of this dependency relationship. 

B.9.3 Use 

Provide or reference a list of athorities actually using the data. 
Also specify the type of access (in accordance with B.6.1). 



16 



18 13394:1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



Annex C 
Human procedure documentation guidelines 

{This annex forms part of the standard,) 



C.I Introduction 

This annex gives guidance on the level of docunnentation re- 
quired for human procedures documentation. 

The level of detail required for component documentation is 
greater than that necessary for the other items in the body of 
this International Standard. The requirements have, therefore, 
been published in the form of an annex. 



C.2 Identification 

C.2.1 Procedure name 

Provide the title or name used for identifying the procedure in 
the related system and program documentation, and a subtitle 
which briefly indicates its function. 

C.2.2 Variants 

Describe the names used to identify any co-existing variants of 
the program. 

C.2. 3 Version 

In addition to the procedure name, and variant names, provide 
identification to distinguish the most recent version from its 
predecessors. For procedures closely related to programs, for 
example operating instructions, it is desirable to relate the pro- 
cedure version name to the program version name. 

C.2.4 Date 

Provide the date of release of the original and current versions 
of the procedure. 

C.2. 5 History 

For every release of a procedure modification, specify 
~ variant name; 

— version name; 

— reference to the reason for and content of the modi- 
fication ; 

— date of release; 

— date of first use. 



C.3 General items 

C.3.1 Responsibilities 

Provide addresses of organizations or persons responsible for 

— development; 

— distribution; 

— training; 

— modification and further development of the procedure. 

C.3.2 Contractual items 

Provide sufficient information about contractual items, in- 
cluding costs as applicable, for example: 

— legal conditions such as copyright, privacy, security, etc. ; 

— training; 

— quality assurance; 

— maintenance, 

C.3.3 Scope and field of application 

C.3,3.1 Describe briefly the objectives which can be achieved 
by following the procedure. 

C.3.3.2 Describe the functions of the procedure in terms of 
the associated software and environment which indicate its 
use. 

C.3.3.3 Describe or reference any philosophical, psycho- 
logical, or ergonometric principles used in the design of the 
procedure; outstanding features; planned future revisions, etc. 

C.3.4 Procedure specifications 

C.3.4.1 Occasion, frequency 

Describe the situations in which the procedure is applicable; if 
periodic, provide the cycle length, and the position within the 
cycle; if conditional, describe the events which prescribe the 
use of the procedure. 

C.3.4.2 Conventions, terminology ^ 

Provide details or a reference to any conventions followed in 
the naming of this or related procedures, any abbreviations 
used, etc. 



17 



1813394:1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



C.3.4.3 Function 

Describe in detail all of the functions of the procedure, with 
particular reference to the materials and data required, the 
results recorded, the software and hardware utilized, the 
organizational units affected. 



C.3.6.3 Hardware requirements 

Provide specifications for any computer hardware configura- 
tion involved in the procedure steps, and for any auxiliary or 
office equipment used with references to the corresponding 
documentation. 



C. 3.4.4 Capabilities and resource requirements 

Provide quantitative information concerning typical volume and 
speed of processing, usage of resources such as computer and 
peripheral hardware, supplies, office equipment, space, etc. 



C.3.6.4 Supplies 

Provide information concerning the procedure's requirements 
for such supplies as computer media, stationery items, etc. 



C. 3.4.5 Restrictions and exceptions 

Describe any restrictions on the use of the procedure, or situa- 
tions in which it is not applicable; preferably, include a 
reference to alternate procedures. 



C.3.6.5 Timing constraints 

Describe any scheduling requirements, any constraints on 
speed of processing, or any limitations on the occasions calling 
for the use of the procedure. 



C.3.4.8 Personnel 

Describe the person or persons who will follow the procedure, 
in terms of their function within the organization, for example 
billing clerk, computer operator. 

C.3.4.7 Data protection, security, and privacy concerns 

Describe briefly or reference any policies relevant to the protec- 
tion of the data or the procedures themselves from unauthor- 
ized access. 



C.3.5 Application data description 

Describe the application-oriented data required by, processed 
by, and generated by the procedure, with attributes relevant to 
their use in the procedure. 

The data shall be described in accordance with annex B. 

The data description may be given in a separate document, 
with appropriate cross-references. 



C.3.6 Environment specification 

C.3.6.1 Personnel skills 

Specify any special skills or training required by the person 
following the procedure. 



C.3.7 Application example 

Provide typical examples to help users understand the pro- 
cedure, including illustrations of typical data and resu'ts, 

C.3.8 Associated documentation 

Provide a list of references to available documentation concern- 
ing the system of which the procedure is a part, the software 
and hardware involved, any related procedures, and any rele- 
vant organizational information. Also provide information con- 
cerning the location of this documentation, and any procedures 
necessary for its procurement. 



C.4 Technical documentation 
C.4.1 Technical procedure description 

C.4.1.1 Terminology and conventions 

Define or reference definitions for any technical or specialized 
terms used, and for any abbreviations. Provide or reference a 
description of the nomenclature conventions used in naming 
system components (programs, procedures, data entities). 

C.4. 1.2 Procedure structure 



C. 3.6.2 Software requirements 

Identify, by name, variant, version, any software involved in the 
usage of the procedure, and provide a reference to its 
documentation. For a procedure detailing the provision of input 
data to a program, make special reference to the data validation 
and error handling features of the program; for a procedure 
detailing the operation of a program, make special reference to 
the operational specifications of the program; for a procedure 
detailing the interpretation, control, or distribution of the out- 
put from a program, make special reference to the application 
and technical data descriptions, and messages. 



For composite procedures, which provide instructions for 
several occasions, or which contain conditional steps, describe 
the organization of the procedure, preferably graphically. 

C.4.2 Procedure structure 

Define the procedure to be followed as a series of numbered 
imperative instructions, beginning with any necessary collec- 
tion of materials or information, and proceeding in chrono- 
logical sequence to final disposition of any results of the pro- 
cedure. 



18 



18 13394:1992 
ISO 6592 : 1985 



Distinguish carefully between instructions, for example worded 
in the imperative and explanatory material, for example worded 
passively, by typographical or other means. 

Where steps are conditional or repetitive, arrange them so that 
the control information precedes the procedures it affects, and 
Indicate the range of the control by step numbers both at the 
beginning of the affected steps and at their conclusion. 

Tailor the language of the procedure steps to the skill set and 
training level of the person who will follow the procedure. 

C.4.3 Technical data description 

Provide a technical description of any data involved in the pro- 
cedure, including names, meanings, representations, media, 
contents, access methods, structure, responsibilities, data 
security provisions, and inter-relationships. This information 
should be provided both for the application-oriented data {see 
C.3.5) and for any data internal to the procedure, for example 
control tallies, tables. 

The data should be described in accordance with annex B. This 
description may be contained in a separate document, in which 
case appropriate cross-references are required. 

C.4.4 Installation and support 

C. 4.4.1 Distribution and filing 

Provide any necessary information about the means of distribu- 
tion and procedures for filing or posting the procedure and its 
associated documentation. 



C.4.4.2 Testing 

Describe the methods used to test the procedure, with sample 
data processed and results. 



C.4.4.3 Training 

Detail 

a) the provisions made for training the person who will 
initially and subsequently use the procedure; 

b) the persons or organizations responsible; 

c) the typical duration of training, the productivity ''learn- 
ing curve", etc. 

C.4.4.4 Refinement 

Describe or reference the means by which persons following 
the procedure, or other persons involved, may contribute 
suggestions for its improvement. 

C. 4.4.5 Adaptation 

Provide any relevant suggestions for adapting the procedure 
for other uses or environments. 

C.4.4.6 Support 

Provide any additional technical information relevant to the 
continuing support and development of the procedure. 



19 « 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



Bureau of Indian Standard 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writting of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designation. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. LTD 33 ( 1546 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text AflFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional OflSces : 

Central : Manafc Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

33101 31 
331 13 75 

C37 84 99, 37 85 61, 
J37 86 26, 37 85 62 

53 38 43, 53 16 40, 
53 23 84 

C41 24 42, 41 25 19, 
{41 23 15, 41 29 16 

r632 92 95, 63 27 80, 
632 78 92 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 

f 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



