**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12176 (1987) : Sweetened Ultra High Temperature (UHT) 
Treated Condensed Milk [FAD 19: Dairy Products and 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:12176- 19B7 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SWEETENED ULTRA HIGH TEMPER ATTTRR 
(UUT) TREATED CONDENSED MILK 



UDC 637 142 442 



© Copyright 198a 

BUREAU OF INDJ4N STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAM. « BAHAUUR SHAH ZAFA& MARC 

NEW DELHI 11(1001 

Of 3 June 1988 



18:12176-1987 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SWEETENED ULTRA HIGH TEMPERATURE 

(UHT) TREATED CONDENSED MILK 



Dairy Products Sectioaal Committee, AFDC 34 

Chairman Representing 

DrB. N. Mathur National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 

Members 

Dr S. K. Gupta ( Alternate to 
Dr B. N. Mathur ) 

Dr R. p. Aneja National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

Dr B. K. Chakraborty ( Alternate ) 
Assistant Director General Central Committee for Food Standards 

( PFA ) ( Ministry of Health & Family Welfare ), 

New Delhi 
Assistant Secretary ( PFA ) {Alternate ) 
Shri J. J» Baxi Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation 

Limited, Anand 
Shri J. M. Contractor ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Bhaskara Rao National Cooperative Dairy Federation of India, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. Sundar ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. C. Bhatt Mehsana District Co-operative Milk Producers' 

Union Limited, Mehsana 
Shri V. M. Patel ( Alternate ) 
SttRi P, N. Daulatjada National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

Brig S, K. Diwan Technical Standardization Committee (Foodstuff) 

( Mmistry of Food and Civil Supplies ), 
New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Krishnamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. C. Ganouli Indian Council of Agricultural Research, 

New Delhi 
General Manager Mahanand Dugdhshala, Bombay 

Assistant Manager ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be ao infringcmeat of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 12176 . 1987 

{ Continued from pag€ 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Maj-Gen Gorakhnath Directorate of Supplies and Transport, Quarter- 

master Gcncrars Branch ( Army Head- 
quarters ), New Delhi 
Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) ? 

Shri D. C. Gupta Rajasthan Co-operative Dairy Federation 

Limited, Jaipur 
Dr S. C. Gwta National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri Mohinder Nath ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. M. Jhala Indian Dairy Corporation, Vadodara 

Dr Narain Raj ( Alternate ) . 

Joint Commissioner Ministry of Agriculture & Rural Development, 

( Dairy Development ) New Delhi 

Shri B. K. Chatteiuee ( Alternate ) 
Shri M.N/ Khan Delhi MiJk Scheme, New Delhi 

Shri Man Mohan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Madhava Rao The Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development 

Corporation Limited, Hyderabad 
Dr a. Sanjeeva Reddy ( Alternate I ) 
Shri Jaswantha Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Shri V. S. Pandya Venus Trading Company, Anand 

Shri M. S Pandya (Alternate ) 
DrC. V. Patel Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers* 

Union Ltd, Anand 
Shri Kailash Vyas ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. S. Puri Indian Dairy Association, New Delhi 

Dr E. Madhavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. N. Panday ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Roy Food Specialities Limited, New Delhi 

Shri M- K. Pandita ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Seth All India Ice-Cream Manufacturers* Association, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. L. Lamba ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. H. Sodhi The Punjab State Co-operative Milk Producers' 

Federation Limited, Chandigarh 
Shri D. B, Doda ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Subramanian Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Shri G. Ramanathan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P^ D. Vashisht Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 

of Agriculture & Kural Development ), 
NewDdhi 
ShmR. J. \e^ma( Alternate) 



( Continued on page 10 )■ 

.. ■ I 



18:12176-1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

SWEETENED ULTRA HIGH TEMPERATURE 

(UHT) TREATED CONDENSED MILK 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on 30 September 1987, after the draft finalized by the Dairy 
Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Condensed milk of various types are produced by partial removal 
of water of either whole, partially skimmed, skimmed or reconstituted or 
recombined milk with suitable adjustment of milk solids and with the 
addition of sucrose in the form of refined sugar. The removal of water 
leads to the possibility of storage of the resulting products unchanged 
for an appreciable length of time. An Indian Standard IS : 1166-1986* has 
already been published which prescribes the requirements for condensed 
milk produced by the conventional method of evaporation in vacuj of 
milk and sterilization in the container. This standard covers ultra high 
temperature treated ( UHT ) condensed milk. 

0.2.1 There have been several technological advancements in the field 
of milk processing, notable amongst these is the process of sterilization 
of milk and several other milk products by ultra h gh temperature (UHT) 
method followed by aseptic pakaging. The heat involved in this method 
is less severe than the conventional in-bottle or in-can sterilization, thus 
ensuring milk or milk products of highly acceptable quality with much 
less loss of nutrients. With the advent of UHT processing technology, 
it is possible to manufacture a highly satisfactory 1:2 milk concentrate 
with added sugar to suit the palate of consumers. 

0.2.2 In addition to its use, on reconstitution with an equal volume of 
water, as fluid milk, the product is also used in the manufacture of 
bakery products, confectionery, a variety of Indian sweets, ice-cream, 
ku^fi and other food products. 

*Specigcatioa for condensed milk, partly skimmed and skimmed condensed milk 
(second revision). 



IS : 12176 . 1987 

0.3 This standard is expected to help the manufacturers in excercising 
necessary quality control in the manufacture of this product and to 
encourage the new manufacturers to take up the production of this 
product. 

0.4 The inclusion of the UHT condensed milk in the PFA Rules, 1955 
has been referred to the Central Committee for Food Standards for 
consideiation. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS ; 2-1960*. The number of significant places rctanied 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and methods of test for 
UHT condensed milk and UHT condensed skimmed milk. 

l.l.l This standard does not apply to any form of concentrated milk 
not packed in sealed unit containers, intended for dilution into 
standardized, toned, double-toned; or skimmed milk, 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Ultra High Temperature ( UHT ) — The process of sterilizing the 
product by heating it at a temperature of not less than NO^'C for a 
mmimum period of 3 seconds followed by aseptic packaging. 

2.2 UHT condensed milk means the product obtained from cow or 
buffalo milk or a combination thereof or from standardized milk or 
recorabined milk or skim milk by partial removal of water, addition of 
cane sugar and subjecting to UHT treatment. 

3. TYPES 

3.1 The material shall be of the following two types: 

a) UHT condensed milk, and 

b) UHT condensed skimmed milk. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 12176 - 1987 

4. REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 The two types of the product (^^^3.1), Shall conform to the 
requirements and specifications as given in 4.1,1 to 4.1 9. 

4.1.1 The products shall be manufactured from fresh, whole standar- 
dized, reconstituted, recombined or skimmed milk obtained from cow 
milk or buffalo milk or a mixture thereof ( milk solids suitably processed 
may also be used), suitably standardized to give the final products as 
given in Table 1. The milk and/or milk solids used in the manufacture 
shall be free from non-permitted additives, 

table: 1 COMPOSITIONAL SPECIFICATION FOR UHT CONDENSED 
MILK AND UHT CONDENSED SKIMMED MILK 



( Clauses 4AA and4AA\ ) 



Sl" 
No. 


Characteristic 

1 


Requirements for 

UHT Con- UHT Con- 
densed Milk densed 
Skimmed 
Milk 


Method of Test, Ref to 




Appendix 

of IS: 1166- 

1986* 


Other 

Indian 
Standards 


(!) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


i) 


Total milk solids, 
percent by mass, 
Min 




26^0 


20-0 


B 


— 


H) 


Fat, percent by 
mass 




Not less 
than 8-0 


Not more 
than 0-5 


— 


IS : I1762-1986f 


iii) 


Sucrose, percent 
by mass» Xfax 




18 


IS 


C 


— * 


•v) 


Titratable acidity 
( as lactic acid ), 
percent by mass, 
Max 




0-35 


0-35 


D 




V) 


Titratable acidity 037 
(as acetic acid) after 
incubation, of 
packages for 7 days 
at 37''C, percent by 
mass, Max 


0-37 


D 





*Specification for condensed 
milk ( second revision ). 

tMethod for determination of fat content 
milk { Reference method ). 



milk, partly skimmed and skimmed condensed 
n condensed milk and evaporated 



4.1.2 The products may contain added refined lactose, permitted 
flavours, calcium chloride, citric acid, sodium citfate, sodium salts of 



IS : 12176 - 1987 

orthophospboric acid and polyphosphoric acid. Such additions shall 
not exceed 0*3 percent by mass of the finished products ( the additions 
need not be declared on the label ). 

4.1.3 Quality of Ingredients — The ingredients shall be clean, of good 
quality and safe. They shall conform to their normal quality require- 
ments, such as colour, flavour and odour. 

4.1.4 Colour — The products shall have whitish to light brown colour, 

4.1.5 Flavour and Taste — The flavour of the fresh products shall be 
pleasant and clean. They shall be free from rancid, fruity, mouldy, 
tallowy, cooked, sour, sandy [ for definitions of these terms, see IS : 5126 
( Part 2 )-1969* ] and any other objectionable odour and taste. These 
may be judged on the basis of their sensory characteristics ( for details, 
see IS : 10029-1981t ). There shall be no unusual flavour and taste, and 
there shall be no visible sediment. 

4.1*6 Sugar used in the manufacture of UHT condensed milk and 
UHT condensed skimmed milk, shall conform to IS : 1679-1960$ or any 
other good quality food grade sugar. 

4.1.7 The products may be fortified with vitamirs A, D and B group. 
The vitamins shall be of food grade. Levels of fortification shall be 
declared on the container. However, even with this fortification, exclu- 
sive use of condensed milk for infant is not recommended. 

4.1.8 Size of Lactose Crystals — The material shall not have more 
than 30 percent of the lactose crystals of size greater than 15 iim, when 
determined by the method given in Appendix A of IS : 1166-1986§. 

4:1.9 Hygienic Conditions — The material should be, as far as possible, 
manufactured and packed under hygienic conditions in the licensed 
premises ( see IS : 2491- 1972|1 ). 

4.1,9,1 The basic principles of hygiene as outlined in IS ; 2491- 
197211 should be applied with appropriate modifications, 

4.1.10 Aficrobiohgical Specifications 

4.1.10.1 Bacterial spores ( plate count ) — The bacterial spore 
count per 0*1 g of the product shall be not more than iO when deter- 
mined according to the method prescribed in Appendix A. 

♦Glossary of general terms for sensory evaluation of foods: Part 2 Quality 
characteristics. 

tMctlibd for sensory evaluation of sweetened condensed milk. 

iSpecification for sugar used in food preservation industry. 

^Specification for condensed milk, partly skimmed and skimmed condensed milk 
{second reriaion ), 

H Code for h>gienic conditions for food processing units {first revision ). 



IS : 12176 - 19S? 

4.1.10.2 Collform count — The coliform bacteria shall be absent in 
the product when determined according to the method prescribed in 
18:5401-1969*, 

4.1.10.3 Coagulase positive Staphylococcus aureus — The coagulase 
positive Staphylococcus aureus shall be absent in the products when 
determined according to the method prescribed in IS : 5887 (Part 2 )- 
1976t. 

4.1.11 The product shall also comply with the compositional specifi- 
cations given in Table 1. 

5. PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing — The material shall be ascptically packed in suitably 
sterilized food grade polyethylene and/or aluminium foil laminated paper 
containers or any other suitable food grade containers of adequate 
mechanical strength capable of withstanding the normal handling and 
transportation, in quantities of 200 g, and 1 kg in such a way as to 
protect it from deterioration. 

5.2 Marking — Each container shall be legibly and indelibly marked 
with the following particulars : 

a) Name of the manufacturer; 

b) Type of material; 

c) Batch or code number; 
u) Minimum nci mass; 

e) Levels uf fortification with vitamins, if done; 

f) The contents of this container; on reconstitution as per the 

directions have iitrc(s) of standardized, toned double 

toned ot t^kimmed milk with added sugar (depending upon the 
type of the material ); 

g) Any other requirement under the standards of Weights and 
Measures ( Packaged Gommodities ) Rules, 1977; and 

h) 'Mother's milk is best for your baby. 



•Meihods for detection and estimation of coliform bacteria in foodstuffs. 

tMethods for detection of bacicria responsible for food poisoning: Part 2 
Isolation, identification and enumeraiion of Staphylococcus aureus and faecal 
hixtpiOGOCc'h\ first rtvisien). 



IS 1 1217« ^ 1987 
5.2.1 The container may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
t«>ftvey8 the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the rcquire- 
tnents of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheeked by BIS for 
conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
Which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be Obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 

6. SAMPL!N<5 

6.1 The method of drawing representative samples of the material and 
the criteria for conformity shall be as piescribed in Appendix F of 
IS: 1166-1986*. 

7. TESTS 

7.1 Tests shall be carried out as prescribed in the appropriate appendices 
and Indjan Standards given in 4.1.8, 4.1,10 and col 5 and 6 of Table 1. 

7.2 Quality of Reagents — Unless otherwise specified, pure chemicals 
shall be employed in tests and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1977t ) shall 
be used where the use of water as a reagent is intended. 

Note — *Pure chemicals' shall mean the chemicals that do not contain 
impurities which afifect tiie results of analysis. 



APPENDIX A 

(Clause 4 A ,10 A ) . 

ENUMERATION OF BACTERIAL SPORES 

A-0. PRINCIPLE 

A-0.1 Sweetened condensed milk, after manufacture may contain bacte- 
rial spores, both aerobic and anaerobx type. The enumeration methods 
for these organisms are different. The prepared sample is subjected to 
heat treatment at SO^'C for 10 minutes to destroy non-spore forming 

•Specification for condensed milk partly skimmed and skimmed condensed milk 
( second revision ). ' 

tSpecification for Water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). . 



18:12176-1987 

bacteria while the spores of aerobic and anacrotic bacteria withstand 
this temperature. The heated and cooled sample is then used for 
isolation and enumeration of bacterial spores. 

A-1. METHOD FOR DESTROYING NON-SPORE FORMING 
BACTERIA 

A-1.1 Prepare 1 : 10 dilution of the sample and heat in a water bath at 
80 ± rc for 10 minutes. Keep a check on the temperature of water 
bath with the help of a thermometer. Cool the heated sample to lO'^C. 

A-2. ENUMERATION OF SPORE FORMING BACTERIA 

A-2.1 With the heated and cooled sample ( A-1.1 ), proceed as per the 
method described in IS : 5887 ( Part 4 )-1976*. 



♦Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisOfliAg * Part 4 
Isolation and identification of Clostridium welchii, Clostridium botuUHum and 
Bacillus cereus and enumeration of Clostridium wetchii &n6 Bad UuineteUs {first 
revision )» 



IS : 12176 . 1987 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri B. Vishwanathan The Haryana Dairy Development Cooperative 

Federation Limited, Chandigarh 
Shri R. K. Chhabra ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, BIS ( Ex^offieio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. K. Grover 
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), BIS 



Milk Products Sectional Committee, AFDC 34 : 1 

Convener 

Dr B. K. Chakraborty National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

Members 

Shri P. Bhaskara Rao National Cooperative Dairy Federation of India 

New Delhi 
Shri R. Sundar ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. C» Bhatt Mehsana District Co-operative Milk Producers' 

Union Limited, Mehsana 
Shri V. M, Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Chatterjee Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri M. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Chaudhary The Punjab State Cooperative Milk Producers' 

Federation Limited, Chandigarh 
Shri D. B. Doda ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. M. Contractor Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation 

Limited. Anand 
Shri N. N. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 
Director ( CFL ) Directorate General of Health Services 

(Ministry of Health & Family Welfaic ), 
New Delhi 
Assistant Secretary ( PFA ) ( Alternate ) 
Maj-Gen Gorakhnath Directorate General of Supplies and Transport, 

Quartermaster General's Branch ( Army 
Headquarters ), New Delhi 
Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri Jagtaran Singh Milk Foods Limited, New Delhi 

Shri R. C. Mahajan {Alternate ) 
DrM. K.Jain National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 
,^ 0r S, a. Singh ( Alternate ) .«,.... ^ 

l$kRi L. €. Java Joy Ice Cream ( Bangalore ) Private Limited, 

-' ■ Bangalore 

( Continued on page 11 ) 
10 



rs : 12176 - 1987 

( Continued from page 10 ) 

Members Represent inf 

KuMARi Radha Moorthy ( Alternate ) 
Dr d M, Jhala Indian Dairy Corporation, Vadodara 

Dr Narayan Raj ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. N. Khan Delhi Milk Scheme, New Delhi 

Shri R. K. Bhargava ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. Madhava Rao The Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development 

Cooperative Federation Limited, Hyderabad 
Dr K. Srihari Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr C. L. Nagarcekar Protein Foods and Nutrition Development 

Association of India, Bombay 
Shri B. P. S. Puri Indian Dairy Association. New Delhi 

Dr E. Madhavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Roy Food Specialities Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri N. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. G. Shah Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers' 

Union Limited, Anand 
Dr C. V. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Seth All India Ice Cream Manufacturers' Association, 

New Delhi 
Shri P- L. Lamba ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Vishwanathan The Haryana Dairy Development Cooperative 

Federation Limited, Chandigarh 
Shri R. K. Chhabra { Alternate ) 



11 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) 





Unit 


SviiaoL 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mass 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


i 


Electric cnrrent 


ampere 


A 


Theroiodynamic 


kelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


fflOl 


Snpylementary Vn\u 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Piane angle 


radian 


rad 


Soitd angle 


steradian 


sr 


Derff ed UnlU 






QUANTITV 


Unit 


Stmboi 


Force 


newton 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Flux 


webef 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesia 


T 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


3 


Electromotive force 


voU 


V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



OaFINlTIOH 

1 N « 1 kg.m/s> 
I J - 1 N.m 
I W-lJ/s 
1 Wb - 1 V.S 
I T -. 1 Wb/m« 
I Hz — 1 c/s (s-i) 
i S - 1 A/V 
I V -i 1 W/A 
1 Pa - 1 N/m« 



