**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11449 (1985) : Mechanical coupler for measurement on bone 
vibrators [LITD 7: Audio^ Video and Multimedia Systems and 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11449-1895 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR MECHANICAL 

COUPLER FOR MEASUREMENT ON 

BONE VIBRATORS 



UDC 534'77i"i6l6 2»-072 7 




Cr3 



© Copyn^ht 19S6 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK &HAVAN, * BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI IIWOZ 

Sgpiemfvr 19R6 



IS : 11449 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR MECHANICAL 

COUPLER FOR MEASUREMENT ON 

BONE VIBRATORS 

Acoustics Sectional Committee, LTDC 5 

Chairman Representing 

Shri K. D. Pavate Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani 

Members 

Shri M. R. Kapoor ( Alternate to 
Shri K. D. Pavate) 
Shri Sandeep Ahuja Ahuja Radios, New Delhi 

Shri K. R. GurUMURTHY ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Bhatia Department of Telecomniunication, New Delhi 

Shri T. R. Wadhwa ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Chandrachudan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri I. S. Vedi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Ghosh Railway Boara, Ministry of Railways 

Shri Shankar ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. N. Gupta Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shri R. K. Jain Electronic Component Industries Association 

( ELCINA ), New Delhi 
Shri L. K. Vishwanath ( Alternate ) 
COL Krishan Lal Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri B, S- Ruprai ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. MOHANAN National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ). New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Monga Bolten Industrial Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Monga ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Kumari ) Shailaja Nikam All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore 

Shri S. S. Murthy ( Alternate ) 
Prof B. S. Ramakrishna Central University, Hyderabad 

Shri S. L. Redey Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; 

and The Radio Electronics & Television 
Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 
Shri M. M. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Representative Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. Sankaralxngam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 



Shri R. S. Arora ( Alternate ) 



(Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11449 - 1985 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shrt a. K. Sen Directorate General of All India Radio, New 

Delhi 
Shri W. V. B. Ramalinoam ( Alternate ) 
Cdr p. K. Sinha Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Lt R. S. DatTA ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Surveyor of Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works ( Food ) 
Surveyor of works I/Food ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. SrinivaSAN, Director General, ISl ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri Pavan Kumar 
Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 

Panel for Hearing Aids and Audiometers, LTDC 5 : P4 



Convener 
DR ( KUMARI ) ShAILAJA NiKAM 

Members 
ShR! T. S. AnAND 

Shki Syed p. Basheer 

Dr Sohan Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shr I B. S. Bedi 
Dr M P. Dhir 

• 
Dr P. Ghosh 

Shri Phirozb A. Peston Jamas 
Shri R. N. Narang 
Shri B. S. Narayanan 

Shri K. Naoaraj ( Alternate ) 
Shrt E. R. Ramachandran 
Representative 

Representative 



All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore 



Electrotech Corporation, Chandigarh 
Radiocraft of India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

The Association of Otolaryngologists of India, 

Bombay 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 
Arphi Incorporated, Bombay 
Alps International Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 
National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), 

New Delhi 
Central Electronics Engineering Research Insti- 
tute ( CSIR ), Pilani 



IS : 114<9-1SJ5 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR MECHANICAL 

COUPLER FOR MEASUREMENT ON 

BONE VIBRATORS 

0, F O R E W O R D 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 25 September 1985^ after the draft finalized by the Acoustics 
Se tional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecom- 
mucication Division Council. 

0.2 The purpose of this standard, as applied to audiometry, is to provide 
a means of calibrating bone vibrators of the types used in bone-conduction 
audiometry by specifying a standardized mechanical impedance with 
which to load the vibrator and a device for measuring the alternating 
force produced. Reference equivalent threshold force levels correspond- 
ing to the normal threshold of hearing are specified in IS : 11024-1984*. 
For this application, the bone vibrator is required to have plane circular 
tip area of 175 ± 25 mm- and to be applied to the mechanical coupler 
with a static force of 5'4 ± 0'5 N, as specified in IS : 10565-19831. The 
mechanical coupLer is also intended for other measurements on bone 
vibrators for audiometers namely, frequency response, unwanted sound 
radiation, harm^onic, distortion, etc. 

0.3 The purpose of this standard, as applied to hearing aids, is to 
provide a means of measuring the electro=mechanical characteristics 
( sensitivity, frequency response, harmonic distortion, etc ) of bone 
vibrators used in hearing aids, or the acousto-mechanical characteristics 
of complete hearing aids of the bone conduction type, when dynamically 
loaded by a specified mechanical impedance and applied with a static 
force in the range 1'7 to 4 N. 

0*4 While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from 
lEC 29C ( CO ) 50 Draft Mechanical coupler for measurements on bone 
vibrators. 



*Standard reference zero for the calibralion of pure-tone bone conduction 
audiometers and guidelines for its practical application, 
tuiagnostic audiometer. 



IS : 11449 - 1985 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard specifies requiremetits for mechanical couplers used 
for calibrating bone-conduction audiometers and for making measure- 
ments on bone vibrators and bone-conduction hearing aids, in the 
frequency range from 125 to 8 000 Hz inclusive. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in 
IS: 1885 (Part 3/Sec 5 )-1966t shall apply in addition to the 
following. 

2.1 Bone Vibrator — An electro-mechanical transducer intended to 
produce the sensation of hearing by vibrating the cranial bones. 

2.2 Mechanical Coupler — A device designed to present a specified 
mechanical impedance to a vibrator applied with a specified static force, 
and equipped with a mechano-electric transducer to determine the 
alternating force level at the surface of contact between vibrator and 
mechanical coupler. 

2.3 Alternating Force Level ( Force Level ) — twenty' times the logarithm 
to the base 10 of the ratio of the rms value of the force transmitting the 
vibration to the reference value of I micronewton ( ItJi^N ). Unit : dB. 

2.4 Mechanical Impedance — of a sinusbidally vibrating object at a speci- 
fied frequency. The complex quotient of the alternating force transmitting 
the vibration to the component of velocity of the object in the direction 
of the force. Unit : Nsm-^ 

2.5 Mechanical Impedance Level — twenty times the logarithm to the base 
10 of the ratio of the absolute value (modulus) of the mechanical 
impedance to the reference value of 1 Nsm~^. Unit : dB. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

tElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part 3 Acoustics, Section 5 Speech ^and hearing. 



IS : 11449 - 1985 

2.6 Mechanical Resistance — The real part of the ( complex ) mechanical 
impedance. 

2.7 Mechanical Reactance — The imaginary part of the ( complex ) 
mechanical impedance. 

Note — By convention, mechanical reactance due to inertia is assigned a 
positive sign. 

2.8 Sensitivity Level — Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the 
ratio of the sensitivity of a mechanical coupler, defined as electrical output 
in volts for an applied alternating force in newton^, to the reference 
sensitivity of IV/N. Unit : dB. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 General — The mechanical coupler shall consist, in essence, of a 
rigid mass of approximately 35 kg containing a force-sensing element 
and surmounted by visco-elastic material having an external profile 
as specified in 3,4. The mechanical impedance of the assembly for 
uniaxial vibration which is coincident with its major axis of symmetry 
shall comply with the specifications in 3.2 and 3.3. The whole assembly 
shall be supported in such a way as to be capable of sustaining a static 
force of up to 6 N ( including the weight of the vibrator under test, if 
mounted on a vertical axis ) with a frequency of natural oscillation on 
the supports not greater than 12*5 Hz. 

Note 1 — It is recommended to include a temperature-sensing device in intimate 
contact with the bulk mass of the mechanical coupler, to permit correct measure- 
ment of its temperature during use and calibration ( see 4.3 ). 

Note 2 — An example of a mechanical coupler complying with this standard is 
described in Appendix A. 

3.2 Mechanical Impedance Level — The mechanical coupler shall present 
a mechanical impedance at a temperature of 23*0°C having the levels 
specified in Table 1 together with tolerances, when driven by a vibrator 
having a plane circular tip of area 175 mm^ and applied with a static 
force of 5*4 N including ( where the apparatus is mounted with its axis 
vertical ) the weight of the vibrator and of any unsupported components 
of the force-delivery device. 

Note 1 — Values of the mechanical impedance level and tolerances are derived 
from experimental data on examples of mechanical coupler. 

Under similar conditions but with the static force reduced to 2*5 N the mechani- 
cal impedance level at 250 Hz shall be 2*0 i 0*5 dB below the value measured with 
the static force of 5*4 N. 



IS : 11449 - 1985 



TABLE 1 MECHANICAL IMPEDANCE LEVEL 

( Clauses 3.2, 4A and 4.2 ) 

Frequency Mechanical Impedance Level i olerance 

( Reference : I Nsm-^) 

Hz dB tlB 

125 48-9 1:20 

160 474 

200 45-8 

250 44-3 

315 42*9 

400 41*3 

500 399 

630 38'5 

750* 374 

800 370 

1 000 35*5 

i 250 340 ±2 5 

I 500* 32-4 

1 600 31*9 

2 000 29*8 

2 500 27*8 

3 000* 27*2 

3 150 27-3 

4 000 29-5 

5 000 32-6 

6 000* 34'4 
6 300 34-6 
8 000 35- 1 

*These frequencies are used in audiometry but are not included in the preferred 
series specified in IS : 2264 - 1963t. 

tPreferred frequencies for acoustical measurements. 



Note 2 — This constitutes a performance specification and the lower value of 
static force is not necessarily that recommended to be used when testing any 
particular device. 

3.3 Phase Angle of Mechanical Impedance — The phase angle of the 
mechanical coupler at a frequency of 250 Hz and a temperature of 23*'C 
shall be —63° ± 4'*, when driven under the same conditions as specified 
in 3.2, with a static force of 5'4 N. 

3.4 External Geometry — The contact surface of the mechanical coupler, 
in the undeformed state, shall be spherical with a nominal radius of 



IS : 11449 - 1985 

96 mm. The exposed portion of the sphere shall be circular in shape 
with a minimum diameter of 35 mm. Within this diameter the surface 
shall be smooth and the tolerance on the spherical radius shall be di 
15 mm. Outside this diameter the external profile of the mechanical 
coupler shall be such as to avoid interference with any bone vibrator 
which it is intended to test. 

3.5 Attachment of Vibrator ~ Means shall be provided for applying the 
vibrator under test to the mechanical coupler witTi the requisite static 
force. This device shall permit the calibration of vibrators mounted on 
a headband or of isolated vibrators without causing spurious response of 
the vibrator. 

Note l — it is recommended that the force-producing mechanism ( for exam- 
ple, springs or gravity-loading mechanism ) provided on the mechanical coupler 
be decoupled from the vibrator under test by means of elastic bands applied 
symmetrically to the back of the vibrator, the elastic bands having negligible 
stiffness in the direction of the vibration. 

Note 2 — For measurements on headband-mounted vibrators it is recommended 
that provision be made to spread the headband so as to develop the required 
static force. The free end of the headband should bear on a resilient material to 
reduce spurious resonance effects and the headband should not shunt the springs 
used to resiliently mount the mechanical coupler. 

Note 3 — Means should be provided for locating the vibrator symmetrically 
on the mechanical coupler. 

An example of one form of mounting is shown in Fig. 2 of IS : 10776 ( Part 4 )- 
1984*. 

4. CALIBRATION 

4.1 Sensitivity Level — The mechanical .coupler shall be calibrated by 
the manufacturer at 23° ± l^'C in terms of its sensitivity level at the 
frequencies listed in Table 1. 

The alternating force shall be applied via a plane-ended circular driving 
plate of area 175 mm", and values of sensitivity level shall be given for 
coupling forces of 5'4 and 2'5 N. The electrical load conditions shall be 
stated. A calibration table or a graph shall be supplied with each 
mechanical coupler, together with a statement defining the uncertainty. 
The calibration uncertainty shall not exceed 1*0 dB for frequencies up to 
and including 2 kHz nor shall it exceed 2'0 dB for frequencies up to 
and including 8 kHz. 



♦Methods of measurement of electroacoustic characteristics of hearing aids: 
Part 4 Hearing aids with bone vibrators. 



IS: 11449-1985 

Note \ — Measurement of the applied alternating force usually requires 
compensation for the mass of material in the driving stylus between the calibrated 
force transducer and the external surface, and the instructions of the transducer 
manufacturer should be followed. 

Note 2 — For the purpose of calibration and elsewhere in this standard where 
temperature is specified, it is to be understood that the temperature is that of the 
mechanical coupler. Due to the large thermal capacity of the mass comprising 
the bulk of the device it may take several hour^ to attain thermal equilibrium. It is 
not reliable to depend on a measurement of room temperature. 

4.2 Mechanical Impedance Level — A table or a graph shall be supplied 
by the manufacturer with each mechanical coupler giving the results of 
measurements of the mechanical impedance level at 25^ ± 1°C at the 
frequencies listed in Table 1, under conditions specified in 3.2. 

4.3 Temperature Dependence — As a type requirement; measurements 
as in 4.1 and 4.2 shall be carried out additionally over a temperature 
range of at least 18° to 28° C, at a sufl&cient number of frequencies to 
characterize the temperature dependence of sensitivity level and mecha- 
nical impedance level. This information shall be supplied in the form of 
temperature coefficients valid over a stated temperature range. 

Note — These data are required purely as indicators of temperature dependence. 
In general, the values for the temperature dependence cannot be used directly to 
correct data measured at other temperatures to the reference temperature of 25°C, 
as the effect of the change in mechanical impedance level on the alternating force 
output of the bone vit rator under test will not be known. 

5. MARKING AND INSTRUCTION MANUAL 

5.1 Marking of the Mechanical Coupler — Mechanical couplers 
complying with this standard shall be marked with the manufacturer's 
name or trade-mark, a serial number, and reference to this standard by 
number. 

5.1.1 The mechanical couplers may also be marked with the ISI Certi- 
fication Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer, ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8 



IS: 11449- 1985 

5.2 Instruction Manual — The mechanical coupler shall be provided 
with an instruction manual which, as a minimum, shall contain the 
information required by 4, Notwithstanding it shall also contain the 
following: 

a) Detailed instructions which need to be followed to ensure that in 
use the coupler meets the requirements of this standard. 

b) Details of the recommended calibration procedures. 

c) The limits of temperature and humidity beyond which permanent 
damage to the mechanical coupler may result. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.1 ) 

EXAMPLE OF A SPECIFIC CONSTRUCTION OF 
A MECHANICAL COUPLER 

A-1. MECHANICAL IMPEDANCE ELEMENT 

A-1.1 Visco-Elastic Components 

i) Butyi Pad 

The butyi pad ( Fig. 1 ) i^ in the form of a fiat plate of diameter approxi- 
mately 40-50 mm and thickness 3*8 mm. The composition for the butyl 
is as follows: 

Butyi 35 SH Parts by Weight 

Butyl 100 

Medium thermal carbon black 50 

Zinc oxide ( lead free ) 5 

Sulphur 2 

Magnesia 1 

Octamine 1 

Tetra methyl thiorem disulphidc 15 

Mercopto benz thiozyl disulphidc 1 
Mixture must be processed within 60 days. 

ii) Neoprene Rubber Pad 

The neoprene rubber pad is in the form of a flat plate of diameter approxi- 
mately 40-50 mm and thickness 3'I mm. The composition for the neoprene 



Parts by Weight 


125 


50 


5 


2-5 


2-5 


16 


12-5 


25 


25 


3-8 



IS: 11449 -1W5 

rubber is as follows: 

Neoprene 35 SH 

Neoprene S-40 

Sevalblack 

Magnozink 

Sterric acid 

Octamine 

Ethylene thio urea 

Faktis 

Dutrex 

Butyl oleat 

Polyethylene 

Mixture must be processed within 60 days. 

A-1.2 Metal Components 

i) Base of mechanical impedance element 

The base consists of stainless steel prepared for vulcanization 
by a proper primer ( Fig. I ). The upper surface has a spheri- 
cal radius of 89 i 05 mm and should be free from obvious 
turning marks or other blemishes. 

ii) Loading insert 

The loading insert is in the form of a frustrum of a cone of 
thickness 2*5 ± 0'05 mm, as shown in Fig. 2. The insert 
should be accurately turned from tungsten alloy density 17 
Mgm~^. 

A-1.3 Assembly — The neoprene rubber is vulcanized to the steel base 
under a pressure of 0*25 MPa at a temperature of nC^C for 20 min. The 
vulcanized steel base v^^ith neoprene and the tungsten mass ( Fig. 2 ) are 
primed and the butyl disc is vulcanized under a pressure of 0* 13 MPa at a 
temperature of 155°C for 20 min. The vulcanized mechanical impedance 
clement shall meet the required tolerances ( see 3.2 to 3.4 ). 

A.2, GENERAL ASSEMBLY 

A- 2.1 The mechanical impedance element is mounted on the brass body as 
shown in Fig. 3, a piezoelectric force sensing element being clamped 
between them. 



10 



IS : 11449 - 1985 




R 1-5 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Dimensions of Mechanical Impedance Element Base 





All dimensions in millimetres. 
FXG. 2 Dimensions of Tungsten Loading Insert 
11 



IS: 11449-1985 



NECPRENE RUS8ER 
-TUNGSTEN LOADING INSERT 
8UTYL RUBBER 

MECHANICAL 
MPEOANCE 

ELEMENT 




PIEZOELECTRIC 

TRANS&UCER 

ELEMENT 



TRANSDUCER 
OUTPUT 



BRASS 
BODY 



SOFT 
SPENSION 



Fig. 3 Assembly of the Mechanical Coupler 



12 



