**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12053 (1987) : Code of practice for the preparation and 
application of putty for repairing plywood and other wood 
based panels [CED 20: Wood and other Lignocellulosic 
products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



l$:l20S3-1d87 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACirCE FOR 
THE PREPAKATION AMD APPLICATION OF 
PUTTY FOR REPAIRING PLYWOOD AND 
0T1!HR WOOD BASED PANELS 



UDC, fjyl'58 [678 68t] : 674^1*) 32 



BUREAU PF INDIAN STANDAPtDS 

MANAK BHAVAW. !' t3AHAl>UR SHAH ZAFAR U\RQ 

NEW DELHI nocica 
Gr 2 Decmbfr 1987 



IS : 12053 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

THE PREPARATION AND APPLICATION OF 

PUTTY FOR REPAIRING PLYWOOD AND 

OTHER WOOD BASED PANELS 

Wood Products Sectional Committee, BDC 20 

Chairman Representing 

Dr p. M. Ganapathy Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 

Mtmbers 

Shri V, SivaNanda ( Alternate to 
Dr P. M. Ganapathy ) 
Shri B. C. Bansal. National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi p. R.Ghandrasekhar Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of Assam, 

Guwahati 
Shri L. N. Dokania Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel 

Industry, New Delhi 
Shri M. R. Motayed ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. P. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri J. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Industrial. Adviser Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri P, V. Mbhta ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Standards Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow 

(Carriagk-I ) 
Shri A. K. Kadebkutty Western India Plywood Limited, Baliapatam 

Shri U. B. Kancban Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri B. B. Mehta [Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Latjlv Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Dandoli 

Lt-Col G. B. Singh ( Rtd ) (Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Motayed Plywood Manufacturers* Association of West 

Bengal, Calcutta 
Shri N. M. Chaohan ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. N. Nayer In personal capacity ( C-59, Inderpuri ^ Kew Delhi ) 

Dii A. PiTRUSHOTHAM Indian Academy of Wood Science, Dharwad 

Dr Satish Kumar ( Alternate ) 

( Continued an page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Ad ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



!S : 12053 - 1987 

( Continu*d from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri A, K, RAMAGHANDaAK South Indian Plvwood Manufacturers Association, 

Trivendrum 
Shri Joseph K. Kurian ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

ShriJ. Skn Gupta ( Alternate) 
Shbi p. R. Riohsinohani Engineer-in-Ghief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Maj D. R. Kohli ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Sanoanebia Assam Plywood Manufacturers* Association, 

Tinsukhia 
Shbi S. N. Sanyal Forest Research Institute and Golleges ( Timber 

Mechanics Branch), Dehra Dun 
Secretary Indian Tea Association, Calcutta 

Shri Shaban Singh Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Dr Y, Sinqh Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shbi L. K. AqabwaIj ( Aiirenaie ) 
SupKRiNTENDiNO SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works ( NZ ) 

Surveyor of Works ( NZ ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. Thomson, Sitapur Plywood Manufacturers Ltd, Sitapur 

Shri G. Ramak, Director General^ BIS ( Ex-officw Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri P. Satyanabayana 

Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 



Adhesives for Wood and Wood Products 
Subcommittee, BDC 20 : 4 

Convener 
Dr R. N. Kumar Western lodia Plywoods Ltd, Baliapatam 

Members 

Shri B. M. Benerjee Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri V= B. Tandon ( Alternate ) 

Shri P, K. Bat^erji Mafatlal Dyes Limited, Bombay 

Shri F B. Kapadia ( Alternate ) 

Shbi C. S- Bhatnaoar Giba-Geigy of India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr P. K. B. R. Ghoudhuri Allied Resins & Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shki a, Ghosh ( Alternate ) 

Director Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 

Shri S. S. Zoolaqub ( Alternate ) 

Shbi R. V. Doshi Doshi Brothers & Go, Anand 

Shri G. V. Doshi ( Alternate ) 

( Cmntinued sn page 8 ) 



IS : 12053 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

THE PREPARATION AND APPLICATION OF 

PUTTY FOR REPAIRING PLYWOOD AND 

OTHER WOOD BASED PANELS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 

Standards on 28 May 1987, after the draft finalized by the Wood 

Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Putty is extensively used by plywood, furniture and other wood 
based industries. This code of practice has, therefore, been formulated 
to cover the type of putty, its formulation, quality requirements and 
method of application. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calulated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the characteristics 
of putty based on nitrocellulose or urea formaldehyde resin for use in 
repairing plywood and other wood based panels. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Putty — Pasty material used to repair the cracks, splits or holes in 
the plywood or wood based panels which sets on application on the 
panels. 

2.2 Setting Time — The time taken for the putty to convert itself into 
a cohesive mass which meets the requirements after a specified time. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revistd). 

3 



IS : 12053 - 1987 

2.3 Filler/Extender — An inert substance, such as wood flour, talc, 
gypsum and china clay which is added to alter the characteristics of 
the putty. 

2.4 Pot Life — The time between the mixing of the constituent parts 
of a putty and its reaching the age when it is no longer usable. 

2.5 Nitrocellulose Putty — A nitrocellulose putty is prepared using 
nitrocellulose 20 sec and nitrocellulose 1/2 sec thoroughly mixed with 
organic solvents and finally mixed with fillers and pigments so as to 
match the colour of panel. 

2-6 Urea Formaldehyde Resin Based Putty — Urea formaldehyde 
resin putty is prepared by mixing the powder resin with fillers, pigments 
and organic solvents. To the final mix, catalyst like ammonium 
chloride or ammonium sulphate is added to enable this putty to set on 
the panel. 

2.7 Putty Based on Urea Formaldehyde { UF ) Modified with 
Polyvinyl Acetate ( PVAc ) Emulsion — Putty based on urea 
formaldehyde modified with PVAc is prepared by mixing either 
powder UF resin dissolved in water or UF resin solution of about 
50 percent solids with filler/extender and a catalyst like ammonium 
chloride or ammonium sulphate, 

3- REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Form and Condition — The putty shall be a homogeneous 
paste and shall be free from grit and visible impurities. 

3.2 Consistency — The putty, after thorough working in handj 
shall have good plastic quality without sliminess or stickiness that would 
render it difficult to handle and apply. 

3.2.1 In addition, it shall work readily and smoothly under flexible 
metallic knife without crumbling. After being applied on the panel 
surface and after setting, it shall remain as a cohesive mass and shall 
not shrink or crack and shall remain on the surface of the panel 
without any deformation when subjected to cold water soaking for 
24 hours. It shall set within 30 to 120 minutes at ambient temxperature 
from the time of its application on the panel. It shall be abrasion 
resistant at par with the panel surface. 

3.2.2 It shall remain permanently on the panel surface and shall 
not split or crack or come off from the surface while the panels are 
handled during transportation and use. 



IS : 12053 - 1987 

3.2.3 Repaired area of the panel shall not crack or split on nailing 
or screwing. 

3.2.4 It shall be possible to crush the nitrocellulose putty or UF resin 
putty base if caked in container or remixed with solvents, if evaporated. 

3.3 Paintability — Surface of the putty repaired area of the panel 
shall be easily paintable with spirit, varnish, oil varnish or paints. 

4. MATERIALS 

4.1 Nitrocellulose — Nitrocellulose shall be ester soluble of viscosity 
15-20 seconds and E. S. 1/2 seconds. 

4.2 Urea Formaldehyde Resin — Urea formaldehyde resin shall be 
in powder or solution form and shall meet the requirements specified 
in IS : 848-1974*. 

4.3 Solvents — Solvents used for the preparation of putty shall be 
acetone and/or methyl or ethyle alcohol and should not contain 
impurities which effect the properties of the putty. 

4.4 Fillers/Extender — Fillers shall be of size specified in 5.1(a) 
and 5.2(b). Extenders shall meet the requirements specified in 
IS : 1508-19721. 

4.5 Pignaents — Mineral pigments in a range of shades to match the 
plywood and the wood panels of any colour. 

4.6 Catalysts — Catalyst for UF resin based putty shall be either 
ammonium chloride or ammonium sulphate. 

5. PREPARATION OF PUTTY 

5.1 Formulation for Nitrocellulose Putty — Nitrocellulose based 
putty formulation consists of two stages: (a) preparation of putty and 
(b) colouring of putty. 

a) Preparation of Putty — The following ingredients are mixed to 
obtain a smooth paste: 

Ingredients Parts by Weight 

Acetone 80 

Methanol 40 



•Specification for synthetic r^sin adhesives for plywood ( phenolic and aminoplastic ) 
{first revision ). 

fSpecification for extenders for use in synthetic resin adhesives ( urea formaldehyde ) 
for plywood [first revision ). 



IS I 12053 - 1987 

Ingredients Parts by Weight 

Nitrocellulose 20 Sec 15 

Nitrocellulose 1/2 Sec 20 

Gypsum ( 45 microns ) 60-90 

Talc powder ( 45 microns ) 60-90 

China clay ( 45 microns ) 20-30 

Wood flour ( 75 microns ) 15-20 

Acetone and methanol are taken in a container which is 
fitted with a stirrer fixed to a heavy duty dust proof and flame 
proof motor. The nitrocellulose ( NG ) 20 Sec is slowly added 
with constant stirring followed by NG 1/2 Sec. Stirring is continued 
till a homogeneous solution is obtained. To the resultant solution, 
gypsum, talc, china clay and wood flour are added and mixed 
thoroughly to get a homogeneous paste. The smooth paste so 
obtained, shall be preserved in an airtight container for further 
processing. The putty prepared shall have a pot life of about 
one week. 

b) Colouring of Putty— General mineral pigments suitable for 
colouring the putty are raw sienna, burnt sienna, turkey 
amber, ferric oxide, titanium dioxide, zinc oxide. The use 
of sand or dust or wood flour of particular species helps in 
reducing the quantity of pigments mentioned above. Suitable 
yjigments and wood flour are mixed with putty and the 
coloured putty so obtained is stored in sealed containers. 

5,2 Formulation for Urea-formaldehyde ( UF ) Putty — UF based 
putty formulation consists of three stages: (a) Preparation of putty base, 
(b) colouring of putty base, and (c) addition of catalyst to the putty 
base. 

a) Preparation of Putty Base — The ingredients mentioned below 
are mixed in powder form and then mixed with acetone and 
stirred thoroughly to obtain a putty base. The putty base shall 
have a pot life of about one week. 

Ingredients Parts by Weight 

UF resin powder 100 

Wood flour ( 75 microns ) 40 

Talc powder ( 45 microns ) 100 

China clay ( 45 microns ) 100 

Acetone 120-130 



IS : 12053 " 1987 

b) Colouring of Putty Base — Generally mineral pigments suitable 
for colouring the putty are raw sienna, burnt sienna, turkey 
amber, ferric oxide, titanium dioxide or zinc oxide. The use 
of sender dust or wood floor of particular species helps in 
reducing the quantity of pigments mentioned above. Suitable 
pigments and wood flour are mixed with putty and the 
coloured putty so obtained is stored in sealed containers. 

c) Addition of Catalyst to the Putty Base — 100 parts of the putty base 
is taken and 2 ml of 20 percent ammonium chloride solution is 
added as catalyst, mixed thoroughly and applied on the 
plywood surface. The putty prepared by this method shall 
have to pot life of about 2 hours. 

5.3 Formulation of Putty Based on UF Resin Modified with 
PVAc Emulsion — A typical formulation of putty based on UF resin 
modified with PVAc consists of the following ingredients mixed to 
obtain a smooth putty. 



Ingredients 


Parts 


by Weight 




I 




II 


UF resin powder 


100 




— 


Water 


100 




— 


UF resin ( 50 percent solids ) 


— 




200 


Polyvinyl acetate emulsion 
( 50 percent solids ) 


100 




100 


Ammonium chloride or 
ammonium sulphate 


2 




2 


Water 


5 




5 


Temarind seed powder 


150-200 




150-200 



6. METHOD OF APPLICATION 

6.1 A small quantity of putty of appropriate colour shall be transferred 
as quickly as possible on the surface to be repaired. It shall be then 
forced into the gaps to be filled using a flexible metallic knife. Putty so 
applied shall be allowed to dry by keeping it aside, undisturbed. 
Excess putty shall then be scrapped off the surface with a scraper and 
the surface sanded. 



IS : 12053 - 1987 

( Continued ff om page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S, Haridas Shaw Wallace & Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shki K. S. LAT7i.y South Indian Plywood Manufacturers Association, 

Trivendrum 
Shri Joseph K, Kubian ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Phadke Ahmedabed Manufacturing & Printing Co Ltd 

( Calico Chemicals Plastic and Fibre 
Division), Ahmadabad 
Shri V, H. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Representative Indian Plastics & Chemicals Ltd, Dandeli 

Shri K. S. Shtjkla Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Composite 

Wood Branch ), Dehra Dun 
Db S. p. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. Thomson Sitapur Plywood Manufacturers Ltd, Sitapur 

Shri P. Dayal ( Alternate ) 



