**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11713-4 (1986) : Guide for physical planning of computer 
complexes. Part 4: Services [LITD 14: Software and System 
Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:11713(Port4)-19gft 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE rOR PHYSICAL PLANNING OF 
COMPUTER COMPLEXES 

PART 4 SERVtCES 



UDC 681 '324 




@ Copyright l?8f 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAJC BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARO 

N£WDIiLHI HQQ02 



IS: 11713 (Part 4) -1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR PHYSICAL PLANNING OF 
COMPUTER COMPLEXES 

PART 4 SERVICES 



Computers, Business Machines, and Calculators Sectional 
Committee, LTDC 24 

Chairman Representing 

Dr N. Seshaoiri Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Members 

Dr K. Subramanian {Alternate to 
Dr N. Seshagiri ) 
Shri R. p. Ahuja Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd^ New 

Delhi 
Shri C. K. Bapiraju State Bank of India, Bombay 

Shr[ S. K. Bhatia Bharat Heavy EJectricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri PVS Cuellapathi Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr Vijay p. Bhatkar Kerala State Electronics Development Corpo- 

ration Ltd, Trivandrum 

Dr S. N, S. Rajesekran ( Alternate ) 
Dr C. R- Chakravarthy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri K. N. Dheer Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

SiiRi IshwarDutt Electronics Trade & Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri Deepak Gupta Tata Electric Companies, Bombay 

Shri R, M. Nair ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. Lahiri Department of Science & Technology, New 

Delhi 
Shri N. Lakshmanan Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Shri P. P. Malhotra Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

Industries ), New Delhi 
Shri M. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Arun Mehta Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr S. C. Mehta Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri S. L. N. Murthy Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. S. Perinanayagam ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Pandey International Computers Indian Manufacturers 

Ltd, Pune 
Shri H. Das ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1987 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an Infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11713 ( Part 4 ) - 1986 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri G. Raghukumar 



Representing 



The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, New 
Delhi 

Shri A. N. Pawar ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. S. Ramachandran Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 

Dr J. Gopala Rao Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Dr V. K. Ravindran PSI Data Systems Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. L. Deshpande ( Alternate ) 

Rrof R. Sadananda Computer Society of India, Bombay 

SiiRi K. L. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri Asms Sen Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 

Shri Umesh P. Shaii ORG Systems, Vadodara 

Shri P. K. Sridharan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Shankralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri V. R. Unniraman Telecommunication Research Centre, New 

Delhi 
Shri K, M. Viswanathan Hindustan Teleprinters Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Devarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojficio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. S. Rawat 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Panel for Computer Infrastructure, LTDC 24/Pl 



Convener 
Shri R. Thiagarajan 

Members 

Shri R. K. Dutta 
Shri S. P, Ghothoskar 
Dr M. Ibramsha 
Shri M^ M. N. Kapur 
Dr Vinav Matri 

Dr S. S. Pillai 

Brio V. M. Sundaram 



Department of Science and Technology, New 
Delhi 



Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi 
Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi 
School of Planning and Architecture, New 

Delhi 
Indian Agriculture Statistical Research Institute, 

New Delhi 
International Computers Indian Manufacturers 

Ltd, New Delhi 



IS : 11713 ( Part 4 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR PHYSICAL PLANNING OF 
COMPUTER COMPLEXES 

PART 4 SERVICES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 23 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Computers' 
Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 The information contained in this standard is intended primarily for 
personnel responsible for physical planning of computer complexes. 
Careful advance planning and preparation before actual installation of 
the equipment would facilitate smooth day-to-day operations. In 
addition, such planning would enable expansion?, to the complex without 
disruption of current operations. The entire subject of physical planning, 
however, is complex since it encompasses a number of specialized 
activities, each of which demands a separate in-depth discussion. This 
standard would provide some guidelines which are common to all types 
of computer complexes. 

0.3 Two most important requirements for any computer complex are 
power supply and controlled environment — power supply for the very 
operation of the system and controlled environment for ensuring 
optimum performance of the equipment and providing comfort to the 
computer personnel. The sensitive nature of computer hardware 
requires a stable power supply and controlled temperature and humidity. 
On the other hand, proper illumination and acceptable noise levels are 
required to be maintained for the personnel working in the complex. 
Airconditioning of a computer complex ( more than in any other 
building ) is a specialized subject in its own merit. In order to avoid 
elaborate description of airconditioning, at the same time constrained by 
a need to provide a meaningful interaction between the planner and the 
a/c engineer salient features only are being attempted in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 4 ) provides guidance for planning, in a 
computer complex, essential services such as power supply, aircondition- 
ing, illumination and acoustics. 



IS:11713(Part4)-1986 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2,1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions as given 
in IS : 1885 { Part 52 )* series shall apply. 

3* POWER SUPPLY 

3.1 Proper power supply is a must for any computer complex and 
depending on the type of installation, uninterrupted supply of power 
may also be required. The available supply of power should be adequate 
to cater to not only the computer system to be installed but also for 
future expansion. Normally three times the present requirement of 
load would serve the purpose. 

The power may be drawn from more than one feeder, preferably 
from different sub-stations to overcome temporary failure at any one 
time. The power supply to any system should not be shared with any 
high frequency equipment or with any equipment capable of drawing a 
variable load such as motors, air conditioning system and lifts. Such a 
precaution is necessary because equipments such as motors, cause 
voltage and frequency fluctuations. In case stable transient-free power 
supply is not available, a motor alternative system or voltage and frequency 
regulating mechanism should be used. The various parameters to be 
considered in planning the power supply requirement for a system are 
given in Appendix A. 

3.2 The planner of a computer complex often has to project the overall 
power requirement of the complex much before the actual make of the 
computer system to be installed is made known to him. In some 
instances, however^ he may not be aware of even the configuration at the 
time of planning the power load. Then he would be forced to estimate 
the load mainly based on the likely type of system, size of the complex 
and services required such as airconditioning, lighting, lifts, etc. The 
exact details given in Appendix A can be looked into only after the 
final selection of the system has been made as most of the parameters 
would depend on the type of system installed. 

3.3 The electrical installation should be designed for 3 phase — 4 wire 
or single phase with neutral and ground wire depending on the available 
power supply in accordance of IS : 732-1963t* The distribution should 
be so arranged that the load gets evenly distributed to all the three 
phases of power supply. The cable layout should be designed in such a 
way that the power supply cables are kept to the periphery of computer 
room and connected to the equipment through the shortest route. The 



•EJectrotechnical vocabulary; Part 52 Data processing. 

tCodc of practice for electrical wiriog installation ( system voltage not exceeding 
650 V ). 

4 



IS : 11713 ( Part 4 ) - 1986 

connections should be made through junction boxes if in the vicinity of 
CPU or magnetic devices. All joints should be made water proof and 
wherever cables are required to be taken in or out of the room, it should 
not be done at floor level but at higher level as otherwise it may allow 
water ingress. All the cables should be run through conduits and in the 
computer room the conduits may be fixed to the under side of false 
floor. The power supply cables must be kept away from logic signal 
cables and, if unavoidable, laid perpendicular to each other to reduce 
interference. 

3.4 The stabilized power supply should be used exclusively for the 
computer equipment. For illumination and other purposes, power 
supply should be drawn from other sources. Similarly, for use of main- 
tenance or test equipment, a number of service oiftlets should be 
provided with power supply connection from other sources. Such an 
approach would ensure that the demand on stabilized power supply 
would be minimized. 

3.5 Good earthing is essential for ensuring the safety of both the system 
and the human beings working in the complex. Earthing should be 
provided by distributed eai th in the mains cable armouring or by running 
on earth wire in conduit along with phase and neutral wire. The earth 
wire and neutral wire should be connected together at the primary 
transformer bank. The earth should be wired to the frames of the 
computer equipment also for ensuring safety of personnel. This ^yill 
also facilitate proper functioning of ac line filter. Details of earthing 
are given in IS : 3043-1966*. 

4. AIR CONDITIONING 

4.1 Computer equipment are generally designed to perform within 
certain limits of environmental conditions. Any drastic change in 
temperature or humidity can cause permanent damage to the electronic 
circuitry. Therefore, it becomes necessary to control the environment 
in the computer room. Although for comfort of personnel a wider 
range of temperature and humidity limits may be maintained in the 
whole complex, additional precautions are required within the computer 
room since the computer equipment itself acts as large source of heat. 
The problem is further complicated by the possibility of moisture 
condensation because of high humidity and low temperature. Such 
condensation also can permanently damage the sensitivity circuitry. 
Another aspect to be controlled is the purity of air since presence of 
corrosive, conductive or abrasive elements in air may also cause 
damage. 



*Code of practice for earthiDg. 



IS : 11713 ( Part 4 ) - 1986 

4.2 In view of the above problems, following factors should be considered 
while planning the airconditioning system: 

a) Heat generated by computer system, 

b) Presence of humidity sources, 

c) Volume, temperature and humidity of air to be drawn into the 
complex, 

d) Heat loss and gain through building, 

e) Heat dissipated by possible number of people likely to be in the 
complex, and 

f) External temperature and the temperature required to be main- 
tained within the complex. 

4.3 The computer complex should be equipped with an independent air- 
conditioning plant. In case a common airconditioning facility is in use 
for the entire building, the impurities from other parts of the building 
(possibly also housing a small industry, hospital, etc ) may enter the 
computer complex and cause harm to equipment and personnel. Within 
the computer room, layout should be such that heat dissipating epuip- 
ment are placed near the exhaust of the room so that dissipated heat is 
taken out straightway without passing through other parts of the room. 
In case of big systems, separate airconditioned enclosures should be 
provided for printers, card readers, paper tape reader/punch, etc. As the 
cards are likely to be most affected by humidity, arrangements should be 
made to provide a conditioning area outside the computer room to 
stabilize their dimensions before use. 

4.4 When a computer complex is not working round the clock, air- 
conditioning is invariably switched off. This may cause condensation of 
residual humidity on the hardware equipment which may damage many 
sensitive components. Therefore, arrangements should be made to blow 
warm and dry air within the computer equipment when the aircondition- 
ing is stopped so that humidity is reduced below condensation limits 
within the computer equipment. 

4.5 There should be proper monitoring arrangements for temperature 
and humidity with facilities to sound alarms and cut off power supply in 
case of deviations beyond preset limits. Incase of fire also the power 
supply to airconditioning system should get automatically cut-off as 
otherwise it may fan fire through ducts. 

4.6 To reduce ingress of dust into the computer room, extra air pressure 
should be maintained inside the room compared to the outside. Further 
the flow of air should be from the ceiling to the floor to avoid flying of 
dust- Overhead ducts diffusing air from ceiling and exhausts at floor 
level may be used. Typical airconditioning system requirements arfc 
highlighted in Appendix B. 

6 



IS : 11713 ( Part 4 ) - 1986 

5. ILLUMINATION 

5.1 Proper illumination is essential in a computer complex. Uniform 
illumination without glare is required for strain-free functioning of 
personnel. The VDU screens particularly require special attention as 
any glare or reflection on the screen may cause difficulties in reading 
the display. Diffused lighting wiih flourescent sources would prove to 
be ideal if uniform illumination can be provided in working area at the 
height of one metre. An illumination level of 600 lux is generally found 
adequate. More details are available in"IS : 3646* series. 

5.2 The illumination should be provided from a power supply other 
than that used for computer equipment. Direct sunlight should not be 
allowed to fall on any equipment to avoid decay or damage to equip- 
ment due to ultraviolet radiation of the sun. Provision should be made 
for emergency lighting in kay/areas. 

6. ACOUSTICS 

6.1 Computer complexes require acoustic treatment because computer 
equipment and ancilliary equipment ( airconditioning system ) can 
increase noise beyond comfortable levels. The computer equipment noise 
is generally from ventilhition and mechanical operations such as punch, 
printer, etc. This cannot be reduced but can be contained and absorbed 
by walls and floor. 

6.2 The floors, walls and ceilings may be treated with sound absorbing 
materials. Large glass surfaces tend to reflect noise and increase the 
levels inside. Therefore, it would be appropriate to isolate the noise 
generating equipment and house them in more sound absorbing room. 

6.3 The noise from external sources and the airconditioning system can 
also be contained by proper insulation of airconditioning ducts and 
use of double doors. Other applicable recommendations of IS : 3483- 
19651 and IS : 1950-19621: may also be followed. 



♦Code of practice for interior illumination. 

tCode of practice for noise reduction in industrial buildings. 

JCode of practice for sound insulation of non-industrlal buildings. 



IS: 11713 (Part 4). 1986 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 3.1 and 3.2) 

VARIOUS PARAMETERS TO BE CONSIDERED IN 
PLANNING OF POWER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS 

a) Input voltage and tolerance permitted 

b) Input frequency and tolerance permitted 

c) Voltage regulation required 

d) Frequency stability required 

e) Power factor 

f) Harmonic contents permitted 

g) Voltage and phase unbalance permitted 
h) Protections required; 

i) Current limiting 

ii) Short circuit 

iii) Instantaneous and sustained overload 
iv) Under and over voltage 

v) Poor earth warning 
vi) Frequency swing 

APPENDIX B 

{Clause 4.6) 
TYPICAL AIRCONDITIONING REQUIREMENTS 

a) Temperature 21 ± 2"C 

b) Temperature change ± 2^C per hour 

c) Maximum deviation within ± O'S'^C 
computer room 

d) Humidity 50 percent ± 5 percent R 4 

( non-condensing ) 

e) Humidity change 2 percent perhour 

f) Air cleanliness < 1 micron particles < 700 ppm 

>1 to^5 micron particles < 70 ppm 
> 5 micron particles < 7 ppm 
Total dust<460xlO-^ gm/m^ 
Two or three stage fan filters may be 
used to obtain above desired levels. 

8 



