**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12061 (1994) : Agricultural tractors - Braking 
performance - Method of test [FAD 21: Farm Implements and 
Machinery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12061 : 1994 

( WWS^^FT ) 

Indian Standard 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS — BRAKING 
PERFORMANCE — METHOD OF TEST 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 631372:^29.114.2-592:620.16 



€> BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1994 Price Group 2 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 APRIL 1997 

TO 

IS 12061:1994 AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS — 

BRAKING PERFORMANCE — METHOD OF TEST 

(First Revision) 

( Second cover page^ Foreword^ para 2, line 3 ) — Inseit tbe words 
'perfonnance of between the words 'testing the' and 'bnkes of. 

( Page 1, clause 2Ji,line2) — Substitute 'as' for 'at'. 

( Page 3, clause 4*1«2.1, para 2, tine 1 ) — Substitute '525 is the conected 
stopping distance for an initial speed of 25 kmph' for '525 is the corrrected 
stopping distance'. 



(FAD 32) 



Repragfipliy Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Agricultural Tractor and Power Ullen Sectional Committee, FAD 32 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Agricultural Tractor and Power Tillers Sectional Oommittee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

Brakes are important components of agricultural tractors. For efficient control of tractor during field 
operations and transport as also for safety, it is important that the brakes should ftinction properly. A 
need was therefore felt to prepare a standard indicating detailed guidelines for testing the brakes of 
agricultural tradtors. 

This standard was first published in the year 1987. This revision has been brought out with the help of 
AS AE standard, ASAE S 36S.2 Braking system test procedure and braking performance for agricultural 
field equipment. 

In reporting the result of the test, made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off 
numerical values (revisedy. 



IS 12061 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS — BRAKING 
PERFORMANCE — METHOD OF TEST 



(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 



This standard specifies method for measuring the 
performance for service brakes and parking brakes 
of agricultural tractors. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Agricultural Tractor 

A self-propelled wheeled vehicle having two axles, 
of a track-laying or semi-track-laying machines, 
more particularly designed to pull, push, carry and 
operate implements and machines used for agricul- 
tural work. 

2.2 Ballasted Tractor 

2J1.1 Ballasted Tractor (for StoppingTest) 

A tractor so ballasted as to attain its maximum mass 
as recommended by the manufocturer for road 
work. . 

2.2.2 Ballasted TYactor (for Brake Holding Capacity 
Tests) 

A tractor so ballasted as to attain its maximum mass 
as recommended by the manufacturer for develop- 
ing maximum drawbar pull during drawbar perfor- 
mance tests. 

2.3 Braking Device 

A combination of parts, the function of which is to 
reduce the speed of moving tractor or to bring it to 
a stop, or to keep it stationary, if already stopped. 
The braking device consists of the braldng device 
control, the braking device transmission and the 
brakes themselves. 

23.1 Braking Device Control 

The part of the braking device actuated directly by 
the operator to supply to the braking device trans- 
mission the energy required for operating the 
brakes. 

23 Jl Braking Device Transmission 

The combination of components connecting the 
braking device control and the brakes. 



233 Brake 

The element of the braking device in which the 
forces opposed to the motion or tendency to mo- 
tion are produced. 

2A Service Braking Device 

A device, the function of which is to reduce the 
speed of a moving tractor or to bring it to a stop. 

2.5 Parking Braking Device 

Assembly of parts by means of which the tractor can 
be maintained at rest even on a slope and in the 
absence of the driver. 

2.6 Spring Brake 

A braking device in which the energy required for 
braking is supplied by one or more springs acting at 
an energy accumulator. 

2.7 Brake Control Input Force 

The sum of all forces applied by the operator to the 
braking device control, measured at the point of 
load application, in a line from the point of applica- 
tion through the operator's hip joint for foot pedal 
controls, or through the arm to shoulder joint for 
hand-operated controls. 

2.8 Maximum Axle Load 

Technically permissible axle load for each axle 
stated by the manufacturer as in the case for the 
road work for stopping distance tests or as ballasted 
during the drawbar tests for brake holding 
capability tests. 

2.9 Maximum Mass 

Technically permissible maximum mass of the trac- 
tor stated by the manufacturer as in the case for the 
road work for stopping distance tests or as ballasted 
during the drawbar tests for brake holding 
capability tests. 

2.10 Maximum Design Speed 

The maximum attainable speed of unballasted trac- 
tor, where the engine spe^ governor has been set 
at the maximum high idle speed rating recom- 
mended by the manufacturer. 



1512061:1994 



NOTE — Maximttiii detign speed and maiiiiittiii mast 
should oofvdate to tlie msadmimi pennissible tyre speed as 
approved by lyie and Rim MannfiMturefB' AssodatkNi. 

2.11 Mean DeceleratkNi 

The average deoeleraUon calculated from initial 
speed and stopping distance as defined by the fol- 
lowing fonnula: 

2S 
where 

F » mean deoelerationt m/s/i; 
K s initial speed, m/i; and 
5 » stopping distance, nt 

2.12 Measured Deoetentlon 

The mean of the sustained deceleration recorded, 
for example on a decelerometen 

2.13 Stopping Distance 

The distance travelled by a traaor between the 
point at which the first movement of the braking 
device control is made, and the point at whidi the 
tractor comes to a stop. 

2.14 Unballasted Mass 
Mass of unballasted tractor. 

2.15 Unballasted Tractor 

A tractor in running order fitted with all standard 
accessories and complete with fuel, coolant and 
lubricant and carrying a 75 kg mass on the driver*s 
seat but without any optional accessory or load. 

2.16 Ballasted Mass (for Stopping Tests) 

Mass of tractor with appropriate ballast weights 
suggested by the manufiicturer for transport work. 

2.17 Ballasted Mass (for Brake Holding 
Capability Tests) 

Maximum permissible weight recommended by the 
manufacturer for conducting maximum drawbar 
pull tests on the tractor. 

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The performance of service braking devices 
shall be based on the mean deceleratioii calculated 
over the stopping distance, 

3.2 The perfonmince of parking brafdng devices 
shall be based on the abuity to tipk} x^ ttactor 
siatibnary qq up and down slopes. 



3.3 

COtki 



The tests shall b« carried out on an ho^zonta^ 
icrele tratic'g^g a jgpM grip for ^es; tiie 
sur&iK9hall^<b|ii&c|aitL^ 
not bave a |Q«gm^) skme eaceedi^g c^tie per- 
cent, nor a si<lfe liope eaceeaiti| 3 petopst. 



3.4 The settings and condition of the brake com- 
ponents shall conform to the manufacturer's 
specifications. 

33 The inflation pressure shall be the pressure 
recommended by the manufacturer for the road 
work. 

3.6 The tractor's weight shall be as prescribed for 
each type of test and be specified in the test report. 

3.7 The test shall be performed when the wind 
velocity is less than 5 m/s. 

3.8 The performance of service braking device 
shall be measured without locking of the braked 
wheels until the tractor has come to stop. 

3.9 The braked axle(s) shall be equipped with the 
largest diameter tyres specified by the manufac* 
turer for normal agricultural work. 

3.10 The measuring accuracy shall be such that the 
following items shall have the tolerances within the 
limits shown against each: 

Percent 

a) Travel speed ± 3 

b) Tractor mass ± 3 

c) Deceleration ± 3 

d) Stopping distance ± 1 

e) Brake control input force ± S 

f) l^re inflation pressure ± S 

g) Brake system fluid (gas) pressure ± S 

4 DETERMINATION OF SERVICE BRAKING 
DEVICE PERFORMANCE 

4.1 Cold Test 

4.1.1 Test Conditions 

4.1.1.1 The brakes shall be cold at the beginning of 
the test. A brake is deemed to be cold, if any, of the 
following conditions are met: 

a) The temperature measured on the disc or 
on the outside of drum is below IQO^C; 

b) tn case of totally enclosed brakes, includ- 
ing oil immersed brakes, the temperature 
m^WUted on the outside of the housing is 
belfMifS(fC;and 

c) ttie brakes have not been actuated in pre- 
vious QOe hour. 

4.14.2 pi^r^g the braking test, an uQbri(ked axle, 
w^en capat^le of being declutched, shall not ht 
cptmef^fed with a braM axle. 

444 Procedure 

Witti the tf^ctor travelling at its maximum at- 
^iiiab{« spe<pd dr U (cin^, whichever is less, ^ 
ti^w^mA ffaitce sfmi pfi kj^j^im io ine control of 



IS 12061 : 1994 



the sorvioe braking device and the resulting stop- 
ping distance measured Where possible* the en- 
gine shall be dedutohed from the driven axles when 
applying the brakes. If it is not possible to declutch 
the engine firom the driven axles, the engine speed 
control shall be moved to the ndnimum engine 
speed position when applt^ the brakes. 

4.1.2.L Thestoppingdistancesftiraseriesofvalues 
offeree applied to the control of the braking device 
shall be recorded and the corresponding values of 
mean deceleration shall t>e calculated jDrom the for- 
mula given under 2.1L Stopping distances for ini- 
tial speeds foster than 25 km/h are to be corrected 
by the formula: 

where 525 is the corrected stopping distance in m, 
S is the observed stopping distance in m, and Vis 
•the measured initial speed in m^. 

4.1.2.2 SufQdent values to establish the relation- 
ship between mean deceleration and force applied 
to the control of the braking device from zero force 
to, if possible, the force at which the braked wheels 
lock, but at least up to a force of 600 N, if the braked 
wheels do not lock, shall be obtained. 

4.1.23 The relationship between mean decelera- 
tion and force applied to the control of the braking 
device, and the corrected stopping distance shall be 
reported either in the form of a graph or a table of 
corresponding values. 

4.1.2.4 Deviation of the traaor from its original 
course and any abnormal vibration during braking 
shall also be reported. 

4.2 Brake Fade Test (Hot Test) 

4.2.1 Procedure for Heating the Brakes 

The ballasted tractor shall be towed for 1 km at 80 
± 5 percent of the speed specified under 4.1.2 or 20 
km/h whichever is less with, if possible, the engine 
disengaged from the driving axles and the service 
brake applied such that the towing force is 10 per- 
cent of the maximum tractor weight 

4.2.2 If the maximum attainable speed of the trac- 
tor is such that a towing vehicle of sufficient 
capacity is not available to carry out the test as 
desaibed above, the tractor shall be driven at 80 
± 5 percent of its maximum attainable speed. 
Without disengaging the engine from the driving 



axles, the engine speed control shall be moved to 
the minimum engine speed position and the service 
brake applied so that the tractor decelerates at 60 
percent of the maximum deceleration measured in 
the cold brake test until its speed has fallen to half 
the initial speed. It shall then be accelerated as 
rapidly as possible to the initial speed and this 
speed allowed to stabUize for at least 10 seconds. At 
the end of this period or 60 seconds after the initial 
brake application, whichever is the longer, the 
brake shall be reapplied with the same force. The 
<^le shall be repeated until the brakes have been 
applied a total of 20 times. 

4.23 Immediately after heating the brakes by 
whichever of the above two procedures are ap- 
propriate, the test under 4.1.2 shall be repeated 
without allowing the brakes to cool and committing 
measurements with the tractor unballasted. 

4.2.4 The report shall state which method of heat- 
ing the brakes was used. 

5 PARKING BRAKING DEVICE TEST 

5.1 The force which is necessaiy to apply at the 
control of the parking braking device to hold the 
traaor stationaiy when facing up and down at 18 
percent gradient, when ballasted to its maximum 
weight, as in case of drawbar performance test, shall 
be measured. 

5.2 The force which is necessary to apply at the 
control of the parking braking device to hold a 
vehicle combination comprising the unballasted 
tractor and an unbraked trailer of the same mass as 
of traaor or 3 tonnes whichever is less, stationaiy 
when facing up and down a 12 percent gradient shall 
also be measured. 

53 The measurements may be made either on a 
sloping road or by applying a pull to the traaor on 
a level roadArack with the equivalent gravitational 
force applied constantly and continuously for both 
forward and reverse direaions. 

5.4 If it is necessary to aauate the parking braking 
device control several times in order to hold the 
tractor stationaiy, the maidmum force applied shall 
be recorded. 

6 TEST REPORT 

6.1 The dau shall be recorded in accordance with 
the proforma gh^n in Annex A 



IS 120(1:1994 



ANNEX 


A 


(Clause6.1) 


SPECIMEN TEST REPORT 


1. Tractor maiiiibaurer's name and address 


3. 


Size and ply rating of tyres 


2. Tractor specification: 


4. 


Inflation pressure 


a) Make 




a) Front, kPa 


b) Model 




b) Rear,kPa 


c) TVpe 


5. 


Braking device specification 


d) Serial No. 




a) Make 


e) Unballasted mass, kg 




b) Tyjpc 


f) Maximum mass for stopping distance 


6. 


Service brake test result 


test, kg 




a) Ambient temperature Deg C 


g) Mass borne by each axle (as tested), kg 




b) Cold test results 


h) Maximum mass technically permissible 




1) Speed be*fore application of brake, 


on each axle, kg 




km/h 


j) Maximum design speed, km/h 




2) Test data 



Braking device control force, N 



Ballasted 



Mean deceleration, m/s/s 



Stopping distance, m* 



Braking device control force, N 



Unballasted 



Mean deceleration m/s/s 



Stopping distance, m* 



* CoffTBCted viluet as per fonnuU given in 4.1^1. 

c) Brake fade test (hot test) results 

1) Speed before application of brake, 
m^ 

2) Braking device control force, N 

3) Mean deceleration m/s/5 

4) Measured deceleration m/s/s 

5) Stopping distance, m 

6) Stopping distance (corrected value), m 

d) Maximum deviation of tractor from its 
original course, m 



e) Abnormal variation 

f) The brakes were heated by (state 
method) 

Brake Holding Test 

Total Ttactor Mass, kg 
Mass at Front Axle, kg 
Mass at Rear Axle, kg 



18 percent slope 



Up Down 



Braking device 
Control force, N 



12 percent slope with 
trailer of tonnes 



Up 



Down 



1 



Boreaa of loditn Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Aet, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardizatiost ^n^Ming and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced In 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also revi' ved periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook* and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 32 ( 245 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Pnbllcation 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 430093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Conunon to all Offices ) 

Telephones 



{ 



331 01 31 
331 13 15 



f 37 84 99, 37 85 
X 37 86 26, 37 86 

{ 



61 
62 



53 38 43, 
53 23 84 



53 16 40 



{ 



2350216. 235 04 42 

235 15 19, 235 2315 

632 92 95, 632 78 58 

632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORB. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Repiognpfay Unit, BIS, New Delhi, Indii 



