**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12957 (1990) : Expression of performance of sample 
handling system for fluids [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12957 : 1990 
WR^'SJTTH^ (Reaffirmed 2006) 

Indian Standard 

EXPRESS lONOFPERFORMANCEOF 
SAMPLEHANDLINGSYSTEMSFORFLUIDS 



UDC 681'2'08 : 681121 



® BIS 1991 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

January 1991 Price Group 7 



Electronic Measuring Equipment Sectional Committee, LTD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 19 March 1990, on 
the recommendations of the Electronic Measuring Equipment Sectional Committee and -approval 
of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

The object of this standard is to specify tests performed to determine the functional performance 
of a sample handling system and also to specify the information required by the user and the 
manufacturer. The information to the manufacturer -may be provided by the manufacturer of 
process analyser or by the manufacturer of sample handling system components. 

While preparing this standard, assistance has, been derived from the document 66D ( Central 
Office) 12 'Expression of performance of sample handling systems for process analyzers', issued by 
the International Electrotechnical Commission ( lEC ). 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 



IS 12957: 1990 



Indian Standard 



EXPRESSION OF PERFORMANCE OF 
SAMPLE HANDLING SYSTEMS FOR FLUIDS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to systems handling 
gaseous or liquid sannples for process analyzers 
used for any ultinnate purpose (process control, 
ennission, annbient air nneasurennents, etc). It 
does not apply to systenns for handling solid 
sannples. 

1.2 It applies to connplete sannple handling 
systenns as well as to sannple handling systenn 
connponents. Power supplies and instrunnentation 
for providing or controlling other utilities 
necessary for process analysers or sannple handl- 
ing systenn connponents are considered part of 
the systenn only in so far as they are a func- 
tional part of it. 

1.3 It applies to facilities for nnaintaining the 
perfornnance of the sannple handling systenn. 

1.4 It applies to facilities for nnaintaining the 
perfornnance of the analyser if these facilities are 
part of the sannple handling systenn and not of 
the analyser . 

1.5 General aspects of gas analysers are not 
dealt with in this standard. 

1.6 This standard does not deal with safety 
aspects concerning electric, explosive or toxic 
hazards. 

1.7 Electric safety requirennents are dealt with 
in IS 9858 : 1981. Safety requirennents for 
electronic nneasuring equipnnent. 

1.8 Indian Standard on general requirennents 
for electrical apparatus for use in explosive 
atnnosphere is under preparation. 

1.9 The influence by environnnental conditions 
is dealt with in IS 9000 series of standards. 

1.10 Requirennents for output signals are dealt 
with in IS 8493 : 1977 'Analogue dc voltage 
signals for industrial process nneasurennent and 
control systenn', and IS 7722 : 1975 'Analogue 
pneunnatic signals for process control systenns'. 

1.11 This standard is in accordance with the 
general principals set out in IS 9176 : 1979 
'Methods for specifying the functional perfor- 
nnance of the electronic nneasuring equipnnent'. 



2REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard. 



IS Xo. 

196 : 1966 



1890 

( Parts to 13) 

7728 : 1984 



10005 ; 1985 



Title 

Atnnospheric test conditions 
for testing ( revised) 

Quantities, units and synnbols 



Analogue dc current signals 
for process control systenns 
{Jirst revision ) 

SI units and reconnnnenda- 
tions for the use of their 
nnultiples and of certain other 
un\ts{ Jirst revision ) 



3DEFINITI0NS AND 
STATEMENTS 



PROCEDURES FOR 



3.1 General Definitions 

( See Annex A and Fig. 3 and 4 for a description 
of sannple handling systenn ) 

3.1.1 Process Analyser 

An analytical instrunnent connected to a source 
fluid that autonnatically provides output signals 
giving infornnation in relation to a quantity of 
one or nnore connponents present in a fluid 
nnixture or in relation to physical or chennical 
properties of a fluid which depends on its 
connposition. 

NOTE — For on line or extractive process analysers a 
sannple streann is extracted fronn the source fluid and 
transported to the analyser. With an in line or in-situ 
analyser the nneasurenneni is perfornned within the source 
fluid. 

3.1.2 Sample Handling System 

A systenn which connects one or nnore process 
analysers with the source fluid, disposal points 
and utilities. 

NOTE — A sample handling system may extract the 
required sample stream from one or more source fluids 
and condition it in order to meet all the input require- 
ments of the process analyser so that an accurate 
measurement of the properties under investigation is 
possible. The system may also ensure the appropriate 
disposal of exhaust streams and the supply of utilities as 
necessary. 



1 



IS 12957 : 1990 



Instrumentation for ensuring the process analyser 
or of a sannple handling systenn connponents or 
for facilitating nnaintenance work is considered 
part of the sannple handling systenn if it is a 
functional part of it (see Annex A, Fig. 4 for 
an exannple ). 

3.1.3 Sannple Extraction 

The function of those parts of a sannple handling 
systenn which extract the required sannple 
streann fronn the source fluid. 

NOTE — The sample stream should be extracted in such 
a way that the information which is to be acquired is not 
biased. 

3.1.3.1 Source fluid 

The fluid ( gas or liquid ) fronn which the sannple 
rtreann is extracted and of which the connposition 
or properties are to be nneasured. 

NOTES 

1 The source fluid may flow through a process line or fill 
a volume. Ambient air can also be the source fluid. 

2 The source fluid and the sample Auid in the sample 
line may consist of a combination of the following 
components ( see Fig. 1 ): 

-Connponents to be measured, 

— Irrelevant components, 
-Obstructive components, and 

— Interfering components. 

3.1.3.2 Components \.o be measured 

The connponents or group of connponent of 
which a quantity ( for exannple, concentration) 
is to be nneasured by the process analyser. 

3.1.3.3 Property to be nneasured 

The physical or chennical property which is to 
be nneasured by the analyser and which depends 
on the connposition of the source fluid. 

3.1.3.4 Irrelevant connponents 

The connponents which are not to be measured 
and which do not affect the performance of the 
analyset or of the sample handling system. 

3.1.3.5 Obstructive components 

The components which adversely affect the 
performance of the analyser or of sample 
handling system components. The effect may be: 

-physical ( for example, by dirtying 
windows in optical analysers ); or 

-* chemical ( for example, by corrosion ); or 

-by causing unacceptable errors ( for 
example, bubbles in a liquid sample stream 
for a photometer ). 



Obstructive components can be solid, liquid or 
gaseous. 

3.1.3.6 Interfering components 

The components which give rise to unacceptable 
interference errors in the analyser. 

3.1.3.7 Sampling point 

The point where the sample stream is extracted 
from the source fluid. 

NOTE — It may be necessary to have a combination of 
sampling points at the inlet of a sample handling system. 
The sample streams from different sampling points can be 
mixed or be measured separately. 

3.1.4 Sannple Transport 

The function of these parts of a sample handling 
system which transfer the sample fluid from the 
sampling point to the inlet of the process 
analyser . 

3.1.4.1 Sannple line 

The connection from the sampling point(s) to 
the analyser inlet in which a stream is allowed 
to flow. 

NOTE — Filters, coolers, pumps, flowmeters, etc, may 
be part of the sample line ( see Annex A, Fig. 4). 

3.1.4.2 Sannple streann 

The fluid stream in the sample line. 
NOTES 

1 Other streams may be branched off the sample stream 
( for example, by pass streams) or be injected into it 
( for example, dilution streams ). 

2 The composition and the physical state of the fluid in 
the sample line shall be allowed to change only in a 
predictable way. 

3 The properties of the conditioned sample stream at the 
inlet of an analyser have to meet the requirements of the 
analyser. 

3.1.4.3 By pass streann 

A fluid stream which is branched off the sample 
stream. 

NOTES 

1 It is frequently the purpose of bypass streams to 
improve the delay time of the sample handling system 
(fast loop ). 

2 The term 'bypass stream' is also used for process lines, 
so the sample stream may be extracted from a bypass 
stream of a process stream. 

3.1.5 Sample Conditioning 

The function of those parts of a sample handling 
system which make the physical and/ or chemical 
properties of the sample stream suitable for the 



IS 12957 : 1990 



POSSIBLE 
SAMPLING 
POINTS 



EXHAUST STREAM 



0-«— {>^ 




SAMPLE LINE, 
SAMPLE 
STREAM - 



EXHAUST STREAM 



O 



T 



PROCESS 
ANALYSER 



EXHAUST 
STREAM 



BYPASS STREAM EXHAUST STREAM! 



o 



> < 



Fig. 1 Schematic Ex A MPLE FOR THE U SE OfTerms Describing the 
Sample Transport AND Exhaust Stream Disposal 



Functions of 



process analyser without changing the composi- 
tion unless this is done in a predictable way. 

NOTES 

lln sample conditioning the sample stream is treated in 

a predictable way whereby obstructive and interfering 
components are removed or converted as far as necessary. 

2 The requirements the sample conditioning has to meet 
depends on the physical and chemical properties of the 
source fluid as well as on the admissible inlet conditions 
of the process analyser. 

3.1.5.1 Conditioned sannple&id 

The sample fluid suitably conditioned for the 
analysis. 

3.1.6 Exhaust Streum Disposal 

The function of those parts of a sample 
handling system which connect the outlet of the 
process analyser or another point in the sample 
handling system with a disposal point. 

NOTES 

1 This function should so be realised that the require- 
ments for the analyser outlet or for other points in the 
sample handling system are met as well as those for the 
disposal point. 

2 The instrumentation for exhaust stream disposal 
depends very much on the physical state (liquid or 
gaseous) of the exhaust stream. One sample handling 
system may give rise to exhaust streams of different 
states. 

3.1.6.1 Disposal point 

The point to which exhaust streams are 
transferred. 

NOTE-A disposal point can be in the open air, the 
inlet to a process line or volume, or the inlet to a disposal 
system external to the sample handling system. 

-3.1.6.2 Exhaust streann 

A fluid stream from the process analyser outlet 
or from an other point in the sample handling 



system to a disposal point. 

3.1.1 Supply of Utilities 

The function of those parts of a sample handling 
system which supply the process analyser or 
components of the sample handling system with 
utilities ( for example, pressurised air, water for 
cooling, steam for heating, test fluids for cali- 
bration, electric power ). 

3.1.7.1 Test fluid ( Calibration fluid) 

A fluid with known quantities or properties to 
be measured. 

3.1.8 Sannple Streann Switching 

The function of those parts of a sample handling 
system which sequentially connect the process 
analyser automatically or manually to different 
sampling points. 

NOTE — The electronics or pneumatics which control 
valves used for sample stream switching and/ or adequa- 
tely process the output signal of the analyser are 
considered part of the sample stream switching if they 
are functional part of the sample handling system. 

3.1.9 Perfornnance Monitoring and Control 

The function of those parts of a sample handling 
system by which the performance of the system 
or of the process analyser can be checked, 
maintained or re-established either auto- 
matically or manually. 

NOTES 

1 Sample handling system components as well as 
analysers may include elements which serve the 
performance monitoring and control. 

2 Euipment which serves the maintainability of the 
sample handling system or of the analyser ( for example, 
valves for draining off condensate or facilities for re- 
calibration) are considered part of the performance 
monitoring and control (see Annex A, Fig. 4 for an 
example). 



IS 12957: 1990 



3 Equipment in which signals from measuring instru- 
ments or sensors or any sample handling system 
components are processed for maintenance or reliability 
reasons and which are an integral part of the sample 
handling system are considered part of the performance 
monitoring. 

3.1.10 Sample Handling System Component 

Any device which is used for realisation of the 
functions of a sannple handling systenn. 

3.1.10.1 Filter 

A device which rennoves solid particles ( and/ or 
liquid droplets if used forgaseous streanns ) fronn 
a fluid streann. 

NOTE- Filtering can be done mechanically or by 
coalescing or with electric precipitators. 

3.1.10.2 Separator 



3;l.lT).9 Vapor (set 

A device for totally converting a liquid into a 
gas. 

3.1.10.10 Sannpling probe 

A device to be inserted into a process streann 
or volunne for the purpose of extraction of a 
sannple streann. 

NOTE -A sampling probe may comprise parts for 
sample conditioning ( for example, a filter ). 

3.1.11 Perfornnance 

The degree to which the intended functions of a 
sannple handling systenn or of a sannple handling 
systenn connponent are acconnplished. 

3.1.11.1 Perfornnance characteristic 



A device in which one liquid phase is separated 
fronn another. 

3J,10.3 Absorber 

A device which separates connponents fronn a 
fluid streann by absorption or chennical 
reactions. 

3.1.10.4 Converter 

A device in which the chennical constitution 
of one or nnore connponents in a streann is 
changed. 

NOTE -A converter may convert an obstructive or 
interfering component into an irrelevant one or a com- 
ponent to be measured into a measurable one. 

3.1J0.5 Scrubber 

A device in which a gaseous streann is passed 
through a liquid for washing out solids or 
droplets or gaseous connponents. 

3.1.10.6 Cooler (Heater ) 

A device in which one or nnore sannple streanns 
are cooled ( heated ). 

3.1.10.7 Punnp 

A device for actively transferring fluids. 

3.1.10.8 Phuse exchanger 

A device in which a connponent or group of 
connponents to be nneasured and present in a 
fluid of one physical state is at least partly 
transferred into a fluid of a different physical 
state. 

NOTE-A device for transferring a component or 
group of components from a liquid into a gas stream is 
frequently called a stripper. 



One of the quantities assigned to a sannple 
handling systenn or a sannple handling systenn 
connponent in order to define by values, 
tolerances, ranges, etc, the perfornnance of the 
systenn or connponent. 

3.1.12 Influence Quantity 

Any quantity, generally extended to a sannple 
handling systenn or sannple handling systenn 
connponents which nnay effect the perfornnance 
of the systenn or connponent. ( Exannples: annbient 
tennperature, annbient pressure, corrosive 
atnnosphere ), 

3.1.13 Specified Range, Specified Value 

The range (value ) of a quantity to be 
measured, observed, supplied or set where a 
sannple handling systenn or systenn connponent 
works within the linnits of perfornnance 
characteristics as stated by the nnanufactu rer. 

3.2 Ternns Related to Conditions of 
Operations, Transportation and Storage 

NOTE — The specified ranges of use. the reference 
conditions and the limit con&ions of operation, storage 
and transport for all influence quantities shall be stated 
and selected only from one of the groups listed in 
Annex B. 

Any exceptions to the values given there shall 
be explicitly and clearly stated by the 
nnanufacturer with an indication that they are 
exceptions. 

3.2.1 Specified Operating Conditions 

The whole of: 

— -effective ranges and values of perfornnance 
characteristics; 



specified ranges of use; 



IS 12957 : 19961 



— specified ranges and values for source fluid 
conditions at the sampling point(s), 
(see 5.1.1); 

— specified ranges and values for exhaust 
stream conditions at the disposal point(s) 
(see 5.1.2); and 

— specified ranges and values for utilities 
(see 5.1.3) within which the sample 
handling system is specified. 

3.2.1.1 Specified range Of use ( refer to Annex B ) 

The range of values for an influence quantity 
within which the sample handling system or 
system component works within the limits of 
performance characteristics as stated by the 
manufacturer. 

3.2.2 Reference Conditions ( refer to Annex B) 

A set of values with tolerances or restricted 
ranges of influence quantities specified for 
making comparison tests. 

3.2.3 Linnit Conditions of Operation (refer to Annex B) 

The whole of the ranges of values for influence 
quantities and performance characteristics 
( beyond the specified ranges of use or effective 
ranges respectively ) within which an apparatus 
can function without resulting in damage or 
degradation of performance when it is 
afterwards operated under rated operating 
conditions. 

3.2.4 Linnit Conditions of Storage and Transport 
( refer to Annex B ) 

All the conditions of temperature, humidity, air 
pressure, vibration, shock, etc, within which an 
apparatus may be stored or transported in an 
inoperative condition, without resulting in 
damage or degradation of performance when it 
is afterwards operated under specified operating 
conditions. 

3.3 Terms Related to the Specification of 
the Performance of Sample Handling 
Systems and Sample Handling System 
Components 

3.3.0 Introduction 

Compliance tests shall be performed with the 
sample handling system or the sample handling 
system component ready for use, after start-up 
time ( if necessary) and after performing 
adjustments according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. 

3.3.1 Tinne Constants (see Fig. 2 ) 
For test procedures ( see 5.5.1 ). 



3.3.1.1 Dday time (Tio) 

The time interval from the instant a step change 
occurs in the concentration or property to be 
measured at the inlet, to the instant when the 
change in the outlet passes and remains beyond 
10 percent of its steady-state difference, with 
the sample flow kept at its specified value. 

NOTE — In sample handling systems the delay time 
frequently depends mainly on the time needed to trans- 
port the sample from the sampling point to the analyser 
inlet. This sample transport time can be determined 
with an analyser with small time constants together with 
suitable test fluids. 

3.3.1.2 Rise (fall ) time Tt.Ti 

The time interval within which the concentra- 
tion or property to be measured passes from 
10 percent to ( and remains beyond ) 90 percent 
of its steady-state difference at the outlet after a 
step increase ( decrease ) in the concentration or 
property to be measured at the inlet, with the 
sample flow kept at its specified value. 

3.3.1.3 90 Percent time( Tgo) 

The sum of the delay time and the rise or fall 
time, whichever is larger. 

3.3.1.4 Cycle time 

For sample handling systems equipped with 
devices for automatic sample stream switching 
the cycle time is the time between two consecu- 
tive starts of the measurement period on the 
sample stream from the same sampling point. 

NOTES 

1 The cycle time is not necessarily identical for all 
sampling points. 

2 If the time between two consecutive starts on any 
sample is less than 90 percent time of that part of the 
system between switching valve and process analyser 
special precautions are necessary for the interpretation 
of the output signal of the analyser. 

For sample handling systems with discon- 
tinuously working sample extraction, sample 
transport or sample conditioning the cycle 
time between two consecutive starts of these 
operations. 

3.3.1.5 Time constants of sample handling system 
with automatic sample stream switching ( see 4.6.2 ) 

For sample handling systems with automatic 
sample stream switching the time constants for 
measurements on one sample stream depend: 

— on the ti me constants of the system between 
sampling point and switching valve, and 

— on the ti me constants of the system between 
switching valve and process analyser. 



1812957:1990 




Fig. 2 Time Constants and Relation Between Tiq^ 7\ (Tt ) and T^ 



90 



Additionally they depend on the tinne-lag 
between the occurence of a concentration 
change at the sannpling point and the start of 
the nneasurennent period on the sannple streann 
fronn that sannpling point. 

3.3.1.6 Start-up time 

The tinne interval between switching on the 
power and other utilities, and the beginning of 
the sannple handling systenn or systenn connponent 
working within the stated linnits of perfornnance 
characteristics. 

3.3.2 Leak Rate ( see 4.6.3 ) 

The annount of unwanted fluid which enters 
( for exannple, annbient air ) or leaves the sannple 
handling systenn or systenn connponent per tinne 
unit with the systenn or connponent with in its 
specified range of operating pressure. 

3.3.3 M aintenance Requirements ( seeA.6A) 

The work which foreseeably has to be done to 
nnaintain the specified operating conditions of a 
sannple handling systenn or systenn connponent. 
This will also include the re-calibration 
procedure. 

3.3.4 Status Signal 

Externally available binary signal which 
describes the status of a sannple handling systenn 



connponent or of a sannple handling systenn. 
This nnay include the status of the process 
analyser. 

3.3.5 Special Performance Characteristics 

NOTE —In sample conditioning the composition of 
the sample fluid may change, and the changes may 
afTect the measurement. Their effect may be corrected 
by calculation or by compensation by appropriate 
calibration procedures, but errors specific for sample 
handling systems can remain. 

Exclusively absolute errors are dealt with in the 
following: 

3.3.5.1 Volume effect ( enrichment effect) 

The effect on the concentration to be nneasured 
which results fronn rennoving connponents fornn 
the sannple streann so that the concentration of 
the connponents to be nneasured is increased in 
the conditioned sannple fluid. 

NOTES 

1 A typical example for increasing the concentration of 
the component to be measured is the removal of vapours 
for dry analysis. 

2 The volume effect depends on the concentration of the 
components to be removed in the source fluid and in the 
conditioned sample fluid (if the removal is not complete). 
If these concentrations are known the volume effect can 
be calculated using the formula: 






(1) 



IS 12957 : 1990 



with Cm: concentration of the component to be 
measured in the source fluid, 

Cm: concentration to be measured in the 
conditioned sample fluid ( measured 
by the process analyser ), 

Cy: concentration of the components to be 
removed in the source fluid, and 

G7: concentration of the components to be 
removed in the conditioned sample 
fluid. 

whereby the concentrations are given as volume 
fractions. 

If necessary the correction for the volume effect 
can be based on estimates for the mean concen- 
trations of C7 and cy, 

3.3.5*2 Volume error ( Enrichment error ) 

The difference between the concentration to be 
measured at the sampling point and the 
concentration measured by the process analyser 
in the conditioned sample fluid [ possibly correc- 
ted by using formula (1) ] which results from 
removing components. 

NOTE — If the concentration to be measured in the 
conditioned sample fluid is corrected by means of mean 
concentrations of Cy and Cy the remaining volume 
error depends on their variation. 

3.3.5.3 Dilution effect 

The efl'ect on the concentration or property to 
be measured which results from injecting a 
dilution stream consisting of insert components 
into the sample stream. The dilution effect for 
concentrations can be calculated using the 
formula: 



(-f> 



(2) 



with Cm 



concentration to be measured before 
injection, 

concentration to be measured after 
injection, 

Q^s: sample stream flow before injection, 
and 

Q^i: flow of the injected dilution stream. 

whereby the concentrations are given as volume 
fractions. 

NOTE — The dilution effect can be compensated by 
calibrating the sample handling system and the process 
analyser with test fluids which are introduced upstream 
the injection instead of the sample stream and with the 

same flow. 



property to be measured at the sampling point 
and the corrected [ by calculation using formula 
(2) or compensation ] concentration or property 
to be measured by the process analyser in the 
conditioned sample fluid, which results from 
flow variations in the sample or dilution flow. 

NOTE — If the specified ranges of flow of the sample 
and dilution stream are known the error by dilution can 
be calculated using formula (2). 

3.3.5«5 Composition error 

The difference between the concentration to be 
measured at the sampling point and in the 
conditioned sample fluid which arises from 
absorption, or dissolution, or permeation or 
reactions of the components to be measured 
within the sample streams. 

NOTE — The composition error should be determined 
with the sample handling system and the process analyser 
working in their specified ranges of use. The analyser is 
calibrated, and then at the sampling point a test fluid is 
introduced that is similar to the source fluid but in which 
the concentration of the component to be measured is in 
a typical range and known. The composition error is the 
difference between the concentration known and that 
found by the process analyser. 

3.3.5.6 Converter efficiency ( see 4.6.5 ) 

The converter efficiency is characterised by the 
conversion factor in the equation: 



Cm* - «.A*,C„ 



(3) 



with Cm: concentration of the component to be 
converted at the inlet of the converter; 

Cm*: concentration of the component 
produced by conversion at the conver- 
ter outlet. If this component is not 
present at the inlet of the converter; 

a: conversion factor ( a = I, if conversion 
is complete ); and 

K: the stochiometric ratio resulting from 
the conversion reaction. 

whereby the concentrations are given as volume 
fractions. 

NOTE — The Effect of the conversion efficiency on the 
measurements of the process analyser can be compensa- 
ted by calibrating the sample handling system and the 
process analyser with test fluids containing the component 
to be converted, which are introduced upstream the 
converter instead of the sample stream. 

3.3.5.7 Converter capacity { see 4.6.5 ) 

The amount of components to be converted 
which a converter is able to convert. 

Usual dimension: concentration X time. 



3.3.5.4 Dilution error 3.3.5.8 Conversion error 

The difference between the concentration or The difference between the corrected [ by 

7 



IS 12957:1990 



calculation using fornnula (3) or connpensation ] 
concentration of the produced connponent at the 
converter outlet and the concentration of the 
connponent to be converted at the converter 
inlet, if the connponent to be produced by 
conversion is not present at the converter inlet. 

3.3.5.9 Phase exchanger efficiency ( see 4.6.5 ) 

The phase exchanger efficiency is characterised 
by the transition factor in the equation: 



C m — P X Ctr 



(4) 



with C',: the concentration of the connponent to 
be nneasured in the fluid into which 
this connponent is transferred, 

Cm: the concentration to be nneasured in 
the fluid fronn which this connponent 
is to be transferred, and 

^: transition factor. 

whereby the concentrations are given as volunne 
fractions. 

NOTES 

1 The transition factor ^ depends on the solubility of the 
component to be transferred in the primary fluid, on the 
temperature; on the flow rates, and on the construction 
of the flow exchanger. 

2 Theeilect of the phase exchanger efficiency on the 
measurement results of the process analyser can be 
compensated by calibrating the sample handling system 
process analyser with test fluids which are introduced 
upstream the phase exchanger. 

3.3.5.10 Phase exchanger error 

The difference between the corrected [by 
calculation using fornnula (4) or connpensation ] 
concentration in the sannple streann outlet and 
concentration of the connponent to be nneasured 
in the fluid at the sannple streann inlet of the 
phase exchanger. 

4PR0CEDURE FOR STATEMENTS 

4.1 A list of statennents follows which nnay be 
important far the nnanufacturer of sannple handl- 
ing systenns or for their user. Due to the 
structure of sannple handling systenns (see Annex 
A, Fig. 3 ) the nnanufacturer of sannple handling 
systenns needs statennents to be provided by the 
user (4.2 ), by the nnanufacturer of the process 
analyser ( 4.3 ), and by the nnanufacturer of 
sannple handling systenn connponents ( 4.4). The 
user will need statennents specifying the perfor- 
nnance of the sannple handling systenn which are 
to be provided by the nnanufacturer of the 
systenn ( 4.5 ). 

The choice of statennents necessary depends on 
the special case. So the following nnay be used as 
a check list fronn which the necessary statennents 



can be selected. The statennents usually of 
prinnary interest and necessary ainnost in each 
case are nnarked by an asterisk (♦). 

To be nnore practical, nnininnunn, nornnal and 
nnaxinnunn values nnay be stated instead of 
ranges. By this way also abnornnal situations 
shall be taken into account. 

4.2 Statennents Concerning the Require- 
nnents for a Sannple Handling Systenn 
( User ) 

4.2.1 Statements Concerning the Source Fluid Conditions 
at the Sannpling Point ( User ) 

The following statennents should be provided by 
the user as far as possible and for each sannpling 
point: 

* ranges of tennperature. 

* ranges of pressure. 

* physical state(s). 

* ranges of concentration of all components. 

— specification of the process line at the 
sannpling point. 

— concentration and size data of particulates 
and/ or droplets. 

— density and viscosity of a liquid source fluid 
and if needed of a gaseous source at one or 
nnore tennperatures. 

— pVi values of a liquid source fluid. 

— ranges of velocity and flow and direction of 
the source fluid streann. 

— dew point, double point, flash point and/ or 
nnelting point. 

— saturation tennperature for solutes present in 
high concentration. 

— critical properties of the source fluid such as 
corrosiveness, possible polynnerisation reac- 
tions, other chennical reactions leading to a 
change of connposition, etc. 

4.2.2 Statennents Concerning the Conditions at the 
Disposal Points ( User and Manufacturer of Sannple 
Handling Systenn ) 

The following statennents should be agreed upon 
between the user and the nnanufacturer for each 
disposal point. 

* range of pressure ( return pressure). 

— range of tennperature. 

— adnnissible nnaxinnunn concentration of 
hazardous connponents. 

— nnaxinnunn flow of exhaust streann. 



IS 12957: 1990 



4.2.3 Statements Concerning the Location ( User ) 

The following statements should be provided by 
the user in order to specify under what environ- 
nnental conditions the sannple handling systenn 
has to work. If necessary special statennents 
should be given for different areas in which parts 
of the sannple handling systenn will be located. 

* distance between analyser and disposal 
points. 

* range of annbient tennperature. 

* available utilities ( specification of power 
supplies; pressure, tennperature and quality 
of auxiliary fluids ). 

* distance between sannpling point and 
analyser. 

— range of annbient pressure. 

— height difference between sannpling point 
and analyser ( for liquid sannple streanns ). 

— area classification. 

— corrosiveness of the atmosphere. 

4.3 Statements Concerning the Require- 
ments for a Sample Handling System 
( Manufacturer of Process Analyser ) 

The following statements should be provided by 
the manufacturer of the process analyser in 
order to specify the requirements a sample 
handling system has to meet for the analyser. 

4.3.1 Process Analyser Inlet foy the Snmple Streann 

* admissible dew point. 

"^ range of temperature of the sample stream. 

'*' range of flow of the sample stream. 

"^ interference error of interfering components 
present in the source fluid. 

* admissible maximum concentration of 
obstructive components present in the source 
fluid. 

— range of pressure. 

— admissible range of density. 

— admissible range of viscosity. 

4.3.2 Process Analyser Outlet of Exhaust Stream 

* range of pressure. 

* range of flow. 

* range of temperature. 

4.3.3 Process Analyser Inlet for Utilities 

* range of pressure of auxiliary fluids. 



* range of flow of auxiliary fluids. 

* requirements concerning the quality of 
auxiliary fluids. 

— range of temperature of auxiliary fluids. 

* specification of power supply and consump- 
tion of electric energy. 

4.4 Statements Concerning Sample Handl- 
ing System Components ( Manufacturer 
of Sample Handling System Components ) 

The following statements should be provided 
by the manufacturer of sample handling system 
components in order to specify the properties of 
the components so that their applicability can 
be judged. These informations are necessary for 
the manufacturer of sample handling systems 
whereas they are not necessary for the user 
of the complete system. They shall be made 
available to the user on request. 

* a list of all materials which come into 
contact with the sample fluid. 

* effective internal volume. 

* range of pressure of the sample fluid. 

* range oftemperature of the sample fluid. 

* range of sample fluid flow. 

* pressure drop at specified flow rate of sample 
fluid. 

* performance characteristics ( see 4.3 and 4.5 
for possibly applicable performance charac- 
teristics ). 

* requirements for environment conditions. 

— limit conditions of operation. 

— limit conditions of storage and transport. 

— requirements for utilities. 

— specification of status signals together with 
their meaning and possible causes. 

— instructions for installation ( for example, of 
sampling probes ). 

4.5 Statements Concerning Sample Handl- 
ing Systems (Manufacturer of Sample 
Handling Systems ) 

The following statements should be provided by 
the manufacturer of sample handling systems in 
order to specify the properties of the sample 
handling system: 

"^ ranges of pressure of auxiliary fluids. 

* ranges of temperature of auxiliary fluids, 

* quality requirements for auxiliary fluids. 

* consumption of auxiliary fluids. 



IS 12957 : 1990 



* ranges of pawer supply. 

* consumption of electric energy. 

* environnnent conditions for the sannple 
handling systenn or parts of it. 

* perfornnance characteristic (see 3.3 and 4.6 
for possibly applicable perfornnance charac- 
teristics). 

* output signals ( for exannple in sannple 
handling systenns with autonnatic sannple 
streann switching ). 

— linnit conditions of operation. 

— linnit conditions of storage and transport. 

— specification of status signals together with 
their nneaning and possible causes. 

— instruction for installation. 

— instruction for re-calibration procedures. 

— instruction for start-upprocedure. 

4.6 Special Statements 

In the following sonne statements of special 
performance characteristics are commented. 

4.6.1 Verification of Time Constants of a Measuring 
Systenn for Process Analysis ( see 4.3.1) 

To determine the time constants of a complete 
measuring system for process analysis Comprising 
a sample handling system and a process analyser 
the following procedure can be performed. 

While the process analyser output is recorded 
the sampling point is flushed with a test fluid 
until a constant reading to the analyser is 
obtained. Then the sampling point is flushed 
with a test fluid of a composition that will give 
rise to an analyser signal change between 65 
percent and 95 percent of full scale. The values 
for the time constants are determined from the 
time elapsed since the start of inserting the 
latter test fluid. 

If either appropriate test fluids are not available 
or introducing test fluids at the sampling point 
is not possible, the following procedure can be 
performed for a system which is attached to a 
source fluid of a nearly constant composition 
which gives rise to an analyser signal of between 
50 percent and 95 percent of full scale. 

The sample handling system and the analyser 
are completely backflushed with a fluid that is 
similar to the source fluid but which will not 
give rise to an analyser signal greater than 10 
percent of full scale. Then backflushing is 
stopped and with the analyser and sample 
handling system working at their specified 
operating conditions the analyser signal is 
recorded. 



The delay time and the rise time are determined 
by evaluating the recorded analyser signal. 
Alternative test methods may be agreed upon 
by the manufacturer and the user. 

4.6.2 Tinne Constants of Sannple Handling Systenns with 
Autonnatic Sannple Streann Switching ( see 3.3.1.5 ) 

The 90 percent time of measuring systems with 
automatic sample stream switching should be 
stated for the best and worst cases. 

4.6.3 Leak Rate ( see 4.3.2 ) 

The leak rate of a system or component can 
often be determined by measuring the pressure 
loss or increase with closed inlets and outlets. 
For many cases that system is sufficiently sealed 
in which an overpressure of about 100 mbar air 
after temperature equalization decreases within 
10 minutes by less or equal 1 percent of the 
pressure difference. Alternative test methods 
should be agreed upon between the manufacturer 
and the user. 

4.6.4 Maintenance Requirennents ( see 3.3.3 ) 

Maintenance requirements normally depend 
in a large extent on the conditions under which 
a sample handling system or system component 
has to work. Therefore they should be stated 
for conditions which the manufacturer and the 
user agree upon. 

The manufacturer should supply the user with 
information necessary for him to estimate the 
maintenance costs. The information should 
include, but is not limited to: 

— a description of the work which foreseeably 
has to be carried out to maintain the 
operating conditions of the sample handling 
system or system component, 

— the frequency with which this work or parts 
of it have to be repeated, 

— the material ( spare parts, reagents, etc ). 
which are consumed for this work, and 

— list of recommended spare parts. 

The information should be sufficiently complete 
to allow the user to estimate the maintenance 
expenditure. 



4.6.5 Efficiency and Capacity o f 
(see 3.3.5.6 and 3.3.5.7 ) 



Converters 



The ranges of converter efficiency and of 
converter capacity should be stated by the 
manufacturer for the specified ranges of use ( for 
example, flow: concentration of the component 
to be converted, etc ) and if necessary together 
with the maximum concentration of the 
component to be converted. 



10 



IS 12957 : 1990 



4.6.6 Phase Exchanger Efficiency ( see 3.3.5.9 ) 

If the phase exchanger efficiency is not 
connpensated in the calibration procedure it 



should be stated for each connponent to be 
transferred, for the fluids used and for the 
specified range of use (especially flows and 
temperature ). 



ANNEX A 
(Clauses 3.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.4.1 and4.1 ) 

PURPOSE, FUNCTIONS AND PROPERTIES OF SAMPLE 
HANDLING SYSTEMS 



A-1 A connplete nneasuring device for process 
analysis consists of at least one process analyser 
and a peripheral systenn called sannple 
handling systenn in which the process analyser is 
enn bedded. 

A-2 In Fig. 3 the requirennents of the process 
analyser for the properties of the sannple liuid 
at its inlet are characterised by a set of 
quantities and ranges (/^i). The set (^o) 
characterises its requirennents for the outlet and 
the set (^a) those at the inlet for auxiliary 
fluids. 

A -2.1 Possible basic functions: 

— sannple extractions, 

— sannple transport, 

— sannple conditioning, 

— sannple streann switching and signal 
processing, 

— supply of utilities, 

— exhaust streann disposal. 



A-2. 2 Additional function: 

— perfornnance nnonitoring and control 
A-2. 3 Properties: 

— response tinne, 
-errors, 

— reliability, and 

— -investnnent and nnaintenance expense. 

A-2. 4 The process analyser with its specified 
requirennents has to be connected to the 
sannpling points and the environnnent by nneans 
of a sannple handling systenn. The properties of 
the source fluid at the sannpling points are 
qualified by the set (-^s), auxiliary fluids and 
power supplies are provided for the systenn with 
the properties {Zk}> and the possible conditions 
at the disposal point are described by the set 

A-2. 5 The tasks of a sannple handling systenn 
can be the following: 

— to change the properties (.^s) of the 
sannple streann at the sannple point so that 



SAMPLING 
POINT (S) 



SAMPLE HANDLING 
SYSTEM 

r 



/SAMPLE 



1 



(Zn)l DISPOSAL 
POINT 



EXHAUST STREAM 



DISPOSAL 



'///////////////////O 



EXTRACTION -^ 
TRANSPORT </ 
CONDITIONING/ 



/sample 

STREAM 



SAMPLE 
INLET 



OUTLET 



(Zo) 



PROCESS 
ANALYSER 



INLET FOR' 

AUXILIARY 

FLUIDS 



:Za) 



OUTPUT^V 



SIGNAL 



SWITCHING 



SUPPLY OFUTILITIES 



v/////////////////// 



SIGNAL y 

PRO"CESSING/ 

MONITORING &V 
CONTROL / 



DATA 
PRESEN- 
TATION 



in 



Fig. 3 Schematic Outline of a Complete Measuring System for Procrss Analysts 
Consisting of a Process Anat^yser and a Sample Handling System 



11 



IS 12957 : 1990 



the requirements (^i) of the processor 
analyser for its inlet are met, 

— to change the properties (^a) of the 
utilities provided so that the requirements 
of the process analyser (^a) and if 
necessary of sample handling system 
components are met, 

~ to connect the process analyser outlet 
with the point of disposal so that the 
respective requirements (^o) and (^d) are 
met, and 

— to process the output signal of the analyser 
so that the wanted information can 
be delivered; this is especially then needed 
when the process analyser is sequentially 
connected with different sampling points. 

A -2.5.1 So a sample handling system may 
perform the following basic functions: 

— sample extraction, 

— sample transport, 

— sample conditioning, 

— exhaust stream disposal, 

— supply of utilities, and 

— sample stream switching and signal 
processing. 

A-3 For obtaining a sufficient reliability and 
for keeping the maintenance expense on an 
economically justified level it is normally 
necessary to realise the additional function: 

— performance monitoring and control. 



The possibilities of instrumentation for this 
function are manifold. They reach from 
equipping the system with simple measuring 
instruments (for example, flowmeter, mano- 
meter ) and values for rinsing with test fluids up 
to the automation of the performance 
monitoring and control by means of status 
sensors and complex electronics. These may 
also be able to perform routine maintenance 
work ( for example, calibrations ) automatically 
and to give externally available failure reports 
for improving the reliability. 

A-3.1 Not all of the basic functionshave to be 
realised in all cases 'sample stream switching' is 
comparatively seldom necessary, and for in 
line or in-situ analysers the functions 'sample 
extraction' 'sample transport', and 'sample 
conditioning' have not to be performed, 
whereas the function 'supply of utilities' may 
nevertheless be needed. For some portable and 
battery driven analyser (for example; for work 
place hygienic measurements ) a sample 
handling system is not at all necessary. 

A -4 A simple example for a complete 
measuring system is shown in Fig. 4. It is 
assumed that the pressure at the sampling point 
is high enough for transferring the sample 
stream through the sample handling system and 
the analyser to the disposal point in the open 
air. The function, 'sample stream switching' 
and 'supply of utilities' are not realised in this 
example. 

A -5 The following table contains the sample 
handling system components of the example 
together with the functions of the system they 
help to realise: 



^-^. Functions 




Sample 


Exhaust 


Performance 
Monitoring 
and Control 


Components ^""^^-^ 


Extraction 


Transport 


— ^ Stream 
Conditioning Disposal 


Sampling probe with in line-filter 


X 


X 


X 




Valve 




X 




X 


Heated sample line 




X 






Filter ( coalescer) 




X 


X 




Cooler 




X 


X 




Absorber 




X 


X 




V al ve for cal i b rati on gases 








X 


Needle valve 




X 


X 


X 


Flowmeter 




X 




X 


Exhaust line 






X 





12 



PLANT 






X 



□ 



ANALYSER HOUSE 



jj-iriM 



SOURCE FLUID STREAM 



IS 12957 : 1990 



I CONTROL 
: ROGW 




r 



SPAN 
GAS 



ty I ( 



Fig. 4 Simple Example for a Complete M easuring System for Process Analysis 



The process analyser comprises components 
( indicator, potentiometers for re-calibrations ) 
which also serve the function 'performance 
monitoring and control'. 

A-6 It is the purpose of a complete measuring 
system to provide information about chemical 
or physical properties of the source fluid. The 
sample stream carries the information from the 
sampling point to the analyser which 
transforms it into a signal. Errors may not only 
arise within the process analyser but also in the 
sample handling system, if the properties of the 
sample stream are changed in an uncontrolled 
way so shat it looses an unknown part of 
information to be acquired. If the functions 
'sample extraction', 'sample transport', and 
above all 'sample conditioning' are performed, 
errors are possible and have to be taken into 
account which are specific for sample handling 
systems (for example, composition error, 
volume error, dilution error, etc ). 

A-6.1 For the properties of a complete 
measuring system important demands can arise 
with emphasis depending on the special cases. 



The most important properties are: 
-time constants, 

— errors, 

— reliability ( operational availability ), 

— investment expense, and 

— maintenance expense. 

A-6.2 Other important properties ( for example, 
safety characteristics) are not dealt with in 
this standard. The properties of a complete 
system depend on the process analyser as well 
as on the construction of the sample handling 
system. 

A-7 A sample handling system has to be 
constructed so that the demands concerning its 
properties are met as far as possible. With 
many measuring systems for process analysis it 
is the sample handling system rather than the 
process analyser that is more frequently the 
source of poor performance or breakdown. The 
objectives of maintenance should be that the 
accuracy and availability are continuously and 
reliably achieved. 



ANNEX B 

(Ckuses 3.2, 3.2.1.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3 and3.2.4j 

OPERATING GROUPS AND LIMIT RANGES OF OPERATION, 
STORAGE AND TRANSPORT 

B-l The operating ranges of influence B-2 Out of the many possible influence 

quantities are divided into five operating quantities only a few are important in the 

groups, according to the severity of the environments in which most sample handling 

environment, as shown in Table 1. systems and process analysers are used. These 



13 



IS 12957: 1990 

quantities are referred to as primary influence operating groups are given or described in 
quantities. Limit values or operating ranges for Table 2. The limit ranges for operation, 
primary influence quantities according to storage and transport are given in Table 3. 

Table 1 Operating Groups 

( Clause B-l ) 



Operating Group 



-Operating Conditions 



The environment existing in standards laboratories, under suitable conditions for 
calibrations, and for measurements to resolve disputes. 



NOTE — The ranges for influence quantities may be chosen to be reference ranges 
or nominal ranges of use as given in other Indian Standards. 

The environment existing indoors under conditions which are normally found in 
laboratories and light industries, and where equipment will be handled carefully. 

The environment existing under conditions which are normally found in heavy 
industries. 



D 



An uncontrolled environment in which the equipment may be subjected to rough 
usage. 

Special environmental requirements relating to usual fields of use. 

NOTE-For this group the details will be subject of special agreement between the 
manufacturer and the user. 



Table 2 Primary Influence Quantities According to Operating Groups 

( Clause B-2) 





Limit Values of Ranges 








Reference 
or Rar 


Value 
ige 

All Operating 
Groups 






Operating 
^ange 




Primary 

Influence 

Quantity 


Operating 
Group A, 
Standard 
Laboratories 


Operating 
Group B, 
General 
Laboratories 
and Light 
Industry 


Operating 
Group C, 
Heavy 
Industry 


Operating 
Group D, 
Uncontrolled 
Environment 


Operating 
Group E, 
Special Duty 


1 Ambient 20, 23, or 27°C~ 
temperature ±: I'^C 
( Notes 1&2) 


As stated in 
Indian 
Standard 
relevant to 
equipment 
( for example, 
nominal range 
of use ) or as 
agreed to 
between the 
manufacturer 
and the user 


+ 5 to + 40°C 


- 10 to + 55°C 


- 25 to + 70°C 


As agreed to 
between the 
manufacturer 
and the user 


2 Relative 
humidity 


40 to 60 percent 


30 to 70 
percent 


10 to 90 
percent 


5 to 95 
percent 




3 a Supply 
voltage 


Rated value 
± 1 percent 


Rated value 
± 5 percent 


Rated value 
±10 percent 


Rated value 
± 15 percent 




3 b Attitude 


Any stated 

attitude 

± rc in any 

direction 


Any stated Any stated Any attitude 

attitude attitude 

± 5 percent ± 30 percent 

in any direction in any direction 





NOTES 

1 These temperatures are taken from IS 196 : 1966. The reference temperature relating to a particular equipment 
must be explicitly stated. If a reference range for temperature is stated, it shall include at least one of these 
temperatures. 

2 The tolerance is as shown unless a smaller tolerance is stated in a relevant Indian Standard. 



14 



IS 12957 : 1990 



Table 3 Limit Ranges for Operation, Storage and Transport 

( Clause B-Z ) 



Operating Group 



Limit Range of Operation, 
( Note 1) 



Limit Range of Storage and 
Transport ( Note 2 ) 



Group A 
Group B, C, D 



Group E 



Equal to operating range, unless 
otherwise stated in the relevant 
Indian Standard 

Equal to operating range 



As agreed to between 
manufacturer and the user 



the 



As agreed to between the manufacturer 
and the user, unless otherwise stated in 
the relevant Indian Standard. 

Primary ( Temperature —40 to 

influence + 70°C ) Relative 

quantities humidity 5 to 95 

percent 

Secondary ( As agreed to between 

influence the manufacturer and 

quantities the user) 

As agreed to between the manufacturer 
and the user 



NOTES 

1 The limit range of operation applies to all stated influence quantities. 

2 The limit range of storage and transport applies only to those stated influence quantities which affect the 
equipment when it is not operating. For instance, supply voltage is not applicable. 



15 



standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under whichalicence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification 
of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sixes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this I ndian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the foil owing reference: 

Doc: No. LTD 21 (1283) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend N o. Date of I ssue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquartera: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 331 01 31,331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to al I Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg /331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 £31 13 75 

Eastern :1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 1843 

Southern : C.I .T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AH MADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THI RUVANANTHAPURAM . 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



