**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14269 (1995) : Automotive vehicles - Integral power 
steering gear - Method of test [TED 2: Automotive 
Primemovers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



^Rcft^r m^^ 



IS 14269 : 1995 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — INTEGRAL POWER 
STEERING GEAR — METHOD OF TEST 



UDC 629-113-014-5 : 620-1 



© BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1995 Price Gronp 3 



Automotive Suspension and Steering Systems Sectionai Committee, Itu 5 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Suspension and Steering Systems Sectional Committee had been approved 
by Transport Engineering Division Council, 

When the gross vehicular weight increases, correspondingly the steering effort of the vehicle 
also increase and make maneuverability of the vehicle difucult. The integral power steering gear 
helps in the reduction of the driver's fatigue and thereby increases the safety. Now a days more 
and more vehicles are coming on the roads with power steering and the committee felt that there 
is an urgent need to specify the method of test to evaluate the performance of the steering gear. 

The power steering enables the driver to circum.vent any obstacle in a critical situation and 
thereby reduces the risk of accidents due to tyre puncture and subsequent dragging/studding. 
The method of test for mechanical steering gear is covered separately in IS 13476 : 1992. 

The committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

In reporting the results of a test Or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
<pjjles for rounding off numerical values ( revised Y. 



IS 14269 : 1995 



Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — INTEGRAL POWER 
STEERING GEAR — METHOD OF TEST 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies methods to deter- 
mme/evaluate the performance of power steering 
gears in respect of functional reliability and 
operational safety under static and dynamic 
conditions. 



2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following 



are 



Indian Standards 
necessary adjuncts to this standard; 

IS No. Title 

11948 : 1986 Method of evaluation of 

steering effort of automotive 
vehicles 

13476 : 1992 Automotive vehicles — 

Mechanical steering gear — 
Methods of test 

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The dimensions and physical requirements 
of the test samples shall be as agreed between 
the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

3.2 Test Media and Conditions 

3.2.1 For Low Pressure External Leak Test by 
Immersion 

Test gas — Dry gas ( Nitrogen or air ) 

at test pressures of 03 to 
0-7 kg/cm2 and at 7 to 
10 kg/cm2 shall be used 

Immersion fluid — Water with appropriate 
rust preventive 

3.2.2 For Hydraulic Test 

a) Hydraulic — ATF (Automatic trans- 
fluid mission fluid — Type *A' 

or 'F' ). Unless otherwise 
agreed to between manu- 
facturer and purchaser 
the fluid supplied shall 
be at rated pressure 
recommended by the 
manufacturer 

b) Filtration — Full flow filtration of 

25 micron ( Max ) 

c) Hydraulic — 55 to 65°C 
fluid tempe- 
rature 

d) Test flow — This shall be as per 
rate to the manufacturer's recom- 
gear mendation 



3.2.3 Input Torque 

Input torque for internal leakage and unloading 
valve test shall be suflicient to close the control 
valve fully and shall be specified by the 
manufacturer. 

3.2.4 Power Steering Gear Mounting 

Unless otherwise specified, the test sample shall 
be mounted in such a manner that it keeps the 
input shaft horizontal and above the output 
shaft. 

3.2.5 Drop Arm/Pitman Arm 

Unless otherwise specified, the test sample shall 
be mounted in such a manner that it keeps the 
input shaft horizontal and above the output 
shaft. 

4 TESTS 

4.1 The following tests shall be carried out to 
determine/evaluate the performance of power 
steering gears. In general these tests shall be 
carried out on fresh samples in the order 
mentioned below, except where noted otherwise. 

NOTE — The tests, loads, cycles specified in the 
standard are generally applicable. In particular 
cases, it may be often necessary to take into account 
the specific requirements of the vehicle operating 
conditions, environnaent so that the tests, loads, 
test cycles may be modified suitably by agreement 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

4.1.1 Classification of Tests 

a) Type tests, and 

b) Routine tests. 

4.2 Type Test 

The following shall comprise of type tests: 

a) Functional/kinematic tests, 

b) Static strength test, and 

c) Dynamic tests/endurance tests. 

4.3 Routine Tests 

Functional/kinematic test 

5 TEST PROCEDURE 

5.1 Functional/Kiuematic Tests 

The following tests shall be carried out on a 
test bench ( see Fig. 1 ) and the observations/ 
values shall be recorded after each test. The 



IS 14269 : 1995 



DiFFERENTiAL 
PRESSURE 



SYSTEM 
PRESSURE 



LEAK 

FLOW 



OiL 
n-EMPERATURE 



steering gear 
Abst fixture 



STEERING 
EAR 



LOCKER ARN 
rDROPAriM> 




^^ /////// ■ i^mr 7^w^ 

Fig* 1 Typical Functional/Kinematic Test Bench for Power Steering Gear 



requirements of these tests shall be as agreed 
between the manufacturer and the user. 

5.1.1 Number of input turns shall be recorded 
from centre to right/left extremes. 

5.1.2 Friction torque shall be recorded at the 
centre and at the extremes without any assist- 
ance of power. 

5.1.3 Input torque versus hydraulic pressure 
( across the gear ) developed shall be carried 
out with hydraulic supply at rated pressure and 
test flow. 

5.1.4 Hydraulic free play at centre that is input 
rotation ( in degrees ) required to raise the inlet 
nressure by one bar above the neutral pressure 
shall be carried out with the gear at centre and 
supply at rated pressure and the test flow. 

5.1.5 Lost Motion Test ( Backlash ) 

With the gear at the centre of travel^ rotate 
the input shaft through -30° to +30^ with the 
inlet and outlet ports vented to atmosphere. 
The output shaft shall follow the input shaft 
movement without backlash. Further there 

cVi-cill K^ r\r\ avinl ( in ?*nrf out ^ mnvptnpnf c\£ i\\f* 

OAAW-^i ^^ XXV. «,^w«. ^ x^^ «.**« v^w y ^^v.^"*^xxv ^* v.^« 

worm/input shaft. 

5.1.6 Leakage 

When steering gear is equipped with a relief 
^'alve replace valve with a suitable i^luo' before 
leakage testing. 



5.1.6.1 External Leakage 

No external leakage is permissible with gear 
statically pressurized as detailed below: 

a) Low pressure leakage — with outlet port 









111 llllLllVi ^iwll 



fluid, pressurize with test gas at 0*3 to 
0-7 kg/cm2 for 20 seconds minimum. 
Increase the pressure to 7 to 10 kg/cm^ 
for 20 seconds minimum. Visually check 
for leaks during this procedure. Repeat 
this cycle 2 or 3 times and if the gear 
complies with the requirements then only 
it shall be subjected to high pressure tesf. 









■■•■ '^6^ 






in 5.1.6.2, pressurize gear to rated pressure 
with hydraulic fluid and maintain pressure 
for 10 seconds minimum and visually 
examine for leaks. 



5.1.6.2 Internal leakage 






\^CL1 li& 



travel, pitman aru« 



located in centre and with the input shaft 
torque value as specified in 3,2.3, with supply at 
rated pressure, flow across the valve shall not 
exceed manufacturer's specification. Internal 



leakage 



application of torque to input shaft. Perform 
the test for both directions of rotation of input 
shaft. 



IS 14269 : 1995 



5.1.7 Unloading Valve Test ( when Provided ) 

With poppet adjusting screw positioned to ensure 
that the poppets are tripped and with the rack 
positioned at bottom against the internal stops 
and input shaft torque value conforming to the 
value specified in 3.2.3, the maximum differential 
pressure between inlet and outlet ports shall be 
half the rated pressure at test flow. Perform 
the test at both ends of travel. 

5.1.8 Neutral Pressure Drop 

With the inpat shaft unrestrained, the differen- 
tial pressure between inlet and outlet ports shall 
not exceed the value recommended by the 
manufacturer at that test flow. 

5.1.9 Reversibility Test 

With the input shaft unrestrained, the gear shall 
reverse from each extreme of recommended 
travel to centre within 5 seconds after applying 
a torque specified by the manufacturer to the 
output shaft with the test flow supplied to the 
gear. 

5.1.10 Performance Rating 

5.1.10.1 Hydromechanical rating 

With test flow supplied to the gear and rated 
torque applied to the output shaft rotate the 
input shaft at a rate not exceeding 60 rev/min. 
Differential pressure between inlet and outlet 
ports shall not exceed rated pressure and input 



torque value shall not exceed the value recom- 
mended by the manufacturer throughout gear 
travel ( excluding zone of stroke limiter opera- 
tion ). 

5.1,10.2 Mechanical efficiency 

With the gear filled with fluid and inlet and 
outlet ports vented to atmosphere, rotate the 
input shaft ( end to end ) at a uniform speed of 
20 rev/min and measure the average input 
torque required for an output torque of 1/3 of 
rated torque. The torque efficiency shall be 
calculated as specified in 3.1.3 of IS 13476 : 1992 
and the value obtained shall be greater than 
60 percent. 

5.2 Static Strength Test — ( see Fig. 2 ). 

With the gear assembly mounted on a suitable 
fixture, lock the output shaft at centre of travel, 
apply a torque corresponding to maximum hand 
force permissible at the steering wheel to the 
input shaft, in both directions. Gear assembly 
is to be filled with lubricant and inlet and 
outlet ports vented to atmosphere. 

5.2.1 Performance Criteria 

After the test, the gear shall be operable. 

NOTES 

1 An operable gear assembly is defined as an 
assembly, which is rotatable in both directions of 
traveil at fufl rated load with power on. 

2 Maximum hand force permissible at steering wheel 
shall be as specified in IS 11948 : 1986- 



SUPPLY 
^PRESSURE 

SYSTEM 
^LOW 



TO POWER PACK 



OIL 

/temperature 




c 



STEERING GEAR 
TF.ST FIXTURE 




STEERING 
GEAR 

DROPARM^ 
LOAD CELL 



HYDRAULIC MOTOR 
(INPUT DRIVE) 

, TORQUE CELL 
MREACTON TYPE) 



z 



:^^ 



HYDRAULIC TEST BENCH AND POWER PACK 



"^^ 



y 



2) 



'^m^ 



Fig. 2 Typical Hydraulic Test Bench for Static and Dynamic Tests for Power 

Steering Gears 



IS 14269 : 1995 



5.3 Dynamic Tests — ( see Fig. 2 ). 
5.3.1 Wear Test ( Power On ) 

With the gear assembly mounted on a suitable 
fixture, rotate the input shaft to cause the 
output shaft to travel through 5 degrees less 
than the maximum angle of travel either side of 
<"entre as specified by manufacturer. Adjust the 
load on a drop arm so that supply pressure does 
not exceed the rated pressure. With test flow and 
fluid temperature as in 3,2.2, rotate the input 
shaft at 60 rev/min ( Max ). 

5.3.1.1 Performance criteria 

a) The gear shall complete 30 000 test cycles 
and still be operable. One cycle is starting 
from centre, going to one extreme on to 
the other extreme and back to centre. 

b) Durins? test, external leakage and loosen- 
ing of fasteners shall not be permitted. 

c) At t\\t end of test, internal leakage carried 
out as specified in 5.1.6.2 shall not exceed 
double the value before test. 

d) At Xht end of test there shall not be any 
cracks or material detachments. However 
normal wear marks on the individual 
components shall not be considered as 
failure. 

5.3.2 Wear Test ( Power Off) 

With a new gear assembly ( new sample ) 
mounted on a suitable fixture, the input shaft 
shall rotate to cause the output shaft to travel 
through 5 degrees less than the maximum angle 
of travel either side of the centre. With the 
assembly adequately lubricated, apply sufficient 
load on drop arm to reach an output torque 
equal to one-third of rated torque and cycle 
the gear. 

5,3.2.1 Performance criteria 

At the end of 1 000 test cycles, the gear shall 
retain measurable pre-load as evidenced by 
friction torque values ( see 5.1.2 ) at the end of 
test and that after releasing the pre-load 
adjusters 

NOTE — Rated torque for the gear under test shall 
be specified by the manufacturer- 

5.3.3 Fatigue Test ( Power On ) 

a) With the gear assembly at the centre of 
travel, lock the input shaft and apply 
alternating load on drop arm. 

b) Gear shall be supplied with test flow at 
rated pressure and temperature as in 
3.2.2. 



c) Adjust load on the drop arm, so that the 
sunnlv Dressure does not exceed the 



supply pressure 
rated pressure. 



5.3.3.1 Performance criteria 

a) The gear shall complete 50 000 test cycles 
and still be operable. 

b) During test, external leakage and loosen- 
ing of fasteners are not permissible. 

c) At the end of test, internal leakage carried 
out in the manner specified in 5.1,6.2 shall 
not exceed double the value before test. 

d) At the end of test, there shall not be any 
cracks or material detachments. However 
normal wear marks on the individual 
components shall not be considered as 
failure. 



5.3.4 Impact Test ( Power On ) 

With the gear assembly mounted on a suitable 
fixture, lock the input shaft with the gear at 
centre of travel. Supply test flow at rated 
pressure as specified in 3.2.2. 

Apply load to output shaft through a drop arm 
at a nominal rise rate of 2 500 to 3 000 m-kg/sec. 
Apply load to a level of two times the maximum 
operating torque and maintain for 0-7 second. 

NOTE — Maximum operating torque for a particular 
application shall be specified by the user. 



5.3.4.1 Performance Criteria 

a) This test shall consist of two impact loads 
as detailed above in each direction. The 
gear ishall be operable at the end of test. 

b) At the end of test, there shall not be any 
cracks or material detachments. Individual 
components may show indentation/defor- 
mations which shall not be considered as 
failure. 

Alternatively, instead of the dynamic tests 
specified in 5.3 the power steering gear may be 
tested for endurance which combines the effects 
of all the above tests as detailed below. 

5.3.5 Endurance Test 

The gear assembly mounted on a suitable test 
fixture shall be supplied with test flow at rated 
pressure and temperature as specified in 3.2.2. 



IS 14269 : 1995 



Rotate the input shaft at 60 rev/min maximum 
and load the drop arm as below: 



SI 



Input Rotation 



Resisting Torque at Output Shaft 



40 percent of rated torque 

2>S percent of rated torque 

40 percent of rated torque 

85 percent of rated torque 

200 percent of rated torque ( only 
100 percent of rated torque shall be 
supported by hydraulic assistance 
remaining 100 percent shall be 
supported mechanically by the input 
drive to simulate manual loading ) 



No, of 
Test Cycles 


Remarks 


30 000 


Normal steering torque 


7 500 


Dry parking torque 


55 000 


Normal steering torque 


7 500 


Dry parking torque 


10 


Rut and Kerb jacking/ 
impact torque 



I. ±180 

2- Maximum usable range 

3. ±180 

4. Maximum usable range 

5. Maximum usable range 



5,3.5.1 Performance criteria 

a) At the end of test, the gear shall be 
operable. 

b) During test, external leakage shall not be 
permitted. 

c) After the test internal leakage carried out 
as specified in 4.1.6.2 shall not exceed 



2-5 times, the value before test. 

d) Individual components may exhibit 
normal wear marks. At the end of test 
there shall not be any cracks or material 
detachments visible on the gear assembly. 
However normal wear marks on the 
individual components shall not be 
considered as failure. 



IS 14269 : 1995 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Automotive Suspension and Steering Systems Sectional Committee, TED 5 



Chairman 
Dr S. Satyamurthy 

Members 

Shri R. Jagannathan ( Alternate to 
Dr S. Satyamurthy ) 

Shri M. Balakumar 

Shri S. Sundarraj ( Alternate ) 

Dr p. R. Sajanpawar 

Shri S. Raju ( Alternate ) 

Shri B. Bhaumik 

Shri C. Y. Deshpande ( Alternate ) 

Shri C. S. Maikhuri 

Shri A. A. Khinvasara ( Alternate ) 

Shri S- R. Tapade 

Shri S. Kumar ( Alternate ) 

Shri O. P. Narula 

Shri K. C Gupta ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. S. Khosla 

Shri A, P. Singh (Alternate ) 

Shri K. C. Jain 

Shri Raju Aqarwal ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. Sundararaman 

Shri S. K. Bhaumick ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. N. Saharsa Budhe 

Shri G. B. Lal 

Shri G. S. Khunnu ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. N. Neelakantan 

Shri I. V. Rao 

Shri Deepak Sawkar ( Alternate ) 

Shri A. K. Malik 

Shri B. L. Pathariya 

Shri M. K. Mishra ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. N. Srinivasan 

Shri V. Murugan ( Alternate ) 

Shri J. K. Subramanian 

Shri S. Radhakrishnan 

Director Motive Power 

Shri T. K. Pal 

Shri K. M. Deshpande ( Alternate ) 

DrP. D. SlNGHAL 

Shri V. Vishwanathan ( Alternate I ) 
Shri B. K. De ( Alternate 11 ) 

Shri B. S. Mohan 

Shri P. K. Chattopadhyaya ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. M. Kishinchandani 

Shri V. V. Athavale ( Alternate ) 

Shri J. H. Munot 

Shri C. K. Dange ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. S. Judge, 
Director ( Transport Engg ) 



Representing 
Richer Goodearth Limited, Ballabhgarh 



Ashok Leyland Limited, Madras 

Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Bajaj Auto Limited, Pune 

Bajaj Tempo Limited, Pune 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Ministry of Defence, DGQA (V). New Delhi 

Deptt of Technical Dev» Ministry of Industry, New Delhi 

Escorts Automotives Ltd, Faridabad 

Gabriel India Limited, Bombay 

Kinetic Engg Limited, Pune 

HMT Limited ( Tractor Division ), Pinjore 

Hydraulics Limited, Madras 
Maruti Udyog Limited, Gurgaon 

Ministry of Surface Transport, New Delhi 
Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ), Jabalpur 

Premier Automobiles Limited, Bombay 

Rane ( Madras ) Ltd, Madras 

Rane Power Steering Ltd, Pudukkottai 

Research, Design and Standards Organization, Lucknow 

Sona Steering Systems Ltd, New Delhi 

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Pune 

Ministry of Defence ( VRDE ), Ahmednagar 
XLO India Limited, Bombay 
Z. F. Steering Gear (I) Ltd, Pune 
Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Member Secretary 

Shri M.V.S.D. Prasada Rao 

Joint Director ( Transport Engg ), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardizationj marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comm.ents. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or editon by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TED 5 (4813 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Pubiicatiou 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



{3 



Telephone 
["331 01 31 
L331 13 75 

r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

1,37 86 26, 37 86 62 

r60 38 43, 

|60 20 25, 
r235 02 16, 235 04 42 



< 



< 



i.235 15 19, 235 23 15 
r632 92 95, 632 78 58 
[632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. 



Printed at Printwcll Printers. Aligarh. India 



