**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13605 (1992) : Method for macroetch test for zinc and 
zinc alloys [MTD 22: Metallography and Heat Treatment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR MACROETCH TEST 
FOR ZINC AND ZINC ALLOYS 



1813605:1992 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 



UDC 669-55-620-183-255 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1992 Price Gronp 1 



Metallography and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee, MTD 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Metallography and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallur- 
gical Engineering Division Council. 

Macroetching is used to reveal the heterogeneity of metals and alloys. Metallographic specimens 
and chemical analysis will provide the necessary detailed information about specific localities but 
they cannot give data about variation from one place to another unless an inordinate large number 
of specimens are taken. 

Macroetching, on the other hand, will provide information on variations in: (1) structure, such as 
grain size, flow lines, columnar structure, dendrites, etc, and (2) variations in chemical composition 
as evidenced by segregation. The information provided about variations in chemical composition 
is strictly qualitative but the location of extremes in segregation will be shown. Chemical analysis 
or other means of determining the chemical composition would have to be performed to determine 
the extent of variation. Macroetching will also Iti show presence of discontinuities and voids, 
such as seams, laps, porosity, flakes, bursts, extrusion rupture, cracks, etc. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from ASTM E340 Standard Test 
Methods for Macroetching Metals and Alloys, American Society for Testing and Materials. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2 : I960 *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



IS 13605 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR MACROETCH TEST 
FOR ZINC AND ZINC ALLOYS 



1 SCOPE 

Macroetching is the etching of specimen for 
examination with unaided eye at low magnifica- 
tions and is used to reveal the macrostructure 
of zinc and zinc alloys products, such as bars, 
billets, forgings and castings. The present 
procedure is intended to be followed for classi- 
fying, zinc and zinc alloys, characteristic 
structure and incidence of certain processing 
defects and is applicable to zinc and zinc alloy 
products. 

2 SIGNIFICANCE 

Macroetching is a simple test which provides 
information about the heterogeneity of the 
sample. It will show: (a) variation in structure 
such as grain size, flowlines columnar structure 
dendrite etc; and (b) presence of macro segrega- 
tion. 

3 SAMPLING 

3.1 When using macroetching as an inspection 
procedure, sampling should be done in an early 
stage of manufacturing so that if the material 
proves defective, the minimum amount of un- 
necessary work is done. However, the sample 
should not be taken so early that further work- 
ing can introduce serious defects. The sample 
is usually taken after ingot breakdown and after 
most chances of flaking and bursts have passed. 
Billets or blooms going into small sizes are 
sampled after initial breakdown. Materials 
going into forging billets or other products are 
sampled at near finish size, sampling may be 
done systematically or on a random basis. 

3.1.1 Some common methods of sampling are 
listed as follows. 

3.1.1.1 Billets, blooms and hot-rolled products 

Discs are usually cut from these products near 
the end, but fish tails should be avoided. Discs 
from large blooms can be cut into smaller pieces 
for ease in handling. 

3.1.2 Forgings and Extrusion 

Discs, cut transverse to the long dimension, are 
used for examining bursts, voids, etc. Forging 
should be cut parallel to flash lines to show flow 
lines. Macroetching of an unprepared speci- 
men shows surface defects, such as shuts, flats^. 
seams, etc. 

3.1.3 Sheets and Plates 

While looking for defects in sheets, as large a 
sample as possible should be taken. When 



seeking information on lamination, a transverse 
section is used. 

3.1.4 Castings 

Specimen should be cut from different regions- 
depending upon the features sought. 

3.2 When macroetching is used to solve a pro- 
blem, then the problem itself largely dictates^ 
the sample location on the workpiece and the 
stage of manufacture; for example, when look- 
ing for pipe, the sample should represent the 
top of the ingot, or when looking for burst, the 
sample should be taken as soon after hot 
working as possible. 

3.3 Sample may be cold cut by any convenient 
means. Saw and abrasive cut off wheels and 
EDS cutting are particularly effective. iThe 
surface to be examined should be properly 
prepared before macroetching. 

4 SPECIMEN PREPARATION 

4.1 Sample preparation need not be elaborate. 
Any method of presenting a smooth surface with 
a minimum amount of cold work will be satisr 
factory. Discs may be faced on a lathe or a 
shaper. The usual procedure is to take a 
roughing cut, then a finish cut. This will gene- 
rate a smooth surface and remove cold work 
layer from prior operations. Grinding may 
also be employed using a free cutting wheel and 
light finishing cut. When fine details arc requir- 
ed, the specimen should be finished through the 
series of metallographic paper. 

4.2 Sample preparation need not be elaborate. 
Any method of presenting a smooth surface with 
a minimum amount of cold work will be satis- 
factory. Discs may be faced on a lathe or shaper. 
The usual procedure is to take a roughing cut, 
then a finish cut. This will generate a smooth 
surface and remove cold work from prior ope- 
rations. Grinding may also be employed using 
a fine wheel and light finished cut. When fine 
detail is required, the specimen should be 
finished with metallographic paper. 

4.3 After surface preparation, the sample 
should be cleaned carefully with suitable sol- 
vents. Any grease, oil or other residue left on 
the surface will produce uneven attack during 
macroetching. Therefore, care should be taken 
not to touch the sample surface or contaminate 
it in any other way after it has been cleaned, 

5 SOLUTIONS 

5.1 The most common solutions for macroetch- 
ing zinc and zinc alloys are given in Table 1. 



1 



IS 13605 : 1992 



Table 1 Macroetchants for Zinc and Zinc Alloys 

( Clauses 5.1 and 6) 



Alloy 


Solution 


Composition 


Cu-free zinc 
alloys 


HCi ( cone ) 
HgO 


50 ml 
50 ml 


Zn alloy con- 
taining Cu 


CraOs 
NagSO* or 
Na,SO4.10H,O 
H,0 


200 g 
1-5 g 
3-4 g 

100 ml 



Procedure 

Immerse in solution for about 15 sec. 
Remove smut by wiping under run- 
ning water. Repeat until desired 
contrast is obtained, then dry. 

Immerse in solution until good 
contrast is obtained. Rinse in 
running water and dry. Repeat if 
necessary. 



Comments 

Grain structure 



Grain structure 



5.2 Caution must be observed in mixing the 
acids as many of the aeids may cause chemical 
burns. The acid should be added slowly to 
water. Mixing and etching should be done in a 
fume hood, as many of the solutions are aggres- 
sive and may give irritating fumes. 

6 PROCEDURE 

The specimen shall be etched to reveal structure 
by immersion or by swabbing or by both means. 
The time of etching will vary dependirg upon 
the composition, size and structural condition. 
Generally speaking 30 s to 10 min will be 
Sufficient. Etching should be stopped when the 
preferred structural details have been revealed. 
Over-etching can lead to misinterpretation and 
hence light etching is better. Table 1 gives the 
time for various etchants, but should be used as 
a guide only. The actual time to develop a 
structure properly may be quite different from 
that suggested. After etching specimen should 



be washed in running water and blown dry with 
compressed air. 

7 EXAMINATION OF SPECIMENS 

7.1 Any special condition like segregation, 
banding, voids, etc, that can be observed should 
be reported. A low magnification ( X 10 ) stereo 
microscope can be used for observation, if ncces* 
sary. Normally it is essential to see the surface 
from various angles to observe flow defects and 
banding. The macrograin size for forged billets 
can be compared with specified macrostructures 
and level of grain size reported. 

7.2 The acceptance and rejection criterion for 
these macrostructures has to be worked out 
according to the type of alloy and application. 
Therefore, the basis of macroetching inspection 
will be a matter of agreement between the manu- 
facturer and the purchaser, if this technique is 
being used as a quality test. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act^ 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bnreaa of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards AcU 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, types or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for re- 
vision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amend- 
ments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly 
Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. MTD 22 ( 3759 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Pnblication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text AflFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 ^37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 {H H ^ ' ^^ ^^ ^^ 

^53 23 o4 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 I235 ?? I9' 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f632 92 95, 632 78 58 



16 



BOMBAY 400093 (.632 78,91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



