•••••••••••••••• 


ic  i3^ 


^ 


if 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


IS  12370  (1993) :  Bursting  discs  and  bursting  disc  devices 
[MED  17:  Chemical  Engineering  Plants  and  Related  Equipment] 


^nz^^^aznz^^ 


SSa£\  *  H>ftPii5c%^Na*^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


-iSiS 


5>- 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  12370  :  1993 
ISO  6718:1991 

(Reaffirmed  2001) 

( *^?^  jHTt^^ ) 

Indian  Standard 
BURSTING  DISCS  AND  BURSTING  DISC  DEVICES 

(  First  Revision  } 


UDC    62V646'8 


Igl  BIS  1993 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK      BHAVAN.     9     BAHADUR      SHAH      ZAFAR      MARG 
NEW  DELHI     110002 

May  1993  Price  Group  11 


Chemical  Engineering  Plants  and  Related  Equipment  Sectional  Committee,  HMD  17 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Section  1  General              ...                   ...  ...  ...  ...  1 

1.1  Scope                               ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  1 

1.2  Normative  reference      ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  1 

1.3  Definitions                      ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  1 

1.4  Selection                         ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  3 

1.5  Application                      ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  3 

1.6  Installation                     ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  5 

1.7  Discharge  capacity        ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  5 

1.8  Information  to  be  supplied  by  the  purchaser  ...  ...  ...  6 

1.9  Quality  assurance           ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  7 

Section  2  Components  of  bursting  disc  devices    ...  ...  ...  8 

2.1   Bursting  discs                ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  8 

2-2  Bursting  disc  holders     ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  10 

2.3  Back  pressure  supports                       •••  ...  ...  ...  12 

2.4  Temperature  shields      •■.                    •••  ...  ...  ...  12 

2.5  Stiffening  rings             ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  12 

2.6  Gaskets                           ...                    •■•  ...  ...  ...  12 

Section  3  Means  of  protection  from  corrosion  ...  ...  ...  13 

3.1  General                            ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  13 

3.2  Coatings                          ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  13 

3.3  Plating                              ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  13 

3.4  Bursting  disc  linings     ...                     ...  ...  ...  ...  13 

Section  4  Inspection  and  testing         ...  ...  ...  ...  14 

4.1  Inspection                       ...                   .••  ...  ...  ...  14 

4.2  Testing                             ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  14 

Sections  Marking,  identification  and  packaging  ...  ...  16 

5.1  Marking                            ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  16 

5.2  Packaging                        ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  16 

Section  6  Certification    ...                   ...  ...  ...  ...  13 

6.1  Test  certificates              ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  -jg 

6.2  Additional    information                       ...  ...  ...  ...  ig 

Annexes 

A     Discharge  capacity         ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  19 

B     Derivation  of  compressibility  factor  Z  ...  ...  ...  27 

C    Typical  outline  of  subjects  for  inclusion  in  a  quality  assurance  system  ...  29 

D     Bibliography                     ...                    ...  ...  ...  ...  31 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (  First  Revision  )  which  is  identical  with  ISO  6718  :  1991  'Bursting  discs 
and  bursting  disc  devices',  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (  ISO  ), 
was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Chemical 
Engineering  Plants  and  Related  Equipment  Sectional  Committee  (  HMD  17)  and  approval  of  the 
Heavy  Mechanical  Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  was  first  issued  in  1988  as  'Bursting  discs  and  bursting  disc  devices'  by  adopting 
ISO  6718:  1988  in  dual  number.  Consequent  upon  the  revision  of  ISO  6718:1988,  this 
standard  has  also  been  revised  by  adopting  ISO  6718  :  1991,  to  bring  it  in  line  with  international 
practices. 

(  Continued  on  third  cover  ) 


IS  12370:1903 
ISO  6718 :  1991 


Indian  Standard 
BURSTING  DISCS  AND  BURSTING  DISC  DEVICES 

(  First  Revision  ) 


Section  1:     General 


1.1  .  Scope 

This  International  Standard  specifies  requirements 
for  bursting  discs  and  bursting  disc  devices  used  to 
protect  pressure  vessels,  piping  or  other  enclosures 
from  excessive  pressure  or  vacuum.  They  are  de- 
signed to  burst  or  vent  when  the  pressure  differen- 
tial across  the  bursting  disc  exceeds  a 
predetermined  value  at  a  predetermined  tempera- 
ture. 


1 .2  Normative  reference 

The  foiiowing  standard  contains  provisions  which, 
through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions 
of  this  International  Standard.  At  the  time  of  publi- 
cation, the  edition  indicated  was  valid.  All  standards 
are  subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to  agreements 
based  on  this  International  Standard  are  encour- 
aged to  investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the 
most  recent  edition  of  the  standard  indicated  below. 
Members  of  lEC  and  ISO  maintain  registers  of  cur- 
rently valid  International  Standards. 

ISO  9001:1987,  Quality  systems  -  Model  for  quality 
assurance  in  design/development,  production,  in- 
stallation and  servicing. 

1.3  Definitions 

For  the  purposes  of  this  International  Standard,  the 
following  definitions  apply. 

1.3.1  purchaser:  Organization  or  individual  who 
purchases  the  finished  bursting  disc  or  bursting  disc 
device. 

1.3.2  manufacturer  Organization  which  designs, 
constructs  and  tests  the  bursting  disc  or  bursting 
disc  device  in  accordance  with  the  purchaser's 
specification. 


1.3.3  bursting  pressure:  Value  of  the  pressure  dif- 
ferential across  the  bursting  disc  at  which  a  bursting 
disc  device  functions. 

It  may  be  specified  as  a  maximum  or  minimum 
value. 

1.3.4  specified  bursting  pressure:  Pressure,  quoted 
with  a  coincident  temperature,  specified  by  the  pur- 
chaser when  defining  the  bursting  disc  requirement. 


It   may   be   specified   as 
value. 


a   maximum   or   mmimum 


1.3.5  average  bursting  pressure:  Arithmetic  aver- 
age value  of  the  bursting  pressures,  at  the  coinci- 
dent temperature  of  the  test  bursts  carried  out,  of  a 
batch  of  bursting  discs. 

1.3.6  coincident  temperature:  Temperature  used  in 
conjunction  with  a  bursting  pressure. 

1.3.7  operating  temperature:  Average  temperature 
of  the  bursting  disc  and  the  surrounding  parts  during 
normal  operation. 

1.3.8  bursting  tolerance:  Maximum  variation  in  test 
results  in  equal  positive  and  negative  quantities  or 
percentages  related  to  the  average  bursting  press- 
ure. When  a  zero  manufacturing  range  is  stated,  the 
tolerance  applies  directly  to  the  specified  bursting 
pressure. 

1.3.9  manufacturing  range:  Range  of  pressure 
within  which  the  average  bursting  pressure  of  a 
batch  of  bursting  discs  shall  fall  in  order  to  be  ac- 
ceptable for  a  particular  application  as  agreed  be- 
tween the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser 

1.3.10  performance  tolerance:  Range  of  pressure, 
in  positive  and  negative  quantities  or  percentages, 
which  Includes  both  the  manufacturing  range  and 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


the  bursting  tolerance  at  a  coincident  temperature, 
and  wtiich  is  applied  directly  to  ttie  specified  burst- 
ing pressure. 

1.3.11  foil:  Sheet  or  strip  used  for  the  manufacture 
of  metallic  bursting  discs. 

1.3.12  batch:  Group  of  bursting  discs  of  the  same 
type,  size,  average  bursting  pressure  and  coincident 
temperature,  manufactured  from  material  of  the 
same  identity  and  properties,  and  made  as  a  single 
group. 

1.3.13  bursting  disc  device;  Non-reclosing 
pressure-relief  device  actuated  by  differential 
pressure  and  designed  to  function  by  the  bursting 
or  venting  of  the  bursting  disc(s).  It  Is  the  complete 
assembly  of  installed  components  including,  where 
appropriate,  the  bursting  disc  holder. 

1.3.14  bursting  disc  assembly:  Complete  assembly 
of  components  which  are  installed  in  the  bursting 
disc  holder  to  perform  the  desired  function. 

1.3.15  bursting  disc:  Pressure-containing  and 
pressure-sensitive  component  of  a  bursting  disc  de- 
vice. 

1.3.16  bursting  disc  holder:  That  part  of  a  bursting 
disc  device  which  retains  the  bursting  disc  assembly 
in  position. 

1.3.17  back  pressure:  Static  pressure  existing  at 
the  outlet  of  a  bursting  disc  device  at  the  time  the 
device  is  required  to  operate. 

It  is  the  result  of  pressure  in  the  discharge  system 
froni  other  sources  or  ae  a  result  of  vacuum  on  the 
upstream  side. 

1.3.18  back  pressure  support:  That  component  of  a 
bursting  disc  assembly  which  prevents  the  failure 
of  the  bursting  disc  due  to  back  pressure  differential. 

A  back  pressure  support  which  is  intended  to  pt'e- 
vent  the  failure  of  the  burstiitg  disc  when  the  system 
pressure  falls  below  atmospheric  pressure  is  some- 
times referred  to  as  a  vacuum  support. 

1.3.19  baffle  plate:  Plate  attached  to  the  vent  side 
of  a  bursting  disc  device  or  system  to  redirect  dis- 
charge and/or  to  reduce  recoil. 

1.3.20  muffied  outlet:  Component  of  a  bursting  disc 
device  which  disperses  the  discharge. 

1.3.21  stiffening  ring:  integral  component  of  the 
bursting  disc  assembly  used  primarily  for  the  stiff- 
ening of  fragile  bursting  discs. 

1.3.22  coating:  Layer  of  metallic  or  non~metallic 
material     applied     by     brush,     spraying,     dipping, 


fluidized  bed  or  other  similar  method  to  components 
of  a  bursting  disc  device, 

1.3.23  lining:  Additional  sheet  or  sheets  of  material 
forming  part  of  the  bursting  disc  assembly  or  holder 
The  lining  may  be  metallic  or  non-metallic 

1.3.24  plating:  Metal  layer  _applied  to  a  bursting 
disc  or  disc. holder  by  a  plating  process. 

1.3.25  excess  flow  valve:  Device  which  permits 
limited  flow.  When  this  flow  is  exceeded  the  vaive 
closes. 

1.3.26  conventional  domed  bursting  disc:  Bursting 
disc  which  is  domed  in  the  direction  of  the  bursting 
pressure  and  designed  to  fail  in  tension. 

(See  figures  1  and  2) 

1.3.27  conventional    slotted    lined    bursting    disc: 

Conventional  dom^d  bursting  disc  made  up  of  two 
or  more  layers,  one  of  which  is  slit  or  slotted  so  as 
to  reduce  its  strength  and  to  control  the  bursting 
pressure  of  the  bursting  disc. 

(See  figure  3.) 

1.3.28  reverse  domed  bursting  disc:  Bursting  disc 
which  is  domed  against  the  direction  of  the  bursting 
pressure  and  designed  to  fail  by  buckling,  bending 
or  shearing. 

(See  figure  4.) 

1.3.29  graphite  bursting  disc;  Bursting  disc  manu- 
factured in  graphite  and  designed  to  fail  by  bending 
or  shearing. 

1.3.30  temperature  shield:  Device  which  protects  a 
bursting  disc  from  excessive  temperature. 

1.3.31  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area:  Area 
which  is  the  minimum  cross-sectional  flow  area  of 
the  bursting  disc  device  taking  into  consideration 
the  possible  reduction  m  the  cross-section  owing  to, 
for  example,  back  pressure  supports,  catching  de- 
vices or  parts  of  the  bursting  disc  which  remain  after 
bursting  or  venting, 

1.3.32  bursting    disc    device    discharge    capacity: 

Rate  at  which  a  bursting  aisc  device  can  discharge 
fluid  after  bursting  or  venting  of  the  bursting  disc. 

1.3.33  independent  authority:  That  authority  which, 
in  the  country  concerned,  bears  responsibility  for  all 
aspects  of  surveillance  of  tests,  checking  of  calcu- 
lations and  certification  of  bursting  disc  device  dis- 
charge capacities.  * 

1.3.34  service  life:  Time  period  beginning  at  the  in- 
stallation of  a  bursting  disc  assembly  and  ending 
when  the  bursting  disc  is  replaced  or  when  it  bursts. 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


1.3.35  operating  pressure:  Pressure  to  which  the 
bursting  disc  is  exposed  during  normal  operation. 

1.3.36  inspection  authority:  Independent  authority 
or  association  which  verifies  compliance  with  this 
International  Standard. 


1.3.37     lot  of  material:  Unless  otherwise  stated 
appropriate  regulations  or  standards, 


m 


a)  For  metal;  all  material  issuing  from  the  same  heat 
number  and  heat  treatment  batch  and  having  a 
specified  thickness  with  tolerances  to  an  appro- 
priate standard; 

b)  for  impregnated  graphite;  all  material  of  a  spe- 
cific grade  and  impregnant. 

1.3.38  relieving  pressure:  Maximum  pressure  un- 
der discharge  conditions  in  the  pressurized  system. 
It  may  differ  from  the  bursting  pressure  of  the 
bursting  disc  device  (see  A. 1.5). 

1.3.39  relieving  temperature:  Maximum  tempera- 
ture under  discharge  conditions  in  the  pressurized 
system.  It  may  differ  from  the  coincident  tempera- 
ture specified  for  the  bursting  disc  device. 


1 .4     Selection 


1.4.1  Bursting  discs  are  differential  pressure  de- 
vices, and  therefore  the  pressure  on  each  side  of  the 
bursting  disc  shall  be  taken  into  account! 


1.4.2  As  highly  stressed  components,  bursting 
discs  have  a  limited  service  life  and  may  require 
replacement  at  regular  intervals.  The  frequency  of 
replacement  depends  on  the  type  and  material  of 
the  bursting  disc,  the  corrosive  nature  of  the  en- 
vironment, the  fluctuations  in  operating  tempera- 
ture, operating  pressure  and  back  pressure,  the 
ratio  of  differential  pressure  to  minimum  bursting 
pressure,  the  resistance  to  creep  and  fatigue  and 
other  operating  conditions. 


1.4.3  Bursting  disc  devices  are  frequently  required 
to  work  in  corrosive  environments  where  corrosion 
may  cause  prematura  failure  of  the  bursting  disc. 
Materials  likely  to  be  affected  by  corrosion  may  be 
protected  by  coating,,  plating,  lining  or  other  siiitable 
means  which  shall  be  supplied  only  by  the  manu- 
facturer (see  section  3), 


1.4.4  The  choice  of  the  appropriate  bursting  disc 
material  depends  on  the  chemical  and  physical 
conditions  that  will  be  met  on  each  side  of  the 
bursting  disc  when  it  is  in  service. 


1.4.5  To  function  properly,  bursting  discs,  and  back 
pressure  supports  where  required,  shall  be  installed 
in  accordance  with  the  recommendations  of  the 
manufacturer. 

1.4.6  When  requested  by  the  purchaser,  data  re- 
garding the  variation  in  bursting  pressure  with  re- 
lation to  the  temperature  for  a  batch  of  bursting 
discs  shall  be  provided  by  the  manufacturer. 

NOTE  1  The  bursting  pressure  of  a  bursting  disc  ac- 
cording to  its  material  and  type  may  vary  with  tempera- 
ture. Generally  a  bursting  disc  operating  at  high 
temperatures  has  a  tower  bursting  pressure  than  that  at 
room  temperature;  a  bursting  disc  operating  at  below 
room  temperature  has  a  higer  bursting  pressure  than  that 
at  room  temperature. 

When  a  bursting  disc  is  specified  with  a  bursting  pressure 
at  a  coincident  temperature  to  protect  a  system,  the 
bursting  disc  may  not  give  the  necessary  protection  at  a 
lower  temperature.  The  system  has  to  be  considered. with 
regard  to  the  bursting  pressures  of  the  bursting  disc  over 
the  temperature  range  of  the  system. 

Bursting  discs  may  be  protected  from  excessive 
temperature  by  suitable  location,  a  temperature 
shield  or  by  other  means.  The  influence  of  the  tem- 
perature protection  should  be  considered  when  es- 
tablishing the  coincident  temperature  of  the  bursting 
disc. 

1.4.7  The  manufacturer's  advice  shall  be  sought 
when  selecting  a  bursting  disc  for  a  particular  ap- 
■plication. 

1.4.8  When  reverse  domed  bursting  discs  are  re- 
quired for  liquid  relief  the  manufacturer  shall  be 
consulted. 


1.5     Application 

1.5.1  Subject  to  the  requirements  of  appropriate 
regulations  or  standards,  bursting  discs  may  be 
used  either  as  the  sole  safety  device  or  in  conjunc- 
tion with  safety  valves. 

1.5.2  The  use  of  a  bursting  disc  as  a  pressure- 
relieving  device  may  be  preferred  in  the  following 
cases:  " 

a)  where  pressure  rise  may  be  so  rapid  that  the  in- 
ertia of  a  safety  valve  would  be  a  disadvantage; 

b)  where  even  minute  leakage  of  the  fluid  cannot 
be  tolerated  under  normal  conditions; 

c)  where  service  conditions  may  invofve  deposition 
which  could  render  a  safety  valve  inoperative; 

d)  where  cold  service  conditions  could  prevent  a 
safety  valve  from  operating. 


IS  12370: 1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


1.5.3  Where  a  bursting  disc  alone  is  used  as  the 
relieving  device,  its  maximum  bursting  pressure  at 
the  coincident  temperature  shall  comply  with  the 
appropriate  regulations  or  standards  covering  the 
system  to  be  protected. 

1.5.4  The  selection  of  bursting  discs  for  use  on 
vessels  which  may  be  involved  with  extremely  rapid 
and  uncontrolled  changes  in  pressure  requires  spe- 
cial consideration  not  covered  by  this  International 
StaVidard. 


1.5.5  Bursting  disc  devices  may  be  used  in  com- 
bination with  safety  valves  as  permitted  by  the  ap- 
propriate regulations  or  standards,  and  as  speciTied 
below.  The  application  of  the  bursting  discs  shall  not 
adversely  affect  the  operation  of  the  safety  valve  nor 
result  in  excess  pressure  to  the  system. 

1.5.5.1  Bursting  disc  devices  in  combination  with 
safety  valve{s)  may  be  used  in  the  following  cases: 

a)  in  series,  to  protect  the  safety  valve  against  cor- 
rosion, fouling  or  service  conditions  which  may 
affect  the  safety  valve  performance; 

b)  in  series,  to  prevent  leakage; 

c)  In  series,  to  prevent  total  loss  of  contents  from 
the  pressure  system  following  venting  of  the 
bursting  disc; 

d)  in  parallel,  as  an  additional  safeguard. 

1.5.5.2  A  bursting  disc  device  may  be  installed  be- 
fore the  Inlet  of  a  safety  valve  if  the  following  re- 
quirements are  met. 

a)  ThO'  maximum  bursting  pressure  at  the  coinci- 
dent temperature  shall  comply  with  the  appro- 
priate regulations  or  standards  for  the  system 
being  protected. 

b)  If  the  discharge  capacity  and  the  operating 
characteristics  of  the  particular  combination  of 
safety  valve  and  bursting  disc  device  have  been 
established  by  test  in  accordance  with  appropri- 
ate regulations  or  standards  the  test  results  shall 
be  used. 

c)  Where  a  combination  has  not  been  tested 

1)  the  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area  shall 
be  such  as  to  satisfy  the  safety  valve  inlet 
piping  pressure  drop  requirements  stated  in 
the  appropriate  regulations  or  standards, 

2)  the  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area  shall 
be  not  less  than  80  %  of  the  nominal  area  of 
the  safety  valve  inlet,  and 


3)  the  flow  capacity  of  the  combination  shall  be 
assumed  to  be  no  greater  than  80  %  of  the 
rated  relieving  capacity  of  the  safety  valve 
alone. 

d)  The  space  between  the  bursting  disc  and  safety 
valve  shall  be  provided  with  a  means  for  moni- 
toring any  pressure  build-up.  This  cavity  may 
also  be  vented  by  means  of  an  excess-flow  valve, 

NOTE  2  Bursting  discs,  since  they  are  pressure  dif- 
ferential devices,  require  a  higher  system  pressure  to 
burst  if  pressure  builds  up  in  the  space  between  the 
bursting  disc  and  safety  valve,  which  will  occur  should 
leakage  develop  tn  the  bursting  disc  due  to  corrosion 
or  other  causes. 

e)  tn  situations  where  fragmentation  or  release  of 
bursting  disc  material  may  occur,  the  installation 
shall  be  designed  so  that  parts  or  particles  of  the 
bursting  disc  cannot  render  the  safety  valve  in- 
operative nor  reduce  the  flow  area  of  the  safety 
valve. 


1.5.5.3  A  bursting  disc  device  may  be  installed  af- 
ter the  outlet  of  a  safety  valve  if  the  following  re- 
quirements are  met. 

a)  The  safety  valve  is  so  designed  that  its  operating 
characteristics  shall  not  be  adversely  affected  by 
the  bursting  disc  installed. 

b)  The  system  shall  be  designed  so  that  the  safety 
vaive  opens  at  its  set  pressure.  The  space  be- 
tween the  safely  valve  disc  and  the  bursting  disc 
shall  be  vented  or  drained  to  prevent  pressure 
build-up. 

c)  The  maximum  bursting  pressure  of  the  bursting 
disc  at  the  coincident  temperature  plus  any 
pressure  in  the  discharge  piping  shall  not  exceed 

1)  the  pressure  permitted  by  the  safety  valve 
manufacturer, 

2)  the  design  pressure  of  any  pipe  or  Titting  be- 
tween the  safety  valve  and  the  bursting  disc, 
and 

3)  the  pressure  permitted  by  the  appropriate 
regulations  or  standards. 

d)  In  installations  where  fragmentation  or  release 
of  bursting  disc  material  may  occur,  the  system 
shall  be  designed  so  that  the  performance  of  the 
safety  valve  is  not  impaired  and  adequate  vent- 
ing is  provided. 

e)  On  bursting,  the  bursting  disc  device  discharge 
area  shall  not  affect  the  discharge  capacity  and 
the  operating  characteristics  of  the  safety  valve. 


IS  12370: 1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


f)  The  contents  of  the  protected  system  shall  be 
clean  fluids,  free  from  gumming  or  fouling  mat- 
ter, so  that  accumulation  in  the  space  between 
the  safety  valve  inlet  and  the  bursting  disc  (or  in 
any  other  outlet  that  may  be  provided)  does  not 
obstruct  the  outlet. 

NOTE  3  A  bursting  disc  assembly  on  the  discharge 
side  of  a  safety  valve  should  not  be  replaced  while 
there  is  any  possibility  of  the  safety  valve  opening. 

1.5.5.4  A  bursting  disc  device  may  be  installed  both 
before  and  after  a  safety  valve  provided  that  the  re- 
quirements of  1.5.5.2  and  1.5.5.3  are  taken  into  con- 
sideration. 

1.5.5.5  A  bursting  disc  device  fitted  in  parallel  with 
a  safety  valve  as  an  additional  safeguard,  such  as 
to  protect  the  system  against  the  consequence  of  a 
rapid  rise  in  pressure,  shall  be  specified  to  burst  at 
a  pressure  not  exceeding  that  specified  in  the  ap- 
propriate regulations  or  standards. 

1.5.5.6  A  bursting  disc  device  may  be  fitted  in  se- 
ries with  a  second  bursting  disc  device.  In  such 
cases  the  system  shall  be  designed  in  accordance 
with  the  following  requirements. 

a)  The  space  between  the  bursting  discs  shall  be 
large  enough  to  ensure  the  correct  functioning 
of  the  bursting  discs. 

b)  The  space  between  the  bursting  discs  shall  be 
provided  with  a  means  of  monitoring  any  press- 
ure build-up.  This  space  may  also  be  vented  by 
means  of  an  excess-flow  valve. 

NOTE  4  Bursting  discs,  since  they  are  pressure  dif- 
ferential devices,  require  a  higher  system  pressure  to 
burst  if  pressure  builds  up  in  the  space  between  the 
bursting  discs,  which  will  ocdur  should  leakage  de- 
velop in  the  bursting  disc  due  to  corrosion  or  other 
causes. 


1.6     Installation 

1.6.1  A  bursting  disc  device  shall  be  placed  as 
close  as  practicable  to  the  space  it  is  intended  to 
protect,  taking  into  account  pressure  pulses,  tem- 
perature conditions,  etc.  The  discharge  system  shall 
be  of  ample  size  and  as  straight  and  as  short  as 
practicable,  terminating  in  such  a  way  as  to  avoid 
dangerous  or  damaging  conditions  arising  on  vent- 
ing. 

1.6.2  Bursting  disc  devices  shall  be  mounted  so 
that  they  are  accessible  for  replacement  and  pro- 
tected from  accidental  damage.  Consideration  shall 
be  given  to  the  effects  of  weather,  including  freezing 
of  the  discharge  pipe  and  possible  corrosion  due  to 
the  atmosphere. 


1.6.3  Adequate  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  pre- 
vent deposition  on  the  pressure  side  of  the  bursting 
disc,  and  in  the  part  leading  to  it,  of  sublimates  or 
other  solids  that  could  affect  the  safe  operation  of 
the  bursting  disc. 

Casual  liquid  or  foreign  matter  sball,  for  similar 
reasons,  be  prevented  from  accumulating  on  the 
vent  side  of  the  bursting  disc  and  within  the  dis- 
charge pipe. 

The  application  of  an  additional  protective  film  or 
coating  to  an  installed  bursting  disc  Is  not  allowed, 
except  when  approved  by  the  manufacturer,  since 
this  may  considerably  affect  the  bursting  pressure 
of  the  bursting  disc. 

1.6.4  The  purchaser  shall  ensure  that  provision  is 
made  to  absorb  the  effect  of  reaction  forces  on  the 
vessel  and  associated  pipework  which  will  arise 
when  the  bursting  disc  bursts  or  vents, 

1.6.5  If  the  bursting  of  a  bursting  disc  can  dis- 
charge a  flammable  fluid,  the  danger  of  ignition  in 
the  discharge  pipe  shall  be  considered  and  appro- 
priate measures  taken  to  minimize  the  hazard. 

1.6.6  Bursting  discs  shall  be  examined  for  defects 
immediately  before  installation  and  care  shall  be 
taken  during  their  assembly,  and  particularly  during 
that  of  thin  bursting  discs. 

1.6.7  In  situations  where  fragmentation  or  release 
of  bursting  disc  material  may  occur,  any  piping  be- 
yond the  bursting  disc  shall  be  so  designed  that  it 
shall  not  be  obstructed  by  fragments  from  the 
bursting  disc  device. 

1.6.8  The  manufacturer's  installation  instructions, 
and  in  particular  the  directional  arrow,  bolting 
torque  instructions  and  the  reference  to  the  use  of 
gaskets,  shall  be  strictly  followed. 

NOTE  5  If  the  components  are  assembled  incorrectly 
or  the  bursting  disc  device  is  installed  incorrectly,  the 
bursting  disc  may  burst  or  vent  at  a  system  pressure 
higher  or  lower  than  that  expected 


U     Discharge  capacity 

1.7.1  Guidance  for  determining  the  mass  flow  rate, 
for  single-phase  flow,  through  a  discharge  system 
containing  a  bursting  disc  device  is  given  In 
annex  A. 

The  manufacturer  shall,  when  requested  by  the  pur- 
chaser, provide  information  relating  to  the  bursting 
disc  device. 

Such  information  may  include 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718  :  1991 


a)  the  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area  (see 
1.3.31),  and 

b)  the  pressure  loss  (resistance  coefficient). 

Unless  specified  otherwise  in  appropriate  regu- 
lations or  standards,  the  information  may  be  estab- 
lished by 

a)  tests  on  actual  bursting  disc  devices,  or 

b)  using  established  scientific  data. 

Alternatively,  by  agreement  between  the  purchaser 
and  the  manufacturer,  conservative  values  may  be 
used. 

1.7.2  The  discharge  area  of  a  bursting  disc  device, 
used  as  the  primary  relief  device,  shall  be  sufficient 
to  discharge  the  maximum  quantity  of  fluid  that  can 
be  generated  or  supplied  to  a  pressure  system 
whilst  preventing  the  pressure  from  exceeding  the 
pressures  permitted  by  appropriate  regulations  or 
standards  covering  the  system  to  be  protected. 

1.8     Information  to  be  supplied  by  the 
purcliaser 

1.8.1  General 

Where  possible,  the  minimum  information  specified 
in  1.8.2  to  1.8.5  shall  be  supplied  by  the  purchaser 
with  every  enquiry,  to  assist  the  manufacturer  in 
specifying  a  suitable  bursting  disc  device  for  a  par- 
ticular application. 

1.8.2  Application  details 

The  following  shall  be  specified: 

a)  description  of  the  vessel,  equipment  or  system 
to  be  protected,  and  vessel  design  cod6  where 
appropriate; 

b)  intended  application  of  the  bursting  disc  device; 
state  whether  the  device  is  required  to  operate 
for  example  as  the  primary  relief  device,  sec- 
ondary relief  device,  for  safety  valve  protection 
or  in  some  other  capacity; 

c)  "performance  specification  and  relative  position 
of  an^  ^J  'v/  valves  or  other  safety  devices  fitted 
to  the  equipnf^ent  or  system; 

d)  the  fiuid  which  may  come  in  contact  with  any  part 
of  the  bursting  disc  device;  physical  properties 
of  the  fiuid,  e.g.  gas,  vapour,  liquid  or  solid,  wet 
or  dry,  at  all  stages  of  the  process  (including 
venting);  chemical  properties  of  the  fluid  which 
may  affect  bursting  disc  performance; 


e)  all  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure  (in- 
cluding back  pressure)  to  which  the  bursting  disc 
device  may  be  subjected;  rate  and  frequency  of 
pressure  changes,  if  applicable; 

0  expected  maximum  pressure  and  temperature 
during  relieving  conditions. 


1.8.3     Bursting  disc  device  operating  details 

The  following  shall  be  specified: 

a)  maximum  specified  bursting  pressure  and  co- 
incident temperature; 

b)  minimum  specified  bursting  pressure  and  co- 
incident temperature; 

c)  rate  of  change  in  the  pressure  with  respect  to  the 
bursting  pressure,  where  appropriate; 

d)  bursting  disc  device  theoretical  discharge  ca- 
pacity, required  to  prevent  accumulated  pressure 
exceeding  allowed  maximum; 

e)  minimum  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area 
required; 

f)  materials  which  the  purchaser,  from  a  l<nowl- 
edge  of  the  process,  regards  as  suitable  for 
consideration  in  the  selection  of  the  bursting  disc 
device  material(s); 

g)  materials  which  may  not  be  used  for  safety,  cor- 
rosion or  other  reasons. 


1.8.4     Installation  details 

The  following  shall  be  specified; 

a)  physical  location  of  the  bursting  disc  device  in 
the  system,  preferably  in  the  form  of  a  sketch; 

b)  method  of  fitting  the  bursting  disc  device  in  the 
system  (e.g.  between  fianges,  direct  fitting  to  one 
fiange,  direct  weld  to  outlet); 

c)  diameter  of  inlet  pipe  to  bursting  disc  device  and 
diameter  of  discharge  pipe  from  bursting  disc 
device,  including  fiange  size,  rating,  type  and 
specification  or  other  fixing  details  (e.g.  thread 
specification  and  size); 

d)  type  and  preferred  material  ,of  bursting  disc 
holder  (see  2.2); 

e)  form  and  finish  of  external  mating  surfaces  if  dif- 
ferent than  the  manufacturer's  standard. 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718  :  1991 


1.8.5     Special  details 

The  following  shall  be  specified: 

a)  inspection  and  certification  requirements  ad- 
ditional to  those  defined  in  this  International 
Standard; 

b)  special  features  required  In  the  bursting  disc 
device  (e.g.  excess-flow  valve,  pressure- 
monitoring  device,  jacking  bolts,  lifting  rings); 

c)  special  features  of  application  not  stated  else- 
where. 

1.9     Quality  assurance 

The  manufacturer  shall  establish,  document  and 
maintain  an  effective  and  economical  quality  assur- 
ance system  to  ensure  and   demonstrate  that  the 


bursting  discs  and  bursting  disc  devices  conform  to 
the  specified  requirements  (see  ISO  9001). 

The  manufacturer  shall  make  available  to  the  in- 
spection authority  at  the  manufacturer's  works  a 
current  copy  of  the  written  description  of  the  quality 
system. 

The  manufacturer's  quality  system  shall  provide  for 
the  inspection  authority  at  the  manufacturer's  works 
to  have  reasonable  access  to  all  documents 
necessary  for  the  inspection  authority  to  perform  its 
duties.  Such  access  to  documentation  shall  be  sub- 
ject to  any  confidentiality  requirements  and  proce- 
dures laid  down  in  the  manufacturer's  quality 
system  The  manufacturer  may  provide  such  access 
either  to  his  own  files  of  such  documents  or  by  pro- 
viding copies  to  the  inspection  authority. 

NOTE  6       Annex  C  provides  a  typical  outline  of  subjects 

for  Inclusion  in  the  quality  system. 


IS  12370:  1993 
180  6718:1991 


Section  2:     Components  of  bursting  disc  devices 


2.1     Bursting  discs 


2.1.1     Materials 

All  materials  Including  linings,  coatings  and  platings 
used  for  the  manufacture  of  bursting  discs  shall 
have  uniform  properties  suitable  for  the  working 
environment  in  which  the  bursting  discs  are  to  be 
used.  The  material  in  the  final  form  shall  be  free 
from  defects  whi-^h  may  lead  to  premature  failure. 


1}     The  bursting  disc  may  be  multilayered. 

Figure  2  —  Conventional  simple  domed  bursting 
disc  with  flat  seat 


2.1.2     Conventional  domed  bursting  discs 

Conventional  domed  bursting  discs  are  domed  In 
the  direction  of  the  subsequent  applied  bursting 
pressure.  These  bursting  discs  shall  be  domed  by  a 
means  capable  of  producing  a  permanent  set  such 
that  no  further  plastic  flow  will  occur  initially  when 
the  bursting  disc  is,  subjected  to  its  intended  oper- 
ating conditions.  Conventional  domed  bursting  discs 
burst  or  vent  in  tension  and  comprise  the  following 
types: 

a)  conventional  simple  domed  bursting  discs  (see 
figures  t  and  2); 

b)  conventional    slotted    lined    bursting    discs   (see 
figures); 

c)  other  types  which  meet  the  requirements  of  this 
International  Standard. 


1)     The  bursting  disc  may  be  multilayered. 

Figure  1  —  Conventional  simple  domed  bursting 
disc  with  angle  seat 


1}     The  bursting  disc  may  be  multilayered. 

Figure  3  ~  Conventional  slotted  lined  bursting  disc 


2.1.3     Reverse  domed  bursting  discs 

Reverse  domed  bursting  discs  are  domed  against 
the  direction  of  the  bursting  pressure  (see  figure  4) 
and  are  designed  to  fail  by  buckling  under  pressure 
They  include  the  following  types: 

a)  reverse  domed  bursting  discs  with  knife  blades, 
which  open  by  being  cut  during  reversal  of  the 
dome; 

b)  reverse  domed  bursting  discs  having  lines  of 
weakness  (without  knife  blades),  which  open 
along  these  lines  when  the  dome  reverses  at  the 
bursting  pressure; 

c)  reverse  domed  bursting  discs  having  a  slip  or 
tear-away  design  (without  knife  blades),  which 
vent  by  being  expelled  downstream  from  the 
holder;  a  catching  device  may  be  provided; 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


d)  other  types  which  meet  the  requirements  of  this 
Internationa!  Standard. 


1)     The  bursting  disc  may  be  multilayered. 

Figure  4  —  Reverse  domed  bursting  disc 

2.1.4     Graphite  bursting  discs 

2.1.4.1  General 

Graphite  bursting  discs  are  designed  to  fail  as  a  re- 
sult of  bending  or  shearing. 

Graphite  bursting  discs  are  normally  flat  and  are 
designed  such  that  upon  bursting  a  full  bore  opening 
is  obtained.  They  comprise  various  types  as  speci- 
fied in  2.1.4.2  to  2.1.4.4. 

2.1.4.2  Replaceable  element  bursting  disc 

Holders  are  required  tor  use  with  replaceable  el- 
ement bursting  discs.  Figures  shows  a  typical  re- 
placeable element  bursting  disc. 

YZ^^7ZW7////////>//////////////////A 


f 


Figure  5  —  Replaceable  element  bursting  disc 


2.1,4.3     Monobloc  bursting  disc 

Monobloc  bursting  discs  are  installed  directly  be- 
tween flanges.  Three  typical  monobloc  designs  are 
illustrated  in  figures  G  to  8. 


Figure  6  —  Monobloc  bursting  disc  recessed  on  the 
outlet  side 


Figure  7  —  Monobloc  bursting  disc  recessed  on  the 
Inlet  side 


Figure  8  —  Monobloc  bursting  disc  recessed  on 
both  sides 


Figures  shows  a  design  in  which  the  bursting 
pressure  shall  only  be  applied  to  the  flat  face  of  the 
monobloc  bursting  disc. 

Figure  7  shows  a  similar  bursting  disc  but  the  design 
is  such  that  the  bursting  pressure  shall  only  be  ap- 
plied into  the  recess.  For  this  type  of  bursting  disc, 
the  bore  of  the  vent-side  mounting  local  to  the 
bursting  disc  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  manu- 
facturer's instructions.  Normally  this  bore  wMI  be 
greater  than  the  inside  diameter  of  the  recess. 

Figures  is  typical  of  designs  where  the  bursting  disc 
has  a  recess  ow  both  sides  and  in  which  the  bursting 


ISl237b^:1993 
ISO  6718:  i991 


pressure  shall  only  be  applied  into  the  smaller  di- 
ameter recess. 

2.1.4.4    Other  types 

Other  types  of  graphite  bursting  discs  are  allowed 
provided  that  they  meet  the  requirements  of  this 
International  Standard. 


2.1.5     Other  designs 

Other  designs,  Including  flat  bursting  discs  (see  fig- 
ure 9),  are  allowed  provided  that  they  meet  the  re- 
quirements of  this  International  Standard. 


2,2.2.3  The  bursting  disc  holder  as  supplied  by  the 
manufacturer  shall  not  be  modified  in  any  way  ex- 
cept with  the  approval  of  the  manufacturer. 


2.2.2.4  Where  reasonably  practicable,  the  thick- 
ness of  that  part  of  the  bursting  disc  holder  into 
which  the  dome  of  the  bursting  disc  protrudes  ^hall 
be  greater  than  the  height  of  the  dome  of  the  burst- 
ing disc  so  as  to  prevent  damage  to  it  during  instal- 
lation. If  this  is  not  reasonably  practicable,  other 
means  may  be  used  to  protect  the  bursting  disc 
during  installation. 


2.2.3     Types 


VAW^^.V////^//////////////////^^^^^^^^^ 


t 


D- 


T 


2.2.3.1     Capsule/insert  bursting  disc  holder 

Tigure  10) 


see 


1)     The  bursting  disc  may  be  multilayered. 

Figure  9  —  Flat  bursting  disc 

2.2     Bursting  disc  holders 

2.2.1  Materiat(s) 

The  materia!{s)  of  the  bursting  disc  holder  shall  be 
as  agreed  betweeiji  the  manufacturer  and  purchaser. 
The  use  of  corrjosion-resistant  material(s)  for  the 
vent  side  is  recommended  because  corrosion  of  Ihis 
part  of  the  bursting  disc  holder  may  cause  damage 
to  the  bursting  disc,  leading  to  premature  failure 
when  pressure  is  applied. 

2.2.2  Design 

2.2.2.1  The  bursting  disc  holder  has  a  substantial 
influence  on  the  bursting  pressure  and  the  correct 
operation  of  the  bursting  disc;  it  shall  adequately 
secure  and  support  the  bursting  disc  in  operation 
Each  bursting  disc  shall  be  used  only  with  its  cor- 
rectly designed  and  manufactured  bursting  disc 
holder 

A  bursting  disc  holder  when  installed  shall  apply,  or 
transmit,  a  clamping  load  sufficient  to  ensure  the 
correct  operation  of  the  bursting  disc. 

2.2.2.2  The  design  of  a  bursting  aisc  holder  shall 
he  such  that,  for  practical  purposes,  the  bursting 
disc  assembly  is  effectively  sealed  when  correctly 
ifisl^^lled. 


A  capsule/insert  bursting  disc  holder  is  designed  to 
be  installed  centrally  within  the  flange  bolts.  Accu- 
rate centralization  of  the  bursting  disc  device  within 
the  supporting  flanges  is  essential  for  correct  burst- 
ing disc  functioning  and  effective  fiange  gasket 
sealing.  Centralization  may  be  achieved  by  one  of 
the  following  means,  as  agreed  by  the  manufacturer 
and  purchaser; 

a)  the  outside  diameter  is  such  that  the  bursting 
disc  holder  or  device  is  accurately  located  within 
the  bolls  of  the  supporting  flanges; 

b)  by  use  of  locating  collars; 

c)  by  manual  adjustment  during  fitting; 

d)  by  other  suitable  means. 


Figure  10  —  Capsule/insert  bursting  disc  holder 


10 


IS  12370:  1993 
180  6718:1991 


2.2,3.2     Full  diameter  bursting  disc  holder  (see 
figares  11  and  12) 

A  full  diameter  bursting  disc  holder  comprises  a  pair 
of  flanges  or  other  type  of  housing  which  normally 
has  the  same  outside  diameter  as  any  companion 
flanges.  The  connections  to  the  mating  pipework 
may  be  threaded,  welded  or  flat,  depending  on  the 
purchaser's  requirements. 


Figure  11  —  Full  diameter  bursting  disc  holder  (in 
line) 


'^5' 


t 


Figure  12  —  Full  diameter  bursting  disc  holder  (end 
of  line) 


2.2.3.3    Union  bursting  disc  holder  (see  figure  13) 

A  union  bursting  disc  holder  consists  of  an  inlet  and 
an  outlet  member  connected  by  a   union  nut.  The 


connection  for  the  Inlet  may  be  threaded  or  welded. 
The  connection  for  the  outlet  may  be  threaded, 
welded,  free-vented  or  muffled. 


Figure  13  —  Union  bursting  disc  holder 


2.2.3.4     Plug/screw  bursting  disc  holder  (see 
figure  14) 

A  plug/screw  bursting  disc  holder  consists  of  two  or 
more  parts  screwed  together  and  locating  a  bursting 
disc.  The  inlet  connection  may  be  welded  or 
threaded.  The  outlet  connection  may  be  welded, 
threaded,  free-vented  or  muffled 

This  type  of  bursting  disc  holder  is  generally  suited 
to  small  sizes  of  bursting  discs  and  a  wide  range  of 
pressures,  If  installed  in  pipework,  an  additional 
connection  may  be  required  to  facilitate  installation 
and  removal  of  the  bursting  disc. 


f 


Figure  14  ~  Plug/screw  bursting  disc  holder 


n 


IS  12370:  1993 
180  6718:1991 


2.2.3.5     Other  types  of  bursting  disc  holders 

Other  types  of  bursting  disc  holders  are  allowed 
provided  that  they  meet  the  requirements  of  this 
International  Standard. 

2.3     Back  pressure  supports 

2.3.1  General 

Where  a  bursting  disc  may  be  subjected  in  service 
to  a  back  pressure  differential,  it  shall  be  fitted  with 
a  back  pressure  support  unless  the  bursting  disc  it- 
self is  strong  enough  to  support  the  pressure  differ- 
ential. The  inclusion  of  a  back  pressure  support  may 
reduce  the  discharge  capacity  and  shall  be  taken 
into  account  when  selecting  the  bursting  disc  size. 

The  bursting  disc  and  back  pressure  support  shall 
be  supplied  by  the  manufacturer,  preferably  as  an 
assembly,  to  ensure  that 

a)  there  is  a  correct  fit  between  the  back  pressure 
support  and  bursting  disc  to  prevent  damage  to 
the  bursting  disc,  and 

b)  the  back  pressure  support  is  fitted  to  the  correct 
side  of  the  bursting  disc  as  designed  by  the 
manufacturer. 

The  back  pressure  support  shall  be  such  that  the 
bursting  disc  assembly  is  not  deformed  when  sub- 
jected to  the  back  pressure  specified. 

The  edges  of  the  siits  and/or  perforations  shall  be 
free  from  all  burrs  or  similar  imperfections  that 
might  cause  a  premature  failure. 

2.3.2  Opening  back  pressure  supports 

The  opening  type  of  back  pressure  support  shall  fit 
closely  against  the  bursting  disc  so  as  to  give  sup- 
port to  part  of  its  area.  The  support  shall  be  slit  or 


perforated  to  transmit  the  pressure  in  the  system  to 
the  bursting  disc. 

If  there  is  not  adequate  discharge  capacity  through 
the  slits  and/or  perforations,  the  back  pressure 
support  shall  open  when  subjected  to  a  pressure  not 
exceeding  the  minimum  bursting  pressure  at  the 
coincident  temperature  of  the  associated  bursting 
disc.  The  support  shall  open  to  provide  a  flow  area 
sufficient  to  permit  the  discharge  of  the  contents  of 
the  system  within  the  requirements  of  1,7.2  when  the 
bursting  disc  has  burst. 

2.3.3     Non-opening  back  pressure  supports 

The  non-opening  type  of  back  pressure  support  snail 
fit  closely  against  the  bursting  disc  to  give  support 
to  part  of  its  area.  The  support  shall  be  perforated 
with  one  or  more  holes  to  provide  a  flow  area  suf- 
ficient to  permit  the  discharge  of  the  contents  of  the 
system  within  the  requirements  of  1.7.2. 

2.4  Temperature  shields 

A  temperature  shield  shall  be  used  to  protect  a 
bursting  disc  fitted  with  a  back  pressure  support 
only  when  specifically  recommended  by  the  bursting 
disc  manufacturer. 

2.5  Stiffening  rings 

Fragile  bursting  discs  may  be  fitted  with  stiffening 
rings  for  easier  handling. 

2.6  Gaskets 

Gaskets  used  on  either  side  or  both  sides  of  a 
bursting  disc  shall  be  compatible  with  the  chemical, 
thermal  and  mechanical  demands  of  the  application. 
The  use,  type,  material,  thickness  and  diameter  of 
the  gasket  shall  comply  with  the  bursting  disc 
manufacturer's  recommendation. 


12 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718  :  1991 


Section  3:     Means  of  protection  from  corrosion 


3.1  General 

Bursting  disc  devices  are  frequently  required  to 
work  in  corrosive  environments.  Materials  likely  to 
be  affected  by  corrosion  may  be  protected  by  coat- 
ing, plating,  lining  or  other  suitable  means  which 
shall  be  supplied  only  by  the  manufacturer. 

3.2  Coatings 

Coatings  shall  be  applied  by  a  suitable  method  to 
give  an  even  and  homogeneous  coating  to  the  sur- 
faces to  be  protected. 


3.3     Plating 

Plating  shall  be  applied  by  a  suitable  method  to  give 
an  even  and  homogeneous  plating  to  the  surface  to 
be  protected. 


3.4     Bursting  disc  linings 

The  linings,  where  possible,  should  be  attached  to 
the  bursting  disc  so  as  to  preserve  them  as  a  set  or 
integral  unit. 


13 


1812370:1993 
ISO  6718 :  1991 


Section  4:     Inspection  and  testing 


4.1     Inspection 

After  manufacture,  all  components  of  a  bursting  disc 
device  shall  be  inspected  visually.  Any  that  exhibit 
defects  which  may  affect  the  performance  of  the 
bursting  disc  device  shall  be  discarded  or  such  de- 
fects shall  be  rectified. 

Bursting  discs  made  from  foil  less  than  0,2  mm  thick 
shall  be  examined,  for  example  over  a  suitable  light 
box  using  an  illuminance  not  less  than  5000  !x,  and 
shall  be  discarded  if  they  appear  porous. 

The  continuity  of  coatings,  plating  and  linings  shall 
be  checked  by  suitable  means 

NOTE  7  For  example,  for  non-conductive  material  a 
suitable  method  is  eleclro-static  testing. 

Those  discs  exhibiting  defects  that  affect  the  integ- 
rity of  the  bursting  disc  device  shall  be  discarded  or 
such  defects  shall  be  rectified. 


4.2     Testing 

4.2.1     Burst  testing  of  sample  bursting  discs 

A  number  of  completed  bursting  discs  shall  be 
seJected  at  random  from  each  batch  and  shall  be 
subjected  to  testing  as  specified  in  4.2.1  1  or  4  2  12. 

4.2.1.1  Bursting  discs  for  use  at  room  temperature 
shall  be  tested  at  room  temperature.  The  number 
tested  shall  be  in  accordance  with  table  1. 

4.2.1.2  Bursting  discs  for  use  at  a  temperature 
other  than  room  temperature  shall  be  lesled  as 
agreed  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  pur- 
chaser, as  specified  in  the  appropriate  regulations 
or  standards,  or  by  one  of  the  procedures  specified 
in  4.2.1.2.1  to  4.2.1.2.3. 

4.2.1.2.1  At  least  two  sample  bursting  discs  from 
each  batch  of  bursting  discs,  manufactured  from  the 
same  material  and  of  the  same  size  as  those  to  be 
used,  shall  be  tested  at  the  specified  coincident 
temperature  to  verify  that  the  bursting  pressure  falls 
within  the  specified  performance  tolerance  or  range 
of  minimum  and  maximum  bursting  pressure  at  the 
coincident  temperature. 

In  addition,  the  number  of  bursting  discs  specified  in 
table  1.  minus  the  number  of  bursting  discs  tested 
at  coincident  temperature,  shall  be  tested  at  room 
temperature,  with  a  minimum  of  one  bursting  disc 
being  tested  at  room  temperature. 


4.2.1.2.2  For  conventional  simple  domed  bursting 
discs  and  flat  and  monobloc  graphite  bursting  discs, 
pressure/temperature  curves  may  be  used  for  the 
interpolation  of  the  bursting  pressure  at  coincident 
temperature.  Each  pressure/temperature  curve  is 
specific  to  each  of  those  types  of  bursting  discs 
manufactured  from  a  specific  lot  of  material. 

These  pressure/temperature  curves  shall  be  estab- 
lished  as  follows. 

A  sample  batch  of  at  least  12  bursting  discs  shall  be 
tested.  The  bursting  discs  shall  be  tested  at  each  of 
four  different  temperatures  across  the  applicable 
temperature  range,  with  a  minimum  of  three  burst- 
ing discs  at  each  temperature. 

The  results  of  these  tests  shall  be  used  to  establish 
a  curve  of  bursting  pressure  versus  temperature  for 
that  particular  batch  of  material. 

When  this  method  of  testing  is  used,  a  quantity  of 
bursting  discs  in  accordance  with  table  1,  from  each 
lot  of  bursting  discs,  shall  be  tested  at  room  tem- 
perature to  verify  that  the  bursting  pressure  falls 
within  the  specified  performance  tolerance  or  range 
of  minimum  and  maximum  bursting  pressure  at 
room  temperature. 

4.2.1.2.3  For  all  types  of  bursting  discs, 
pressure/temperature  curves  may  be  used  for  the 
interpolation  of  the  bursting  pressure  at  coincident 
temperature.  Each  pressure/temperature  curve  es- 
tablished by  this  method  is  specific  to  a  particular 
type  of  bursting  disc,  a  particular  size  and  a  par- 
ticular lot  of  material. 

These  pressure/temperature  curves  shall  be  estab- 
lished as  follows. 

A  sample  batch  of  at  least  12  bursting  discs  of  a 
particular  type,  manufactured  from  the  same  lot  of 
material  and  of  the  same  size  as  those  for  which  the 
pressure/temperature  curve  is  being  established, 
shall  be  tested.  The  bursting  discs  from  this  batch 
shall  be  tested  ai  four  different  temperatures  across 
the  applicable  temperature  range,  with  a  minimum 
of  three  bursting  discs  at  each  temperature. 

The  results  of  these  tests  shall  be  used  to  establish 
a  curve  of  bursting  pressure  versus  temperature  for 
that  particular  size,  lot  of  material  and  type  of 
bursting  disc. 

Where  the  lest  results  obtained  lor  at  least  three 
different  sizes  of  a  particular  type  of  bursting  disc, 
in  a  particular  lot  of  material,  establish  that  the 
pressure/temperature  curve  is  the  same  across  the 
tested  size  range,  then  one  curve  may  be  used  for 


14 


1812370:1993 
ISO  0718: 1901 


the  interpolation  of  the  bursting  pressure  at  the  co- 
incident temperature,  within  the  size  range  tested. 

When  this  method  is  used,  a  quantity  of  bursting 
discs  in  accordance  with  table  1,  from  each  batch  of 
bursting  discs  manufactured  from  the  same  lot  of 
material  and  of  the  same  size  and  type  for  which  the 
pressure/temperature  curves  have  been  estab- 
lished, shall  be  tested  at  room  temperature  to  verify 
that  the  bursting  pressure  falls  within  the  specified 
performance  itolerance  or  range  of  minimum  and 
maximum  bursting  pressure  at  room  temperature. 

4.2.2     General  requirements 

4.2.2.1  The  sample  bursting  discs  shall  be  burst  in 
a  holder  or  test  die  identical  in  orifice  size  and 
orifice  configuration  with  that  in  which  the  bursting 
disc  will  be  installed. 

4.2.2.2  In  the  case  of  reverse  domed  bursting  discs, 
the  holder  shall  be  connected  to  a  pressure  system 
suitable  to  achieve  bursting  disc  reversal. 

4.2.2.3  A  clamping  load  shall  be  applied  in  accord- 
ance with  the  manufacturer's  specification. 

4.2.2.4  The  testing  apparatus  shall  include  press- 
ure and  temperature  measuring  equipment. 

4.2.2.5  The  pressure  sensing  device  shall  be  lo- 
cated as  near  as  possible  to  the  bursting  disc  inlet 
and  connected  to  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  minimize 
pressure  drop 

4.2.2.6  With  one  of  the  bursting  discs  installed,  in- 
crease the  pressure  at  the  inlet  to  90  %  of  the  ex- 
pected minimum  bursting  pressure  in  a  time  not  less 
than  5  s.  Thereafter,  Increase  the  pressure  at  the 
device  inlet  steadily  and  continuously  until  the 
bursting  disc  bursts  or  vents.  Record  the  bursting 
pressure  and  any  other  pertinent  characteristics. 


Some  applications  may  require  testing  procedures 
which  deviate  from  the  above.  These  shall  be  as 
agreed  between  the  purchaser  and  the  manufac- 
turer or  as  specified  in  the  appropriate  regulations 
or  standards. 


4.2.2.7  When  testing  with  gas  it  is  particularly  Im- 
portant to  ensure  that  the  appropriate  safety  pre- 
cautions are  observed. 


4.2.2.8  When  required  by  the  appropriate  regu- 
lations or  standards  or  the  user,  an  Independent 
authority  shall  witness  the  test. 


Table  1  —  Number  of  bursting  discs  to  be  tested 

Total  number  of  bursting 
discs  in  batch 

Number  of  bursting  discs 
to  be  tested 

Less  than  10 

2 

10  to  15 

3 

16  to  30 

4 

31  to  100 

6 

101  to  250 

4  %  but  not  less  than  6 

251  to  1  000 

3  %  but  not  less  than  10 

NOTES 

1     Discarded    and    test   bursting   discs    are   not   con- 
sidered as  part  of  the  total  number  of  the  batch. 

2     For  batches   above   1  000  the   number  of  bursting 
discs  to  be  tested  shall  be  agreed  between  the  manu- 
facturer and  purchaser. 

3     Any   agreement   to  vary   the   number  of  bursting 
discs  to  be  tested  shall  be  based  upon  appropriate 
regulations  or  standards 

15 


1912370:1993 
ISO  6718  :  1991 


Section  5:     Marking,  identification  and  packaging 


5.1     Marking 

5.1.1     Bursting  discs 

5.1.1.1  Each  bursting  disc  shall  be  permanently 
marked  (where  practicable;  see  5.1.1.2  to  5.1.14) 
with  the  following  minimum  information: 

a)  manufacturer's  identity; 

b)  nominal  size  DN  or  nominal  pipe  size  NPS,  as 
appropriate; 

c)  material  identity; 

d)  the  maximum  and  minimum  specified  bursting 
pressures  and  coincident  temperature,  stating 
units, 

or 

the  specified  bursting  pressure  and  a  perform- 
ance tolerance  and  a  coincident  temper3ture, 
stating  units; 

NOTE  8  The  range  of  pressure  between  the  maxi- 
mum and  minimum  specified  bursting  pressures  will 
be  equivalent  to  the  performance  tolerance. 

e)  the  number  of  this  International  Standard; 

f)  vent  side; 

g)  for  monobloc  bursting  discs  only,  a  direction  of 
flow  arrow  on  the  outside  diameter; 

h)  where  appropriate,  torque  loading,  number  and 
size  of  bolts  required  to  clamp; 

i)     appropriate  bursting  disc  holder  identity. 

The  method  of  marking  shall  not  impair  perform- 
ance. Where  practicable,  the  bursting  disc  shall  be 
marked  such  that  the  information  is  visible  after  in- 
stallation. 

A  physical  coding  system  such  as  pins  and  slots 
applied  to  a  holder  and  bursting  disc  may  be  used 
in  addition  to  the  marking  on  the  bursting  disc.  The 
holder  for  such  a  combination  shall  be  permanently 
marked  with  all  information  plus  the  code  reference 
available 

5.1.1.2  If  bursting  discs  cannot  be  marked  with  the 
information  specified  in  5.1.1.1,  this  information  shall 
be  permanently  marked  on  a  ^ag  or  label  attached 
to  the  bursting  disc  such  that  {where  practicable)  it 
is  visible  after  installation 


5.1.1.3  Where  the  physical  size  of  the  bursting  disc 
is  so  small  that  it  can  only  bear  the  vent  side 
identiricatfon  mark,  a  suitable  individual  package 
bearing  the  other  markings  required  by  5.1,1.''  shall 
be  used  to  contain  the  bursting  disc  until  it  is 
mounted.  A  tag  bearing  the  same  markings  should 
be  included  in  the  package. 

5.1.1.4  Where  identification  marks  cannot  be  seen 
when  the  bursting  disc  assembly  is  installed  in  the 
system,. the  purchaser  shall  be  responsible  for  at- 
taching to  the  installation  a  suitable  tag  which  shall 
be  permanently  marked  with  the  same  information 
as  placed  on  the  bursting  disc  or  in  the  package. 

5.1.2  Bursting  disc  holder 

Each  bursting  disc  holder  shall  be  permanently 
marked  on  the  outside  diameter  with  the  following 
minimum  information: 

a)  manufacturer's  identity; 

b)  bursting  disc  holder  identity: 

c)  nominal  size  DN  or  nominal  pipe  size  NPS,  as 
appropriate; 

d)  material  identity: 

e)  direction  of  flow  arrow; 

f)  the  number  of  this  International  Standard. 

5.1.3  Ancillary  components 

Ancillary  components,  such  as  temperature  shields, 
which  may  be  supplied  separately  from  a  bursting 
disc  assembly,  when  appropriate,  shall  be  marked 
to  indicate  the  direction  of  flow 

5.2     Packaging 

Bursting  disc  devices  or  their  components  shall  be 
packed  to  prevent  any  damage  which  may  impair 
performance. 

Each  container  shall  be  permanently  marked  with 
the  following  minimum  information: 

a)  manufacturer's  identity; 

b)  nominal  size  DN  or  nominal  pipe  size  NPS,  as 
appropriate: 

c)  material  identity: 


16 


1812370:1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


d)  the   maximum  and   minimum  specified   bursting  f)     the  bursting  disc  holder  identity,  where  appro- 
pressures   and    coincident   temperature,   stating  priate. 

units, 

If  required   by  the   purchaser,   installation   and   as- 

or  sembly  instructions  shall  be  provided  by  the  manu- 

facture*-. 
the  specified   bursting  pressure  and  a  perform- 
ance  tolerance   and    a    coincident   temperature,  Where  components  of  the  bursting  disc  assembly, 
stating  units;  for  example  back  pressure  supports,  are  to  be  sup- 
plied separately  then  the  containers  shall  be  marked 

e)  the  number  of  this  Internationa!  Standard;  with  the  appropriate  cross-reference. 


17 


1812370:1993 
180  6718:1991 


Section  6:     Certification 


6.1     Test  certificates 

If  specified  by  the  purchaser,  the  manufacturer  shall 
provide  for  each  batch,  or  part  of  batch,  a  test  cer- 
tificate stating  that  the  bursting  discs  have  been 
manufactured  and  tested  in  accordance  with  the  re- 
quirements of  this  International  Standard,  and  giving 
the  following  minimum  information: 

a)  nominal  size  DN  or  nominal  pipe  size  NPS,  as 
appropriate; 

b)  the  maximum  and  minimum  speciHed  bursting 
pressures  and  coincident  temperature  as  speci- 
fied by  the  purchaser  for  the  application, 

or 

the  specified  bursting  pressure  and  a  perform- 
ance tolerance  and  a  coincident  temperature; 

c)  information  as  in  b)  correlated  to  the  conditions 
of  the  test; 

d)  any  further  information  regarding  bursting 
pressure/temperature,  if  requested  by  the  pur- 
chaser; 

e)  the  actual  bursting  pressures  and  temperatures 
recorded  when  the  bursting  discs  under  test 
were  burst; 


0  the  material{s)  of  the  bursting  disc  and  com- 
ponents supplied; 

g)   name  of  the  manufacturer; 

h)    manufacturer's  identification  mark; 

i)  inspection  authority  identification  (where  appro- 
priate); 

j)     batch  identification; 

k)   the  number  of  this  International  Standard; 

I)  endorsement  that  the  tests  reported  have  been 
carried  out; 

m)  where  testing  is  required  by  an  appropriate 
regulation  or  standard,  or  as  agreed  between  the 
manufacturer  and  the  purchaser,  the  bursting 
disc  device  discharge  area  established  by  the 
test,  stating  units. 

6.2     Additional  information 

If  specified  by  the  purchaser,  where  the  bursting 
disc  device  discharge  area  has  been  determined 
other  than  by  testing  on  the  batch  or  part  batch  {see 
1.7.1),  the  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area 
should  be  provided  to  the  purchaser,  stating  the 
units  and  the  method  by  which  it  was  established. 


It 


1812370:1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


Annex  A 

(informative) 

Discharge  capacity 


A.I     General 


A.2     Method  1 


A.1.1  This  annex  gives  some  guidance  on  the  de- 
termination of  the  mass  flow  rate  of  a  discharge 
system  that  contains  a  bursting  disc  device.  It  re- 
lates only  to  single-phase  flow. 

NOTE  9  Rules  for  sizing  where  two-phase  vapour-liquid 
flow  occurs,  either  because  it  is  two  phase  at  the  inlet  or 
because  some  or  all  of  the  liquid  flashes  to  vapour  on 
venting,  are  being  considered  for  Inclusion  in  a  future  re- 
vision of  this  International  Standard. 

A,1.2     Two  methods  are  given  as  follows. 

a)  The  first  method  gives  a  simplified  approach, 
neglecting  pressure  drops  in  the  inlet  pipe  and 
in  the  discharge  pipe.  Therefore  this  method  is 
of  limited  application. 

b)  The  second  method  relates  to  discharge  systems 
where  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  the 
changes  in  pressure  throughout  the  discharge 
system. 

A.1.3  It  is  important  io  ensure  that  the  method 
selected  is  appropriate  to  the  particular  application 
and  is  correctly  applied  by  appropriately  qualified 
and  experienced  persons. 

A.I. 4  Values  of  pressure  loss  (resistance  coef- 
ficients) and  coefficients  of  discharge  of  the  bursting 
disc  device  may  be  governed  by  appropriate  regu- 
lations or  standards. 

A. 1.5  This  discharge  rate  of  the  discharge  system 
should  be  such  as  to  ensure  that  under  relieving 
conditions  the  maximum  allowable  working  press- 
ure of  the  pressurized  system  to  be  protected  is  not 
exceeded  by  more  than  10  %  of  the  maximum  al- 
lowable working  pressure,  or  as  governed  by  the 
appropriate  regulations  or  standards. 


A. 2.1     General 

This  method  should  be  used  where  it  can  be  safely 
assumed  that  there  are  only  negligible  pressure 
drops  in  the  inlet  pipe  or  the  discharge  pipe. 

In  such  cases  the  following  applies: 

a)  for  compressible  fluids  the  flow  rate  is  controlled 
by  the  nozzle  entry  configuration  of  the  equip- 
ment and  the  bursting  disc  device; 

b)  for  incompressible  fluids  a  discharge  coefficient 
of  0,62  is  used 

The  values  of  the  combined  coefficient  given  In 
table  A. 1  for  the  nozzle  entry  configuration  and  the 
bursting  disc  device  to  be  used  for  compressible 
fluids  are  based  on  experimental  work  carried  out 
at  the  University  (RWTH)  of  Aachen  and  reported  in 
Ml, 

The  limitations  of  the  applications  for  compressible 
'luids  and  incompressible  fiuids  are  given  In  A. 2. 2 
and  A. 2. 3  respectively. 

A.2. 2     Compressible  fluids 

The  use  of  this  method  is  limited  to  those  appli- 
cations where 

a)  the  bursting  disc  device  is  installed  within  eight 
pipe  diameters  from  the  entry  to  the  equipment 
nozzle, 

b)  the  bursting  disc  device  discharge  area  Is  not 
less  than  50  %  of  the  inlet  pipe  area, 

c)  the  nozzle  configurations  are  as  illustrated  in  ta- 
ble A. 1, 

d)  the  flow  is  single  phase,  and 

e)  the  length  of  the  discharge  pipe  following  the 
bursting  disc  device  does  not  exceed  five  pipe 
diameters.  * 


19 


1$  12370: 1993 
ISO  6718:  1991. 


Table  A.I  ~  Discharge  coefficients  a. 


No. 

No;!zle  type 

Discharge  coefficient  a. 
(compressible  fluids) 

1 

Protruding  nozzle 

0.68 

1 

2 

1 

Set-on  or  set-in  nozzle  and 
also  a  block  flange  whose 
design  is  not  of  hydrodyn- 
amic  configuration 

0,73 

) 

3 

..J 

t 

V 

Block  flange  of  hydrodyn- 
amic  configuration,  e.g.  with 
rounded  or  chanr>fered  inlet 
edges,  and  also  with  a 
necked-out  opening 

0,80 

A.2.2.1    Critical  and  subcrltlcal  flow 

The  flow  rate  of  a  compressible  fluid  through  a 
bursting  disc  device  increases  as  the  downstream 
pressure  is  decreased  until  critical  flow  is  achieved. 
A  further  decrease  In  the  downstream  pressure  will 
not  result  in  any  further  Increase  in  the  flow  rate. 

Critical  flow  occurs  when 


A> 


<^) 


...(A.1) 


and  subcritical  flow  occurs  when 

,  Kl{K  -  1) 


P  \    K  +  1     / 


p  Is  the  relieving  pressure,  In  bar  absolute. 

A. 2.2.2    Discharge  capacity  at  critical  flow 

The  discharge  capacity  at  critical  flow  can  be  ob- 
tained from  one  of  the  following  equations: 

.  .  .  (A.3) 
.  .  (A.4) 
.  . .  (A.5) 

.  .    (A.6) 


^^  =  0.288  3Cor/fov    V 
•7^ 


Af^  =  3.469 


Ca 


q„  =  CaAoP 


M 
TZ 


•••(A.2)  >   ^JL5l!L      flK 

^       C    «/'  V    M 


where 
A, 


Is  the  back  pressure  immediately  down- 
stream of  the  smallest  cross-sectional 
flow  area,  in  bar'>  absolute; 

is  the  isentropic  exponent  of  the  gas  or 
vapour  in  the  pressure  system  at  the  re- 
lieving Inlet  conditions; 


where 
C 


is  the  required  minimum  cross-sectional 
flow  area  of  a  bursting  disc  device,  in 
square  millimetres; 

is  a  function  of  the  isentropic  exponent  k 
(for  values,  see  table  A.2),  where 


t)    1  btr  -  10«N/m2  -  100  kPa 


20 


IS  12370:  1993 
130  6718:1991 


C=3 


■^-fhh) 


(K  +    \)f(K  -    1) 


■  (A.7) 


M  Is  the  molar  mass,  in  kilograms  per  kilo- 
mole; 

p  is  the  relieving  pressure,  In  bar  absolute; 

q^  is  the  mass  flow  rate  to  be  discharged 
or  the  required  capacity  of  the  bursting 
disc  device,  in  kilograms  per  hour; 

T  is  the  relieving  temperature,  in  kelvin; 

V  is  the  specific  volume  at  the  actual  re- 

lieving pressure  and  relieving  tempera- 
ture, in  cubic  metres  per  kilogram; 

Z  is  the  compressibility  factor  (this  may  be 

assessed  from  figure  B.1); 

NOTE  10  Table  A. 3  gives  values  of  critical 
temperature  and  pressure  for  sonr>e  gases  to 
assist  in  the  determination  of  Z;  however,  If 
insufficient  information  is  available,  a  value 
of  1,0  may  be  used,  (See  also  annex  B.) 

a  is  the  discharge  coefficient  of  the  nozzle 

type  and  the  bursting  disc  device  com- 
bined as  per  A. 2. 2. 3. 


Table  A. 2  —  Values  of  C  relative  to  values  of  k 


K 

C 

K 

C 

K 

C 

0,40 

1,65 

1,02 

2.41 

1;42 

2,72 

0,45 

1,73 

1,04 

2,43 

1,44 

2,73 

0,50 

1,81 

1,06 

2.45 

1,46 

2,74 

0,55 

1,89 

1,08 

2.46 

1,48 

2,76 

0,60 

1,96 

1,10 

2,48 

1,50 

2,77 

0,65 

2.02 

1,1,2 

2,50 

1,52 

2,78 

0,70 

2,08 

1.14 

2,51 

1,54 

2,79 

0,75 

2,14 

1,16 

2,53 

1,56 

2,80 

0,80 

2,20 

1,18 

2,55 

1,58 

2,82 

0,82 

2,22 

1,20 

2.56 

1,60 

2.83 

0,84 

2,24 

1,22 

2.58 

1,62 

2.84 

0,86 

2,26 

1,24 

2,59 

1,64 

2.85 

0.88 

2,28 

1,26 

2.61 

1,66 

2.86 

0,90 

2,30 

1,28 

2,62 

1,68 

2.87 

0,92 

2,32 

1,30 

2,63 

1,70 

2,89 

0,94 

2,34 

1,32 

2,65 

1,80 

2.94 

0.96 

2,36 

1,34 

2,66 

1.90 

2,99 

0,98 

2,38 

1,36 

2,68 

2,00 

3.04 

0,99 

2,39 

1,38 

2,69 

2,10 

3,09 

t.OOl 

2,40 

1,40 

2,70 

2,20 

3.13 

A.2.2.3    Discharge  coefficient  at  critical  flow 

A.2.2.3.1  The  discharge  coefficients  for  three  spe- 
cific types  of  nozzle  and  bursting  disc  device  com- 
binations are  listed  In  table  A. 1. 

These  discharge  coefTicients  are  valid  where 


where 


/^t 


is  the  required  minimum  cross-sectional 
flow  area  of  the  bursting  disc  device,  in 
square  millimetres; 

is  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  inlet 
pipe,  in  square  millimetres. 


A. 2. 2, 3. 2  Where  required  by  appropriate  regu- 
lations or  standards,  or  where  the  nozzle -disc 
configuration  is  different  from  those  shown  in 
table  A. 1,  tests  may  be  required. 

The  experimentally  established  discharge  coefficient 
shall  be  multiplied  by  0.9  before  application  in  for- 
mulae (A. 3)  to  (A. 6).  The  given  discharge  area, 
however,  can  be  applied  without  any  correction. 

A. 2, 2. 4    Discharge  capacity  at  subcritical  flow 

The  discharge  capacity  at  subcritical  flow  can  be 
obtained  from  one  of  the  following  equations: 


.  .  (A.B) 

.  .  {A.9) 

,  .  ,  (A. 10) 

...(A.11) 


. 1         ^m 


TZ 
M 


where 
C 


is  the  required  minimum  cross-sectional 
flow  area  of  a  bursting  disc  device,  in 
square  millimetres; 

is  a  function  of  the  isentropic  coefficient 
K  (for  values,  see  table  A. 2); 

Is  a  factor  which  corrects  for  the  re- 
ductior^  in  capacity  due  to  the  increase  in 
back  pressure  (see  table  A. 4),  where 


ATk- 


,..(A.12) 


NOTE  1 1        For  critical  How,  K.  =  1,0, 


M         is  the  molar  mass,  in  kilograms  per  kilo- 
mole; 


21 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


p  is  the  relieving  pressure,  in  bar  absolute; 

p^  Is  the  back  pressure  immediateiy  down- 
stream of  the  smallest  cro'ss-sectional 
flow  area,  In  bar  absolute; 

q^  is  the  mass  flow  rate  to  be  discharged 
or  the  required  capacity  of  a  bursting 
disc  device,  in  kilograms  per  hour; 

T  is  the  relieving  temperature,  in  kelvin; 

V  is  the  specirrc  volume  at  the  actual  re- 

lieving pressure  and  relieving  tempera- 
ture, in  cubic  metres  per  kilogram; 


2  is  the  compressibility  factor  (this  may  be 

assessed  from  HgureBI); 

NOTE  12  TableA,3  gives  values  of  critical 
temperature  and  pressure  for  some  gases  to 
assist  in  the  determination  of  Z;  however,  if 
insufricrent  information  is  available,  a  value 
of  1,0  may  be  used   (See  also  annex   B.) 

a  Is  the  discharge  coefficient  of  the  nozzle 

type  and  the  bursting  disc  device  com- 
bined as  per  A. 2. 2. 3. 


Table  A. 3  —  Properties  of  gases 

Oas 

Symbol  or 
formula 

Molar  mass, 

M 

kg/kmol 

Ratio  of  specific 
heat  capacities 

(1,013  bar  absolute; 
15  "O 

Crttica! 
pressure,  p^ 

bar 
absolute 

Critical 
temperature, 

K 

CrHical 

pressure 

ratio 

Acetylene 

C^H^ 

26,04 

1,26 

62.82 

309,15 

0,553 

Air 

- 

28,97 

1,40 

37,69 

132,45 

0,528 

Ammonia 

NHj 

17,03 

1.31 

112.98 

405,55 

0,544 

Argon 

Ar  or  A 

39,95 

1,66 

48,64 

151,15 

0,488 

Butadiene 

C,He 

54,09 

1,113 

43.27 

425 

0,581 

n-Butane 

C^Hio    ' 

58,12 

1,11 

36,48 

426,15 

0,583 

Carbon  dioxide 

COj 

44,01 

1,30 

73,97 

304,25 

0.546 

Carbon  monoxide 

CO 

28,01 

1,40 

35,46 

134,15 

0,528 

►  Chlorine 

a. 

70,91 

1,35 

77,11 

417,15 

0.537 

Chlorodifluoromethane  (R  22) 

CHcirj 

86,47 

1,18 

49.14 

370,15 

0,568 

Dlchlorodirtypromethane  (R  12) 

CCIjF; 

120,91 

1,139 

40,08 

384,65 

0,577 

Ethane 

C^He 

30,05 

1,22 

49,45 

305,25 

0,561 

Ethylene 

C^H, 

28,05 

1,25 

51,57 

282,85 

0,555 

Hydrogen 

Hj 

2,02 

1,41 

12,97 

33,25 

0,527 

Hydrogen  chloride 

HCI 

36,46 

1,41 

02,68 

324,55 

0,527 

Hydrogen  sulfide 

H^S 

34,08 

1,32 

90,08 

373,55 

0,542 

Isobutane 

CH{CH3)3 

58,12 

1,11 

37,49 

407,15 

0,583 

Methane 

CH^ 

16,04 

1,31 

46,41 

190,65 

0,544 

Methyl  chloride 

CHjCI 

50,49 

1,28 

66,67 

416,25 

0,549 

Nitrogen 

Nj 

28,01 

1,40 

33,94 

126,05 

0,528 

Nitrous  oxide 

N,0 

44,01 

1,30 

72,65 

309.65 

0,546 

Qxygen 

Oj 

32,00 

1,40 

50,36 

154,35 

0,528 

n- Propane 

^3^8 

44,10 

1,13 

43,57 

368,75 

0,579 

Propylene 

C3H6 

42,08 

1,15 

45,60 

365,45 

0,574 

Sulfur  dioxide 

SO, 

64,06 

1.29 

78,73 

430,35 

0,548 

NOTE  —  The  principal  sources  on  wr 

ilch  these  data  are  based  are  ' 

?t,  I''  and  H). 

22 


1312370:1993 
180  6718:1991 


Table  A.4  —  Capacity  correction  factors  for  back  pressure,  K^ 


8 


01 

d" 


o 


sh 


o"  o"  o"  o"  o'  o'  o"  o'  <^  o'  o"  o'  o"  o  o  o*  o'  o' 


*  in  ' 


J)^CTO>OTOTcoa>h-r-co<Otoin  •<*  ^ricJO 
o  o"  o  o  o'  o  o  o  o  o"  o'  o  o  o'  o  o  o  o" 


o"  o"  o*  o*  o'  o'  o*  o  o"  o'  o"  d"  o'  o'  o"  o'  o' 


o>  eft  c3>^  dn  00  oo_  r^_^  f~-.  r-  «3  CD  to  »o.  ^f  co  oj  o 

o"  o"  o"  o"  o'  o"  o'  o'  o"  o"  o"  d  cT  o"  o'  o"  o" 


•    CM 


l'r-C0<NCDt^C0"<N-'<-O"<"Q 
-jOlOooiOT-ttJcOoOOJtOeOf^O 

-  _  -  ^  ,.  oi  O)  00  r~  t^  r--  (D  to  lo  I/)  -^t  oo  cm  o 

o"  o'  o'  o"  o"  o'  o"  d  o'  cS  Q  CD  <^  o  cS  d  cS 


I   C3>   I 


•  3oo»-r)T-'^cor^f^'t^r^Of^r^O 
'23'i:!i};rtt><*iocMr--'4cftcoN.oQ(^Q 

1^  OT   C7>  Crt  en   OO   t--^  r^_^  r>~   (D   CD  to  lO    "^   rt   CM   o 

'oc5<:5<Sf:>o<:Sd<ood<Df^ocSo 


•  h~   CO  O)  CM  CM  I 


.-,,-,   ^,   V,   W   -^    O) 

»0)cotoeMr^pt^co 


UJ   N.   CD  ^   CM  O 

a>.a)0}0)ooo0h^r--eo{0toio  -^cocmo 
d"  d"  d  d"  d"  d"  d  d"  d  d^  d^  d  d"  d"  o'  d^ 


wo)r^CM'<0)r^cvjpooi^cnc»^aio 

gj00<0C0«0T-00l0Ot0<r-l000Q00O 

d"  ©■  d^  d  d  d  d  o  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


lCO'<tC9tOP5T-<OCMCVT-T-'r--<ta>Q 

tQ»r:r3ai«0<D^oocOt^O>«-OTO 
I^OT(ndjcoaooor-^,tD(oin«>-«foio 

'  d  d  d  d  d"  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


58  fe  2i  1 

CJ>0)0)0>0)aooor^r^co<oioiOTfcio 
d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d"  d  d 


f  CM  ■«*  tM  T-  OO 


^t. 


OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 


d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


®»oroocMcncni/)cooiocnh-o 
aii«ow>ot^for^u>o-*<Dtofoo 

d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


O)  ^  o)  «  00  m  f"^  n;  (o  vf) 

o'  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


'T-3<MOOoo-tr-0)roo 

iCMCntOpfOCMCpr-    —   —    — 


'  yj  ' 


imc»Gococ>ig)t^co-<tco<- 

'    —    -^       ■   «0V0O«00)r-T-h. 
-t  ay - 


5jCTCT6>c5o&Sf^Stio«JOrO_ 

d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


O)  O)  O)  Oi  O)  oo  ( 


CM  T-   N.  r^  CM   CO  Q 
l^cnoooot^f^CDtOCOO 

<D  C3  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


iioo<jgO)*-T-o)t>-c»cMQ 
1^  w  tn  CT  cft  TO  <o  r^  ©  lo  ■*  o 
'  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


gCMOjr>--«tOOO)«>«>o 
0Jr-tf>eM«0<NC0CMCMO 

enoio>cSOTeo  oon-id  ^t  o 
d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d  d 


d  o  d  d  d  d  d  o  d  o  d  d  d  d  d  o  d  t-" 


23 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


A. 2. 2. 5     Discharge  coefficient  at  subcritical  flow 

In  the  case  of  subcritical  flow  conditions,  the  dis- 
charge coefficients  caused  by  flow  rer;trtctions  ap- 
proximate with  increasing  pressure  ratio  p^jp  to 
those  which  have  been  demonstrated  for  incom- 
pressible fluids. 

A.2.3     Incompressible  fluids 
A. 2.3.1     Discharge  capacity 

For  Incompressible  fluids  as  single-phase  flow  at  the 
inlet  and  which  do  not  flash  to  vapour  (neither  partly, 
nor  completely)  on  venting,  the  following  equation 
applies: 

^.=  1-610/1o./;,«Va^  ...(A.  13) 

which  may  be  rewritten  as 


/4o- 0,621  1 


LajApp 


...(A.14) 


where 
An 


Ap 


is  the  required  minimum  cross-sectional 
flow  area  of  a  bursting  disc  device,  in 
square  millimetres; 

is  a  correction  factor  for  liquid  viscosity. 
Where  the  liquid  has  a  viscosity  less  than 
or  equal  to  that  of  water  at  20  ''C,  this 
factor  may  be  taken  as  1,0.  For  greater 
viscosities,  the  discharge  through  a  given 
bursting  disc  device  will  be  reduced. 

The  factory^  is  related  to  the  Reynolds 
number  and  can  be  obtained  from 
figure  A. 1.  Reynolds  number  Re  may  be 
established  from  the  equation 

Re  =  0,3^3A 


where  ^  is  the  liquid  dynamic  viscosity, 
in  pascal  second^'; 

is  the  pressure  difference  on  venting  be- 
tween the  pressure  system  and  the 
pressure  at  the  end  of  the  discharge 
system/the  atmosphere,  in  bar; 

NOTE  13  The  effect  of  static  head  should 
be  considered. 

is  the  mass  flow  rate  to  be  discharged,  in 
kilograms  per  hour; 

is  the  discharge  coefficient  of  the  nozzle 
type,  asper  A. 2. 3. 2; 


p  is   the    density,    in    kilograms    per   cubic 

metre. 

When  sizing  for  viscous  relief,  first  establish  what 
the  size  would  be  for  non-viscous  service  to  obtain 
a  preliminary  area.  Then  select  the  next  largest  size 
in  calculating  Re.  If  the  sizing  formula  shows  that  the 
area  assumed  in  calulating  Re  was  too  small,  then 
repeat  the  calculation  with  the  next  largest  size  of 
bursting  disc  device. 

A. 2. 3. 2     Discharge  coefficient 

The  discharge  coefficient  a  is  equal  to  0,62  or  as 
established  in  the  appropriate  regulations  or  stan- 
dards. 

A. 2.4     Selection  of  the  bursting  d+sc  device 

The  actual  cross-sectional  flow  area  A^  of  a  bursting 
disc  device  shall  be  not  less  than  the  required 
minimum  cross-sectional  flow  area  A^  calculated, 
where  A^,  which  is  also  the  discharge  area  after 
bursting  or  venting,  is  in  square  millimetres 

When  the  cross-sectional  flow  area  of  a  bursting 
disc  device  being  selected  exceeds  the  inlet  pipe 
flow  area  /f,,  then  /f,  instead  of  A^  is  the  controlling 
cross-sectional  flow  area. 

A.3     Method  2 

A. 3.1     General 

A. 3. 1.1  This  method  takes  into  consideration  the 
reversible  and  the  irreversible  changes  in  pressure 
throughout  the  discharge  system  (eg.  nozzle  entry, 
inlet  pipe,  bursting  disc  device,  discharge  pipe,  exit 
to  a  downstream  vessel  or  to  the  atmosphere). 

A. 3. 1.2  For  the  analysis  of  the  discharge  system 
the  following  information  relating  to  the  bursting  disc 
device  is  required: 

a)  the   pressure   loss   (resistance   coefficient)   after 
bursting  or  venting; 

b)  the  discharge  area  after  bursting  or  venting. 

A.3. 2     Compressible  fluids 

Establish  whether  the  flow  is  subcritical  or  critical. 

A. 3. 2.1     Subcritical  flow 

In  the  case  of  subcritical  flow,  assume  a  flow  rate 
and  calculate  the  changes  in  pressure  through  the 
discharge  system.  Use  an  iterative  procedure  until 


2)     1  Pa  s  «  1  kg/{m  s) 


24 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


the  flow  rate,  for  which  the  calculated  pressure  drop 
is  equal  to  or  less  than  the  pressure  difference 
available,  is  found. 

A. 3.2.2     Critical  flow 

In  the  case  of  critical  flow,  carry  out  a  detailed 
analysis  for  the  entire  discharge  system  in  order  to 
determine  where  the  flow  chokes  and  what  the  dis- 
charge capacity  of  the  system  is. 

The  recommended  method  of  carrying  out  the 
analysis  is  as  follows. 

a)  Determine  the  possible  choke  locations,  starting 
at  the  entry  to  the  equipment  nozzle. 

b)  Assume  a  flow  rate  and  then  calculate  the 
changes  in  pressure  throughout  the  discharge 
system  from  the  exit  towards  the  entry  into  the 
equipment  nozzle  At  each  possible  choke  point 
the  pressure  at  which  the  velocity  would  be 
equal  to  the  critical  velocity  can  be  calculated.  In 
this  way  it  can  be  established  whether  choking 
would  actually  occur. 

Use  an  iterative  procedure  until  the  flow  rate,  for 
which  the  calculated  pressure  drop  is  equal  to  or 
less  than  the  pressure. difference  available,  is  found. 

There  are  many  sizing  methods  given  in  published 
literature    but   care    is    necessary   in    selecting   the 


method  relevant  to  the  particular  application.  The 
wrong  method  can  lead  to  serious  errors. 

The  most  accurate  method  of  sizing  is  to  use  a 
computer  program  based  on  the  basic  fluid  flow 
equations  and  thermodynamic/physlcal  property 
data.  Such  basic  equations  are  given  in,  for  exam- 
ple. [5]. 

A. 3.3     Incompressible  fluids 

Establish  whether  the  flow  is  independent  of  the 
Reynolds  number  or  dependent  on  the  Reynolds 
number. 

A. 3. 3.1     Flow  Independent  of  the  Reynolds  number 

In  the  case  where  the  flow  is  independent  of  the 
Reynolds  number  (complete  turbulence),  the  flow 
rate  may  be  determined  directly  by  using  basic  fluid 
flow  formulae. 

A. 3. 3. 2    Flow  dependent  on  the  Reynolds  n6mber 

In  the  case  where  flow  is  dependent  on  the  Reynolds 
number,  assume  a  flow  rate  and  calculate  the 
changes  in  pressure  through  the  discharge  system. 
Use  an  iterative  procedure  until  the  flow  rate,  for 
which  the  calculated  pressure  drop  is  equal  to  or 
less  than  the  pressure  difference  available,  is  found. 


25 


»S  12370:  1993 
180  6718:1991 


2 

o 


o^ 

CO 

I— 

■o 

LH 

<»■ 

m 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o" 

o 

Figure  A.I 


^f  'jo;oBj  uonoajjoo  A;!Soos|a 
Correction  factors  for  liquid  dynamic  viscosity 


26 


IS  12370:  1993 
180  6718:1991 


Annex  B 

(informative) 

Derivation  of  compressibility  factor  Z 


The  compressibility  factor  Z  at  relieving  conditions 
may  be  obtained  from  accurate /^-v- /' data  for  the 
gas  using  the  following  equation: 


Z--WpvMjRl' 


where 
M 

P 
R 


is  the   moiar  mass  of  the   gas,   In    kilo- 
grams per  kilomote; 

is  the  relieving  pressure,  in  bar  absolute; 

is        the        universal        gas        constant 
[  =  8  314  J/(kmol  K)l; 


T  IS  the  relieving  temperature,  in  Kelvin; 

V  is  the  specific  volume  at  the  actual  re- 

lieving pressure  and  relieving  tempera- 
ture, in  cubic  metres  per  kilogram. 

In  the  absence  of  accurate  data,  the  compressibility 
factor  may  be  obtained  from  the  reduced  tempera- 
ture 1\  =  T/7c  and  the  reduced  pressure  /),  =  pjp^  of 


the  gas  from  figure  B.I,  1'^  and  p^  being  the  critical 
lemperafure  and  pressure  of  the  pure  gas. 

EXAMPLE 

The  value  of  /  for  a  gas  relieving  through  a  bursting 
disc  device  with  a  pressure  of  100  bar  gauge  and  a 
temperature  of  70  "C  is  determined  as  follows. 

Relieving  pressure  p 


(in  bar  absolute) 

-100+1 

-  101 

Relieving  temperature  /' 

(in  kelvin) 

-  70  -f  273 

-343 

Critical  pressure  p^ 

—  50,5  bar  absolute 

Critical  temperature  7'^ 

-  298  K 

Pr 


7'c 


101 
50,5 


-2 


''       7,        298        '''^ 
From  figure  B.1,  Z  ^  0,5 


27 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


Reduced  pressure,  p^  =  plp^ 
p        is  the  relieving  pressure,  in  bsr  absolute; 
/?c      is  the  critical  pressure,  in  bar  absolute; 
T       is  the  relieving  temperature,  in  keivin; 
7*^,      is  the  critical  temperature,  in  keivin. 

Figure  B  J  --  Compressibiiity  factor  Z  as  a  function  of  redu 


20       30 


ed  pressure  and  reduced  temperature 


28 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


Annex  C 

(informative) 

Typical  outline  of  subjects  for  inclusion  in  a  quality  assurance  system 


This  annex  gives  general  guidance  for  a  manufac- 
turer's quality  system  that  covers  design,  manufac- 
ture, inspection,  testing,  marking  and  packaging. 

C.1     Scope  of  work 

The  written  description  of  the  quality  system  should 
include  the  scope  and  locations  of  the  work  to  which 
the  system  is  applicable. 

C.2     Authority  and  responsibility 

The  authority  and  responsibility  of  the  management 
representative  in  charge  of  the  quality  system 
should  be  clearly  established. 

C.3     Organization 

An  organization  chart  showing  the  relationship  be- 
tween management  and  engineering,  purchasing, 
manufacturing,  inspection  and  quality  control, 
should  be  prepared. 

NOTE  14  The  purpose  of  this  chart  is  to  identify  and 
associate  the  various  organizational  groups  with  the  par- 
ticular functions  for  which  they  are  responsible.  These 
requirements  are  not  intended  to  encroach  on  the  manu- 
facturer's right  to  establish  and,  from  time  to  time,  to  alter 
whatever  form  of  organization  the  manufacturer  considers 
appropriate  for  his  work. 

Persons  performing  quality  control  functions  should 
have  well-defined  responsibility,  and  the  authority 
and  the  organizational  freedom  to  identify  quality 
control  problems  and  to  initiate,  recommend  and 
provide  solutions. 

C.4     Review  of  the  quality  system 

The  manufacturer  should  ensure  and  demonstrate 
the  continuous  effectiveness  of  his  quality  system. 

C.5     Design  control 

The  manufacturer  should  establish  procedures  for 
controlling  and  verifying  the  design  of  the  product  in 
order  to  ensure  that  the  specified  requirements  are 
met.  The  design  and  design  verification  should  be 
assigned  to  qualified  personnel  having  well-deHned 
responsibility.  The  design  should  conform  to  appro- 


priate regulations  and  national  standards  and 
should  identify  those  design  characteristics  that  are 
crucial  to  the  safe  and  proper  functioning  of  the 
bursting  disc  devices. 

C.6     Document  control 

The  manufacturer's  quality  system  should  provide 
procedures  which  will  ensure  that  the  latest  appli- 
cable documentation,  Including  all  authorized 
changes,  is  used  for  manufacture,  inspection,  test- 
ing, marking  and  packaging. 

C.7     Purchase  control 

The  manufacturer  should  ensure  that  all  purchased 
materials  and  services  conform  to  specified  re- 
quirements and  that  all  purchase  orders  give  full 
details  of  the  material  and  services  ordered. 

C.8     Material  control 

The  manufacturer  should  Include  a  system  of  re- 
ceiving control  which  ensures  that  the  material  re- 
ceived is  properly  identified  and  that  any  required 
documentation  is  present,  identified  to  the  material, 
and  verifies  compliance  with  the  specified  require- 
ments. The  material  control  system  should  ensure 
that  only  the  intended  material  Is  used  in  manufac- 
ture. The  manufacturer  should  maintain  control  of 
material  during  the  manufacturing  process  by  a 
system  which  identifies  inspection  status  of  material 
throughout  alt  stages  of  manufacture. 

C.9     Manufacturing  control 

The  manufacturer  should  ensure  that  manufacturing 
operations  are  carried  out  under  controlled  con- 
ditions utilizing  documented  work  instructions.  The 
manufacturer  should  provide  for  inspection,  wher^ 
appropriate,  for  each  operation  that  affects  quality, 
or  should  arrange  an  appropriate  monitoring  oper- 
ation. 

CIO     Quality  control  plan 

The  manufacturer's  quality  control  plan  should  de- 
scribe the  manufacturing  operations,  including  in- 
spections as  indicated  in  this  International  Standard. 


29 


IS  12370:  1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


C.11     Welding 

The  quality  control  system  should  Include  provisions 
for  ensuring  that  welding  conforms  to  specified  re- 
quirements. Welders  should  be  qualifiijd  to  the  ap- 
propriate standards  sr,d  their  qualifictition  records 
should  be  made  available  to  the  inspection  authority 
if  requested 

C.12     Non-destructive  examination 

Provision  should  be  made  to  utilize  non-destructive 
examination  as  necessary  to  ensure  that  materials 
and  components  comply  with  the  speciTied  require- 
ments. Non-destructive  examination  operators 
should  be  authorized  by  their  employer  and/or 
qualified  by  a  national  recognized  body,  and  their 
authorizations/qualification  records  should  be  made 
available  to  the  inspection  authority  if  required. 

C.I  3     Non-conforming  materials/items 

The  manufacturer  should  establish  procedures  for 
controlling  materials/items  not  in  conformance  with 
the  specified  requirements. 

C.I  4     Heat  treatment 

The  manufacturer  should  maintain  a  system  to  en- 
sure that  all  required  heat  treatments  have  been 
applied.  Means  should  be  provided  by  which  heat 
treatment  requirements  can  be  verified. 

C.15     Inspection  status 

The  manufacturer  should  maintain  a  system  for 
Identifying  the  inspection  status  of  material  during 
all  stages  of  manufacture  and  should  be  able  to 
distinguish  between  in*;pected  and  non-inspected 
material. 


C.16  Calibration  of  measurement  and  test 
equipment 

The  manufacturer  should  provide,  control,  calibrate 
and  maintain  inspection,  measuring  and  test  equip- 
ment to  be  used  in  verifying  conformance  to  the 
specified  requirements.  Such  calibration  should  be 
traceable  to  a  national  standard  and  calibration 
records  should  be  maintained. 

C,17     Completed  item  inspection  and  test 

The  manufacturer  should  perform  all  inspections 
and  tests  on  the  Tmished  product  necessary  to  com- 
plete the  evidence  of  full  conformance  to  the  speci- 
fied requirements. 

Procedures  for  Tinal  inspection  and  test  should  en- 
sure thai  ail  relevant  inspection  and  testing,  speci- 
fied for  quality  control,  have  been  carried  out. 

C.18     Marking  and  packaging 

The  manufacturer  should  have  a  system  to  control 
marking  and  packaging  lu  (he  extent  necessary  io 
ensure  conformance  with  the  specified  require- 
ments. 

C.19     Records  retention 

The  manufacturer  should  have  a  system  for  the 
maintenance  of  inspection  records,  radiographs  and 
manufacturer's  data  reports  that  describe  the 
achievement  of  the  required  quality  and  the  effective 
operation  of  the  quality  system.  The  records  should 
be  retained  for  a  minimum  period  of  5  years  or  as 
agreed  with  the  purchaser 

C.20     Sample  forms 

The  forms  used  in  the  quality  control  system  and 
any  detailed  procedures  for  their  use  should  be 
available  for  review.  The  written  description  should 
make  reference  to  these  forms. 


30 


1812370:1993 
ISO  6718:  1991 


Annex  D 

(informative) 

Bibliography 

[1]  Krause,    E.    AusfluSzahlen    von    Lochblenden,  [4]  Braker    and      Mossman   Matheson   Gas   Data 

Aerodynamisches  Institut.  20  December  1983.  Book    1980.   6th   ed,   Matheson   Gas   Products, 

1980. 
[2]  lUPAC   Commission   on   Atomic  Weights   and 

Isotopic  Abundances.   Atomic  weights  of  the  [5]  Shapiro  The  dynamics  and  thermodynamics  of 

elements.  Pergamon  Press,  1983.  compressible  fluid  flow.  Roland  Press,  Volume 

1,  1953. 
[3]  Pure    and    Applied    Chemistry.    Oxford,    1984, 
pp.  653-674. 


31 


Printed  at  Dee  Kay  Primers,  New  Delhi,  India 


(  Continued  from  second  cover  ) 

The  text  of  ISO  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard 
without  deviations.  Certain  conventions  are,  however,  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian 
Standards.    Attention  is  particularly  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should 
be  read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (  ,  )  has  been  used  as  a   decimal    marker  in    the  International   Standard    while  in 
Indian  Standards,  the  current  practice  is  to  use  point  (  .  )  as  the  decimal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  ISO  9001.  The  Indian  Standard  IS  14001  : 
1988  'Quality  systems  —  Model  for  quality  assurance  in  design/development,  production, 
installation  and  servicing',  which  is  identical  with  ISO  9001  :  1987,  is  to  be  substituted  in  its 
place. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  in  complied  with 
the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be 
rounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  )'. 
The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that 
of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


Standard  Mark 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark 
on  products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been 
produced  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system 
of  inspection,  testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and 
operated  by  the  producer.  Standard  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by 
BIS  for  conformity  to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under 
which  a  licence  for  the  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or 
producers  may  be  obtained  from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Stanaards  Act,  19H6  to 
promote  harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality 
certification  of  goods  and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced 
in  any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use, 
in  the  course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type 
or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director 
(  Publications  ),  BIS. 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards 
are  also  reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review 
indicates  that  no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken 
up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the 
latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  *BIS  Handbook  and  *Standards 
Monthly  Additions'.  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent  to  BIS  giving  the  following 
reference: 


Doc  :  No.  HMD  17  (  0130  ) 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones  :  331  01  31,     331  13  75 

Regional  Offices  i 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 


Telegrams 
(  Common 


Manaksanstha 
to   all    Offices  ) 


NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  1.  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036 


Southern 
Western 

Branches 


Telephone 

C331  01  31 
{331  13  75 

07  84  99,     37  85  61 
137  86  26,     37  86  62 

i53  38  43,     53  16  40 
53  23  84 

p35  02  16,     235  04  42 
{235  15  19,     235  23  15 

|632  92  95,     632  78  58 
1632  78  91.    632  78  92 

AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATL  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR 
LUCKNOW.   PATNA.   THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


C.  \.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600U3 

Manakalaya,  E9  MI  DC,  Marol,  Andheri  (  East  ) 
BOMBAY  400093 


PriDted  at  Printwel)  Printer*.  Aligarh   India 


