**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mrjsssss^^ft^: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13890 : 1994 
ISO 8637 : 1989 



SrrefaT *TH*F ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

HAEMODIALYSERS, HAEMOFILTERS AND 
HAEMOCONCENTRATORS — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 615-47:615-38 



© BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1994 Price Group 8 



Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee, MHD 6 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8637 : 1989 'Haemodialysers, haemofilters and 
haemoconcentrators' issued by the International Organization for Standardization, was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Thoracic and Cardiovascular 
Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital 
Planning Division Council. 

This Indian Standard covers the requirements for medical devices intended for single use for 
haemodialysis, haemofiltration and haemoconcentration in humans with a view to ensure their 
safety and satisfactory function. 

It has not been found practicable to specify materials of construction nor to give test methods 
for biocompatibility, validation of sterility, non-pyrogenicity and certain performance character- 
istics ior haemodialysers, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators. This standard, therefore 
requires that the materials have been tested and that the test methods and results are made 
available upon request. There is no intention to specify, or to set limits on the performance 
characteristics of the devices because such restrictions are unnecessary for the qualified user 
and would limit the alternatives available when choosing a device for a specific application. 

The dimensions of the blood ports and the dialysing fluid or filtrate ports have been specified to 
ensure compatibility of the device with the extracorporeal blood circuit specified in IS 13898 : 
1993 'Extracorporeal blood circuit for haemodialysers, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators'. 
The design and dimensions have been selected in order to minimize the risk of leakage of blood 
and the ingress of air. The dialysing Tiuid ports wiii accommodate either Hansen or Walther 
connectors. 

The text of the above-mentioned ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as 
Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are, however, not 
identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the practice is 
to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

In this Indian Standard, the following international standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following: 

International Standard Indian Standard Degree of 

Correspondence 

ISO 472 : 1979 Plastics — Vocabulary IS 2828 : 1964 Glossary of terms Technically 

used in the plastics industry equivalent 

ISO 8638 : 1989 Extracorporeal blood IS 13898 : 1993 Extracorporeal blood Identical 
circuit for haemodialysers, haemo- circuit for haemodialysers, haemo- 

filters and haemoconcentrators filters and haemoconcentrators 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )', The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Indian Standard 

HAEMODIALYSERS, HAEMOFILTERS AND 
HAEMOCONCENTRATORS — SPECIFICATION 



1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies requirements for haemo- 
dialysers, including those of coil, hollow fibre and parallel plate 
design, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators for single use for 
humans. 

Materials of construction and test methods for biocompati- 
bility, validation of sterility, non-pyrogenicity and some per- 
formance characteristics are not specified; the rationale for 
these omissions is given in the Introduction. 

This International Standard does not apply to devices as- 
sembled and sterilized by the user, the extracorporeal blood cir- 
cuit, plasma filters, haemoperfusion devices, vascular access 
devices, blood pumps, pressure monitors of the extracorporeal 
circuit, air detection devices or systems to prepare, maintain or 
monitor dialysing fluid. 

NOTE — Requirements for the extracorporeal blood circuit for haemo- 
dialysers, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators are specified in 
ISO 8638. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, through 
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International 
Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions 
of the standards listed below. Members of IEC and ISO main- 
tain registers of currently valid International Standards. 

ISO 472 : 1979, Plastics - Vocabulary. 

ISO 8638 : 1989, Extracorporeal blood circuit for haemo- 
dialysers, haemofilters and haemoconcentrators. 



3.2 blood compartment volume; volume of the blood 
compartment: Volume of blood required to fill the haemo- 
dialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator at a given trans- 
membrane or mean coil pressure. 



3.3 blood flow rate, q v : Quantity of blood flowing through 
the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator per unit 
time. 

NOTE — The blood flow rate is usually expressed in miHilitres per 
minute. 



3.4 clearance, c/, : Net flux of solute across the haemo 
dialyser or haemofilter, calculated using the following 
equations, as appropriate : 



For haemodialysis, using an open loop 



</!-, 






( 'A 



<A 



(1) 



NOTE — -- ({\ represents the clearance due to convection. 

( 'A 

For haemodialysis, using a closed loop 



Qy c = </ h 



b M 



1 



q^ts.1 



+ 1 



n 1 - 



(2) 



NOTE — It has been found that q v has to be greater than 2 ml/min to 
achieve accurate results. 



For haemofiltration 



3 Definitions 



<lv, 



1v f x t'F 



... (3) 



For the purposes of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply. 

3.1 arterial blood circuit: Portion of the extracorporeal 
blood pathway from the vascular access device of the patient to 
the blood inlet of the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemo- 
concentrator. 



In equations (1) and (3), it is necessary to use the same units of 
measurement for c A , c v and c F . 

In equations (1) to (3) 

b is the slope of linear regression of the natural logarithm 
of the reservoir concentration over time; 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



c A is the concentration of solute on the inlet side of the 
haemodialyser or haemofilter; 

c F is the filtrate concentration ; 

r v is the concentration of solute on the outlet side of the 
haemodialyser or haemofilter; 

qi is the blood flow rate, in millilitres per minute, at the 
inlet of the device; 

q v is the filtrate flow rate (ultrafiltration rate), in millilitres 
per minute; 

At is the duration of the test, in minutes it - t Q ), where r 
is the time at the beginning of the test and t the time at the 
end of the test ; 

K is the volume of the "blood" reservoir, in millilitres, at 
time / . 

NOTES 

1 The term "ultrafiltration" is commonly used as a synonym for 
"filtration" in haemodialysis. 

2 Clearance is usually expressed as the number of millilitres of blqod 
completely cleared of the solute per minute (corrected for ultra- 
filtration). 

3.5 clotted residual blood : Residua! blood that cannot be 
recovered by rinsing the blood compartment. 

3.6 compliance: Change in volume of the blood compart- 
ment of the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator 
in relation to change in transmembrane pressure. 

NOTE — Compliance is usually expressed in millilitres per 100 
millimetres of mercury of transmembrane pressure or mean coil 
pressure. 

3.7 dialysance, q v : Rate of exchange per unit time of a 
solute between blood and dialysing fluid per unit blood to 
dialysing fluid concentration gradient, calculated using the 
following equation : 



2 Dialysance measurement is useful for comparing devices in systems 
where the concentration of the solute in the dialysing fluid entering 
the haemodialyser is greater than zero, e.g. in recirculation single-pass 
systems. 

3 Dialysance is equal to the clearance in single-pass systems, 
i.e. when c D = 0. 



3.8 dialysate; dialysing fluid: Solution used to perfuse a 
compartment that is separated from the blood in a 
haemodialyser by the semi-permeable membrane. 



3.9 dialysing fluid compartment volume ; volume of the 
dialysing fluid compartment: Volume of the dialysing fluid 
required to fill the dialysing fluid compartment of the haemo- 
dialyser at a given transmembrane pressure. 



3.10 dialysing fluid addition rate: Rate at which fresh 
dialysing fluid is added to a recirculation single-pass system. 

NOTE — The dialysing fluid addition rate is usually expressed in 
millilitres per minute. 



3.11 dialysing fluid flow rate, q v : Rate at which dialysing 
fluid enters the haemodialyser. 

NOTE — The dialysing fluid flow rate is usually expressed in millilitres 
per minute. 



3.12 dialysing fluid recirculation rate: In coil haemo- 
dialysers, the rate at which dialysing fluid is recirculated 
through the device. 

NOTE — The dialysing fluid recirculation rate is usually expressed in 
millilitres per minute. 



3.13 distributor: Any party other than the manufacturer 
who offers the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoGoncen- 
trator for sale. 



<?», 



where 



<V 



1v B 



<V 



C A ~ C D 



■iy. 



. (4) 



r D is the concentration of the solute entering the 
haemodialyser ; 

the other symbols are as defined in 3.4. 

It is necessary to use the same units of measurement for c A , c v 
and c . 

NOTES 

1 Clearance may be derived from dialysance for recirculating dialys- 
ing fluid systems using the following equation : 



ft, 



(5) 



1 + 



<?!< 



01, 



where </( is the dialysing fluid flow rate. 



3.14 filtrate: Fluid removed from the blood compartment 
across the semi-permeable membrane into the dialysate or 
filtrate compartment of a haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemo- 
concentrator due to a pressure gradient across the semi- 
permeable membrane. 



3.15 fluid residual blood: Residual blood that can be 
recovered by further rinsing of the blood compartment. after 
rinsing as recommended by the manufacturer. 



3.16 haemoconcentration : Treatment whereby extra- 
corporeal blood is passed through a device (the haemoconcen- 
trator) for the sole purpose of removing fluid from the blood. 

NOTE — In haemoconcentration, blood flows through one part of a 
chamber divided by a semi-permeable membrane. The filtrate passing 
through the membrane is collected in the other part of the chamber 
and is led to waste. The permeability of the membrane does not allow 
clinically significant loss of protein from the blood. 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



3.17 haemoconcentrator : 

concentration. 



Device used to perform haemo- 



3.18 haemodialyser : 

dialysis. 



Device used to perform haemo- 



3.25 non-pyrogenic : Free of pyrogenic material within the 
limit of error of test methods for such determinations, as 
defined by the national regulatory agency of the country in 
which the device is to be marketed or, where available, an Inter- 
national Standard, and maintained in that state by suitable pro- 
tection. 



3.19 haemodialysis : Treatment whereby extracorporeal 
blood is passed through a device (the haemodialyser) that 
allows the transfer of substances by diffusion and convection 
for the purpose of decreasing biochemical abnormalities as well 
as fluid, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances. 

NOTE — In haemodialysis, the blood flows through a chamber divided 
by a semi-permeable membrane, on the other side of which flows the 
dialysing fluid. Solute exchange between the blood and the dialysing 
fluid is mainly due to diffusion. Fluid exchange between the blood and 
dialysing fluid is mainly due to ultrafiltration. The permeability of the 
membrane does not allow clinically significant loss of protein from the 
blood. 



3.20 haemofilter: Device used to perform haemofiltration. 



3.21 haemofiltration : Treatment whereby extracorporeal 
blood is passed through a filtration device (the haemofilter) for 
the purpose of decreasing biochemical abnormalities as well as 
fluid, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances, which is achieved 
by the exchange of a filtrate of the blood for an appropriate 
volume of a physiological replacement solution. 

NOTE — In haemofiltration, the blood flows through a chamber divided 
by a semi-permeable membrane on the other side of which flows a 
physiological replacement solution which infuses into the bloodstream 
The permeability of the membrane does not allow clinically sign ficant 
loss of protein from the blood. 



3.22 hydraulic resistance: Blood or dialysing fluid com- 
partment flow resistance measured as the pressure drop, in 
millimetres of mercury, or change in pressure, p, between inlet 
and outlet ports of the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemo- 
concentrator at a given flow rate. 



3.23 manufacturer: Party that assumes responsibility for 
quality assurance of the final product. 



3.24 mean coil pressure (MCP), p MC - Arithmetic mean of 
the inlet and outlet pressure of the blood pathway of a coil 
naemodialyser with an open dialysing fluid compartment, 
calculated using the following equation : 



Pmc ~ 



PB,i + PB.o 



... (6) 



where 



p B j is the pressure of blood on the arterial side of the 
haemodialyser, in millimetres of mercury- 

p Bo is the pressure of blood on the venous side of the 
haemodialyser, in millimetres of mercury. 



3.26 recirculation system : Dialysing fluid system in which 
the dialysing fluid is recirculated through the haemodialyser 
repeatedly during dialysis. 

3.27 recirculation single-pass system : Dialysing fluid 
system in which the dialysing fluid is recirculated repeatedly 
through the haemodialyser during dialysis and the recirculating 
volume is displaced continuously to waste by fresh dialysing 
fluid. 

3.28 residual blood : Volume of blood remaining in the 
haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator after the 
procedure recommended by the manufacturer for returning the 
blood from the device to the patient. 

NOTE — Residual blood is usually expressed in millilitres. 

3.29 semi-permeable membrane: Membrane used to 
separate blood from dialysing fluid in haemodialysis or through 
which filtrate passes in haemofiltration or haemoconcentration. 

3.30 single-pass dialysing fluid system : Dialysing fluid 
system in which the dialysing fluid flows to waste after one 
passage through the haemodialyser. 

3.31 sterile: Free from all living organisms within the limits 
of validation tests for sterility and maintained in that state by 
suitable protection. 

3.32 transmembrane pressure (TMPL p JM : Hydrostatic 
pressure exerted across the semi-permeabie membrane of 
certain haemodialysers (hollow-fibre, parallel-plate, coil with 
closed dialysate compartment) or a haemofilter, calculated 
using the following equations: 

For haemodialysis 



Ptm 



PB.i + PB,o Pd.i + Pd.o 



(7) 



For haemofiltration 



PB.i + PB.Q 

Ptm = p F 



where 



.. (8) 



p d #i is the pressure of dialysing fluid on the inlet side of the 
haemodialyser ; 

p d is the pressure of dialysing fluid on the outlet side of 
the haemodialyser ; 

Pp is the pressure at the outlet of the filtrate compartment ; 

p R j and p B are as defined in 3.24. 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



3.33 user: Operator of a device. 

3.34 venous blood circuit: Extracorporeal blood circuit 
from the outlet of the haemodialyser,. haemofilter or haemo- 
concentrator, returning blood to the vascular access device of 
the patient. 



4 Requirements 

4.1 Good manufacturing practice 

The haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator shall be 
manufactured in a clean environment and the fluid pathways 
shall be free of visible foreign material. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether codes for 
good manufacturing practice exist in the country in which the device is 
produced and, if applicable, in the countries in which the device is to 
be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.1. 



4.2 Toxicology and biological compatibility 

Samples of the device shall be tested for freedom from toxicity 
using, if available, the method specified in the relevant national 
standard and the results of such tests shall indicate freedom 
from biological hazard. If requested, details of the test method 
and the results shall be made available by the manufacturer of 
the device. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing toxicology and biocom- 
patibility testing exist in the country in which the device is produced 
and, if applicable, in the countries in which the device is to be 
marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.2. 



4.3 Sterility 

The fluid pathways of the device shall be supplied sterile. 

NOTE - Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing sterility testing exist in the 
country in which the device is produced and, if applicable, in the 
countries in which the device is to be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.3. 

4.4 Pyrogenicity 

The blood pathway(s) of the device shall be non-pyrogenic. If 
requested, details of the test method(s) and the results shall be 
made available by the manufacturer of the device. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing pyrogen testing exist in the 
country in which the device is produced and, if applicable, in the 
countries in which the device is to be marketed. 



4.5 Residues from sterilization 

After sterilization by the procedure recommended by the 
manufacturer, the device shall be tested for freedom from toxic 
residues that have adverse chemical, physical or biological 
effects on the blood or that result in release of clinically signifi- 
cant amounts of potentially toxic substances into the blood. If 
requested, details of the test methods and the results shall be 
made available by the manufacturer of the device. 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the need to establish whether national 
regulations or national standards governing testing for residues from 
sterilization exist in the country in which the device is produced and, if 
applicable, in the countries in which the device is to be marketed. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.5. 

4.6 Mechanical characteristics 

4.6.1 Structural integrity 

Samples of the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcen- 
trator shall be capable of withstanding 1,5 times the maximum 
transmembrane pressure or mean coil pressure specified by the 
manufacturer. Devices with a closed dialysing fluid compart- 
ment or filtrate compartment shall also withstand a subatmos- 
pheric pressure that is 

a) 1,5 times the maximum subatmospheric pressure 
specified by the manufacturer, or 

b) 700 mmHg below atmospheric pressure if the manu- 
facturer's maximum specified subatmospheric pressure 
exceeds this value. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.6.1. 

4.6.2 Membrane integrity 

A test that will detect a blood leak shall be performed on each 
haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator. 

Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.6.2. 

4.6.3 Blood compartment ports 

Except where the haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcen- 
trator and the extracorporeal circuit are designed as an integral 
system, the dimensions of the blood ports shall be as given in 
figures 1 and 2. 

The dimensions shall be checked in accordance with 5.6.3. 

4.6.4 Haemodialyser dialysing fluid compartment ports 

The dimensions of the dialysing fluid compartment ports shall 
be as given in figure 3. In addition, the dialysing fluid compart- 
ment port may have a component that will open a self-sealing 
connector. 

The dimensions of the dialysing fluid compartment ports shall 
be checked in accordance with 5.6.4. 

4.6.5 Haemofilter or haemoconcentrator filtrate port 

The haemofilter or haemoconcentrator filtrate port shall meen 
the requirements specified in 4.6.3 or 4.6.4. 



Testing shall be carried out in accordance with 5.4. 



The filtrate port shall be checked in accordance with 5.6.5. 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Dimensions in millimetres 




\\\\\^^ 




0,06:1 









E 

m 



1,2 ±0.1 



1) Double thread. 



Figure 1 — Main fitting dimensions of blood inlet and outlet connections 



Dimensions in millimetres 



9 min. 





•^m 






^»- 










-Inner con 










Outer cone -^_^ 




\/ / 




/^ 


7~ 














J 
1 


O 

i 
■©■ 


. 


I 


/, 


r — » r \c\f, ■ 1 


m i 


i 


,/ U-^ J,UD . I 


o o 

+ 

m 

no 








1 „ 






/// 




1 


1 ^^~- 




'/, 


Y/ 


/ 




X / 






8 
5,5 






— ^» 










m 




10 m 


i 

n. 





Figure 2 — Length of engagement of male and female cones of blood inlet and outlet connectors 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Dimensions in millimetres 




oo 

i 






9~ 



4f 



& 



^ ° 

J -0,1 



M 



13,1 ±0,1 



U«V 



2TP 



t — 



Figure 3 — Main fitting dimensions of dialysing fluid inlet and outlet port 



4.7 Disclosure of performance characteristics 
4.7.1 General 

The performance characteristics specified in 4.7.2 to 4.7.6 shall 
be determined prior to marketing a new type of device and shall 
be re-evaluated after changes in the device that may alter its 
performance. 

The sample of devices shall be drawn at random from the 
manufacturer's production and shall have passed all safety and 
quality control measures, when applicable. They shall be 
prepared according to the manufacturer's recommendations as 
though they are to be used for a clinical procedure. 



The following information shall be given in the product 
literature or the product data sheet : 

a) the number of units tested; 

b) the mean and standard deviation of measurement for 
each parameter; 

c! the details of change in performance that may occur 
with duration of observation; 

d) a statement, if appropriate, that in vitro results are likely 
to differ from in vivo results, with an estimate of the 
magnitude of the difference, if known. 



Measurements shall be made in vitro at 37 °C ± 1 °C. When 
the relationship between variables is non-linear, sufficient 
determinations shall be made to permit interpolation between 
the data points. The techniques of measurement are referee 
tests. Other techniques may be used provided that the results 
are within ± 5 % of the technique used in the referee test. 

The test systems shown do not indicate all the necessary 
details of practicable test apparatus. The design and construc- 
tion of actual test systems and the establishment of actual test 
systems shall also address the many factors contributing to 
measurement error, including, but not limited to, pressure 
measurement errors due to static head effects and dynamic 
pressure drops, parameter stabilization time, uncontrolled 
temperature variations at the non-constant flow rates, pH, 
degradation of test substances due to heat, light and time, out- 
g8ssing of test fluids, trapped air, and system contamination by 
foreign material, algae and bacteria. 



4.7.2 Clearance of haemodialysers 

The clearance rates of urea, creatinine and vitamin B 12 shall be 

stated for the range of blood and dialysing fluid flow rates 

recommended by the manufacturer and shall include a blood 

flow rate of 200 ml/min and _a dialysing fluid flow rate of 

500 ml/min. The filtrate flow rate, in , shall be stated for each 

' ' F 

condition. 

The blood compartment s : iall be perfused with the test sub- 
stances dissolved in dialysing fluid. The perfusate shall contain 
the mateiials within the range specified below: 

Urea : 15 mmol/l to 35 mmol/l 

Creatinine: 500 umol/l to 1 000 pmol'l 

Vitamin B 12 : 15 umol/l to 40 umol/l 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



The dialysing fluid compartment shall be perfused with dia- 
lysing fluid. In the case of coil haemodialysers, dialysance shall 
not be substituted for clearance and, if the former is given in 
addition, the relationship between the two and the clinical 
relevance of clearance shall be emphasized. In addition, the 
recirculation rate through the coil haemodialyser shall be 
stated. 

NOTE — Examples of suitable test circuits are given in figures 4 to 8. 

4.7.3 Clearance for haemofilters 

The clearance rate of urea, creatinine and vitamin B-| 2 shall be 
stated for the range of blood flow rates recommended by the 
manufacturer and shall include a blood flow rate of 200 mi/min. 
The composition of the solution perfusing the blood compart- 
ment shall be as specified in 4.7.2. 

NOTE — An example of a suitable test circuit is given in figure 8. 



millilitres per hour. The priming pressure shall not exceed the 
maximum test pressure. 

Measurements shall be performed with dialysing fluid perfusing 
the blood compartment, and, in the case of haemodialysers, no 
fluid perfusing the dialysing fluid compartment. The sequence 
of measurement shall be from minimum to maximum trans- 
membrane pressure or mean. coil pressure. 

NOTE — Examples of suitable test circuits are given in figures 8 and 9. 

4.7.5 Volume of blood compartment 

The volume of the blood compartment and, if applicable, the 
dialysing fluid compartment shall be determined with wetted 
membranes (i.e. a device prepared as recommended by the 
manufacturer for clinical use) using non-ultrafiltratable liquid, 
and shall be given at stated conditions over the range of trans- 
membrane pressure or mean coil pressure recommended by the 
manufacturer. 



4.7.4 Filtration rate 

If the relationship between filtration rate and transmembrane 
pressure or mean coil pressure is non-linear, the filtration rate, 
expressed in millilitres per hour, shall be given over the 
manufacturer's stated range of transmembrane pressure or 
mean coil pressure, if there is a linear relationship between 
filtration rate and the transmembrane pressure or mean coil 
pressure, the filtration coefficient shall be stated, expressed in 



4.7.6 Hydraulic resistance 

The hydraulic resistance of the blood compartment and, if ap- 
plicable, the dialysing fluid compartment shall be determined 
using a 32 % ( VI V) solution of glycerol and water respectively. 
These measurements shall be carried out over the range of 
blood flow rate, dialysing fluid flow rate and transmembrane 
pressure or mean coil pressure recommended by the manu- 
facturer. 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Pressure 
controller 





B.o 



'Pv 




Blood pump 



w 



Waste 




Test solution 
reservoir 



^d.C 





'd,i 



Dialysing fluid 
negative pressure 
source 




Dialysing fluid 
supply system 



□ 



Waste 



NOTE - For explanation of symbols, see 3.24 and 3.32. 

Figure 4 — Diagram of open-loop system for measuring clearance in parallel-plate or hollow-fibre haemodialyser 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Pressure 
controller 




B,o 




B.i 





Blood pump 



Test solution 
reservoir 



a 



'd.o 




id- 



Dialysing fluid 
negative pressure 
device 




d.i 




Dialysing fluid 
supply system 



W 



Waste 



NOTE - For explanation of symbols, see 3.24 and 3.32. 

Figure 5 - Diagram of closed-loop system for measuring clearance in parallel-plate or hollow-fibre haemodialyser 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



B.o H B.\ 



Pressure 
controller 





Fresh dialysing fluid 



B B 



Haemodialyser 



Dialysing fluid 
overflow to waste 



Dialysing fluid 
recirculation pump 



i_^ 



/ 



w 







Waste 




Blood pump 



Test solution 
reservoir 



NOTE — For explanation of symbols, see 3.24. 

Figure 6 — Diagram of open-loop system for measuring clearance in coil haemodialyser 



10 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Pressure 
controller 




% ^B,i 




Fresh dialysing fluid 



a a 



Dialysing fluid 
overflow to waste 




Dialysing fluid 
recirculation pump 



Blood pump 



Test solution 
reservoir 



NOTE — For explanation of symbols, see 3.24. 

Figure 7 - Diagram of closed-loop system for measuring clearance in coil haemodialyser 



11 



IS 13890. 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Pressure 
controller 




B,o 




Blood pump 





a 



* 



Haemodialyser, 
haemofilter or 
haemoconcentrator 



Xh 



Test solution 
reservoir 



Filtrate 



E 



Waste 



NOTE — For explanation of symbols, see 3.24. 

figure 8 — Diagram of system for measuring clearance in haemofilter or filtration rate in parallel-plate 
or hollow-fibre haemodialyser, haemofilter or haemoconcentrator 



12 



Pressure 
controller 





Waste 



B,o ^B.i 




Haemodialyser 



' . "1 




IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Blood pump 




Test solution 
reservoir 



NOTE — For explanation of symbols, see 3.24. 

Figure 9 — Diagram of system for measuring filtration rate in coil haemodialyser 



13 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



5 Test methods 

5.1 Good manufacturing practice 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.1 shall be deter- 
mined by inspection. 

5.2 Toxicology and biological compatibility 

The toxicology and biological compatibility of materials (of a 
device) which will come into contact with biological fluids shall 
be determined on samples of each new type of device prior to 
its marketing or after any change in the materials of construc- 
tion of that type of device or after any change in the method of 
sterilization. 

NOTE — Testing should be carried out using the method(s) specified in 
appropriate national regulations or national standards. 

5.3 Sterility 

The sterilization process shall be validated on samples of the 
finished device prior to marketing a new type of device, and, 
thereafter, the sterilization process shall be monitored for each 
batch. 

5.4 Pyrogenicity 

Testing for pyrogens shall be carried out on samples of eacn 
new type of device prior to marketing, and, thereafter, the 
manufacturer shall perform pyrogen testing at intervals shown 
to ensure non-pyrogenicity of the device. 



5.6.1.2.2 Water, at 37 °C ± 1 °C; if a negative pressure test 
(see 5.6.1.5.3) is to be carried out, freshly boiled distilled water 
is to be used. 

5.6.1.3 Apparatus 

5.6.1.3.1 Extracorporeal circuit, blood pump and stain- 
less steel or plastic vessel suitable for use with the plasma 
(5.6.1.2.1) to be used in simulated haemodialysis, haemo- 
filtration or haemoconcentration. See ISO 8638. 

5.6.1.3.2 Connectors for the blood ports of the device, 

fitted with tubing capable of withstanding the test pressure(s) 
and, if appropriate, suitable for the pressure-generating device 
(5.6.1.3.6). 

See ISO 8638 for specifications of these connectors. 

5.6.1.3.3 Connectors for the dialysing fluid or filtrate 
port(s) fitted with tubing capable of withstanding the test 
pressure(s). 

NOTE — These connectors are for use with devices with closed dialys- 
ing fluid or filtrate compartments. 

See ISO 8638 for specifications of these connectors. 

5.6.1.3.4 Fittings designed to close the dialysing compart- 
ment when fitted with tubing capable of withstanding the test 
pressure(s). 

NOTE — These fittings are for use with devices with open dialysing 
fluid or filtrate compartments. 



5.5 Residues from sterilization 

Samples of the finished device shall be tested for potentially 
toxic residues by recognized toxicological methods prior to 
marketing a new type of device, and, thereafter, the manufac- 
turer shall test for toxic residues at intervals shown to ensure 
the safety of the device and after any change of materials of 
construction. 

5.6 Mechanical characteristics 

5.6.1 Structural integrity 

The test described shall be carried out prior to marketing a new 
type of device; it is not intended to be a quality control test. 



5.6.1.3.5 Tubing clamps. 

5.6.1.3.6 Device or devices suitable for generating the 
required pressure(s). 

5.6.1.3.7 Pressure gauges, accurate to ±10 mmHg with a 
suitable range of pressure. 

5.6.1.4 Sampling and preparation of test samples 

A statistically significant sample of devices drawn at random 
from the manufacturer's production which have passed all 
safety and quality control measures, where applicable, shall be 
used. These devices shall be prepared as recommended by the 
manufacturer for clinical procedures. 



5.6.1.1 Principle 

Filling the device with water, followed by subjection of the 
device to positive pressure and observation for leaks or other 
faults. If appropriate, subjection of the device to negative 
pressure and observation for leaks or other faults. 

5.6.1.2 Reagents 

5.6.1.2.1 Anticoagulated bovine or human plasma, with a 
protein mass concentration of 60 g/l ± 5 g/l. 



5.6.1.5 Procedure 

5.6.1.5.1 Perfuse the device with plasma (5.6.1.2.1) for 7 hat 
37 °C ± 1 °C at the maximum pressure gradient across the 
semi-permeable membrane recommended by the manu- 
facturer. 

Assemble the apparatus as shown in figure 10. 

Flush the blood and dialysing fluid or filtrate compartments 
with water (5.6.1.2.2) at 37 °C + 1 °C, taking care to purge 
the system of air. 



14 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Pressure gauge 




*-CE 



Blood compartment 



ID- 



Dialysing fluid or filtrate compartment 



>< 



X 



* 




Test fluid source 
with positive and 
negative pressure 



NOTE — Haemofilters and tiaemoconcentrators may have only one port in the filtrate compartment; in the case of haemodialysers with an open 
dialysing fluid compartment, the ends of the dialysing fluid compartment shall be occluded with caps developed especially for this test. 

Figure 10 — Test circuit for mechanical integrity 



5.6.1.5.2 Apply a positive pressure 1,5 times the manufac- 
turer's recommended pressure and seal the apparatus. After 
10 min, record the pressure and examine the device visually. 



5.6.1.5.3 If appropriate, apply a negative pressure 1,5 times 
the manufacturer's recommended pressure and seal the ap- 
paratus unless that negative pressure exceeds 700 mmHg; in 
that case, apply a negative pressure of 700 mmHg. After 
10 min, record the pressure and examine the device visually. 



5.6.1.6 Expression of results 

5.6.1.6.1 Positive pressure test 

An unsatisfactory test is shown by a decrease in pressure of 
more than 1 %, leakage or by a fault in the materials of con- 
struction. 



5.6.2 Membrane integrity 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.2 shall be 
determined by the procedure recommended by the manufac- 
turer. If requested, details of the test and the results shall be 
made available by the manufacturer. The validity of the test for 
membrane integrity shall be checked prior to marketing a new 
type of device in accordance with the method given in 
annex A. 

5.6.3 Blood compartment ports 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.3 shall be 
determined by inspection. 

5.6.4 Haemodialyser dialysing fluid compartment ports 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.4 shall be 
determined by inspection. 



The results shall be recorded as •"Pass" or "Fail". 



5.6.1.6.2 Negative pressure test 

An unsatisfactory test is shown by a decrease in the negative 
pressure of more than 1 %, leakage or by a fault in the 
materials of construction. 

The results shall be recorded as "Pass" or "Fail". 



5.6.1.7 Test report 

The test shall be recorded as satisfactory if all samples pass and 
unsatisfactory if any sample fails. 

The size of the sample and the rationale for its statistical 
significance shall be given. 



5.6.5 Haemofilter or haemoconcentrator filtrate port 

Compliance with the requirement specified in 4.6.5 shall be 
determined by inspection. 



6 Packaging, marking and accompanying 
documentation 

6.1 Packaging and marking 

6.1.1 Unit containers 

At least the following information shall be visible on or through 
the unit container : 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the product name ; 



15 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) the lot number which will allow the manufacturing 
history of the device to be traced ; 

e) a statement of sterility and non-pyrogenicity, and 
whether the entire contents of the container or the fluid 
pathways only are sterile; 

f) the month and year of sterilization, accurate to within 
30 days of the actual date of sterilization ; 

g) a statement of single use; 

NOTE - Symbol 1051 from ISO 7000 (j^) may also be used. 

h) the statement "Read the instructions before use"; 

i) a prominent instruction to prepare the haemodialyser, 
haemofilter or haemoconcentrator circuit as directed ; 

j) instructions and warnings regarding storage and 
handling. 

6.1.2 Outer containers 

At least the following information shall appear on the outer 
container : 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the name and address of the distributor, if different 
from the information given under a) ; 

c) the product name, description of contents and number 
of devices contained within the outer container ; 

d) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

e) the lot number which will allow the manufacturing 
history of the device to be traced ; 

f ) a statement of sterility and non-pyrogenicity ; 

g) the month and year of sterilization, accurate to within 
30 days of the actual date of sterilization; 

h) instructions and warnings regarding handling and 
storage. 



6.1.3 Device markings 

The device shall be marked with at least the following infor- 
mation ; 

a) the manufacturer's name; 

b) the product name; 

c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) the lot number which will allow the manufacturing 
history of the device to be traced ; 



e) the manufacturer's maximum recommended trans- 
membrane or mean (toil pressure (TMP or MCP), as ap- 
plicable; 

f) the direction of ±>lood flow and dialysing fluid flow, if 
applicable, 

6.2 Documentation 

6.2.1 Accompanying documents 

At least the following information shall be supplied with each 
outer container: 

a) the manufacturer's name and address; 

b) the product name; 

c) the manufacturer's identifying code for the device; 

d) a statement of sterility and non-pyrogenicity and the 
method of sterilization ; 

e) a statement of single use; 

NOTE - Symbol 1051 from ISO 7000 QT) may also be used. 

f) cautions and warnings (see 6.2.3) ; 

g) the recommended practice for anticoagulation; 

h) details of any ancillary equipment required; 

i) the generic name and, if applicable, the brand name of 
the membrane; 

j) a general description of the device; 

NOTE — This information should include special features such as 
filtration Tates requiring special controllers or adverse effects of 
bubbles in the dialysing fluid. 

k) the connectors recommended for the dialysing fluid 
ports or filtration port; 

I) the performance characteristics in accordance with 4.7 ; 

NOTE — If possible, this information should be displayed using 
graphs of sufficient size to permit interpolation between values. 

m) a statement that the following information is available 
to the user on request: 

1) details of the test methods used to obtain the 
values used in disclosure of the in vitro performance 
characteristics, 

2) the in vivo performance characteristics as specified 
in 4.7 for in vitro data, 

3) the volume of clotted and fluid residual blood, 

4) the generic names of materials of construction, in 
accordance with ISO 472 (if applicable), 

5) the number and size range of particulate matter and 
fibres in the effluent from the device when prepared as 
recommended by the manufacturer for clinical use, and 
details of the test method used to make this measure- 
ment. 



16 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



6.2.2 Operating instructions 

At least the following information shall be given to guide the 
user on the appropriate steps for setting up the device : 

a) directions for mounting the device in the support, if ap- 
plicable; 

b) the positioning of the extracorporeal circuit connection 
and, if appropriate, the positioning of the dialysing fluid 
tubing connections; 

c) the recommended priming, rinsing and termination of 
haemodialysis, haemofiltration or haemoconcentration pro- 
cedures; 

d) the direction of blood flow, if applicable; 

e) a typical circuit diagram. 

6.2.3 Cautions and warnings 

At least the following cautions and warnings shall be given 
under 6.2.1 f ) : 

a) pressure limitations; 



b) dialysing fluid flow rate limitations {applicable only to 
haemodialysers) ; 

c) blood flow rate limitations ; 

d) a warning, when appropriate, that due to obligatory 
filtration, a zero filtration rate cannot be achieved without 
a positive dialysing fluid pressure which is hazardous, 
because of the risk of infusing non-sterile dialysing fluid into 
the bloodstream and, if relevant, the risk of obstruction of 
the blood pathway(s) by collapse of the membrane; 

e) instructions to rinse the device as recommended before 
use; 

f) the need for any special equipment; 

g) a list of known adverse reactions ; 

h) a list of general and specific contraindications, such as 
"Not Recommended for Paediatric Use", "Do Not Use on 
Non-De-aerated Dialysing Fluid Delivery Systems" ; 

i) appropriate warnings and contra-indications of dim- 
inished performance if the device is used below certain flow 
rates or below a certain pressure or in particular orientations 
(horizontal, vertical, etc.). 



17 



IS 13890: 1994 
ISO 8637: 1989 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Test to check validity of membrane integrity test 



The test described in this annex shall be carried out prior to 
marketing the device (see 5.6.2) ; it is not intended to be a 
quality control test. 



A.1 Principle 

Submission of the device to the non-destructive test used to 
detect membrane leaks. Perfusion of the device with blood in 
vitro to determine if there is a blood leak. 



A.2 Reagent 

A. 2.1 Anticoagulated bovine or human blood, .with a 
hematocrit of 25 % and a protein concentration of 
60 g/l ± 5g/l at 37 °C ± 1 °C. 

A. 2. 2 Diaiysing fluid, which may be either water at 37 °C 
or, if clearance of ions is a concern, a 154 meq/l sodium 
chloride solution. 



A. 3 Apparatus 

A. 3.1 Blood pump, as commonly used for clinical haemo- 
dialysis, haemofiltration or haemoconcentration. 



A. 3. 6 System for perfusing the diaiysing fluid compart- 
ment with diaiysing fluid at 37 °C ± 1 °C. 

NOTE — This system is only required for dialysers. 



A. 4 Sampling and preparation of test 
samples 

A statistically significant sample of devices that have passed all 
safety and quality control measures, where applicable, shall be 
used. These devices shall be prepared as recommended by the 
manufacturer for clinical procedures. 



A. 5 Procedure 

Displace the fluid in the blood compartment with blood (A.2.1). 

Recirculate the blood through the blood compartment at the 
maximum pressure gradient across the semi-permeable mem- 
brane recommended by the manufacturer, using a blood flow 
rate that is typical of the blood flow rate during the clinical pro- 
cedure. 

Examine the diaiysing fluid or the filtrate visually for the 
presence of blood after a period of 30 min. 



A. 3. 2 Stainless steel or plastic vessel for the perfusate. 

A. 3. 3 Heating device, external to the blood pathway and 
the vessel of perfusate, capable of maintaining the perfusate at 
37 °C ± 1 °C. 



A. 6 Expression of results 

No presence of blood shall be observed. 

The results shall be recorded as "Pass" or "Fail". 



A. 3. 4 Pressure gauges, at least comparable in accuracy 
to those used for clinical haemodialysis, haemofiltration or 
haemoconcentration. 

A. 3.5 Extracorporeal blood circuit, designed for clinical 
haemodialysis, haemofiltration or haemoconcentration. See 
ISO 8638. 



A. 7 Test report 

The test shall be recorded as unsatisfactory if any of the 
samples fails the test. 

The size of the sample and the rationale for its statistical 
significance shall be given. 



18 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Qelhi-110015, India 



