**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



(1974): Limestone (Slab and Tiles) [CED 6: Stones] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; IIZB- If74 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIMESTONE { SLAB AND TILES ) 

( First Revision ) 

Second Reprint SEPTEMBER 1984 



U1>C 601"215MU 




# Copfrtxhi 1974 
INDIAIH 8TANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAH. t lAHADUR SKAH ZAPAR MARO 

NBW DBLHI 110001 

Cr 2 •'""■ *^''* 



18:1128-1974 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIMESTONE (SLAB AND TILES) 



( First Revision ) 



Stones Sectional Committee, BDG 6 

Chairman Representing 

Shei C. B. L. Mathur Public Works Department, Government of 

Rajrsthan, Jaipur 

Members 
Shbi K. K. Agrawala Builders' Association of India, Bombay 

Shri K. K. Madhok ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Bhakgava Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping & 

Transport 
Chief Architect Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Lala G. C. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. R. Das ( Alternate ) 
DEPtJTY Director ( Research ), Public Works Department, Government of Orissa, 
Control and Research Bhubaneshwar 

Laboratory 
Chief Engineer ( B & R ) Public Works Department, Government of Kerala, 

Trivandrum 
Dr M. P. Dhir Central Road Research Institute (CSIP), 

New Delhi 
Shri R. L. Nanda ( Alternate) 
Director ( CSMRS ) Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( CSMRS ) ( Alternate ) 
Director, MERI, Nasik Building & Communication Department, 

Maharashtra, Bombay 
Research Officer, MERI {Alternate) 
Executive Engineer ( Research ) Public Works Department, Government of 

Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shri M. K, Gupta Himalayan Tiles and Marble Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. D. Pathak {Alternate) 
Db Iqbal Ali Engineering Research Laboratory, Government of 

Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Shri A. B. Lingam ( Alternate ). 

( Continued on page 2) 



© Copyright 1974 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



15:1128-1974 



( Continued from page I ) 

Members 

Shkt D, C. Kadkade 

Siiiii V. B. Dks Ai ( Alternate ) 
SuRi T. R. MiuiANnRu 

ShRI MOHINOKIl.TIT SlXtnT 

Shbi S. R. N\m 
Shri Prbm Savarup 



Representing 
Hindustan Constniction Co lAd. Bombay 

, Calcutta 



Institvition of Engineers ( India ] 
M/s Stonco, Delhi 

Directorate G( ncral Border Roads, New Delhi 
Department of Geology & Mining, Government 
of Utlar Pradesli, Lucknow 
Shbi A, K. Agarwal ( Alternate) 
SuBi S. N. Ramanathan Directorate General of Mines Safety ( Ministry of 

Labour & Rehabilitation ), Dhanbad 
Shri M. Mahato ( Alternate ) 
Db a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Materials ) ( Alternate ) 



SiiRi M, L. Sethi 



[ Alternate ) 



Shri Y. N. Dave I 
Shbi B. C. Shah 
Dr B. N. Sinha 

Supebintenjjiko E ngi nee u. 
Capital Project (C) Circlii: 



Department of Geology & Mining, Government 
of Rajusthan, Udaipur 



Engineering Research Institute, Baroda 
Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 
Public W'oiks Department, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
ExB cuTivE Engineer ( Designs ) ( Alternate ) 
SupERlNTENBiNo ENGINEER Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
(Design & Marine Works ) Nadu, MMdnis 

Depi;ty Chief Engineer ( I & D ) ( Alterufde ) 
S UPEBINTENDING E N G I N E E u PubHc VVorks Department, Government of 
( Design & Pi.avning ) Andlira Pnulesh, Hyderabad 

Public Works Deportment, Government of 

Karnataka, Bangalore 
Public Works Department, Government of West 

Bengal, Calcutta 
Public Works Department, Government of Assam, 

Gauhali 
Engineer-in-Chief*s Branch ( Ministry of Defence ) 



Superintending Engineer 

( Designs ) 
Superintending En g in ee b 

(Pi.ANNiNG Chicle ) 
S u p E R I N t E n ij> I N ft Engineer 

( R & B ), Gauhati Circle 
Suui M. Y, Yo(;i 



Shri K. N. Subha Rao ( Alternate) 



Srrni D. Ajitha Simha, 
Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Director General, iSI ( tix-qfficw Member ) 



Secretary 

Shbi K- M. Mathur 
Deputy Director (Civ Engg), TSI 



18:1128-1974 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LIMESTONE ( SLAB AND TILES ) 



{ First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards institution on 15 March 1974, after the draft finalized by the 
Stones Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

0,2 Limestone slabs and tiles are now-a-days extensively used in the construc- 
tion of building floors. Limestone is found more or less in every part of India. 
There exists considerable variation in size, and quality of the finished product. 
Standardization of limestone slabs and tiles with regard to properties and 
sizes would substantially help in raising the quality and speed of construction. 
This standard was first published in 1957. The revision has been prepared so 
as to keep the provisions in line with present practice. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1 960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the requirements for dimensions and physical 
properties, of limestone slabs and tiles for use in flooring and face work. 

2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 The stone shall be without any soft veins, cracks or flaws and shall have 
a uniform texture. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised) 

3 



IS: 1128 -1974 

2.2 The curvature in any direction shall not exceed 5 mm. 

3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 Rough Cut 

3.1.1 Limestone slabs and tiles shall be supplied in sizes specified in 
Table 1 . The sizes in between ( of length and breadth ) shall be reckoned as 
next lower size. 

Note — This aspect will also cover tolerance in length and breadth. 

TABLE 1 STANDARD SIZES OF LIMESTONE SLABS AND TILES 

{ Clauses 3A A and3A,2) 

Length Breadth Thickness 

15 to 60 cm in 15 to 60 cm in 15 to 95 mm in 

stages of 5 cm stages of 5 cm stages of 1 mm 

60 to 100 cm in 30 to 100 cm in -do- 

stages of 10 cm stages of 10 cm 

ICO to 150 cm in 30 to 100 cm in 25 to 95 mm in 

stages of 10 cm stages of 10 cm stages of 10 mm 

3.1.2 Sizes other than those specified in Table 1 , if required for special 
purposes, may be supplied by mutual agreement between the purchaser and 
the supplier. 

3.1.3 Tolerances^ — The tolerances in thickness shall be +5 mm up to 25 mm 
thickness and ±5 mm for thickness above 25 mm. 

3.2 Cut Slabs^^ Machine cut slabs with true and square edges to the exact 
sizes mentioned in 3.1.1 ( with tolerance of ± 1 mm ) shall be supplied if so 
specified by the purchaser. The tolerance in thickness shall be as in 3.1.3. 

4. PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 

4.1 The physical properties of limestone slabs shall conform to the require- 
ments given in col 2 of Table 2, when tested in accordance with the provisions 
of Indian Standards given in col 3. 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each type of limestone slabs and tiles may be marked in a suitable 
manner with the manufacturer's identification mark or initials. 



tlS: 112^. 1974 



Si, 


Chabactbeistics 


No, 




(i) 


(2) 


i) 


Water absorption 


ii) 


Transverse strength 


iii) 


Durability 



TABLE 2 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF LIMESTONE SLABS 

(Ciause 4.1) 

RKQtriREMENT METHOD OF TeST ( ReF 

TO Indiak Stakdabd ) 
(3) (4) 

0-15 percent by weight IS : 1124-1974* 

70kg/cm2 IS:1121.1974t 

Shall not develop signs IS : 1126-1974J 

of spalling, disintegration 
of cracks 

♦Method of test for determination of water absorption and apparent specific gravity 
of natural building stones (jiM/ revision), 

tMethod of test for determination of compressive, transverse and shear strengths of 
natural building stones {first revision ) . 

JMethod of test for determination of durability of natural building stones {first 
revision ) . 

5.1.1 Each type of limestone slabs and tiles may also be marked with 
the IS! Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which 
is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products 
are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certifica- 
tion Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the 
Indian Standards Institution. 

6. SAMPLING 

6.1 Lot — In any consignment all the slabs/tiles of the same quarry shall 
be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

6.1.1 Samples sliall be selected and tested separately for each lot for 
determining its conformity or otherwise to the requirements of the 
specification, 

6.2 The number of slabs/lilcs to be selected for the sample shall depend 
upon the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with Table 3. 

6.2.1 The slabs/tiles in the sample shall be selected at random and in 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, random number table may be 
used (i^^ IS: 4905-1968*). 

♦Methods for random sanipiing. 



t$: 1128- 1974 



TABLE 3 


SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 




( Clauses 6.2, 


6.3 


and 6.4 ) 




Number of 
Slabs/Tiles 
IN THE Lot 


Number of 

SLABS/Tir.ES 

TO BE Selected 
IN Sample 




Permissible 
Number of 
Defectives 


'Sub-sample Size 
in Numbers 


(I) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


Up to 100 


5 







3 


101 to 300 


8 







3 


301 to 500 


13 







6 


501 to 1 000 


20 




1 


6 



6.3 All the slabs/tiles selected as per col 2 of Table 3 shall be examined for 
general requirements and dimensions {see 2 and 3). Any slab/tile failing in 
any one or more of the above requirements shall be considered as defective. 
A lot shall be considered as conforming to these requirements if the number 
of defective obtained is not more than the permissible number of defectives 
given in col 3 of Table 3. 

6.4 The lot having been found satisfactory with respect to general requirements 
and dimensions shall be tested for physical properties. For this purpose a 
sub-sample of size given in col 4 of Table 3 shall be selected at random. 
These slabs/tiles in the sub-sample shall be fii*st tested for transverse strength, 
the same samples after completion of this test shall be utilized for determin- 
ing water absorption and durability {see 4). A lot shall be considered 
having been satisfied the requirements of the physical properties if none of 
the slab^/tiles tested for these requirements fails in any of these tests. 



