**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10799 (1999) : Irrigation Equipment - Design, 
Installation and Field Evaluation of Microirrigation 
Systems - Code of Practice [FAD 17: Farm Irrigation and 
Drainage Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i img*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10799:1999 

Indian Standard 

IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT — DESIGN, 

INSTALLATION AND FIELD EVALUATION 

OF MICROIRRIGATION SYSTEMS — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 65.060.35 



©BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1999 Price Group 7 



Irrigation and Farm Drainage Equipment and System Sectional Committee, FAD 54 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Irrigation and Farm Drainage Equipment and System Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

The use of microirrigation systems in this country is increasing at a substantial rate. As the need for 
recommended practices for systems design and installation has been felt extensively, this standard was first 
prepared in 1984. With the change in the technology it was felt to revise the standard and update it with the 
present practices being followed. While revising the standard the procedure for field evaluation of 
microirrigation system has also been included. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance, has been derived from the following ASAE standards published 
by American Society of Agricultural Engineering: 

ASAE EP 405.1 Design and Installation of Microirrigation Systems, and 

ASAE EP 458 Field Evaluation of Microirrigation System. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'- The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value, should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 10799 : 1999 



Indian Standard 

IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT — DESIGN, 

INSTALLATION AND FIELD EVALUATION 

OF MICROIRRIGATION SYSTEMS — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard specifies recommendations for the 
design, installation, performance and procedure for 
field evaluation of microirrigation systems; including 
trickle, drip, subsurface, bubbler and spray irrigation 
systems. 

2 DEFINITIONS 



2.1 Application Efficiency, E a 

The percentage of the total water applied that is 
actually stored in the root zone. 

2.2 Chemical Water Treatment 

Chemical treatment of the water to make it acceptable 
for uje in microirrigation systems. This may include 
acids, fungicides and bactericides used to prevent 
emitter clogging or used forpH adjustment. 

2.3 Coefficient of Variation, Vqs 

A statistical measure of the relative dispersion for an 
independent variable as denned in this code (see 2.22). 

2.4 Confidence Limits 

A statement which relates the probability that the true 
value of a variable falls within the described interval. 

2.5 Control Station 

The control station may include facilities for water 
measurement, filtration, treatment, application of 
additives, flow and pressure control, timing of 
application and backflow prevention. 

2.6 Crop Area 

The field surface area allocated to each plant. In tree 
crops the tree crop area is the spacing multiplied by 
the row spacing. 

2.7 Design Area 

The specific land area which is to be irrigated by the 
microirrigation system. 



2.8 Design Emission Uniformity 

An estimate of the uniformity of emitter discharge 
rates throughout the system, as described by the 
equation in 3.5.2. 

2.9 Emitters 

Device fitted to an irrigation lateral and intended to 
emit water in the form of drops or continuous flow at 
a rate not exceeding 16 1/h per outlet except during 
flushing. 

2.9.1 Emission Point 

Point where the water is discharged from an emitter. 

2.9.2 Line-Source Emitters 

Water is discharged from closely spaced perforations, 
emitters or a porous wall along the lateral line. 

2.9.3 Point-Source Emitters 

Water is discharged from emission points that are 
individually and relatively widely spaced, usually over 
1 m. Multiple-outlet emitters discharge water at two 
or more emission points. 

2.10 Emitter Discharge Coefficient of Variation, 

Vqs 

A statistical term used to describe the variation in 
emitter discharge rates in a submain unit or throughout 
a microirrigation system for a given set of operating 
conditions. 

2.11 Emitter Discharge Exponent 

The emitter discharge exponent, x, as described by the 
equation q = kh x y which characterizes the type of 
emitter. For example, an x value of 0.5 is common for 
orifice type emitters, whereas the x value for a pressure 
compensating emitter would range from 0.0 to 0.2. 

2.12 Emitter Discharge Rate 

The discharge rate at a given operating pressure and at 
a temperature of 27 °C from an individual point-source 



1 



IS 10799 : 1999 



emitter expressed as a volume per unit time or from a 
unit length of line-source emitter expressed as a 
volume per unit length per unit time. 

2.13 Emitter Operating Pressure 

The average operating pressure of the emitters within 
any simultaneously operated portion of the system. 

2.14 Emitter Performance Coefficient of 
Variation, V p f 

A statistical term used to describe the variation in 
emitter discharge due to the combined effects of 
emitter manufacturer's variation, emitter wear and 
emitter plugging. 

2.15 Evapotranspiration 

The combined effects of evaporation from the soil and 
plant surface and transpiration from plants. Peak 
evapotranspiration is the maximum rate of daily 
evapotranspiration. 

2.16 Filtration System 

The assembly of independently controlled physical 
components used to remove suspended solids from 
irrigation water. This may include both pressure and 
gravity-type devices and such specific units as settling 
basins or reservoirs, screens, media beds and 
centrifugal force units. 

2.17 Hydraulic Design Coefficient of Variation, 

Vhs 

A statistical term used to describe the variation in 
hydraulic pressure in a submain unit or throughout a 
nncrotrrigation system. Care should be taken not to 
confuse this term with the emitter discharge 
coefficient of variation due to hydraulics, Vqh, as 
defined by the equation in 4.1.3.4. 

2.18l Irrigation Deficit 

The percentage of the soil volume in the root zone 
which is not wetted to field capacity or above (after 
irrigation) divided by the total potential root zone of 
the crop. 

2.19 Lateral 

The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the 
emitters from the manifolds. 

2.20 Main and Submain 

The water delivery pipelines that supply water from 
the control station to the manifolds. 

2.21 Manifold 

The water delivery pipeline that supplies water from 
the submain or main to the laterals. 



2.22 Manufacturer's Coefficient of Variation (C v ) 

This is a measure of the variability of discharge of a 
random sample of a given make, model and size of 
emitter, as produced by the manufacturer and before 
any field operation of ageing has taken place. 



C v = 



where 
x 



= the mean discharge of an emitter in the 
sample, and 

= the standard deviation of the discharge of 
the emitters in the sample 

E(xj-jc) 2 
n-1 



where 

x\ 
n 



= the mean discharge of an emitter, 
= the number of emitters in the sample, and 
/ = a subscript identifying individual emitters. 

If a line-source emitter is used, the individual 
discharges from holes on a one-meter or other 
specified length of emitter tape are used. This term 
can also be used to describe the variability in the 
downstream pressure from pressure control valves or 
the variability in discharge from flow control valves 
or orifices. 

2.23 Microirrigation 

The frequent application of small quantities of water 
on or below the soil surface as drops, tiny streams or 
miniature spray through emitters or applicators placed 
along a water delivery line. Microirrigation 
encompasses a number of methods or concepts; such 
as bubbler, drip, trickle, mist or spray and subsurface 
irrigation. 

2.23.1 Bubbler Irrigation 

The application of water to the soil surface as a small 
stream or fountain, where the discharge rates for 
point-source bubbler emitters are greater than for drip 
or subsurface emitters but generally less than 225 1/h. 
Because the emitter discharge rate normally exceeds 
the infiltration rate of the soil, a small basin is usually 
required to contain or control the water. 

2.23.2 Drip and Trickle Irrigation 

The application of water to the soil surface as drops or 
tiny streams through emitters. Often the terms drip 
and trickle irrigation are considered synonymous. For 
trickle and drip irrigation, discharge rates for point 
source emitters are generally less than 16 1/h for 
single-outlet emitters, and discharge rates for 
line-source emitters are generally less than 16 1/h/m 
of lateral. 



IS 10799 : 1999 



2.23.3 Spray Irrigation 

The application of water by a small spray or mist to 
the soil surface, where travel through the air becomes 
instrumental in the distribution of water. Discharge 
rates for point-source spray emitters are generally 
lower than 175 1/h. 

2.23.4 Subsurface Irrigation 

The application of water below the soil surface 
through emitters with discharge rates generally in the 
same range as drip irrigation. This method of water 
application is different from and not to be confused 
with the method where the root zone is irrigated by 
water table control, herein referred to as subirrigation. 

2.24 Microirrigation Systems 

The physical components required to apply water by 
microirrigation system components that may be 
required include the emitters, lateral lines, manifold 
lines, main and submain lines, filter, chemical 
injectors, flow control station and other necessary 
items. 

2.25 Net Irrigation Water Requirement 

Quantity of water that is required for crop production, 
exclusive of effective precipitation. 

2.26 Peak Daily Irrigation Water Requirement 

The net quantity of water needed to meet the peak daily 
evapotranspiration rate occurring during the growing 
season expressed in mm/day. 

2.27 Percentage Wetting 

The percentage of the soil volume in the root zone 
which is wetted to field capacity or above (after 
irrigation) divided by the total potential root zone of 
the crop, 

2.28 Percent Area Wetted 

The area wetted as a percentage of the total crop area. 

2.29 Pumping Station 

The pump or pumps that provide water and pressure 
to the system, together with all necessary 
appurtenances such as base, sump, screens, valves, 
motor controls, motor protection devices, fences and 
shelters. 

2.30 Root Zone 

The root zone of a plant is defined as the depth of soil, 
from which the plant extracts moisture. 

2.31 Statistical Uniformity, U 

An estimate of the uniformity of emitter discharge 
rates throughout an existing microirrigation system as 
described by the equation in 4*1.1.2. 



2.32 Submain Unit 

An independently controlled irrigation unit usually 
covering from 1 ha to 5 ha and including a submain 
manifold, lateral lines and emitters. 

2.33 Subunit 

The main manifold and lateral pipelines which operate 
simultaneously and have independent flow control. 

2.34 System Operating Pressure 

The average operating pressure downstream from the 
pumping and control station where the main lines 
begin. 

2.35 Water Additives 

The addition of fertilizers, herbicides, insecticides or 
other additives to the water primarily for the 
enhancement of crop production, and sometimes as a 
chemical water treatment to reduce emitter clogging. 

2.36 Water Amendment 

The fertilizer, herbicide, insecticide or other material 
added to the water for the enhancement of crop 
production or as a chemical water treatment to reduce 
emitter clogging. 

2.37 Wetted Area 

The average irrigated soil area in a horizontal plane 
located at or below the emitter. 

3 DESIGN, INSTALLATION, AND 
PERFORMANCE 

3,1 System Capacity 

Microirrigation systems shall have a design capacity 
adequate to satisfy the peak irrigation water 
requirement as described in 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 of each 
and all crops to be irrigated within the design area. 
The capacity shall include an allowance for water 
losses (evaporation, runoff, deep percolation) that may 
occur during application periods. The system shall 
have the capacity to apply a stated amourit of water to 
the design area in a specified net operation period. The 
system should have a minimum design capacity 
sufficient to deliver the peak daily irrigation water 
requirements in about 90 percent of the time-avarlable 
or not more than 22 h of operation per day. If a system 
is designed with a capacity less than the peak daily 
irrigation water requirement, the design capacity shall 
be stated in writing. The principle for estimation of 
water requirements for installation of drip irrigation 
system is given in Annex A. 

3.1.1 Design According to Peak Irrigation 
Requirement 

Where irrigation provides all or part of the water to the 
crop, the system shall have the capacity to meet the 



IS 10799 : 1999 



peak daily irrigation requirements of all crops irrigated 
within the design area. Unless field research with 
microirrigation systems is available, peak daily 
irrigation water requirements for crops determined 
with conventional irrigation systems should be used to 
determine system capacity. 

3.1.2 Special Cases 

If specified by the user (for example, economic 
considerations, especially in areas of frequent rainfall) 
and/or for special uses, the system may be designed 
with a capacity to apply a required volume of water, 
which is less than peak, to a design area in a specified 
net operating period. 

3.2 Emitter Discharge Rate 

The following conditions shall be met: 

3.2.1 For drip, subsurface, and spray irrigation, the 
emitter discharge rate should not create runoff within 
the immediate application area. Small depressional 
ponds may develop beneath or above an emitter, but 
channelization to a furrow or other nearby low-lying 
area should be avoided. In fields with varying soil 
types, this criterion shall apply to the soil with the 
lowest infiltration rate unless it is less than 15 percent 
of the area irrigated. 

3.2.2 For bubbler irrigation, a basin beneath the plant 
canopy will be required for water control. 
Applications shall generally be confined to the basin 
area. 

3.2.3 Where natural precipitation and/or stored soil 
water is not sufficient for germination, special 
provisions shall be made for germination, or the 
microirrigation system shall apply water at a rate 
sufficient to adequately wet the soil to germinate seeds 
or establish transplants. The depth of a subsurface 
system for use on annualcrops shall be limited by the 
ability of the system to germinate the seeds, unless it 
is stated in writing that other provisions will be 
required for this function. 

3.2.4 Proper emitter discharge rate shall be 
determined and specified. Infiltration rates for 
different types of local, bare soils may be obtained 
from responsible agricultural technicians. In the 
absence of such advice, the proper emitter discharge 
rate may be estimated on the basis of past experience 
with similar soil types. In area field tests are 
recommended. 

3.3 Number and Spacing of Emitters 

The number and spacing of emitters along the lateral 
line depend upon the emitter discharge rate, system 
capacity, soil waterholding capacity, lateral spread of 
water from the emission points, crop being grown, 
depth of irrigated root zone, desired water application 



efficiency and emitter discharge variability. 
Information on soil water-holding capacity and 
effective crop rooting depth can usually be obtained 
from responsible agricultural technicians, or may be 
estimated on the basis of past experience with similar 
crops and soil types. The lateral spread of water may 
also be estimated from past experience, but in new 
areas field tests are recommended. The area wetted as 
a percent of the total crop area may range from a low 
of 20 percent for widely spaced crops, such as trees, to 
a high of over 75 percent for row crops. 

3.4 Operating Pressure 

The design operating pressure shall be in accordance 
with the recommendations of the manufacturers. The 
system operating pressure must compensate for 
pressure losses through system components and field 
elevation effects. 

3.5 Water Application Uniformity 

The water application uniformity (for nonpressure 
compensating emitters) is affected by the operating 
pressure, emitter spacing, land slope, pipeline size, 
emitter discharge rate and emitter discharge 
variability, The emitter discharge variability is due to 
pressure and temperature changes, manufacturing 
variability, ageing and clogging. 

3.5.1 Emitter Manufacturing Variability 

The expected manufacturer's coefficient of variation 
(C v ) should be available for new emitters operated at 
a constant temperature and near the design emitter 
operating pressure. A general guide for classifying C v 
values is shown in Table 1. 

Table 1 Recommended Classification of 

Manufacturer's Coefficient of Variation (C v ) 

(Clauses 3.5.1. and 5.1.2.2) 



Emitter Type 


C v Range 


Classification 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Point -source 


<0.05 


Excellent 




0.05 to 0.07 


Average 




0.07 to 0.1 1 


Marginal 




0.11 to 0.15 


Poor 




>0.15 


Unacceptable 


Line-source 


<0.10 


Good 




0.10 to 0.20 


Average 




>0.20 


Marginal to 
Unacceptable 



3.5.2 Design Emission Uniformity 

To estimate design emission uniformity in terms of C v 
and pressure variations at the emitter, the following 
equation is suggested: 



EU = 100 



1.0-- 



1.27 C v 



IT 



4m 



IS 10799 : 1999 



where 
EU 
n 



C v = 



Qm 



the design emission uniformity, percent; 
for a point-source emitter on a perennial 
crop, the number of emitters per plant; for 
a line-source emitter on an annual or 
perennial row crop, either the lateral 
rooting diameter of the plants divided by 
the same unit length of lateral line used to 
calculate C v or 1, which is greater; 

the manufacturer's coefficient of 
variation for point or line-source emitters; 

the minimum emitter discharge rate for 
the minimum pressure in the subunit, 1/h; 
and 



<7a 



= the average or design emitter discharge 
rate for the subunit, 1/h. 
Table 2 shows recommended ranges of EU values. 

Table 2 Recommended Ranges of Design 

Emission Uniformity (EU) 

(Clause 3.5.2) 



Emitter Type 


Spacing Topography 
(m) 


Slope, 
Percent 


EU 
Range, 
Percent 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


Point source on 
perennial crops 


>4 


Uniform 

Steep or undulating 


<2 
>2 


90 to 95 
85 to 90 


Point source on 
perennial or 
semipermanent 
crops 


<4 


Uniform 

Steep or undulating 


<2 
>2 


85 to 90 
80 to 90 


Line source on 
annual or 
perennial crops 


All 


Uniform 

Steep or undulating 


<2 

>2 


80 to 90 
70 tc 85 



3.5.3 Allowable Pressure Variations 

The following recommendations are made to reduce 
pressure loss and minimize pipeline sizes in 
microsystems. 

3.5.3.1 Pressure differences at the emitters 
throughout the system (or block or subunit) should be 
maintained in a range such that the desired design 
emission uniformity (EU) is obtained. For example, 
from the equation in 3.5,2, with an EU of 80 percent, 
a C v of 0.10, and one emitter per plant, the ratio 
between the minimum and average emitter discharge 
rate should be no less than 0.92. Since the allowable 
pressure loss corresponding to the minimum emitter 
discharge rate will differ depending on the emitter 
characteristics, the allowable pressure variation 
should be stated in writing for the specific emitter type 
and C v specified. 

3.5.3.2 Field shape and slope frequently dictate the 
most economical lateral direction. Whenever 



possible, laterals should be laid downslope for slopes 
of less than 5 percent if lateral size reduction can be 
attained. For steeper terrain, lateral lines should be laid 
along the field contour and pressure compensating 
emitters should be specified or pressure control 
devices used along downsloped laterals. 

3.5.3.3 Excessive main or submain pressure 
differences can result in widely varying manifold or 
lateral takeoff pressures. In some instances, these 
excessive variations cannot be controlled by main or 
submain size alone. The only practical alternative is 
to design for adequate pressure at the lateral lines and 
properly regulate the pressures at the manifold or 
lateral lines. This pressure regulation may be 
accomplished by using automatic pressure regulators, 
fixed orifice or flow control pipe restrictions, or 
manually set valves. 

3.5.3.4 Pipe sizes for mains and submains should be 
chosen after considering pipe costs and power costs, 
while keeping flow velocities within recommended 
limits for surge control and accounting for the effect 
on design emission uniformity from the resulting 
pressure variations. 

3.6 Filtration Systems 

A general design recommendation for the water 
filtration system should include location, size, 
specification of allowable suspended material sizes, 
types offilter or filters, and maintenance requirements. 

3.6.1 Location 

A primary filter shall be located after the pump and 
chemical injection point to remove both large and fine 
particles from the flow. Secondary filters may be used 
downstream from the primary filter to remove any 
particles which may pass through the primary filter 
during normal or cleaning operations. Water meters, 
solenoid-operated valves and final pressure regulators 
should follow the primary and secondary filters. 
Lateral-line or inline filters can be used as additional 
protection. 

3.6.2 Size 

Filter flow openings shall be sufficiently small to 
prevent the passage of unwanted particles into the 
system. When available, recommendations of the 
emitter manufacturer shall be used to select the size of 
the filtration system. In the absence of manufacturer's 
recommendations, the filter size should be based on 
the diameter of the emitter opening or the type and size 
of contaminants to be filtered. The capacity of the 
filter should be sufficiently large to permit the rated 
flow without frequent cleaning. Filters that are to be 
cleaned by hand should not require more than daily 
maintenance. The maximum permissible head loss 
across the filter shall be 70 kPa before filter cleaning 
is required. 



IS 10799 : 1999 



3.6.3 Types 

Filtration may be accomplished through the use of 
pressure filters (screen and media) and gravity filters 
(centrifugal separators, gravity screen filters and 
settling basins). 

3.6.3.1 Pressure screen filters 

This filter consists of a screen made of metal, plastic, 
or synthetic cloth enclosed in a .special housing used 
to limit maximum particle size. The presence of algae 
in irrigation water tends to cause screen blockage and 
can considerably reduce filtering capacity. Screens 
are classified according to the number of openings per 
inch with standard wire size for each screen size. Most 
manufacturers recommend 150 u: to 75 (X (100 to 200 
mesh) screens for emitters, but some recommend 
screens as coarse as 600 microns (30 mesh). Screen 
flow capacity should not exceed 135 1/s per square 
metre of screen opening. 

3.6.3.2 Media filters 

Media filters consist of fine gravel and sand of selected 
sizes placed in pressurized tanks. Media can lose 
effectiveness with time (due to rounding, etc) and 
should be replaced after extended usage. Media filters 
are not easily plugged by algae and can remove 
relatively large amounts of suspended solids before 
cleaning is needed. Cleaning is accomplished by 
forcing water backwards through the filter 
(baekflushing). Media filters in current use will retain 
particle sizes in the range of 25 to 200 microns. In 
general, water flow rates through the filters should be 
between 10 and 18 1/s per square metre of filtration 
surface area Media filters should be followed by 
secondary screen filter or a rinse cycle valve to prevent 
carryover of contaminants following the backwashing 
process. 

3.6.3.3 Centrifugal separators 

Sand separators, hydrocyclones or centrifugal filters 
remove suspended particles that have a specific 
gravity greater than water. These filters are ineffective 
in removing most organic solids. A sand separator can 
effectively remove a large number of sand particles 
and may be installed on the suction side of the pump 
as a prefilter to reduce pump wear. 

3.6.3.4 Settling basins 

Settling basins, ponds or reservoirs can be used as a 
form of pre-filtration treatment, but unless covered, 
the water is exposed to wind-blown contaminants and 
algae growth. Open reservoirs can be treated with 
commercially available algicides; however, care must 
be taken to avoid potential environmental hazards. 
When used, basins should be sized to limit turbulence 
and permit a minimum of 15 min for water to travel 
from the basin inlet to the pumping system intake. 



3.6.3.5 Gravity screen filters 

Gravity screen filters rely upon gravity instead of 
water pressure to move water through the screen. 
Pressure losses across gravity screen filters rarely 
exceed 7 kPa consequently they can be used in systems 
where pressure losses must be minimized. They are 
also effective in removing organic (that is, algae) as 
well as inorganic contaminants. 

3.7 Flushing System 

To assist in keeping sediment build-up at a minimum, 
automatic or hand flushing of all microirrigation 
pipelines is recommended on a regular time schedule. 
Filtration should be effective enough so that flushing 
of the system is needed on more frequently than once 
per week. 

3.7.1 location 

Valves shall be provided at the ends of mains and 
submains and provisions made for flushing of lateral 
lines. All connections and pipeline fittings shall be 
large enough in diameter to facilitate flushing. 

3.7.2 Capacity 

A minimum flow velocity of 0.3 m/s is needed for 
flushing of lateral lines. Because only a few lateral 
lines can be flushed at one time, the flushing system 
should be adequately valved so that subunits can be 
flushed independently. 

3,8 Chemical Water Treatment 

The need for chemical water treatment depends 
primarily on the type of microirrigation system used 
and the composition of the water. Acids and 
bactericides are both used for prevention of emitter 
clogging and renovation after clogging occurs. 

3.8.1 Acids 

The least expensive acid available can be used, usually 
at a concentration which is sufficient to offset calcium, 
magnesium or iron carbonate and bicarbonate 
precipitation. Another method for dealing with water 
high in bicarbonates is to aerate the water and hold it 
in a reservoir until equilibrium is reached and the 
precipitates have settled out. 

NOTE — The reduction of water pH may cause harmful effects 
on crop production if it results in lowering of pH of the soil. 
Before deciding the concentration of acid solution for lowering 
the /?H, the particular crop in question should be studied. 

3.8.2 Bactericides 

Calcium hypochlorite, sodium hypochlorite, chlorine 
gas, or other algicides and bactericides can be added 
continuously or periodically at the control station to 
inhibit bacterial growth. Registration of these 
chemicals for use in microirrigation systems may be 
required. For high /?H waters, acids can be injected to 



IS 10799 : 1999 



adjust pH to increase the bacteria-killing property of 
the hypochlorites. If hypochlorite and acids are used 
simultaneously, they shall be injected from separate 
sources to avoid the possibility of generating lethal 
chlorine gas. Gas chlorination or hypochlorination is 
not recommended for water containing more than 
0.4 mg/1 (0.4 ppm) dissolved iron, since it can lead to 
the precipitation of iron that may not be filterable and 
may deposit in pipelines and emitters. The amount of 
chlorine to be added depends on the chlorine demand 
and the potential for bacterial emitter clogging. 
Where bacterial control is needed, enough chlorine 
should be added to have some measurable amount of 
free residual chlorine [at least 0.1 mg/1 (0.1 ppm)] 
present at the ends of all lateral lines after a chemical 
injection period. When continuous or frequent 
monitoring for chlorine is not possible, it may be 
prudent to target for 1 .0 mg/1 (1 .0 ppm) free chlorine 
at the ends of laterals to provide a sufficient safety 
factor to cover fluctuations in chlorine demand 
between monitoring times. 

3.9 Fertilization System 

Microirrigation systems provide a convenient method 
of supplying nutrient materials to the crop; however, 
the effects of the nutrient on the system should be 
considered, 

3.9,1 Nitrogen 

Ammonium sulphate, ammonium nitrate and urea 
have been used at low concentrations with no harmful 
effects on the water or irrigation system. Anhydrous 
ammonia, aqueous ammonia or ammophos increase 
pH and can cause chemical precipitation which can 
clog emitters, particularly with high pH water. 



3.9.2 Phosphorous 

Commonly used phosphate fertilizers tend to 
precipitate in irrigation waters with high hydroxyl, 
calcium and manganese contents. Phosphorous 
fertilizers can become immobilized in the soil. 
Phosphoric acid and water soluble organic 
phosphorous compounds have been successfully used 
in microsystems; however, common practice is to 
apply the phosphorous separately and not through the 
irrigation system. 

3.9.3 Potassium 

There are no problems associated with potassium 
application through microirrigation systems. 

3.9.4 Micronutrients 

Manganese, zinc, iron, copper, etc, may be applied as 
soluble salts through the irrigation system. These 
should each be injected separately and apart from other 
fertilizers and chemicals to avoid chemical interaction 
and precipitation in emitters. The effects of improper 



application amounts on the nutrient balance in the soil 
should be considered when applying micronutrients 

3.10 Injection System 

The following are some of the more important 
considerations that shall be considered in the design of 
a chemical or fertilizer injection system. 

3.10.1 Injection Method and Rate 

Fertilizers may be injected by a differential pressure 
system, venturi injector or by pumping under pressure 
(pressure injected) into the irrigation water. Other 
chemicals such as acids, bactericides chlorine which 
require a constant concentration rate entering the 
irrigation water shall be injected by constant rate 
injection devices only. Chemicals shall be injected 
into the system after the primary filter and before the 
fine filter. The required rate of chemical injection 
depends on the initial concentration of chemical and 
the desired concentration of chemical to be applied 
during the irrigation. An injector that will operate 
within a range of injection rates for a number of 
chemicals may be desired. 

3.10.2 Concentration 

The concentration of chemicals to be injected in the 
irrigation water is normally very low, with ranges of 
200 to 500 ppm for fertilizers and chemicals and 
0.5-10 mg/1 (0.5-10 ppm) for bactericides. Chemical 
concentrations should be routinely measured after 
filters and before main pipelines, and occasionally at 
the end of the last lateral line, to check if the entire 
microirrigation system is being treated. 

3.10.3 Storage Tank Capacity 

Large, low cost tanks constructed from epoxy-coated 
metal, plastic or fiberglass are usually practical when 
injection pumps are used, For a pressure differential 
injection system, the high pressure rated chemical tank 
should have enough capacity for a complete 
application. 

3.10.4 Contamination of Water Supply 

When the water supply or pump fails, it may be 
possible to have reverse flow from the injection or 
irrigation system, A pressure switch or other means 
should be used to turn off the injector pump or close 
solenoid operated valve on a differential pressure 
system so that chemicals cannot be injected when the 
irrigation pump is not operating. A vacuum-breaker 
and check valve should be placed between the water 
supply pump and the injection point to prevent 
backflow from the pipeline to the water supply. In 
addition, municipalities may require other backflow 
prevention valves at connections to municipal water 
lines to prevent reverse flow, particularly when water 
is being treated with chemicals or amendments. 



IS 10799 : 1999 



3.10.5 Resistance to Chemicals 

All hardware shall be resistant to reaction with the 
chemicals being injected. 



3.11 Flow Monitoring 

A flow measuring device shall be installed as part of 
the control station to aid in scheduling irrigations and 
monitoring system performance. Flow measurements 
can indicate if pressure regulation is malfunctioning, 
excessive leaks exist, emitters are clogging or emitter 
opening enlargement is occurring. Some flow 
measuring devices give both the accumulated flow and 
instantaneous flow rate. Accumulated flow over a 
specified period of time can be used to determine flow 
rate if instantaneous readings are not available. 

3.12 Safety 

3.12.1 The design or operation of the irrigation 

systems shall prevent the leaking or spraying of water 
on electrical lines or power units. 

3.12.2 Protective devices on chemical injection 

equipment shall be provided to prevent contamination 
of the water supply or unplanned discharge of 
chemicals. A water source should be provided near 
the chemical tank for washing off chemicals if skin 
contact occurs. Protective clothing is advisable when 
handling chemicals. 

3.12.3 Pumps and power units shall be set on a firm 
base and kept in proper alignment. Primary filters and 
control valves may also be mounted on a firm base. 

3.12.4 Wiring and starting equipment for electrically 
operated plants shall comply with overload and low 
voltage protection requirements, and any applicable 
electrical codes. 

3.12.5 Pumps, power units, primary filters and 
control valves shall be provided with protective 
devices. Thermostats shall be provided which stop the 
power units when engine or motor temperatures 
exceed safety points. If failure of the water supply 
might cause the pump to lose its prime, the motor or 
engine shall be properly protected. Chemical and 
fertilizer injection equipment shall be automatically 
turned off when the irrigation pump is not operating. 

3.12.6 Few piping systems are operated under static 
conditions for long time resulting in hydraulic 
transient condition or Surges. A pressure Surges or 
water hammers, created any time, changes the 
flowrate in a piping system. This may be caused by 
valve operation, line break or rapid escape of 
entrapped air. In hill areas one has to be careful about 
this aspect and control the water hammer by using 
various design techniques to maintain constant 



downstream pressure regardless of the flowrate, 
controlling valve closure speed and avoiding 
entrapment of air during filling of water initially or 
after draining. 

4 EVALUATION PRINCIPLES AND 
PROCEDURES 

4.1 Water Application Uniformity 

The water application uniformity is affected by the 
hydraulic design, topography, operating pressure, pipe 
size, emitter spacing and emitter discharge variability. 
The emitter discharge variability is due to water 
temperature variation, emitter manufacturer's 
variation, emitter wear and emitter plugging. The 
coefficient of variation and the statistical uniformity 
shall be used to evaluate the emitter discharge 
variation and to differentiate between hydraulic design 
and emitter performance variation. 

4.1.1 Statistical Uniformity 

The statistical uniformity shall be used to evaluate 
water application uniformity within a^ubmain unit or 
thorough a microirrigation system. 

4.1.1.1 The mean emitter discharge rate, q, standard 
deviation, S q and coefficient of variation for a submain 
unit or system, V qs , shall be determined as follows: 



1 n 



Q\ 



S q ~ 



IF* £• 



£qi)\ 
i=l 



V* 



K 



-*L 



qs 



where 

q\ = the emitter discharge rate, 

n = the number of randomly selected emitters, 
and 

i =? a subscript identifying individual emitters. 

4.1.1.2 The statistical uniformity of the emitter 
discharge rate shall be determined as follows: 

t/. = looo" -iv 

where 

Us = statistical uniformity of the emitter 
discharge rate. 

4.1.1.3 The 95 percent confidence limits for a specific 
statistical uniformity, t/ s , or emitter discharge 



coefficient of variation, V qs , and a given random 
sample size, n, will be selected from Table 3. 
For example, given a statistical uniformity, £/ s , of 
90 percent as determined from a sample size of 
36 observations would result in a confidence limit 
of ±2.4 percent. 



8 



IS 10799 : 1999 



Table 3 95 Percent Confidence Limits, ± Percent 

(Clauses 4AA3AA2AAA3A and 5A2A) 



U s 




Number of Observations, n 


v qs 




18 


36 


72 


144 




0) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


90 


3.5 


2.4 


1.7 


1.2 


0.1 


80 


73 


5.0 


3.4 


2.4 


0.2 


70 


11.5 


7.8 


5.4 


3.8 


0.3 


60 


16.2 


10.9 


7.6 


5.4 


0.4 



4.1.1.4 The mean hydraulic pressure, h, standard 
deviation, S h , and hydraulic design coefficient of 
variation, V^s can be determined using the equations 
shown in 4.1.1.1 with the substitution of lateral line 
pressure, h, for emitter discharge, q 2 , while all other 
variables are as previously defined. 

4.1.1.5 The statistical uniformity was selected for this 
Indian Standard because of its ability to differentiate 
between the various factors affecting emitter 
discharge variation. In order to facilitate comparisons, 
a table of equivalent uniformities has been developed. 
Table 4 relates the statistical uniformity, £/ s , to the 
emission uniformity, EU, as estimated using the lower 
quartile and acceptability of the design. 

Table 4 Comparison of Uniformities, Percent 



Method 


Statistical 


Emission 


Acceptability 


Uniformity (t/ s ) 


Uniformity (EU) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Excellent 


100-95 


100-94 


Good 


90-85 


87-81 


Fair 


80-75 


75-68 


Poor 


70-65 


62-56 


Unacceptable 


<60 


<50 



4.1.2 Emitter Discharge Variation 

The emitter discharge variation is a measure of the 
variation ofthe emitter discharge rate in asubmain unit 
or throughout a microirrigation system. The 
coefficient of variation will be used to determine the 
emitter discharge variation using the following 
procedure. 

4.1.2.1 Decide upon a reasonable sample size n, for 
the 95 percent confidence limits desired from Table 3. 
The number of observations required is dependent on 
the existing emitter discharge variation and the 
confidence limits desired. 

4.1.2.2 Individually measure the time required to fill 
a constant volume container (that is, 200 ml) for n 
randomly selected emitters. A method for artificially 
selecting the random emitters would be to select an 
emitter randomly from each of n uniformly distributed 
locations in the submain unit or system. 

4.1.2.3 Calculate the emitter discharge rates, 1/h, for 
each emitter. 



4.1.2.4 Calculate the emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation, V qs , using the equations in 4.1.1.1 and the 
statistical uniformity using the equation in 4.1.1.2. 

4.1.2.5 A nomograph which uses approximately 
one-third of the data collected can also be used for a 
quick field evaluation. In this case, the time to fill a 
container (that is, 100 ml or 200 mlbottle) can be used 
in place of tbe emitter discharge rate to determine the 
statistical uniformity. Using this technique, the time 
to fill the randomly placed container, 7Max and 7mUu 
can be calculated as the sum of the highest one-sixth 
and lowest one-sixth of the emitter discharge times, 
respectively. The emitter discharge variation can then 
be determined using Fig. 1. In the case of plugged 
emitters the equations referred to in 4.1.2.4 and found 
in 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1*2 must be used. 

4.1.2.6 The number of emitters per plant may affect 
the actual emitter discharge coefficient of variation, 
Vqs, due to the overlapping nature ofthe variance. For 
this situation the emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation, Vqs shall be adjusted by dividing V qs by the 
square root of the number of emitters per plant to 
obtain the corrected emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation, Vq S , and the corrected statistical uniformity, 
[/&, will result. 

4.1.3 Hydraulic Variation 

The hydraulic variation is a measure of the variation 
in emitter discharge rate due to hydraulic design and 
emitter type. The coefficient of variation will be used 
to determine the variations in hydraulic pressure in a 
microirrigation submain unit or throughout a 
microirrigation system. The emitter discharge 
exponent is then used to calculate the emitter discharge 
coefficient of variation due to hydraulics using the 
following procedure. 

4.1.3.1 Decide upon a reasonable sample size, n, for 
the 95 percent confidence limits desired (see Table 3). 
The number of observations required is dependent on 
the existing emitter discharge variation and the 
confidence limit desired. 

4.1.3.2 Individually measure the emitter pressure for 
n randomly selected emitters. A method for 
artificially selecting the random emitters would be to 
select one emitter from each of n uniformly distributed 
locations in a submain unit or system. 

4.1.3.3 Calculate the hydraulic design coefficient 
of variation Vhs for the pressure data as described 
in 4.1.1.4 

4.1.3.4 Calculate the emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation due to hydraulics by the equation: 

Vqh=* Vhs 



IS 10799 : 1999 



where 

V q h= the emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation due to hydraulics, and 

x = the emitter discharge exponent. 

4.1.3.5 A simplified graphical technique which uses 
approximately one-third of the data collected can be 
used for quick field evaluations. In this case, the 
emitter pressures can be used in place of the emitter 
discharge rate to determine the statistical uniformity. 
Using the same technique described in 4.1.2.5, the 
randomly selected pressure data can be used to 
calculate ^Max anc * Pmm- The hydraulic design 
coefficient of variation can be determined using 
Fig. 1. In the case of plugged emitters, the procedures 
in 4.1.2.4 must be used. 

4.1.3.6 When using the graphical technique presented 
in 4.1.3.5, the emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation due to hydraulics, Vhs» must be adjusted 
using the equation in 4.1.3.4 before it can be used to 
determine the statistical uniformity of emitter 
discharge due to hydraulics. 



4.1.4 Emitter Performance Variation 

Emitter performance variation is a measure of emitter 
discharge variability due to water temperature, emitter 
manufacturer's variation, emitter wear and emitter 
plugging. The emitter performance coefficient of 
variation shall be determined using the previously 
collected discharge and pressure data and the 
following procedure. 

4.1.4.1 Calculate the emitter performance coefficient 
of variation using the previously determined emitter 
discharge coefficient of variation, the emitter 
discharge coefficient of variation due to hydraulics 
and the following equation: 

v P f=(V"V) ,/2 

where 

V p f = emitter performance coefficient of 

variation, 
V qs = emitter discharge coefficient of variation, and 

Vqh » emitter discharge coefficient of variation 
due to hydraulics, 



cc 

in 
in 

UJ 600 

cr 

or 
o 

£ 500 



en 
UJ 



UJ 



U- 

o 

2 

ID 

to 



ESTIMATED COEFFICIENT OF 
VARIATION 



ESTIMATED STATISTICAL * 
UNIFORMITY (Us) 



400 



~ 300 

I 
UJ 



10 200 
LU 

X 
CD 

X 



100 




I 1 1 ■ ■ > ■ 1 ■ ft ■ ■ ■ ■ I * » ■ 



J I I I I I I I 1 I I I I 

200 250 300 



50 100 150 

SUM OF THE LOWEST ONE-SIXTH OF TIMES, Tmin OR PRESSURES, Pmin 



Fig. 1 Statistical Uniformity Nomograph 



10 



IS 10799 : 1999 



4.1.4.2 A nomograph for determining the emitter 
performance coefficient of variation is shown in 

Fig. 2. 

4.1.4.3 If the original emitter performance coefficient 
of variation is excessively high (greater than 0.2 or 20 
percent) due to emitter wear and plugging, it is 
recommended that additional emitter flow and 
pressure data be collected. If the emitter performance 
coefficient of variation is still excessively high, it is 
recommended that emitter cleaning and replacement 
precede further evaluation. 

4.2 Water Application Efficiency 

The adequacy of soil moisture distribution and the 
resulting application efficiency are two very important 
components of a complete microirrigation system 
evaluation. The application efficiency is affected by 
the plant root zone, irrigation application rate, water 
application uniformity and allowable irrigation 
deficit. 

4.2.1 Maximum Application Depth 

The maximum irrigation depth, /Max, will be used to 
calculate the application efficiency, £ a > and shall be 
determined using the following equation: 

ZP 



discharge coefficient of variation, V gs , and the actual 
irrigation application. Fig. 3 illustrates the 
relationship of the above variables as they relate to the 
irrigation deficit for a normal distribution. 

4.2.3 Application Efficiency 

The application efficiency, £ a , of an irrigation system 
is defined as the percentage of total water applied that 
is actually stored in the crop root zone. When the root 
zone is fully irrigated based on the required irrigation 
volume, then the application efficiency shall be 
determined using the following equation: 



E a = 100 



V r (l-Pd) 



« 100 



Vr(l-P«) 



3 600 QJ 



where 

V r = required irrigation volume, m 3 ; 

V a = total amount of water applied, m 3 ; 

(1-Pd)= percent or root zone irrigated; 

Q a = actual discharge into the system, m 3 /s; and 

T = irrigation time in hours, h. 

4.2.4 Statistical Uniformity 

The relationship between the statistical uniformity, £/ s , 
the irrigation deficit, P& and the application 
efficiency, E a , is shown in Fig. 4. 



where 

y 



AWC 

Z 
P 



= the percentage of AWC to be depleted 
before irrigation; 

= the available water holding capacity of 
the soil, mm/m; 

= the soil depth (root zone, m); and 

- the wetted volume as a proportion of the 
total. 



4.2.1.1 For field evaluation purposes, the maximum 
net irrigation depth, /Max* is converted to required 
irrigation volume, V m when multiplied by the irrigated 
area. 

4.2.2 Irrigation Deficit 

The percentage irrigation deficit, Pd, is dependent 
upon the maximum application depth, the emitter 



4.3 Filtration Systems 

Depending upon the source of water for the irrigation 
system, the filtration system may include a single or 
combination of screen, media and centrifugal filters. 
The field evaluation of microirrigation systems should 
include a determination of removal efficiency and 
pressure differential across the filter. The 
effectiveness of the filtration system can be indirectly 
assessed by evaluating the degree of emitter plugging. 
In order to maintain a record of the filtration 
efficiency, the data in 4.3.1.2 and 4.3.1.3 should be 
recorded. 

4.3.1 Removal Efficiency 

The removal efficiency, E r , of a filtration system shall 
be determined by the following equation: 



Tiff kY i T 

.04 ^ .08 



4- 



.12 



H h 



HYDRAUUC UWTORM1TY 

T i T i 

.16 .13 

STATISTICAL UNIFORMITY 

T I T i T 

.2 .22 24 



4- 



78 
22 



£ 



V«h 



V«t 



100 96 92 90^88 ' 86 84 

ill l lM 1 1 i No 1 11 

.04 .08 .1 .12^.14 -18 



4- 



74 



4- 

.28 



4- 



.24 



.18 



02 4 5 
III I I 



V 



*!r 



EMITTER PERFORMANCE VARIATION 



12 



13 



14 



15 

.15 



16 



17 



18 

-t 



19 

-4- 



20 



• .02.04.05.06 .07 .06 .09 



Fig. 2 Emitter Performance Nomograph 



11 



IS 10799 : 1999 



^EMITTER DISCHARGE COEFFICIENT 
OF VARIATION 




IRRIGATION DEFICIT (P«,%) 

Fig. 3 Irrigation Application Based Upon the Irrigation Deficit, Pd , and the Emitter Discharge 
Coefficient of Variation, V qs , as Percentage of the Total Irrigation Volume 




10 12 U 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 
IRRIGATION DEFICIT ( Pd % ) 



Fig. 4 Application Efficiency Based Upon the Irrigation Deficit, Pd, and the Emitter 



Discharge Coefficient of Variation, V c 



qs 



E T = 100 



where 

i3out = 

S'm — 



1-- 



the concentration of suspended solids, 
mg/1, in filter outlet; and 

the concentration of suspended solids, 
mg/1, in filter inlet. 



4.3.1.1 The definition in 4.3.1 can be used for 
individual constituents such as suspended solids. 

4.3.1.2 Water samples shall be taken before and after 
the filter, 30 min after start-up to determine removal 
efficiency. 

4.3.1.3 The time of the season that the water sample 
(or samples) are taken may affect the outcome of this 
evaluation. For this reason the time of year should be 



12 



IS 10799: 1999 



recorded as well as any special considerations related 
to water quality. 

4.3.2 Pressure Differential 

The differential pressure (inlet pressure minus outlet 
pressure) before and after filter backflushing takes 
place shall be recorded. If the differential pressure 
after backflushing significantly exceeds the filter 
manufacturer's specifications, the source of this 
excess differential needs to be found. Excess pressure 
differential may be caused by insufficient flushing 
flow rates or time, plugged media underdrains, screens 
partially plugged by particles which need to be 
removed manually or other problems which will need 
to be resolved. Inversely, if the differential pressure 
is constantly very low, then the filter should be 
checked for defective screens, worn seals or 
inoperable flush valves. 

4.3.3 Emitter Plugging 

The amount of emitter plugging is an indirect measure 
for assessing the effectiveness of a microirrigation 
filtration system. The possible sources of emitter 
plugging are physical, chemical and biological in 
nature. In addition, the degree of emitter plugging can 
be used as a measure of the effectiveness of 
preventative practices such as chemical water 
treatment. 



4.3.3.1 Calculate the effect of emitter plugging on the 
coefficient of variation by using the previously 
determined emitter discharge coefficient of variation, 
Vq S , the proportion (decimal) of emitters completely 
plugged, C, and the following equation: 



V qp = 



1 



(i-O 



(V+n-i 



where 



Vqp = the emitter discharge coefficient of 
variation including emitter plugging, and 

(1-Q = the proportion (decimal) of emitters 
openly flowing. 

4.3.3.2 A simplified graphical technique for 
determining the effect of emitter plugging on the 
statistical uniformity can be found in Fig. 5. 

5 EXAMPLE PROCEDURES 

5.1 Estimate the emitter discharge variation as 
represented by the statistical uniformity, U s , for a 
microirrigation submain unit with the following field 
data. 

5.1.1 Given 

Time (seconds) to fill a 100 ml container from 
individual emitters: 64, 79, 67, 71, 75,-81, 68, 85, 75, 
69,85,77,89,68,81,90,65,61. 



CD 

s 



Q_ 
CL 



Ui 

O 

X 



UI 

? 



UI 



2 



EMITTER DISCHARGE COEFFICIENT OF VARIATION < V qp > INCLUDING 
EMITTER PLUGGING 




"1 l"l M l" 

99 98 97 96 94 92 90 85 80 70 60 40 20 

UNIFORMITY OF EMITTER DISCHARGE i\)») INCLUDING EMITTER 
PLUGGING 



Fig. 5 Relationship Between Emitter Plugging and the Statistical Uniformity of 
Emitter Discharge, J7 sp , Including Emitter Plugging 



13 



IS 10799 : 1999 



5.1.2 Solution 

5.1.2.1 Direct calculation method 

Step 1 — Calculate the flow rates : (ml/s) using 

the above data 

q\ = 100 ml per 64 s = 1.56 ml/s, etc. 
Step 2 — Calculate the mean standard deviation 

and coefficient of variation using the 

equation in 4.1.1.2. 
Ans: — q= 1.35 ml/s, £ q = 0.159 ml/s 

V qs = 0.118 

Step 3 — Calculate the statistical uniformity 
using the equation in 4.1.1.2 and 
determine the confidence limit from 
Table 3. 

Ans: — I /s = 88 ± 3 percent 

5.1.2.2 Graphical solution method 

Step 1 — Calculating 7>4ax and 7Min using the 
three highest and three lowest times 
7Max = 85 + 89 + 90 = 264 
r M in = 64 + 65+61 = 190 

Ans: — T M ax = 264, 7 M in = 190 

Step 2 — Use Fig. 1 to determine the statistical 
uniformity, and Table 1 to determine 
the confidence limits. 

Ans: — Us = 88 + 3 percent 

5.2 Estimate the hydraulic variation. V^, and the 
statistical uniformity due to hydraulics, £/ s , for a 
microirrigation submain unit. 

5.2.1 Given 

An emitter discharge exponent of x = 0.4 and the 
following field data. Pressure head in meters of water 
at individual emitters: 10.20, 9.98, 8,80, 8.50, 10.18, 
9.01, 7.59, 10.10, 9.43, 9.75, 10:07, 8.37, 7.92, 10.07, 
9.25, 10.50, 9.43, 8.97. 

5.2.2 Solution 

5.2.2.1 Direct calculation method 

Step 1 — Calculate the mean, standard deviation 
and coefficient of variation using the 
equation in 4.1.1.2. 

Ans: — /i = 9.31 mi, 5 h = 0.85 m, V hs = 0.091 

Step 2 — Use the equation in 4.1.3.4 and 4.1.1.2 
to determine the emitter discharge 
coefficient of variation and the 
statistical uniformity due to hydraulics 
for jc = 0.4. 

V qh = 0.4 (0.091) =0.036 
U s = 100 (1-0.036) = 96.4 

Ans: — V q h = 3 .6 percent, U s = 96.4 ± 3 percent 

5.2.2.2 Graphical Solution Method 

Step 1 — Calculate Pmox and PMin using the three 
highest and three lowest pressures. 
/W = 10.50 + 10.20 + 10.18 = 30.88 
PMin = 7.59 + 7.92 + 8.37 = 23.88 



Ans: — /W = 30.88. PMin = 23.88 

Step 2 — Use Fig.l to determine the hydraulic 
design coefficient of variation. 

Ans: — Vhs = 0.09 or 9 percent 

Step 3 — Use the equations in 4.1.1.2 and 4.1.3.4 
to determine the emitter discharge 
coefficient of variation and statistical 
uniformity due to hydraulics for 
* = 0.4. 

Vqh = 0.4 (0.09) =0.036 
l/s = 100 (1-0.036) « 96.4 percent 

Ans: — V q h = 3.6 percent. £/ s = 96.4 ±3 percent 

5.2.3 To facilitate the use of Fig.l, Pj^ax an <* ^Min 
may be multiplied by a factor of 10. 

5.3 Estimate the Percentage Variation Due to 
Emitter Performance 

5.3.1 Given — The total statistical uniformity of 
90 percent (see Example in 5.1, and the statistical 
uniformity due to hydraulic of 96.4 percent (see 
Example in 5.2). 

5.3.2 Solution 

Step 1 — Use the equation in 4.1.4.1 or Fig. 2 to 
determine the emitter performance 
variation. 

Ans: — V p f = 0.1 12 or 11.2 percent 

5.4 Determine the application efficiency, £ a , and the 
percentage deficit, P& when the irrigation application 
is equal to the required irrigation volume for the 
following submain unit 

5.4.1 Given — The statistical uniformity, U SJ for a 
microirrigation submain unit is 80 percent ( V qs = 0.2). 

5.4.2 Solution 

Step 1 — From Fig. 3 the irrigation deficit for 
this situation can be found. 

Ans: — Pd, = 8 percent 

Step 2 — Calculate the application efficiency 
using the equation in 4.2.3 or Fig. 4. 

Ans: — is a = 32 percent. 

5.5 Determine the percent deficit, Pd, and the 
application efficiency, £ a , when the irrigation 
application is 1 .2 times the required irrigation volume. 
Compare with example in 5.4. 

5.5.1 Given — The total statistical uniformity, Us, 
for a microirrigation submain unit as 80 percent 
(V qs = 0.20). 

5.5.2 Solution 

Step 1 — Determine the percent deficit for 
Vqs = 0.20 and a required irrigation 
application factor of 1.2 using Fig. 3. 

Ans: — Pd = 3 percent 



14 



IS 10799 : 1999 



Step 2 — Determine the application efficiency 

of the irrigation using Fig. 4. 
Ans: — E a - 82 percent 

5,5.3 The application efficiency in this example is less 
than that found in the example in 5.4 because over 
irrigation to make up for a large irrigation deficit or a 
low system uniformity decreases the application 
efficiency. 

5*6 Determine the removal efficiency, E r , of a 200 
mesh screen filter system used in microirrigation for 
the removal of very fine sand, 

5.6.1 Given — The field test results indicate the 
unfiltered water contains 20 mg/1 greater than 15 \im 
material and the filtered water contains 15 mg/1 greater 
than 75 |irn material. 

5.6.2 Solution 

Step 1 — Using the equation in 4.3.1, the 
removal efficiency can be calculated. 
Ans: — Et = 25 percent 



5.7 Determine the uniformity of emitter discharge 
including emitter plugging, l/ S p, for a drip irrigation 
submain unit* 

5.7.1 Given — The uniformity of emitter discharge, 
Us, without emitter plugging is 90 percent (Vq S = 0.1), 
and the emitter plugging rate is 3 percent for complete 
plugging. 

5.7.2 Solution 

Step 1 — Determine the uniformity of emitter 
discharge using the equation in 4.3.3.1 
or Fig. 5. 

Ans: — t/ S p = 80 percent (Vqp = 0.2) 

6 REPORTING OF RESULTS 
6.1 Irrigation System Description 

The following information shall be reported. 

6.1.1 Irrigation system location, farm address and 
irrigated parcel location. 

6.1.2 Crops irrigated, variety, spacing, age and 
rooting depth. 

6.1.3 Soil type, description, water holding capacity, 
infiltration rate and total irrigated area. 

6.1.4 Topography, major land slopes, and elevation 
differences between the water source, pumping station 
and irrigated area. 

6.1.5 Water supply, water source, pumping station, 
system capacity and available pressure. 

6.1.6 Control station, water measurement, filtration, 
treatment, addition of amendments, pressure control 
and timing of application. 



6.1.7 Mainline material, size, length, installation 
depth and differential elevation to submain units under 
investigation. 

6.1.8 Submain manifold material, size, pressure 
control, length, lateral spacing, installation depth and 
major slope. 

6.1.9 Lateral line material, size, length, emitter 
spacing, installation depth and major slope. 

6.1.10 Emitter type, manufacturer, size and 
installation depth. 

6.2 Evaluation Data Collection 

The following information shall be collected and 
reported. 

6.2.1 Water supply, mainline flow rate and pressure 
at the water source. 

6.2.2 Irrigation practice, allowable deficit, irrigation 
frequency and duration. 

6.2.3 Submain manifold flow rate and pressure at the 
head of the manifold. 

6.2.4 Emitter discharge time, rate and pressure for n 
random locations in the microirrigation system or 
submain unit. 

6.2.5 Filtration efficiency, inlet water sample, outlet 
water sampie, differential pressure across the finer and 
rate of percentage of emitter plugging. 



6.3 Evaluation Analysis Results 

The following results shall be reported. 

6.3.1 System Capacity and Design 

A statement regarding the adequacy of the existing 
system design and its conformance with 3 of this 
standard, shall be made based upon the irrigation 
system description data. 

6.3.2 Water Application Uniformity 

Based upon the emitter discharge and pressure data 
collected, the submain unit or microirrigation systems 
statistical uniformity, f/ s , hydraulic variation, V Q ^, and 
emitter performance variation, V p f, shall be reported. 
In addition, a statement regarding the adequacy of the 
various system components based upon the 
interpretation guidelines found in 6.4 shall be 
reported. 

6.3.3 Water Application Efficiency 

The results of the water application efficiency, E A , 
determination shall be reported. In addition, a 
statement regarding the current irrigation practices, 
including frequency and duration of irrigation, shall be 
made. 



15 



IS 10799 : 1999 

6.3.4 Filter System Performance 

Based upon the data collected regarding the irrigation 
system filter, a statement regarding the removal 
efficiency, £ r , pressure differential and emitter 
plugging rates shall be reported. 

6.4 Evaluation Interpretation Guidelines 

The following guidelines will be used to report the 
adequacy of the irrigation system based on the 
evaluation results. 

6.4.1 Statistical Uniformity 

The criteria for an acceptable statistical uniformity, 
U Sf are 90 percent or greater, excellent; 80 percent 
to 90 percent, very good; 70 percent to 80 percent, 
fair; 60 percent to 70 percent, poor, and less than 60 
percent, unacceptable. A statistical uniformity of 80 
percent or greater shall be required before fertilizer 
injection through the microirrigation system is 
recommended. Possible remedies for improving the 
statistical uniformity include increasing the number of 



emitters per plant and/or improving the hydraulic and 
emitter performance variation. 

6.4.2 Hydraulic Variation 

The criteria for an acceptable coefficient of hydraulic 
variation, Vhs, are 10 percent or less, excellent; 
10 percent to 20 percent, very good; 20 percent to 
30 percent, fair; 30 percent to 40 percent, poor, and 
greater than 40 percent, unacceptable. Possible 
remedies for improving the hydraulic variation 
include readjustment of pressure regulation devices, 
repair or removal of pinched lateral lines and the 
redesign of the hydraulic system. 

6.4.3 Emitter Performance Variation 

The criteria for emitter performance variation, V ps , are 
5 percent or less, excellent; 5 percent to 10 percent, 
very good; 10 percent to 1 5 percent, fair; 1 5 percent to 
20 percent, poor; and greater than 20 percent 
unacceptable. Possible remedies for improved emitter 
performance include cleaning plugged emitters and 
replacing poorly performing emitters. 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 3.1) 

PRINCIPLES FOR ESTIMATION OF WATER REQUIREMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF DRIP 

IRRIGATION SYSTEM 



A-l ESTIMATION OF QUANTITY OF WATER 

To irrigate an area by drip irrigation system sufficient 
quantity and rate of water should be made available at 
that place. To estimate the minimum quantity of water 
for meeting the irrigation water requirement of any 
area, the following steps are required. 

A-l.l Collection of General Information 

General information on water source, crops to be 
grown, topographic conditions, type and texture of soil 
and climatic data are essential for designing the drip 
irrigation system. 

A-1.2 Layout of the Field 

The layout of the field by giving the path and lengths 
of main line, sub-main line and lateral lines in meters 
to connect water source with the existing/planned crop 
in the area must be worked out. 

A-13 Crop Water Requirement 

Water requirement of crops (WR) is a function of 
plants, surface area covered by plants, 
evapotranspiration rate. Irrigation water requirement 



has to be calculated for different seasons. The 
maximum discharge required during any one of the 
three seasons is adopted for design purposes. The 
daily water requirement for fully grown plants can be 
calculated as under: 

V^E P x ^x^pXW p x5p 

Net depth of irrigation to be applied ( V n ) = V R e x S p 

The total water requirement of the farm plot would be 
V n xNo. of plants. 

where 

V = the water requirement (lpd plant); 

E p - the pan evaporation (mm/da> ); 

K c = the crop factor; 

K v - the pan factor; 

W p = the wetted area (0.3 for widely spaced 
crops and 0.9 for closely spaced crops); 

S p = the spacing of crops/plant, (m 2 ); and 

/? e - the effective rainfall (mm) and A is the area 
of the plot (m 2 ). 



16 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. FAD 54 ( 579 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHCPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



f337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 

T60 38 43 
160 20 25 

f235 0216,235 04 42 
123515 19,235 23 15 

f832 92 95,832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India 



