**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 15086 (Part3): 2003 
■ EC 60099-3 (1990) 

•^TFT 3 T^t^f>^ f^tpp c^ fen? ^if^ ?l^^ ^^^FT 

Indian Standard 
SURGE ARRESTERS 

PART 3 ARTIFICIAL POLLUTION TESTING OF SURGE ARRESTERS 

ICS 29.120.50:29.240.10 



©BIS 2003 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

.7j//v 2003 Price Group 5 



Surge Arresters Sectional Committee, ET 30 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) which is identical with lEC 60099-3 ( 1990 ) 'Surge arresters — Part 3 : Artificial 
pollution testing of surge arresters' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( lEC ) was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Surge Arresters Sectional Committee and approval 
of the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The text of the lEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. 
Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn 
to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as 
"Indian Standard'; and 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards the current practice is to use a 
point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

Only the English text of the International Standard had been retained while adopting it as Indian Standard. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

In this adopted standard, references appear to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also 
exist. The corresponding Indian Standards, which are to be substituted in their respective places are listed below 
along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



hilernationaJ Standard 

I EC 60099-1 (1991 ) Surge arresters — 
Part 1 : Non-linear resistor type gapped 
surge arresters for a.c. systems 

lEC 60507 { 1991 ) Artificial pollution 
rests on high-voltage insulators to be 
used on a.c. systems 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS 1 5086 ( Part 1 ) : 2001 Surge arresters : 
Part I Non-linear resistor type gapped 
surge arresters for a.c. systems 



IS 8704 : 1 995 Artificial pollution tests 
on high-voltage insulators to be used 
on a.c. systems {first revision ) 



Degree of Equivalence 
Identical 

Technically equivalent 



For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the fmal value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : I960 'Rules 
for rounding of numerical values ( revised)' . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
siiould be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 



1 Scope 



Indian Standard 
SURGE ARRESTERS 

PART 3 ARTIFICIAL POLLUTION TESTING OF SURGE ARRESTERS 



This Technical Report gives the basic principles of artificial pollution testing of non-linear resistor type 
(valve type) surge arresters, together with details of pollutant compositions and methods of application 
and the test procedures associated with each mode of pollution. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this Technical Report. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this Technical Report are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. 
Members of I EC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. 



I EC 99-1 : 1970, Lightning arresters - Part 1 : Non-linear resistor type arresters for a.c. systems. 
I EC 507: 1975, Artificial pollution tests on high-voltage insulators to be used on a.c. systems. 

3 Basic principles 

It is well known that a surge arrester can fail at normal service voltage under certain pollution 
conditions, owing to the setting up of a very uneven voltage distribution on its external surface and/or 
because of very rapid changes in this distribution. These two stages arise as a consequence of the 
formation under such conditions of an initially nearly continuous conducting surface layer consisting 
typically of an aqueous solution of electrolyte formed und^r high humidity by the moisture pick-up of 
hygroscopic solid particles or liquid droplets deposited on the surface. Dusts may also be present, 
affecting the washing and drying characteristics of the surface. It is well established also that the effect 
of leakage current heating the surface layer, when the conductivity is high enough, is to cause "dry 
bands" to form, across which most of the voltage drop occurs and that surges of leakage-current occur 
when these bands are temporarily bridged by an arc. 



These phenomena can result in the voltage applied across some of the gaps exceeding their sparkover 
value, with consequential failure, in some cases, through disturbance of the gap potentials caused by 
capacitive coupling between electrodes and wet bands. 

It is consequently the primary purpose of artificial pollution testing of surge arresters to simulate 
relevant pollution conditions, representative of those occurring in service and establishing that when 
subjected to these, the surge arrester, energized at appropriate power-frequency voltage does not suffer 
gap sparkover. 

1 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 

Pollution flashover of the surge arrester surface is a serious matter operationally, and the performance 
in this respect also must be determined. This is discussed in the following paragraphs. 

There is now evidence both from service and testing that the pollution conditions which may result in 
surge arrester sparkover can be generally different from those leading to surface flashover. The latter is 
associated typically with severe conditions characterized by frequent high-amplitude leakage-current 
surges, whereas gap sparkover is typically associated with pollution onset or drying-out of the pollutant. 
Accordingly, separate tests for these two distinct modes of failure may be needed, at least with some test 
methods. 

Some artificial pollution test methods for surface flashover of high-voltage insulators have been 
developed to a stage where they are generally accepted as giving a valid indication of pollution 
performance. These are fully described in I EC 507. The essential common feature of the tests, even 
though there are differences in the polluting techniques, are the repeatable production of various 
degrees or "severities" of pollution, measured, for example, in terms of specific conductance of the 
pollutant, application of a suitable test voltage and consequent determination of the performance in 
terms of a given severity. 

The mode of operation of surge arresters, however, is such that the methods used for insulator testing 
are not directly applicable to surge arresters, especially in respect of arrester sparkover. The tests 
described in this report, though broadly based on those of I E C 507, are essentially aimed at meeting the 
special requirements for surge arrester operation and bear specifically on gap sparkover. 

The methods of I EC 507 are directly applicable to surface flashover of insulation, and it is^tccordingly 
recommended that they should be used to determine performance in this respect. 

It should be noted that the tests according to I EC 507 with respect to such surface flashover perfor- 
mance and those proposed here to check sparkover performance are recommended only for surge 
arresters exposed to natural pollution, possibly with live washing, and not for those subject to periodic 
cleaning or greasing. 

From the foregoing account of the failure mechanism it follows that for pollution tests of both kinds, it 
is essential that they be performed on a complete service surge arrester assembly. 

When sufficient experience has been gained from the tests described in the following clauses, this 
experience will form the basis of a type test. 

NOTE - In service, surge arresters sometimes suffer long-term deterioration associated with internal corona discharges. 
The tests described in this report do not demonstrate the performance of the surge arrester in this respect. 



4 Test objective 

The objective of the test is to establish that the surge arrester can withstand a specified severity of 
pollution without sparkover when energized at a specified voltage or voltage-application mode, both 
severity and voltage mode being representative of service conditions. 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 

5 General requirements 

5. 1 Test arrester 

The test shall be made on a complete arrester, with all normal spark-gaps, grading resistors and any 
grading ring, etc., which may significantly affect the voltage distribution of the arrester. However, for 
pollution tests, it is not generally necessary to mount the arrester on a pedestal. This is because the 
conductive surface layer and the internal processes determine the voltage distribution and its vari- 
ations in this case, as opposed to that of tests for impulse sparkover performance in the normal 
unpolluted state, for example, where the distribution, though partly controlled by grading resistors, 
series capacitance of the gaps, etc., can also be affected by the distributed capacitance to the earth plane 
and high-voltage lead, etc. 

The dry arrester power-frequency sparkover value and grading current measured at the operating 
voltage should be measured prior to and after the test. 



5.2 Cleaning 

Before the arrester is tested for the first time, the surface shall be carefully cleaned (using a detergent 
solution such as trisodium phosphate) and thoroughly rinsed (using tap or mains water) so that all 
traces of surface contamination, particularly grease, are removed before testing. Care must be taken to 
avoid touching the cleaned arrester. 

NOTE - It may be necessary in some cases, particularly when spraying salt pollutants, to paint the metal parts and 
cement to ensure that no corrosion products wash down onto the insulating surface during the test. 



5.3 Installation 

The cleaned arrester shall be erected so that the minimum distance between any part of it and any 
earthed object other than the jets, and a ceiling or a wall is not less than one-half of the length of the 
arrester. The arrester shall be in thermal equilibrium with the ambient air at the start of the test and the 
temperature shall be noted. The temperature shall not be below 5 '*C or greater than 40 "C. 



5.4 Arrangements for arrester current monitoring 

For test result diagnostic purposes according to 7.5 the surface leakage and internal current paths shall 
be separately connected to the earth terminal of the test voltage source so that the surface leakage and 
internal currents can be separately monitored. If the arrester is not provided with an internal current 
lead isolated from the bottom flange, a surface leakage current collecting band is fitted above the flange 
and the insulation surface between the band and the flange should be greased. Band/flange spacing 
should be as small as possible, subject to provision of the necessary insulation, to minimize encroach- 
ment on the leakage path. For most designs of arrester housing these requirements are met by fitting the 
band immediately above the bottom shed. 



In the case of a multi-unit arrester, the band is applied only to the bottom unit. 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 

5.5 Test circuit requirements 

The impedance of the whole circuit, including the transformer and regulator, should not be so great that 
sparkover is inhibited by a drop in the voltage, or distortion of the wave shape. 

This condition is met when the regulation of the source is such as to maintain the specified voltage on 
the arrester except for infrequent, non-consecutive, half-cycle voltage dips of no more than 5 % during 
leakage current pulses. 

It is also met by compliance with I EC 507. 

The values in I EC 507 for the circuit R/X values and minimum short-circuit current are given in 
Table 1. 



Table 1 



R/X at test voltage 



Minimum short-circuit 

current at test voltage 

A 



<0,05 
0.05 to 0.15 
0,15 to 0,5 
0,5 to 1,5 



5 
7 

10 
15 



NOTES 

1 The values in the above table are based on investigations on a small number of insulators. They represent the 
best suggestion that can be given at present, but may be modified with further experience. 

2 In the case of large diameter housings, it may be necessary to increase the source short-circuit current to values 
higher than those specified in the table, in order to avoid premature extinction of the arcs bridgingdry bands in the 
pollution layer. 

3 One method of determining the R/X value of the circuit is to measure: 

a) The short-circuit current l^ corresponding to an open circuit voltage il„ equal to the specified test vol- 
tage. 

b) The voltage U]_ existing when the current passes through a load whose resistance is such that the r.m.s. value 
/l of the current is equal to 1 A. 

R/X can be found from the following formula: 



R/X 



\ 4Ul Ul (/l//sc)' - {Ui[l - ajhc)'] - u(}' 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 



6 Voltage application 



The requirements here are specific to arresters, two different modes of application being recognized 
according to the operating conditions of the arrester. 

6. 1 Arresters for use on isolated neutral and resonant earthed systems - test methods according to 
8.2 and 8.3 

A steady voltage equal to the rated voltage of the arrester is applied throughout the lest period. 



NOTE - When the rated voltage exceeds the highest voltage (between phases) of the system, by agreement between the 
user and the manufacturer, the test voltage chosen should be the latter. 

6.2 Arresters for earthed neutral systems ~ Earth-fault factor between 1,2 and 1,4 

A voltage of 0,75 to 0,8 (see note l)times the rated voltage of the arrester, or 0,87 (= 1/1,15) times the 
specified continuous operating voltage*, whichever is lower, is applied initially and at intervals is 
increased quickly to a higher value corresponding in principle to the earth-fault voltage (see note 2) for 
1 to 2 s, and then lowered quickly to the initial value. The intervals and higher voltage values are 
specified in 8.2, 8.3 and 8.4. 



NOTES 

1 The factors of 0,75 and 0,8 correspond to system earth-fault factors of 1,33 and 1,25 respectively. 

2 The differences in the higher voltage levels used in 8.2, 8.3 and 8.4 are a reflection of the sensitivity of the method to the 
long rise and fall times necessitated with present testing techniques, compared with the very much shorter times occurring 



3 In some resistance earthed systems the earth-fault factor can continually exceed 1 ,4. Where the voltage rise can persist 
for more than 1 s. the procedure of 6. 1 is applied. Where it persists less than 1 s, that of 6.2 is applied, however, with 
voltage levels to be agreed upon between the user and manufacturer. 



7 Test procedure 



7.1 Test initiation 



The prepared arrester is installed in its test position. Pollution and voltage are applied according to the 
selected method. The test is deemed to have begun when the full test voltage as specified in clause 6 is 
applied under the relevant polluting conditions. 



7.2 Test sequence 

Tests should be made at each of the three pollution severities of 7.3 for the methods given in 8.2 and 8.3 
and using the prescribed pollutant given in 8.4 and clause 9 for the method given in 8.4, and the 
occurrence noted of arrester sparkover or flashover of the surface insulation. 



• specified continuous operating voltage is a voltage which can be applied continuously between the arrester terminals. This 
value is equal to or less than the rated voltage. 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 

7.3 Pollution severities 

The severities are characterized by the solution salinity for the salt-fog method and by the slurry 
suspension conductivity for the solid pollutant methods. The following levels are recommended: 

- salt-fog according to 8.2: 2,5, 5,0 and 10 kg of NaCl/m^; 

- solid pollutant - wetting according to 8.3: 2,5, 5,0 and 10 mS/cm; 

- solid pollutant - drying according to 8.4: not greater than 2,5 mS/cm. 

7.4 Test evaluation 

The results of the tests establish the severity which the arrester withstands without sparkover in four 
tests at a given severity. 

There shall be no significant change in the dry power-frequency sparkover value nor grading current 
value following the test. 

7.5 Test monitoring: indication of breakdown 

The applied test voltage, the current flowing internally and the surface leakage current should be 
recorded separately with an oscillograph in order to distinguish between surface flashover or gap 
sparkover. 

A sudden increase in surface current to near short-circuit current, usually supplemented by visual and 
aural observations, indicates a flashover. A similar increase in internal current indicates gap spark- 
over. 

If the oscillogram shows a collapse of voltage for approximately five half cycles to a value less than 1 0% 
of the test voltage, an external flashover is indicated. A voltage collapse to values higher than 10% 
indicates gap sparkover. 



8 Methods of applying pollution 

8. 1 General 

The methods given below, although related to the procedures now established for determining the 
flashover performance of insulators (see I EC 507) have been specifically developed for determining 
the gap sparkover performance of arresters under pollution conditions. 

Two basic methods are proposed: 

a) Application of a salt-fog, according to 8.2, while the arrester is energized at a specified voltage 
level(s). 

b) Application of a conducting layer of solid pollutant which, in one case, is wetted before voltage 
application at the specified level(s) according to 8.3 and, in the other, during this application 
according to 8.4. 

8.2 Salt-fog method 

After preparation in accordance with 5. 1 , 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4, a fine mist orfog of salt solution of controlled 
salinity is produced from arrays of special spray jets of specified design set 0,6 m apart 

6 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 

and arranged in two vertical columns on opposite sides of the arrester, to which are fed the solution and 
compressed air. The solution flow rates per nozzle during the test is 0,5 1/min ± 5%. The air supply 
pressure is between 650 and 700 kPa. 



A full description of the apparatus and its normal application, including the preconditioning, is given 
in clause 8of IEC507. 

For the present purpose of testing for arrester sparkover, it is recommended that fog production should 
be stopped after 1 5 min from the beginning of each test, drying processes taking place during the 
remainder of the test period of 30 min. 

The test voltage as given in 6.1 or 6.2, as appropriate, is applied during the above period or until 
sparkover or flashover occurs. For 6.2 the higher voltage level is the arrester rated voltage or an agreed 
voltage calculated on the basis of the highest system phase/earth voltage times the earth-fault factor, the 
interval between voltage excursions is 5 min. 

This process is repeated, the arrester being cleaned between each test. 
Four tests are made at each of the three reference salinities given in 7.3. 



8.3 Solid pollutant-wetting method 

After preparation in accordance with 5.1, 5,2, 5.3 and 5.4, the dry arrester is completely coated, as 
uniformly as possible, by flow-coating with the suspension given in 9. 1 . The surface conductivity of 
each of the units (i.e. conductance of each unit times the form factor*) of the arrester, measured 2 min 
after coating, should not differ by more than 10% from the average. 

The layer is allowed to dry completely before beginning the test. Four tests, each lasting 30 min or until 
sparkover occurs, are made at each reference conouctance value given in 7.3. Each test consists of the 
application of the test voltages of 6.1 or 6.2, as appropriate. Before every lest the arrester should be 
rinsed with tap or mains water and then coated anew. 

For 6.2, the higher voltage level is the arrester rated voltage or an agreed voltage calculated on the basis 
of the highest system phase to earth voltage times the earth-fault factor, and the interval between 
voltage excursions is 5 min. 

For wetting the pre-applied layer on the test arrester, steam fog should be used. To achieve a uniform 
wetting over the whole length and around the arrester enough steam fog shall be introduced inside the 
test chamber. A rate of flow of 0,5 kg steam per hour and per cubic meter chamber volume is sufficient. 
The steam fog may be introduced by several tubes placed at uniform distances at the bottom of the test 
chamber. 

If the external flashover of the arrester occurs at or below rated voltage during the test cycle, attempts to 
perform the test cycle shall be made at about 5 min intervals until a cycle has been 



• For the definition of "form factor" see lEC 507. 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 

successfully performed. The cycles during which the flashover occurred shall not be considered as part 
of the test. 



NOTE - In the case of a multi-unit arrester, the parts may be polluted and measured separately with respect to surface 
conductivity. In the case of very large units it is advisable to flow-coat from bottom to top and finally from top to 
bottom. 

8.4 Solid pollutant-drying method 

After preparation in accordance with 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4, the arrester is completely coated including 
the area under the sheds, by spraying, flow-coating or dipping with the pollutant given in 9.2, Within 
3 min after the coating operation the initial test voltage of 0,8 times the arrester rated voltage is applied 
to the arrester. At intervals of 60 s the voltage is increased to rated voltage, held for 1 s, then lowered to 
the initial value. 

This cycle is repeated eight times to produce a test period of approximately 8 min. After completion of 
the 8-cycle test period, the test is stopped and a fresh coating of pollutant is applied to the arrester. Four 
series of 8-cycle test periods shall constitute a complete test. 

Because the greatest reduction in arrester internal sparkover occurs when there is profuse scintillation 
(i.e. numerous short low-current arcs) on the arrester housing, the volume conductivity of the pollutant 
must be high enough to cause scintillation and may vary with the design of the housing sheds. Some 
designs require a higher conductivity than others but the conductivity of the pollutant used should not 
be more than 2,5 mS/cm. 

Successive pollutant coatings may be applied without washing and drying the arrester, although 
washing and drying between coatings is permissible. However, if the test sequence is interrupted or 
delayed to the point where a coating has dried, the arrester shall be washed and dried before it is again 
coated. 

If the external flashover of the arrester occurs at or below rated voltage during a test cycle, attempts to 
perform the lest cycle shall be made at about 1 min intervals until a cycle has been successfully 
performed. The cycles during which the flashover occurred shall not be considered as part of the 
test. 

The arrester shall be considered to have passed this test if it has not sparked over at or below the 
specified test voltage at any time during the test. 



9 Solid pollutants for the methods of 8.3 and 8.4 

9. 1 Pollutant for the methods of 8. 3 

A suspension of: 

1000 g water 
20 g Aerosil 380 (highly dispersed SiOj) 
2 g wetting agent (nonyl-phenol-polyethylene-glycol-ether) 

Sodium chloride (NaCl). 

The conductivity of the suspension is adjusted to the desired level by adding a suitable amount of 
sodium chloride, 

NOTE - The suspension should not be used more than 48 h after preparation. 

8 



IS 15086 (Part 3) : 2003 
lEC 60099-3 (1990) 



9.2 Pollutant for the method of 8. 4 



A slurry of 5 g of bentonite and I g of an undiluted non-ionic detergent, such as nonyl-phenot- 
polyethylene-glycol-ether, per litre of water. The resistivity of the pollutant can be adjusted to the 
desired level by adding a suitable amount of sodium chloride. 



1 0. Pollutants for trial use with the methods of 8.3 or 8.4 

10.1 A suspension of: 

40 g kaolin powder in 1000 g water 

To the above is added a quantity of sodium chloride, for example 20 g, 40 g, 80 g or 1 60 g, to give the 
required conductance. 

10.2 A suspension of Portland cement 

NOTE - The cement is composed of a large number of slightly soluble salts which form a film of saturated electrolyte on 
wetting. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ET 30 ( 5352 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 2323 1 3 1 , 2323 3375, 2323 9402 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 

NEWDELHI 110002 L23233841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi r2337 8499,2337 8561 

KOLKATA700054 123378626,23379120 

Northern :SC0335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 r603843 

1.609285 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 r2254 1216,2254 1442 

1.22542519,22542315 

Western : Manakalaya,E9MIDC,Marol,Andheri(East) f 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI400093 1.28327891,28327892 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR, NALAGARH.PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, khurja, India 



