**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13241-1 (1991) : Code of practice for installation and 
maintenance of indoor PLC equipment. Part 1: PLC terminals 
[LITD 10: Power System Control and Associated 
Communications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13241 ( Parti ) : 1991 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 
INDOOR PLC EQUIPMENT - CODE OF 

PRACTICE 

PART 1 PLC TERMINALS 



UDC 62r3052-63: 621 •372-512 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1991 Price Gronp 2 



Power Line Carrier Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment Sectional Committee, LTD 25 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Power Line Carrier Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

This standard ( Part 1 ) is one of a series of standards on Code of Practice for Indoor PLC Equipment. 
Other parts likely to be brought out under this series shall cover equipment like teleprotection 
equipment, protection signalling channels, etc. 



IS 13241 (Part! ) : 1991 



Indian Standard 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 
INDOOR PLC EQUIPMENT - CODE OF 

PRACTICE 



PART 1 PLC TERMINALS 



1 SCOPE 

!•! This standard ( Part 1 ) covers installation and 
maintenance of PLC terminals used as indoor 
equipment. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standards given below are neces- 
sary adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No, Title 

3043 : 1987 Code of practice for earthing 

9482; 1980 Characteristic values of inputs 
and outputs of single side band 
PLC terminals 

10706 : 1983 Methods of tests for single 
side band PLC terminals 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the defini- 
tions given in IS 9482 ; 1980 shall apply. 

4 INSTALLATION 

4.1 General and Carrier Room 

The following points should be obeserved when 
installing PLC terminals in carrier room: 

a) PLC terminal rooms should be clean and 
dust free; 

NOTE — The carrier room should be preferably 
air conditioned. 

b) The room should be well ventilated with air 
at a temperature of 15 to 35°C and RH of 
45 to 75 percent; 

c) The cabinet of the PLC terminals should be 
preferably mounted on plinths about 75 mm 
high; 

d) A suitable covered cable duct should be 
provided. Where it is not possible to provide 
a cable duct, the height of the plinth should 
be suitably raised to accommodate the 
connecting cables; and 

c) Wherever cable entry is from the top, cables 
may be carried on aerial cable tray. 



4.1.1 It is recommended that PLC terminal is 
installed only after the carrior room is fully ready 
for use. 

4.1.2 Carrier Room 

4.1.2.1 The carrier room should be well illumi- 
nated and there should be provision of ac supply 
socket which will be used for feeding, the testing 
instruments ( during commissioning or subsequent 
line-ups ). if there are a number of PLC terminals 
in the carrier room, a minimum working space of 
r5 m should be provided between adjacent rows 
of cabinets. This space is required for keeping the 
testing instruments on a work-bench. 

4.1.2.2 Supply to each PLC terminal should be 
given through distribution board with separate 

fusel cutout. 

4.1.2.3 Most essential spares, such as fuse/cutout 
of correct rating and size transistors, ICs, LEDs 
and supervisory alarm lamps should be stored 
such that they are readily available. This would 
definately keep the downtime of the equipment 
to minimum. 

4.1.2.4 The essential plug-in units and test/ 
measuring instruments should be available at a 
centrally located store. Certain plug-in-modules 
and test/memiring instruments should be available 
in individu^ substations as per manufacturer's 
recommendations. 

4.1.2.5 The relevent documentation, interconnec- 
tion diagrams, cable schedule, commissioning test 
results and subsequent alignment test results 
should be readily available in the PLC room. 

4.1.2.6 For easy maintenance, it is reccommended 
that a suitable distribution frame is used for 
terminating subscriber lines in the Carrier Room 
and for interconnection of the same with the 
switching equipment/PAX, etc. 

The distribution frame should consist of fuses, 
lightning arrestors in each of the subscriber lines 
for the protection of the equipment as well as 
the user. 

4.1.2.7 Only authorized persons should have 
access to PLC terminals used for teleprotection. 



1 



IS 13241 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 



4.2 Cabinets 

4.2.1 The cabinet with hinged-frame design may 
be directly located against the wall or back-to- 
back. Cabinets which have doors at the back should 
have adequate clearance from the wall for 

inspection, 

4.2.2 For external connections, reference should 
be made to the wiring diagrams of the PLC 
terminals. Cabling should be done systematically 
for quick checking and tracing. Identification 
marks on cables would help in fault location. 

4.2.3 The packing provided during transport 
should be removed. It should be checked whether 
all prints/modules ( as per face plan ) are in 
position; and the circuit boards should be plugged 
in the correct locations according to manu- 
facturer's face plan. 

4.3 Supply Connections 

If in the carrier room, a number of PLC terminals 
are present, supplies should be given to each 
cabinet through distribution boards- 

4.4 Checks 

The following checks should be made before 
commissioning tests on PLC terminals: 

a) Check if supply connections have been 
made according to diagram; 

b) Check the voltage and capacity of the float 
charger, if terminals are dc powered; 

c) Check if the cross section of the cable is 
adequate; and 

d) Check whether protective earthing to 
the equipments has been provided in 
accordance with IS 3043 : 1987. 

4.4.1 After these preliminary check6fcommission- 
ing tests on PLC terminal may be started. 

4.5 Earthing 

4.5.1 For earthing conductors protected against 
corrosion, the minimum cross-sectional area of 
earthing conductor shall be 16 mm^ of copper or 
iron. For earthing conductors not protected 
against corrosion, the minimum cross-sectional 
area of earthing conductor shall be 25 mm* of 
copper or 50 mm^ of iron. 

4.5.2 In addition to protective earthing tele- 
communication systems may require functional 
earths for any or all of the following purposes: 

a) To complete the circuits of telegraph or 
telephone systems employing on-earth path 
for signalling purpose; 



b) To earth the power supply circuit and 
stabilize the potential of the equipment 
with respect to earth; 

c) For lightning-protective apparatus; and 

d) To earth screening conductors to reduce 
electrical interference to the telecommuni- 
cation circuits. 

The functional earthings as per 29.1 and 29.2 
of IS 3043 : 1987 shall be provided. 

4.6 If PLC terminals are connected in parallel on 
CF side, separate connecting point should be 
used. Further care should be taken to match the 
output impedance of PLC terminal to the impe- 
dance of the carrier frequency line. 

5 STORAGE OF PLC TERMINALS 

The manufacturer recommendations with regard 
to conditions and period of storage should be 
adhered to. 

6 MAINTENANCE OF PLC TERMINALS 

6.0 In general, all routine checks should be carried 
out to ensure that all operating voltages/currents, 
levels for various services. Automatic Gain Control 
Characteristic, AGC, etc, are as per manufacturer's 
recommendations and comply with the provisions 
of relevant Indian Standard. 

6.1 Routine Maintenance 

Under normal circumstances, the following routine 
checks should be carried out at interval of 3 
months: 

a) Check voltages of power supply to be within 
limits according to IS 9482 : 1980. If 
possible, these should be brought to the 
normal values. 

b) On the transmit side, distribution of power 
between speech and signals should be 
checked for compliance with IS 9482 : 1980. 
It is important that HF amplifiers is not 
overloaded, otherwise there would be risk 
of intermodulation products. 

c) On the receive side, it should be checked 
that PLC terminal is working in the middle 
of AGC range. 

d) The input and output levels of both speech 
( test tone ) as well as signals should be 
checked for compliance with IS 9482 : 1980, 

6.2 Annual Maintenance 

The installation should be systematically aligned 
and levels adjusted once a year and this job should 
be attended to by qualified personnel conversant 
with the equipment. In this alignment, special 



IS 13241 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 



attention should be paid to the distribution of 
power between speech and signals as well as to 
VF response within the entire effectively trans- 
mitted speech and signals frequencies. Moreover 
the line-up should be done by using suitable 
measuring/testing instruments ( see Annex B of 
IS 10706 : 1983 ). 

6.3 Fault Rectification 

6.3.1 For fault location, the guidelines given in 
the instruction manual provided by the PLC 
terminal manufacturers may be followed. 

6.3.2 The fault may be located with the use 
of suitable test/measuring instrument and rectified 
by replacing the faulty units. 

6.3.3 In the case of faults of serious and persistent 
nature, it may be necessary to realign the 
complete channel. 



6.3.4 A major change in level may require 
complete realignment of the PLC channel ( both 
transmitter and receiver ). It should also be 
ensured that the change in AGC is not due to 
defect in the outdoor coupling equipment or any 
possible change in transmission line configuration 
etc. Any such major re-arrangement in the line 
configuration should be taken up only after due 
consideration to the functioning of the PLC 
channel. 

6.3.5 Record should be kept of the test results at 
the time of commissioning and subsequent line- 
ups of the PLC channels. 

6.4 Schedule of Maintenance 

A recommended schedule of of PLC maintenance 
terminals is given in Annex A. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 6.4 ) 

RECOMMENDED SCHEDULE FOR MAINTENANCE OF PLC TERMINALS 



Details to be Checked 

i) Measurement of various operating 

parameters by built-in facilities 
ii) Functioning of speech channel 
iii) Measurement of supply voltage 
iv) Cleaning of relay contacts 



v) Alignment of PLC Link 

i) Pilot, and HF oscillators frequencies 

and levels 
ii) Carrier leak measurement 

iii) Sub-division of power in various sub-channels 

iv) Audio frequency response and equalisation 

v) Setting of automatic gain control 



Frequency of Checking 
Weekly 

Daily 
Daily 
As and when required 



Remarks 



Exhaustive cleaning 

may be made under 

supervision of 

experienced persons 



Half Yearly 

Half Yearly 
Half Yearly 
Half Yearly 
Half Yearly 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Acty 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard (Conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. LTD 25 ( 586 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

(Common to all OflBces ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg nil 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 }331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD,.GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



