**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 1475-1 (2001) : Self-Contained Drinking Water Coolers, 
Part 1: Energy Consumption and Performance [MED 3: 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1475 (Parti): 2001 
^IFT 1 T33rf -m^ ?WT cbl4*lRdl 

Indian Standard 

SELF-CONTAINED DRINKING 
WATER COOLERS — SPECIFICATION 

PART 1 ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND PERFORMANCE 

( Third Revision ) 



ICS 27.200; 97.130.20 



©BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 2001 Price Group 4 



Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, ME 3 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first issued in 1959 and was revised in 1971 to allow for the use of more readily available 
materials as alternative to stainless steel for the constructions of storage tanks of storage type water coolers. 
The main modifications made in the second revision were as follows: 

a) It did not specify any particular material for the storage tank but instead stipulated that the materials 
used would be corrosion resistant, non-toxic non-absorbent and durable. 

b) The requirement relating to the performance factor was deleted in view of lack of authentic data available 
in this regard and the difficulties experienced by the manufacturers to meet this requirement. 

c) The classification of the various types of water coolers had been aligned with the practices prevailing in 
other countries. 

o 

d) It specified only 35 C ambient temperature for capacity rating test condition and also included maximum 
operating condition of 43 C ambient and the related requirements so as to provide guidance to the consumers 
about the performance of these units at adverse ambient conditions. 

Water coolers with a voltage and a frequency other than specified in this standard may also be manufactured for 
the purposes of export. 

Since the publication of second revision, 7 amendments were issued. The rate of energy consumption for 
different cooling capacity rating were specified through amendment in 1989. These were reduced in 1991. In the 
third revision all these amendments have been reviewed and incorporated in the standard. In this revision, the 
energy consumption has been further reduced by approximately 3 to 1 1 percent. 

In view of the prevailing energy scenario in the country, the Govt of India is laying emphasis on the energy 
conservation through various means by emphasizing the use of energy efficiency products. Accordingly, Govt 
of India is considering introduction of scheme of energy labelling. The drinking water cooler is one such item 
which consumes considerable amount of energy and hence is considered as a product which may be covered 
under energy labelling scheme. 

With a view to segregate performance and energy labelling requirements, this standard has been split into two 
parts. The other part of this standard shall deal with the energy labelling requirements. The maximum energy 
consumption values specified in this standard for various capacity ranges are based on the data generated over 
the years. Regular R&D efforts should be employed to improve the energy consumption with the developments 
in technology. 

Under the Montreal Protocol and subsequent London Amendment, India has agreed to phase out the use of 
ozone depleting substances according to a schedule. The above protocol grants a 10 year grace period on all 
phase out dates and interim reduction deadlines for developing countries whose per capita consumption of 
Annex A chemicals (as identified in Annexures to Montreal Protocol) is less than 0.3 kg/year. Annex A 
chemicals include CFC 11, 12, 113, 114, llSandHalon 1211 and Halon 1301. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules 
for rounding off numerical values ( r^vwe J)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 1475 (Part 1) : 2001 



Indian Standard 



SELF-CONTAINED DRINKING 
WATER COOLERS — SPECIFICATION 

PART 1 ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND PERFORMANCE 

(Third Revision) 



1 SCOPE 



This standard (Part 1) prescribes the general 
constructional requirements, recommended standard 
sizes, methods of testing and rating, and installation 
of self contained drinking water coolers operated by 
electrically driven vapour compression type 
refrigerating machine with air-cooled condenser. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 



IS No. 



694:1990 



9%: 1979 



9968 (Parti): 1988 



3 TERMINOLOGY 



Title 

PVC insulated cables for 
working voltages up to and 
including 1 lOOY (third revision) 
Single-phase small ac and 
universal electric motors 
(second revision) 
Elastomer insulated cables : Part 
1 For working voltages up to and 
including 1 lOOV (first revision) 



3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Cooling Capacity Rating of a Water Cooler — It 

is the quantity ofwater, it will cool under given ambient 
temperature conditions with a given inlet water 
temperature and a given outlet water temperature. This 
shall be expressed as number of litres of water cooled 
per hour. 

3.2 Power Input of a Water Cooler — It is the total 
power input in watts when the cooler is operated under 
given conditions. 



33 Self-Contained Drinking Water Cooler — A 

factory made assembly, in one structure which includes 
a complete mechanical refrigerating system, and which 
has the primary function of cooling potable water and 
also provides for dispensing such water, by either 
integral or remote means, or both. 

3.4 Pressure lype Water Cooler — A type of water 
cooler which employs a closed cooling chamber having 
connections for inlet water under pressure and outlet 
for cold water. 

3^ Storage Type Water Cooler — A type of water 
cooler which stores and cools the water in the same 
container or separate containers. Such water coolers 
may or may not be fitted with plumbing connections 
for water inlet, drain, overflow, etc. 

3.6 Static Head — It is the minimum head in metres of 
water column required to promote the flow at the 
rated capacity defined in 3.1 through cooling unit 

and its controlling valve. This is essentially 
applicable to pressure type after cooler. 

3.7 Storage Capacity of Tank in the Storage Type 
Drinking Unit — It shall be the amount of water in 
litres that can be drawn from drinking water faucet 
after the storage tank has been first filled to the level 
which is normally maintained, either by a water level 
actuated automatic shut off valve or manually in case 
of non-plumbing type models, 

4 CLASSIFICATION 

4.1 Self-propelled water coolers shall be classified as: 

a) Pressure type water coolers, and 

b) Storage type water coolers. 

4.1.1 Pressure type water coolers shall ordinarily be 
of the two types given below: 

a) Bubbler Type — The type of cooler employs a 
bubbler which projects stream of water so that it 
can be consumed without use of cups, glasses 
or other containers. 

b) Faucet Type — This type employs faucet or spout 
suitable for filling cups, glasses or other 
containers. 



1 



IS 1475 (Parti): 2001 



4.1.2 Storage type water coolers shall ordinarily be 
any of the following types: 

a) Cooler which may store or cool water in the same 
container, and 

b) Cooler which may employ bottle or container for 
storing supply of water to be cooled. Such bottle 
or container is placed on or within the water 
cooler. 

4.1.3 Water cooler with remote type dispensing means 
have the primary function of cooling potable water 
for delivery to remotely installed dispensers. Such 
remotely installed dispensing means are not 
considered part of the water cooler. Water coolers with 
remote type dispensing means can be either of pressure 

type or storage type. 

4.2 The self-contained coolers may also employ means 
of pre-cooling. For bubbler type pressure water coolers, 
normal spill of cold water may be utilized to cool 
incoming water in a heatchanger also called pre-cooler. 
In another arrangement suction line of refrigeration 
system may be used to pre-cool incoming water before 
it enters storage tank. 

5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 All ratings shall be based on either 230 or 240 volts 
in the case of single phase supply and either 400 or 
415 volts in the case of 3 phase supply. The unit, 
however, shall be capable of working at any voltage 
within ±10 percent of the rated voltage. 

5.2 Capacity Rating Test Conditions 

Self-contained water coolers of all type shall be rated 
under the following conditions: 

o 

a) Ambient temperature 35.0 C, 

b) Inlet water temperature 30.0** C, and 

c) Maximum outlet water temperature 13.5 C. 

5.2.1 Maximum Operating^Test Conditions 

Self-contained water coolers of all types shall perform 
satisfactorily and meet the requirements given in 7.7.4 
when tested under the following conditions : 

o 

a) Ambient temperature 43.0 C, 

b) Inlet water temperature 35.0 C, 

c) Maximum outlet water temperature 18.5 C, 

d) Water flow rate maintained at 90 percent of the 
capacity as determined under the conditions 
specified in 5.2, and 

e) Supply voltage at 90% and 1 10% of rated voltage. 

53 The recommended sizes, capacity ratings and static 
heads for different types of water coolers shall be as 
given in Table 1 . 

5.3,1 It is recommended that static water head in the 
inlet pipe, wherever provided, shall not exceed 12 m in 
any type of water cooler. 



5-4 Drinking water requirements for various types of 
services shall be as specified in Table 2. 

Table 1 Minimum Static Head For Pressure Type 
Water Coolers 

{Clause 5,3) 



Size 


Cooling 


Storage Capacity 


Minimum 




Capacity 


for Storage Type 


Static 




Rating 


Water Coolers 


Head 




1/h 


1 


m 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 





5 


5. 10 and 15 


3 


I 


10 


10, 20 and 30 


3 


2 


15 


15, 30 and 40 


3 


3 


30 


30, 40 and 60 


3 


4 


40 


40, 60 and 80 


4.5 


5 


60 


60, m and 120 


4.5 


6 


80 


80. 120 and 225 


4.5 


7 


120 


120, 225 and 300 


4.5 


8 


150 


150, 300 and 400 


4.5 


9 


225 


225, 400 and 550 


4.5 



Ikble2 Drinking Water Requirements For Various 
Types of Services 

{Clause 5 A) 



Type of Service 


Drinking Water Requirement 




Temperature 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Office 


10-15,5 


0.166 litre/person hour 


Light manufacturing 


10-15.5 


0,5 litre/person/hour 


Heavy manufacturing 


13-18 


1.0 litre/person/hour 


Hot heavy manufacturing 15-18.5 


1.0 litre/person/hour 


Restaurant 


10-15.5 


0.5 litre/person 


Cafeteria 


10-15.5 


0.33 litre/person 


Cinema 


10-15.5 


6 litre/ 100 seats 


Theatre 


10-15.5 


6 litre/100 seats 
continuous capacity 
(each fountain shall 
have storage capacity 
to provide 28 litres in 
10 min) 


School 


10-15.5 


Same as for offices 


Hospitals : per bed per 


10-15.5 


0.33 litre 


attendant 






Hotels 


10-15.5 


0.33 litre/hour/room 


Public fountains, parks 


10-15.5 


120-160 litres/hour 


fairs, etc 






Departmental stores 


10-15.5 


23-28 litres/hour 


hostel and offices 




fountain 


building lobbies 







NOTE — The above requirements relate to coolers with 
faucet arrangements. In the case of coolers with bubbler 
type outlet, tfie water requirements per person shall be taken 
as 2.5 times the above values. 

5.5 Published Ratings 

Published ratings shall include the rated cooling 
capacity under the conditions specified in 5,2. 

5.6 Tolerances 

5.6.1 To comply with this standard, declared or 
reported water cooler ratings shall be based on 
conditions specified in S2 and shall be such that 
performance of any unit shall have a capacity not less 
than 90 percent of the stated capacity. 



IS 1475 (Part 1) : 2001 



5.6.2 The storage capacity of the storage type water 
coolers shall not be less than 95 percent of the values 
specified. 

5.6.3 The rate of energy consumption for drinking 
water coolers tested under test conditions laid down 
in 5.2 shall not be more than the values given below for 
the following capacity rating: 

Size Cooling Capacity Rate of Maximum Energy 

Rating Consumption in Watts 
1/h 

5 175 

1 10 270 

2 15 300 

3 30 400 

4 40 575 

5 60 775 

6 80 950 

7 120 1300 

8 150 1550 

9 ^5 2 200 

6 COMPONENTS AND THEIR MATERIALS 

6.1 Chassis shall be of rigid construction, made of 
steel or alloy steel members and coated with anti-rust 
plating or paint. 

6.2 Cooling unit for storage type water cooler shall 
consist of storage tank with its surfaces acting as 
heat exchanger on the exterior. If the heat exchanger 
consists of cooling coil it shall be bonded to the tank 
on the exterior and held in good thermal contact. The 
coil, if prone to rust, shall be given a good coating of 
suitable rust preventing material. 

6.3 Cooling unit for pressure type water cooler shall 
comprise a suitable heat exchanger designed to promote 
effective heat transfer. In case of double coil heat 
exchanger, both coils shall be held in good thermal 
contact. The portion of the heat exchanger in contact 
with the cooled water shall be of suitable corrosion 
resistant alloy so as to keep the water safe for human 
consumption. 

6.4 The condensing unit shall be selected to balance 
the rated output plus all the losses. If not internally 
spring mounted, the compressor shall be securely 
supported on antivibration mountings to prevent 
transmission of mechanical vibrations. Low pressure 
and high pressure cut outs shall be provided to protect 
the compressor against unusually low suction and 
high pressure for water coolers using expansion valve 
only. This provision, however, will not be applicable to 
systems using capillaries. The compressor motor shall 
be equipped with an overload protection. 

6.5 The refrigerant used shall be odourless, non- 
irritating, non-toxic, non-inflammable, non-explosive. 



non-corrosive and shall be free from CFC. 

6.6 The refrigerant flow to the low side shall be 
controlled by expansion valve or capillary preceeded 
by suitable liquid refrigerant drier. 

6.7 Thermostat capable of adjustment shall control 
the automatic operation of the condensing unit to 
maintain the required temperature of the cooled water. 

6.8 In storage type unit, the storage tank shall be of 
corrosion resistant, non-toxic, non-absorbent and 
durable materials made up of stainless steel or FDA 
grade material. The tank shall be provided, where 
necessary, with overflow and make up correction with 
ball float and drain. The construction of the tank shall 
be such that the possibility of any dirt accumulating in 
the tank due to rough surface and Improper welded 
joints is eliminated. There shall be no direct contact of 
any lead based solder with the water so as to keep the 
water safe for human consumption. 

6.9 A cleanable or throwaway type strainer (filter) to 
remove suspended matters from water may also be fitted 
externally to the water cooler at the inlet to the cooling 
unit when desired by the purchaser. The filter elements 
shall not be of asbestos based materials. The filter 
shall have suitable mesh size (500u and more) and shall 
be free from mercury, lead, aluminium, cadmium, arsenic 
and other poisonous materials for human consumption. 

6.10 The drain tray shall be made of sufficiently strong 
corrosion-resistant material which shall not warp or 
get deteriorated in constant use with cooled water 
under varying weather conditions. This shall be of 
ample size to prevent any splash outside its periphery. 
The drain wherever provided, shall have a suitable 
strainer so as to prevent this from being clogged. 

6.11 The outlet device and its valve for fitting the 
container or for direct feed shall be drip proof and 
made of a material which is corrosion resistant or where 
the material is not corrosion resistant it shall be coated 
against corrosion so as to keep the water safe for human 
consumption. 

6.12 The thermal insulation for the cooling unit, 
connections therefrom to the outlets, and for suction 
pipe of the condensing unit shall be of vapour-proof 
materials or covered with external vapour-proof barrier. 
The insulation shall have no interior air gap and shall 
be of sufficient thickness to prevent condensation on 
the exterior cold surfaces. 

6.13 The inflow drain and overflow connections 
wherever provided, shall be accessible so as to 
facilitate easy connection at the time of the installation, 

6.14 The panel of the unit shall be of suitable materials 
(steel sheets, galvanized iron, aluminium or plastics 



IS 1475 (Parti): 2001 



or decorative laminates) having proper thickness and 
suitably protected against the corrosion and coated to 
give decorative finish and long life under condition of 
use. It shall be easily removable. 

6.15 The inspection lid for storage type water cooler 
shall be of rigid construction and hinged. It shall be 
provided with a gasket to keep the storage tank dust- 
proof. The internal part of the inspection lid shall be of 
corrosion resistant material so as not to contaminate 
the water and make it unsafe for human consumption, 
if necessary. 

6.16 Three-core cable conforming to IS 9968 (Part 1) 
oris 694 of at least 1.5 metres length shall be provided 
with each unit. A three-pin plug and starter, if required, 
shall be provided at the time of installation. 

6.17 Where the static head is in excess of 12 m, a 
suitable pressure reducing device shall be provided at 
the time of installation. 

7 TESTS 

7.1 Type Tests 

The following shall constitute the type tests : 

a) Insulation resistance tests, 

b) High voltage test, 

c) Cooling capacity rating test, and 

d) Maximum operating condition test. 

7»1.1 Once a water cooler has undergone type test 
any major alterations effecting the performance which 
the manufacturer intends to make in the water cooler 
shall be reported to the testing authority and further 
type test shall be carried out in the modified water cooler 
in accordance with the procedure laid down in 7.7. 

7.2 Production Routine Tests 

Every water cooler, after completion, shall be subjected 
to the following routine tests at the manufacturer's 
works : 

a) Electric insulation test, 

b) Performance test, and 

c) High voltage test. 

7.2.1 The manufacturer shall furnish with each water 
cooler a certificate that the production routine tests 
specified in 7.2 have been conducted in accordance 
with the prescribed procedure (see 7.8) and that the 
unit conforms to the requireipents of this standard. 

7.3 Acceptance Tests 

If the purchaser desires any of the production routine 
tests to be repeated at the time of purchase then, where 
agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer, 
the tests may be carried out at the manufacturer's 
works; alternatively, the tests may be repeated at the 
place specified by the purchaser provided all the 



arrangements for tests are made by the purchaser at 
the specified place. 

7.4 Sample for Tests 

7.4.1 Type Tests 

Two water coolers of each type and size shall be sent 
along with manufacturer's detailed specifications to 
the appropriate testing authority for purposes of type 
tests. 

7.4.2 Acceptance Tests 

The number of samples shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

7.5 Preparation and Test Conditions 

7.5.1 Each specimen tested shall be selected from 
stock or routine factory production, and shall be 
representative of construction and adjustments. 

7.5.2 The drinking water cooler with all panels in place 
shall be tested in a room in which the temperature can 
be controlled. Panels should remain in place throughout 
the entire test. 

7.5 J Pressure water coolers shall have an arrangement 
to maintain a constant head at the inlet of the water 
coolers. This shall be connected to a pressure water 
supply which is provided with means of controlling 
the water temperature. 

7.5.4 Water coolers shall have a hand regulated shut- 
off valve, if necessary, attached at the cooled water 
outlet in place of the bubbler or faucet for regulating 
the flow of water and measuring its temperature. 

7.5.5 Bottle water coolers shall be tested with the 
largest bottle for which the cooler is designed. 

7.5.6 The storage type water cooler shall be tested 
with the storage tanks filled up to the normal level 
required for the rated storage capacity. 

7.5.7 Water coolers shall be operated until stable 
operating conditions are reached. The stable operating 
conditions are deemed to have reached when during a 
time of 2 hours the outlet water temperature does not 
vary by more than ± 0.5 C from the mean value. 

7.5.8 The water cooler being tested shall be located 
in a room so that its temperature is not affected by 
direct radiation to or from external cooling or heating 
equipment. The air circulation in the room shall be 
such that the specified uniformity of ambient 
temperature is obtained without direct draft upon the 
water cooler under test. 

7.5.9 The fan motor and compressor shall be so 
connected as to facilitate measurement of the power 



IS 1475 (Part 1) : 2001 



input. When tested under actual working conditions 
the fan motors shall conform to the requirements 
specified in IS 996. 

7.6 Instruments 

7.6.1 Temperature measurement shall be made with 
one or more of the following instruments : 

a) Mercury-in-glass thermometers, 

b) Thermocouples, 

c) Electric resistance thermometers, or 

d) Electric resistance measuring instruments having 
accuracy 0.2 percent of the scale. 

7.6.1,1 Accuracy of measurement shall be within 

±0.25''C 

7.6.2 Electrical measurements shall be made with 
indicating instrument. 

7.6.2.1 The accuracy of indicating instruments shall 
be within 0.5 percent of the full scale reading. 

7.63 Volume measurement shall be made with one or 
more of the following instruments: 

a) Liquid quantity measuring device, measuring 
either volume or weight, or 

b) Liquid flow meter. 

7.6.3.1 Accuracy of measurement shall be within ±1 
percent. 

7.6*4 The smallest division on the scale of any 
instrument shall not exceed twice the specified accuracy 
for it 

7.7 Procedure for Type Tests 

7.7.1 Insulation Resistance 

The insulation resistance between all electric circuits 
included in the cooler, and earthed metal parts, when 
measured at normal room temperatures at the 
manufacturer's works with a voltage of 500 V dc shall 
be not less than 1 MQ at the end of maximum operating 
condition test. This test shall be repeated after high 
voltage test. 

7.7.2 High Voltage Test 

The electrical insulation ofall electric circuits included 
in the water cooler shall be such as to withstand ,a 
high voltage test of 1 000 V rms applied for 2 seconds 
between all electric circuits and all accessible metal 
parts (electrically connected together for this test) at 
normal room temperature. For water coolers to be 
connected to circuits of 50 V and below, the high voltage 
tests shall be 500 V rms. The test voltage shall be 
alternating of approximately sine-wave form, and of 
any convenient frequency between 25 and 100 Hz. 



7.73 Cooling Capacity Rating Test 

The object of the test is to determine the cooling 
capacity of a specimen cooler under rating conditions 
specified in 5.2. The procedure given in 7.73.1 to 
7.73.9 shall be adopted to measure the following: 

a) Temperature of inlet water; 

b) Temperature of outlet water; 

c) Volume of water in litres cooled per hour; 

d) Volume of water in litres, by passed per hour 
through pre-cooler, if provided; 

e) Ambient temperature; 

f) Voltage at motor service connections when the 
cooler is working; 

g) Power consumption of the unit; and 
h) Current taken by the unit. 

7.7.3*1 Start the condensing unit and regulate the 
voltage at the service connection to within + 5 percent 
of the motor rated voltage. 

7.73.2 Pressure bubbler water coolers equipped with 
a pre-cooler and when being tested for capacity with 
the pre-cooler, shall have the outlet hand-regulated 
shut-off valve arranged to bypass 60 percent of the 
total stream to the drain and 40 percent to an outside 
drain. The flow from both streams shall be noted and 
their sum reported as litres of water per hour. 

7.733 Adjust the temperature of the inlet water for all 
types of water coolers or the average temperature of 
the water in bottles for bottle water coolers to within 

o 

± 0.5 C of the rating conditions specified in 5.2. For 
non plumbing type storage water coolers a temporary 
inlet water connection with a flow regulator/valve shall 
be provided to facilitate maintenance of constant water 
level in the tank to rated storage capacity, as specified 
by the manufacturer, 

7.73.4 Adjust or bridge the temperature control device 
so that continuous operation during the test is 
assumed. 

7.73.5 Operate the water cooler until steady 
temperatures and mechanical equilibrium are 
established. For storage type water cooler, the water 
cooler shall be run for a time depending upon storage 
and cooling capacity so as to ensure that a stable outlet 
water temperature is established. 

7.73.6 At an interval of 15 minutes record readings of 
the measurements stated in 7.73. In the case of bottle 
water coolers, measurements of inlet water temperature 
may be taken only at the beginning of the test and 
when abottle is replaced. 

7.73.7 Continue the test until eight successive 
readings of outlet water temperature are steady, with 
individual readings varying within +0.5 C and average 
of such readings conforming to 5.2. 



IS 1475 (Parti): 2001 



7,7,3.8 Ambient temperatures shall be maintained 
within ±1 C of the specified value and shall be measured 
at points located 25 cm from the sides other than the 
sides in which the condenser outlet is located, on the 
perpendicular passing through the geometrical centres 
of the surfaces of these sides. 

7 J3.9 Evaluation and report of cooling capacity rating 
test results: 

a) The cooling capacity rating of the cooler tested 
shall be the average of the eight successive 
readings recorded in 7.7.3.7. 

b) The test report shall contain the measurements 
of parameters given in 7.7.3 (a) to (h) after 
specified rating conditions have become 
established. 

7.7.4 Maximum Operating Condition Test 

Water coolers shall be tested at the conditions specified 
in 4,2.1. The water cooler shall operate continuously 
for a period of 2 hours after the test conditions are 
established without tripping of motor overload 
protective device. 

7.7.5 The type test report shall also contain the 
following identification data: 

a) Name-plate data of water cooler: 

b) Name-plate data of compressor; 

c) Kind of cooler, that is whether pressure bubbler 
with pre-cooler, pressure bubbler with no pre- 
cooler, pressure faucet, bottle faucet, etc; and 

d) Motor name-plate data. 

7.8 Procedure for Production Routine Tests 

7.8.1 Insulation Resistance Test 

Electrical insulation test shall be carried out at 500 V 
dc, as given in 7.7.1 after the end of performance test. 

7.8.2 Performance Test 

For pressure type water cooler, measurement shall be 
made of the following under the prevailing ambient 
conditions and the performance figure from (a) to (g) 
shall be compared with the results of the unit which 
has already passed the type lest: 

a) Temperature of inlet water; 

b) Temperature of outlet water; 

c) Volume of water in litres cooled per hour; 

d) Ambient temperature; 

e) Voltage at motor service connections; 
g) Power consumption; and 

h) Current. 

7.8.2.1 For storage type water coolers, pull down test 
may be conducted instead of the one involving 
continuous flow of water through the unit. 
Measurement shall be made of the pull down time. 



When the initial water temperature, not exceeding 
32 C, drops down by at least 15°C during the lest, 
measurement shall also be made of the following, which 
shall be compared with the results of a type tested 
and approved unit, under the same temperature 
conditions : 

a) Ambient temperature, 

b) Initial water temperature, 

c) Final water temperature, 

d) Pull down time, 

e) Voltage, 

f) Current, and 

g) Power consumption. 

The initial and final temperature of the water shall be 
measured in the top layer of the water surface in the 
tank after thoroughly mixing the water. When the initial 
water temperature, not exceeding 32 C, drops down by 
at least 15 C during the test, measurement shall be 
compared with the results of a type tested and approved 
unit, under the prevailing ambient conditions. 

7.8.3 High Voltage Test 

This shall be conducted as given in 7.7.2. 

8 MANUFACTURER'S CERTIFICATE 

8,1 The manufacturer shall furnish with each water 
cooler a copy of the type test certificate, if required by 
the customer, and shall also certify that the water cooler 
has been manufactured according to the type tested 
by the testing authority and that it conforms to the 
requirements of this standard. 

8.1.1 The manufacturer's certificate shall not be 
necessary unless specifically demanded by the 
consumer/if the water cooler bears the BIS 
Certification Mark (see 9.2). 

9 MARKING AND INFORMATION 

9.1 Each self-contained water cooler shall have the 
following information marked in a permanent and 
legible manner in a location where it is easily accessible 
and easily visible after installation: 

a) Name-plate data of water cooler including make, 
model and serial number of the unit and the name 
and quantity of refrigerant; 

b) Supply characteristics; 

c) Cooling capacity; 

d) Wiring diagram; 

e) Full load current, and 

f) The rate of maximum energy consumption under 
test conditions laid down in 5.2 in watts 
(see 5.63), 

92 BIS Certification Marking 

9.2.1 The water cooler may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 



IS 1475 (Parti): 2001 



9,2.2 The use of the standard mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 



The details of condition under which a license for the 
use of the standard mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards, 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, ME 03 



Organization 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

All India Air conditioning & Refrigeration Association, 
New Delhi 

ASHRAE India Chapter, Gurgaon 

Blue Star Limited, Thane 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Confederation of India Industry, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi 

Directorate of Quality Assurance, Pune 

Energy Management Centre, New Delhi 

Fedders Lloyd Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Frac Power Motors, New Delhi 
Godrej Appliances Ltd, Mumbai 

Indfos Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 

conditioning Engineers, New Delhi 
Kirloskar Copeland Ltd, Pune 

Kirioskar Pneumatic Co Ltd, Pune 

National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Tecumseh Products India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Annapurna Electronics & Services Ltd, Hyderabad 
Tata Energy Research Institute, New Delhi 

Videocon Appliances Ltd, Aurangabad 

Volga Airtechnics Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Voltas Limited, Mumbai 



Representativeis} 

Prof R. S. Agarwal {Chairman) 

Shri KamalSahdev 

Shri a. p. Khurana {Alternate) 

Shri P. K. Chowdhury 

Shri Ashish Rekheja {Alternate) 

Shri D.Ravindra 

Shri N. Sivasankaran {Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (E) 

Superintended Engineer {Alternate) 

Shri S. S. Gopaucrishnan 

Shri J. K. Khanna 

Shri R, Karuppiah {Alternate) 

Col M. S. Parthasarathy 

Lt-Col B. T. Jade {Alternate) 

ShriJ.Vasudevan 

Shri Satish Sabharwal {Alternate) 

Shri H. J. Kewalramani 

Shri Umakant V. H. {Alternate) 

Shri V. D. Trehan 

ShriB.J.Wadia 

Shri N. T Desai {Alternate) 

Shri S. S. Malhotra 

Shri D. K. Jain {Alternate) 

President 

Shri V. G. Sardesai 

Shri N. M, Ingle {Alternate) 

Shri V. D. Mane 

Shri Aditya Kowshik (Alternate) 

Shri V. D. Joshi 

Shri T. N. Jayaraman {Alternate) 

Shri S. Anand 

Shri T. Pal {Alternate) 

DrVenkateswarlu 

Shri V. Raghavendra Rao {Alternate) 

Shri G. K. Prasad 

Shri Pankaj Bhatta 

Dr Ajay Mathur {Alternate) 

Shri M. S. Dhaber 

Shri S. Shankarnarayanan {Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Mehta 

Shri S. R. Srinivasan 

Shri M. M. Roy {Alternate) 



{Continued on page 8) 



IS 1475 (Part 1) : 2001 



{Continued from page 7) 

Organization 
Voltas Ltd (White Goods), Hyderabad 

Whirlpool of India Ltd, Ranjangaon, Pune 
BIS Directorate Genera! 



Representaiiveis} 

ShriS. James 

Shki S. Bhujanoa Rao {Alternate) 
ShriS. M.SAS111Y 

Shri M. L.CH0I1U. Director & Head (MED) 
fl)^^»c»ienting l^rector General {Ex-officio)] 



Member-Secretalry 
Shri R Venkaieswara Rao. 



r-.tYj 



Joint Director (MED),^1S' 
Panel for Refrigeration and Commercial Appliances, ME 3/P-l 



Organization 

Whirlpool of India Limited, Ranjangaon, Pune 

All India Air conditioning & Refrigeration 
Association, New Delhi 

Blue Star Limited, Thane 

Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals. New Delhi 

Godrej Appliances Limited, Mumbai 

Kirloskar Copeland Limited, Pune 

Tecumseh Products (India) Ltd, Hyderabad 

Videocon Appliances Ltd, Aurangabad 
Voltas Limited (White Goods), Hyderabad 

Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 

Voluntary Organization (In Interest of Consumer 
Education), New Delhi 



Representative{s) ? 

Shri S. M. Sastry {Convenor) 

Shri R. K. Malhotra 

Shri A. P. Khurana {Alternate) 

Shri D. Ravindran 

Shri Ajay Aoarwal {Alternate) 

Shri S. C. Chadha 

Shri V. K. Sridhar {Altemme) 

ShriB.J.Wadia 

Shri N. T. Desai {Alternate) 

Shri V. G. Sardesai 

Shri N. M. Ingle {Alternate) 

Dr Venkateswarlu 

Shri V, Raghavendra Rao {Alternate) 

Shri Ajay Bhavsagar 

Shri S.James 

Shri S. Bhujanga Rao {Alternate) 

Shri L, C. Gupta 

Shri J. R. Kulkarni {Alternate) 

Shri T. C. Kapoor 

Shri H. Wadhwa {Alternate) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ME 03 { 0524 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 



Regional Offices 
Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAl 600 1 13 



Western 



Branches 



: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

/323 76 17 
\_323 38 41 

r337 84 99, 337 85 61 
L337 86 26, 337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



r254 12 16,254 14 42 
1^254 25 19,254 13 15 

r832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1.832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Pi-ess, New Delhi-2 



