**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10330 (1982) : Specification for Formed Asbestos Packing 
Rings for High Pressure and High-temperature Valves [MED 
30: Gaskets and Packing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-762-642-4 : 621 -646-2-986 



IS: 10330-1982 



CO 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 1999 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 

FORMED ASBESTOS PACKING RINGS FOR 

HIGH PRESSURE AND HIGH TEMPERATURE VALVES 



1- Scope — Covers the dimensional, constructional, functional and qualitative requirements of 
metal wire reinforced, formed asbestos gland packing rings intended for use in valves to contain 
non-toxic gases, fluids, slurries, etc, at different temperatures and pressure ranges. 

1.1 The asbestos gland packing rings covered by this standard are not applicable for food 
industry. 

.2. General— The asbestos gland packing rings shall be hereinafter .referred as 'PACKING! in 
this standard. 

3. Material 

3.1 Fibre —The yarn used in the manufacture of packing shall be the long staple white chrysotile 
asbestos fibre containing long staple organic fibre. The percentage of organic fibre used shall 
correspond with the grade of the yarn as indicated in Table 1. The organic fibre used shall be 
evenly distributed throughout the asbestos and shall be free from grit or rocky matter and from 
the inclusion of spun cotton threads. The grade of asbestos to be determined jas described in 
Appendix A ( A-5 ) shall be as agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. The count of the 
single ply of asbestos yarn, used in the construction, shall be not coarser than 1 100 tex*. 



TABLE 1 GRADES OF ASBESTOS YARN ( WITHOUT REINFORCEMENT ) 


Grades of Yarn 


Percent Asbestos 
Content 


Approximate Service 
Temperature of Packing 


A 


85 — 90 


290°C 


A A 


90 — 95 


315°C 


AAA 


95 — 99 


400°C ' 


A A A A 


99 —100 


480°C , 

I 



♦Tex : Weight of single ply of asbestos yarn expressed in grams/kilometre length of yarn. 

3.2 Wire Reinforcement — The material of wire reinforcement shall be inconel, monel or any 
austenitic stainless steel. The exact material used shall be as agreed between the purchaser and 
the supplier. 

3.3 Binder — The asbestos yarn or fibre, unless specified otherwise, may be treated with a suitable 
binder including grease, oil, rubber, etc, to suit the requirement of the manufacturing process. 
The total content of the binder when determined as described in A-3 shall be less than 1% by 
weight. 

3.4 Lubricant — The lubricant used shall be free graphite, PTFE, mica, molybdenum disuiphide or 
tungsten disuiphide. It shall be evenly distributed over the entire surface of the packing and 
mixed with pure asbestos fibre in the plastic core, The exact lubricant to be used shall be selec- 
ted by the purchaser taking into consideration the properties of medium sealed, temperature, 
contamination, etc. The percentage of mica or graphite may be determined by the procedure 
described in A-4, and the percentage of molybdenum disuiphide or tungsten disuiphide can be 
determined by suitable chemical analysis. The percentage of lubricant content by weight shall be 
not less than the values indicated in Table 2. 



Adopted 29 October 1982 



© April, 1983 



Gr 4 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10330- 1982 



TABLE 2 MINIMUM LUBRICANT CONTENT 

( Clause 3.4 ) 



Type of Packing 


Percent Lubricant 
Content 


Braid over braid 
Braid over twisted core 
Braid over plastic core 

a) in the braided jacket 

b) In the plastic core 


3 
3 

3 

30 



3.5 Corrosion Inhibitor — If graphite is used as lubricant, the packing shall contain corrosion 
inhibitor. The inhibitor shall be in the plastic core and .also on the surface of the packing. 

4. Dimension — The cross section of the packing shall be square or rectangular within the 
variations permitted for dimensions. The packing shall be ring shaped with one inclined cut as 
indicated in Fig. 1. The dimensional details of the packing shall be as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. The square or rectangular cross section shall have edges as sharp as 
possible with corner radiused preferably not greater than 0"5 mm. 




Ail dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 GLAND PACKING 

4.1 The diameter of the reinforcement metal wire shall be between 0"15 to 0"19 mm. 

5. Manufacture and Workmanship — Surface of the packing shall be smooth and it shall not 
have torn out threads. 

5.1 The construction of the packing shall be one of the following types and the exact type shall be 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

5.1.1 Braid over braid — These packings consist of a series of braided tubes laid one over the- 
other and separate from one another. This is braided round, then calendered square (see Fig. 2A). 



IS: 10330 -1982 

5.1.2 Braid over twisted core — In this type, the core material is twisted asbestos yarns. Braided 
jacket is of wire reinforced asbestos yarns ( see Fig. 2C ). 

5.1.3 Braid over plastic core — This is made of wire inserted asbestos yarn jacket over a core 
of pure asbestos fibre mixed with lubricant and corrosion inhibitor if specified ( see Fig. 2B ). 




2A Braid Over Braid 




2B Braid Over Plastic Core 




2C Braid Over Twisted Core 
FIG, 2 TYPES OF PACKING 

5.2 It is preferable to have the asbestos yarn spun with the reinforcement wire in its core, rather 
than plaiting the wire along with the yarn. 

5.3 The slit between the two free ends of packing shall be parallel and at 45° to the axis of the 
packing ring. The width of slit shall be controlled within the specified limits. 

5.4 Ignition Loss — The ignition loss on dried material when determined as described in A-6 shall 
not exceed the value in Table 3. 



TABLE 3 LOSS ON IGNITION 

( Clause 5.4 ) 



Grade 


Asbestos Content 


Percent loss* on ignition 


A 


85 — 90 


27-0 


A A 


93 — 95 


22'5 


AAA 


95 — 99 


18'5 


A A A A 


99 —100 


15-0 


♦The percent loss on ignition includes water of crystallization, organic 
materials and impurities. 



5.5 pH Value — The pH value of the packing shall be in the range of 7 to 9. 

5.6 Chloride Content — The leachable chloride content of the packing shall be less than 200 ppm. 



IS: 10330 -1982 

6. Details to be Specified by Purchaser — The purchaser while placing order shall specify the 
following details: 

a) Packing construction; 

b) Grade of asbestos yarn; 

c) Reinforcement material; 

d) Lubricant; 

e) Corrosion inhibitor; 

f) Binder content; 

g) Medium to be sealed; 
h) Medium temperature; 
j ) Medium pressure; 

k) Dimensions — OD X ID x Height; and 
m) Number of rings to be packed in a set. 

7. Packing — The packing rings shall be stacked and covered by cellophane paper. The number 
of rings to be stacked in a set shall be specified by the purchaser based on the application 
requirements. If not specified, the manufacturer shall decide the number of rings to be stacked 
in a set. These stacks shall be packed in cardboard boxes of convenient dimensions. The 
package shall be airtight and durably intact without giving way during transit and subsequent 
storage and handling. 

7.1 The following details shall be clearly indicated on every package for easy identification: 

a) Manufacturer's name, 

b) Packing dimensions, and 

c) Date of manufacture. 

8. Sampling 

8.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier the procedure given in 
IS : 2500 ( Parts I & II ) ' Sampling inspection tables: Part I Inspection by attributes and by count of 
defects, Part II Inspection by variables for percent defectives 1 shall be followed for sampling 
inspection. The level ( AQL ) for various characteristics shall be as given in 8.2 and 8.3. 

8.2 For dimensional and visual requirements, the single sampling plan with inspection level III 
and AQL 2*5 percent given in Table 1 and 2 of IS : 2500 ( Part I ) - 1973 shall be followed. 

8.3 For remaining characteristics the sampling plan with inspection level II and AQL 1 percent 
given in Table 1 and 4 of IS : 2500 ( Part II ) - 1 965 shall be followed. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.1 ) 

METHODS OF TESTS 

A-1. Sample Preparation — Unplait a representative section of the packing not less than 5 grams 
mass, taking care to collect all pieces which are dislodged. 

A-2. Method of Test — Place a soxhlet thimble in a weighing bottle and with the lid offset, place 
in an oven at 105-1 10°C for 1 hour. Replace the lid, cool in a desiccator to room temperature 
and weigh (Mi). Transfer the sample prepared as above to the soxhlet thimble and replace in 
the oven for 1 hour as before. Cool in a desiccator to room temperature and weigh (M a ). Place 
the thimble with the dried sample in a vapour jacketed soxhlet extraction apparatus and extract 
for one hour with carbon tetrachloride. The volume of solvent to be used should beat least 
three times the volume of the soxhlet liner. 

A-3. Determination of Binder Content — Dry an evaporating basin in an oven at 105°C, cool to 
room temperature and weigh (M 3 ). Transfer the solution from the extraction flask to the basin 
and evaporate off the solvent. Place the basin and its contents in an oven for half an hour at 
105°C. Cool to room temperature and weigh (M 4 ). 

Binder content, percent = - * ~ * x 100 



IS: 10330- 1982 

A-4. Determination of Graphite ( or Mica ) Content — Dry the soxhlet thimble and its contents 
in an oven. Carefully remove the extracted yarn from the soxhlet thimble on to a sheet of clean 
smooth paper. Dislodge the mica or graphite flakes by gently twisting the yarn. Return the mica 
or graphite to the thimble. Replace the thimble in the weighing bottle used originally and replace 
in oven for one hour. Cool to room temperature and reweigh ( M 5 ). 

Mica or graphite content, percent = ,. 5 ~~ . - 1 x TOO 

M2 — Mi 

A-5. Determination of Asbestos Content in the Yarn — Take a number of test specimens each 
of 5 gram of dried material from which all lubricants and binders have been extracted and wire 
reinforcements removed, and proceed as follows. 

A-5.1 Procedure for Determining Presence of Carbonates 

A-5.1.1 Place a specimen of approximately 0*5 gram in a test tube. Wet the specimen thoroughly 
with 10 millilitre of distilled water by stirring and tamping with a glass rod, so that no air bubbles 
are visible in the wet specimen. Add 5 millilitre of hydrochloric acid (specific gravity 1 '19) and 
again stir and tamp gently with a glass rod, taking care not to introduce any air bubbles. Warm 
gently. 

A-5. 1.2 If no gas bubbles are detected, proceed as directed in A-5.2. 

A-5. 1.3 If gas bubbles form on the surface of the submerged specimen, proceed as directed 
in A-5.3 and A-5.4. 

A-5.2 Procedure for Asbestos Content by Ignition ( Carbonates Absent ) 

A-5. 2.1 Take two test specimens, each weighing not less than 5 grams. Place the specimens 
in tared crucibles which have been previously heated to 800 to 840°C for 1 hour, cool in a desiccator 
and weigh to the nearest 0001 g. 

Dry each specimen to constant weight at 105 to 110°C and record the mass to the nearest 
0'001 g. Subtract the mass of the crucible to obtain the mass of the oven-dry specimens and record 
as M. 

A-5.2. 2 Place the crucible containing the specimens in the muffle furnace and heat for not less 
than 1 hour at 800 to 840°C. Remove the specimen and crucible from the furnace, and cool in a 
desiccator to room temperature. Weigh to the nearest 0'001 g and subtract the tared mass of the 
crucible to obtain the mass of the residue ( ash ). Record this mass as A. 

A-5. 2. 3 Calculations — When carbonates are not present, calculate the asbestos content to the 
nearest 0'1 percent as follows: 

Asbestos content, percent = ( A/0'86 M) x 100 
where 
M = Mass of the specimen after drying but prior to ignition, in grams ( see A-5.2.1 ), 
A ■= Mass of residue ( ash ) from the specimen after ignition grams ( see A-5.2.2 ), and 
086 = factor to correct for 14 percent water of crystallization lost when heating. 

A-5.3 Procedure for Quantitative Test for Carbon dioxide 

A-5.3. 1 The carbon dioxide content shall be measured using knorr alkalimeter, consisting of the 
following parts connected as shown in Fig. 3 and 4. 

A-5.3. 1.1 Gas washing bottle (A) — It is filled with concentrated sulphuric acid which serves 
to indicate the rate of gas flow and to prevent any water vapour entering the systems from the 
atmosphere. 

A-5. 3. 1.2 Drying tube or cylinder (fi) — It is filled two-thirds full of soda-asbestos absorbent 
( ascarite ) and one-third full drying agent to remove all carbon dioxide from the air. 

A-5.3. 1.3 Knorr alkali unit (C) — It consists of a dropping funnel, a distillation flask, and a 
condenser fitted with standard taper joints to form a unit assembly. 

A-5. 3. 1.4 Gas welding bottle (D) — It contains solution of 5 to 10 percent by mass of silver 
sulphate ( Ag 2 S0 4 ) in concentrated sulphuric acid. This serves to absorb any water vapour that 
escapes from the condenser and to remove any hydrochloric acid from the evolved gases. 

A-5.3. 1.5 Drying tube (£) — It contains copper sulphate to absorb hydrogen sulphide 
generated by the absorption of hydrochloric acid. 

A-5.3.1.6 Drying tube (F) — It is filled with a suitable drying agent to effect complete drying. 

A-5. 3. 1.7 Absorption tube (G)— It is filled two-thirds full of soda-asbestos absorbent (ascarite) 
and one-third full of drying agent to absorb the carbon dioxide. 



CO 



o 

CO 




s 

to 



^3 M M 



^ ^ ^ 



^/^tN 




FIG. 3 KNORR ALKALIMETER FOR DETERMINATION OF CARBON DIOXIDE CONTENT 



IS: 10330- 1982 



DRYI NG 
AGENT 




ABSORBENT 



FIG. 4 ABSORPTION TUBE FOR CARBON DIOXIDE DETERMINATION 

A-5.3.1.8 Absorption tube (H) — It is filled with a drying agent and soda-asbestos absorbent 
( ascarite ) in the reverse direction to prevent carbon dioxide from entering the system (see Fig. 4). 

A-5.3.1.9 Trap ( /) — It is used to prevent back flow of water from the aspirator. 

A-5.3.1.10 Valve or pinched tubing ( J ) — It is used to control the rate of air flow pulled 
through the system by the aspirator. 

A-5.3.1.11 Source of suction — Suction pump with regulator. 

A-5.3.2 Aspirate a current of air through the system at the rate of about two bubbles per minute 
for a period of 10 minutes. Stop the air current and remove the absorption tube. Place the 
absorption tube (G) in the balance case and allow it to stand for several minutes. Just before 
weighing, open the stop cocks momentarily and then close them. Weigh the tube and repeat the 
above procedure. The second reading should agree with the first within 0*005 g. If it does not, 
repeat the process until the two successive weighings agree. When a constant mass is reached, 
replace the absorption tube in the gas train. 

A-5.3.3 Place a specimen of approximately 1 g weighed to the nearest 0"001 g in the distillation 
flask Wash down any adhering particles on the inside neck of the flask with distilled water. 
Add enough distilled water to the flask so that when the apparatus is reconnected the tip of the 
dropping funnel will be 5 to 10 mm below the surface of th^ liquid. Place 50 millilitre of dilute 
hydrochloric acid ( 1 : 1 ) in the dropping funnel and replace the guard gas absorption tube at the 
top of the funnel. Start the flow of water in the condenser and open all stop cocks fully except 
the one in the dropping funnel. Turn on the aspirator for medium suction. Adjust the stop cock 
on the dropping funnel so that the suction will draw the acid slowly into the flask. When all the 
acid is in the flask, open the funnel stop cock full and adjust the aspirator to pull air through the 
system at a rate of two or three bubbles per second. After the reaction in the flask has subsided, 
heat the contents slowly to boiling. When condensation appears in the condenser, turn off the 
heat. Continue to draw air through the apparatus for 30 to 35 minutes. Reweigh the absorption 
tube (G) as before. The gain in mass represents the carbon dioxides in the specimen. Record 
this mass as D. 

A-5.3.4 Calculate the mass of carbon dioxide recovered per gram of specimen as follows: 

£ - DIF 



IS : 10330-1982 

where, 

F = mass in g of the specimen used for the knorr alkalimeter test, 

D = gain in mass of the absorption tube (G), in grams, and 

£ = mass in g of carbon dioxide released per gram of specimen. 

A-5.3.5 Repeat the procedure on another specimen of similar size and calculate the average 
value of £ in the two determinations. If desired, use the mass of the absorption tube (6) after 
the first determination as the starting point for the second determination without repeating the 
initial process of obtaining constant weight of the tube {JB)\ 

A-5.4 Procedure for Asbestos Content by Ignition ( Carbonates Present ) 

A-5.4.1 Proceed as directed in A-5.2.1 and A-5.2.2. 

A-5.4.2 Calculation for asbestps content — Use the values for carbon dioxide content, £ as 
determined in A-5.3.3 and calculate .the asbestos content using either of the two equations given 
below : 

Asbestos content, percent 

x 100, or 



M 

A + 0-68 ME 
0-86 



X 100 



where 



M = mass in g of the specimen after drying but prior to ignition ( see A-5.2.1 ); 
A «= mass in g of the residue ( ash ) from the specimen after ignition ( see A-5.2.2 ). 
£ = mass in g of carbon dioxide recorded per gram of specimen as calculated 
in A-5.3.3. 
1-27 = factor to be calculated from £, the grams of calcium carbonate per gram of 

specimen. 
2*27 = factor to be calculated from £, the grams of calcium carbonate per gram of 
specimen. 

A-6. Determination of Ignition Loss on Dried Material 

A-6.1 Prepare the test specimens as described in A-5. Determine whether carbonates are present 
in the asbestos, by the procedure described in A-5.1. 

A-6.2 If carbonates are present in the asbestos, determine the mass of carbon dioxide released 
per gram of specimen by the procedure described in A-5. 3. Record this mass as £. 

A-6.3 Proceed as described in A-5.2.1 and A-5.2.2. 

A-6.4 Calculations 

A-6. 4.1 If no carbonates are present in the asbestos, calculate the percentage loss on ignition 
as follows: 



Ignition loss percentage « ( — ^ j x 100 



where 

M = mass in g of the specimen after drying but prior to ignition ( see A-5.2.1 ), and 
A = mass in g of the residue (ash) from the specimen after ignition ( see A-5.2.2 ). 

A-6.4.2 If carbonates are present in the asbestos, calculate the percentage loss of ignition .as 
follows: 



Ignition loss percentage = ( — — ^ J x 100 



where 

£ = mass in g of carbon dioxide released per gram of specimen ( see A-5.3.3 ); 
M = mass in g of the specimen after drying but prior to ignition ( see A-5.2.1 ), and 
A -= mass in g of the residue (ash) from the specimen after ignition ( see A-5.2.2 ). 

8 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuria, India 



