•••••••••••••••• 



^ is^ 





T-^^^i^ 






Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 




&^Jfffc^:c»frj^^¥ffflAfe^lCO>.jrfa^ T ^S^=^ Ir ^^ 



IS 13030 (1991) : Method of test for laboratory 
determination of water content, porosity, density and 
related properties of rock material [CED 48: Rock 
Mechanics ] 



>^^lllfcJ^9>^^bv/ff^feial>^h:>^^Ts;>&^T^FS 



5?aiU I l>ft=55S5&'>S*^ 



^^:<xvvv^i^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



*Tsr- 





^^ 



iA*^*^ 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13030: 1991 

mTrft^TTPTW; ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

"RE-AFFIRUED 1996" 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

LABORATORY DETERMINATION OF 

WATER CONTENT, POROSITY, DENSITY AND 

RELATED PROPERTIES OF ROCK MATERIAL 



UDC 624- 121-43 



(§) BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

^"^ ^^^ Price Group 3 



Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rock 
Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

The presence of pores in fabric of a rock material decreases its strength and increases its deformability. A 
small volume fraction of pores can produce an appreciable mechanical eflfect. 

Information on the porous nature of rock materials is frequently omitted from petrological descriptions but 
is required if these descriptions are to be used as a guide to mechanical performance. Sand stones and 
carbonate rocks in particular occur with a wide range of porosities and hence of mechanical character; 
igneous rocks that have been weakened by weathering processes also have typically high porosities. 

Most rocks have similar grain densities and therefore have porosity and dry density values that are highly 
correlated. A low density rock is usually highly porous. It is often sufficient, therefore, to quote values for 
porosity alone but a complete description requires values for both porosity and density. 

Different methods of determination of density and porosity described in the standard are suitable for 
different types of rocks and sample. While method using saturation and caliper technique and using satu- 
ration and buoyancy technique are suitable for regular and irregular shape of sample respectively of those 
rocks which do not appreciably swell or disintegrate when immersed in water, the method using mercury 
displacement and grain specific gravity technique is suitable for irregular shape of such rock which are 
liable to swell or disintegrate when immersed in water. 

These methods are based on the suggested method of International Society of Rock Mechanics. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for 
rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ 



IS 13030 1 1991 



Indian Standard 



METHOD OF TEST FOR 

LABORATORY DETERMINATION OF 

WATER CONTENT, POROSITY, DENSITY AND 

RELATED PROPERTIES OF ROCK MATERIAL 



1 SCOPE 

This standard gives the procedure for the test 
to evaluate water content, porosity, density and 
related properties of rock material. The following 
test methods have been covered: 

a) Determination of the water content of rock 
sample; 

b) Determination of porosity and density using 
saturation and caliper technique; 

c) Determination of porosity and density using 
saturation and buoyancy; and 

d) Determination of porosity and density using 
mercury displacement and grain specific 
gravity technique. 

2 DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS 

2.1 Symbols 

For the purpose of this standard unless otherwise 
defined in the text, the following symbols shall 
apply: 

Me «B Mass of grain ( the solid component of 
the sample ) 



I7_ 



_ Vrtl, 



nf 



M-f! ■= Mass of pore water 
V^ =■ Volume of pore water 
P^ e= Density of water 
Fa = Volume of pore air 
2.2 Definitions 

For the purpose of this standard, physical proper- 
ties pertinent to the methods of test shall be 
described as follows. 

o «> t TJ„1I, C„->,«1^ "k/T-^-o AjT A/T 1. A/f 

2.2.2 Bulk Sample Volume F = Fs + Fy 

2.2.3 Pore ( Voids ) Volume F, = Tw + ^b, 

2.2.4 Water Content, w 



Ms 



X 100 ( percent ) 



2,2.5 Degree of Saturation, Sr 

= -=^ X 100 ( percent ) 



2.2.6 Porosity n = -~- X 100 ( percent ) 



/..£..{ voiQ x^atio e = — j^r- 

2.2.8 Density or Bulk Density or Mass Density 
M Ms + M, 



2.2.9 Relative Density 



kg/m^ 



( mass specific gravity ) Cm = -^ 



2.2. tO Dry density pa= 



M 



8 i__/„.n 
Jig/ Hi" 



2.2.11 Dry Relative Density 

( dry specific gravity ) Ga = 



1± 



2.2.12 Saturated Density 

_ Afg + Fy -pw 



Peat 



V 



kg/m^ 



2.2.13 Saturated Relative Density 

{ saturated specific gravity ) G'eat = 



Psat 
Pw 



2.2.14 Solid Density or Density 



Ms 



of Rock Material pa = — „- kg/m^ 

KS 

2.2.15 Solid Relative density 



( solid specific gravity ) Cg = 



Pw 



j:.4.io unit vveignt y 
3. TEST SAMPLE 



P X g iN/m" 



A representative sample for testing should 
generally comprise several rock lumps, each in 
order of magnitude larger than the largest grain 
or pore size. Microfissures of similar size to that 
of a rock will cause erratic results, their presence 
should be noted and if possible the lump size 
increased or reduced to specifically include or 
exclude the influence of such fissures. 



IS 130301 1991 



4 DETERMINATION OF THE WATER 
CONTENT OF A ROCK SAMPLE 

4.1 Object 

This method of test covers the procedure of deter- 
mining the mass of water contained in a rock 
sample as a percentage of the oven dry sample 
mass. 

4.2 Apparatus 

a) An oven capable of maintaining a tempera- 
ture of 105 ± S^G for a period of at least 
24 h. 

b) A sample container non-corrodible material 
including an airtight lid. 

c) A desiccator to hold sample container 
during cooling. 

d) A balance of adequate capacity, capable of 
weighing to an accuracy of 0-01 percent of 
the sample mass. 

4.3 Procedure 

4.3.1 The container with its lid is cleaned and 
dried, and its mass m, is determined. 

4.3.2 A representative sample comprised at least 
10 lumps each having either a mass of at least 50 g 
or a minimum dimensions of ten times the maxi- 
mum grain size, whichever is greater, is selected. 
For in situ water content determination sampling, 
storage and handling precautions should be such 
that water content remains within 1 percent of 
the in situ value. 

4.3.3 The sample is placed in the container, the 
lid replaced and the mass ^2 of the sample plus 
container determined. 

4.3.4 The lid is removed and the sample dried to 
constant mass at a temperature of 105 ± 3°C. 

4.3.5 The lid is replaced and the sample allowed 
to cool in the desiccator for 30 minutes. The mass 
W3 of sample plus container is determined. 

4.4 Calculation and Reporting of Results 

4.4.1 The water content shall be calculated from 
the following formula: 

Water content, w 

Pore water mass M^ 



Grain mass Ms 



X 100 ( percent ) 



TTli — mg 



X 100 ( percent ) 



?ng — mi 

nil = Mass in g of the container with its lid 
at room temperature 

mg = Mass in g of the container with its lid 
and the sample at room temperature 

Mass in g of the container with its lid 
and the sample after drying 



JWg 



4.4.2 The water content should be reported to the 
nearest 0* 1 percent stating whether this corres- 
ponds to in situ water content, in which case 
precautions taken to retain water during sampling 
and storage should be specified. 

5 POROSITY AND DENSITY 
DETERMINATION USING SATURATION 
AND CALIPER TEGHNIQ,UES 

5.1 Object 

5.1.1 This method of test covers the procedure for 
determining the porosity and dry density of rock 
samples in the form of specimen of regular geome- 
try. 

5.1.2 The method is applicable only to nonfriable 
coherent rocks that can be machined and do not 
appreciably swell or disintegrate when they are 
oven dried or are immersed in water. The method 
is suitable when regularly shaped specimens are 
required for other test purposes. 

5.2 Apparatus 

a) An oven capable of maintaining a tempera- 
ture of 105 ±i 3°G for a period of at least 
24 h. 

b) A desiccator to hold specimen during 
cooling. 

c) A measuring instrument such as vernier or 
micrometer caliper, capable of reading 
specimen dimensions to an accuracy of 
0-1 mm. 

d) Vacuum saturation equipment such that 
the specimen can be immersed in water 
under a vacuum of less than 0'8 kPa for a 
period of at least one hour. 

e) A sample container of non-corrodible mate- 
rial, including an airtight lid. 

f ) A balance of adequate capacity for deter- 
mining the mass of a specimen to an 
accuracy of 001 percent of the specimen 
mass. 

5.3 Procedure 

5.3.1 Select at least three specimens from a 
representative sample of material. Machine each 
specimen to conform closely to the geometry of a 
right cylinder or prism. The minimum size of 
each specimen should either be such that its mass 
is at least 50 g (for an average density rock a 
cube with sides of 27 mm will have sufficient 
mass ) or such that its minimum dimension is at 
least ten times the maximum grain size, whichever 
is the greater. 

5.3.2 Repeat the following procedure for each of 
the specimen in the sample: 

i) Determine the external dimension and then 
bulk volume V of each specimen with the 
vernier or calipers. Measurement should 
be accurate to O'l mm. An average of three 
separate measurement should be obtained 
for each dimension. 



18^13030: 1991 



ii) Place the specimen in an oven and dry at 
105 ± 3°C. For this test method specimens 
should be of sufficient coherence not to 
require containers, but these should be 
used if the rock is at all friable or fissibie. 
The specimen is deemed to be dry when 
the difference between successive deter- 
minations of mass of the cooled specimen 
at intervals of 4 hours does not exceed O'l 
percent of the original mass of the speci- 
men. 

iii) Remove the specimen from the oven and 
place in a desiccator to cool. 

iv) Determine the dry mass, Ms, of the speci- 
men. 

v) Immerse the specimen in a container of 
water and place the container with the 
specimen in a vacuum of less than 0*8 kPa 
for a period of one hour with periodic 
agitation to remove trapped air, 

vi) Determine the water temperature, t, to the 
nearest degree centigrade. 

vii) Remove the specimen from the container 
and surface dry it using a moist cloth. 
Care should be taken to remove only surface 
water and to ensure that no fragments 
are lost. 

viii) Determine the saturation mass, Mg^t, of the 
specimen. 

3A Calculations 

a) For each specimen calculate the pore 
volume, Fy, by the following formula: 

Msat - Ms 



F, = 



Pw 



where p,^ = density of water at tempera- 
ture, t. 

h) For each specimen calculate the bulk 
volume, F, from the external dimensions. 

c) For each specimen calculate the dry density, 
Pd, by the following formula: 

M, 



Pd = 



( kg/m3 ) 



d) For each specimen calculate the porosity, n, 
by the following formula: 

n = -~ X 100 ( percent ) 

e) Calculate average values of porosity and 
dry density for the sample. 

5.5 Reporting of Results 

a) Report the individual dry density and 
porosity values for each specimen in the 
sample, together with the average values of 
. dry density and porosity for the sample. 
Density values should be given to the 
nearest 10 kg/m^ and porosity values to 
the nearest O'l percent. 



b) Report that the bulk volume was obtained 
by measurement of dimension by caliper or 
vernier and the pore volume was obtained 
by water saturation. 

c) Record any change in the shape and size of 
the rock specimen during wetting or 
drying. 

d) Record the following general information: 

i) Project title, 

ii) Sampling technique and sample identi- 
fications number. 

iii) Dates of sampling and of testing. 

iv) Lithological description of the rock 
samples. 

6 POROSITY AND DENSITY 
DETERMINATION USING SATURATION 
AND BUOYANCY TECHNIQIJES 

6.1 Object 

This method of test covers the procedure for 
determining the porosity and the dry density of a 
rock sample in the form of lumps or aggregate of 
irregular shape-geometry. It may also be applied 
to a sample in the form of specimens of irregular 
geometry. 

6.1.1 The method should only be used for rocks 
that do not appreciably swell or disintegrate when 
oven-dried and immersed in water. 

6.2 Apparatus 

a) An oven capable of maintaining a tempera- 
ture of 105 ± 3°G for a period of at least 
24 h. 

b) A sample container of non-corrodible 
material, including an air-tight lid. 

c) A desiccator to hold sample container 
during cooling. 

d) A vacuum vessel such that the sample can 
be immersed in water under a vacuum of 
less than 0"8 kPa for a period of at least 
1 h. 

e) A balance of adequate capacity, capable of 
weighing to an accuracy of O'Ol percent of 
the sample weight. 

f ) An immersion bath and a wire basket or 
perforated container, such that the sample 
immersed in water can be freely suspended 
from the stirrup of the balance to deter- 
mine the saturated-submerged weight. The 
basket should be suspended from the 
balance by a fine wire so that only the wire 
intersects the water surface in the immer- 
sion bath. 

6.3 Procedure 

a) A representative sample comprising at least 
10 lumps of regular or irregular geometry. 



IS 13030 : 1991 



each having either a mass of at least 50 g 
or a minimum dimension of at least 10 
times the maximum grain size, whichever 
is the greater, is selected. The sample is 
washed in water to remove dust. 

b) The sample is saturated by water immer- 
sion in a vacuum of less than 8 kPa for a 
period of at least 1 h, with periodic 
agitation to remove trapped air. 

c) Determine the temperature, i, of the water 
in the immersion bath to the nearest degree 
centigrade. 

d) Determine the mass, M^, of the basket sub- 
merged in the immersion bath. 

e) Transfer the sample under water to the 
basket in the immersion bath. Determine 
the saturated-submerged mass, M^, of the 
basket plus sample to an accuracy of O'Ol 
percent of the sample mass. 

f ) Determine the mass, Afg, of a clean, dry 
sample container and lid. 

g) Remove the sample from the immersion 
bath and surface dry the sample with a 
moist cloth, care being taken to remove 
only surface water and to ensure that no 
rock fragment are lost. Transfer the sample 
to the sample container and replace ttie 
lid. Determine the mass, M<, of the satura- 
ted surface dry sample plus container. 

h) Remove the lid and place the container 
with contents and lid in the oven and dry 
at 105 ± 3°G. The sample is deemed to 
be dry when the diflference between succes- 
sive determination of mass of the cooled 
sample at interval of 4 hours does not 
exceed 0"1 percent of the original mass of 
the sample. 

j) Replace the lid, remove the container from 
the oven and place the whole in the desic- 
cator to cool for 30 minutes. 

k) Determine the dried mass, Ms, of the con- 
tainer with the oven dry sample. 

6.4 Observations 

Sample No. Date 

Temperature of water, /, in Centigrade 



Determination Mo. 



(1) 



(2) 



(3) 



Determination JVo. 



(I) 



(2) 



(3) 



1) Saturated-submerged 
mass of basket alone. 
Ml in kg 

2) Saturated-submerged 
mass of basket -}- 
specimen, Ma in kg 

3) Mass of container and 
lid, Ms in kg 



4) Saturated surface dry 
mass of the sample 
plus container. Mi 
in kg 

5) Dried mass of the 
container with sam- 
ple, Afg in kg 

6.5 Calculations 

a) Calculate the saturated-submerged mass, 
-^sabj of the sample 

Vl/sub = Afa — Ml ( kg ) 

b) Calculate the saturated-surface-dry mass, 
Msat, of the sample 

Ma&t = M4 — Ms ( kg ) 

c) Calculate the dry mass ( Grain Weight ) 
Ms, of the sample 

Ms = M5 — Mb ( kg ) 

d) Calculate the bulk-volume, F, of the 
sample by the following formula: 



= ( 



Msat " Msnb 
pw 



)< 



m3 ) 



Pw = density of water at temperature t 

e) Calculate the pore volume, Fy of the sample 
by following formula: 

Msat — Ms 



= ( 



pw 



) (ni8) 



f) Calculate porosity, n, of the rock sample 
by the following formula : 

n = ( VyjV) X 100 ( percent ) 

or = ( 'Yl'-'~f; ) X 100 ( percent ) 
V Msat — Msub / 

g) Calculate the dry density, p^, of the rock 
sample by the following formula: 

Ms 



pd = 



(kg/mS) 



6.6 Reporting of Result 

a) Report the porosity and dry density values 
or the sample to the nearest O-I percent 
and 10 kg/m8 respectively. 

b) Report that the bulk volume was obtained 
by a buoyancy technique and that the pore 
volume was obtained by water saturation. 

c) Report the following general information: 

i) Project title 

ii) Sampling technique and sample identi- 
fication numbers 

iii) Date of sampling and testing 
iv) Lithological description of the rock 
samples. 



IS 13030 : 1991 



7 POROSITY AND DENSITY 
DETERMINATION USING MERCURY 
DISPLACEMENT AND GRAIN SPECIFIC 
GRAVITY TECHNIQ,UES 

7.1 Object 

a) This method of test covers the procedure 
for determining the porosity and the density 
of a rock sample in the form of lumps or 
aggregate of irregular geometry. 

b) This is particularly suitable if the rock 
material is liable to swell or disintegrate if 
immersed in water. The test is also appli- 
cable to regularly shaped rock specimens or 
to coherent rock materials but other tech- 
niques are usually found more convenient 
in these cases. 

7.2 Apparatus 

a) An oven capable of maintaining a tempera- 
ture of 105 ± 3°G for a period of at least 
24 h. It should have forced ventilation 
exhausting to outside atmosphere. 

b) Specimen containers of non-corrodible 
material, including airtight lids. 

c) A desiccator to hold specimen containers 
during cooling. 

d) A balance of adequate capacity, capable of 
mass determination to 0*0 1 percent of 
sample mass. 

e) A mercury-displacement volume measuring 
apparatus capable of measuring specimen 
volume to 0*5 percent. 

f ) Grinding equipment to reduce the sample 
to a pulverized powder less than 150 mm in 
grain size. 

g) A calibrated volumetric flask and stopper 
( conveniently 50 cm3 ). 

h) A constant temperature water bath, 
j) A vacuum apparatus capable of maintain- 
ing a vacuum with a pressure of less than 
0-8 kPa. 

k) A soft brush of camel hair or of similar 
softness. 

7.3 Procedure 

a) A representative sample is selected compris- 
ing at least ten rock lumps, the shape and 
size of lumps suiting the capabilities of the 
volume measuring apparatus. The minimum 
size of each lump should preferably be 
either such that its mass exceeds 50 g or 
such that its minimum dimension is at least 
10 times the maximum grain size, which- 
ever is the greater. Specimen and swelling 
or fissible rock should be sampled and stoned 
to retain water content to within 1 percent 
of its in situ value prior to testing. 



b) Repeat the following procedure for each of 
the specimens in the sample: 

i) Brush each specimen to remove loose 
material and measure its volume, V, by 
mercury displacement. 

ii) Carefully remove mercury adhering to 
the sample, ensuring that no rock frag- 
ment are lost. 

iii) Determine the mass, Mi, of a suitable 
clean, dry, container and its lid. 

iv) Place the specimen in the container, 
replace the lid and determine the mass, 
M2, of the container plus specimen at 
initial water content. 

v) Remove the lid and the specimen is 
oven dried to constant mass at a tem- 
perature of 105 Jt 3°C allowed to cool 
for 30 minutes in a desiccator. The mass, 
Ms, of container plus oven dry specimen 
is determined. 

c) Crush all the rock specimens and grind to 
a grain size not exceeding 150 mm. A 
number of representative sub-sarnples of 
about 15 g of the pulverized material are 
selected and oven-dried. 

d) Determine the mass, M^, of a clean, dry 
volumetric flask plus stopper to an accuracy 
of 001 g. 

e) Fill the flask with a liquid such as kerosene 
that is non-reactive with the rock. 

f ) Bring the flask to equilibrium temperature 
in me constant temperature bath and 
adjust the liquid level accurately to the 
50 cm3 graduation. Remove the flask from 
the constant temperature bath, insert the 
stopper and clean and dry the outside of 
the tiask, 

g) Determine the mass, M^, of the flask and 
liquid to an accuracy of 0"01 percent of the 
total mass. 

h) Empty and dry the flask and add the 
representative 15 g sub-sample of dry pul- 
verized rock with the aid of a funnel. 

j) Determine the mass, M^, of flask, sample 
and stopper to an accuracy of 0*001 g. 

k) The flask and sub-sample are evacuated for 
about 20 minutes and suflicient fluid added 
to thoroughly wet the sample. Further 
fluid is then added and the flask is carefully 
evacuated to remove air. The flask is^ 
replaced in the constant temperature water 
bath and the liquid level adjusted accura- 
tely to the 50 cm3 graduation. 

m) The stoppered flask with its contents is 
allowed to cool and its mass, G, is deter- 
mined to 0"01 percent of the total mass. 

n) Steps (e) to (m) arc repeated for each sub- 
sample of pulverized material. 



IS 13030 : 1991 



7.4 Precautions 

a) It is preferable to use self-indicating silica 
gel as the desiccant. 

b) Metallic mercury is a toxic material and 
should bejiandled with considerable care. 
It is principally absorbed via the respira- 
tory tract as elemental mercury vapour but 
there is also some absorption through the 
gastro-intestinal tract. Spillages are difficult 
to clean up completely owing to the propen- 
sity of the substance, if left, to divide into 
miniscue globules which can generate 
unacceptably high levels of mercury vapour 
in the atmosphere of a room. Tests should 
be carried out in fume cupboard to avoid 
accumulation of vapour, and mercury spil- 
lages should be liberally sprinkled with 
powdered sulphur which takes up the metal- 
lic mercury to form the less volatile 
sulphide. 

c) The density of some non-reactive liquids 
may vary appreciably. It is essential that 
a consistent source of liquid is used for 
each test and that volumes are adjusted in 
the constant temperature bath. 



Specimen No, 



7.5 Observations 

Sample No, 



Date 



Specimen No. 



1 Bulk volume of speci- 
men by mercury 
displacement, V, in 
MS 

2 Mass of dry container 
plus lid, Ml in kg 

3 Mass of the container 
and sample, -|- lid, 
Ma in kg 

4 Mass of the container 
and oven dried sam- 
ple, + lid, Mg in kg 

5 Mass of the dry flask 
( volumetric ) and 
stopper, Mi in kg 

6 Mass of volumetric 
flask plus liquid stop- 
per, Mg in kg 

7 Mass of flask, stopper 
and sample, M^ in kg 

8 Mass of flask, sample 
liquid 4 stopper, M<, 
in kg 

9 Wet mass of sample 
= Ms — Ml ( kg ) 

10 Dry mass of sample 
Ms = Ms -M, (kg) 



1 1 Mass of water in the 
sample = Ma — Ms 

(kg) 

12 Moisture content 

Mj — Mg 



w ^ 



Ms 



X 100 



Ma 
( percent ) 

7.6 Calculations 

a) Calculate the grain density, ps, of the pul- 
verized rock material by the following 
formula: 

Me 

ps 



Ms 



^'['-(^T^J] 



( kg/m2 ) 



where 

Vf = Calibrated volume, in m^ of the 
volumetric flask. 

b) For each specimen in the sample calculate 
the following: 

i) Dry density, pa, by the following for- 
mula: 

Ms 

ii) Porosity, n, by the following formula: 

„ _ r P^~P'^ 1 X 100 ( percent ) 

c) From the values for the individual speci- 
mens, calculate the average dry density, 
porosity, moisture content and grain density 
for the sample. 

7.7 Reporting of Results 

a) Report the individual dry density, porosity 
and moisture content values for each speci- 
men in the sample together with the 
average values of dry density, porosity and 
moisture content for the sample. Density 
values shall be given to the nearest 10 
kg/m^ porosity values to the nearest 0*1 
percent and moisture content values to the 
nearest 1 percent. 

b) Report that the bulk volume was obtained 
using a mercury displacement technique, 
and that the porosity was calculated from 
grain volume, measurement using- a 
pulverization technique. 

c) Record any gross change in the shape or 
competence of the rock specimens during 
drying. 

d) Record the following general information: 
i) Project title 

ii) Sampling technique and sample identi- 
fication number 
iii) Dates of sampling and of testing 

iv) Lithological description of the rock 
sample. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the a^urance that they have been produced to comply 
with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard 
marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
tt[id attending to connected matters in the country. 

CSopyright 

BIS has the copyright of ail its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc : No. CED 48 ( 4656 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 1 0002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 3 i, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg / 331 01 31 



{ 



NEW DELHI 110002 1 331 13 75 

^Eastern : 1/14 G. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 87 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-^, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : G. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 2 35 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDG, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

GOIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 

HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Ptiated at New India Ptinting Piefs, Khuria, India 



