**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13971-1 (1994) : Rough terrain fork lift trucks - Code of 
practice for safety^ Part 1: Application^ operation and 
maintenance [TED 22: Transport Tractors and Trailers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13971 (Parti ) : 1994 
r. ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

ROUGH TERRAIN FORK LIFT TRUCKS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY 

PARTI APPLICATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 



UDC 621-868-258-5-004-54 : 614-8 



© BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN SIANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 1994 Price Group 4 



Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee, TED 23 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering 
Division Council. 

The purpose of this standard is to promote safety in the design and construction of rough 
terrain fork lift trucks which may cause injury, if improperly used or maintained. This standard 
may be used as a guide by authorities desiring to formulate safety rules and regulations. 
This standard is also intended for use by industries associated with manufacturing or utilizing 
rough terrain forklift trucks. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ANSI B 56*6—1978. 'Safety 
Standard for powered industrial trucks — Rough terrain fork lift trucks', issued by the American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers and ISO/DIS 8379 'Rough terrain lift trucks — Stability test' 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 

This standard is being issued in the following two parts: 

Part 1 Application, operation and maintenance 
Part 2 General requirements 

The committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex B. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



Indian Standard 



ROUGH TERRAIN FORK LIFT TRUCKS 
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY 

PARTI APPLICATION, OPERATION AND MArNTENANCE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard defines safety requirements 
relating to application, operation and 
maintenance of rough terrain fork lift trucks. 

1.2 This standard does not cover vehicles 
intended primarily for earth moving or over the 
road hauling. 

2 REFERENCES 



The following Indian Standards 
adjuncts to this standard: 



are necessary 



IS No, 
4660 : 1993 



6305 (Part 2): 
1980 



6665 : 1972 



7621 : 1974 



13302 : 1992 



13971 (Part 2) 
1994 



Title 

Glossary of terms relating to 
powered industrial trucks 
( third revision ) 

Safety code for powered 
industrial trucks, Part 2 Manu- 
facture ( first revision ) 

Code of practice for industrial 
lighting 

Test for overhead guards of 
powered industrial trucks 

Rough terrain fork lift trucks 

— Stability test 

Rough terrain fork lift trucks 

— Code of practice for safety 
Part 2 General requirements 
( under print) 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 4660 : 1993 in addition 
to the following shall apply. 

3.1 User 

The user is defined as the owner/the person/ 
company to whom the truck belongs. 

4 GENERAL SAFETY PRACTICES 

4.1 Modifications, Nameplates, Markings and 
Capacity 

4.1.1 Modifications and additions which aftect 
capacity or safe operation shall not be carried 



out by^ the user without manufacturer's prior 
authorization. Where such authorization is 
granted, capacity, operation and maintenance 
instruction plates, tags or decals shall be 
changed accordingly. 

4.1.2 If the truck is equipped with front end 
attachments, the identification oT the attach- 
ments, combined weight and capacity of the 
truck with attachments shall be in accordance 
with IS 13971 ( Part 2) : 1994. 

4.1.3 All nameplates, caution and instruction 
markings shall comply with 3 of IS 6305 ( Part 
2 ) : 1980. 

4.2 Stability 

4.2.1 The stability conditions for rough terrain 
fork lift trucks shall be in accordance with 
IS 13302 : 1992. 

4.2.2 Trucks equipped with attachments shall 
be considered as partially loaded trucks when 
operated without a load. 

4.3 Safety Gua ds 

4.3.1 Rough terrain fork lift trucks shall be 
fitted with an overhead guard manufactured in 
accordance with IS 7621 : 1974. 

4.3.1.1 For special operating conditions, a 
stronger guard, or one having , openings of 
smaller size shall be agreed upon between 
purchaser and supplier, except for the following : 

Exceptions 

a) Where overhead obstructions limit the 
lowest height of the trucks normal over- 
head guard height and the vertical clear- 
ance under the guard may be reduced to 
permit safe operation with a guard. 

b) The truck may be operated without the 
overhead guard provided all of the 
following conditions are met: 

1) Lift height is restricted to 1 800 mm or 
less from the ground. 

2) The truck shall operate only in an 
area where: 



1 



IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



i) The bottom of the top tiered load 
is not higher than 1 800 mm and 
the top is not more than 3 000 mm 
from the ground when tiered. 

ii) Only stable, preferably interlocked, 
unit or container loads are 
handled, 
iii) There is protection against falling 
objects from adjacent high stack 
areas, 

4.3.2 Load Backrest Extension 

A load backrest extension shall be used to guard 
against the load, or part of it, from falling 
towards the operator. 

4.4 Fuel Handling and Storage 

4,4,1 Liquid Fuels ( Such as Gasoline and Diesel 

Fuel) 

4,4.1.1 Trucks shall be refuelled only at 

locations designated for the purpose and from 

approved dispensing pumps. Safe outdoor 

locations are preferable to those indoors 

-4.4.1.2 Engine shall be stopped during the truck 
refuelling. 

4.4.1.3 Emergency refuejling shall be from 
approved safety cans. ISafety cans shall be 
inspected regularly for damage to closures and 
for leaks; faulty cans shall be replaced. The 
area shall be made free from smoke and naked 
light. 

4.4.1.4 Spillage of fuel or over filling the vehicle 
fuel tank shall be avoided. 

4.5 Lighting for Operating Areas 

4.5.1 A<lequate lighting shall be provided in 
operating areas in accordance with 
IS 6665 : 1972. 

4.6 Control af Noxious Gases and Fumes 

4.6.1 Ventilation shall be provided in enclosed 
areas, where internal combustion powered 
equipment is used to minim-ize the accumu- 
lation of exhaust gases in air-line combination. 
This includes the atm.osphere within the truck 
cab where a cab is provided. 

4.6.2 The degree of concentration and method 
of sampling to ascertain the conditions shall be 
carried out periodically. 

4.7 Warning Device 

4.7.1 Every truck shall be equipped with one of 
the following: 

Audible warning devices such as horns, whistle, 
gong or any other sound producing device(s). 



4.7.2 The truck may also be equipped with 
additional sound producing or visuaf ( such as 
lights or blinkers ) devices if agreed to between 
purchaser and supplier. 

4.8 Lifting of Personnel 

Whenever a truck is used to lift personnel, the 
following precautions shall be taken for the 
protection of the personnel being elevated: 

a) Use a work platform secured to the 

lifting carriage and/or forks. 

b) Provide such overhead protection from. 
falling objects as indicated necessary by 
the operating conditions. 

c) Provide a slip resistant floor, toe boards, 

standard guardrails or a safety belt and 
lanyard. 

d) Have an operator in the control station 
on the truck or in the immediate area or 
provide truck controk, including power- 
shut=oJfr, on the elevatable platform. 

e) Provide means to render inoperative all 
operating controls other than those on the 
elevatable platform when the controls on 
the elevatable platform have been sele- 
cted for use. Only one location of 
controls shall be capable of being 
operated at one tim.e. 

f ) Make sure that the lifting mechanism is 
operating smoothly. 

g) Place mast vertical and the fixed tilt 
platform forward or rearward when 

elevated. 

h) Place truck in neutral and apply parking 

brake. 

3 ) Lift and lower smoothly and with 
caution. 

k) Watch for overhead obstructions. 

m) Keep hands and feet clear of controls 
other than those in use. 

n) Never transport personnel on the work 
platform from one location to another. 

p) Provide protection for personnel in their 
working position from moving parts of 
the truck that represent a hazard. 

5 OPERATING RULES AND PRACTICES 
5.1 Operator Qualifications 

5.1.1 Only trained and authorized operators 
shall be permitted to operate a rough terrain 
fork lift truck. 



IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



5.1,2 Proof of operator's qualification shall be 
in possession of the operator at all times. 

5.2 Operator's [nstruction Manual 

Operator's instruction manual shall be as given 
in Annex A. 

6 MAINTENANCE PRACTICES 

6.1 Maintenance Provision 

Rough terrain trucks may become hazardous 
if maintenance is neglected* Therefore, main- 
tenance facilities, trained personnel and 
procedures shall be provided. 

6.2 Maintenance, Repair and Inspection 

Maintenance and inspection of all trucks shall 
be performed in accordance to the manufa- 
cturer's recommendations. A typical schedule 
shall be as follows: 

a) A scheduled preventive maintenance, 
lubrication and inspection system shall 

be followed. 

b) Only qualified and authorized personnel 
shall be permitted to maintain, repair, 
adjust and inspect industrial trucks. 

c) Before starting inspection and repair of 

truck: 

1) Raise drive wheels free of floor or 
disconnect battery and use chocks or 
other positive truck positioning 
devices. 

2) Block load engaging means, inner- 
most(s) or chassis before working on 
them. 

3) Before disconnecting any part of the 
engine fuel system or gasoline powered 
trucks with gravity feed fuel systems, 
take precaution to eliminate any 
possibility of unintentional fuel leaks. 

4) Before disconnecting any part of the 
engine fuel system of LP gas-powered 
trucks, close LP tank valve and run 
the engine until fuel in system is 
depleted and engine stops. 

d) Operation of the truck to check perform- 
ance shall be conducted in an authori- 
zed area where safe clearance exists. 

e) Avoid tyre hazards and have fire pro- 
tection equipment present in the work 
area. 



Do not use an open flame to check level, 
or for leakage of fuel electrolyte or 
coolant. Do not use open pans of fuel 
or flammable cleaning fluids for cleaning 
parts. 

f) Ventilate work area, exhaust fumes and 
keep shop clean and dry. 

g) Handle LP gas tanks with care. Physical 
damage, suciias dents, scrapes or gauges 
may dangerously weaken the tank and 
make it unsafe for use. 

h) Brakes, steering mechanisms, warning 
devices, stabilizers, lights, governors, lift 
over-load devices, guards and safety 
devices, lift-tilt mechanism and other 
frame members shall be carefully and 
regularly inspected and maintained in a 
safe operating condition. 

j) Fuel systems shall be checTced for leaks 
and condition of parts. Extra special 
consideration shall be given in the case 
of leak in the fuel system. 

fc) All hydraulic systems shall be regularly 
inspected and maintained in good condi- 
tions. Tilt cylinders, values and other 
similar parts shall be checked to assure 
that 'drift' or leakage has not developed 
to the extent that it would create a 
hazard. 

m) The truck manufacturer's capacity 
details, operation and maintenance 
instruction plates, tags or labels shall be 
maintained in legible condition. 

n) Trucks shall be kept in a clean condition 
to minimize fire hazards and facilitate 
detection of loose or defective parts. 

p) Modifications and additions which affect 
capacity and safe truck operation shall 
not be carried out unless agreed to bet- 
ween purchasers and suppliers changes of 
agreed upon then capacity, operation 
and maintenance instruction plates, tags 
or labels shall be changed accordingly. 

q) Care shall be taken to assure that all 
replacement parts are interchangeable 
with the original parts and of a good 
quality. 

r) When removing tyre, deflate it completely 
prior to removal. While assembling 
tyres on multi-piece rims, use a safety cage 
or restraining device while inflating. 



Is 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



ANNEX A 

( Item 5.2 ) 

OPERATOR'S INSTRUCTION MANUAL 



A-1 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 

A-1.1 The operator shall develop safe working 
habits and also be aware of hazardous 
conditions to protect himself, other personnel, 
the truck and other material. 

A-1.2 He shall be familiar with the operation 
and function of all controls and instruments. 

A-1.3 He shall not start or operate the truck 
from any place other than from the operator's 
position. 

A-1.4 Hands and feet shall be kept always 
inside operator's compartment. 

A-1,5 Understand truck limitations and keep 
the truck under control. 

A-1.6 Safeguard pedestrians at all times. Do 
not drive a truck up to any one standing in 
front of a fixed object. 

A-1.7 He shall not allow anyone to stand or 
pass under the elevated portion of any truck, 
whether loaded or empty. 

A-1.8 He shall not put any part of the body 
between the uprights of the mast, the reach 
mechanism or outside the operator compart- 
ment of the truck. 

A-l*9 Before leaving the operator's position; he 
shall 

a) Stop truck; 

b) Place directional controls in neutral; 

c) Apply the parking brake; 

d) Fully lower the load engaging means 
unless supporting an elevated platform; 

e) When leaving the truck unattended stop 
the engine or turn off the controls; and 

f) Block the wheels if truck is on an incline. 

A-1.10 Check clearance carefully before driving 
under electric lines, bridges, or entering or 
leaving buildings. 

A-1.11 Unauthorized passengers shall not be 
permitted to ride on powered industrial trucks. 
A safe place to ride shall be provided for 
authorized passengers. 

A-1.12 Report all accidents. 

A-1.13 Addition or modify the truck shall not 
be permitted. 



A-L14 Fire aisles, access to stairways and fire 
equipment shall be kept clear. 

A-1.15 An overhead guard is intended to offer 
protection from falling objects, but cannot 
protect against every possible impact. It shall 
not be considered a substitute for load-handling. 

A-2 OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY 

A-2.1 Safe operation is the responsibility of the 
operator. Truck operators shall read and be 
familiar with the operator's manual for the 
truck being operated; they shall also abide by 
the safety rules and practices as given A-1 
and A-4 to A-6. 

A-3 OPERATOR TRAINING 

A-3.1 An effective operator training programme 

shall centre around user company's policies, 
operating conditions and trucks. The 
programme shall b:; presented completely to all 
new operators and may be condensed for those 
with previous experience. 

An operator train- ig programme shall consist 
of the following: 

a) Careful selection of the operator, 
considering physical qualifications, job 
attitude and aptitude. 

b) Emphasis on safety of stock, equipment, 
operator and other personnel. City safety 
rules and why they were formulated. 

c) Instruction in basic fundamentals of truck 
and component design as related to 
safety, that is, Nm loading, mechanical 
limitations, centre of gravity, stability, 
etc. 

d) Introduction to equipment, control 
locations and fuactions, and explanation 
of how they work when used properly and 
problems encountered when used 
improperly. 

e) Supervised practice on operating course 
remote from normal activity and designed 
to simulate actual in-plant operations, 
that is, lumber stacking, elevating 
shingles to the roof, etc. 

f ) Oral, written and operational performance 
tests and evaluations during and at 
completion of the course. 



IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



g) Refresher courses which may be con- 
densed versions of the primary course, 
and periodic 'on job' operator evaluation. 

A-4 TRAVELLING 

A-4,1 On trucks equipped with individual wheel 
brake pedals, lock pedals together for simulta- 
neous operation before travel on public roads 
or when changing job sites. 

A-4,2 For truck equipped with differential lock, 
the lock shall not be engaged when driving on 
the road or at high speeds or when turning. If 
the lock is engaged when turning, there may 
be loss of steering control. 

A-4.3 Observe all traffic regulations including 
authorized speed limits. Maintain a safe 
distance, based on speed of travel, from the 
vehicle ahead and keep the vehicle under control 
at all times. 

A-4.4 Yield the right of way to pedestrian, 
ambulances, fire trucks or other vehicles in 
emergency situations. 

A-4.5 Do not pass another truck travelling in 
the same direction at intersections, blind spots 
or at other dangerous locations. 

A-4.6 Slow down and sound the audible warn- 
ing devices(s) at locations where vrsion is 
obstructed. If the load being carried obstructs 
forward view, travel with the load trailing or 
use a signallman to give directions. 

A-4,7 Railroad tracks shall be crossed at an 
angle wherever possible. Do not park closer 
than 1 800 mm to the nearest rail of a railroad 
track. 

A-4.8 Keep a clear view of the path of travel 
and watch for other traffic, personnel and safe 
clearances. 

A-4.9 Operate with caution on grades. 

A-4.10 Take special care when required to turn 
on grades, ramps or inclines. 

A-4.11 Under all travel conditions the truck 
shall be operated at a speed that shall permit 
it to be brought to a stop in a safe manner. 

A-4.12 Travel with load engaging means or 
load low and, where possible, tilted back. Do 
not elevate the load except during stacking. 

A-4.13 Make starts, stops, turns or direction 
reversals in a smooth manner so as not to shift 
load and/or overturn the truck. 

A-4.14 Do not indulge in stunt driving or 
horseplay. 



A»4.15 Slow dov/n on wet and slippery surfaces. 
Operate at speed which are compatible with th.e 
conditions encountered. 

A-4.16 Avoid running over loose objects on the 
roadway surface, 

A-4.17 While negotiating turns, reduce speed 
to a safe level, turning hand steering wheel in 
a smooth sweeping motion. Except when 
maneuvering at a very low speed, turn the hand 
steering wheel at a moderate, even rate. 

A-4,18 Handle only stable or safety arranged 
loads. When handling off-center loads which 
cannot be centered, operate with extra caution. 

A-4.19 Handle loads only within the capacity 
of the truck. 

A-4.20 On all grades the load and load engag- 
ing means shall be tilted back, if applicable, 
and raised only as far as necessary to clear the 
road surface. 

A-4.21 Trucks steered with their rear wheels 
have exaggerated trail swing. Operator fami- 
liarity with this feature is necessary for safe 
operation. 

A-5 LOADING INSTEUCTIONS 

A-5.1 Improper use of stabilizer controls ( if 
so equipped ) could cause truck upset. Stabi- 
lizers are to be used for additional stability 
only. Do not use them for levelling or raising 
the front of the machine. 

A-5.2 For the trucks equipped with lateral 
leveling: 

a) Always level the frame before raising 
the boom or mast with or without a load. 

b) Lateral levelling shall not be used to 
position an elevated load;Jnstead lower 
the load and reposition truck. 

A-5. 3 Handle loads exceeding the dimensions 
used to establish truck capacity with extra 
caution otherwise stability and maneuverability 
may be adversely affected. 

A-5.4 When attachments are used, extra care 
shall be taken in securing, manipulating, posi- 
tioning and transporting the load. Operate 
trucks equipped with attachments as partially 
loaded trucks even when not handling a load. 

A-5.5 Completely engage the load with the load 
engaging means and where tilt is provided, 
carefully tilt mast backward or tiltable forks 
upward to stabilize the load. Caution should 
be used in tilting backward with high or 
segmented loads. 



IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



A-5.6 A load backrest extension shall be used 
when necessary to guard against the load, or 
part of it, from falling toward the operator. 

A-5.7 Use extreme care when tilting load 
forward or backward particularly when high 
tiering. Do not tilt forward with load engaging 
means elevated except to pick up or deposit a 
load over a rack or stack. When stacking or 
tiering use only enough backward tilt to 
stabilize the load. 

A-5.8 The handling of suspended loads by 
means of crane arm ( 'boom' ) or other device, 
can introduce dynamic forces affecting the 
stability of a truck that are not considered in 
the ability criteria. Sudden starts, stops and 
turns can cause the load to swing and create a 
hazards. The following precautions shall be 
taken when handling suspended loads: 

a) It shall not exceed the truck manufactu- 
rer's load rating of the truck as equipped 
for suspended loads. 

b) The load shall only be lifted vertically 
and never dragged horizontally. 

c) The load shall be transported with the 
bottom of the load and the mast as low 
as possible. 

d) Maneuvering the truck with load elevated 
shall be done slowly and cautiously 
and only to the extent necessary to 
permit lowering to the transport position. 

A-6 OPERATOR CARE OF THE TRUCK 

A-6.1 It is not advisable to make repairs or 
adjustments unless specifically authorized to 
do so, 
A-6.1.1 Do not attempt repairs that need help. 

A-6.2 Before operating the truck on each shift, 
check its conditions, giving special attention 
to: 



a) Tyres 

b) Warning devices 

c) Lights 

d) Battery 

e) Tilt and lift system including load engag- 
ing means, chains, cable and limit 
switches. 

f) Brakes 

g) Steering mechanism 

h) Overhead guard and 
extension. 



load backrest 



A-6.3 If the truck while starting of shift 
operation or during operation is found to be m 
need of repairs or i;i any way unsafe or 
contributes to an unsafe condition, the matter 
shall be reported immediately to the designated 
authority, and the truck shall not be operated 
until it has been restored to safe operating 
condition. 

A-6,4 Before refuelling LP gas-powered 
trucks, close the LP gas-cylinder valve. If the 
system does not include a self sealing discon- 
nect coupling, run engine until fuel in system is 
depleted and engine stops running. 

A-6.5 The engine shall be stopped and the 
operator shall not be on the truck while 
refuelling. 

A-6. 6 Spillage of oil or fuel shall be carefully 
washed away or completely evaporated and 
fuel tank cap replaced before restarting engine. 

A-6.7 Smoking is not permitted while refuelling. 

A-6.8 Truck shall not be operated with a leak 
in the front fuel system. 

A-6.9 Open flames shall not be used when 
checking electrolyte level in storages batteries 
or liquid level in fuel tanks. 



IS 13971 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 



Chairman 



Shri J. A. Khan 

Members 

Shri S. Ray ChaudhARI ( Alternate to 

Shri J* A. Khan ) 

Shri S- C Anand 

Shri S. M. Munjal ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. K. Chaudhary 

Shri V. K- Jadon ( Alternate ) 

Brig V. S. Dhawan 

Shri P- T. Chaubal ( Alternate ) 

Shri S. K. Gulati 

Shri D- Gangopadhyaya ( Alternate ) 

Jt Director Stds 

AssTT Design Engineer ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. Kausjk 

Shri K. B. Nair (Alternate ) 

Shri N- L. Kodnaney 

Shri N. G. Kamat Satoskar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A- Konar 

Shri M. E. Madhusudan 

Shri K. K. Tiwari ( Alternate ) 

Shri M- Murashetty 

Shri S. G. Dharvekar ( Alternate ) 

ShriN. S. Nindi 

Shri A. C Bhattach^ryya ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. G. Paranjpe 

Shri K. R- Prasad 

Shri B. Nath ( Alternate ) 

Shri H. F- Ragina 

Shri D. B- Vuayakar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S- M. Sen 

Shri Nirmalya Sengupta (Alternate ) 

Shri R- C. Sharma 

Shri Love Dev Raj ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. P. Sulakhe 

Shri M. N. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 

Shri N. S. Vijayaraghavan, 
Director ( Transport Engg ) 



ANNEX B 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee, TED 23 

Representing 
Macneill Engineering Ltd, Calcutta 



Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( DGS & D ), New 

Delhi 
Escorts Ltd, Faridabad 

Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, "New Delhi 

Directorate of Tech Dev & Production ( Air ), "New Delhi 

Research^ Designs & Standards Organization, Ministry of 

Railways, Lucknow 
Voltas Ltd, Bonvbay 

Bombay Port Trust, Bombay 

Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Directorate General of Tech Dev ( Management Support 

Section ), New Delhi 

Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour, Institute 
( CLT ), Bombay 

Punjab Tractors Ltd, Chandigarh 

Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay 
Jost's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay 

Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Texmaco Ltd, Calcutta 

Ministry of Railways (Railway Board ), New Delhi 

Vehicle, Research & Dev Estt, Ministry of Defence (R&D), 

Ahmednagar 

Director General BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri T. M. Majumdar 
Director ( Transport Engg ), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Acty 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of stadardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publicatioas. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and ^Standards 
Monthly Additions', 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TED 23 ( 902 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Maaak Bhavaa, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r33I 01 31 

NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 {3311375 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Schems VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1,37 86 26, 37 86 62 

f53 38 43, 53 16 40 
Northern : SCO 4t5-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 < 53 ^3 34 

235 02 16, 235 04 42 

^235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f 632 92 93, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Southern : Q I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



{ 



Printed at Printwcll Printers, Aligarh, India 



