**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11067 (1984): Direct current standard resistors [ETD 12: 
Measuring Equipment for Basic Electrical Quantities] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS!11Q67-1SS4 

Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2002) 

SPECinCATION FOR 

DC STANDARD RESISTORS 



UDC 621-3ie'e"024 




@ Cof^righl 1985 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAMj S BAHADUR &HAU ZaPAK MaEIO 

NEW DELH[ 110002 

Gf 2 Jflnutfr^ 1985 



IS t 11067 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DC STANDARD RESISTORS 

Electrical Measuring Instruments Sectional Committee, ETDG 48 

Chairman 

Prof J. K. Choudhury 

Jadavpur University, 

Calcutta 

Members Representing 

Shri a. K, Barman The Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation (I) 

Ltd, Calcutta 
Shri S. B. Mukhopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Shbi a. K. Basak Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries ( Ministry of Industry ), New 
Delhi 
Shri A. N. Sahai ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Batba National Physical Laboratory ( GSIR ), New Delhi 

Shhi K. P, Bhatnagar Directorate of Standaidization, Ministry of 

Defence (R&D Organization ), New Delhi 
Shri B. M. Shankab Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. C. Golaco Larson & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J.J. Daruwai^a All India Instruments Manufacturers & Dealers' 

Association, Bombay 
Shri C. P. Goliya ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. Mukhopadhyaya {Alternate) 
Shri Narenbra Goliya Shanti Electric Instruments, Bombay 

Shri H. S. Sawarkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. V. Gopalaratnam Institute for Design of Electric Measuring 

Instruments, Bombay 
Shri B. V. Vardarajan ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Standards Research Design & Standards Organisation, 

( Electrical )-6 Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 

Assistant Desion Engineer 
{ Electrical )-CI ( Alternate) 
Shri M. R. Kataria Central Scientific Instruments Organization 

(CSIR). Chandigarh 
Shri S. S. Kulkarni Automatic Electric Ltd, Bombay 



Shri O. P. PtJRi ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11067 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi Lakshmi Saoak The Oriental Science Apparatus, Ambala 

Shbi K. S. Gupta {Alternate) 
Shri p. T, Lbkdhb The Bombay • Electric Supply & Transport 

Undertaking, Bombay 
Shri M, A. Kabim ( Alternate ) 
Shki M. M. Lohia Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Shki a. H. Thakore ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Mahsshwari Toshniwal Industries Pvt Ltd, Ajmer 

Shri B. Singh {Alternate) 
Shri D. B. Malik Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. N. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Narayana Directorate General of Inspection, Ministry of 

Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi 
Shri D. P. Dhiman ( Alternate ) 
Shri Narindbrjit Singh Directorate of Industries Punjab, Chandigarh 

Shbi Parminder Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Shabma Sharmason*s Sakova Instruments ( F ) Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shbi G. K. Sinha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection ), New Delhi 
Shri Anii* Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi T. Somasundram Directorate of Industries & Commerce, Madras 

Shbi M. Rajagopalan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Thangabaj The Motwane Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Nasik 

Road 
Shbi R. Venkateswaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri RakEsh Verma Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

Shri S. Nogi ( Alternate) 
Shri R. Viswanathan Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, 

Department of Communication, Jabalpur 
Shri T. S, Vasudevan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M.S. Wandalkar Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri S. K, Kasliwal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. P, Sachdev, Director General, IS! ( Ex~officio Member) 

Director ( Elec Tech ) 

Secretary 

Shri B.K. Mahata 

Senior Deputy Director ( Etec Tech ), ISI 



iS : 1105? ' 19S4 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DC STANDARD RESISTORS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 11 October 1984, after the draft finalized by the Electrical 
Measuring Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council, 

0,2 This standard covers the requirements of dc standard resistors which 
are used to establish the values of other resistors and for reference 
purposes in the calibration of apparatus comprising resistors. Standard 
resistors shall be resistors of the highest quality, whose resistance is closely 
adjusted to some standard nominal value having accuracy between 01 
percent and 0'005 percent and whose stability is assured by proper design 
and construction. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requiremrnts of dc standard resistors 
assembled from resistance material in enclosure for laboratory and 
commercial use and for comparison and reference purpose. 

i«2 It covers standard resistors within a range of 100 micro ohms 
to 1 megohms, having accuracies between 01 percent and 0*005 percent 
( both inclusive ). 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard^ the following definitions shall apply. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 11067 - 1984 

2.1 Standard Resistors — Resistors used as a standard or for reference 
purpose. This may be 2 terminals or 4 terminals type, air cooled or oil- 
cooJed. 

2.2 Resistor — An assembly of conductors which is used specially 
because of its resistance. 

2.3 Temperature Co-efficient — The change in magnitude of any 
property of a substance ( such as its resistance ) caused by a rise of 
one degree celsius in temperature^ and expressed as a fraction of the 
magnitude at some defined temperature adopted as a standard, 

2.4 Terminal — That portion of a circuit or piece of apparatus which is 
intended for the reception of conductors by means of which it may 
be connected electrically to another circuit or piece of apparatus. 

2.4.1 Two-Terminal Resistor — A resistor having a single combined 
current-potential terminal at each end. 

2.4.2 Four-Terminal Resistor 

2.4.2.1 Current terminal — Two terminals of standard resistors at each 
end for current carrying circuit. 

2.4*2.2 Potential terminal — Two terminals of standard resistors for 
connection to a potential measuring circuit. 

Note — The value of the resistance is defined as the quotient of the potential 
difference between the two poiemial t( rminals to the current entering and leaving 
the current terminals, provided that no current is drawn from the potential 
terminals. 

2.5 Thermo-emf — The electromotive force due to a thermo-electric 
effect. 

2.5.1 Thermo-electric Effect — An effect that an emf arises due to a 
difference of temperature between two junctions of dissimilar materials in 
the same circuit. 

2.6 Influence Quantity — A quantity, other than the measured quantity 
which is liable to cause unwanted variation. 

2.7 Variation with Influence Qiiantity — The difference between two 
measured values when an intluence quantity assumes successively two 
different specified values. 

2-8 Reference Conditions — The specified condition under which the 
standard resistor meets the specified value. 



IS s lt067 - 1984 

23 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
specification. These are intended to prove the general quantities and 
design of a given type of resistors. 

2.10 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each type resistor to check 
requirements which are Hkely to vary during production. 

3. ACCURACY CLASS 

3*1 Standard resistors specified in this standard are classified according to 
their accuracy classes as follows: 

a) 0-005, O'OI, 0-05, 0-1; and 

b) 50 PPxM, 100 PPM, 500 PPM, 1 000 PPM. 

The accuracy of a standard resistors may be expressed either in 
percentage using (a) or in PPM using, (b) or both. 

4. MATERIALS 

4,1 The resistors shall be constructed from resistance material, having a 
negligible temperature coefiicient of resistance and negligible thermo-emf 
against copper. The coils, after being wound, shall be thoroughly aged. 

4.1.1 Materials used in the construction shall be adequate protected 
against oxidation and corrosion and shall have adequate mechanical 
strength. 

5. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The apparatus shall be robust in construction. It shall present a good 
finish. Paint, lacquering or any other surface finish shall be hard and 
smooth so that cleaning of accumulated dust shall be facilitated. 

5.2 All the resistors shall be treated to be moisture resistant. 

5.2.1 All exposed terminals shall be treated to withstand oxidation 
and corrosion. 

5.3 Soldering and brazing shall preferably be done with non-corrosive 
tlux. When a corrosive ilux is used, it shaii be completely recovered. 
Soldered joints shall present a smooth and continuous appearance. All 
excess solder and flux shall be removed. 

5.4 The container cover should have a suitable opening for pouring oil 
into the container and for putting thermom.eter. 

5.5 Current terminals should be of adequate cross-section so that they are 
not excessively heated while carrying maximum rated current. 



IS : 11067 - 1984 

5.6 Spring washers and lock nuts or similar devices should preferably be 
used especially for fixing binding posts so that they do not become loose 
on repeated turning and twisting. 

5.7 A certificate of tests shall also be provided by the manufacturer, as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 The following information shall be marked on the exposed panel or 
nameplate: 

a) Nominal value and accuracy class of the resistor at 27^*0, 

b) Maximum current rating, 

c) Manufacturers' name or trade-mark, 

d) Serial number and type number of the resistor, and 
c) Country of manufacture. 

6.2 Terminals shall be clearly and indelibly marked either by recognised 
electrical symbols or by lettering, where required, 

6.3 The maximum allowable current through or voltage across individual, 
coils, shall be clearly indicated either by indelible marking on the exposed 
panel or by mentioning in any booklet accompanying the resistor. It is 
usual practice to state power rating of resistance in air and/or oil. 

6.3.1 It is preferable to give two critical values of current as follows: 

a) The measuring current at 27 db 2^C up to which the resistors 
shall remain within their specified accuracy class, and 

b) The maximum current value which the resistor is capable of 
carrying without any damage to the unit. 

6.4 The apparatus may also be marked with the IS I Certification Mark, 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer, 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for 
the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards institution* 



IS : 11067 - 1984 

7. TESTS 

7.1 Routine Tests — The following shall constitute the routine test: 

a) Insulation resistance test ( 7»3 ), 

b) High voltage test {7 A ), and 
c) Accuracy test ( 7,5 ). 

7.2 Type Tests — The following shall constitute the type test: 

a) Insulation resistance test ( 7.3 ), 

b) High voltage test ( 7.4 ), 

c) Accuracy test ( 7.5 ), 

d) Temperature variation test ( 7.6 ), 

e) Thermo-emf with copper test ( for standard resistance of 
accuracy 0*005 percent and O'l percent only ) ( 7.7 ), 

f ) Temperature cycle test ( 7.8 ), 

g) Damp heat ( cyclic ) test ( 7.9 ), and 
h) Vibration and shock test ( 7.10 ). 

7.3 Insulation Resistance Test — Insulation resistance between 
terminal and enclosure shall be at least 10^ times, the value of resistance 
of the resistor at 500 ± 50 volt dc. 

7.4 High Voltage Test — No break down, arcing or sparking shall 
occur when 2 000 volts rms is applied between terminals and enclosure 
for a period of one minute, 

7.5 Accuracy Test — It is recommended for that measuring the value 
of standard resistance, the accuracy of the measuring apparatus shall 
be 2 times better than the accuracy of the standard resistance of 0*005 
and 0*01 percent grade and 5 times better than other grades. This may 
be carried out at any value of the current up to the rated current through 
the standard resistor. 

7.5.1 The test shall be carried out at reference condition specified or as 
given below: 

Temperature 27 ± 2'G 

Humidity 40 to 70 RH 

7 



IS : 11067 - 1984 

7.6 Temperature Variation Test — The value of the resistance 
measured shall be remeasured at temperature lO^G higher and 10*C lower 
than the specified temperature and the variation of resistance for this 
change shall be within the variation given by a temperature co-efficient 
of 0-000 02 for I'G in case of accuracy class 0005 to O'Ol and 0-000 05 
for 1**C for other accuracy class. Resistance values as measured in this 
range shall be within the limits of error. 

7.7 Thermo-emf With Copper Test — ( For the standard resistance of 
0*005 percent and 001 percent accuracy. ) Thermo-emf of the resistance 
material used in the resistance shall be measured against copper and shall 
not be greater than 2 microvolt per degree celcius of temperature 
difference between the cold and hot junction. 

7.8 Temperature Cycle Test — The resistor shall operate without 
incurring permanent damage and also satisfy the requirements of 7.5 
when subjected to the temperature cycle as given in 6.5.3 of IS: 121r8 
( Part 1 )-1983* for the temperature cycle limits — lO^C to +55°C. 

7*9 Damp Heat ( Cyclic ) Test — The test shall be carried out as given 
in IS : 9000 ( Part 5/Sec 1 )- 198 If for 16*8h cycle with number of cycles 2 
and recovery period of 24 hours. 

7.10 Vibration and Shock Test — Provisions of 7.6 of IS : 1248 
( Part 1 )-1983* shall apply. 



♦Direct acting indicating analogue eleciticsii measuting mstrUtnents and thfeif 
Accessories: Part 1 General requirements { second revision ) . 

fBasic environmental testing procedures electronic and electrical items; Part 5 
t)amp heat ( cyclic ) test. 

8 



