**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10875 (1983) : Glossary of terms and material of 
construction for rotary dryers and coolers [MED 17: 
Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 66-047-57/58 : 00V4 IS : 10875 - 1983 




, ,. „ , , ( Reaffirmed 1999) 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND MATERIAL OF 
CONSTRUCTION FOR ROTARY DRYERS AND COOLERS 



o 



1. Scope — This standard covers definitions and material of construction for rotary dryers and coolers 
which are commonly used for granular materials. 

2, Terminology 

2.1 Capacity — Capacity shall imply the quantity of material produced under the stipulated conditions 
of quality. In the case of rotary dryers it can be expressed as the quantity ( kg ) of dried material per 
unit time ( h ) within stipulated moisture contents at inlet and outlet of dryer, alternatively, the evapora- 
tion capacity, which is quantity of moisture ( kg ) evaporated per unit time ( h ). In the case of rotary 
coolers it can be expressed as quantity ( kg ) of material cooled within stipulated temperature ( °C ) 
differential at inlet and outlet of cooler. 

2.2 Concurrent Dryer — Concurrent dryer is one in which t>oth wet material to be dried as well as the 
hot air used for drying enter from the same end and travel in the same direction of the dryer. A basic 
advantage is that higher inlet temperatures for the hot air can be used. 

2.3 Constant Rate Drying — Constant rate drying occurs in the initial stage in drying of wet materials 
during which period of time the evaporation rate per unit drying surface area remains constant. 

2.4 Counter Flow Dryer — Counter flow dryer is one in which the direction of flow of the material to 
be dried and that of the hot air are opposite. They are also called counter-current flow dryers. A dried 
product with an extremely low moisture content can be obtained in this set-up. 

2.5 Critical Moisture Content — Critical moisture content is the moisture content at a particular time 
during the drying process when the constant rate drying period changes to the falling rate one. 
Sometimes it is also referred to as a point differentiating the bound and the unbound moisture 
content. 

2.6 Dry Basis — Dry basis is the representation of the moisture content in the product obtained by 
dividing the mass of water by the mass of the dry material. 

2.7 Dryer Thermal Efficiency — Dryer thermal efficiency is a representation of the percentage of the 
total heat supplied by the fuel to evaporate a specific amount of water from the product. 

2.8 Drying Curve — Drying curve is a graphical representation of the moisture content in the product 
being dried versus the time during the process of drying. It identifies the constant rate and falling 
rate regimes as well as the critical moisture content. 

2.9 Dust Burden or Loading — Dust burden or loading in the exhaust gases is a representation of the 
quantity of dust picked up by the exhaust gases and is generally expressed in mg/Nm 3 . 

2.10 Falling Rate Drying — Falling rate drying occurs in the latter stages in the drying of wet 
materials during which period the change of moisture content goes on decreasing with time elapsed. 

2.11 Final Moisture Content — Final moisture content represents the exact moisture content in the 
final product leaving the dryer or cooler. The oven method is to be followed for determination of 
moislure contents unless specified otherwise. 

2.12 Free Moisture — Free moisture is generally referred to as the water content in a material which 
is not held by hygroscopic forces. It may include bound and unbound moisture. 

2.13 Hold-up — Hold-up is a representation of the total mass of material held in the dryer or cooler 
at any time of operation. It is expressed either in absolute mass ( kg ) or as a percentage of the volume 
of the material to the clear internal volume of the cylindrical shell of the dryer or cooler. 

2.14 Moisture Content — Moisture content is a basic representation of the mass of moisture in a 
product compared to the mass of the product on either dry or wet basis. 



Adopted 23 December 1983 



© July 1984, ISI 



Gr2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10875 -1983 

2.15 Retention Time — Retention time is the time taken by the feed to travel the length of the dryer 
or cooler and is the sum of the movement time due to action of the lifters as well as slide along its 
slope. It is also referred to as the time requirement for which the material has to be retained to 
complete the process x>f drying or cooling. 

2.16 Wet Basis — Wet basis calculations incorporate the mass of wet material in the denominator. 
It is obtained by dividing the mass of water by the mass of wet material, 

2.17 Specific Power Consumption — Specific power consumption is obtained by dividing the actual 
electrical energy ( kwh ) consumed by the complete dryer or cooler installation and its auxiliaries 
divided by the output ( dry basis ). 

2.18 Specific Heat Consumption or Thermai Requirement — Specific heat consumption or thermal 
requirement is obtained by dividing the net heat input ( J ) by the output of dryer (dry basis ) in kg 
per unit time. 

3. Nomenclature — The various components of the rotary dryer or cooler shall be designated as in 
Fig. 1. 



MOIST 
AIR 



GIRTH GEAR 
SHELL 




DISCHARGE 
SCR EEN 
TYRE 



DISCHARGE 
END HOUSING 




AIR 
INLET 



SUPP ORTING \ BEARING 
ROLLER 




RADIAL FLIGHTS 



QUADRANTS CROSS 

TVPICAL LIFTER ARRANGEMENTS 
FIG. 1 NOMENCLATURE FOR ROTARY DRYER OR COOLER 



4. Classification — The rotary dryers and coolers may be classified as ; 

a) Batch type, and 

b) Continuous type. 



In the batch type, the charge to be dried or cooled is loaded into the dryer or cooler and after 
the drying or cooling process it is removed in a batch; whereas in the continuous type, a continuous 
supply and removal of material is maintained. 



IS: 10875 -1983 

4.1 The rotary dryers are further classified as : 

a) Direct heat dryers, 

b) Indirect heat dryers, and 

c) Indirect-direct heat dryers. 

4.1.1 Direct heat dryer is one in which the material being dried is brought into direct contact with 
the drying medium, either in the parallel or counterflow configuration. The heat transfer is predomi- 
nently convective. 

4.1.2 Indirect heat dryer is one in which the heat to the material being dried is transferred through a 
metallic wall. The configuration could very in either shell and tube type or furnace enclosed shell type. 
Radiation is the dominant mode of heat transfer. 

4.1.3 Indirect-direct heat dryer is one employing a combination of the above two principles and 
applying a double-pass for the hot gases, resulting in a high degree of heat utilization through all the 
three modes. 

4.2 The rotary coolers are further classified as: 

a) Direct coolers, and 

b) Indirect coolers. 

4.2.1 Direct cooler is one in which the air used for cooling comes into direct contact, generally in 
counter flow, with the material being cooled. 

4.2.2 Indirect cooler is one in which the cooling medium, air or water, picks up the heat from the 
material being cooled through a metal wall. 

5. Sizes — Sizes of rotary dryers and coolers shall be denoted by the internal nominal diameter and 
length of the cylindrical shell in metres. 

6. Designation — The designation of a rotary dryer or cooler shall include : 

a) Commonly used name, 

b) Classification, 

c) Size designation, and 

d) Number of this standard. 

Example : 

A rotary sand dryer with an inside diameter of 3'0 m and 18 m long, the hot gases for drying 
flowing in opposite direction to the feed sand, will be designated as : 

Direct Heat Counter-Current Rotary Dryer 3*0X18 IS : 10875-1984 

7. Materials — The materials of construction of the rotary dryers and coolers will depend upon the 
duty requirements of the individual components. Table 1 gives a list of the same in accordance with 
general practice. 



IS: 10875 -1983 



TABLE 1 MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION 
( Clause 1 ) 



SI 

No. 


Components 


Material/Specification 


Remarks 


i) 


Main shell 


a) Grade 2 of IS : 2002-1982 Specification for steel 
plates for pressure vessels for intermediate and 
high temperature service including boilers 
( first revision ) 








b) IS : 2062-1980 Specification for structural steel 


For high temperature and 






( fusion welding quality ) ( second revision ) 


corrosive materials 






c) Stainless steel 




ii) 


Tyres 


a) CS 640 of IS : 2644-1979 Specification for high 
tensile steel castings ( second revision ) 

b) Grade 27-54 of IS : 1030-1982 Specification for 
carbon steel castings for general engineering 
purposes ( third revision ) 




iii) 


Support rollers 


a) CS 640 of IS : 2644-1979 

b) Grade 27-54 of IS : 1030-1982 




iv) 


Support roller shafts 


a) 15 C8of IS :1570 (Part2)-1979 'Schedules for 
wrought steels: Part 2 carbon steels ( unalloyed 
steels) ( first revision )' 

b) Class 3 of IS: 1879-1978 'Specification for 
carbon steel, billets, blooms, slabs and bars for 
forgings ( fourth revision )' 




v) 


Support roller 


a) Antifriction roller bearings 






bearings 


b) Journal bearings 




vi) 


Girth gear 


a) CS 65 of IS: 2644-1979 

b) Grade 27-54 of IS : 1030-1982 




vii) 


Pinion 


a) IS 226-1 975 'Specification for structural steel 
( standard quality ) ( fifth revision )' 


Plate thickness not exceed- 


viii) 


All other fabricated 


a) IS : 226-1975 


ing 20 mm 




items 


b) IS: 2062-1980 


Plate thickness exceeding 
20 mm 


ix) 


Lifters 


a) IS : 2062-1980 

b) Stainless steel 








c) Grade 1 of IS : 276-1978 'Specification for 


For casting 






austenitic manganese steel castings ( third revision ) 




x) 


Refractories 


a) High alumina bricks 


To suit material temperature 






b) Castables 


profile and abrassive 
resistance 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The rotary dryer or cooler consists of a near horizontal cylinder or shell supported by means of 
tyres or riding rings on plain rollers held in bearings. It is rotated by means of a girth-gear and counter 
shaft pinion, alternatively a chain and sprocket drive arrangement through a main gearbox. An electric 
motor is the prime mover in nearly all cases. 

The inside of the shell is equipped with flights running throughout the length of the dryer or 
cooler. These flights lift the material to be dried and shower it across the air stream. The flight 
configuration, sizes, shapes and geometry vary considerably. 

The drying action basically involves the removal of liquid, in most cases water, by converting 
it into vapour that separates readily from the solid. In the rotary dryer, the drying action is intermediate 
between that of a particle suspension unit and a static bed. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



