**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10814 (1984): Method for sampling green coffee in bags 
[FAD 6: Stimulant Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS; 10814- 19B4 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 



METHOD FOR 
SAMPLING GREEN COFFEE IN BAGS 



UDC 633 73:620 m 




© Copyright 1 964 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH KAFAtt MARC 

NEW DELHI M0O0S 



IS : 10814 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
SAMPLING GREEN COFFEE IN BAGS 

Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee, AFDG 39 

Chairman Representing 

Shri A. K. Roy Food Specialities Limited, Moga 

Members 

Db N. Rama Krisbnaw ( Alternate to 
Shri A. K, Roy ) 
De K. V. Ahmed Bavafpa Central Plantation Crop Research Institute 

( ICAR ), Kasaragod 
Shri T. A. Sriram ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Shrimaii D. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. K. Jain Tea Research Association, Calcutta 

Shri P. C, Shahma ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Kasturi Government Analyst Laboratory, Madras 

Shri R. K. Khosla Calcutta Tea Traders Association, Calcutta 

Shri J. S. Sabhakwal ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. L. Khosla Public Analyst, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Shri S. K. ANand ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. K, Mitra Tea Board, Calcutta 

Shri G. V. Pal Cadbury India Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. J. Kekobad ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Ramakrishna Pillai The Kerala State Co-operative Marketing 

Federation Ltd, Cochin 
Shri P. P. Bhaskaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Ramji Coffee Board, Bangalore 

Shrjmati Sttnauni N. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Rakganathan United Planter's Association of Southern India, 

Coonoor 
Shri P. K. Sabharwal Brooke Bond India Limited, Calcutta 

Dr M. L. Shankabanabayana Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR ), Mysore 
Shri V. H. Shah Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producer's Union 

Limited, Anand 



Shri Kailasb: Vyas ( Alternate ] 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10814 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr S. B. Singh Public Aaalyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Shri K. N. Sircar India Tea Association, Calcutta 

Brig R. N. Vebma Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquar- 

ters, New Delhi 
Lt-Col P. J. Cherian ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Vishveshwara Central Coffee Research Institute, Chikmagalur 

Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojficio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) ( Secretary ) 



Coffee and Its Products Subcommittee, AFDC 39 : 2 

Convener 
Shri S. Vishveshwara Coffee Board, Bangalore 

Members 
Shri N. G. Gopala Krishan Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Shri S. Kasttjri Government Analyst Laboratory, Madras 

Shri N. Ramji Coffee Board, Bangalore 

Shri A. K. Roy Food Specialities Limited, Moga 

Dr N. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Sabarwal Brooke Bond India Limited, Calcutta 

Shri E. B. Unni Mangalore Curers* Association, Mangalore 

Shri P. V. Ramakrishna ( Alternate ) 
Brig R. N. Verma Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquar- 

ters, New Delhi 
Lt-Col P. J. Cherian ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10814 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 
SAMPLING GREEN COFFEE IN BAGS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 29 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Stimulant Foods 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food 
Products Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended to assist in sampling of consignment of 
green coffee traded within the country and for export based on scientific 
and statistical principles. This standard is partially based on 
ISO 4072 2 'Green coffee in bags — Sampling* published by the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization, with regard to terminology. 

0.3 It is hoped that this standard would help in uniform and represent- 
ative sampling of the consignment of green coffee which is a pre- 
requisite for determination of its quality. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies a method of sampling a consignment of 
green coffee. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions apply. 

2.1 Consignment — The quantity of green coffee in bags dispatched or 
received at one time and covered by a particular contract or shipping 
document. It may be composed of one or more lots. 

2.2 Lot — A part of a consignment or a consignment presumed to be 
of uniform characteristics, consisting of not more than 500 bags of 
the same type, with the same marks and mass, containing green coffee 
assumed to have common properties of reasonably uniform character 
and to which a given scheme of examination can be applied. 



IS : 10814 - 1984 

2.3 Damaged Lot — A part of a consignment constituted for separate 
examination, incorporating the existing damaged bags of the same type, 
with the same marks and mass and containing green coffee assumed to 
be of the same type. 

2.4 Damaged Bags — Bags which are tern, stained, soiled or other- 
wise detectably contaminated, indicating possible damage to the coffee 
contained in them. 

2.5 Sample — A part of a lot, from which the properties of the lot are 
to be estimated by examination. 

2.6 Increment Primary Sample — The quantity of 30 ± 6 g of 
green coffee beans taken from a single bag of a specific lot. 

2.7 Bulk Sample — The quantity of not less than 1 500 g of green 
coffee beans obtained by combining all the increments ( see also 2.6 ) 
taken from bags of specific lot. 

2.8 Gross Sample — The quantity of green coffee bean obtained by 
combining and blending all the increments ( see also 2.6 ) taken from 
bags of a specific lot. 

2.9 Laboratory Sample — The quantity of not less than 300 g of 
green coffee beans removed from the gross sample ( see also 2.8 ) of a 
specific lot. 

3. PRINCIPLE OF THE METHOD OF SAMPLING 

3.1 The method specified follows an established |scheme based on 
experience. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Coffee Trier — A special device for removing coffee through the 
wall without opening the bag. 

5. SAMPLE CONTAINERS AND PACKAGES 

5#1 The containers and packages intended for collecting samples shall be 
clean and shall be made from materials which will not affect the odour, 
flavour or composition of the samples. 

5.2 They shall be sufficiently robust to withstand hazards during 
transport by the chosen method and shall have the ability to preserve 
the samples unchanged for the approprite period. 



|§? 10814 -19^ 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Taking Increments 

6.1.1 The number of bags to be selected from the lot for the purpose 
of taking increments shall be as given below: 

No. of Bags in the Lot Sample Size 
Up to 100 10 

101 „ 200 15 

201 „ 300 20 

301 „ 500 25 

6,1$ The increments shall be taken at randqjn frpm individual bags 
from different locations on the pile, using the coffee ( set -$,1 ). Each bag 
should preferably be sampled at three different points. 

6.1.3 More than one increment may be taken from each bag sampled, 
if this is necessary, in order to obtain a bulk sample of 1 500 g ( see 2.7 ). 

6.2 Preparation of Samples 

6.2.1 Bulk Sample — Examine the increments as they are taken. If 
they are evidently homogeneous. Combine them in a container. Label 
the bulk sample obtained ( see 7 ). 

6.2.1.1 Samples taken from damaged bags shall not be included in 
the bulk sample. 

Note — If there is a noticeable lack of uniformity among any of the increments, 
keep them separate and report this condition in the sampling report ( see 7.2 ). 

6.2.2 Gross Sample — Remove the bulk sample ( 6.2.1 ) from its 
container and thoroughly mix it. 

6.2.3 Laboratory Samples — Prepare each laboratory sample by 
removing a quantity of not less than 300 g from the gross sample 
( 6.2.2 ). Package and label each laboratory sample obtained ( see 7 ). 

6.2.3.1 For the purpose of preparing the laboratory sample of not 
less than 300 g, the procedure coning and quartering shall be used. 
The material in the gross sample shall be heaped into the shape of a 
cone by pouring one scoopful of the material after another at the apex 
of the cone till the entire gross sample has been coned. The material 
shall be allowed to slide down the sides of cone only under the influence 
of gravity. Flatten the cone evenly so that it forms a low circular pile. 
Cut the pile into the four quarters along two diameters which intersect 
at right angles. Retain one pair of opposite quarters and reject the 
other. Repeat till the size of the retained sample is reduced to the 
required weight of the laboratory sample. 

5 



IS : 10814 - 1984 

7. PACKING, SEALING AND MARKING OF SAMPLES OR 
SAMPLE CONTAINERS AND PACKAGES 

7.1 Filling and Sealing of Sample Containers and Packages — 

Sample containers and packages, together with their corresponding 
closure systems (see 5) shall be dry. 

7.1.1 Samples intended for the determination of moisture content or 
for any other test liable to be influenced by an alternation of moisture 
content, shall be packed in HDPE bags, sealed and then padled in 
moisture-proof containers fitted with air-tight closures. The containers, 
in this case, shall be completely filled with green coffee so as to prevent 
loss or alternation of the contents. 

7.2 Marking : Sampling Report — The samples shall be identified by 
recording the following information on the container or package, or on a 
label affixed to the container or package, unless otherwise specified: 

a) Date 

b) Name of sampler and his employer 

c) Shipping document or contract No. 

d) Ship ( or other transport vehicle ) 

e) Location 

f) Identifying marks and numbers ( including the origin of the 
coffee ) 

g) Quantity 

h) Mass of the sample 

j) Samplers comments ( these may be added either on the label or 
in a separate document ). 

8. PRECAUTIONS DURING STORAGE AND TRANSPORT OF 
SAMPLES 

8.1 Laboratory samples shall be despatched to the place of examination 
as soon as possible after preparation and only in exceptional circumst- 
ances more than 48 h after preparation, non-business days excluded. 

A copy of the sampling report ( see 7.2 ) shall be attached to them. 

8.2 After taking the laboratory samples, the rest of the blender bulk 
sample ftom each lot shall be retained in a container labelled in 
accordance with 7.2, for further use if necessary ( inspection, etc ) until 
final acceptance of the consignment by the purchaser. 



