**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12224 (1987) : Method of test for hydraulic power and 
lifting capacity of agricultural tractors [FAD 11: 
Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 1995 

TO 

IS 12224 : 1987 METHOD OF TEST FOR 

HYDRAULIC POWER AND LIFTING CAPACITY 

OF AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS 

( Page 1, clause 3A.I, firsi line ) — Substitute the word 'wheel* for *whee*. 

( Page 1, clause 3.1.2(a), fourth line ) — Substitute 'category I and 2* for 
'category 1'. 

( Page 2, clauses 3.2.3 and 3.3.4, first sentence ) — Substitute 'The 
minimum of lifting force shall be corrected to the pressure equivalent to 90 
percent of the minimum of relief valve pressure setting specified by the 
manufacturer.* for *Thc minimum of the lifting forces shall be corrected to the 
pressure corrosponding to the maximum hydraulic power.' 

( Page 2, clause 3.4(c) | — Substitute *The pressure in kPa, corresponding 
to 90 percent of the minimum of relief valve pressure setting specified by the 
manufacturer/ for 'The pressure, in kilopascals, conesponding to maximum 
hydraulic power;*. 

( Page 3, clause S3 ) — Add 'If transport lock is provided shall be 
unlocked' at the end. 



(FAD 32) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 JULY 2006 

TO 

IS 12224 : 1987 METHOD OF TEST FOR 

HYDRAULIC POWER AND LIFTING CAPACITY OF 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS 

[ Page 1, clause 1(a) ] — Substitute the following for tlie existing text: 

'The maximum static vertical force which can be exerted by the hydrauUc lift at 
the lower hitch points and at a point 610 mm rear to lower hitch points 
throughout its power range;' 

[ Page 3, clause 5.3 ( see also Amendment No. 1)1 — Substitute the 
following for the existing text: 

"With the hydrauUc lift in its uppermost position and the control lever in the 
'raised' position, the engine shall be stopped and the 'vertical height from 
ground level' of the point of application of force shall be measured.'* 

( Page 5, clause B-7, col 1 of informal table ) — Substitute *Drop in hcighi. 
nun for 'Lx>wering» mm'. 



(FAD 11) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



UDC 631 372033 : 629*1 1 4*2 : 6201 IS ; 1 2224 - 1 987 



Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

HYDRAULIC POWER AND LIFTING CAPACITY OF 

AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS 



O 

CM 

o 
o 



o 

Q 



-1 

£ 
o 



< 



1. Scope — This standard specifies test procedures for determining following hydraulic performance 
characteristics of agricultural tractors: 

a) The maximum static vertical force which can be exerted by the hydraulic lift at the tower hitch 
points throughout their full range of movement; 

b) The maximum static vertical force which can be exerted by the hydraulic lift at a point 
610 mm to the rear of the hitch points on a frame attached to the three*point linkage, 
throughout its full range of movement; 

hydraulic pump and relief valve performance; and 

d) The ability of the lifting system to maintain the load in the lifted position without hydraulic 
power. 

2. Test Conditions 

2.1 The tractor shall be run-in prior to the test, if specified by the manufacturer/applicant. 

2.2 The type and viscosity of the hydraulic fluid shall conform to the specifications supplied by the 
tractor manufacturer/applicant. If it conforms to the relevant Indian Standard, this shall be stated. 

2.3 The throttle or governor control lever shall be adjusted to maintain the rated engine speed except 
where otherwise specified by the manufacturer/applicant. 

2.4 At the start of each test, the temperature of the hydraulic fluid in the tank shall be measured and 
shall be 65 4i5X. If this cannot be achieved, owing to the presence of an oil cooler for example, the 
temperature measured during the test shall be stated in the test report. 

2.5 A pressure gauge shall be fitted externally in the hydraulic circuit of the tractor as specified by 
the manufacturer/applicant. 

2.6 The test set up and method for flow versus pressure determination of pump as given in Appendix A 
should be followed. 

2.7 Other general guidelines and accuracy of measurement as given in IS : 5994-1987 'Test code for 
agricultural tractors (second revision)' , shall be followed- 

3. Hydraulic Lift Capacity Test 

3.1 General 

3.1.1 The unballasted tractor shall be supported and secured in horizontal position at the rear whee 
axis so that the tyres are not deflected by the reactive forces of the power lift. 

3.1.2 The linkage shall be adjusted as appropriate for the tests with or without the coupled frame, 
to achieve typical and repeatable arrangements as follows: 

a) The linkage shall be adjusted in such a way as to achieve the power range required in 
IS : 4468-1986 'Dimensions for three-point linkage of agricultural wheeled tractors {second 
revision )', and a height of the lower hitch points, in the lowered position, of 200 mm for 
category 1 and 230 mm for category 3 above ground level. The height shall be obtained with 
the loaded radius of tyre with inflation pressure recommended for field operation. For those 
tractors which do not achieve the standard power range, the lifting force shall be measured 
at the maximum achievable power range. 

b) The upper link shall be adjusted to the length necessary to bring the mast of the frame 
vertical when the lower links are horizontal. 



JOjOPtttd 30 Novembor 1987 



O March 1988. BIS 



Or 3 



BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:12224-1987 

c) Where more than one upper or lower link point is available on the tractor, the points used 
shall be those specified by the manufacturer/applicant and shall be included in the test report. 

d) Where there is more than one point attachment to connect the lift rod to the lower links, the 
connection points used shall be those specified by the manufacturer/applicant and shall be 
included in the test report. 

e) These initial adjustments, as far as possible, shall cause the mast to rotate through a minimum 
of 10*" over the full range of lift. If this is not possible, the fact shall be stated in the test 
report. 

3.2 Static Lift at Lower Hitcti Points 

3.2.1 An external vertical downward force shall be applied to a horizontal bar connecting the hitch 
points. This force, which shall be capable of being measured, shall lie in the central longitudinal 
plane of the tractor and shall be maintained vertical throughout the lift range. 

Note --"Care should be taken to avoid torsional components in this force. This can affect the accuracy of 
measurements. 

3.2.2 The lifting force available and the corresponding pressure of the hydraulic fluid shall be 
measured at a minimum of six points approximately equally spaced throughout the range of movement 
of the lift. At each point, the force shall be the maximum which can be exerted against a static load. 
Additionally, the range of movement shall be measured. 

3.2.3 The minimum of the lifting forces shall be corrected to the pressure corresponding to the 
maximum hydraulic power. The corrected value shall constitute the maximum vertical force which can 
be supported by the hydraulic lift throughout its full range of movement. 

3.3 Static Lift on Coupled Frame 

3.3.1 A frame having the following characteristics shall be attached to the three-point linkage: 

a) The mast height and the distance from the hitch points to the centre line of the tractor shall be 
appropriate to the linkage category of the tractor as specified in IS : 4468-1986. Where more 
than one category is specified, that chosen for test shall be at the manufacturer's/applicant's 
option. 

b) The centre of gravity shall be at a point 610 mm to the rear of the hitch points, on a line at 
right angles to the mast upper hitch point and passing through the middle of the line joining 
the lower hitch points. 

3.3.2 An external downward vertical forces, which shall be capable of being measured, shall be 
applied to the frame at the centre of gravity and the weight of the frame shall be added to it to obtain 
the lifting force. 

3.3.3 The lifting force available and the corresponding pressure of the hydraulic fluid shall be 
measured at a minimum of six points approximately equally spaced throughout the range of the 
movement of the lift. At each point, the force shall be the maximum which can be exerted against a 
static load. Additionally, the range of movement shall be measured. 

3.3.4 The minimum of the lifting forces shall be corrected to the pressure corresponding to maximum 
hydraulic power. The corrected value shall constitute the maximum vertical force which can be 
supported by the hydraulic lift throughout its full range of movement. 

3.4 A?eporr — The following shall be reported: 

a) The maximum corrected vertical forces at the hitch points (5ee 3.2.3) and at the centre 
of gravity of the frame ( 3.3.4 ); 

b) The full range of vertical movement of the respective points of application of force 
(5^^3.2.2 and 3.3.3); 



c) The pressure, in kilopascals, corresponding to maximum hydraulic power; 

d) The height in millimetres, of the lower hitch point above the ground in ita 
and without load; 

e) The angle through which the mast rotates over the full range of lift; 



18:12224-1987 

f) The main linkage dimensions in millimetres including the mast height of the frame, as tested, 
relative to the centre of the rear wheels ( see Fig. 1 ); 

g) The temperature of the hydraulic fluid at the start of each test in degree Celsius; and 

h) Tha calculated moment around the rear axle, in newton metres, resulting from the maximum 
corrected external lift force at the frame which can be exerted through the full range of 
movement. 



-LIFT ARM 



-Lif- T ROD 



// 



-TOP 
LINK 



-LOWtR 
LINK 





/ 

^ 


r 


^ 


^MK^. 






REAR 1/ 
WHEEL /A 


^7 ' 


L 


1 / 




AXI5--CA 






GL 







FIG. 1 A TYPICAL ILLUSTRATION OF MAIN LINKAGE DIMENSIONS 

4. Hydraulic Pump Test 

4.1 The following measurements shall be reported; 

a) The pressure corresponding to maximum hydraulic power; 

b) The pressure sustained by open relief valve with the pump stalled in case of a closed-centre 
system with pressure compensated variable delivery pump; 

c) The opening and closing pressures of the unloading valve in the case of a closed-centre 
system having an accumulator; 

d) The pump delivery rate, in litres per minute, using a designated auxiliary service coupling, 
as determined with measuring equipment causing negligible pressure drop in the external 
line; 

e) The maximum hydraulic power, in kilowatts, available at the designated auxiliary service 
coupling and the corresponding flow rate and pressure. 

5. Maintenance of Lift of Load 

5.1 The tractor shall be secured in accordance with 3.1. 

5.2 A downward vertical force equal to 90 percent of the maximum force as reported under 3.3.4, 
which can be exerted throughout the full range of movement, shall be applied to the frame at the 
centre of gravity. 

5.3 With the hydraulic lift in its uppermost position and the control lever in the 'raise' position, the 
engine shall be stopped and the vertical height of the point of application of force shall be measured. 

5.4 At intervals of 5 min over a period of 30 min, the vertical height shall be remeasured. 

6.5 The following measurements shall be reported: 

a) Force applied to the frame, 

b) Decrease in height of the point of application of the force after each 5 min interval and shall 
be compared with the relevant specification provided by the manufacturer/applicants. 

c) Ambient temperature at the start of measuring, and 

d) Temperature of hydraulic fluid at the start of test. 

6. Test Report - A specimen test report is given in Appendix B. 

3 



IS: 12224-1987 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 2.6 ) 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF FLOW/PRESSURE 
CHARACTERISTICS OF PUMP 

A-1. Test Set-Up — The set up may be made as per the circuit diagram shown in Fig. 2. 

PRESSURE OAUOE 



® T 



PUMP 




Wv 



IXH 



FLOWMFTER 



THROTTLE VALVE 
PUMP RELIEF VALVE 



FIG. 2 TEST SET-UP 



A-2. Tests 



A-2.1 The test shall be carried out to find out the flow versus pressure characteristics of pump at rated 
engine speed at least up to the sustained pressure specifications of the manufacturer/applicant for an 
open relief valve. The relief valve shall not be in the circuit except where the same is not possible. 

A-2.2 The test shall also be carried out to find out the flow versus pressure characteristics of the 
pump with relief valve combination, at full accelerator setting giving high idling speed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's specifications, up to the sustained pressure of an open relief valve. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 6 ) 

SPECIMEN TEST REPORT 

B-1. General 

a) Tractor manufacturer's name and address 

b) Name of the applicant 

c) Date and location of tests 

B-2. Details of Tractor 

a) Model 

b) Serial Number 

c) Mass with tanks full but without ballast or driver, kg 

d) Tyre size 

i) Front 
ii) Rear 

e) Wheel base, mm 

4 



18:12224-1987 



B-3. Details of Engine 

a) Make 

b) Model 

c) Type 

d) Serial Number 

e) Rated engine speed, rev/min. 

B^4. Hydraulic Fluid Used in Tests 

a) Type 

b) Viscosity 

c) Viscosity index 

d) Type of the iiydraulic system 

B-5. Hydraulic Lift Capacity Test 

a) Test data 



Characteristics 


Height of lower 

hitch point 

above ground 

in down 

position, 

mm 


Vertical 

movement, 

mm 


Maximum 

force exerted 

through full 

range. 


Pressure, 
kPa 


Moment 

about rear 

axle, 

kN.m 


Tilt angle 
of mast over 

range of 
lift, degrees 


At hitch points 














On the frame 















b) Temperature of hydraulic fluid, ''C 

c) Main linl<age dimensions (as tested) (see Fig. 1 ) 

6. Hydraulic Power Test 

a) Sustained pressure with relief valve open, kPa (Pump stalled — yes/no) 

b) Opening pressure of the unloading valve, kPa 

c) Closing pressure of the unloading valve, kPa 

d) Pump delivery rate at minimum pressure and rated engine speed, i/min 

e) Maximum hydraulic power, kW 

f) Pressure specified by the manufacturer for an external hydraulic motor, kPa 

g) Tapping point 

h) Pump delivery rate at stated power, I/min 
j) Pressure at maximum power, kPa 
k) Temperature of hydraulic fluid, ^'C 

B-7. Maintenance of Lift of Load 

a) Force applied to frame, kN 

b) Ambient temperature at the start of test, X 

c) Temperature of hydraulic fluid at the start of test, 'C 

d) Test data 



Time, min 


5 


10 


16 


20 


25 


30 


Lowering, mm 















e) Data obtained at (d) corresponds with the manufacturer's specification —yes/no. 

5 



18:12224-1987 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The hydraulic lift of tractors is an important functional component through which the power isi 
delivered to the three-point linkage system. This standard covers the test method for hydraulic power 
and lifting capacity. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following: 

a) Procedure followed at Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute (Ministry of 
Agriculture), Budni. 

b) ISO 789/2-1983 Agricultural tractors -— Test procedures -- Part 2 : Hydraulic power and 
lifting capacity. International Organization for Standardization. 

c) OECD standard codes for the official testing of agricultural tractors performance, 1985. 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 

In ISO 782/2-1983, relief valve pressure has been stated at a number of places in different forms, 
^such^as, pressure sustained by the relief valve« minimum relief valve pressure and relief valve pressure. 
In this standard, only two terms namely pressure sustained by the open relief valve and the presl^ure 
corresponding to the maximum hydraulic power have been used to avoid ambiguity. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the 
final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 



Printed at Prlntrade, New Dslhi: Irtdta 



