**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13281 (1999) : Mechanical Vibration and Shock Affecting 
Man - Vocabulary [MED 28: Mechanical Vibration and Shock] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13281 : 1999 

., ,, ,_o ISO 5805 : 1997 

*fl VC7/«y nrfcp ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK 

AFFECTING MAN — VOCABULARY 

(First Revision) 

ICS 13.160 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1999 Price Group 5 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with ISO 5805:1997 'Mechanical vibration and 
shock affecting man — Vocabulary', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Mechanical Vibration and 
Shock Sectional Committee and approval of Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1992. This first revision has been taken up to align with the latest 
version of ISO 5805 which has been technically revised in 1997. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as 
'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to 
use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to one International Standard for which Indian Standard also 
exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along with 
its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: 

International Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of 

Standard Equivalence 

ISO 2041:1990 Vibration IS 11717:1999 Vibration and shock Identical 

and shock — Vocabulary — Vocabulary(f/rsf revision) 



Indian Standard 



IS 13281 : 1999 
ISO 5805 : 1997 



MECHANICAL VIBRATION AND SHOCK 

AFFECTING MAN — VOCABULARY 

(First Revision) 



1 Scope 

This International Standard defines terms relating 
to human biodynamics or which are used in specific 
contexts in other standards pertaining to the 
evaluation of human exposure to mechanical 
vibration and shock. It provides standard definitions 
of terms and supplements ISO 2041 but does not 
contain general terms readily found in dictionaries. 

NOTES 

1 A few synonyms are included among terms defining 
directions of vibration or shock affecting man, wliere 
widespread use of the synonym in the literature on 
biodynamics or the evaluation of human exposure to 
mechanical vibration and shock is still current. However, use 
of the primary standard term (listed first) is preferred, and 
the use of ambiguous terms is deprecated. References to 
"shock" in the context of biodynamics are to be understood 
in the mechanical, and not the medical sense. Mechanical 
shock (commonly called "impact" when applied to man) is 
defined in ISO 2041. 

2 References to "man" should be interpreted as applying 
equally to man or woman. 

3 The numbers appearing before eadh term are arbitrary 
within each categorical section: they are used solely for 
reference purposes, including the facilitation of cross-reference 
in translation of the primary term between the languages 
of ISO and its member bodies. 

2 Normative reference 

The following standard contains provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this International Standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this International Standard 
are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below. Members of lEC and ISO maintain 
registers of currently valid International Standards. 

ISO 2041 : 1 990, Vibration and shock - Vocabulary, 

3 General terms 

3.1 

building vibration [shock] 

mechanical vibration [shock] affecting man, or 



sensed or detectable by man, in or on a building, 
bridge or other fixed structure 

NOTE — Building vibration disturbing to man is very often 
associated with airborne sound, and many people have 
difficulty in distinguishing vibratory disturbances from 
acoustical disturbances In buildings. 

3.2 
footfall 

mechanical vibration, shock motion or noise 
generated by people moving about in buildings 

3.3 

indirect vibration 

mechanical vibration which disturbs man without 
entering the body 

EXAMPLE 

Visible oscillation of objects in the field of view. 

3.4 

limb vibrator 

segmental vibrator 

vibration machine (usually small) for applying 
vibration topically to a human limb or other segment 
of the body for experimental or therapeutic 
purposes 

3.5 
ride 

measurable motion environment (including 
vibration, shock, translational and rotational 
accelerations) as experienced by people in or on 
a vehicle 

NOTE — Some authorities regard associated noise heard 
inside a moving vehicle as part of the ride environment, 
particularly where a composite vibroacoustical environment 
generally adverse to man is generated by a common source 
or sources (e.g. fork-lift trucks, helicopters, ships, space 
vehicles). 

3.6 

self-applied vibration 

mechanical vibration applied to one's own body 
for therapeutic, recreational or pleasurable 
purposes 



1 



IS 13281 : 1999 
ISO 5805: 1997 



3.7 

self generated vibration 

<biodynamics> endogenous vibration, that is, 
vibratory or oscillatory motion of or within the 
body induced by muscular activity (e.g. walking, 
dancing, rocking) or the involuntary action 
of organs (e.g. the beating of the heart, 
neuromuscular tremor) 

3.8 

vibration [shock] limit 

quantitative expression of the maximum intensity 
or severity of mechanical vibration [shock] 
recommended for human exposure according to a 
specified criterion (for example, a boundary of safe 
exposure when the criterion is the prevention of 
injury or disease) 



NOTE — Standards on human exposure to vibration and 
shock commonly define evaluation methods for human 
response, and, in some cases, specific dose-response 
relationships are given or implied. As a general rule it is 
not properly the function of International Standards to 
prescribe absolute exposure limits. In some member 
countries, vibration [shock] limits are sometimes set by 
legislative or regulatory authorities. Where that is done, 
the use of evaluation methods and data ratified in 
international or cognate national consensus standards 
should be er^couraged. 

3.9 

vibration [shock] criterion 

expression of the purpose (e.g. to preserve health, 
working efficiency) of establishing a vibration 
[shock] limit or boundary 

NOTE — Fully expressed, the criterion should specify 
the fraction or percentage of the population to be 
protected. 

3.10 
vibration rating 

<biodynamics> subjective estimation of vibration 
severity or intensity using a rating scale or 
corresponding numerical assessment obtained by 
methods of psychological testing 



NOTE — Vibration rating is in several respects analogous 
to the scaling of loudness or perceived noisiness of audible 
sound. 



3.11 

vibratory communication 

communication with a person by means of the 
vibrotactile sense using vibratory signals, coded 
by location and other parameters, applied to the 
body mechanically or induced electrically 



4 Terms characterizing mechanical 
vibration [shock] affecting man 

4.1 

directional vibration [shock] 

translational or rotational mechanical vibration 
[shock] acting upon man as a whole or upon parts 
of man (e.g. hand, head or limbs) 

See note 6 in 5.2. 



4.2 

X-axis vibration [shock] 

for-and-aft vibration (deprecated) 
surge (deprecated) 
shunt (deprecated) 
transverse vibration (deprecated) 
longitudinal vibration (deprecated) 

translational mechanical vibration [shock] in the 
direction of the x-axis of the anatomical coordinate 
system of the human body or of a part of the body 
(e.g. a hand) 

NOTES 

1 Surge is used for ships and shunt is used for trains. 

2 In a right handed orthogonal coordinate system, the 
direction of the x-axis is deemed by convention to point from 
the subject's back towards the front (see ISO 8727). 

4.3 

y-axis vibration [shock] 

side-to-side vibration (deprecated) 

sway (deprecated) 

transverse vibration (deprecated) 

translational mechanical vibration [shock] in the 
direction of the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate 
system of the human body or of a part of the body 
(e.g. a hand) 

NOTE — In a right-handed orthogonal coordinate 
system, the direction of the y-axis is deemed by 
convention to point from the subject's right to left side 
(see ISO 8727). 

4.4 

z-axis vibration [shock] 

vertical vibration (deprecated) 

heave (deprecated) 

longitudinal vibration (deprecated) 

translational mechanical vibration [shock] in the 
Direction of the z-axis of the anatomical coordinate 
system of the human body or of a part of the body 
(e.g. a hand) 



IS 13281 
ISO 5805 



1999 
1997 



NOTES 

1 It is important to appreciate that z-axis vibration of man 
is not necessarily vertical vibration; geocentrically speaking, 
it depends on the body's orientation with respect both to the 
true or notional vertical and to the direction of the vibration. 

2 In a right-handed orthogonal coordinate system, the 
direction of the z-axis is deemed by convention to point from 
below the subject towards the head (see ISO 8727). 

4.5 

multidirectional translational vibration 

[shock] 

translational mechanical vibration [shock] acting in 
more than one direction upon the human body or 
upon a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 

4.6 
roll 

rotational mechanical vibration about the x-axis of 
the anatomical coordinate system of the human 
body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 

NOTE — Vehicular roll, pitch and yaw axes do not necessarily 
(and commonly do not) intersect: indeed, in ships and other 
large mobile structures, one or more of these axes may lie 
outside the hui! or any space occupied by man, requiring 
computational transformation of data when evaluating human 
inputs. 

4.7 
pitch 

Rotational mechanical vibration about the y-axis 
of the anatomical coordinate system of the human 
body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 

4.8 
yaw 

rotational mechanical vibration about the z-axis of 
the anatomical coordinate system of the human 
body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 

4.9 

multi-axis rotational vibration [shock] 

rotational mechanical vibration [shock] about more 
than one axis of the anatomical coordinate system 
of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a 
hand) 

4.10 
exposure time 

actual or notional duration (derived by a 
prescribed standard computational procedure) of 
human exposure to mechanical vibration (or 
repeated shock motion) treated as continuous in 
nature 



EXAMPLE 



The total duration of exposure deemed to have 
been undergone by a worker in a vibration 
environment during the working day. 

NOTE — A notional aggregate exposure time can be computed 
even in cases when the vibration has been intermittent, 
interrupted or of varied intensity, as when making several 
trips in different vehicles or using a power too between periods 
of other work during the period of evaluation. 

5 Terms relating to biodynamics 

5,1 

basicentric coordinate system 

right-handed orthogonal coordinate system 
originating at a point (or related to) a contact surface 
or a structure (for example, the floor of a vehicle) 
from which mechanical vibration [shock] is 
considered to enter the human body 

NOTE — Such a coordinate system may originate remotely, 
at some identifiable point (e.g. the centre of gravity of a 
vehicle or a ship) to which the measured motion of 
blodynamical concern may reliably be related by computational 
transformation. 



5.2 

anatomical coordinate system 

right-handed orthogonal coordinate system having 
an origin located within the human a human 
analogue body, and an orientation defined by fixed 
(skeletal) anatomical landmarks 

NOTES 

1 The term "biodynamic coordinate system" is sometimes 
used with the same meaning (and was so defined in the 
first edition of this International Standard). However, that 
term now has a generic meaning applying to any coordinate 
system, whether body-centered or not, that is used in 
biodynamics. "Anatomical coordinate system" is the preferred 
term for a coordinate system originating specifically within 
the human body or one of its parts (e.g. a hand) or human 
analogue body. 

2 The region or segment of the body for which an anatomical 
coordinate system is defined should be designated in 
parentheses whenever reported: for example, "anatomical 
coordinate system (hand)", "anatomical coordinate system 

(head)". 

3 Anatomical coordinate systems originate and are fixed 
in the corresponding body segment with respect to bony 
reference points, and so (unlike basicentric systems) move 
with that body segment during changes of body orientation 
or posture. Within this context, body segments are deemed 
to be anatomical elements acting in conformity with the laws 
of rigid-body mechanics to a demonstrably reasonable 
approximation (see ISO 8727). 

4 It is implicit in the definition of any anatomical coordinate 
system that the origin can be described in a precise 



IS 13281 
ISO 5805 



1999 
1997 



anthropometrical manner, with reference to identifiable skeletal 
reference points. 

5 The use of ill-defined, freely mobile or deformable parts 
of the body, such as the heart or the buttocks, as origins for 
anatomical coordinate systems leads to a lack of precision and 
repeatability in measuring vibration and shock motion of the 
body, and Is accordingly aeprecated. 

6 Mechanical vibration and shock inputs to the human or 
human analogue body may be described with reference to 
either an anatomical and/or geocentric or a basicentric coordinate 
system, depending on which is most appropriate to the measured 
response or to the evaluative procedure. As a general rule, 
however, the use of anatomical coordinate systems is preferred. 

5.3 
biodynamlcs 

science of the physical, biological and mechanical 
(inertial) properties and responses of the human 
or human analogue body, its tissues, organs, parts 
and systems, either with reference to external 
forces (externa! biodynamics), including self- 
generated vibration or in relation to the internal 
forces, produced by an interplay of external forces 
and the body's own mechanical activity (internal 
biodynamics) 

NOTE — The term biomechanics is sometimes used 
synonymously with biodynamics (etymologically, biodynamics 
is properly a subset of biomechanics). As a general rule, 
however, biomechanics in practice has come to mean mainly 
the science of the static physical properties (e.g.) material 
strength, elasticity, ranges of motion of tissues, organs and 
structures within the body, not necessarily with any consideration 
being given to the dynamic response. 

5.4 

contact surface 

surface or area (interface) through which 
mechanical vibration [shock] is considered to enter 
the human body or one of its parts (e.g. a hand) or 
human analogue body 

NOTE — The principal mechanical driving point of Impressed 
vibratory or shock motion may for many practical purposes 
be deemed to lie at the centre of a plane circumscribing the 
contact surface. 

5.5 

dummy 

anthropometric dummy 
manikin 

test device or mechanically realizable human 
analogue model that simulates one or more of the 
anthropometric, ballistic and dynamic 
characteristics of man 

NOTE — Various qualifying words are used to Indicate 
the purpose or nature of dummies. For example, an 



anthropomorphic dummy or manikin simulates the general 
appearance and external anatomical features (although not 
necessarily the innate properties) of the human body, an 
anthropometric dummy is constructed to reproduce the 
dimensions and ranges of posture of the human body (at 
a specified percentile of size or mass), an anthropodynamic 
dummy or manikin simulates with varying degrees of fidelity 
the dynamic characteristics of the body or its major 
segments in one or more axes, while a kinematic dummy 
simulates certain of the ballistic properties of the body 
(e.g.) the ranges or inertial movement of the limbs flailing 
under severe impact or aerodynamic loads) without 
necessarily reproducing at all realistically the human form 
or visible anatomy, or internal dynamic response, 

5.6 

hand-arm system 

human forelimb, considered as a vibration [shock] 
receiver 

5.7 

whole-body vibration [shock] 

WBV 

mechanical vibration [shock] transmitted to the 
body as a whole, usually through areas of the body 
(e.g. buttocks, soles of the feet, back) in contact 
with a supporting contact surface that is vibrating 
(or subjected to shock motion) 

5.8 

segmental vibration [shock] 

regional vibration (deprecated) 

local vibration (deprecated) 

topical vibration (deprecated) 

mechanical vibration [shock] applied or transmitted 

to a particular segment, area or region of the human 

body (usually distinguished from a whole-body 

input) such as the hand-arm system or the head 

5.9 

hand-transmitted vibration [shock] 

HTV 

hand-arm vibration 

HAV 

mechanical vibration [shock] directly applied or 

transmitted to the hand-arm system, commonly 

through the palm of the hand or through the fingers 

gripping a tool or workpiece 

6 Terms describing human reactions 
to vibration [shock] 

6.1 
comfort 

<biodynamics> subjective state of well-being or 
absence of mechanical disturbance in relation to 
the induced environment, (mechanical vibration or 
repetitive shock) 



IS 13281 
ISO 5805 



1999 
1997 



NOTE — Comfort connotes the absence of significantly 
disturbing or intrusive physical factors. It is a complex subjective 
entity depending upon the effective summation of all the physical 
factors present in the induced environment, as well as upon 
individual sensitivity to those factors and their summation, and 
such psychological factors as expectation. (For these reasons, 
for example, the same values of vibration that might be judged 
by most riders to be uncomfortable In a limousine may be 
judged acceptably comfortable in a bus.). 

6.2 

equal vibration sensation contour 

values of equal vibration sensation magnitude 
expressed as a function of frequency of vibration 

6.3 
habituation 

acclimatization (deprecated) 
adaptation (deprecated) 

<biodynamics> reduction or inhibition of a 
psychophysiological reaction (for example, motion 
sickness) to motion, vibration or shock as a result 
of continued or repeated exposure to the stimulus 

NOTE -- Popularly referred to, in the case of sea sickness, 
as "getting one's sea legs". 

6.4 

motion sickness 

kinetosis 

motion sickness syndrome (deprecated) 
vomiting (emesis), nausea or malaise (usually 
preceded by a variety of premonitory symptoms 
and clinical signs mediated by the autonomic 
nervous system) provoked by actual or perceived 
low-frequency passive motion of the body 

NOTE — The malady popularly takes a variety of names 
according to context, for example sea sickness, air sickness, 
car sickness. Recently, the term space (motion) sickness 
has been applied to nausea and vomiting experienced by 
astronauts and cosmonauts during weightless orbital flight. 
However, it remains debatable whether this condition is 
physiologically the same as motion sickness experienced in 
earthbound situations. 

6.5 motion sickness incidence 
MSI 

fraction (usually expressed as a percentage) of a 
group or population who succumb to motion 
sickness (usually defined as frank emesis) within 
a specified period or in specified conditions of 
provocative motion 

6.6 ride quality 

degree to which the whole subjective experience 
(including the motion environment and associated 
factors) or a journey or ensemble of journeys by 



vehicle is perceived and rated as favourable or 
unfavourable by passengers or operators 

6.7 

sopite syndrome 

inordinate sleepiness, lassitude or drowsy 
inattention induced by vibration, low-frequency 
oscillatory motion (e.g. ship motion) or general 
travel stress 

6.8 

vibration [shock] [impact] tolerance 

maximum severity of mechanical vibration [shock] 
[impact] tolerable by an individual or, on the 
average, by a specified group or population 
according to a specified vibration [shock] [impact] 
criterion 

6.9 

vibration white finger 
VWF 

vibration-induced white finger 
Raynaud's phenomenon of occupational 
origin 

traumatic vasospastic disease (deprecated) 
disturbance of the finger skin blood-flow, usually 
lasting as long as the inducing factor or factors are 
present and possibly progressing during this 
period, in some workers exposed to vibration from 
hand-held power tools and workpieces. in this 
disorder, after a latent interval following the 
beginning of the exposure, characteristic symptoms 
occur in one or more fingers. Their distribution 
generally agrees with the strongest vibration 
exposure, and the larger the exposure does the 
more f lingers tend to become affected. The typical 
manifestation of the disorder is attacks of well- 
demarcated, local blanching and accompanying 
numbness of parts of the finger skin in response 
to hand or whole-body exposure to cold 

NOTE — This is also known in the medical community as 
"occupational Raynaud's". Many more picturesque, names 
are given to the affliction popularly by workers who daily 
use hand-held vibration tools (e.g. "dead hand", wax finger"). 

6.10 

hand-arm vibration syndrome 

HAVS 

set of symptoms occurring in some workers using 
hand-held vibrating power tools; this syndrome is 
considered to comprise: 

a) blood circulatory disturbance in the finger skin 
(vibration white finger, Raynaud's 
phenomenon); 



IS 13281 ; 
ISO 5805 : 



1999 
1997 



b) neurological disturbance in the hand and 
forearnn (pain, paresthesia; elevation of 
sensory thresholds in the hands); 

c) disturbance in the locomotor apparatus (pain 
and reduction of muscular strength in the hand 
and forearm; elbow and wrist arthrosis with 
very low prevalence). 



NOTE — In its classical manifestation, the diagnosis of HAVS 
is made based on a history of blanching of one or more 
digits - often In response to cold - In workers using hand- 
held vibrating tools. 



7 Various terms 

7.1 

fatigue/decreased proficiency 

<biodynamics> fatigue and/or impairment of human 
activity or task performance caused by mechanical 
vibration [shock] 

NOTES 

1 TNs term is retained in the vocabulary for the time 
being because, while it is a concept not universally 
recognized or accepted by experts in the psychology of 
human task performance, it has been embodied in 
International Standards and cognate literature. The world 
"proficiency" in this term was in some respects an 
unfortunate choice, because, as normally used in English, 
it properly connotes not necessarily the efficiency with 
which a task in hand is accomplished (which may at the 
time be degraded by vibration or shock motion), but acquired 
skill or expertise, which is essentially retained by a trained 
individual regardless of the action of temporarily adverse 
environmental factors. 

2 This term is widely rendered incorrectly, in scientific 
literature and even in some English-language editions 
of biodynamic standards, as "fatigue-decreased 
proficiency". (This alternative form is deprecated.) Use 
of this hyphenated form wrongly implies that all task 
performance is impaired by "fatigue", that is, by time- 
dependent adverse physiological effects or vibration or 
shock motion. In fact, many kinds of human activity and 
task performance are degraded Instantaneously by the 
mechanical interference directly caused by vibration or 
shock motion, in a manner not necessarily related to 
any subsequent onset of physiological fatigue during 
continued exposure. 



7.2 

grip force 

gripping force 

gripping pressure (deprecated) 
strength of the grip applied by the worker's hand 
to a vibration [shock] generating hand-held tool 
or workpiece or any hand-held vibrating surface, 
e.g. a vehicle steering wheel 



7,3 

pushing force 

force applied by the worker's hand to the stock or 
other part of a vibration- [shock-] generating tool 
or workpiece to guide or advance it 

7.4 

hand-arm mechanical impedance 

hand-arm impedance 

complex ratio of force to velocity measurable at a 
point of vibration (usually the driving-point) of the 
hand-arm system 

NOTE — This term commonly means the mechanical driving- 
point impedance of the hand-arm system as a function of 
harmonic vibration frequency. Whenever reference is made 
to a hand-arm system transfer impedance, the distinction 
should be clearly made or implied. 

7.5 

human analogue 

human analogue model 

human surrogate (deprecated) 
<biodynamics> dynamically representative 
substitute for, or model of, specified inertial 
properties of the human body 

NOTES 

1 Human analogues may be: 

a) animals whose major anatomical features and inertial 
responses to mechanical vibration and shock (particularly 
in the trunk, head and neck) simulate those of man and 
can be equated with human inertial characteristics by 
appropriate scaling data derived empirically; 

b) human cadavers used, for example, in vehicle crash tests 
to simulate live human injury effects and kinematic 
mechanisms during severe shock motion (impact); 

c) mechanical dummied (manikins); or 

d) mathematical models (including computer simulations) of 
human dynamic or kinematic responses. 

2 The term human analogue is sometimes extended to 
include any physical representation of the dimensions, 
geometry of material properties of the human body. 
Circumspection must be exercised, however, when interpreting 
data from tests using such analogues for biodynamic purposes, 
lest the verisimilitude of the model's representation of the 
dynamic properties of the living body be fallacious. (Even 
human cadavers, while visibly human material, may lack 
certain of the living body's elastic and other inertial properties 
and hence provide an inexact or unrepresentative simulation 
of the living human biodynamic response to force and motion 
inputs.) 

7.6 

Impulsive vibration 

<biodynamics> quasi-steady-state or sustained 
transient vibration generated by rapidly repetitive 



shock motion, when the duration of each shock 
and the intervals separating the shocks are short 
in comparison with the damped transient response 
or the natural periods of vibration of the receiver 



IS 13281 
ISO 5805 



1999 
1997 



2-axis, defined by the anatomical coordinate 
System (pelvis), is rotated posteriorly to an angle 
between 15° and 75° from the geocentric or 
notional vertical 



NOTES 

1 Impulsiveness, as defined here, is commonly characteristic 
(as often is strong periodicity) of hand-transmitted vibration 
generated in hand-heid reciprocating power tools designed 
to deliver a high-frequency series of impacts to a workpiece 
(e.g. chipping hammers, concrete breakers, pneumatic 
nailers). 

2 In many situations, the distinction between impulsive 
vibration and repetitive shock may be debatable and a mater 
of semantic usage. This is so particularly when a repetitive 
shock excitation is strongly periodic and when the repetition 
frequency falls within a relatively high frequency range of 
concern with regard to the human receiver. The latter term 
(see 7.13) generally implied human whole-body exposure 
{e.g. when riding along a continuously bumpy road or flying 
through small-cell air turbulence), whereas, as mentioned 
in note 1 of subclause 7.6, the term "impulsive vibration" 
is usually applied to the hand-transmitted mechanical output 
of high-speed reciprocating power tools. 

7.7 

interrupted exposure 

discontinuous exposure 

human vibration exposure, of quasi-steady-state 
or continuous vibration exposure (usually involving 
hand-transmitted vibration in an occupational 
context), which is interrupted by vibration-free 
periods having a specified time-course (times of 
occurrence and duration) 

NOTE — The antonym of this term is uninterrupted (or 
continuous) exposure. 

7.8 

latent interval 

latent period 

latency 

interval (which may range from a few weeks to 
many years) between a person's first exposure to 
a hazardous agent and the first manifestation of 
symptoms related to exposure 

7.9 

long-duration vibration [repetitive shock] 

exposure 

<biodynamics> continuous vibration [repetitive 
shock] affecting man and lasting for more than one 

hour 

7.10 
reclining 

<biodynamics> reference posture, between seated 
and supine, in which the whole-body anatomical 



7.11 
recumbent 

lying (deprecated) 

<biodynamics> reference posture in which the 
Vv'hole body anatomical z-axis is rotated between 
75° and 90° from the vertical in any direction (e.g. 
supine, lateral, or prone) 

NOTES 

1 The term "lying" is deprecated because of its amoiguous 
meaning in English. 

2 In recumbent postures, substantial fractions of the weight 
of the person may be distributed through the upper body and 
the limbs, but the impressed vibration or shock may nevertheless 
be deemed still to act through the pelvis or the body's centre 
of mass. 

7.12 

reference posture 

<biodynamics> notional orientation and posture of 
the body considered as the receiver of whole-body 
mechanical vibration [shock] 

7.13 

repetitive shock 

repeated shock 

<biodynamics> series of brief (less than one 
second) shock motions or bursts of quasi-steady- 
state vibration affecting man 

See also 7.6. 

NOTES 

1 Shocks repeated regularly and more frequently than once 
per second may for many purposes be regarded and analysed 
for biodynamic purposes as a form of continuous vibration. 

2 Shocks may be symmetric or asymmetric about the time 



7.14 

weighted acceleration 
weighted vibration 
weighted acceleration level 

weighted vibration level (deprecated) 
<biodynamics> value or set of values of vibrational 
or repetitive shock acceleration affecting man that 
has been subjected to a computational or signal- 
conditioning operation to reflect human response 
characteristics as a function of vibration frequency 
or exposure time 



IS 13281 : 1999 
ISO 5805: 1997 



(MOTE — When the world "level" is included in the term, 
reference to a standard acceleration reference value is implied 
(see ISO 1683). 

7.15 

burst of mechanical vibration affecting man 

discrete and continuous (but usually short-lived 
series of reversed of vibration at a driving-point of 
the hunnan body or a body segment 

NOTES 

1 A burst of vibration affecting man may typically contain 
a quasi-harmonic vibration of exponentially decaying amplitude 
(popularly, "ringing") following a shock input to a resonant 
system impinging on man, a fusiform envelope of rising and 
falling amplitude (for example, vibration of bridge deck excited 
by the passage of a heavy vehicle), or a short-lived random 
motion such as the response of an aircraft to an isolated 
gust of air turbulence, or of a ship's hull due to the motion 
in heavy seas. 

2 A burst as a rule is of short duration in relation to most 
human relations. The point at which a burst of vibration is 
of sufficient persistence to be treated as a continuous vibration 
of short duration will depend upon the circumstances and 
the human response elicited. 

7.16 

intermittent vibration affecting man 

repeated periods of continuous vibration separated 
by intervals in which the vibration ceases or varies 
substantially in nnagnitude and/or character 

NOTE — The term frequently (but not necessarily) connotes 
conditions in which the resumption of vibration is abrupt or 
irregular, and accordingly may induce startle or annoyance 
in the human receiver. 

7.17 

vibroacoustic habitability 

the acceptable freedom, or mainly large vehicles 
or structures occupied for extended periods or 
continuously by man, from adverse conditions of 
combined acoustical noise and mechanical 
vibration 

NOTES 

1 Vibroacoustic habitability may be evaluated according to 
the criteria of subjective disturbance, interference with human 
activity or performance, occupational safety and health, or 
any combination of these. 

2 Extended periods may as a rule be deemed to be periods 
of exposure (especially occupational exposure) lasting at least 



one hour and repeated on a daily or regular working basis, 
or continuous periods or exposure lasting one or more days, 
in whk:h the person affected necessarily spends resting, sleeping 
and other living time as well as working time in vibroacoustic 
environment (for example, abroad sea-going ships, space 
missions, long-range aircraft, off-shore rigs, and in institutional 
or other buildings constantly exposed to traffic or aircraft noise). 

7.18 

equivalent torque 

<biodynamics> torque generated between 
anatomical segments that is consistent with the 
mass distribution properties of the segments, the 
location of the articulation between the segments, 
and the kinematic motion of the segments 

7.19 

occipital condylar point 

mid-point on a line tangent to the most inferior 
prominences of the occipital condyles 

NOTE — The tangential positions of this imaginary line are 
usually determinable from radiographical anthropometry. 

7.20 

human impact 

impact acceleration 

crash (force) 

short-duration acceleration (deprecated) 

<biodynamics> shock or shock motion applied to 

man 

NOTES 

1 "Shock" and "Shock motion" are defined in ISO 2041. 

2 The term human impact as used in biodynamics usually 
connotes a severity of shock excitation of the human frame 
of sufficient magnitude to cause pain, injury or significant 
physiological distress in the single event, of the kind caused 
by accidents or military action. It may accordingly be 
distinguished from mild and/or repetitive shocks of moderate 
magnitude (bumps) mostly experienced in vehicle ride or 
as structure-borne disturbances in buildings, and associated 
with transient discomfort, annoyance or interruption of 
human living and working activities of an everyday kind. 
A domain of intermediate severity and hazard may also 
be distinguishable, including repeated mechanical assault 
of the kind affecting people abroad rough-riding vehicles 
and carrying a risk of cumulative damage in the course 
of chronic occupational exposure (e.g. of tractor and truck 
drivers, mobile heavy equipment operators) or excessive 
recreational exposure (e.g. aboard off-road vehicles, power- 
beats, snowmobiles). 



IS 13281 
ISO 5805 



1999 
1997 



Annex A 

(informative) 
Bibliography 



[1] ISO 1503:1977, Geometrical orientation and 
directions of movements. 

[2] ISO 1683:1983, Acoustics — Preferred 
reference quantities for acoustic levels, 

[3] ISO 2631-1:— ^\ Mechanical vibration and 
shock — Evaluation of human exposure to 
whole-body vibration — Part 1: General 
requirements. 

[4] ISO 5349:1986, Mechanical vibration — 
Guidelines for the measurement and the 
assessment of human exposure to hand- 
transmitted vibration. 

[5] ISO 5353:1995, Earth-moving machinery, and 
^ tractors and machinery for agriculture and 
forestry — Seat index point. 



[6] ISO 5982:1981, Vibration and shock — 
Mechanical driving point impedance of the 
human body 

[7] ISO 7962:1987, Mechanical vibration and 
shock — Mechanical transmissibility of the 
human body in z direction. 

[8] ISO 8727: —^\ Mechanical vibration and shock 

— Human exposure — Biodynamic coordinate 
systems. 

[9] ISO 9996:— 2\ Mechanical vibration and shock 

— Disturbance to human activity and 
performance — Classification. 



1) To be published. (Revision of ISO 2631-1:1985) 
'> To be published. 



IS 1^01 
ISO 5805 



ISM 
1967 



Alphabetical index 



acclimatization 6.3 
adaptation 6.3 

anatonr^ica! coordinate systenn 5.2 
anthropometric dummy 5.5 



B 

oasicentric coordinate system 
biodynamics 5.3 
building vibration Ishockl 3.1 
burst of mechanleai vibration 
affecting man 7.15 



5.1 



comfort 6. 1 
contact surface 
crash 7.20 



5.4 



directional vibration [shock] 4.1 
discontinuous exposure 7.7 
dummy 5.5 



equal vibration sensation 

contour 6.2 
equivalent torque 7.18 
exposure time 4.10 



fatigue/decreased proficiency 7 . 1 
footfall 3.2 
fore-and-aft vibration 4.2 



grip force 7.2 
gripping force 7.2 
gripping pressure 7.2 



human analogue 7.5 
human analogue model 7.5 
human impact 7.20 
human surrogate 7.5 



I 

impact acceleration 7.20 
impulsive vibration 7.6 
indirect vibration 3.3 
intermittent vibration affecting 

man 7.16 
interrupted exposure 7.7 



kinetosis 6.4 



latency 7.8 

latent interval 7.8 

latent period 7.8 

limb vibrator 3.4 

local vibration 5.8 

long-duration vibration [repetitive 

shockl exposure 7.9 
longitudinal vibration 4.2, 4.4 
lying 7.11 



M 

manikin 5.5 

motion sickness 6.4 

motion sickness incidence 6.5 

motion sickness syndrome 6.4 

MSI 6.5 

multi-axis rotational vibration 

Ishockl 4.9 
multidirectional translational vibration 

[shockl 4.5 



O 
occipital condylar point 7.19 



repetitive shock 7.13 
ride 3.5 
ride quality 6.6 
roll 4.6 



segmental vibration [shockl 5.8 

segmental vibrator 3.4 

L elf-applied vibration 3.6 

self-generated vibration 3.7 

side-to-side vibration 4.3 

short-duration acceleration 7.20 

shunt 4.2 

sopite syndrome 6.7 

surge 4.2 

Sway 4.3 



topical vibration 5,8 
transverse vibration 4.2, 4.3 
traumatic vasospastic desease 6.9 



V 

vertical vibration 4.4 
vibration [shock] criterion 3.9 
vibration-induced white finger 6.9 
vibration [shock] limit 3.8 
vibration rating 3.10 
vibration [shock] [impact! 

tolerance 6.8 
vibration white finger 6.9 
vibratory communication 3.1 1 
vibroacoustic habitability 7.17 
VWF 6.9 



W 

WBV 5.7 

weighted acceleration 7. 1 4 
weighted acceleration level 7.14 
weighted vibration 7.14 
weighted vibration \eve] 7. 1 4 
whole-body vibration [shock] 5.7 



H 

habituation 6.3 
hand-arm impedance 7.4 
hand-arm mechanical 

impedance 7.4 
hand-arm system 5.6 
hand-arm vibration 5.S 
hand-arm vibration syndrome 6.10 
hand-transmitted vibration 

[shock] 5.9 
HAV 5.9 
HAVS 6.10 
heave 4.4 
HTV 5.9 



pitch 4.7 
pushing force 



7.3 



Raynaud's phenomenon of 
occupational origin 6.9 
''eclinlng 7.10 
recumbent 7.11 
reference posture 7. 1 2 
regional vibration 5.8 
repeated shock 7.13 



jc-axis vibration [shockl 4.2 



:y-axis vibration [shock] 4.3 
yaw 4.8 



z-axis vibration [shock] 4.4 



10 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these pubHcations may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of ladian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. LM 04 (0392). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional (3ffices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/1 4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHW^AR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PLTNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



(-337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 91 20 

|60 38 43 

160 20 25 

r235 02 16,235 04 42 

1235 15 19,235 23 15 

r832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



