**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12079 (1987) : Recommendations for packaging, transport 
and storage of asbestos [CED 53: Cement Matrix Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



rSM2079- 1987 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

PACKAGING, TRANSPORT AND 

STORAGE OF ASBESTOS 



UDC 677"511(H)4 3/4 : 658-3821 



® Gupjrighi 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2 AFAR UAKG 

htEW uKiift niKxia 
Gr 3 Oil^htr 19B7 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

PACKAGING, TRANSPORT AND 

STORAGE OF ASBESTOS 

Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDC 2 

Chairman Representing 

Db H, C. Visvesvaraya National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 

New Delhi 

Members 

Additional Director Stand- Research, Designs & Standards Organization 
ARDS ( B & S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Director Stand- 
ards ( B & S ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. p. Banerjee Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shri Harish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 
Shri-S. K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Chief Engineer ( BD ) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 

Shri J. C. Basur ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Designs ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Executive Engineer (D)-III ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Research )- Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 

fWm-DlRECTOR 

Research Officer ( Con- 
crete Technology ) ( Alternate ) 
Director A. P. Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 

Joint Director ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 

New Delhi 
Chief Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( GMDD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( GMDD-I ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Ghanekab Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri S. Gopinath The India Cements Ltd, Madras 

Shri T. Tamilakeran ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



©Copyright 1987 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

{Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Sum A. K, GxjPTA Hyderabad Industries Limited, Hyderabad 

Shbi p. J. Jagus Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Dr a. K. Ghattebjee ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N, G. Joshi Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi R. L. Kapoob Ministry of Transport ( Department of Surface 

Transport ) ( Roads Wing ), New Delhi 
Shbi R. K, Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Laha The Institution of Engineers { India ), Calcutta 

Shbi B. T. Unwalla ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. K, MtTLLiCK National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 

New Delhi 
Shbi S. N. Pal M. N, Dastur and Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi Biman Dasgitpta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H, S. Pasbicha Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi Y. R. Phull Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central 

Road Research Institute ) CSIR ), New Delhi 
Shbi M. R. Ghattebjee Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New 

( Alternate ) Delhi 

De Mohan Rat Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Koorkee 
Db S. S. Rehsi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. V. Ramana Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Db K. C. Narang ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Madras 
Db a. G. Madhava Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G, Ramdas Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Dr a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shbi J. SeK Gtjpta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi T. N. Subba Rao Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S, A. Reddi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A, U. RijhsiKGhani Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shbi G. S. Sharma {.Alternate ) 
Shbi H. S. SatyaNabayana Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Shbi V, R. Kotnis ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Shbi K. R. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
ShbiR. K. Sinha Development Commissioner for Cement Industry 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Shri S. S. Miglani ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineeb Public Works Department, Government of 

( Designs ) Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineeb ( SMR 
Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. Swaroop Orissa Cement Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi H. Bhattaohabya. ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Guha Thakurta Gannon Dunkerley & Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. P. Sankabnarayanan ( Alternate } 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shbi N. C, Bandyopadhyay 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 

( Continued on page 10 ) 

2 



IS ! 12079 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

PACKAGING, TRANSPORT AND 

STORAGE OF ASBESTOS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 30 July 1987j after the draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

0.2 In recent years there has been a growing awareness that exposure to 
asbestos dust can have harmful effects on the health of workers. In order 
to give guidance on how the risk of exposure to asbestos dust can be 
prevented, controlled or minimized, it was felt necessary to lay down 
some standards regarding safe use of different products containing asbestos, 
improving conditions in workplaces, preventive measures, protection and 
supervision of health of workers, packaging, transport and disposal of 
asbestos and asbestos waste, etc. This standard lays down the recom- 
mendations for packaging, transport and storage of asbestos. 

0»3 In the formulation of this standard Jdue weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the 
field in this country. This has been met by deriving .assistance from 
'ILO Codes of practice: Safety in the Use of Asbestos, 1984Vpublished by 
the International Labour Office, Geneva. 

0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on safety in 
handling and use of asbestos. Other standards in the series already 
formulated and under preparation are as follows: 

IS : 11450-1986 Method for determination of airborne asbestos fibre 
concentration in work environment by light nxicroscopy 
( membrane filter method ) 

IS : 11451-1986 Recommendations for safety and health require- 
ments relating to occupational exposure to asbestos 

IS : 11767-1986 Recommendations for cleaning of premises and 
plants using asbestos fibres 

IS : 11768-1986 Recommendations for disposal of asbestos waste 
material 

3 



IS : 1Z079 - 1987 

IS : 11769 ( Part 1 )-1987 Guidelines for safe use of products con- 
taining asbestos: Part 1 Asbestos cement products 

IS : 11769 ( Part 2 )-1986 Guidelines for safe use of products con- 
taining asbestos: Part 2 Friction materials 

IS : 11769 ( Part 3 )-I986 Guidelines for safe use of products con- 
taining asbestos: Part 3 Non-cement asbestos products other than 
friction materials 

IS : 11770 ( Part 1 )-1987 Recommendations for control of emission 
of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing products containing 
asbestos: Part 1 Asbestos cement products 

IS : 11770 ( Part 2 )-l986 Recommendations for control of emission 
of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing products containing 
asbestos: Part 2 Friction materials 

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 )-1987 Recommendations for control of emission 
of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing products containing 
asbestos: Part 3 Non-cement asbestos products other than friction 
materials 

IS : 12078-1978 Recommendations for personal protection of 
workers engaged in handling asbestos 

IS : 12080-1987 Recommendations for local exhaust ventilation 
systems in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos 

IS : 12081 ( Part 1 )-1987 Recommendations for pictorial warning 
signs and precautionary notices for asbestos and products contain- 
ing asbestos: Part 1 Workplaces 

IS : 12081 ( Part 2 )-1987 Recommendations for pictorial warning 
signs and precautionary notices for asbestos and products contain- 
ing asbestos: Part 2 Asbestos and its products 

IS : 12082 ( Part 1 )-1987 Recommendations for control of asbestos 
emission: Part 1 Mining of asbestos ore 

IS : 12082 ( Part 2 ) Recommendations for control of asbestos 
emission: Part 2 Milling of asbestos ( under preparation ) 

Method for determination of asbestos concentration in water ( under 
preparation ) 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the recommendations for packaging, trans- 
port and storage of asbestos fibres so as to prevent the release of airborne 
asbestos fibre during these operations. 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

2. OBJECT 

2,1 The objects of this standard are as follows: 

a) To prevent the generation of airborne asbestos dust and its 
release to the environment in the process of handling of asbestos 
fibre during transit and at storage; 

b) To ensure safe arrival of asbestos fibre at its final destination 
without any spillage; and 

c) To reduce the exposure of workers to airborne asbestos fibres. 

3. INITIAL PACKING OF FIBRE IN BAGS 

3.1 Type of Bag — Asbestos fibres shall always be packed in imperme- 
able woven and coated or lined polyethylene or polypropylene bags. 

3.1.1 Plastic material used for bags shall incorporate an ultra-violet 
inhibitor to protect the bags from sunlight and thus prevent deterioration 
during trans-shipment. 

3.2 Packing 

3.2.1 The bags shall be closed by either stitching or heat-sealing. 
Stitching shall be not less than two stitches per centimetre. Where 
plastic bags are recycled, polyethylene tape or rayon cord shall be used 
for sewing, if heat-sealing is not possible. 

3.2.2 All bags shall be printed with the pictorial warning sign and 
precautionary notice as given in IS : 12081 ( Part 2 )-1987*. 

4. PACKAGING FOR TRANSPORTATION 
4.1 General 

4.1.1 Packaging for transport shall eliminate the handling of individual 
bags. 

4.1.2 All packed bags shall be unitized in an interlocked fashion 
for the transport of small tonnages in break bulk. 

4.1.3 The bags shall be securely unitized by using such techniques 
as strapping, glue locking, and shrink or stretch wrapping. 

4.1.4 The size and design of the units shall be made to suit the asbestos 
bags and the type of consignment involved. The actual dimensions of 
the unit shall be such that the bags slightly overhang the wooden pallet 
on all sides. 



♦Recommendations for pictorial warning signs and precautionary notices for 
asbestos and products containing asbestos: Part 2 Asbestos and its products. 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

4.1.5 The gross height of two units one over another shall not exceed 
2'2in. 

4.1.6 The pallet shall be a 4-way eritry pallet {see Fig. 1 ) and shall be 
integrated with the unit with 4-way strapping or any other effective 
method. 



^ 



=5 



,1 1 I I ^i^^ji^ 

111 1,1 [T 



e 



3 



Fig. 1 4-Way Entry Pallet 
4.2 Packaging in Preslung Units 

4.2.1 This mode of packing shall apply to all pressure packed asbestos 
bags which can form a stable and firm base on their own. 

4.2.2 One tonne of preslung unit shall contain 20 bags of 50 kg each 
and 4 rows of 5 bags pattern ( see Fig. 2 ). 

4.2.3 Layer to layer gluing of bags shall be done by palletizing 
adhesive followed by 2 layers of stretch wrap around four sides of unit. 

4.2.4 The unit shall be slinged after top cover, bottom card-board and 
bottom cover are added. Finally, the unit shall be stretch wrapped 
over slings by another 2 to 3 layers of stretch wrap. 

4.2.5 The four sling loops at four top corners of units shall be retained 
on top of unit with an interconnecting elastic band to avoid fetching of 
sling loops by workers. The over lapping of stretch wrapping on top 
4 edges also keeps the sling loops on top of unit without dropping on to 
sides of unit ( see Fig. 2 ). 

Note — The preslung units are placed on pallets for further handling by forklift 

truck. 

4.2.6 The sling shall have a minimum lift web of 3*75 cm wide and 
breaking load 1 450 kg and clinch web of 1"87 cm wide and breaking 
load 450 kg. Lift and clinch webs shall be made of industrial grade 
polyester or nylon. The lift capacity of sling shall be 2*0 tonnes at factor 
of safety of 5. 

4.2.7 To protect the bags from damage and bring|stability to the 
unit, a plastic cover shall be used over the unit. This shall be applied 
as shrink or stretch wrapping or shall be strapped into position. The 
plastic cover shall incorporate an ultra-violet inhibitor. 

6 



IS : 12079 - 1987 




Fig. 2 One Tonne Preslung Unit 



4.3 Palletized Packaging 

4.3.1 This mode of packing shall apply to all semi-pressure packed 
asbestos bags where the bags on their own are not able to provide a 
stable and firm base. 

4.3.2 The bags shall be palletized in an interlocked fashion and the 
bags shall be securely attached to the pallet by using such techniques as 
strapping, glue locking, and shrink or stretch wrapping. 

4.3.3 The pallet shall be a 4-way entry pallet and shall be integrated 
with the unit with 4-way strapping. The size of the pallet shall be such 
that the bags overhang on all sides to prevent adjacent bags from being 
damaged during the course of handling. 

4.3.4 Ten-bag bale ( depending on bag size and stability) shall be 
made of 2-way strapping taking care that strapping does not cut into the 
bags. These bales shall be arranged to form one tonne unit with 20 bags. 

4.3.5 The bales are 4-way strapped through the pallet, again taking 
care that the strapping does not cut into the bags. 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

4.3.6 A plastic cover shall be placed covering top and sides from top 
and shrunk to hold the bags firmly. The plastic cover shall incorporate 
an ultra-violet inhibitor. 

4.3.7 When such packing has to be transported, they shall also be 
preslung to avoid handling damages. 

5. CONTAINERIZED SHIPMENTS 

5.1 For containerized shipments preslung units described in 4.2 or 
palletized units described in 4.3 shall be followed. 

5.2 When preslung units are shipped in containers, every two units 
stacked one over another shall have one 4-way entry pallet below the 
bottom unit to facilitate destuffing. 

6. TRANSPORTATION 

6.1 Where practicable, unit loads other than in very large shipments 
shall be stacked on pallets and carried in closed road vehicles or railway 
wagons for overland shipment and in closed containers for overseas 
shipment. 

6.1.1 For inland transport from mines to factories, impermeable 
bags ( see 3.1 ) with non-pressure packing may be individually handled 
and carried in covered vehicles. 

6.2 Loading and unloading shall be carried out by forklift truck or by 
some other equally effective method, to prevent the handling of single 
bag and, therefore, the risk of damaging the bags. 

6.3 Hooks and other sharp equipment shall not be used on bags or unit 
loads. 

6.4 Loads carried in containers shall be so stacked as to reduce the risk 
of damage to bags from the wooden pallets. 

6-5 All vehicles used for the transport of asbestos shall be properly 
cleaned after they have been unloaded. 

6.6 A vacuum cleaner shall be used for cleaning. Where this is not 
practicable surfaces shall be thoroughly wetted before being swept. 

6.7 When the wrapping of a bag is damaged and spillage of asbestos is 
likely, suitable protective clothing and respiratory equipment shall be 
provided and worn. 

7. DAMAGED LOADS AND BAGS 

7.1 Suitable adhesive tape shall be available for repair of damaged loads. 

7.2 Damaged loads shall be repaired immediately. 

8 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

7.3 Damaged bags, which are not part of unit loads, shall be repaired 
with tape; and where this is considered inadequate, the bags shall be 
placed in another impermeable bag which shall be sealed and clearly 
identified ^before being forwarded. 

8. STORAGE 

8.1 Before final storage, all units shall be carefully inspected for clean- 
liness and for damage. 

8.2 All bags shall be stacked on pallets. 

8.3 All damaged bags shall be repaired immediately. 

8.4 All units having loose asbestos or other debris on them shall be 
cleared as soon as possible by vacuum equipment or by some other 
means which causes no secondary dust generation. The workers shall 
be provided with approriate protective clothing and respiratory equip- 
ment where required ( see IS : 12078-1987* ), 

8.5 Final storage shall be in a warehouse. In case of outside storage 
under unavoidable circumstances, units shall be protected by tarpaulins, 
black plastic sheeting or other suitable covering. 

8.6 Receptacles/pallets containing raw fibre received into the workplace 
shall be transferred to a suitable storage area [without delay. Such storage 
areas should be positioned or arranged to ensure that the receptacles 
containing the raw fibres are not liable to damage. 

9. DISPOSAL OF PACKING MATERIAL 

9.1 Packing materials shall be disposed of in accordance with the 
provisions given in IS : 11768-1968t. 



♦Recommendations for personal protection of workers engaged in handling asbestos. 
fRecommendations for disposal of asbestos waste material. 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Asbestos Cement Products Subcommittee, BDC 2:3 

Convener 

Dr S. K. Chopra 

S-436 Greater Kailash 

New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shri S. K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shki p. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Basu Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri T. N. Oboveja ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Bhandabi Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. R, Natarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Chakrabobtv Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. C. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director Stanbarbs Research, Designs & Standards Organization 
( B & S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Assistant Director Stan- 
dards ( B & S )-II ( Alternate ) 
Director, Engineering Geology Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 
Division I 

Shri S. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ganapathy Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras 

jGeneral Manager ( Cement ) Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar 

Shbi D. N. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. GoeNka Sarbamangala Manufacturing Co, Calcutta 

Shbi I. P. Goenka ( Alternate ) 
Shri Srinivasan N. Iyer Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. G. TJpADHYAYA ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Kalani Saurabh Construction Co, Indore 

Dr KaIiYAN Das Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri K. D. Dhariyal ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col Kamlesh Pbakash Engineer-in-Chief*s Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. R. Bhambani ( Alternate ) 
Shri Harshad R. Oza Flowel Asbestos Products, Ahmadabad 

Shri V. Pattabhi Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri A. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. Raghavendra National Council for Cement and Building 

Materials, New Delhi 
Dr A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Surveyor op Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works ( CZ ) 

Surveyor or Works ( CZ ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. A. Swamy Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 

( Continued on page 11) 

10 



IS : 12079 - 1987 

( Continued from page 10 ) 

Panel for Safety in Handling and Use of Asbestos, BDG 2 : 3/P2 

Convener Representing 

Shri D. K. Biswas Department of Bio-Technology ( Ministry of Science 

and Technology ), New Delhi 

Members 

Shbi B. K, Banerjee Sundaram-Abex Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Pakdabinath ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G, Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Ghakbaborty Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shbi S. G. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Db G. G. Day ay In personal capacity ( 7172, Varma Nagar^ Old 

Nagardas Road, Andkeri East, Bombay ) 
Dibectob National Institute of Occupational Health, 

Ahmadabad 
Db S. K. Dave ( Alternate) 
Shbi S. GaiJapathy Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras 

Shbi S, A. Bhima Raja ( Alternate ) 
Db H. N. Gupta Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and 

Labour Institutes, Bombay 
Shbi V. S. Sasikumab ( Alternate) 
Shbi Sbinivasan N. Iyeb Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi T. S. Pbadhan ( Alternate ) 
Bbig D. B. Kapoob ( Retd ) Asbestos Information Centre ( India ), New Delhi 

Db J. L. Kaw Industrial Toxicology Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Lucknow 
Db N. K. Mbhbotra { Alternate ) 
Db M. V, Nanothi National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Db D. M. Dhabmabhikari ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. K, Pandey Department of Environment, New Delhi 

Shbi V. Pattabhi Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Db S. P, Vivek Chandba 
Rao ( Alternate ) 
Db N. Raghavendba National Council for Cement and Building 

Materials, New Delhi 
Shbi Rattan Lal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S, Ramaswamy Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi A. Homem ( Alternate ) 
Db A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shbi D. N. Mat hub ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. K. Shaban Directorate General of Mines Safety ( Ministry of 

Labour ), Dhanbad 
Db D. K. Sbivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Navnit Talwab Reinz Tal-Broz ( Pvt ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Sharma ( Alternate ) 



11 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS ) 
Base Units 



Qqantitt 


Unit 


Stmbol 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mass 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


s 


Electric current 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 


Supplementary Units 






Qxr^^NTITY 


"Unit 


Symbol 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 


Derived Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Force 


newt on 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 



1 N =^ 1 kg.m/s^ 
1 J = 1 N.m 
1 W = 1 J/s 
1 Wb == 1 V.S 
1 T =* 1 Wb/m» 
1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-») 
1 S -= 1 A/V 
1 V -= 1 W/A 
1 Pa = 1 N/m' 



