***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10974-3 (1984) : Code for hygienic condition for 
production, transport, storage and ditribution of 
indigenous milk products. Part 3: Coagulated products 
CHHANA and CHHANA based sweetmeats [FAD 15: Food Hygiene, 
Safety Management and Other Systems] 



C^IJIi^^^JCsS^ffill^vbJag^TN^^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; 10974 ( Parts ) - iaS4 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

hidkm Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 3 COAGULATED PRODUCTS 
CHHANA AND CHHANA BASED SWEETMEATS 



UDC 637'325O04'3; 4 : 613 6 




® Copyright iyj*5 

JNPIAIN STANDARDS l!NSTITUTION 
MAbJAl;: BHAVAN. ^ BAHADUit SHAH ZAt^Aft MARG 

MEW DELHI H0002 

Gf 3 January \^%5 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 3 COAGULATED PRODUCTS 
CHHANA AND CHHANA BASED SWEETMEATS 

Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, AFDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

Dr a. N. Rai Chowdhury National Institute of Communicable Diseases 

( DGHS ). New Delhi 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection 
TO Government of India ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. p. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Izatnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Dr ( Shrimati ) Indira Chakraborty All India Institute of Hygiene & Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Shri Om P, Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR), Mysore 
Executive Health Officer Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 

Bombay 
Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
CoL O. p. Kapur Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri S. Kasturi Government Analyst to the Governmeat of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri S. J. Kekobad C«<ibury India Ltd, Bombay 

Maj-Gen Kewal Krishna Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi 
Col N. L. Sachdbva { Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr ( Shrimati ) R. Sankaran Defence Food Research Laboratory, Ministry 

of Defence (R&D), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati ) D. Vijaya Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. K. Sen Northern Railway, New Delhi 

Shri G. D. Sharma Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies 

Dr B. K. Nandi ( Alternate) 
Col L. R. Sharma Health Department, Municipal Corporation 

of Delhi, Delhi 
Dr a. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. A. SiDDiQi Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & 

Fats, Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, 
New Delhi 
Shri S. M. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 
Dr S. C. Sarma ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. a. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N, K. Grover 

Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcommittee, AFDC 36 : 5 
Convener 

Dr R. S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
TO Government of India Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate) 
Dr N. p. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Izatnagar 
Dr S. B, Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Brahme Deonar Abbatoire, Bombay 

Dr D. N. Gore ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. R. Choudhuri Department of Food and Technology 

Bio-chemical Engineering, Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 
Shri C. T. Dwarakanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

( Continued on page 12 ) 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 3 COAGULATED PRODUCTS 
CHHANA AND CHHANA BASED SWEETMEATS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 5 March 1984, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and 
Food Products Division Council. 

0,2 Indigenous milk products, such as KHOA, KHOA based sweets, 
DAHJ, CHHANA RASOGOLLA, are produced in large quantities in 
India. It has been often observed that proper hygienic conditions are 
not maintained in production, transport, storage and distribution of 
these indigenous milk products and there is a considerable scope for 
improving the hygienic conditions in these respects. Unless proper 
hygienic norms are adopted, the consumption of such indigenous milk 
products may be a potential health hazard to the consumer, 

0.3 As the process of production, handling, transport, storage and 
distribution of the various indigenous milk products differ very widely, 
codes of hygienic conditions for different milk products are being pub- 
lished in parts. The first part covers KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 
Part 2 covers DAHI, Part 4 covers KULFI and Part 5 covers SHRI- 
KHAND. 

0.4 CHHANA (also called PANEER in some parts of country) refers to 
the milk product prepared by the acid coagulation of whole or skim 
milk, cow or buffalo or a combination thereof, at its near-boiling tem- 
perature followed by removal of whey by straining. The acids commonly 
used are lactic or citric in both natural ( citrous fruits juices, whey from 
earlier batches of preparation, sour milk ) and chemical forms. It 
constitutes one of the two chief bases (the other being, KHOA, KHAVA 
or MAVA ) for the preparation of indigenous milk sweetmeats, such as, 
RASOGOLLA, SANDESH, KHEER-PANEER ( CHHANA KHEER ), 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

PANTOOAH, CHHANA MURGI, etc. Conventionally, CHHANA is 
prepared in open mild steel vessels in which just boiled milk is trans- 
ferred and the coagulant promptly and slowly added with gentle stirring 
with a laddie to mix it properly and left for a clear coagulation to take 
place. The CHHANA lumps are then strained through a clean muslin 
cloth to drain away the whey. There is no protection against contami- 
nation from extraneous matter, such as dust, ash, flies and posts. It is 
packaged improperly using leaf or ordinary paper ( including news- 
paper ), lined bamboo baskets or earthenware vessels for overnight 
transportation. Since CHHANA has fairly high fat and protein content, 
contains minerals and fat soluble vitamins A & D with low sugar content, 
it provides a good medium for growth of many microorganism resulting 
in early deterioration of the product. However, because of less sugar 
and added acid for coagulation, its shelf life is about 3 to 4 days at 5°C 
to 10°C in a well wrapped condition. It is, therefore, necessary to protect 
the commodity during production, transport, storage and distribution 
from extraneous contamination to maintain, and prevent its original 
characteristics from deterioration. This standard provides guidelines 
for maintaining optimum hygienic conditions in production, storage and 
distribution of CHHANA and CHHANA based sweetmeats. 

0.5 It is expected that this standard would be of considerable assistance 
to local health authorities in enforcing proper hygienic conditions in 
the interest of public health. 

0.6 This code is subject to the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and rules framed thereunder as amended from 
time to time and other local regulations. 

0.7 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been 
provided by National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code ( Part 3 ) presribes the hygienic conditions and practices 
for production, storage, transportation and distribution of CHHANA 
and CHHANA based sweetmeats. 

2. SITE AND PREMISES 

2.1 Site and nremises should be as eiven in 2 of IS : 10974 ( Part 1 )- 
1984*. 



♦Code for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and distribution 
of indigenous milk products: Part 1 KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 



3. EQUIPMENTS 



3.1 Heating Pans — Traditionally, KADAHIES ( heating pans ) of iron 
are generally used in small scale operations for heating milk on open 
fire for preparing Cifi/yliVy^. KADAHIES shall be constructed with 
hemispherical or dished bottom and should have rigid welded handles. 
The joints in the pans shall be welded and finished smooth. The com- 
ponent parts shall not be riveted. The KADAHI may be of 20 or 50 
Itres capacity. Alternatively, the heating-CMw-coagulation of milk can 
bie accomplished in stainless steel jacketed pans, heated by passing 
steam through the jacket. 

3.2 Heating of Milk 

3.2.1 Ovens of different types are used for heating of milk in the 
small scale production of CHHANA. Wood, charcoal, coal, cow 
dung cake, kerosene or gas, are normally used as fuel. 

3.2.2 When open hearth is used, the fuel used for burning should not 
give rise to smoke or obnoxious odour which may be absorbed by the 
product. Adequate protection must be provided to ventilate the com- 
bustion products and to prevent the ash and unburnt material coming 
in contact with the product. 

3.2.3 Where heating is done by steam in large scale operations, the 

nan cIiqII f>r>nfnrm tn TS • 9890-1 Q7Q* Rtainliaoo cfool in r-Vofo/i r/MiM/^arl 

bottomed open pan provided with steam line, steam control and safety 
valves, pressure gauge and cold water line in the jacket, with steam 
trap and air outlet may be used. There should be arrangement for 
tilting the pan and al«o keeping it fixed in normal position. 

3.3 Stirrers — - After first boil, milk is allowed for a few moments to 
come down to around SCC and then the coagulant is added. Mild 
steel, hand operated ladles are generally used for stirring boiled milk. 
Stainless steel or aluminium alloy stirrers with flattened end on one 
side may preferably be used in place of iron. The stirrers shall be 
such as to resist acid action of the coagulant. Suitable arrangement 
may be made on the brim of the heating pan for resting of stirrers. 

3.4 All the components and metallic parts which come in contact with 
milk and CHHANA shall be constructed from iron or stainless steel 
conforming to grade 07 Cr 18 Ni 9 of IS : 1570 ( Part 5 ) - 1972t or 



•Specification for steam jacketed ghee pans ( stainless steel ) {first revision ). 
+Schedules for wrought steels for •^enera! en^ineerin" "ur"osss; ?«.**■ 5 Cfi"'" 
and heat-resisting steels ( first revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

aluminium conforming to IS Designations 31000 ( NS 3 ), 52000 {NS 4) 
or 53000 ( NS 5 ) of IS : 737-1974*. Copper and its alloys, cadmium, lead 
and zinc shall not come in contact with CHHANA at any stage. 

3.5 Nonmetallic materials, if used for sealing or gasketing, shall be 
nontoxic; nonabsorbent and shall not impart any flavour and be inert 
to milk, CHHANA or any cleaning solution normally used. 

3.6 Fabrication — All surfaces coming in contact with milk or 
CHHANA shall be finished smooth, free from pits, crevices or other 
constructional features which might inhibit satisfactory sanitation. 

3.7 Strainer — Whatever method of straining, immediate or delayed, a 
clean bleached dirt free, fresh or washed piece of muslin cloth shall 
be used for the purpose. The cloth should be strong enough to hold 
the weight of the coagulum alongwith the trapped whey when hung up 
for draining out the whey or when pressed in hoops for 'PANEER' 
preparation for use in cooked vegetable dishes. 

4. RECEPTION DOCK 

4.1 Milk brought to the processing unit shall be received in an airy, 
clean, spacious enclosure. Usually fresh sweet, clean milk free from 
colostrum and in every way fit for human consumption shall be used. 
However, slight developed acidity lowers the amount of coagulant 
required. The milk shall be free from adulterants, preservatives and any 
matter foreign to milk. 

5. TRANSFER OF CHHANA TO CONTAINERS 

5.1 When the CHHANA drains to the desired moisture level, it is 
removed from the muslin cloth and stored either in bulk or transferred 
to smaller containers of half to one kg capacity. Usually aluminium or 
enamelled iron containers are used for this purpose after cutting the 
mass with clean knives ( see IS : 2498-1963t ). 

5.1.1 When PANEER is to be used for cooking vegetable dishes, the 
drained mass after having been cut into smaller blocks is immersed in 
cold ( 4 to 6°C ) brine solution ( 5 percent sodium chloride ) for 2 to 3 
hours. The salt used should be of edible quality ( see IS : 253-1970t ). 

5.1.1.1 The salted and chilled PANEER pieces after removing from 
brine, shall be wiped with a clean cloth and packaged for cold storage 
or marketing. 

•Specification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, sheet and strip ( for 
general engineering purposes ) ( second revision ). 
fSpccification for cheese knife. 
tSpecification for edible common salt ( second revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

5.1.2 The metallic containers used in such transfers, with which the 
product comes in contact should be nontoxic, corrosion r^stant, 
resistant to mild acids, and should be kept thoroughly cleaned and 
sanitized before use. 

5.1.3 While handling for transfer or cutting, direct touch by hands 
should be avoided to safeguard against contamination by body micro- 
flora. 

5.1.4 Printing — The seal used for printing or embossing on the 
surface of the product should be made of nontoxic material. It should 
be cleaned and sanitized before each usage by dipping in a sanitizing 
solution and wiping with a clean dry cloth in order to prevent it from 
becoming a source of contamination. 

6. PACKING AND TRANSPORT 

6.1 At present CHHANA sold in the market is not packaged satisfac- 
torily. During its transport various types of unspecified wrapping mate- 
rials like tree leaves, ordinary paper, parchment paper, etc, are used 
for wrapping the product and for covering the CHHANA containers. 
Bamboo baskets with leaf lining and steel buckets are the usual contai- 
ners for overnight journeys while for short journeys, no packaging is 
done at all. Buses, trains or other vehicles are the various means of 
transport. 

6.2 It is desirable always to provide modern packaging materials which 
include parchment or laminated pouches, plastic ( polyethylene, poly- 
vinyl chloride, nylon, polyester ), bags/pouches, etc. Wrapping should 
be done as soon as the product is manufactured and moulded/cut into 
shape. These materials shall be placed in bamboo baskets for 
protection. 

6.2.1 The packaging material purchased from approved sources shall 
preferably be pre-sanitized and stored under dry and hygienic condi- 
tions. If parchment paper used is suspected to be exposed, it could be 
dipped in boiling water prior to use. Treating the paper in chlorine 
solution ( 15 to 20 ppm ) prior to use, would also be satisfactory. An 
ideal wrapper should be completely opaque, scalable, impermeable to 
odour, moisture and grease and should have sufficient physical rigidity 
to preclude damage during packing. 

6.2.2 The secondary outer packaging that is the bamboo basket or 
the bucket shall also be pre-sanitized before use and in between two 
uses. 

6.3 Storage at Manufacturing Centre — CHHANA should preferably 
be stored at refrigeration temperature, 5 to 10°C, since it has a very 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

low keeping quality when stored at room temperature, CHHANA made 
from fresh sweet milk keeps good for 5 to 7 days at 5 to lO^C while 
PANEER made from slight acid milk has a storage life of 3 to 4 days 
at 5 to 10°C. 

6.4 Transport — During the transport of CHHANA from manufactur- 
ing centres to urban markets, precautions should be taken not to expose 
the product to sunlight, dust and contamination. It is advisable to make 
suitable arrangement to maintain the product below lO^C during 
transport. 

7. STORAGE AT URBAN MARKET 

7.1 CHHANA blocks should be maintained at 5 to IO°C during storage. 
They should preferably be stored in a wrapped condition. The product 
should, however, be disposed of for conversion into sweetmeat prepa- 
ration well in time before deterioration due to microbial activity sets 
in. It is advisable not to store the product for more than a week at 5 
to 10°C or more than 24 to 48 hours at 22 to 30°C. 

7.1.1 It is recommended that suitable refrigeration facilities be pro- 
vided to the apartments used for storing CHHANA for maintaining the 
product at 5 to 10°C. 

7.1.2 The apartment used for storage should be dust and insect proof 
and also rodent proof. The shelves used for placing CHHANA may 
either be made from or covered with laminated wooden panels, stain- 
less steel sheets or glazed tiles. The shelves should be maintained in a 
thoroughly clean condition. They should be periodically washed 
thoroughly with suitable detergent solutions and cleaning agents, sani- 
tized and dried well before CHHANA packages are placed. 

8. SALE AND DISTRIBUTION 

8.1 Although, CHHANA is at present generally marketed soon after pro- 
duction in an unpacked or crudely packed condition depending on the 
distance of the sale point, it is a general practice to handle CHHANA 
by more than one person with bare hands for the purpose of testing 
the samples and during weighing while selling to retailers. The product 
also comes in contact with the pan of the balance which is kept exposed 
and rarely cleaned. Such practices lead to the contamination of the 
product with micro-organisms and if such a product is subsequently 
stored for periods exceeding 18 to 24 hours at room temperature prior 
to conversion into sweetmeats, it provides an opportunity for the 
micro-organisms to multiply. Some of the organisms like toxigenic 
staphylococci may produce heat stable enterotoxins without producing 

8 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

any visible defect in the product. This may lead to outbreak of food 
poisoning when sweetmeats prepared from these products are consumed. 

8.2 It is, therefore, advisable to protect the product from being touched 
by hands. Use of metallic scoops, ladles, spoons or cheese triers which 
have been cleaned and sanitized, is recommended for sampling, testing 
and weighing. 

8.2.1 In the market the manufactured 'wet' CHHANA invariably 
wrapped in cloth and pressed between stone weights to remove excess 
whey before being offered for sale. This cloth also shall be of good 
quality as mentioned earlier ( 3.7 ). Also the stone weights should be 
cleaned and pre-sanitized. 

8.3 One block from each lot of CHHANA may preferably be kept apart 
for such sampling and testing. This practice will ensure storage of 
other blocks in a protected condition. 

8.4 It is recommended to cover the pan of the balance with a clean 
sheet of parchment paper before any block of CHHANA is placed over 
it for weighting. 

9. CHHANA BASED SWEETS 

9.1 CHHANA ( or PANEER ) is the main basic raw material for several 
varieties of sweetmeats like RASOGOLLA, SANDESH, CHHANA- 
MURGI, etc. The methods of preparation vary considerably in dijQFerent 
parts of the country but one of the essential steps is the addition of 
sugar in all the preparations. It is added either as crystals, as a powder 
or as a more or less concentrated syrup and CHHANA is further pro- 
cessed under controlled heating conditions as in case of SANDESH 
and CHHANA MURGI; or further heat processed with some other 
ingredients ( for example KHOA ); or may be dipped in sugar syrups as in 
PANTOOAH, or cooked in sugar syrup as in RASOGOLLA or boiled 
in milk with added sugar as in KHEER-PANEER. Edible colours and 
flavourings are also added in some preparations. In the preparation 
of some sweetmeats other ingredients like maida flour, coadiments, 
baking powder, etc, are also added. 

9.2 Sweetening Agent — Cane sugar is the most commonly used swee- 
tening agent in the preparation of CHHANA based sweets. Sugar used 
should be of good quality ( see IS : 1679-1960* ), 

9.3 The sugar should be clean and properly packed, preferably in multi- 
wall paper bags and stored in a clean dry place to prevent contamination 
from moulds and yeasts. If sugar is improperly packed in dirty gunny 

♦Specification for sugar used in food preservation industry. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

or cloth bags and handled carelessly it may become heavily contaminated 
particularly during monsoon. It is preferable to purchase sugar during 
dry season and store it in a clean dry place. 

9.4 If sugar is suspected to be heavily contaminated it may be made 
into a syrup and boiled for a few minutes before adding to CHHANA. 

10. OTHER INGREDIENTS 

10.1 The ingredients used shall conform to the specifications given in 
IS : 5550-1970*. Maida used in preparation of GULAB JAMAN shall 
conform to specifications given in IS : 1009-1979t. 

10.2 Flavoaring Materials — Various artificial or imitation flavours are 
added to CHHANA based sweets. As most of them are prepared and 
maintained in the form of alcoholic solutions and used in small concen- 
trations they are not considered to be significant sources of contami- 
nation. 

10.3 Aqueous flavour extract may be sterilized by pasteurization at 63°C 
for 30 minutes without any serious deterioration in the flavour. 

10.4 Colouring Materials — Only food grade colours permitted under 
The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 should be used in the 
CHHANA based sweet preparation. 

11. STORAGE AND SALE OF CHHANA BASED SWEETS 

11.1 Restaurants, catering establishments, HALWAIS, sweetmeat shops 
and other selling outlets which store and sell CHHANA based sweets in 
retail to customers should be fully licensed for the purpose and fulfil 
all the hygienic requirements prescribed by the appropriate authorities 
in respect of public catering places. 

11.2 The floor and drains of the premises and every bench, counter, 
stall or other places where CHHANA based sweets are stored or exposed 
for sale should be washed and cleaned effectively everyday using on 
odourless bactericidal solution ( for example, Quaternary ammonium 
compounds ). There should be sufficient amount of clean water and 
detergents for cleaning of utensils and arrangements for toilet, washing 
of hands, plates and disposal of wrapping materials, if any. 

11.3 It is desirable to store CHHANA based sweets at a low temperature 
( below 4°C ) so that they will have a longer shelf life. Suitable cold 
storage facilities may, therefore, be provided. 



♦Specification for BURFI. 

tSpecification for MAIDA for general purposes ( second revision ). 

10 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 ) - 1984 

12. DISTRIBUTION 

12.1 Sweetmeats prepared from CHHANA should not be allowed to get 
contaminated during distribution which shall be affected in the most 
hygienic and efficient way. 

12.2 Products stored for a long period should not be distributed. 

12.3 The product should be distributed in suitable pressurized contai- 
ners which may be kept closed. In case of bulk delivery, the containers 
should have well fitting lids. 

13. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

13.1 Employee hygiene should be as given in 13 of IS : 10974 ( Part 1 )- 
1984*. 



♦Code for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and distribution 
of indigenous milk products : Part I KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 

11 



IS : 10974 ( Part 3 )- 1984 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr B. N. Ghosh All India Institute of Hygiene and Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Dr S. p. Mukhopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. C. Ghoshal Central Health Education Bureau { DGHS ), 

New Delhi 
Dr M. N. Gurnani Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay 

Joint Director ( Prevention of Delhi Administration, Delhi 

Food Adulteration ) 
Col O. p. Kapur Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Dr V. V- Karnik Brooke Bond India Limited, Aurangabad 

Dr S. J. Pardikar ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. K. Nandi Food and Nutrition Board, Ministry of Food 

and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Shri Harpal Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. V. R. C. Panicker National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Dr ( Shrimati ) A. S. Gadkari ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ravi Krishna Britannia Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Secretary Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kailash Vyas Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers' 

Union Limited, Anand 
Dr Brijesh Narayan ( Alternate ) 



12 



