**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13632 (2005) : Shipbuilding - Marine gyro compasses [TED 
19: Marine Engineering and Safety Aids] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13632 : 1993 
^TRcJtlTTTR^ (Reaffirmed 2003) 

Indian Standard 

SHIPBUILDING — MARINE GYRO 
COMPASSES - SPECIFICATION 



UDC 629- 1 2-034 



€) BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
WEN DELHI 3U001II 

March 1993 Price Gr«up 3 



Marine Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee, ThD 20 



FOREWORD 

This standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Marine Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee had been approved by the iransport 
Engineering Division Council. 

Gyro-compass are fitted on board ship to indicate the ships heading and for taking of bearing 
while navigating at sea. 

IMO stipulates provision of a Gyro Compass for ships of 500 tons gross tonnage and upwards with 
the following requirements: 

a) Master Gyro Compass or a Gyro Repeater clearly readable by the Helmsman at the Main 
steering position. 

b) On ships of 1 600 tons gross tonnage and above a Gyro Repeater or Gyro Repeaters shall 
be provided and shall be suitably placed for taking bearing as nearly as practicable over 
an arc of the horizon of 360 degrees. 

This Indian Standard is based on ISO 8728 : 1987 *Shipbuilding — Marine gyro-compasses', issued 
by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and IMO Resolution A. 424 (XI) 
'Performance standards for gyro-copasses'. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revisedY. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



IS 13632 : 1993 



Indian Standard 



SHIPBUILDING — MARINE GYRO 
COMPASSES - SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This Indian standard specifies construction, 
performance and type testing of gyro-compasses 
for navigation at sea. 



3.8 Scorsby Table 

Test machine which independently oscillates a 
platform about three axes. It is used to simulate 
the motion of a ship. 



2 REFERENCE 

2.1 The IS 4550 : 1968 ^Recommendations for 
positioning of magnetic compasses in ships' is a 
necessary adjunct to this Standard, 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Gyro-Corapass 

Complete equipment with all essential elements of 
complete design, including a gyroscopic device, 
which measures the direction of the meridian, and 
permits the taking of bearings. 

3.2 Bearing Repeater Compass 

Device that reproduces the master compass card 
at a remote location. 

3.3 Compass Card 

Graduated dial of the compass which indicates 
the measured direction of the meridian. 

3.4 Error 

Difference between the observed value and the 
settle point heading as defined in 3.11. 



3.5 Latitude Error 

Error to which some gyro-compasses are subject- 
ed, the magnitude and sign of which depends 
upon the local latitude. 

NOTE — Means are provided for correcting this error. 



3.9 Settled 

Stable situation when any three readings taken at 
intervals of 30 minutes are within a band of 0'7°, 
with the compass level and stationary. 

NOTE — The settling time is the elapsed time between 
the time of switch on at the initial heading error and 
the third recording of tiie settle. 

3.10 Settle Point Error 

Difference between the settle point heading as 
defined in 3.11 and the true heading. 

3.11 Settle Point Heading 

Mean value of ten readings taken at 20 minutes 
intervals after the compass has settled as defined 
in 3.9. 

3.12 Speed Error 

Error to which gyro-compasses are subjected, the 
magnitude and sign of which depends upon the 
speed, course and latitude of the ship. 

NOTE — Means arc provided for correcting this error, 

3.13 True Heading 

Horizontal angle between the vertical plane 
passing through the true meridian and the vertical 
plane passing through the ships fore and aft 
datum line. It is measured from true north 
(000° ) clockwise through 360". 

NOTE — When th? gyro compass equipment is not 
installed on board sh:p, this ''trir:: heading" shall be 
regarded as the true heading of the lubber iine. Where 
a gyro-compass has the facility of introducing a 
correction by moving the lubber line, the correction 
shall b^ set for the local latitude. 



3.6 Lubber Line 

Index line situated on the body of the compass 
against which the compass heading is read. 



4 CONSTRUCTION 

Gyro-compass units shall conform to the follow- 
ing requirements. 



3.7 Master Compass 

Main compass unit which supplies the heading 
information to the repeaters and other 
navigational aids. 



4.1 The equipment, shall be capable of continuous 
operation under conditions of vibration, humidity. 
change of temperature as specified in 6.8 *and 6.9 
and variations of the power supply as are 
normally expected in a ship. 



1 



IS 13632: 1993 



4.2 For those ships which are required to carry 
bearings repeaters, the construction of these shall 
be as follows: 

a) The bearing repeater compass shall be 
designed to be fitted with an azimuth 
reading device. 

b) A gimble mechanism shall be provided to 
enable the repeater compass card to be held 
horizontally against the ship's motion. 

c) Any bearing repeater compass intended for 
use on an open deck shall be waterproof. 

4.3 The compass card shall be graduated at equal 
intervals of 1** (degree of latitude ) or fraction 
thereof. 

The graduation error shall be less than ±0'2°. 

A numerical indication shall be provided at least 
at every 10°, starting from 000*" clockwise through 
360". 

4.4 Fully adequate illumination shall be provided 
to enable the reading of all compass cards at all 
times. Facilities for dimming shall be provided. 

4.5 Both master compass and repeater compasses 
shall be provided with a lubber line to indicate 
the ship's heading. 

4.5.1 The base or some other fixed extremity of 
the compass shall be marked or identified in such 
a way as to facilitate the installation of the 
compass in a ship so that the lubber line lies in 
a vertical fore and aft plane of the ship. Where a 
gyro-compass has the faciUty of introducing a 
correction by moving the lubber line, the correc- 
tion during installation shall be set to zero. 

4.5.2 If such marks or identifications are not in 
the same vertical plane as the uncorrected lubber 
line, the horizontal angular relationship between 
them shall be clearly indicated. 

4.6 Means shall be provided for correcting the 
errors induced by speed and latitude. Graphical 
or tabular means of correction may be used. 

4.7 Steps shall be taken to eliminate as far as is 
practicable and to suppress the cause of electro- 
magnetic interferences between the gyro-compass 
and other equipment on board. 

4.8 Mechanical noise from all units shall be so 
limited as to ensure the hearing of sounds on 
which the safety of the ship may depend. 

4.9 The equipment shall be so constructed that it 
is readily accessible for maintenance purposes. 

4.10 An automatic alarm shall be provided to indi- 
cate a power failure in the gyro-compass system 
not only to indicate power supply failure but also 
in case of high temperature of supporting liquid 
suspended gyro spheres. 



4.11 Means shall be incorporated for the protec- 
tion of the equipment from excessive currents 
and voltages, transients and accidental reversal 
of power supply polarity. 

4.12 If provision is made for operating the equip- 
ment from more than one source of electrical 
power, arrangements for rapidly changing from 
one source of supply to the other shall be 
incorporated. 

4.13 The system shall be designed to enable 
heading information to be provided to other 
navigational aids. 

4.14 Means shall be provided to prevent 
condensation of gyro compass. 

5 ACCURACY IN LATITUDE UP TO 60" 

5.1 Settling Time 

When switched on in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions the compass shall 
settle within 6 h. 

5.2 Settle Point Error 

5.2.1 The settle point error as defined in 3.10 at 
any heading shall not exceed ± 0*75° x secant 
latitude, and the RMS value of the differences 
between individual heading indications and the 
mean value shall be less than 0*25° x secant 
latitude. 

5.2.2 The repeatability of settle point error from 
one run-up to another shall be within 0'25'' x 
secant latitude. 

5.3 Settling Time Under Operational Conditions 

When switched on in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's instructions, the compass shall settle 
within 6 h when rolling and pitching Vv'ith simple 
harmonic motion of any period between 6 and 
15 s, a maximum angle of 5°, and maximum 
horizontal acceleration of 0*22 m/s^ 

5.4 Settle Point Error Under General Conditions 

The repeatability of the settle point error of the 
master compass shall be within dbrxsecant 
latitude under the general conditions and includ- 
ing variations in magnetic fields likely to be 
experienced in the ship in which it is installed. 

5.5 Residual Error in Correction 

The residual steady state error, after correction 
for speed and course influences at a speed of 20 
knots, shall not exceed ±0'25*'x secant latitude. 



5.6 Effect of Alteration of Speed 

The error due to a rapid alteration of speed on 
20 knots shall not exceed ±2*. 



IS 13632 : 1993 



5.7 Effect of Aheraticn of Coarse 

The error due to a rapid alteration of course of 
180'' at a speed of 20 knots shall not exceed 

5.8 Accuracy on a Scorsby Table 

The transient and steady state errors due to 
rolling, pitching, and yawing, with simple 
harmonic motions of any period between 6 and 
15 s, maximum angles of 20**, 10° and S"" respccti-i 
vely, and a maximum horizontal acceleration not 
exceeding i m/V, shall not exceed irX secant 
latitude. 

5.9 Synchronization Between the Master Compass 
and Repeaters 

Once the repeaters have been synchronised with 
the master, the maximum divergence in reading 
between the master compass and repeaters under 
all operational conditions shall not exceed ±0*5*. 

5.9.1 For the purpose of this requirement, the 
latitude and speed correction shall be assumed 
equal to zero. 

6 TYPE TESTS 



6,1 Construction 

The construction of the gyro-compass 
conform to the requirements specified in 4. 



shall 



6.2 Settling Time Test 

The master compass shall be securely positioned 
on a nominally level and stationary base. It shall 
be energized from nominal value power supplies 
and started in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions from an initial heading error ( high ) 
of 30"" or more. 



3.9) shall nicct the 



The settling time ( see 
requirements of 5.1. 

6,3 Settle Point Error Test 



When the master compass has settled as defined 
in 3.9, the settle point error {see 3.10) shall 
conform to the requirements specified in 5.2.1. 

6A Settle Point Heading Repeatability Test 

6.4. 1 The master compass shall be started in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions 
from an initial heading error (high) of 30° or 
more, and shall allowed to settle. 

6.4.2 The settle point heading shall be determined 
as specified in 3.11. The master compass shall 
then be switched off for a period of not less than 
12 h and not more than 7 days and then started 
again from an initial heading error ( low ) of 30*^ 
or more and the settle point heading determined 
once more. The master compass shall then be 
switched off for a period of not less than 12 h and 
not more than 7 days and then started again from 



an initial heading error (high) of 30* or more 
and the settle point heading determined. The 
three values of settle point heading so obtained 
shall be recorded and the difference between any 
two shall not exceed 0'25*x secant latitude. 

NOTE — If this test follows that in 6.3 then the 
**settlc" obtained may be used as the first value 
required by this repeatability test provided that the 
second **scttlc" follows a switch off period of not less 
than 12 h and not more than 7 days. 

6.5 Settling Time on a Scorsby Table 

6.5.1 The master compass shall be mounted on a 
Scorsby table with the master compass fore and 
aft line nominally parallel with one axis of the 
table which shall be designated the roll axis. 

6.5.2 The other nominally horizontal axis at right 
angles to the first shall be designated the pitch 
axis. 

6.5.3 The compass shall then be switched on in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions 
with the following nominal simple harmonic table 
motions: 

—roll axis : Peak amplitude 5±r, period 
15±1 s; and 

—pitch axis : Peak amplitude Sil"*, period 
6±ls. 

6.5.4 The settling time measured between switch- 
on and compass settle as defined in 3.9 shall 
conform to the requirements specified in 5.3. 

NOTE — Compass readings to detcrniine the settle 
condition may be taken with the table stationary and 
nominally level, and with a minimum deiay before 
resuming the specified table motion. 



6.6 Scorsby Test 

6.6.i The master compass shall be settled on the 
Scorsby table with the table stationary, nominally 
level and its roll axis aligned North-South w^ithin 

±r. 

6.6.2 The compass lubber line shall be aligned to 
within :t 1 ' of the table roll axis. The following 
nominal simple harmonic motions shall be applied 
simultaneously to the three axes of the table for 
25 minutes: 

—roll a^is : Peak amplitude 20±2'', period 
iO±ls; 

— pitch axis : Peak amplitude 10±1°» period 
6±i s; and 

—yaw axis : Peak amplitude 5±r, period 
15±ls. 



6.6.3 At the end of 25 minutes, the table motion 
shall be stopped, the table returned to its original 
position and the compass heading recorded 
without delay. 



IS 13632:1993 



6.6A This test shall be repeated with the roll 
axis of the motion table aligned at 045 ± T, 
090 ± l"* and at 315 ± 1'. At each of these 
headings the compass settle point shall he deter- 
mined before commencing the table motion and 
any change of heading indication by the compass 
between the settle {)oint heading immediately prior 
to the motion and the heading at the conclusion 
of the motion shall be recorded as error due to 
motion. 

6.6.5 In each of the four t^sts, the error due to 
the motion shall be less than ± T x secant 
latitude. 

6.6.6 Any horizontal accelerations applied during 
this test shall not exceed Im/s^ 



6.7 Intercardinal Motion Test 

6.7.1 The master compass shall be securely 
mounted on a device having the ability to move 
with nominal simple harmonic motion such thz^t 
the component of motion in a horizonal plane 
shall have a peak acceleration of rO ± 0*1 m/s*. 
The direction of motion of the device in the 
horizontal plane shall be an intercardinal 
direction to within ± 3*". 

6.7.2 When so mounted, the compass shall be 
settled ( see 3.9 ) and the settle point heading 
shall be obtained ( see 3.11 ) with the device 
stationary and nominally level. The device shall 
then be submitted to the motion previously descri- 
bed having a peak acceleration of 1*0 ± ,0'i m/s^ 
with a periodic time of not less than 3 s, for a 
duration of 2 h. Any difference between the 
compass heading recorded during the motion and 
the settle point heading prior to the motion will 
be considered as due to the motioq; it shall not 
exceed 1*' x secant latitude. 

NOTE — The compass heading recorded during the 
motion shall discount any modulation at frequencies 
equal to or higher than the frequency of the applied 
motion. 

6.8 Environmental Test 

In ail the environmental tests, the datum from 
which settle point variations shall be measured is 
the settle point heading obtained in the absence 
of the particular environmental condition to be 
applied. Where the gyro-compass includes 
repeater compasses, at least one repeater compass 
of the gyro-compass shall be energised and 
aligned with the master compass at all times 
during the course of cnvironmetal tests. Each 
remaining repeater compass output shall be con- 
nected to a normal load, or to a suitable 
impedance representing a normal load, supplied 
by the manufacturer. 

6.8.1 Voltage Variation Test 

The supply voltage shall be set to 10 percent above 
nominal value for 3 h, during which time the 
compass heading shall be recorded at 20 minute 



intervals. The supply voltage shall then be set to 
a value 10 percent below nominal for 3 h, and the 
compass heading again recorded at 20 minutes 
intervals. None of the recorded headings shall 
depart from the original datum by more than 
r X secant latitude. 

6.8.2 Frequency Variation Test 

The supply frequency shall be set to 5 percent 
above the dominal value for 3 h, during which time 
thecompass heading shall be recorded at 20 minute 
intervals. The supply frequency shall then be set 
to a value 5 percent below nominal for 3 h and the 
compass heading again recorded at 20 minute 
intervals. None of the recorded headings shall 
depart from the original datum by more than 
r X secant latitude. 

6.8.3 Vibration Test 



6.8.3,1 Vibration test of the master compass 

6.8.3.1.1 In all these tests, the direction of 
compass lubber line shall be 30 ± 1° to 
meridian. 



the 

the 



6.8.3.1.2 The master compass shall be subjected 
to the vibration described below. Three separate 
tests shall be c\rried out, the direction of 
vibration being: 

a) + 30 ± 1° to the meridian and horizontal; 

b) " 60 i r to the meridian and horizontal; 
and 

c) vertical. 

6.8.3.1.3 In each case the compass shall be 
settled initially and then the vibration shall be 
applied at the lowest frequency, holding the 
appropriate vibration amplitude for a period of 
25 minutes as indicated in Table 1. At the end 
of that period, the frequency and amplitude shall 
be changed to the next value tabulated below and 
held for a further 25 minutes. This process shall 
continue until the entire frequency range has been 
covered. 

Table 1 Frequency and Amplitude for 
Vibration Test 



Frequency 
Hz 


Amplitude 
mm 


5 


±0*71 


>. .- 7 


± 0-71 


10 


± 0-71 


14 


± 0*63 


20 


± 031 


28 


± 0-16 


40 


± 0*08 



6.8.3.1.4 The indicated heading shall be recorded 
at the end of each period; any difference between 
these recorded headings and the datum settle 
point heading shall be not more than 1° x secant 
latitude during the test. 



NOTE — Provision may be made to reduce or nullify 
any adverse effect on the equipment performance 
caused by the Presence of any electromagnetic field 
due to the vibration unit. 

6.8.3.2 Vibration test of compass equipment other 
than the master compass 

6.8.3.2.1 The equipment, complete with any shock 
absorbers which are part of it, shall be secured 
by its normal means of support to the vibration 
table. It shall then be connected in its normal 
electrical configuration to the master compass. 
The master compass shall then be switched on in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions 
and its settle point heading ascertained and 
recorded. 

6.8.3.2.2 The equipment on the vibration table 
shall then be vibrated vertically at all frequencies 
between: 

a) 5 Hz and 13'2 Hz with an amplitude 
of 10 mm; and 

b) 13*2 Hz and 40 Hz with a maximum 
acceleration of 0'7 X 9*8 m/s^ 

taking at least 25 minutes to cover each frequency 
range. 

6.8.3.2.3 This whole procedure shall be repeated 
when the equipment is vibrated in two mutually 
perpendicular directions in the horizontal plane. 
There shall be no electrical or mechanical 
failure during any part of this series of tests. 

6.8.3.2.4 The indicated heading shall be recorded 
at the end of each period and any difference bet- 
ween these recorded headings and the datum 
settle point heading shall be not more than 1° X 
secant latitude during the test. 

6.8.4 Temperature Test 

The compass equipment shall be placed in a 
chamber at normal room temperature, switched 
on and allowed to settle. The settle point 
heading fshall be obtained and recorded. The 
temperature of the chamber shall then be raised 
to 45 ± T'C and maintained for a period of 3 h. 
At the end of this period, the compass heading 
indication shall again be recorded. The tem- 
perature of the chamber shall then be reduced 
to ± l^'C and maintained at this temperature 
for 3 h.% At the end of this period the compass 
heading indication shall be recorded once more. 
Neither of the recorded heading indications shall 
differ from the- datum settle point heading by 
more than T x secant latitude. 

NOTE •— When'"the temperature of the chamber is 
being changed it shall not alter by a rate which 
exceeds 45^ per hour. 

6.8.5 Damp Heat Test 

6.8.5.1 The compass equipment shall be placed 
in a chamber at normal room temperature and 
humidity, switched on and allowed to settle. The 



IS 13632 : 1993 

settle point heading shall be obtained and 
recorded. The temperature and relative humidity 
of the chamber shall then be raised steadily over 
a period of 3 ± 0*5 h to 40 ± 2"C anc/ a relative 
humidity of 95 ± 2 percent. These conditions 
shall be maintained for a period of 3 h. 

6.8.5.2 The compass heading indication at the 
end of this test shall not differ from the datum 
settle point heading by more than V x secant 
latitude. 

6.8.6 Waterproof Test 

6.8.6.1 This test only applies to compass equip- 
ment which includes a bearing repeater compass 
intended for use on an open deck and only 
applies to that bearing repeater compass. The 
repeater compass shall be subjected to a jet of 
water delivered from 13 mm ( or larger ) diameter 
hose and a nozzle connected to a domestic water 
supply having a static pressure of 240 to 345 kPa 
for a period of 30 minutes. During this period 
the equipment shall be sprayed from all possible 
directions from a distance of 3 m. 

6.8.6.2 There shall be no ingress of water. 

6.9 Repeater^ Accuracy Test 

6.9.1 This test only applies to compass equipment 
which includes a repeater compass. The master 
compass shall be settled on a level rotary table 
and the repeater aligned with the master compass 
The table and master compass shall then be 
turned at a rate not greater than 57.s, the table 
bemg stopped at every 30° and the compass 
heading and the repeater heading recorded. This 
procedure shall be repeated in the reverse 
direction of rotation. 

6.9.2 The difference between the master compass 
heading and the repeated compass heading at any 
point shall be less tnan 0'5°. 

NOTE — The exact angle of the table when readings 
are taken is unimportant since the object of the test is 
to compare master and repeater heading indications. 

6.9.3 If the repeater compass to be tested is 
mtended for use on an open deck, it shall be 
tested at a temperature of - 20 ± 3°C and 
again at + 60 ± 3^C having been exposed to the 
test temperature for 2 h prior to the test. Any 
climatically controlled system designed as a part 
of the repeater installation may be switched on 
for this test. 

6.10 Speed Correction Test 

6.10.1 This test applies to compass units fitted 
with a correction device for speed and course 
error. 

6.10.2 With the master compass mounted on a 
level and stationary base and the lubber line of 
the compass aligned North-South, the master 
compass shall be settled and the settle point 
heading recorded. 



IS 13632 : 1993 



6.10.3 A speed correction signal of 20 knots shall 
be applied to the compass equipment and the 
compass allowed to resettle. 

6.10.4 The difference between the settle point 
heading so obtained and that recorded initially 
shall agree with the value computed theoretically 
for the latitude of the test to within O'lS"" x 
secant latitude. 

NOTE — Speed and course error, in degrees, for a 
compass aligned North-South is: 



57r 



-X secant latitude 



where Vis the speed in knots. 

6.11 Electrical Interference Test 

The radiated noise which is generated when the 
gyro-compass is in operation shall be measured 
with an electric field intensity meter or any other 
instrument of equivalent performance. No noise 
harmful to other equipment on board shall be 
generated. 

6.12 Mechanical Noise Test 

The sound level generated by units of the gyro- 
compass which is installed on the navigation 
deck shall be measured with a sound level indi- 
cator by placing it 1 m away from the surface of 
the sound generating part. The measured sound 
level shall be 65 dB or less. However, no 
measurement shall be made at the time of starting 
the gyro-compass. 



7 MARKING AND PACKING 



7.1 Each unit of the gyro-compass 
marked with the following: 

a) Indication of source of manufacture; 



shall be 



b) Type; 

c) Serial number; and 

d) Year of manufacture. 

7.1.1 Each unit of the equipment shall be marked 
with the minimum safe distance at which it may 
be mounted from a standard and a steering 
magnetic compass. The safe distance shall be 
measured in accordance with IS 4550 : 1968. 

7.2 Each unit of the gyro-compass shall be 
individually packed as per agreement between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

8 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY 
THE MANUFACTURER 

8.1 Information shall be provided to enable 
competent members of a ship's crew to operate 
and maintain the equipment efficiently. 

9 ADVICE TO SHIP SURVEYORS FOR THE 
INSTALLATION OF GYRO-COMPASSES 
AND REPEATER COMPASSES ON BOARD 
SHIPS 

9.1 To ensure that the errors induced by the 
motions specified in 6.8 are not exceeded in 
practice, it will be necessary to pay particular 
attention to the siting of the master compass. 

9.2 Where the master compass and/or any 
repeated compasses are to be used for taking 
bearings, then the horizontal angle between the 
vertical plane passing through the centre of the 
compass card, including the lubber line and the 
vertical plane passing through the ship's fore and 
aft datum fine, shall be within ±0*5*' when 
installed. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the pTowi%\on% of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products arc also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of commerits. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no 
changes arc needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of 
Indian Standards should ascertain that they arc in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and *Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this 
Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. TED 20 ( 847 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

f331 01 31 
1331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



(37 84 99. 37 85 61 
(37 86 26, 37 86 62 



153 38 43, 
|53 23 84 



53 16 40 



(235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 \5 19. 235 23 15 

J632 92 95. 632 78 58 

1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



