*•*•*••**•••*•*• 


^  ts:^ 


-A 


^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


25Si1  V I  i>ft!55«^N5*^ 


>?<:i^\\i^ 


IS  12078  (1987):  Recommendations  for  personal  protection  of 
workers  engaged  in  handling  asbestos  [CED  53:  Cement  Matrix 
Products] 


K^!S:Vff/I3^^Si&>:^^ 


sssti  V  ii>ft!v%ft^>a«^ 


^i^^r^Wi^^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge"  v^^^'^* 


v^ 


%^  i). 


% 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


lir 


■k 


A 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<LS££i 


^jji> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS.  12078*1967 

(  Reaffirmed  2001  ) 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR 

PERSONAL  PROTECTION  OF  WORKERS 

ENGAGED  IN  HANDLING  ASBESTOS 


UDC    G77-511  :  628*311  :  658  3E}2l/a 


BUEEAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 
Mfl^NAK    BHAVANj     9     MAH/tDUR    SHAM     7.MAR     MARO 

NEW  DELHI  lJ00tl2 

Gr  3  Om^tT  I^JST 


IS  :  12078.-  1987 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR 

PERSONAL  PROTECTION  OF  WORKERS 

ENGAGED  IN  HANDLING  ASBESTOS 


Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee,  BDG  2 

Chairman  Representing 

Db  H.  C.  Visvesvae  aya  National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials, 

New  Delhi 

Members 

Additional   Director     Stand-     Research,     Designs     &     Standards      Organization 
ABDS  (  B  &  S  )  (  Ministry  ol  Railways),  Lucknow 

Deputy    Director   Stand- 
ards (  B  &  S  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shei  K.  p.  Banebjee  Larsen  and  Toubro  Limited,  Bombay 

Shei  Harish  N.  Malani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Banerjee  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Chief  Engineer  (  BD  )  Bhakra  Beas  Management  Board,  Nangal  Township 

Shri  J.  C,  Basur  {  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Engineer  (  Designs  )  Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 

Executive  Engineer  (D)-III  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief   Engineer  (  Research  )-     Irrigation  and  Power  Research  Institute,  Amritsar 

CWm-DlRECTOR 

Research   Officer    (  Con- 
crete Technology  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  A.  P.  Engineering  Research  Laboratories,  Hyderabad 

Joint  Director  (  Alternate ) 
Director  Central    Soil    and      Materials     Research      Station, 

New  Delhi 
Chief  Research  Officer  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  (  CMDD-I  )  Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Deputy  Director  (  CMDD-I  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V,  K.  Ghanekar  Structural  Engineering  .Research   Centre   (  CSIR  ), 

Roorkee 
Shri  S.  Gopinath  The  India  Cements  Ltd,  Madras 

Shbi  T.  Tamil aker  an  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Coftjnigkt  1987 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Mian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed   to  be  an   infringement   of  copyright   under   the  said  Act. 


IS  :  12078  -  1987  a 

{Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shbi  a.  K.  Gupta  Hyderabad  Industries  Limited,  Hyderabad 

Shbi  p.  J.  Jagus  Associated  Cement  Companies  Ltd,  Bombay 

Dr  a.  K.  Ghattebjee  (  Atternate  )     • 
Shbi  N.  G,  Joshi  Indian  Hume  Pipes  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  R.  L.  Kapoob  Ministry  of   Transport     (  Department     of   Surface 

Transport  )  (  Roads  Wing  ) 
Shbi  R.  K.  Saxena  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Laha  The  Institution  of  Engineers  (  India  ),  Calcutta 

Shbi  B.  T.  Unwalla  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  a.  K.  MaiiiiiOK  National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  S.  N.  Pal  M.  N.  Dastur  and  Co  Pvt  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  Biman  Dasgupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  H.  S.  Pasbicha  Hindustan  Prefab  Ltd,  New  Dell^i 

Shbi  Y.  R.  Phull  Indian  Roads   Congress,   New   Delhi;  and    Central 

Road  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  New  Delhi 
Shbi  M.  R.  Ghatteejee  Central    Road    Research    Institute    (  CSIR  ),  New 

(  Alternate  }  Delhi 

Db  Mohan  Rai  Central    Building     Research     Institute      (CSIR), 

Roorkee 
Db  S.  S.  Rehsi  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  M.  Ramaiah  Structural  Engineering  Research   Centre  (CSIR), 

Madras 
Dr  a.  G.  Madhava  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  A.  V.  Ramana  Dalmia  Cement  (  Bharat )  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Db  K.  C.  Nabano  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  G.  Ramdas  Directorate    General    of   Supplies    and     Disposals, 

New  Delhi 
Db  a.  V.  R.  Rao  National  Buildings  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  J.  Sen  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  T.  N.  Subba  Rao  Gammon  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  S.  A.  Reddi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  A.  U.^RuhsiNghani  Cement  Corporation  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  G.  S.  Shabma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  H.  S.  Satyakarayana  Engineer-in-Chief 's  Branch,  Army  Headquarters,  New 

Delhi 
Shbi  V.  R.  Kotnis  (  Alternate  ) 
Secbetaby  Central  Board  of  Irrigation  and  Power,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  K.  R.  Saxena  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  R.  K.  SiNha  Development    Commissioner  for  Cement   Industry 

(  Ministry  of  Industry  ) ,  New  Delhi 
Shbi  S.  S.  Miglani  {  Alternate  ) 
SuPBBiNTENDiNQ  ENGINEER    Public      Works      Department,        Government       of 

(  Designs  )  Tamil  Nadu,  Madras 

Executive  Engineeb  (  SMR 
Division  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  L.  Swaboop  Orissa  Cement  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  H.  Bhattaohaeya  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Guha  Thakubta  Gannon  Dunkerley  &  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  p.  Sankabnabayanan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  G.  Raman,  Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Civ  Engg  ) 

Secretary 

Shbi  N.  C.  Bandyopadhyay 
Deputy  Director  (Civ  Engg  ),  BIS 

( Continued  on  page  1 1  ) 

2 


IS  :  1207^^-  1987 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR 

PERSONAL  PROTECTION  OF  WORKERS 

ENGAGED  IN  HANDLING  ASBESTOS 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  3  August  1987,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Cement  and 
Concrete  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineer- 
ing Division  Council. 

0,2  In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  growing  awareness  that  exposure  to 
asbestos  dust  can  have  harmful  effects  on  the  health  of  workers.  In 
order  to  give  guidance  on  how  the  risk  of  exposure  to  asbestos  dust  can 
be  prevented,  controlled  or  minimized,  it  was  felt  necessary  to  lay  down 
some  standards  regarding  safe  use  of  different  products  containing 
asbestos,  improving  conditions  in  workplaces,  preventive  measures,  pro- 
tection and  supervision  of  the  health  of  workers,  packaging  and  trans- 
port of  asbestos,  disposal  of  asbestos,  etc.  This  standard  lays  down  the 
recommendations  for  personal  protection  and  hygiene  of  workers  engaged 
in  handling  asbestos  in  asbestos  mines  and  factories  manufacturing 
products  containing  asbestos.  The  concentration  of  airborne  asbestos 
dust  in  work  environment  shall  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
method  given  in  IS  :  11450-1986*. 

0.3  In  the  formulation  of  this  standard,  due  weightage  has  been  given 
to  international  co-ordination  among  the  standards  and  practices  pre- 
vailing in  different  countries  in  addition  to  relating  it  to  the  practices  in 
the  field  in  this  country.  This  has  been  met  by  deriving  assistance  from 
'ILO  Codes  of  practice:  Safety  in  the  use  of  asbestos',  1984,  published  by 
the  International  Labour  Offiice,  Geneva  and  Schedule  XIV  on  'Hand- 
ling and  Processing  of  Asbestos',  framed  under  Section  87  of  Factories 
Act, 

0.4  This  sandard  is  one  of  a  series  of  Indian  Standards  on  safety  in 
handling  and  use  of  asbestos.  Other  standards  in  the  series  already 
formulated  and  under  preparation  are  as  follows: 

IS  :  11450-1986  Method  for  determination  of  airborne  asbestos  fibre 
concentration  in  work  environment  by  light  microscopy  (  memb- 
rane filter  method  ) 

*Method  for  determination  of  airborne  asbestos  fibre  concentration  in  work  environ- 
ment by  light  microscopy  (  membrane  filter  method  ). 

3 


IS  :  12078  -  1987 

IS  :  11451-1986  Recommendations  for  safety  and  health  requirements 
relating  to  occupational  exposure  to  asbestos 

IS:  1 1767-1986  Recommendations  for  cleaning  of  premises  and 
plants  using  asbestos  fibres 

IS:  11768-1986  Recommendations  for  disposal  of  asbestos  waste 
material 

IS  :  11769  (Part  1  )-1987  Guidelines  for  safe  use  of  products  con- 
taining asbestos:  Part  1  Asbestos  cement  products 

IS  :  11769  (  Part  2  )-1986  Guidelines  for  safe  use  of  products  con- 
taining asbestos:  Part  2  Friction  materials 

IS  :  11769  (  Parts  )-1986  Guidelines  for  safe  use  of  products  con- 
taining asbestos:  Part  3  Non-cement  asbestos  products  other  than 
friction  materials 

IS  :  11770  (  Part  1  )-1987  Recommendations  for  control  of  emission 
of  asbestos  dust  in  premises  manufacturing  products  containing 
asbestos:  Part  1  Asbestos  cement  products 

IS  :  11770  (  Part  2  )-1986  Recommendations  for  control  of  emission 
of  asbestos  dust  in  premises  manufacturing  products  containing 
asbestos:  Part  2  Friction  materials 

IS  :  11770  (  Part  3  )-1987  Recommendations  for  control  of  emission 
of  asbestos  dust  in  premises  manufacturing  products  containing 
asbestos:  Part  3  Non-cement  asbestos  products  other  than  friction 
materials 

IS  :  12079-1987  Recommendations  for  packaging,  transport  and 
storage  of  asbestos 

IS  :  12080-1987  Recommendations  for  local  exhaust  ventilation 
systems  in  permises  manufacturing  products  containing  asbestos 

IS  :  12081  (  Part  1  )-1987  Recommendations  for  pictorial  warning 
signs  and  precautionary  notices  for  asbestos  and  products  contain- 
ing asbestos:  Part  1  Workplaces 

IS:  12081  (  Part  2  )-1987  Recommendations  for  pictorial  warning 
signs  and  precautionary  notices  for  asbestos  and  products  contain- 
ing asbestos:  Part  2  Asbestos  and  its  products 

IS  :  12082  (  Part  1  )-l987  Recommendations  for  control  of  asbestos 
emission:  Part  1  Mining  of  asbestos  ore 

IS  :  12082  (  Part  2  )  Recommendations  for  control  of  asbestos 
emission:  Part  2  Milling  of  asbestos  (  under  preparation  ) 

Method  for  determination  of  asbestos  concentration  in  water  (  under 
preparation  ) 


IS:  12078  >^  1987 

1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  lays  down  the  recommendations  for  personal  protection 
of  workers  engaged  in  handling  asbestos  in  asbestos  mines  and  factories 
manufacturing  products  containing  asbestos. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  definitions  given  in  IS  :  11451- 
1986*,  IS  :  8J47-1977t  and  the  following  definition  shall  apply. 

2.1.1  Respiratory  Protective  Equipment  —  Equipment  which  removes 
airborne  contaminents  from  the  supply  of  breathing  air  reaching  the 
wearer  or  equipment  which  provides  a  source  of  uncontaminated  air 
or  oxygen  to  the  wearer.  It  includes  both  respirators  and  breathing 
apparatus. 

3.  GENERAL 

3.1  In  addition  to  the  recommendations  laid  down  in  this  standard,  it  is 
absolutely  essential  for  the  mines  and  factories  handling  asbestos  to  adopt 
suitable  measures  to  control  and  minimize  the  occupational  exposure  to 
airborne  asbestos  dust.  The  mines  and  factories  shajl,  therefore,  equip 
and  maintain  buildings,  installations,  machines  and  workplaces,  and 
organize  work  in  such  a  way  that  contamination  of  working  environment 
is  minimized  and  that  the  exposure  of  workers  to  airborne  asbestos  dust 
is  limited  as  far  as  is  reasonably  practicable,  and  is  at  least  within  the 
permissible  exposure  limit.  For  safety  and  health  requirements  of  the 
workers,  the  recommendations  given  in  IS  :  1 1451-1986*  shall  be  followed. 
Personal  protection  to  be  used  and  adopted  by  the  workers  shall  be 
regarded  only  as  a  temporary  or  emergency  measure  and  not  as  an  alter- 
native to  technical  control  specified  in  Indian  Standards  listed  in  0.4, 

4.  PERSONAL  PROTECTION 

4*1  Personal  protection  of  workers  comprises  of  the  folio  wings: 

a)  Use  of  respiratory  protective  equipment, 

b)  Use  of  protective  clothing,  and 

c)  Use  of  proper  hygienic  facilities. 

5.  RESPIRATORY  PROTECTIVE  EQUIPMENT 

5.1  Approved  respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  provided  for  and 
worn  by  any  person  who  is  exposed  or  liable  to  be  exposed  to  airborne 
asbestos    dust   concentration   in   excess  of  the  permissible  exposure  limit. 


♦Recommendations  for  safety   and  health  requirements  relating  to   occupational 
exposure  to  asbestos. 

tClossary  of  terms  relating  to  respiratory  protective  devices. 


IS  :  12078  -  1987 

All  respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  subject  to  approval  by  the 
appropriate  authority. 

5.2  Selection 

5.2.1  Selection  of  respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  made 
according  to  IS  :  9623-1980*.  Only  those  types  of  respiratory  protective 
equipment,  which  have  been  tested  and  approved  by  the  appropriate 
authority,  shall  be  v^rorn.  It  shall  also  be  suitable  for  the  particular 
work  activity  and  wearable  for  the  entire  period  of  use. 

5.2.2  The  type  of  respiratory  protective  equipment  to  be  used  shall 
depend  on  the  maximum  concentration  of  airborne  asbestos  dust  likely 
to  be  encountered  during  the  work.  Unless  otherwise  specified  by  the 
appropriate  authority,  for  classifying  the  range  of  concentrations  and  the 
use  of  the  type  of  respiratory  protective  equipment,  the  recommendations 
given  in  Appendix  A  shall  be  followed. 

5.2.3  The  following  points  shall  also  be  taken  care  of  while  selecting 
the  respiratory  protective  equipment: 

a)  Facial  shape, 

b)  Facial  hair,  and 

c)  Comfort. 

5.2.4  While  selecting  a  respiratory  protective  equipment,  it  shall  be 
ensured  that  spares  are  readily  obtainable.  Ease  of  maintenance  and 
adequate  range  of  sizes  in  the  model  selected  are  also  important  factors. 

5.2.5  Filter-type  respirators  shall  conform  to  IS  :  9473-1980t  and 
breathing  apparatus  shall  conform  to  IS  :  10245  (  Parts  1  to  4  )-l982j- 

5.3  Cleaning  and  Maintenance  —  Cleaning  and  maintenance  of 
respiratory  protective  equipment  shall,  in  general,  be  done  according  to 
IS  :  9623-1980*.  However,  special  care,  as  detailed  in  5.3.1  to  5.3.8  shall 
be  taken. 

5.3.1  Respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  issued  for  the  exclusive 
use  of  the  workers  to  whom  they  are  supplied.  Respiratory  protective 
equipment  shall  be  regularly  cleaned  and  serviced  by  properly  trained 
operators  before  re-issue  and  suitable  record  shall  be  maintained. 

♦Recommendations  for  the  selection,  use  and  maintenance  of  respiratory   protective 
devices. 

fSpecification  for  filter-type  particulate  matter  respirators. 
jSpecification  for  breathing  appratus: 

Part  1   Closed-circuit  breathing  apparatus  (  compressed  oxygen  cylinder  ), 

Part  2  Open-circuit  breathing  apparatus, 

Part  3  Fresh  air  hose  and  compressed  air  line  breathing  apparatus,  and 

Part  4  Escape  breathing  apparatus  {  short  duration  self-contained  type  ). 


IS  :  12Q78  -  1987 

5.3.2  Accumulated  asbestos  dust  on  the  outside  of  the  equipmi^nt  shall 
be  removed  by  suitable  vacuum  cleaning  so  that  asbestos  dust  is  not  libe- 
rated to  the  air. 

5.3.3  Respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  issued  from  and 
returned  to  a  central  point.  After  thorough  cleaning,  checks  shall  be 
made  on  the  condition  of  the  face  piece,  head  straps,  inlet  and  exhaust 
valves.  For  positive  pressure  respirators  fitted  with  battery  driven  air 
supplies,  the  battery  shall  be  recharged  as  necessary.  Manufacturer's 
guidance  shall  be  followed  at  all  times. 

5.3.4  A  suitable  container,  such  as  metal  box  or  plastic  bag  shall  be 
provided  for  the  storage  of  individual  respiratory  protective  equipment, 
when  not  in  use. 

5.3.5  Respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  disinfected,  washed 
and  cleaned  weekly  or  more  often  when  the  equipment  is  in  regular  use. 
Prefilters  on  filtered  air  respirators  shall  be  changed  and  filters  shall  be 
checked  on  each  occasion. 

5.3.6  A  record  shall  be  kept  for  each  respirator  or  breathing  apparatus 
showing  the  worker  to  whom  it  is  issued  and  the  dates  on  which  it  is 
cleaned  and  serviced. 

5.3.7  A  record  of  training  and  instruction  in  the  use  of  respiratory 
protective  equipment  shall  be  made  for  each  worker  concerned. 

5.3.8  Where  respiratory  protective  equipment  is  used,  this  fact  shall 
be  recorded  on  the  monitoring  records  of  dust  exposure  for  the  particular 
job. 

5.4  Use 

5.4.1  Use  of  respiratory  protective  equipment  shall,  in  general,  be 
made  according  to  IS  :  9623-1980*. 

5.4.2  The  part  of  respiratory  protective  equipment  incorporating  the 
facepiece  shall  be  a  personal  issue.  Before  it  is  passed  to  anyone  else,  it 
shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  and  disinfected. 

5.4.3  All  workers  required  to  use  respiratory  protective  equipment 
shall  be  instructed  in  its  use.  Instruction  shall  be  given  on  the  following 
points: 

a)  The  reason  for  the  use  of  the  equipment,  and  the  importance  of 
using  it  conscientiously; 

b)  The   circumstances   in   which   it   shall   be   used    and  how  these 
circumstances  are  to  be  recognized; 


♦Recommendations  for  the  selection,  use  and  maintenance  of  respiratory   protective 
devices. 

7 


IS  :  12078  -  1987  ■  ^ 

c)  The  manner  in  which  the  equipment  operates; 

d)  The  correct  method  of  use  and  of  checking  the  fit; 

e)  The  method  of  checking  for  correct  operation;  and 

f )  The  need  for  regular  servicing. 

5.5  Storage  —  Gleaned  respiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  stored 
in  accordance  Vi^ith  IS  :  9623-1980*  taking  care  to  avoid  contamination. 

5.6  Establishment  of  a  Respirator  Programme  —  The  employee 
shall  establish  a  respirator  programme  and  maintain  a  historic  file  in  this 
connection. 

6.  PROTECTIVE  CLOTHING 

6.1  Where  personal  clothing  may  become  contaminated  with  asbestos 
dustj  the  employer  shall  provide  appropriate  work  clothing. 

6.2  Where  airborne  asbestos  dust  concentration  necessitate  the  use  of 
respiratory  protective  equipment,  special  protective  clothing  shall  also  be 
provided  and  worn, 

6.3  Such  special  protective  clothing  shall  cover  completely  all  works 
clothing  so  that  no  asbestos  dust  is  retained  when  the  protective  clothing 
is  removed.     Suitable  head  covering  shall  also  be  provided. 

6.4  When  re-usable  protective  or  works  clothing  is  provided,  separate 
lockers  shall  be  provided  so  that  contaminated  clothing  can  be  stored 
separately  from  personal  clothing. 

6.5  Vaccum  cleaners  for  preliminary  de-dusting  of  protective  or  works 
clothing  shall  be  provided  at  the  entrance  to  the  locker  room,  in  which 
such  clothing  is  removed  and  stored. 

6.6  Repiratory  protective  equipment  shall  be  removed  only  after  de- 
dusting  of  protective  clothing. 

6.7  Regular  cleaning  and  inspection  of  the  contaminated  locker  room 
shall  be  undertaken  to  ensure  that  no  accumulation  of  asbostos  dust 
occurs. 

6.8  Clean  spare  clothing  of  appropriate  size  shall  be  available  when 
circumstances  demand. 

6.9  Protective  clothing  shall  be  worn  only  in  the  asbostos  working  area 
and  the  contaminated  side  of  the  wash/ changing  room. 

♦Recommendations  for  the  selection,  use  and  maintenance  of  respiratory   protective 
devices. 


IS:  1207^-1987 

6.10  Gleaning  and  Laundering  —  Cleaning  and  laundering  of 
protective  clothing  shall  be  done  as  detailed  in  6.10.1  to  6.10.2.4. 

6.10.1  It  shall  be  cleaned  by   vacuum-cleaning   equipment,    whenever 
the  wearer  leaves  the  asbestos  working  area. 

6.10.2  It  shall  be  laundered  as  frequently  as  is  necessary  to   ensure  its 

cleanliness  and  efficiency. 

6.10.2.1  Clothing  shall  be  laundered  done  under  controlled 
conditions  to  prevent  the  emission  of  airborne  asbestos  during  handling, 
transport  and  laundering. 

6.10.2.2  Where  contaminated  clothing  is  sent  for  laundering  outside 
the  factory,  it  shall  be  packed  in  dust-proof  containers,  such  as  plastic 
bags,  and  such  containers  shall  be  secured  at  the  neck.  Such  containers 
shall  be  conspicuously  marked  'asbestos  contaminated  clothing'  in 
capital  letters. 

6.10.2.3  When  a  contract  laundry  is  employed,  care  shall  be  taken 
that  the  contractor  fully  understands  the  precautions  necessary  for  handl- 
ing asbestos  contaminated  clothing  and  is  equipped  to  deal  with  such 
clothing. 

6.10.2.4  Laundering  of  protective  clothing  in  wearer's  home  shall 
be  strictly  prohibited. 

6.11  Clothes  Lockers  —  Two  separate  lockers  or  containers  for  each 
worker  so  separated  or  isolated  as  to  prevent  contamination  of  the 
workers  off-site  clothes  from  work  or  protective  clothes  shall  be 
provided. 

7.  HYGIENIC  FACILITIES 

7.1  Adequate  provision  shall  be  made  for  the  following  hygienic 
facilities: 

a)  Arrangement  for  removal  and  replacement  of  works  or  protective 
clothing  worn  to  and  from  work  together  with  storage  for  such 
clothing; 

b)  Arrangement  to  ensure  that  the  air  flow  is  such  as  to  prevent 
the  movements  of  air  from  areas  having  airborne  asbestos 
concentration  in  excess  of  the  permissible  limit  into  the  clean 
side  of  the  facility; 

c)  Arrangement  for  removal  and  replacement  of  respiratory 
protective  equipment  together  with  storage  for  such  equipment; 
and 


IS  s  12078  -  1987 

d)  Showering  facilities,  at  least  one  for  every  1 5  persons  requiring 
the  use  of  protective  clothing,  including  provision  for  disposal  of 
contaminated  water. 

7.2  Location  of  Facilities  —  The  hygienic  facilities  shall,  whenever 
possible,  adjoin  the  asbestos  working  area  to  prevent  the  contamination 
of  other  areas.  When  this  is  not  possible,  they  shall  be  as  close  to  the 
working  area  as  circumstances  will  allow  and  supplementary  facilities 
as  given  in  7,2.1  and  7.2.2  shall  be  provided  next  to  the  working  area. 

7.2.1  Supplementary  facilities  provided  next  to  the  working    area  shall 
allow  a  worker  to  do  the  following  operations; 

a)  Vaccum  cleanining  of  the  protective  equipment;  and 

b)  Remove  and  store  first  protective  clothing  and   then   respiratory 
protective  equipment. 

7.2.2  Exhaust  ventilation  creating  negative  pressure  shall  be   provided 
in  the  unit  providing  supplementary  facilities. 

7.3  Maintenance  and   Gleaning  —  Effective   arrangements  shall   be 
made  for  cleaning  and  maintaining  the  hygienic  facilities. 


APPENDIX     A 

(  Clause  5.22  ) 

REGOMMENDED  RESPIRATORS  FOR  DIFFERENT 

CONCENTRATION  AIRBORNE  ASBESTOS 

FIBRE  IN  WORKPLACE 

A-1.  The  type  of  respirators  to  be   used   for   different   concentration   of 
airborne  asbestos  fibre  in  a  workplace  shall  be  as  given  below: 

Concentration  Type  of  Respirators  Required 

Less  than  permissible  exposure  No  respirator  required, 

limit 

Less  than  or  equal  to  5  fibres  Re-usable  or  replaceable   filter-type 

per  cm^  air  purifying    dust    respirator   or 

single-use  dust  respirator 

Less  than  or  equal  to  50  fibres  Powered    air     purifying     positive- 

per  cm^  pressure  dust  respirator 

Greater  then  50  fibres  per  cm^  Positive-pressure        supplied         air 

respirator  with  full  face  piece 

10 


IS  :  120711   -  1987 

(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 

Asbestos  Cement  Products  Subcommittee,  BDG  2  :  3 

Convener 

Dr  S.  K.  Chopra 

S-436  Greater  Kailash 

New  Delhi 

Members  Representing 

Shri  S.  K.  Eanssjeb  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shbi  N.  G.  Basak  Directorate  General     of   Technical     Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  P.  K.  Jain  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  N.  Bastt  Directorate      General      of   Supplies     &   Disposals, 

New  Delhi 
Shki  T.  N.  Oboveja  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  R.  Bhakdari  Shree  Digvijay  Cement  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  V,  R.  Natabajan  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Ghakbaborty  Development  Commissioner,  Small  Scale  Industries, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  S.  C.  Kumar  (  Alternate  ) 
Deputy    Dibectob  Standards    Research,    Designs      &      Standards     Organization 
(  B  &  S  )  (  Ministry  of  Railways  ) ,  Lucknow 

Assistant  Dibectob  Stan- 
dards (  B  &  S  )-II  (  Alternate  ) 
DtBBCTOB,  Engineering  Geology  Geological  Survey  of  India,  Calcutta 
Division  I 

Shbi  S.  K.  Mathur  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  Ganapathy  Southern  Asbestos  Cement  Ltd,  Madras 

Genebai,  Manager  (  Cement  )      Rohtas  Industries  Ltd,  Dalmianagar 

Shbi  D.  N.  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  S.  GoeNka  Sarbamangala  Manufacturing  Co,  Calcutta 

Shbi  I.  P.  GoeNka  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  Sbinivasan  N.  Iyer  Everest  Building  Products  Ltd,  Bombay 

Db  V.  G.  Upadhyaya  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  P.  S.  Kalani  Saurabh  Construction  Co,  Indore 

Db  Kalyan  Das  Central    Building     Research     Institute     (  CSIR  ), 

Roorkee 
Shbi  K.  D.  Dhariyal  (  Alternate  ) 
Lt-Col  Kamlesh  Praeash  Engineer-in-Chief's  Branch,    Army      Headquarters, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  K.  R.  Bhambani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  Harshad  R,  Oza  Flowel  Asbestos  Products,  Ahmadabad 

Shbi  V.  Pattabhi  Hyderabad  Industries  Ltd,  Hyderabad 

Shbi  A.  K.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  N.  Raohavendba  National      Council     for     Cement      and     Building 

Materials,  New  Delhi 
Dr  a.  V.  R.  Rao  National  Buildings  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Shri  J.  Sen  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Superintending  Sxtbveyoe    or    Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 
WOBKS  (  CZ  ) 

Sttbveyor  OF  Works  (  CZ  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  A.  Swamy  Municipal  Corporation  of  Delhi,  Delhi 

(  Continued  on  page  12) 

u 


IS  :  12078  -  1987 

(  Continued  from  page  11) 

Panel  for  Safety  in  Handling  and  Use  of  Asbestos,  BDG  2  :  3/P2 

Convener  Representing 

Shbi  D.  K.  Biswas  Department  of  Bio- Technology  (  Ministry  of  Science 

and  Technology  ),  New  Delhi 

Members 

Shbi  B.  K.  Banebjee  Sundaram-Abex  Ltd,  Madras 

Shbi  K.  Pandabiij ath  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  G.  Basak  Directorate   General   of    Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  P,  K.  Jain  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Ghakrabobty  Development  Commissioner,  Small  Scale  Industries, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  S.  G.  Kumar  {  Alternate  ) 
Db  G.  G.  Davay  In    personal    capacity    (  7172,     Varma    Xagar,     Old 

Magardas  Road,  Andheri  East,  Bombay  ) 
DiBECTOB  National      Institute      of      Occupational        Health, 

Ahmadabad 
Db  S.  K.  Dave  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  S.  GaUapathy  Southern  Asbestos  Cement  Ltd,  Madras 

Shri  S.  A.  Bhima  Raja  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  H.  N.  Gupta  Directorate  General  of  Factory  Advice  Service  and 

Labour  Institutes,  Bombay 
Shbi  V.  S.  Sasikumab  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  Srinivasan  N.  Iyer  Everest  Building  Products  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  T.  S.  Pradhan  (  Alternate  ) 
Brio  D.  B.  Kapoob  {  Rktd  )  Asbestos  Information  Centre  (  India  ),  New  Delhi 

Dr  J.  L.  Kaw  Industrial   Toxicology  Research   Centre    {  CSIR  ), 

Lucknow 
Db  N.  K.  Mehrotba  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  V.  Nanothi  National     Environmental     Engineering     Research 

Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Nagpur 
Db  D.  M.Dharmadhikari  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  K.  Pandey  Department  of  Environment,  New  Delhi 

Shri  V.  Pattabhi  Hyderabad  Industries  Ltd,  Hyderabad 

Dr  S.  p.  Vivek      Chandra 
Rao  (  Alternate ) 
Dr  N.  Raghavendra  National      Council    for      Cement      and      Building 

Materials,  New  Delhi 
Shri  Rattan  Lai>  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Ramaswamy  Hindustan  Ferodo  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  A.  Homem  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  a.  V,  R.  Rao  National  Buildings  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Shri  D,  N.  Mathub  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  B.  K.  Sharan  Directorate  General  of  Mines  Safety   (  Ministry   of 

Labour  ),  Dhanbad 
Dr  D.  K.  Sbivastava  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Navnit  Talwar  Reinz  Tal-Broz  (  Pvt )  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  A.  K.  Shabma  (  Alternate  ) 


12 


AMENDMENT  NO.    1       SEPTEMBER  2005 

TO 
IS  12078  :  1987     RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR 
PERSONAL  PROTECTION  OF  WORKERS  ENGAGED 
IN    HANDLING    ASBESTOS 

( Page  5,  clause  1.1 )  —  Insert  the  following  new  clause: 
'2     OBJECT 
2.2  The  objectives  of  this  standard  are: 

c)  To  prevent  or  minimize  the  potential  for  exposure  of  aiibome 
asbestos  dust  to  workers  in  asbestos  mines, 

d)  To  prevent  or  minimize  the  potential  for  exposure  of  airborne 
asbestos  dust  to  workers  engaged  in  asbestos  based  industries.' 


( CED  53  ) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


