•••*****•*•••••• 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 


Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
'The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live' 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


IS  11532  (1995) :  Construction  and  maintenance  of  river 
embankments  (levees)  -  Guidelines  [WRD  22:  River  Training 
and  Diversion  Works] 


<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 


[SS^  V I  l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 


^^\\X^L 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


<a^EL 


!**> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  11532:  1995 
(  Reaffirmed  2001  ) 

(  vm^rftm ) 

Indian  Standard 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  MAINTENANCE  OF 
RIVER  EMBANKMENTS  (LEVEES)  — 

GUIDELINES 

(  First  Revision  ) 


UDC    627.18.03(026) 


©BIS  1995 

BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

February  1995  Price  Group  2 


River  Training  and  Control  Works  Sectional  Committee,  RVD  22 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  tHe  River  Training  and  Control  Works  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  River 
Valley  Division  Council. 

River  embankment  (levee)  is  an  artificial  bank  built  along  a  river  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  adjacent 
land  from  inundation  by  flood.  Such  type  of  structure  is  also  called  embankment,  levee,  'stop-bank',  'bund' 
or  'dyke' .  Construction  of  embankment  to  control  flood  is  an  age-old  practice  and  is  still  being  followed 
due  to  its  proven  suitability. 

Previously  construction  and  maintenance  of  river  embankments  were  covered  in  two  Indian  Standards, 
namely  IS  11532 :  1985  'Guidelines  for  construction  of  river  embankments  (levees)'  and  IS  12028 :  1987 
'Guidelines  for  maintenance  of  river  embankments  (levees)'.  For  the  convenience  of  users  it  was  felt 
necessary  to  amalgamate  these  two  standards  and  accordingly,  the  present  revision  has  been  taken  up. 


With    ttio    m 

TTlkU      kUW       LSI 


embankments  (levees)'  shall  stand  withdrawn.  In  this  revision  some  of  the  provisions  given  in  the  earlier 
standards  have  been  modified  based  on  the  current  practices  in  the  field  and  experience  gained  with  the 
use  of  the  standards  in  addition  to  incorporating  a  table  giving  approximate  values  of  maximum  dry  density 
and  optimum  moisture  content  for  different  types  of  soil.  Soil  classification  given  in  this  standard  is  based 
on  IS  1498 :  1970  'Classification  and  identification  of  soils  for  general  engineering  purposes  (first  revision )'. 


IS  11532 :  1995 


Indian  Standard 

CONSTRUCTION  AND  MAINTENANCE  OF 
RIVER   EMBANKMENTS  (LEVEES) — 

GUIDELINES 


(  First  Revision ) 


1  SCOPE 


This  standard  covers  the  guidelines  regarding 
construction  and  maintenance  of  river  embank- 
ments (levees). 

2  CONSTRUCTION  OF  EMBANKMENTS 

2.1  Construction  of  an  embankment  should  en- 
visage, for  the  sake  of  economy,  maximum  utiliza- 
tion of  natural  unprocessed  materials  available 
locally.  Embankments  may  be  homogeneous  or 
zoned.  They  should  generally  be  of  compacted  roll 
fill  at  controlled  moisture  content. 

Investigation  of  borrow  areas,  their  location  and 
depth  of  excavation,  foundation  preparation, 
earthwork,  compaction,  moisture  control  and  slope 
protection  are  the  important  aspects  to  be  carefully 
attended  to  during  construction. 

2.2  Borrow  Pits 

2.2.1  Borrow  areas  should  preferably  be  located  on 
the  river  side  of  the  proposed  embankment,  be- 
cause they  get  silted  up  in  course  of  time,  whereas 
those  located  on  the  countryside  remain  a  per- 
manent disfiguration  and  are  liable  to  induce  or 
aggravate  seepage  under  the  embankment,  thereby 
causing  increased  maintenance  problems. 

2.2.2  For  low  embankment  less  than  6  m  in  height, 
borrow  areas  should  not  be  selected  within  25  m 
from  the  toe/heel  of  the  embankment.  In  case  of 
higher  embankment  the  distance  should  not  be  less 
than  50  m. 

2.2.3  Preliminary  soil  investigation  may  be  done 
from  a  few  representative  auger  holes  or  borrow 
pits. 

2.2.4  After  selection  of  an  area  apparently  suitable 
for  borrow  pits  in  accordance  with  2.2.1,  2.2.2 
and  2.2.3,  detailed  investigations  should  be  under- 
taken for  a  systematic  mapping  and  determination 
of  engineering  properties  such  as  gradation, 
permeability,  plastic  limits,  etc,  of  the  soils  in  the 
borrow. 


2.2.5  Plan  showing  borrow  areas  and  the  quantity 
of  materials  for  different  zones  of  the  embankment 
section  should  be  used  for  actual  construction. 

2.2.6  The  recommended  mean  distance  of  the  bor- 
row pits  from  the  toe  of  the  embankments  as  well 
as  the  depth  of  borrow  pits  should  generally  be  as 
under: 

Distance  of         Maximum  Depth  of  Borrow 

Borrow  Pits         Pks 

f  River  Side      Country  Side  ^ 


m  m 

25  to  50  1.0 

Over  50  up  to  75  1.5 

Over  75  up  to  100  2.0 


m 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 


2.2.7  In  order  to  obviate  development  of  flow 
parallel  to  embankment,  cross  bars  of  width  eight 
times  the  depth  of  borrow  pits  spaced  at  50  to  60 
metres  centre-to-centre  should  be  left  in  the  bor- 
row pits. 

2.2.8  All  borrow  areas/pits  should  be  stripped  of 
the  top  soil,  sod,  loam  and  other  objectionable 
materials  considered  unsuitable  for  use  in  the 
embankment. 

2.3  Laboratory  Tests 

For  important  and  also  for  embankments  higher 
than  6  m,  representative  samples  obtained  from  the 
borrow  areas  should  be  tested  in  the  laboratory  to 
determine  the  engineering  properties  of  soils,  such 
as  gradation,  permeability,  plastic  limits,  shear 
strength,  dry  density,  compaction  tests,  etc,  as  given 
in  design. 

2.4  Preparation  of  Foundation 

The  seat  of  the  embankment  should  be  properly 
prepared  for  fill  placement.  It  should  be  ensured 
that  all  stumps,  brush,  large  roots,  top  soil  anU 
other  objectionable  materials  are  completely 
removed  before  placement  of  the  fill.  Any  ridges  or 
mounds,  which  are  in  line  of  embankment,  should 
be  loosened  by  ploughing  or  stepped  or  dug  or 
provided  with  V-cut  benching  at  intervals  running 


IS  11532 :  1995 


parallel  to  the  centre  line.  The  prepared  surface 
should  enable  proper  bond  with  the  fill  material  to 
be  placed  thereon. 

2.5  Earthwork 

2.5.1  Embankment  Profile 

A  complete  profile  of  the  embankment  with  its 
correct  height,  width  and  all  slopes  dressed  to  true 
form  should  be  laid  by  pegs,  bamboo  posts  and 
strings  at  50  m  intervals  or  by  actual  construction 
of  the  embankment  of  3  m  length  at  150  m  intervals. 
The  actual  construction  should,  however,  be  done 
by  giving  suitable  settlement  allowances  which  may 
be  about  1  to  2  percent  of  the  embankment  height. 

2.5.2  Embankment  Involving  Mechanical 
Compaction 

In  case  of  embankment  involving  mechanical  com- 
paction, the  materials  free  from  all  organic  matter 
should  be  compacted  in  layers  of  15  to  20  cm  for  the 
full  width  of  the  embankment  and  carried  up 
regularly  in  accordance  with  embankment  section. 
All  clods  should  be  broken  up  to  a  size  having  not 
more  than  5  cm  diameter.  Each  layer  should  be 
properly  watered  and  compacted.  The  surface 
should  be  well  graded  and  crowned  in  the  centre  so 
that  during  rain  the  surface  water  is  carried  rapidly 
to  the  slopes  of  the  fill. 

2.5.3  Embankment  Involving  Manual  Compaction 

In  case  of  embankment  involving  manual  compac- 
tion, the  layers  not  exceeding  15  cm  thickness 
should  be  placed  slightly  sloped  towards  the  centre 
of  the  crest  so  that  rainfall  will  naturally  con- 
solidate the  embankment  during  the  construction. 
The  materials  should  be  free  from  organic  matter. 


The  top  layer  forming  the  crest  of  the  embankment 
should  be  suitably  graded  so  that  rainwater  does  not 
accumulate  and  create  maintenance  problems. 

2.5.4  Remodelling  of  Embankments 

When  adding  new  earthwork  to  existing  embank- 
ment, the  old  bank  should  first  be  cut  or  benched 
into  steps  with  the  treads  sloping  slightly  towards 
the  centre  of  the  embankment  and  the  surface  of 
the  old  work  should  be  wetted  so  that  new  earth 
may  adhere  to  the  old.  Similarly,  junctions  should 
be  made  by  cutting  grips  or  forks  in  the  side  slopes 
of  the  old  embankment. 

2.5.5  Incomplete  Embankment 

In  case  the  whole  length  is  not  taken  up  simul- 
taneously, the  incomplete  embankment  should 
have  steps  not  steeper  than  overall  longitudinal 
slope  of  1  in  5  to  permit  satisfactory  bond  with  the 
portion  to  be  taken  up  later. 

2.6  Compaction 

2.6.1  The  basic  criteria  of  the  quality  and 
suitability  of  the  work  done  is  the  degree  of  com- 
paction attained.  For  effective  quality  control  of 
compaction,  data  on  optimum  moisture  content 
and  maximum  dry  density  obtained  from  laboratory 
compaction  tests  are  required.  For  small  embank- 
ments, in  the  absence  of  such  laboratory  data, 
values  given  in  Table  1  may  be  used.  The  best  result 
is  obtained  by  spreading  materials  with  a  moisture 
content  1  to  2  percent  less  than  the  optimum  mois- 
ture content  in  layers  of  limited  thickness  and  roll- 
ing with  properly  designed  rollers  with  sufficient 
number  of  passes.  Smooth  contact  surface  between 
successive  layers  should  be  avoided  and  uniform 
density  throughout  the  fill  should  be  achieved. 


Table  1    Approximate  Values  of  Maximum  Dry  Density  and  Optimum  Moisture  Content  for 

Different  Types  of  Soils 


Soil 
Classification 

Proctor  Compaction 

f 

T 

Maximum  Dry  Density 
g/cm 

Optimum  Moisture  Content 

percent 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

GW 

>  1.907 

<13.3 

GP 

>  1.762 

<12.4 

GM 

>  1.826 

<14.5 

GC 

>  1.843 

<14.7 

SW 

1.907  ±  0.08 

13.3  ±  2.5 

SP 

1.762  +  0.032 

12  4  ±  1.0 

SM 

1.826  ±0.016 

14.5  ±0.4 

SM  SC 

1.907  ±0.016 

12.8  ±  0.5 

SC 

1.842  ±  0.016 

14.7  ±0.4 

ML 

1.6*50  ±0.016 

19.2  ±  0.7 

CL 

1.730  +  0.016 

16 .8  ±  0.7 

MH 

1.314  ±  0.064 

36.3  ±  3.2 

CM 

1 .506  ±  0.032 

25  5   +  1.2 

NOTE  — ±  Emry  indicate  90  percent  confidence  limits  of  the  average  value. 

IS  11532 :  1995 


2.6.2  Compaction  of  each  layer  of  fill  materials 
should  proceed  in  systematic,  orderly  and  con- 
tinuous manner  so  as  to  ensure  the  specified 
coverage  by  the  compactors.  Sheepfoot  roller  or 
tamping  type  roller  is  generally  accepted  as  the  best 
available  means  of  ensuring  proper  compaction  for 
average  type  embankment  material.  The  accept- 
able limit  of  compaction  as  compared  to  the  dry 
density  at  optimum  moisture  content  would 
depend  on  the  desired  shear  strength  for  the 
stability  of  side  slopes.  For  mechanical  compaction 
the  minimum  compaction  should  be  90  percent  and 
for  manual  compaction  85  percent.  Adequate 
quality  control  and  field  tests  are  needed  to  ensure 
this. 

2.6.3  If  the  soil  is  granular  with  practically  no 
cohesion,  road  rollers  are  considered  quite  ade- 
quate for  compaction. 

2.6.4  Those  parts  of  the  fill  which  cannot  be 
reached  by  rolling  equipment  should  receive 
equivalent  manual  compaction  or  mechanical 
tampers.  Particular  care  should  be  taken  for 
suitable  compaction  and  jointing  of  embankments 
with  the  structures. 

2.7  Moisture  Control  for  Mechanical  Compaction 

2.7.1  Proper  moisture  control  of  the  material  is 
very  important  in  order  to  ensure  proper  compac- 
tion. Materials  may  be  conditioned  to  the  desired 
moisture  content  either  at  the  site  of  excavation,  on 
the  embankment  or  under  same  condition  at  both 
the  borrow  pit  and  during  placement.  It  is  necessary 
that  some  rapid  and  convenient  methods  be 
employed  to  determine  whether  or  not  the 
materials  have  the  desired  moisture  content  as  they 
are  placed  on  embankment. 

2.7.2  The  penetration  resistance  needle,  which 
makes  use  of  the  penetration  resistance-moisture 
relation  for  the  material  being  placed,  is  very  useful 
for  the  purpose.  It  is  desirable  to  establish  field 
laboratories  to  carry  out  tests  in  the  field  while 
compaction  operation  goes  on. 

2.8    Slope  Protection 

The  surface  protection  of  embankment  against  ac- 
tion of  rain  and  wind  is  usually  achieved  by  turfing. 
In  case  of  embankment  using  non-cohesive 
material,  a  cover  of  0.3  to  0.6  m  thick  cohesive 
material  can  be  given.  Since  velocities  along  river 
side  slopes  of  embankment  are  expected  to  be  low, 
no  slope  protection  may  ordinarily  be  required  and 
turfing  on  both  sides  may  suffice.  If  river  action  is 
more  severe,  suitably  designed  slope  protection 
should  be  adopted. 

2.8.1  The  planting  of  trees  on  embankment  should 
not  be  permitted  because  their  roots  tend  to  loosen 


the  structure  of  the  embankment  when  shaken  by 
wind  storm  which,  in  turn,  causes  cracks  and  leaks. 
Shrubs,  thorny  bushes  and  short  grass  growing  on 
the  slopes  of  embankments  provide  good  protec- 
tion against  erosions,  wave  wash  and  stray  cattle. 
Generally  the  side  slopes  and  0.6  metre  width  in  top 
from  the  edges  of  the  embankments  should  be 
turfed  with  grass  sods  and  this  turfing  should  extend 
beyond  the  toe  to  country-side  and  the  river  side  by 

6.0  metres  and  3.0  metres  respectively. 

3  MAINTENANCE 

3.1  Proper  maintenance  of  embankments  is  ex- 
tremely important  as  breaches  in  them  can  be  dis- 
astrous and  may  cause  even  greater  damage  than 
the  inundation  by  the  floods  where  no  embank- 
ments are  provided.  The  maintenance  work  can  be 
divided  into  2  parts: 

a)  Pre-monsoon  maintenance,  and 

b)  Monsoon  maintenance. 

3.1.1  Pre-monsoon  Maintenance 

3.1.1.1  Existing  embankments  have  to  be  repaired 
or  reconditioned  to  the  original  designed  section  in 
advance  for  their  efficient  performance  during  the 
ensuing  monsoons.  The  free  board  may  be  checked 
up  for  any  rise  in  the  bed  level  of  the  river  or  other 
constrictions  which  may  result  in  higher  design 
flood  level  and  provided/maintained  accordingly. 

3.1.1.2  All  hollows  and  depressions  in  the 
embankment's  section,  wherever  existing,  should 
be  made  up  with  rammed  earth  after  clearing  the 
site  of  all  loose  and  vegetal  materials.  Where  the 
top  material  is  sandy  or  silty,  it  is  desirable  to 
provide  a  cover  of  soil  containing  10  to  IS  percent 
of  clay  well  rammed  or  rolled. 

3.1.1.3  A  register  of  leaks  should  be  maintained 
indicating  the  location  and  action  taken  during  the 
monsoon  period.  The  leaks,  which  could  not  be 
fully  treated  during  the  monsoon  period,  should  be 
attended  to  immediately  afterwards.  Such  leakage 
sites  should  be  opened  in  the  full  width  of  the 
embankment  taking  care  to  trace  to  its  upstream 
ends,  and  then  be  refilled  with  good  earth  in  15 
centimetre  layers,  watered  and  rammed,  the  old 
earth  being  stepped  or  benched  back  at  the  sides 
and  new  earthwork  properly  bonded  and  interlock- 
ed into  the  old. 

3.1.1.4  Rodents  and  other  animals  make  holes, 
cavities  and  tunnels  through  and  under  embank- 
ments. These  are  sources  of  danger  causing  leakage 
and  excessive  seepages  which  may  give  rise  to 
serious  breaches  during  flood  period.  Such  holes 
should  be  carefully  located,  examined,  provided 
with  an  inverted  filter,  filled  with  earth  and 
rammed.  Alternatively  such  holes  should  be  filled 
with  well  rammed  stiff  clay. 


3 


IS  11532 :  1995 


3.1.1.5  All  the  masonry  works  should  be  carefully 
inspected  to  detect  if  there  is  any  danger  of  seepage 
of  water  along  the  planes  of  contact  between  the 
earth  and  masonry.  The  earth  adjacent  to  the 
masonry  work  should  be  laid  in  15  cm  layers, 
watered  and  compacted,  and  brought  to  the  design 
section. 

3.1.1.6  For  embankments  which  were  severely 
threatened  by  erosion  during  the  previous  mon- 
soon, revetment/rip  rap  or  other  river  training 
works  should  be  separately  examined.  Where 
stones  or  bricks,  etc,  are  costly,  cheaper  means  like 
brushwood  matting,  etc,  may  be  used.  In  case  of 
wave  action,  pitching  should  be  taken  at  least 
0.3  metre  above  the  maximum  height  of  wave  ex- 
pected. 

3.1.1.7  Approach  roads  and  also  top  of  embank- 
ments, wherever  they  are  designed  to  carry 
vehicular  traffic,  as  well  as  ramps  provided  for  in- 
spection and  maintenance  should  be  kept  in  good 
condition  so  that  they  serve  the  purpose  of 
transport  of  materials  and  inspections  both  during 
thepre-monsoon  and  monsoon  periods.  No  habita- 
tion should  be  permitted  on  the  embankments. 

3.1.1.8  All  departmental  vehicles,  boats  and 
launches  should  be  kept  operational. 

3.1.1.9  All  sluice  gates,  regulation  gates  and  valves 
should  be  properly  greased,  oiled  and  treated. 

3.1.1.10  All  tools  and  equipment  including  torch 
lights,  hurricane  lamps,  spades,  etc,  and  flood  fight* 
ing  articles  as  well  as  materials  for  erecting  tem- 
porary sheds  at  the  work  sites  for  workers  should 
be  arranged  and  stored  in  suitable  places. 

3.1.1.11  Proper  communication  system  should  be 
installed  for  quick  transmission  of  messages  to  the 
concerned  authorities. 

3.1.2  Maintenance  During  Monsoon 

3.1.2.1  During  monsoon,  prompt  maintenance  of 
the  embankment  is  required  as  the  flood  water  of 
river  threatens  the  safety  of  the  embankment  most- 
ly during  this  period.  This  is  all  the  more  important 
in  case  of  new  embankments  and  also  in  case  of 
those  reaches  of  old  embankments  where  breaches 
occured  in  the  past.  The  establishment  required  to 
be  engaged  for  proper  maintenance  of  an  embank- 
ment will  vary  depending  upon  importance  of  the 
embankment  and  behaviour  of  the  river.  As  soon  as 
water  touches  the  embankment  and  river  shows 
rising  trend  of  its  water  level,  round  the  clock 
patrolling  should  start  by  the  establishment 
engaged  for  this  purpose  and  continue  until  water 


finally  receeds  from  the  embankment.  During  this 
period,  inspection  by  senior  officials  should  be  car- 
ried out  systematically  and  all  the  concerned  of- 
ficers and  staff  should  remain  alert  to  meet  any 
emergent  situation. 

3.1.2.2  Special  vigilance  is  necessary  in  the 
countryside  of  the  embankment  to  detect  any  for- 
mation of  boils  due  to  seepage.  This  should  be 
immediately  attended  to  by  providing  loading  berm 
to  counter  balance  exit  gradient.  A  suitable  filter 
material  may  be  placed  around  the  boil  below  the 
loading  berm  to  arrest  fines  in  seepage  water. 

3.1.2.3  Water  may  seep  through  a  sand  stratum 
under  the  levee  and  emerge  on  the  countryside  in 
the  form  of  bubbling  springs.  Under  these  condi- 
tions, a  stream  of  water  bursts  through  the  ground, 
carrying  with  it  sand  which  then  settles  around  the 
edge  of  the  hole.  These  sandboils  may  be  as  large  as 
1  to  1.3  metres  in  diameter  and  may  occur  from  13 
to  100  metres  from  the  levee  or  even  further  away. 

As  a  protective  measure  embankments  of  earth 
filled  sacks  may  be  built  around  them  thus  ponding 
the  water  and  creating  a  head  on  the  countryside 
sufficient  to  stop  the  flow  of  silt  through  minimis- 
ing the  effective  head  of  water.  If  other  boils  take 
place  outside  this  encircling  embankment,  it  may 
be  necessary  to  construct  sub-levees  around  the 
area  containing  such  sand-boils. 

3.1.2.4  To  prevent  the  water  from  overtopping  and 
washing  out  a  portion  of  the  levee,  a  dowel  at  the 
river  side  of  the  top  of  the  embankment  with 
sand/earth  filled  bags  may  be  provided. 

The  bags  should  be  filled  half  full  only  so  that  they 
will  fit  closely  against  each  other.  Sand  should  not 
be  used  for  filling  the  sacks,  if  clay  or  loamy  soil  is 
available.  In  case  of  emergency,  the  material  may  be 
taken  from  the  back  slope  of  the  levee  much  above 
the  hydraulic  gradient  line  with  respect  to  maxi- 
mum flood  level. 

3.1.2.5  Repair  of  rain  cuts  in  the  embankment, 
stacking  of  material  and  machinery  required  for 
repairing,  putting  the  top  of  embankment  in  order, 
etc,  should  also  be  made.  Scouring  and  eroding 
behaviour  of  the  river  should  also  be  carefully 
watched  for  taking  necessary  precautionary 
measures.  In  this  way,  by  means  of  proper  vigilance 
and  timely  action  for  repair  works,  flood  disaster 
can  be  reduced  to  a  great  extent. 

3.1.2.6  All  information  connected  with  rising  flood 
water  level  and  flood  situation  should  be  passed  on 
to  concerned  higher  authorities  to  enable  them  to 
take  safety  measures  in  time. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  ihey  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc :  No.  RVD  22  ( 134 ). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected  . 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002  Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 

Telephones :  331 01  31, 331 13  75  (Common  to  all  offices) 

Regional  Offices :  Telephone 

Central    :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  f  331 01 31 

NEW  DELHI  1 10002  \  331 13  75 

Eastern    :  1/14 C.  IT.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola  f  37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA  700054  \  378626,378662 


Northern :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34- A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  f  60  38  43 

602025 


{ 


Southern :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001 13  f  235  02  16, 235  04  42 

123515  19,235  2315 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  /  632  92  95, 632  78  58 

BOMBAY  400093  \  632  78  91, 632  78  92 

Branches :  AHMADABAD.      BANGALORE.         BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR.    KANPUR.    LUCKNOW.    PATNA   THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


