**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11702-2 (1986) : Measurement of airborne noise emitted by 
pneumatic tools and machines. Part 2: Method for checking 
compliance with noise limits [PGD 8: Pneumatic Tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1t70a ( Part 3 } - 1 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE NOISE 

EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS 

AND MACHINES 

PART 2 METHOD FOR CHECKIH6 COMPLIANCE WITH 

N015E LLMLT5 



UDC 621 542 ; 534&35*46 z 534 833 522 : 534 832-7 




d) Copyright 19&7 

INDIAN STANDARDs'lNSTITUTlON 
MANAlt BEIAVAN. 9 &^HADUR SHAH StAFAH MARO 

NEW UGLHt 110D02 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE NOISE 

EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS 

AND MACHINES 

PART 2 METHOD FOR CHECKING COMPLIANCE WITH 

NOISE LIMITS 

Acoustics Sectional Committee, LTDG 5 

Chairman Representing 

Suiu K, D. Pavatje Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(GSIR),Pilani 

Members 

Shri M. K. Kapoor ( Alternate to 
ShriK. O, Pavate ) 
Shui Sandebp Ahuja Ahuja Radios, New Delhi 

Shui K. R. Gurumurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K.- Bhatia Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi 

SiiRi T. R. Wadhwa ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Ghandrachudan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri p. Ghosu Railway Board, New Delhi 

Shri Sjiankar ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. N. Gupta Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Col KrisjianLal Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

SuRi B. S. RuPUAi ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. MouANAK National Physical Laboratory ( GSIR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri J, S, Monoa Bolton Private Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Monoa ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Monga Electronic Component Industries Association 

( ELCINA ), New Delhi 

Shri Ghanisiiam Dass ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Nauayan Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shki K. NAaAUA.T ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Miss ) ^hailaja NikaM All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore 

Shri S. S. Muutjiy ( Alternate) 

( Continueii &n page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) ■ 1986 



{Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Prof B. S. Ramakbishna 
Shbi S. L. Redby 



Shbi M. M.Joshi {Alternate) 
SiiRi M, Skankaualtngam 



Representing 

Central University, Hyderabad 

Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and 
The Radio Electronic & Television Manufac- 
turers* Association, Bombay 



Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 
New Delhi 

ShbiS. K, Sen Directorate General of All India Radio, 

New Delhi 
Shbi W. V, B. Ramalingam ( Alternate ) 
Cdb p. K, Sinha Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Lt R. S. Datta ( Alternate ) 
Superintendent Surveyor of Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works ( Food ) 

Surveyor of Works I/Food ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N, Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shbi Pavan Kumar 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE NOISE 

EMITTED BY PNEUMATIC TOOLS 

AND MACHINES 

PART 2 METHOD FOR CHECKING COMPLIANCE WITH 

NOISE LIMITS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 26 May 1986, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sec- 
tional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommu- 
nication Division Council. 

0.2 This standard specifies methods for determining and presenting the 
acoustic characteristics of pneumatic tools and machines. 

0.3 The purpose of this standard is to provide data on acoustic perfor- 
mance of machinery for acoustic planning and for checking compliance 
with noise limits. 

0.4 For acoustic planning, the determination of both A-weighted and 
octave band sound power levels are normally required, whereas for check- 
ing compliance with noise limits normally only the A-weighted sound 
power level is required. 

0.5 The more comprehensive data obtained in Part 1 may be used not only 
for acoustic comparison of different types of machines and for prediction 
of disturbance in the near vicinity ( in the case of a machine operating 
outdoors, for example, on a building site ), but also as a contribution to- 
wards assessing the risk of hearing damage for people operating or work- 
ing close to the machine. 

0.6 This standard deals, firstly, with determination of surface sound pres- 
sure levels and, secondly, with the calculation of sound power levels. The 
measurements shall be made in a free field over a reflecting plane. An 
example of the recommended form of test report is also included, 



IS: 11702 ( Part 2). 1986 

0.7 This standard has been divided into two parts. Part 1 is an engineer- 
ing method for determination of sound power levels, and gives information 
for acoustic planning. Part 2 is a method for checking compliance with 
noise limits, and is primarily used for type approvals in accordance with 
legal or contractual requirements. Both parts are complete in themselves 
and independent of each other. 

0.8 The operating conditions in Part 1 are as far as possible conditions 
met in everyday use of the machinery which tend to give a relatively high 
degree of uncertainty. The operating conditions in this part are chosen so 
as to give the best possible repeatability of test results involving, if neces- 
sary, the isolation of machine noise and suppression of the tool and pro- 
cess noise. 

0.9 Section 1 of this part gives a general specification of measurement 
methods valid for all types of machines covered. Section two lays down 
special operating conditions for the various types of machines. If, in future, 
new machines are to be added, this can conveniently be done by adding 
further sections, thus maintaining the format of this part. 

0.10 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from 
ISO/DIS 3481|2.2 ^Acoustics — Measurement of airborne noise emitted by 
pneumatic tools and machines, Part 2 Method for checking compliance 
with noise limits' issued by International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO). 

0.11 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this stan- 
dard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it 
shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



SECTION 1 GENERAL SPECIFICATION 
1, SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies a method for measuring the airborne 
noise emitted by pneumatic tools and machines and stipulates precise 
instructions for conducting the tests and reporting the results, for the pur- 
pose of checking noise limits. 

1.2 This standard covers measurements in a free field over a reflecting 
plane. Only the A-weighted surface sound pressure level is measured and 
the sound power is determined. It applies, for example, to rock-drills 
(sinkers), paving-breakers, pickhammers, plug-hole-drills, picks and 
spades. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 11702 { Part 2 ) - 1986 

1.3 Devices emitting isolated sound bursts, for example, low frequency 
pile-drivers, or series of sound pulses with a repetition frequency lower 
than 10 Hz are not covered by this part. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in 
IS : 1885 ( Part 3 )* shall apply. 

3. REFERENCE PRESSURE AND REFERENCE POWER 

3.1 In this standard the reference pressure of 20 fiPa is used for the expre^ 
ssion of sound pressure level and the reference power of 1 pW is used 
for the expression of sound power level. 

4. INSTRUMENTATION 

4*1 General 

4,1.1 The instrumentation shall be designed to permit the determina- 
tion of the value of the A-weighted sound pressure level averaged over 
time. Tolerances as regards the several components comprising the inst- 
rumentation system shall not exceed the tolerances given in the relevant 
clauses of IS : 9779 - 198It, type I or better. 

NoTK 1 — An example of an appropriate instrument for these measurements is 
a sound level meter that fulfils at least the requirements for a type 1 instrument, 
conforming with IS : 9779-1981t with a 'slow' meter characteristic. In addition, for 
establishing the presence of impulsive noise, the 'impulsive' meter characteristic, 
conforming with IS : 9779 - 198lt shall be used. 

Note 2 — Another example of an appropriate instrumentation system is an 
integrator which carries out an analogue or digital integration of the squared signal 
over a given time interval. 

4.2 Microphone and Associated Gable 

4.2.1 So as to minimize the influence of the observer on the measure^ 
ments, a cable should preferably be used between the microphone and the 
sound level meter. The observer shall not stand between the microphone 
and the source the sound power level which is being determined. The 
microphone shall comply with the specifications given in IS : 9779-l981f, 
type 1 or better. 

4.3 Frequency Response of the Instrumentation System 

4.3.1 The frequency response of the instrumentation system for the 
angle of incidence specified bv the manufacturer shall be within the toler- 
ances given in IS : 9779-1981t. 



*Electrotechnical vocabulary ; Part 3 Acoustics. 
fSpecification for sound level meters. 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

4 A Calibration 

4,4.1 At least before each series of measurements an acoustic calibrator 
with an accuracy of ±0*5 dB shall be applied to the microphone to cali- 
brate the entire instrumentation system, including cable, if used, at one or 
more frequencies. One calibration frequency should be in the range from 
250 to 1 000 Hz. The calibrator shall be checked annually to verify that 
its output has not changed. 

5. OPERATING AND LOADING 

5.1 The machine shall be operating in stable condition as for normal 
continuous service. 

5.2 The machine shall be operated at an effective working pressure of 6 
bar or at rated pressure, if this is considered more normal, and rated 
energy supply. During testing, air pressure shall be measured at the cou- 
pling which is closest to the machine while it is in operation. The machine 
shall operate normally; restriction of the exhaust by freezing shall be avoi- 
ded. The type, quality and quantity of lubricant shall be as recommended 
by the manufacturer. 

Note — The pressure may be checked by means of a dial pressure gauge, but, 
in view of the pulsation of the machine, it is preferable to use an arrangement con- 
sisting of an air receiver with a capacity of 50 to 100 1, supplied by a conventional 
hose, 20 ni in length with a diameter of 19 mm. The machine will be supplied from 
this receiver through a hose, with a diameter between 25 and 30 mm diameter, and 
4'5 mm in length connected to the coupling. The receiver shall be as far away 
from the machine as possible. The pressure inside the receiver shall be measured 
through a connection. 

The pressure may be adjusted either through the outlet valve on the 
compressor or by a calibrated pressure regulator. 

A schematic diagram illustrating a typical device for a paving-brea- 
ker is given in Fig. 1. 

For operating and loading specifications, the relevant section should 
be referred to. 

6. REFERENCE AND MEASUREMENT SURFACES 

6.1 Reference Paralleloplped 

6.1.1 So as make the location of the microphone positions, more straight- 
forward, the smallest possible imaginary rectangular parallelepiped (length 
/i, width /g, height I^ ), just enclosing the source and terminating on the 
reflecting plane, is used for reference purposes. When defining the paral- 
lelepiped, small elements protruding from the source, which are unlikely 
to be major radiators of sound energy, may be disregarded. 



ACOUSTIC SHIELD PRECISION PRESSURE GAUGE 

ADJUSTMENT OF PRESSURE / HOSE 30 mm x 4-5 m LONG 



BY CONTROLLED LEAKAGE 



* /?//JJ??/ ^?/??A}??JTT 



COMPRESSOR 



^^ 





CON VENTIONAL COUPLING 
TO MACHINE 

PICK 
SPRINGS OR 



AIR RECEIVER 
REFLECTING SURFACE 



BLOCK 
Fig. I Ekample of Device for Supplying Compressed Air 



Xi^ 









(O 

^ 



IS I 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

6.2 Measurement Surface 

6.2.1 The measurement surface is a hypothetical hemisphere with its 
geometric centre at the point at which the geometric centre of the refere- 
nce parallelopiped is projected into the reflecting plane. 

6.2.2 The radius of the hemispherical measurement surface shall be 
2 m or 4 m depending on the relevant section. 

7. NOISE MEASUREMENT 

7.1 Test Environment 

7.1.1 A suitable test area shall be a hard reflecting surface of such dia- 
meter that all microphone positions are within its perimeter. A qualifica- 
tion procedure for determining the adequacy of the acousticd.1 environ- 
ment and methods for determining the environmental correction factor, if 
necessary, are given in Indian Standard measurement of airborne noise 
emitted by construction equipment intended for outdoor use — Method 
for checking compliance with noise limits ( under preparation ) . A surface 
of concrete or impervious asphalt may, for example, be satisfactory. 

7.1.2 The presence of large objects such as buildings and machines 
within a radius of 10 m from the machine being tested shall be avoided. 
Measurements may be carried out indoors, if a suitable test room is avail- 
able. 

Note — Care shall also be taken to ensure that gusts of wind do not distort the 
results of the measurements and that no microphone is placed in the exhaust air 
zone during the measurement. A microphone wind-screen shall be used. If neces- 
sary, in this case, a specified calibration correction may be required. Wind speed 
should not exceed 8 tnjs. 

7.2 Background Noise 

7.2.1 The sound pressure level of the background noise with the ma- 
chine being tested but not running shall be determined at the microphone 
positions to be used when carrying out the tests. The period of measure- 
ment shall be long in relation to any fluctuation in the background sound 
pressure level observed so that a correct average reading can be obtained 
with the ^slow' response setting of the sound level meter. 

7.2.2 The readings at each position, with the machine running, should 
preferably exceed the background sound pressure level by at least 10 dB. 
If the difference is less, corrections shall be applied as shown in Table 1. 

7.2.3 If the difference between the measured sound pressure level and 
the background sound pressure level is less than 6 dB, a valid result cannot 
be obtained. 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 



TABLE 1 CORRECTIONS TO BE APPLIED 

( Clauses 7.2.2 and 8 A. 2 ) 

Difference Between Sound Pressure Correction to be Subtracted from 
Level Measured with Sound Source Sound Pressure Level Measured 

Operating and Background Sound with Sound Source Operating to 

Pressure Level Alone Obtain Sound Pressure Level 

DUE to Sound Source Alone 
dB dB 

6 to 8 1-0 

9 to 10 0*5 

Greater than 10 



7.3 Measurements 

7.3.1 General 

7.3.1.1 Observers and measuring instruments shall be at least 1 m 
behind the microphone. Care shall be taken to ensure that operating per- 
sonnel do not come between or in line with the machine and the micro- 
phone while readings are being taken so as not to impair the validity of 
the measurements, 

7.3.2 Readings to be Recorded 

7.3.2.1 The A-weighted sound pressure levels shall be recorded at 
each microphone position as specified in 7.3.3, with the machine being 
tested running as laid down in 5. The sound level meter shall be used 
on the ^slow' response setting. 

7.3.3 Microphone Positions 

7.3.3.1 The microphone shall be located on the measurement surface 
in accordance with the specifications laid down in the relevant section. 

7.3.4 Measurement Technique 

7.3.4.1 With the microphone in each of the positions given in the 
relevant section, the sound pressure levels shall be recorded as specified 
in 7.3.2. 

7.3.4.2 The period of measurement shall be long in relation to any 
fluctuation in sound pressure level observed so that a visual average read- 
ing can be obtained with the ^slow* response setting of the meter. 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

7.3,4,3 The microphone shall be held in the position of grazing in- 
cidence or perpendicular incidence as recommended by the manufacturer. 

Note — If the noise from the machine being tested contains strong audible dis- 
crete frequency components, errors in the measurement results may occur. Where 
the discrete-frequency components are of high frequency, the errors can be reduced 
by slowly raising and lowering the microphone by approximately i0*3 m from each 
nominal microphone position. During the movement, care shall be taken to avoid 
the generation of noise, either mechanical or aerodynamic in originj which could 
influence the measurements. If the moving microphone technique is used, this shall 
be reported. 

8. CORRECTIONS AND CALCULATIONS 

8.1 Application of Corrections 

8.1.1 Instrumentation calibration corrections and wind-screen correc- 
tions shall be applied, as appropriate. 

8.1.2 Readings shall be corrected for the influence of background noise 
in accordance with Table 1. 

8.2 Calculation of the Surface Sound Pressure Level 

8.2.1 If the spread between the readings for one set of microphone posi- 
tions does not exceed 5 dB, the surface sound pressure level can be obtai- 
ned by arithmetically averaging the readings and subtracting the environ- 
mental correction K ( see below ). 

8.2.2 If the spread exceeds 5 dB, the A-weighted surface sound pressure 
level Zp in decibels, is calculated using the following formula: 

Zp=101og[-L(antilog -^ + antilog +^ + ... +antilog :^ )] -K 

where 

Lj is the sound pressure level, at microphone position No. 1, in 
decibels, corrected in accordance with 8.1; 

Lj, is the sound pressure IgvcI^ at microphone position No. n, in 
decibels, corrected in accordance with 8.1; 

JV is the number of microphone positions at a given distance; 
and 

K is the environmental correction, in decibels, as determined 
by one of the procedures specified in Indian Standard 
measurement of airborne noise emitted by construction 
equipment intended for outdoor use — Method for checking 
compliance with noise limits ( under preparation ) for test 
environments meeting the requirements of 7.1, A' = 0. 

10 



IS t 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

9. CALCULATION OF THE SOUND POWER LEVEL 
9.1 Area of the Measurement Surface 

9.1.1 For the purposes of calculating sound power level, the area 5 of 
the measurement surface, in square metres, shall be calculated from the 
formula 

where r is the radius of the hemispherical measurement surface, in metres. 

9«2 Calculation of A-Weighted Sound Power Level 

9.2.1 The weighted sound power level, I^, in decibels, of the machine 
being tested is given by the formula 

Iw- ip+ lOlogf^) 

where 

Lp is the surface sound pressure level, in decibels of the machine 
being tested, calculated in accordance with 8.2; 

i5' is the area of the measurement surface, in square metres, calcul- 
ated in accordance with 9.1; and 

^o ===: 1 mK 
The logarithmic relation 10 log { —^~ ] is 20 dB for a hemisphere radius 
of 4 m and 14 dB for a hemisphere radius of 2 m. 

10. TEST REPORT 

10.1 The test report shall include at least the following information ; 

a) reference to this part; 

b) a description of the machine being tested ( including make, 
model and serial number ); 

c) the operating conditions ( including ambient temperature, wind 
speed and air pressure at the machine ) and nature of the energy- 
absorbing device; 

d) a sketch showing the test layoiit, pinpointing the microphone 
positions and indicating the direction and distance to large 
objects within the test area; 

e) the make, model and serial number of the acoustic instrumenta- 
tion used, including any device used for protecting the micro- 
phone against effect of wind, and calibration method; 

11 



IS: 11702 (Part 2 ) - 1986 

f) the A-weighted background sound pressure level, in decibels, at 

the microphone positions used for the test; the correction shall 
be stated; 

g) the sound pressure level at each microphone position, reported in 
the table in the test report ( after the correction for background 
noise and wind-screening have been made ); 

h) the environmental correction factor, to be stated in the table in 
the test report; 

j) the surface sound pressure level, corrected by the environmental 
correction factor; 

k) graphs giving A-weighted surface sound pressure level; and 

m) the directivity index in accordance with the specifications of 
Appendix A. 

For the purposes of stating sound power, the following additional 
information shall be given: 

a) the area of the measurement surface, in square metres; and 

b) the A-weighted sound power level. 

The recommended format for the test report is shown in Appendix B. 

SECTION 2 SPECIAL TEST CONDITIONS FOR PAVING- 
BREAKERS, PICKHAMMERS, ETC 

11. GENERAL 

11,1 For the purposes of testing the noise emission from paving-breakers, 
pickhammers, plug-hole-drills and similar tools used on building sites, the 
special test conditions given in this section are applicable. The general 
specifications laid down in 1 to 10 shall be valid for the test. 

12. LOADING OF MACHINE 

12.1 During the test the machine shall be operated in the following way: 

a) In a vertical position on the device consisting of a concrete block 
in which a tool is embedded ( see 13 ). The device shall be placed 
in a concrete pit ( see 14 ) , 

b) Unattended by an operator and firmly held down on the tool 
shank described below by means of a flexible device preventing 
the machine from bouncing while operating, that is, giving the 
same operating conditions as when the tool is embedded in 
the material to be broken up, before it fractures. The flexible 
device may take the form of calibrated springs or pneumatic 
jacks. 

12 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 
13. CONCRETE BLOCK AND TOOL 

13.1 General 

13.1.1 The machine shaii be run, as described in 12, on the tool which 
is embedded in a cube-shaped concrete block, placed in a concrete pit, 
below the surface of the ground. The tool shank shall be tested for correct 
type and dimensions for the machine. 

13.2 Block Characteristics 

13.2.1 The block shall be in the shape of a regular cube with 0*6 m 
sides, it shall be made of reinforced concrete and thoroughly vibrated in 
layers up to 0*2 m to avoid excessive sedimentation. 

13.3 Composition of Concrete 

13.3.1 The concrete for the block shall have the following proportions: 

a) 50 kg pure Portland cement, class 400 or equivalent; 

b) 65 1 of ungraded, non calcareous sand with a grain size of 0*5 to 
5 mm; and 

c) 115 1 of calcareous, alluvial gravel with a grain size of 5 to 25 
mm. 

The cube shall be reinforced by 8 mm steel rods without ties, each rod 
being independent of the others. 

The design concept of the block is illustrated in Fig, 2, 

13.4 Tool 

13.4.1 The tool shall be sealed into the concrete and shall consist of a 
rammer of not less than 178 mm and not more than 220 mm in diameter 
and a tool chuck component identical to that normally used with the 
pick or concrete-breaker to be tested. The tool shall comply with the rele- 
vant standard and shall be long enough to enable the practical test to be 
carried out. 

13.4.2 Suitable treatment shall be carried out to integrate the two com- 
ponents. The tool shall be fixed in the block so that the bottom of the 
rammer is 0-30 m from„ the upper face of the block ( see Fig. 2 ), 

13.4.3 The block shall rcamin mechanically sound, particularly at the 
point where the supporting tool and the concrete meet before and after 
each test it should be ensured that the tool sealed in the concrete block is 
integrated with it. 

13 



IS t 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 




SECTION AA 



V 



V?-?--?-4<< 




J ^i--i-i—H . 



o*so 



T 



Fig. 2 Concrete Block and Tool 
13.5 Test Site 

13«5«1 The concrete block with the tool shall be set into a pit which is 
cemented throughout. The block shall be covered by a screening slab 
weighing at least 100 kg/m^j as indicated in Fig. 3. The upper surface of 
the screening slab is flush with the ground. The block shall be insulated 
against the bottom and sides of the pit by means of elastic blocks. They 
should have a cut-off frequency which shall be not more than half the blow 
frequency of the paving-breaker or hammer to be tested. 

14 



IS: 11702 ( Pwt 2 )" 1986 




SUPPORT TOOL 
T OOL OPENING 
SCREENING SLAB 
AB SORBENT FOAM 

^ MASTIC SUPPORT 
SERVING AS A 

JOINT 



* » 7^^^- ^ELA5TIC BLOCK 



:-jL:.-^ 




CEMENT FLOOR 

CONCRETE BLOCK 
600x800x600 



ELASTIC BLOCK 



Al] dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 3 Test Site 

13.5.2 The opening in the screening slab through which the tool shank 
component passes shall be as small as possible and be sealed by a flexible 
sound proof joint, 
13.6 Measurement Surface and Microphone Positions 

13.6.1 The measurement surface in accordance with 6.2 shall be chosen 
according to Table 2. 



TABLE 2 CHOICE OF MEASUREMENT SURFACE ANO 
MICROPHONE POSITIONS 


{CUuse 13.6) 




Weight of thb Pavino-Bbeakek Hemisp- 
OB Hammer as Normally Used here 


Hbight Above Ground for 
Measurement Positions 


AND Exclusive of Tool Radius 


m 


kg m 


lto8 9 to 12 


< 10 2 


0*75 1-40 


> 10 4 


1-50 2-80 



15 



IS: 11702 {Part2). 1986 

13.6.2 In Fig. 4, measurement positions 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 are 
the key measurement points which should always be used. If it is deemed 
necessary to introduce more measurement positions, they should conform 
with measurement positions 2, 4, 6 and 8. 

In no circumstances are more than 12 measurement positions necessary. 

13.6.3 The exhaust shall be directed to fall between one of the 
following pairs of microphone positions, between 2 and 3, 4 and 5, 6 and 
7 or 8 and 1 . 






^ 


i 




-- 


^ 


1 


/" 


10 


n 

n 




4 


^•e 


3 


7 


i'a \ 















tA 



r ^ Radius of hemisphere 

Fio. 4 Microphone Array for Measurement of Noise 

FROM PaV1N-B REARERS 



16 



IS : 11702 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 10.1 ) 

DETERMINATION OF DIRECTIVITY INDEX 

A-1. The directivity index, D/, of a source operating in a free field above 
a reflecting plane is defined as the difTcrence between the highest value of 
the A-weightcd sound pressure level measured at one of the microphone 
positions and the energy-averaged value of the A-weighted sound pressure 
levels at all of the microphone positions; 

DI == Zpi ^ Ip 
where 

Lpi is the highest value of the A- weighted sound pressure level, 
in decibels, at the microphone positions; 

Lp is the energy-averaged mean A-weighted sound pressure 
level, in decibels, at all microphone positions. 

Note 1 — This formula is difTerent from that of Indian Standard measurement 
ofairbrone noise emitted by constructional equipment intended for outdoor use — 
Method for checking compliance with noise limits (under preparation )f which is 
given for spherical radiation. 

Note 2 — For some purposes it may be advantageous to calculate the directivity 
index for a particular plane, for example, the horizontal plane. For these purposes 
the directivity index is defined as the difference between the highest value of the 
A-weighted sound pressure level measured at one of the microphone positions in the 
plane and the energy-averaged value of the A-weighted sound pressure levels at all 
the microphone positions in the plane: 

where 

JLpi is the highest value of the A-weighted sound pressure level, in decibels, 
at microphone positions in one plane; 

Zp is the energy-averaged mean A-weighted sound pressure level, in deci- 
bels, at all microphone positions in the same plane. 

APPENDIX B 

( Clause 10.1 ) 

FORMAT FOR HAND-HELD TOOL REPORT 

Report on Tool Noise Test 

The following test has been made in accordance with this standard. 

1« Description of Tool 

Manufacturer: , ..,, .„ 

Model: SerialNo. ,., 

Rated speed and capacity: 

Description: » 

17 



ISt 11702 ( Part 2 )- 1986 

2. Operating Conditions 

2.1 On load— Rotational/blow frequency, r/min: 

Air pressure supplied, bar: Airflow, 1/s: ...„.., 

2.2 Running free — Speed, rev/min: 

2.3 Nature of energy-absorbing device: 

3. Test Conditions 

Barometric pressure, bar: Ambient temperature, °C: 

Wind speed, m/s: 

Reflecting plane, composition and dimensions, m: 

Remarks; , *. 



4. Instrumentation 

Microphone: ,. Serial No. 

Sound level meter: Serial No. 

Octave band analyser: ..... ••••-.. Serial No. 

Calibrator: Serial No. 

Other, for example wind-screen or Serial No. 
recorder: 

5. Test Layout 

Area of the measurement surface, m*: 



Sketch showing microphone positions, orientation of machine, direction of 
exhaust, direction and distance to large objects near machine being tested. 



Height above reflecting plane: 

Background noise measured at microphone position No. 



The test results are given in the table on the following page. 

Reported by: ,„ Date: , 

Approved by: Date: ..., ......»., 



18 



REPORT ON TOOL NOISE TEST 
Sound Pressure and Sound Power Levels 





Test conditions 


Microphone 
position No. 


A-weighted 
sound pressure level 


to 

5 

*"M 

c 
o 
o 

•a 

1 

c 
O 


Microphone readings, 
corrected for background 
^oise and wind-screen 
if any 


1 




2 




3 




4 




5 




6 




7 




8 




9 




10 




11 




12 




Average 






Environmental correction K 






Mean surface sound pressure 
level corrected for 
environment 






Measurement surface, expressed 
as 10 Ig (5/5o) 






Sound power level 






0) 

o 

c 

*c 

c 

3 


Microphone readings 
corrected for background 
noise and wind-screen, 
if any 


1 




2 




3 




4 




5 




6 




7 




8 




9 




10 




11 




12 


' 


Average 






Environmental correction K 






Mean surface sound pressure 
level corrected for 

environment 






Measurement surface, 
as 10 tg {S/Sq) 






Sound power level 







NOTE — Readings that need correction for background noise shall be shown in parentheses. 



Ml 

o 






