***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 11749 (1986): Manually operated toggle clips used in 
leather industry [CHD 17: Leather, Tanning Materials and 
Allied Products] 



.^^llli^=ac^^fc^ll f fm^>N:>;»gaTCAaiiTgs 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:%^>^ift^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISM174d-1986 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
MANUALLY OPERATED TOGGLE CLIPS FOR 

LEATHER INDUSTRY 



UDC 675*025'24 ; 62r828'2 




® Copyright 198? 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BILAVAN, 9 BAIJADUR SHAH ZAPAft MARO 

NEW DULHl UOOOl 

Gr X March 1947 



IS : 11749 - 198d 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

MANUALLY OPERATED TOGGLE CLIPS FOR 

LEATHER INDUSTRY 



Leather Sectional Committee, CDC 16 

Chairman Representing 

Shri K. V. S. Murthi PJanning Commission, New Delhi 

Members 

Shw Sved Zafar Ali Council for Leather Exports, Madras 

Shri Rajgopal Naidu {Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Basu Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

Shri N. R. Dighe ( Alternate ) 
Development Officer, Leather Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri O. P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

Shri G. Sukumar ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Madras 
Shri P. K. Ghosh Bata India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri G. S. Johal Punjab State Leather Development Corpora- 

tion, Chandigarh 
General Manager, Project ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Kannan Ministry of Defence ( R *& D ) 

Shri M. K. Awasthi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Malhotra State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New 

Delhi 
Shri p. Bhattacharya ( Alternate) 
Shri S- Narayanan Gordon Woodroffe Ltd, Madras 

Dr E. P. Kanniappan ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Akbar Pasha Akbar Leathers Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Ameenur Rahman Indian Finished Leather Manufacturers and 

Exporters Association, Madras 
Shri V. P. Naimur Rahman ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Raja The Tanner, Bangalore 

Dr p. H. Rao Department of Education, Government of West 

Bengal, Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R, Saha Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. C. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 > and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11749 - 1986 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri M, K. Saksena Leather Research and Testing Laboratory. 

Directorate of Industries, Kan pur 
Shri S. Sampath Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India 

Ltd, Kanpur 
Shri S. Murgan ( Aiternate ) 
Shri G. M. Sharif All India Small Scale Tanners and Exporters 

Association, Madras 
Shri V, P. A. Abdul Rasheed ( Alternate ) 
Shri G, S. Shukla Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 

Faridabad 
Dr G. Gopala Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Singaram Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries, New Delhi 
Shri M. K. Udaya Varma ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Subramaniam Tata Exports Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. L. Arjunan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. R. Swaminathan Bihar Finished Leather Ltd, Patna 

Project Manager ( Tech ) { Alternate ) 
Shri S. Venkateswaran All India Skin and Hide Tanners* and Mer- 

chants' Association, Madras 
Shri A. Subramanian ( Alternate ) 
ilHRi Satish Chandek, Director General, ISI ( JEx-ojffjcio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri E. Devender 
Deputy Director ( Chem ). ISI 



Leather and Leather Goods Machinery Subcommittee, CDC 16 : 13 

Convener 

Shri O. P. Ramaswamy 

Apollo Footwear Pvt Ltd, 

Bangalore 

Members 

Shri T. N. Ganjwar Nagappa Industrial Trading Corporation* 

Madras 
Dr D. K. Ghosh Khadi and Gramodyog Commission, Bombay 

Shri B. Majumdar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. E. Jayakumar Prototype Development Training Centre, 

Madras 
Shri M. Booth alingam ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Paul Bengal Machinery Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Hariram S. Punjabi Deepu Industries. Madras 

Shri S. Raja Modern Tanners' Cooperative Society Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri M. K. Bhagvat ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Seshaganapathy Rao Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ). 

Madras 
Shri S. Sriramula R . S. P. Ltd, Ambur 

Shri M. K. Udaya Verma Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industry, New Delhi 
Shri I. B. Sarkar ( Alternate ) 

2 



IS : 11749 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

MANUALLY OPERATED TOGGLE CLIPS FOR 

LEATHER INDUSTRY 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 1 April 1986, after the draft finalized by the Leather Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

0,2 Toggle clips are used in the toggle drying operation in the tannery. 
Toggling is normally done after the staking operation, when the crust 
leathers are still moist, so that they can easily be pulled and the excess 
stretch removed. The leather dries out flat and firm and yields a 
higher area than in hang drying. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements, and methods of sampling 
and test for manually operated toggle clips for use on slotted metal 
frames ( toggle boards ) used in the leather industry. 

1.2 This standard is applicable io toggle clips meant for leathers up to 
a thickness of 2*5 mm. 

2, TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS : 1640-19601- shall apply. 



*Ru]es for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
jGlossary of terms relating to hides, skins and leather. 



IS : 11749 - 1986 



3. TYPES 

3.1 The toggle clips shall be of the following two types: 

a) Type 1 — Toggle clips with double side thumb lever, and 

b) Type 2 — Toggle clips with central thumb lever. 

4, REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Material 

4.1.1 BocJy — The body shall be made from either of the following: 

a) Non-rusting steel, 

b) Suitable aluminium alloy, or 

c) Plastics reinforced with metal inserts. 

4.1.2 Spring — The spring of the lever shall be corrosion resistant and 
of galvanized steel. 

4.2 Shape and Dimensions — The shape for the two types shall generally 
be as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. 



FINGER HOLE 
FOR PULLING 



THUMB LEVER 




TEETH FOR 
GRIPPING 



Fig. 1 Toggle Clip with Double Side Thumb Lever 

4.2.1 Diameter of the finger hole, D in Fig. 2 shall not be less 
than 24 mm. 

4.3 Mass — The toggle clip shall not weigh more than 50 grains. 

4.4 Impact Resistance — The toggle clip shall not break when dropped 
from 3 metres height onto a concrete surface. 

4.5 Humidity and Heat Resistance — The toggle clip shall withstand a 
continuous exposure of VOT and 100 percent relative humidity for 

4 



IS : 11749 - 1986 



THUMB LEVER 



TEETH FOR 
GRIPPING 




PIVOT AND 
HOOK-^ \> SPRING 

Fig. 2 Toggle Clip with Central Thumb Lever 

five hours without any visible coating and also fulfil requirements 
specified in 4.4, 4.6, 4,6.1 and 4.8. 

Note — A toggle clip may be expected to last a minimum of 2 000 operations 
in actual working conditions. 

4.6 Grip — When tested as in Appendix A, the toggle dip shall not slip 
out of the gripping portion. 

Note — The clip shall be designed so as to provide sufficient tension for the 
initial gripping of the leather and also provide increased gripping pressure while 
pulling the clip without tearing or leaving deep and permanent impressions on the 
leather. 

4.6.1 The portion of the clip which is hooked onto the slotted metal 
frame ( toggle board ) shall be so designed to provide easy hooking onto 
the slotted metal frame ( toggle board ), yet not allow the clip to get 
unhooked by itself. 

4.7 Lateral Stability — The base support of the toggle clip shall be so 
designed as to keep the clip vertical on the slotted metal frame ( toggle 
board ). 

4.8 General Requirements — Finger grips of the toggle clip shall have no 
sharp edges and should have a comfortable grip with provision for easy 
removal of the finger from the grip. The thumb lever for opening and 
closing the toggle clip shall be easy to operate for both left and right 
handed persons, with the operating edge being suitably rounded to 
reduce the pressure on the thumb while opening the toggle. The hook of 



IS : 11749 - 1986 

the toggle clip shall be so designed as to provide for easy insertion and 
removal from the slotted metal frame (toggle board ). 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each toggle clip shall be marked legibly with the following 
particulars: 

a) Manufacturers name or trade-mark, if any; 

b) Type; and 

c) Year of manufacture. 

5.2 Each toggle clip shall also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for 
conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under 
which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards 
Institution. 

6. PACKING 

6.1 The toggle clip shall be wrapped in wax paper conforming to 
IS : 3962-1967* and securely tied. The toggle clip shall then be packed 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

7. SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

7.1 The scale of sampling and the criteria for conformity of the material 
in the lot to this standard shall be as prescribed in Appendix B. 



•Specification for wax paper for general packaging. 

6 



18:11749-1986 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.6 ) 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF GRIP OF TOGGLE CLIP 

A-1. APPARATUS 

A-1.1 Spring Balance — to 100 kilogram range in divisions of 10 kilo- 
gram. 

A-1. 2 Dry Crust Leather Specimen — Cut from full chrome, semi- 
chrome or chrome retan crust leather, full grained and of thickness 
1*2 ± 2 mm. The specimen shall be 150 X 30 mm, cut such that the 
length of the specimen is parallel and 50 mm away from the backbone 
line. 

A-2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Clamp one end of the leather specimen with the toggle clip and 
attach ihe toggle clip to the slotted metal frame ( toggle board ). 

A-2,2 To the other end of the leather specimen, attach the second toggle 
clip to which the spring balance is attached at the finger hole. 

A-2.3 Apply a pulling force of 30 kilograms and attach the toggle clip 
to the slotted metal frame ( toggle board ). Allow the leather specimen 
to remain in the stretched condition for 30 minutes. 

A-3. REPORT 

A-3.1 Report slippage of the toggle clip and any changes on the grain 
surface of the leather. 

APPENDIX B 

( Clause 74 ) 
SAMPLING OF TOGGLE CLIPS FOR LEATHER INDUSTRY 

B-l. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-1.1 Lot — In a consignment all the toggle clips of the same type shall 
constitute a lot, 

B-1.2 Each lot shall be tested separately for determining its conformity 
to the requirements of this specification. The number of toggle clips to 
be selected in the sample depends on the size of the lot and shall be in 
accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1. 



IS : 11749 . 1986 



TABLE I SCALE OF SAMPLING AND PERMISSIBLE 
• NUMBER OF DEFECTIVES 

( Clauses A-1.2 and A-2.1 ) 

Number of Toggle Number of Toggle Permissible Number 

Clips Clips to be of Defective 
Selected 

(1) (2) (3) 

Up to 25 5 

26., 50 8 

51 ., 100 13 1 

101 ,. 200 20 I 

201 „ 400 32 2 

401 and above 50 3 



B-1.3 The sample toggle clips shall be selected at random from the lot. 
Random selection "procedures as given in IS : 4905-1968* may be 
referred to. 

B.2. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-2.1 All the selected toggle clips shall be examined for requirements 
in 4.1, 4.2, 4,3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8. A toggle clip failing in any 
one of these requirements shall be taken as a defective. The number 
of the defectives shall not exceed the permissible number given in col 3 
of Table 1 if the lot is to be accepted as satisfactory. 



•Methods for random sampling. 



