**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11466-2 (1985) : Guidelines for packing, stowage and 
securing of cargo inside the freight containers, Part 2 
Dangerous goods [TED 12: Freight Containers and Pallets] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; 11466 ( Part 2 ) -19B5 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF 

CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CON I AINERS 

PART 2 DANGEROUS GOODS 



UDC 62r369-SBB : f56*Q73'42:W»4'J/"4l026) l 65fr07V436 




@ Copyright ]?86 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAM, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 3CAFA& MARO 

NEW DELHI L 10002 

Gr 3 May 19*6 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF 

CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINERS 

PART 2 DANGEROUS GOODS 

Freight Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 7 

Chairman Representing 

Capt N. A. Tamhane Container Information & Services Co, Bombay 

Members 

Shri Murarilal Bahri The Indian Roads & Transport Development 

Association, Bombay 
Shri M. P. Sanghvi ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K, Bajaj Directorate General of Factory Advice Service 

& Labour Institute, Bombay 
Shri V. L. Kathane ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Bishnoi Balmer Lawrie & Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. Seth ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. R. Choksi The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N L. Dalmia Trans-Freight Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. Mittal ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. R. Dave Department of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri P. G. Deshmukh Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri Pravin Kanakia Federation of Freight Forwarders' Association 

in India, Bombay 
Capt N. A. Tamhane ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Kaushik Voltas Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. V. Bal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Khare Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Suri Madan L. Kochhar American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri R. C. Bhavanani ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ram V. Kotak Intermodal Transport and Trading Systems 

Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 
Shri M. O. Sharieff ( Alternate) 
Shri V. L. Krishnamurthy Cochin Port Trust, Cochin 

Shri M. Velu ( Alternate ) 
Capt S. B. Kundargi The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Capt C. P. Alexander ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Repr&senteHg 

Capt S. B. Kunexargi Indian National Shipowners* Association, 

Bombay 
Shri D. Madmok Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri J. N. Goswamy ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Majumdar Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Shri N. N. Mookherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. E. I. Mampiili Bombay Port Trust, Bombay 

Shri M. J. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Manerkar Federation of Association of Stavadofes, 

Madras 
Shri J. S. Marwaha Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow 

Shri K. L Nirwan ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Obhan Indian Federation of Transport Operators, 

Bombay 
Shri Harkirat Singh Kohli ( Alternate) 
Shri L. M. Prabhakar Sea Lord Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. G. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. N. Pradhan In personal capacity ( Narain Nivas , 21, North 

Avenue, Santacruz West, Bombay ) 
Shri S. R. Prasad The UK & Continental Shipping Conferences, 

Bombay 
Shri M, G. Scindia Peninsular European & Asian Container Express, 

Bombay 
Shri R. C. Sharma Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), 

New Delhi 
Shri Love DeV Raj ( Alternate ) 
Shri Raj Jaswant Singh Directorate General of Technical Development* 

New Delhi 
Shri Kamal Krishna ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. C. Singhal Mahindra Owens Ltd, Pune 

Shri B V. Baliga ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Srivastava Ministry of Defence (R&D), New Delhi 

Shri A. K* Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Thakur Ministry of Shipping and Transport, New Delhi 

Shri S. N. Suman ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Venkatachalam Nathani Steel Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. V Jagannath ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. B. Warrier Bureau Veritas, Bombay 

Shri M. C. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. L. Raina, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojflcio Member) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri V- K. SEHGAt 

Joint Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 

PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF 

CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINERS 

PART 2 DANGEROUS GOODS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 September 1985, after the draft finalized by the 
Freight Containers Sectional Corrimittee had been approved by the 
Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Use of freight containers substantially reduces the hazards to which 
goods are exposed while improper or careless loading of goods into a 
container may be the cause of personal injury when the container is 
handled or transported; in addition to serious damage which may 
occur to the goods inside or to the equipment. The person who packs 
and secures goods into the container, may be the last person to look 
inside the container. It is only opened by the consignee at its final 
destination. Consequently, a great many persons will rely on his skill; 
road vehicle drivers and other highway users, when the container is 
carried by road; railway personnel and others when the container is 
carried on a rail car; dock workers when the container is lifted on or 
off the ship and crew members of the ship which may be taking the 
container through its most difficult conditions; as well as shippers and 
consignees, etc. All these persons may be at risk from a poorly packed 
container, especially one which is carrying dangerous goods. 

0.3 Dangerous goods are the goods which, as a result of their hazards, 
may cause injury or damage to people, animals, installations, road or 
rail vehicle or ships and other property. These goods are classified and 
listed in the International Maritime Dangerous Goods ( IMDG ) Code, 
published by the International Maritime Organization. 

0.4 Section 12 of IMDG code particularly refers to the use of freight 
containers for carrying dangerous goods and should be strictly complied 
with. In addition, it may also be necessary to comply with national or 
other statutory regulations. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

0.5 Infringement of these rules can make the cargo vessels liable to pay 
heavy fines. Therefore, dangerous cargo should be loaded with full 
knowledge and approval of ship owners and carriers. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expiessmg the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) gives guidelines for the safe packing, stowage 
and securing of dangerous goods in freight containers. 

2. CLASSJF [CATION OF DANGEROUS GOODS 

2.1 Dangerous goods are divided into the following classes in accordance 
with IS: 1446 « 1959f : 

Class 1 Explosives 

Class 2 Gases; compressed, liquefied or dissolved under pressure 

Class 3 Inflammable liquids 

Class 4 Inflammable solids 

Class 4.1 Inflammable solids 

Class 4.2 Substances liable to spontaneous combustion 

Class 4.3 Substances emitting inflammable gases when wet 

Class 5 Oxidizing substances : organic peroxides 

Class 5.1 Oxidizing substances 

Class 5.2 Organic peroxides 

Class 6 Poisonous and infectious substances 

Class 6.1 Poisonous ( toxic ) substances 

Class 6.2 Infectious substances 

Class 7 Radioactive substances 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 
•{Classification of dangerous goods. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

Class 8 Corrosives 

Class 9 Miscellaneous dangerous subtances, that is, any other 
substances which experience has shown or may show to 
be of such a dangerous character that the provisions of 
the other classes do not apply to it. 

3. GUIDELINES FOR PACKING OF DANGEROUS GOODS 
INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINER 

3.1 Before Packing 

3.1,1 Dangerous goods should only be stowed in the containers 
designed for them. 

3*1.2 The containers, into which dangerous goods are to be packed, 
should be examined visually for damage and if there is evidence of 
material damage, the container should not be packed. Container should 
be clean, dry and fit for use. Irrelevant dangerous goods labels should 
be removed or masked before packing begins. 

3.1.3 Information should be provided by the shipper about the 
hazardous properties of the dangerous goods to be handled. The shipper 
should also ensure that dangerous goods are packed, marked and 
labelled in accordance with IMDG Code. Dangerous goods should not 
be handled unless packed, marked and labelled in accordance with 
these regulations. 

3.1.4 Dangerous goods should only be handled, packed and secured 
under direct and identifiable supervision of a responsible person who 
is familiar with the risks involved and knows which emergency measures 
should be taken, if the need arises. He should also ensure that any 
necessary protective equipment is also available. 

3.1.5 Smoking should be prohibited while work is going on and suit- 
able fire protection measures should be taken. 

3.1.6 Packages should be examined and if found to be damaged, 
leaking or sifting should not be packed into a freight container. Packages 
showing evidence of staining, etc, should not be packed into a container 
without first determining that it is safe and acceptable to do so. Water, 
snow, ice or other matter adhering to packages should be removed 
before packing into a freight container. 

3.1.7 If goods are palletized or otherwise unitized, they should be 
compact and secured in a manner unlikely to damage the individual 
packages comprising the unit load. The materials used to band the 
unit load together should be compatible with the substances unitized 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

and retain their efficiency when exposed to moisture, extremes of 
temperature and sunlight. 

3.1.8 When dangerous goods are packed in temperature controlled 
containers, the power supply and the machinery should be of a type 
unlikely to cause hazard to the goods or adjacent containers. 

3.1.9 A container intended to carry dangerous goods under tempera- 
ture controlled conditions, should be inspected and operated to ensure 
that the machinery is in proper working order before the shipment is 
made. A record of this inspection should also be made. 

3.2 Packing and Securing 

3.2.1 Special care should be taken during handling to ensure that the 
packages are not damaged. 

3.2.2 If a package containing dangerous goods is damaged during 
handling, so that the contents leak out, the immediate area, should be 
evacuated until the hazard potential can be assessed. The damaged 
package should not be transported under any circumstances. 

3.2.3 If leakage from dangerous goods results in the risk of explosion 
spontaneous combustion, poisoning or similar danger personnel should 
be immediately moved to a safe place and the emergency response 
organization, such as fire services be notified. 

3.2.4 Where substances emitting inflammable gases when wet (Class 

4.3 ) are to be packed in a container, the possibility that the container 
could suffer from heavy condensation on the internal surfaces should be 
kept in mind. The degree of such condensation is dependent upon the 
amount of moisture contained within the closed container and on the 
temperature differences experienced during transportation. The risk is 
minimized if the moisture content of the packing and securing material, 
that is dunnage is kept low. 

3.2.5 General cargo which is incompatible or may suffer damage as 
a result of being in contact with dangerous goods must not be stowed 
together in the same container. 

3.2.6 It is also possible that in some instances, goods of the same 
class should not be packed into the same container as they may be 
incompatible, for example, peroxides and permanganates are both 
oxidizing agents ( Class 5.1 ). However, they may interact dangerously 
in the event of an accident. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 198$ 

3.2.7 Dangerous goods which may cause damage by taint, odour or 
contamination to other products should not be packed in the same 
container* as goods may be susceptible to such damage. 

3.2.8 When dangerous goods such as poisons ( Class 6.1 ) and 
corrosives ( Class 8 ) are handled, consumption of any form of food or 
drink should be prohibited while handling these goods. 

3.2.9 Special packing instructions detailed on individual packages or 
otherwise available, should be strictly observed. For example : 

a) Goods marked 'protect from frost' should be stowed away 
from the walls of the container. 

b) Goods marked this way up should be packed accordingly. 

3.2.10 When a dangerous goods consignment forms only a part of 
the load of a container* it should preferably be stowed as close to the 
door of the container as possible, keeping in view the even distribution 
of load on the floor. 

3. ON COMPLETION OF PACKING 

3.3.1 The containers should be sealed prior to despatch. However* 
they should not b$ locked unless specifically required and agreed to by 
the container operator. In such cases, a key should be readily available 
at all times. 

3,3*2 Container, in which dangerous goods are packed shall bear 
IMDG Code class labels ( placards ) not less than 250X25U mm in size. 
Except where not required by ihe IMDG Code, there should be at least 
four such lables placed externally, preferably one on each side and one 
on each end. Labels for the sides of the container should be affixed in 
such a position that they are not obscured when the container doors 
are opened. 

3.3.3 It is preferable that the container should also bear externally 
the correct technical name of each of the dangerous substances packed 
therein. 

3.3.4 Additional labels may be required by rail and road transport 
authorities. 

3.4 Packing Certificate — ■ The person responsible for packing of dange- 
rous goods into a freight container shall be provided with a 'Container 
Packing Certificate', ceitifying that this has been properly carried out, 
embodying the following provisions. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

3.4.1 The container was clean, dry and apparently fit to receive the 
goods. 

3.4.2 No incompatible substances have been packed in the container. 

3.4.3 All packages have been externally inspected for damage and 
only dry, sound packages packed. 

3.4.4 All packages are in accordance with relevant specification and 
codes and have been properly packed and secured in the container, using 
suitable securing material. 

3.4.5 The container and packages are appropriately marked and 
labelled. 

3.4.6 The dangerous goods in the container are those for which acce- 
ptance has been specifically obtained with the shipment in question. 

3.4.7 The consigner of the dangerous goods has in each case, issued a 
dangerous goods declaration as to the nature of the hazard and that 
the goods are packaged suitably for transport by sea. 

3.4.8 The container packing certificate should be forwarded with 
the container, to be available at the time of loading on board ship. 

4. GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR RECEIPT OF CONTAINERS 
CONTAINING DANGEROUS GOODS 

4.1 Containers containing dangerous goods should be unpacked with 
care always bearing in mind that the cargo may have been damaged in 
transit. Before the doors are opened, this possibility should be borne 
in mind in relation to the properties of the cargo, for example, depend- 
ing on the contents of the container, there may exist the possibility that 
leakage has caused an unsafe concentration of toxic, inflammable or 
explosive vapour, or to have produced an oxygen enriched or depleted 
atmosphere. If there is evidence that damage has occured and such a 
condition exists, expert advice must be sought before commencing to 
unpack the container. 

4.2 Any containes which carries dangerous cargo, particularly toxic 
products, should be ventilated before unpacking commences that is, the 
door should be left open for a short period. 

4.3 After a container containing dangerous goods has been unpacked 
particular care should be taken to ensure that no hazard remains. This 
may entail special cleaning particularly if toxic spillage has occured or 
is suspected. When satisfied that a container has no hazard, the 
dangerous goods labels should be removed. 

8 



IS: 11466 (I!aa*2|-t9&? 

4.4 If any container shows signs of heat, it should be removed to a safe 
place and fire services immediately notified. Care should be taken to 
see that any fire fighting methods to be used are suitable for the cargo in 
question. 

4.5 Attention is drawn to the feet that consignee is normally obliged to 
return the container, after discharging, clean and suitable for the trans- 
port of every kind of cargo. This applies especially when poisonous, 
dangerous or obnoxious cargo &as been transported. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


ra 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount ot substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


new to d 


N 


1 N « 1 kg.m/s» 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


J Wb » 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


\ t - 1 Wb/m* 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-i) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V - 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m2 



