**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10743  (1983)  :  Method  for  Determination  of  Centre  of 
Gravity  of  Agricultural  Tractors  [FAD  11:  Agricultural 
Tractors  and  Power  Tillers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  10743  -  1933 

(  Reaffirmed  2004 ) 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  CENTRE  OF 

GRAVITY  OF  AGRICULTURAL  TRACTORS 


l  DC    62fl'U4'2  !  631372:  531  "24 


ig>  Copyright  LB54 
INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

WANAK      HHAVAK,      9      BAHADUR      SHAH    Z  AT  All      MARC 

NEW  DB14U  mxwa 
Gr  3  Febiwty  1984 


IS  i  10743  -  1983 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  CENTRE  OF 

GRAVITY  OF  AGRICULTURAL  TRACTORS 

Agricultural  Tractors  and  Power  Tillers  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  52 

Chairman  Representing 

Pros'  M.  M.  Mehta  Escorts  Limited,  Faridabad;  and  Indian   Society   of 

Agricultural  Engineers,  New  Delhi 

Members 

Shri  A.  K.  Raman  (  Alternate  to  Escorts  Limited,  Faridabad 

Prof  M.  M.  Mehta  ) 
Dr  K.  N.  Singh  (  Alternate  to     Indian  Society  of  Agricultural  Engineers,  New  Delhi 
Prof  M.  M.  Mehta  ) 
Dr  A.  Alam  Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  Research,  New  Delhi 

Shri  A.  V,  Alexander  Escorts  Tractors  Limited,  Faridabad 

Shri  K,  P.  Jain  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  S.  Babhulkar  Kirloskar  Tractors  Limited,  Nasik 

Shri  P.  N.  Balgude  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Bhupendra  National      Agricultural      Go-operative      Marketing 

Federation  T)f  India  Limited,  New  Delhi 
Shri  Y.  K.  Jain  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Chandra  Mohan  Punjab  Tractors  Limited,  Mohali  (  Punjab  ) 

Shri  G.  S.  Rihai,  (  Alternate  I  ) 
Shri  S.  S.  Grewal  (  Alternate  II  ) 
Shri  C.  B.  Chtjgh  Indian  Investment  Centre,  New  Delhi 

Shri  M.  R.  Dewan  Tractor  Training  and  Testing  Station  (  Ministry  of 

Agriculture  ),  Budni 
Shri  J.  Prasad  (  Alternate  I  ) 
Shri  R.  S.  Dass  (  Alternate  II  ) 
Director  Central     Institute      of      Agricultural      Engineering 

(  ICAR  ),  Bhopal 
Dr  R.  C.  Maheswari  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  N.  GaUr  Central  Mechanical  Engineering  Research  Institute 

(  CSIR  ),  Durgapur 
Shri  R.  K.  Gupta  State  Farms  Corporation  of  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  M.  L.  Garg  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  C.  Gupta  Harsha  Tractors  Limited,  Ghaziabad 


Shri  M.  S.  Rao  (  Alternate  \ 


(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  198* 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher   shall    be   deemed    to    be   an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 


(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shbi  V.  K.  Jain  Directorate    General    of    Technical     Development 

(  Ministry  of  Industries  ),  New  Delhi 

Shbi  T.  K.  B.  Varma  (  Alternate^) 
Shri  G.  N.  Mehta 

Shbi  G.  G.  Patel  (  Alternate  ) 


DB  V.  K.  MlTTAL 

Dr  R.  B.  Ram  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  J.  S.  Mudhar 

Shbi  G.  B.  Lal  _(  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  H.  M.  Mutta 


Gujarat  Tractors  Corporation  Ltd,  Vadodara 
Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 
HMT  Limited  (  Tractor  Division  ),  Pinjore 


Mahindra  &  Mahindra  Ltd  (  International  Tractor 
Division  ),  Bombay 
Shbi  M.  V.  Venkateswaean  (  Alternate  I  ) 
Shbi  A.  R.  Sonalkar  (  Alternate  II  ) 
Shbi  A.  T.  Nahender  VST  Tillers  Tractors  Limited,  Bangalore 

Shri  V.  P.  Mahendba  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  S.  T.  Narayanaswamy  Bharat  Earthmovers  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Da  V.  Panduranga  Tractors  and  Farm  Equipment  Ltd,  Madras 

Shbi  S;  RanganathaK  (  Alternate  ) 


ShbiS.  B.  Pandya 
Shri  V.  V.  Patil 
Shri  K.  Ramkumab 

Shri  M.  K.  Chakdra- 
mohanan  Naib  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  B.  Roy 


National  Farmers  Organization,  New  Delhi 
Bharat  Krishak  Samaj.  New  Delhi 
Kerala     Agro     Machinery     Corporation     Limited, 
Ernakulam 


(  Small         Scale 


Da  S.  Satyamubty 


Development         Commissioner 

Industries),  New  Delhi 
Eicher  Goodearth  Limited,  New  Delhi 
Da  J.  Bhattachabyya  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  C.  Saxbna  J.  K.  Satoh  Agricultural  Machines  Limited,  Kanpur 

Shbi  R.  K.  Bajpai  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  S.  Yadav  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (  Department  of  Agriculture 

&  Co-operation  "i,  New  Delhi 
Shri  T.  Pubjstanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-qfficio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food) 


Secretary 

Shbi  R.  N.  Sharma 
Deputy  Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ), 


ISI 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 

DETERMINATION  OF  CENTRE  OF 

GRAVITY  OF  AGRICULTURAL  TRACTORS 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  30  November  1983,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Agri- 
cultural Tractors  and  Power  Tillers  Sectional  Committee  had  been 
approved  by  the  Agricultural  and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  To  evaluate  the  effect  of  gradients  on  tractive  effort  and  stability  it  is 
important  to  determine  the  position  of  centre  of  gravity  of  the  tractor. 
While  formulating  IS  :  5994  (  Part  2  )-1979*,  a  need  was  felt  to  prepare 
a  separate  Indian  Standard  on  this  subject.  This  standard  has  been 
prepared  to  fulfil  this  need. 

0.3  This  standard  is  complementary  to  IS  :  5994  (  Part  2  J-1979*. 

0.4  In  preparation  of  this  standard  assistance  has  been  derived  fr  om 
ISO  789/6-1982  Agricultural  tractors  —  test  procedures  —  Part  6:  Centre 
of  gravity  issued  by  International  Organization  for  Standardization.  An 
alternative  method  suggested  by  the  Tractor  Training  and  Testing 
Station,  Budni,  has  also  been  incorporated. 

0.5  In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with 
this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded 
off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960f. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This   standard  specifies  method  of   determining  the  position  of  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  agricultural  tractors. 

2.  DEFINITIONS 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this   standard,   the   following    definitions   shall 
apply. 

♦Test     code    for     agricultural    tractors:      Part   II     Laboratory     and    track    tests 
{first  revision  ). 

fRules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 


2.1  Agricultural  Tractors  —  See  2.1  of  IS  :  5994  (  Part  1  )-1979*. 

2.2  Coordinates  of  Centre  of  Gravity  —  See  Fig.  1,  2  and  3. 

3.2.1  Horizontal   Fore-and-Aft  Coordinate    (  Symbol  x  )  —  The    horizontal 
distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  from  the  transverse  reference  plane. 

2.2.2  Lateral   Coordinate   (  symbol  y  )  —  The   horizontal  distance  of  the 
centre  of  gravity  from  the  median  longitudinal  place  of  the  tractor. 

2.2.3  Vertical  Coordinate  (  symbol  h  )  —  The  vertical  distance  of  the  centre 
of  gravity  from  the  horizontal  reference  plane. 

2.3  Reference  Planes 

2.3.1  Horizontal  Reference  Plane  —  Ground  level  (  a  hard    contact  shall 
be  assumed  ). 

2.3.2  Vertical  Reference  Plane 

2.3.2.1  Transverse  Plane 

a)  For  wheeled  tractor  —  Vertical  plane  containing  the  centre  line  of 
the  rear  axle;  in  case  of  articulated  tractors  locked  in  a  straight 
line. 

b)  For  crawler  tractor  —  Vertical  plane  containing  the  centre  line  of 
the  driving  sprocket  axle. 

2.3.2.2  Median  Longitudinal  Plane  —  The  median  plane  of  the  wheel 
or  track  assembly  is  equidistant  from  the  two  planes  containing  the 
periphery  of  the  rims  or  track  plates  respectively  at  their  outer  edges. 


CENTRE  OF   GRAVITY 


DECKING 


wpiftHttRinfiP       Y  i    /*     WEIGHBRIDGE 

d *J 


REFERENCE   LINE" 


1A  1B 

Fig.   1  Determination  of  Horizontal  Fore-and-Aft  Coordinate  (X) 


*T>st   code   for   agricultural  tractors: 
[first  revision  ). 


Part  1      Terminology  and  general  guidelines 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 


-CABLE    VERTICAL  IN    BOTH    PLANES 


WEIGHBRIDGE 


Uit;  tft^gpir\ne  ir 

i 


^r 


i-c  ^WEIGHBRIDGE 
—  cJ- 


2A     Suspension  cable  in  vertical  position 

VCABLE    INCLINED 


CENTRE    OF 
GRAVITY 


^^r 


2B    Suspension  cable  in  inclined  position  . 
Fig.  2     Determination  of  Vertical  Coordinate  (^) 


IS  :  10743  -  198  3 


fa 


'/////, 


m 

It] 


rh 


^m 


°3U- 


i 


b»//////S' 


(dt)    TRACK 


F. 


Fig.  3     Determination  of  Lateral  Coordinate  in 
the  Horizontal  Plane  (j) 

2.4  Tractor  Mass  —  The  mass  of  the  tractor  as  submitted  for  test. 

2.5  Wheel  Base  —  See  2.2  of  IS  :  5994  (  Part  1  )-1979*. 

3.  GENERAL 

3.1  Although  there  are  many  possible  methods  of  determining  the  centre 
of  gravity,  in  this  standard  a  simple  practical  method,  which  requires  the 
use  of  a  weighbridge  and  crane,  has  been  covered.  Alternatively  any 
method  may  be  used  if  they  locate  the  centre  of  gravity  with  respect  to 
the  specified  reference  planes  and  within  the  specified  tolerances.  A 
suggestive  alternative  method  is  given  in  8. 

4.  APPARATUS 

4.0  The  following  apparatus  is  required. 

4.1  Weighbridge  or  Load  Cells  or  Strain  Gauge  Load  Cell 

4.2  Digtal  Load  Indicator 

4.3  Crane 

4*4  Decking  with  Knife  Edges 

4.5  Plumb  Rule 

4.6  Level 

4.7  Squares 


♦Test  code   for  agricultural  tractors:     Part  1   Terminology  and  general  guidelines 
(  first  revision  ) . 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 

4.8  Scribing  Board  —  The  scribing  board  shall  be  at  least  600  mm 
high  by  450  mm  wide,  rigidly  constructed,  and  attached  to  the  tractor  in 
a  suitable  position  with  a  smooth  face  vertical  and  parallel  to  the  side  or 
other  appropriate  plane. 

4.9  Marking  Materials 

4.10  Tape  Measure 

5.  GENERAL  REQjUIREMENTS 

5.0  The  tractor  shall  be  clean  and  shall  be  tested  in  normal  working 
conditions  or  in  a  specified  condition  agreed  to  between  the  manufacturer 
and  the  testing  authority. 

5.1  The  radiator,  sump,  hydraulic  and  other  reservoirs  shall  be  filled  to 
the  specified  levels;  the  fuel  tank  shall  be  full  or^mpty  or  in  a  specified 
condition  as  agreed  to  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  testing 
authority. 

5.2  Tools,  spare  tyre  and  loose  accessories  and  equipment  shall  be  com- 
plete as  supplied  and  shall  be  in  the  normal  storage  positions. 

5.3  Tyre  pressures  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  manufacturer's  operating 
instructions  or,  if  a  range  of  pressures  is  allowed,  at  the  highest  recom- 
mended pressure.  In  the  case  of  tractors  fitted  with  hydro-inflation  tyres, 
they  shall  be  filled  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  operating 
instructions. 

5*4  Articulated  tractors  shall  normally  be  tested  locked  in  a  straight  line 
but  it  may  be  necessary  to  conduct  the  test  with  condition  or  the  joint  set 
at  the  maximum  or  any  intermediate  angle. 

5.5  If  testing  a  sprung  tractor,  no  special  measure  shall  be  taken  to  lock 
the  suspension  of  the  machine. 

5.6  In  conducting  the  test,  the  following  measuring  tolerances  shall  be 
observed: 

a)  Distance  —  ±  0*5  percent 

b)  Mass  —  ±  0*5  percent 

c)  Tyre  pressure  —  ±5  percent 

Note  —  Tyre    pressure  should   be  in  accordance   with  the  manufacturer's  recom- 
mendations. 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 

6.  PROCEDURE 

6.1  General  Principle  —  The  centre  of  gravity  is  determined  by  the 
suspension  and  ground  reaction  method.  This  involves  measuring  the 
ground  reactions  with  the  tractor: 

a)  in  a  horizontal  position, 

b)  tilted  with  front  end  lifted,  and 

c)  tilted  with  rear  end  lifted. 

6.1.1  The  calculated  horizontal  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  from 
a  ground  contact  point  is  measured  in  each  case  and  verticals  are  drawn 
on  the  scribing  board  fixed  to  the  tractor.  The  intersection  of  the 
verticals  indicates  the  centre  of  gravity. 

6.2  Determination    of  Horizontal  Fore-and-Aft  Coordinate  (  x  ) 

6.2.1  Tracked  Tractors  (  see  Fig.  1A  ). 

6.2.1.1  Determine  the  mass  (  m  )  of  the  whole  tractor  on  the  weigh- 
bridge. 

6.2.1.2  Measure  the  reaction  (  Ft  )  under  the  knife  edge  due  to  its 
mass  and  part  of  the  decking. 

6.2.1.3  Move  the  tractor  on  to  the  decking,  part  supported  by  the 
weighbridge,  and  measure  the  reaction  at  the  front  knife  edge  due  to 
the  mass  of  the  tractor,  the  decking  and  knife  edge  (  F1  +  F%  ).  Calculate 
the  reaction  of  the  front  knife  edge  due  to  the  tractor  mass  only  (  F%  )  by 
subtraction. 

6.2.1.4  Measure  the  distance  (d). 

6.2.1.5  The  horizontal  fore-and-aft  coordinate  may  be  calculated  by 
the  following  formula: 

m 

6.2.2  Wheeled  Tractors  (?ee  Fig.  IB  )  —  In  the  case  of  wheeled  tractors, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  use  the  decking  or  knife  edges.  With  the  brakes  off> 
measure  the  axle  loads  and  calculate  x  from  the  mass  and  the  wheelbase 
of  the  tractor  by  the  formula  given  in  6.2.1.5  (  using  the  wheelbase  as  the 
value  for  d). 

6.3  Determination  of  Vertical  Coordinate  (~h)  (  see  Fig.  2  ) 

6.3.1  Suspend  the  tractor  from  front  end  at  an  angle  of  20  to  25°  to  the 
horizontal,  the  other  end  resting  on  the  weighbridge.  The  method  is 
applicable   to    wheeled  or  tracked  tractors,  the  main  difference  being  in 

8 


IS  1 10743  -  1983 

establishing  the  exact  location  of  the  point  of  application  of  the  ground 
contact.  In  the  case  of  wheeled  tractors,  which  shall  be  unbraked,  this 
is  vertically  below  the  axle.  In  the  case  of  tracked  tractors,  it  is  necessary 
to  manoeuvre  until  the  contact-grousers  are  in  the  line  of  ground  contact 
BB'  on  either  side,  or  to  make  contact  through  a  knifeedge  on  the  ground 
contact  line  BB\  The  suspension  cable  shall  be  either  vertical  ( see 
Fig.  2A  )  or  inclined  (  see  Fig.  2B  )  ensuring  that  the  two  axles  shall  be  in 
horizontal  position  as  verified  by  the  spirit  level. 

6.3.2  Measure  the  reaction  (  F3 )  at  the  ground  contact  on  the  weigh- 
bridge. 

6.3.3  Measure  the  horizontal  distance  (  d )  from  the  ground  contact  to 
the  point  of  suspension. 

6.3.4  Calculate  the  horizontal  distance  from  the  centre  of  gravity  to  the 
point  of  suspension  (  c  )  from  the  following  formula: 

c  »  -A  x  d 
m 

where  m  is  the  mass  of  the  tractor. 

6.3.5  Draw  a  vertical  on  the  scribing  board  at  a  distance  ( c )  from  the 
point  of  suspension. 

6.3.6  Repeat  the  procedures  specified  in  6.3.1  to  6.3.5  with  the  tractor 
suspended  from  the  rear  end.  The  suspension  angle  need  not  be  the  same 
for  both  ends. 

6.3.7  The  intersection  of  the  two  lines  on  the  scribing  board,  determin- 
ed as  specified  in  6.3.5  and  6.3.6,  give  the  vertical  coordinate  of  the 
centre  of  gravity  (  k). 

Note  1  — The  tractor  may  be  conveniently  run  on.  to  the  weighbridge  square,  using 
chalked  lines.    This  will  assist  in  drawing  the  plan.    If,  in  the  case  of  tracked  tractors, 
the  grousers  are  not  in  the  ground  contact  line   BB'    (  see  Fig.  2A  ),   it  is  necessary  to 
resort    to   trial   and   error  by  running  the  tractor  in  varying  circles  until  the  required 
result  is  attained  at  the  last  approach. 

Note  2  —  An  alternative  method  is  to  use  a  tilting  platform  and  load  cells. 

6.4  Determination  of  Lateral  Coordinate  in  the  Horizontal  Plane 

(jT)  (see  Fig.  3). 

6.4.1  Measure  the  left-hand  (  F4  )  and  right-hand  (  F5  )  wheel  or  track 
loadings.  Calculate  the  offset  (  b  )  of  the  centre  of  gravity  using  track 
gauge,  or  wheel  track  (  dt  )  as  the  moment  arm,  that  is, 

m 


IS  1 10743  ■  1983 

6.4.2  The  lateral  coordinate  in  the  horizontal  plane  shall  be  calculated 
given  by  the  following  formula: 

Note  1  —  It  is  usually  found  that  the  right-hand  and  left-hand  side  loads  do  not 
exactly  total  the  mass  of  the  tractor  due  to  small  difference  in  level  between  the 
weighbridge  deck  and  the  surrounding.  Any  error  is  minimized  by  equalizing 
the  overlap  of  the  side  being  weighed  in  both  cases. 

Note  2  —  It  is  preferable  to  use  the  total  right-hand  side  and  left-hand  side  wheel 
(  track  )  loadings  to  determine  the  mass  of  the  tractor  (m). 

7.  TEST  REPORT 

7.1  The  test  report  shall  include  the  identification  of  the  tractor  and  test 
parameters,    together    with    the    coordinate   of   the   centre  of  gravity 

\x>  h>y)  expressed  in  millimetres. 

7.2  A  suggested  form  of  test  report  is  given  in  Appendix  A. 

8.  ALTERNATIVE  METHOD 

8.0  The  alternative  method   for   determination  of  vertical  co-ordinate 

(h)  (see  Fig.  4  )  given  below. 

8.1  Necessary  fixtures  may  be  fabricated  for  lifting  the  tractor  from  the 
front. 

8.2  Determine  the  tola!  mass  (m)  of  the  tractor  (  fitted  with  fixtures  )  with 
fuel,  lubricants  and  coolants  full  but  without  ballast  and  75  kg  mass  on 
the  operator's  seat. 


CENTRE    OF    GRA^TV 


P2,P3 "   "Pn 


Fig.  4     Alternative  Method  for  Determination  of 
Vertical  Co-ORDfNATE  (  k ) 


10 


IS  :  10743  -  1983 

8.3  Measure  the  horizontal  distance  (  d\  )  from  the  axis  of  the  rear  wheels 
to  the  plane  containing  the  point  of  lifting  of  the  tractor. 

8.4  Measure  the  loaded  radius  (  jR  )  of  the  rear  tyresat  the  recommended 
tyre  pressure  when  the  tractor  rests  on  a  horizontal  surface. 

8.5  The  tractor  is  lifted  with  the  help  of  crane  from  the  front  so  that  the 
front  wheels  are  just  above  the  ground  level.  Measure  the  load  (Pi) 
required  from  lifting. 

8.6  Measure  the  tilting  angle  a1# 

8.7  Lift  the  tractor  now  at  different  angles  (  upto  25°  )  from  the  position 
at  8.6.  As  the  tractor  is  lifted  part  of  the  mass  of  the  tractor  at  the  front 
will  be  transferred  to  the  rear  and  the  load  required  to  lift  from  front  gets 
reduced.     Measure  the  loads  P%,  jP3,  P& Pn. 

8.8  Measures  the  tilting  angles  a2,  a3,  ac4  ...  a  n. 

8.9  The  vertical  co-ordinate  k  is  determined  by  the  formula: 

r.  R  +         d,(Pl-P%) 
h  m  (  tan  a2  —  tan  ax  ) 

Values  of  X  are  determined  at  different  angles  and  then 
average  of  all  represent  the  vertical  co-ordinate  of  the  centre  of 
gravity. 


APPENDIX    A 

(  Clause  7.2  ) 
SUGGESTED  FORM  OF  TEST  REPORT 

Manufacturer's  name  and  address  

Tractor  type:  Model:  

Serial  No 

Description  of  the  main  tractor  specifications  influencing  the  position  of 
the  centre  of  gravity  (  for  example,  if  provided  with  a  cabin,  state  the 
type) 

Tyre  inflation  pressures: 

Front  kPa 

Rear  _ kPa 


11 


JS  :  10743  -  1983 

Tyre  size: 

Front 

Rear 

Tractor  mass  (  m  ):  (  for  wheeled  tractors ) 

Total  kg 

Front kg 

Rear kg 

Coordinates  of  the  centre  of  gravity: 

x  ...  mm 

fo mm 

y    mm 


12 


