**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13496 (1992) : General requirements of suction machine 
for cleaning sewers^ manholes and ancillary structures 
provided on sewer line and closed storm water drains [CED 
24: Public Health Engineering.] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iimmK-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nvF^f 



:2^S^\\%%19^J^/;S^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



iS 13496 : 1992 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

^^T ^J^ ^T# cT^T ^^T ^r^^ sftT ^^\ ^^ ^ ^^ 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SUCTION 

MACHINE FOR CLEANING SEWERS, 

MANHOLES AND ANCILLARY STRUCTURES 

PROVIDED ON SEWER LINE AND CLOSED 

STORM WATER DRAINS 



UDC 628-28 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 1992 Price Group 1 



Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee, CBD 40 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council, 

Keeping the sewers clean is an important obligation of the civic authorities. If this is not done or 

liupiupciiy uuuCj lucic will uc uiiM^miy *jvciiiuwa ui acwa^c wiin^ii aic iiui »Jiiiy acaLiiciicaii^ lilUbL 

repulsive, but also a source of danger to the health of the community. 

The suction machine is used to syphon the mud, sand and other debris along with the sewage from deep 
sewerlines, manholes, gulley sewer trap and other such ancillary structures through negative pressure. 

This standard is intended to cover essential features of the machine to serve as a guidance to the manu- 
facturers and the users. 



IS 13496 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SUCTION 
MACHINE FOR CLEANING SEWERS, 



Ayf AXTTUr^I CC A XI PV 






PROVIDED ON SEWER LINE AND CLOSED 
STORM WATER DRAINS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers the general requirements 
of suction machine used for cleaning deep 
sewer lines, stagnant manholes, guliey sewer 
trap, cess pools, septic tanks and other such 
ancillary structures provided in the sewer and 
storm water system. 

i REFERENCE 

The Indian Standard IS 10002 : 1981 'Per- 
formance requirements for constant speed 
compression ignition ( diesel ) engines for 
general purposes ( above 20 kW )' is a necessary 
adjunct to this standard. 

3 DIMENSIONS 

The overall dimensions of the machines/equip- 



■f^rrtair* 



within the requirements of Motor Vehicles Act 
and should not unduly obstruct traffic and 
movement on the road, while the equipment is 
operating. 

4 CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 Prime Mover 

The prime mover shall be a standard commercial 
chassis with at least 25 percent overloading 
capacity and shall conform to IS 10002 : 198L 

A 'J V«]i^iiiim T*iiTifiTi 

The pump shall be of a simple design and shall 
be easy to maintain. Vacuum pump shall be run 
through arrangements. Rotary Vane type pumps 
are recommended to be used. It should be able 
to develop sufficient vacuum to suck slurry which 
consist of grit and other solid materials from a 
depth of 8 m up to depth of 12 m with deep suc- 
tion device. 

4.3 Suction Pipe 

The minimum dia of suction pipe shall be 100 mm 
ana a v^uick /\ciuig vaivc wm uc t^n^viutu i^jl 
loading. This valve and pipe should be so desig- 
ned as not to allow lank contents to leak. A 
replaceable wear plate should be provided above 
the top end of the suction pipe. Proper hoses for 



loading should be provided. All pipes will have 
quick-coupling devices. Hose pipe shall be so 
designed and the material used shall be such 
that it can withstand 90 percent vacuum, and 
corrosion and abrasion resistant. Shut off valve is 
so designed and manufactured that it shall be 
quick acting, corrosion and abrasion resistant 
and shall be able to pass sewage containing grit, 
floating fibre material up to 50 mm dia, 

4A Loading Arm 

The guliey arm shall be fully counter balanced 
and shall be easy to manipulate by hand. It 
should be easy to rotate it by hand around the 
pivot by 270". The lowering and lifting operation 
of the guliey arm into and out of the pit can be 
performed manually or hydrauhcally. 

4.5 Tank 

The tanks shall be built from steel. It shall be 
designed at a safety factor of 4 times the operat- 
ing pressure. 

Two-thirds volume of the tank at the rear will 
carry solid contents. This portion again shall be 
divided into one-third and two-thirds by a sludge 
screen. The sludge screen will separate water 
from solids. Water can be drained back into the 
manhole. The bottom portion of the sludge 
screen shall be tilting while domg tipping opera- 
tion m vacuum and the tank should be provided 
v\ith a back door which can be opened and 
closed manually or hydraulically iot tipping or 
transporting as the case may be. The door 
should be clamped to the rear portion of the 
tank through reliable clamping system. 

4.6 Tipping Gear 

There should be a Front End Tippiug Gear pro- 
vided in the front portion of the tank. The 

shall draw power from the vehicle drive only. 
Control valves shall be provided to tip, hold and 
lower the tank. The operating levers shall be 
provided in the driver^s cab at convenient place. 



IS 13496 : 1992 



4.7 Discharge Pipe 

A discharge pipe of 100 mm minimum diameter 
with a quick-acting valve of sulEcient bore 
should be provided on the rear side or rear door 
of the tank for pressure discharge of the hquid. 
Proper hoses for discharge at a point away from 
the vehicle should be provided. All pipes will 
have quick coupling devices. 

4.8 Accessories 

It should be fitted with necessary accessories 
such as Full Bore Quick Acting Valves in the 
sewage paths so that the bores do not offer any 
resistance or blockage to the flow 2 Nos. Pressure 
Relief Valves, one at the Air Pump to safeguard 
the pump from overload and another on the 
sewage portion of the tank to safeguard the tank 
from excessive pressure due to effervescence of 
gases, I No. Vacuum Relief Valve on the Air 
Pump Suction line to limit the vacuum levclj a 
compound valve pressure/vacuum gauge to be 
provided on the tank in an easy to see position. 
A sludge trap shall be provided between the air 
pump and the tank to trap solid particles and 
prevent them from entering the pump. 

A float cut-out valve to be provided on the tank 
5>o that the pump suction line is sealed off once 
the liquid level crosses the specified limit. This 
will work as a safeguard against liquid entering 
the air pump. A lubricating system for the air 



pump to be provided in order to reduce friction 
losses in the pump. 

A rotary control valve to be provided between the 
Air Pump and the Tank so that the tank can be 
pressurised while discharging screened water to 
Gulley pits. Level gauges transparent pipe should 
be provided so that the levels of contents of the 
tank can be visually noted iu the fresh water 
tank and also in the sludge compartment. 

An overhead filling, suction filling, hydrant filling 
or a combination of two or more methods for 
filling the fresh water tank shall be provided. 

An inter-connecting valve to be provided 
between the front and rear compartment for 
Hushing the left overs after completion of the 
pressure/tipping discharge. 



5 PAINTING AND FINISHING 

5.1 As the contents are corrosive, 
treatments are recommended. 



fol 



ov^tng 



5.1.1 The interior of the tank shall be cleaned 
by sand blasting and treated with epoxy/biturnes- 
tic paint. 

5.1.2 Finish paint on the external side may be 
done as per the choice of the buyer. 

5,2 Side racks shall be provided on both side^ of 
the sludge tank to store hose pipes. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a farther safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureaa of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
fo llowing reference: 

Doc : No. CED 40 ( 4690 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text AfiFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters! 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C I, T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T, Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri < East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all offices ) 

Telephone 



f 37 
I 37 



f 331 01 31 

1 331 13 75 

84 99, 37 85 61 
86 26, 37 86 62 



53 38 43, 53 16 40 



j 53 23 84 



f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

I 632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



printed «t New India Printing Preis. Kburia. India 



