**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



g^l/l:^:^i^J^^lf/lJJ^i^N^^ g^^TS^,^^ 



IS 10199 (1982) 
vessels [TED 1^ 
Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Acceptance tests and trials for fishing 
Inland^ Harbour Crafts and Fishing 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: iai39-19@Z 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



ACCEPTANCE TESTS AND TRIALS FOR 

FISHING VESSELS 



UDC 6^9 206:62016 




© Coftyrisht 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BIJAVAN, i HAHADtlR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI I14KK^ 

Q^ 2 Sfpf/mher 1R82 



IS: 10199 -1982 



Indian Standard 

ACCEPTANCE TESTS AND TRIALS FOR 
FISHING VESSELS 

Fishing Vessels Sectional Committee, MGPD 21 

Chairman Representing 

Capt K. K. Lohana Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay 

Members 
Capt N. S. Mohan Ram ( Alternate to 
Capt K. K. Lohana ) 
Shbi S. W. Atre Kirloskar Cummins Ltd, Pune 

Shri K. K. Mahajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Balastjbbamanyan Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Cochin 

Shri K. Sbeedhaban 
Namboodibi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Banebjee Ministry of Shipping and Transport ( Development 

Wing ), New Delhi 
Shbi K. R. L. Aiyeb ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. G. Gadgil Cummins Diesel Sales and Service ( India ) Ltd, 

Pune 
Shbi B. K. Gadbb Kirloskar Pneumatic Co Ltd, Pune 

Shbi R. Y. Ghanekar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. J ay aba j Office of the Directorate of Fisheries in Karnataka, 

Bangalore 
Shbi B. L. Kotbagi {Alternate ) 
Shbi K. M.Joseph Exploratory Fisheries Project, Bombay 

Shbi S. K. Bhadtjby ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V, J. Joseph Greaves Cotton and Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi A. P. Chaubhabi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. A. Kamath Kamath and D'Abreo, Cochin 

Shbi P. L. D'Abbeo ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. R. Khabe Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shbi A. K. Chopba ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C. R. Kulasekabam Gear Transmissions Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shbi P. S. Kumabadas Fisheries Department, Government of Kerala, 

Trivandrum 
Shbi V. G. Joseph ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. V. Menon Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd, Pune 

Shbi S. G. Sabdesai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. K. Nangia Geeta Engineering Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. N. Sewgtjpta ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on p^ge 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 10199 - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Production Manager Andhra Pradesh Fisheries Corp (P) Ltd, Kakinada 

Thiru a, D. Isaac Rajbndban Directorate of Fisheries, Madras 
Shsi Vijay Ranchaw Gujarat Fisheries, Ahmadabad 

Shri D. L. Dholakia ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Rane Bharati Engineering Co, Bombay 

Shri M. Shanmugam Brunton and Co Engineering Ltd, Cochin 

Ssai S. Thiagabajan ( Alternate ) 
ShriH. K. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Sadasivbn ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. D. Stjryawanshi Ruston & Hornsby ( India ) Ltd, Pune 

Shri P. S. Satwe ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Swaminath Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agri- 

culture ), New Delhi 
Shri K. B. C. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri George Varghese Directorate of Fisheries, Union Territory of 

Lakshadweep, Kavaratti Island 
Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri V. K. Sehgal 

Deputy Director ( Marine ), ISI 



IS : iei99 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

ACCEPTANCE TESTS AND TRIALS FOR 
FISHING VESSELS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Fishing 
Vessels Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo 
Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Tests and trials to ensure operational efficacy of the finishing vessels 
are very important before the same are accepted by their owners. The 
users of this standard are required to ensure compliance with Statutory 
Authorities/Classification Societies, where applicable. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers tests and trials for fishing vessels of 15 m 
length overall ( L.O.A. ) and above to ensure their operational efficacy 
and their acceptance by the owners. 

1.2 It may be used as a guideline for vessels below 15 m length over- 
all. 

2. REQUIREMENTS 

2.0 The following tests and trials shall be undertaken before any fishing 
vessel is accepted for operation: 

a) Tank model tests, 

b) Shop test, 

c) Floating trials, 

d) Bollard pull test, 

e) Stability test, 

f) Sea trials, 

g) Speed trials, and 
b) Fishing trials. 



IS : 10199 - 1982 

2.1 Tank model test is normally carried out to determine resistance and 
propulsion characteristics of the vessel, where adequate data on past 
vessel is not available. This test shall be undertaken for the first of any 
new design, if mutually agreed to between the shipbuilder and the 
owner. 

2.2 The shop test shall be carried out at the place of manufacture for all 
main and auxiliary machinery to the satisfaction of Statutory Authority/ 
Classification Society, as applicable. The tests for marine diesel engines 
shall be carried out in accordance with IS : 8013-1976*. For other 
machinery the test shall be carried out in accordance with relevant Indian 
Standards, where applicable. 

2.3 Floating Trials — All equipment shall be run individually and 
collectively for specified period and performance. The equipment and 
machinery shall be tested in presence of inspecting authority/owner's 
representative. The tests shall include the following items: 

a) Main engine in accordance with IS : 8013-1976*; 

b) Auxiliary engine; 

c) All pumps ( bilge, fire fighting, fuel, etc ); 

d) Mechnical ventilation system; 

e) Refrigeration and air-conditioning system; 

f) Electrical machinery and switch gears; 

g) Masts/boom/ derricks and all load handling tackles ( mooring 
equipment ) to be subjected to load test to ensure safety. These 
tests shall be supported by issuance of necessary certificates, 

2.3.1 The calculated tank capacity curves against sounding depths shall 
be duly certified. 

2.3.2 Inspection of equipment and instrument shall be in accordance 
with the agreement between the builder and the owner. 

2.4 Bollard Pull Test — Bollard pull tests are important especially in 
the case of trawlers, as the capability of the vessel to tow the fishing gear 
determines its capability to undertake bottom trawling and mid water/ 
pelagic trawling. 

2.4.1 The bollard pull test shall be carried out under the following 
conditions: 

a) Vessels' displacement to full ballast and full fuel capacity; 

b) Vessel trimmed at even keel or at a trim by the stern not exceed- 
ing 1 percent of the vessels* length; 



♦Guide for selection and testing of marine diestl enginess for fishing vessels. 



£3 : 10199 - 1982 

c) Wind speed not exceeding 5 m/sec; 

d) The water current at the test location not exceeding one knot in 
any direction; 

e) As the propeller efficiency depends on adequate water depth, the 
optimum depth of water at the test location should be 8 times the 
draught of the vessel; and 

f ) The main engine(s) to run at the manufacturers' recommended 

maximum continuous output. 

2.4.2 The static bollard pull developed by the fishing vessel shall be 
measured by an approved tension measuring device ( strain cell, dynamo 
meter ), connected between the shore bollard and the vessel. Engine rpm 
shall be gradually increased to its maximum value. The value certified 
as the vessels' continuous bollard pull shall be the pull recorded as being 
maintained without any tendency to decline for a duration of not less than 
five minutes. 

In case adequate depth of water is not available at the test location, 
the bollard pull as recorded may be suitably corrected to arrive at the 
rated bollard pull. 

2-4.3 Working of the transmission gear shall be watched during the 
bollard pull test for signs of failure, 

2.5 Inclining Tests — Inclining experiment shall be undertaken to 
determine initial stability before proceeding to sea. 

2.5.1 The trim and stability calculations for the following loading 
conditions shall be submitted to owners: 

a) Lightship condition; 

b) Vessel ready to sail with full fuel oil, stores, fresh water, ice, 
fishing gear, etc; 

c) Departure from fishing grounds with full catch; 

d) Arrival at port with 10 percent of fuel and consumables and full 
catch; and 

e) Arrival at port with 10 percent of fuel and consumables and 20 
percent of full catch. 

Note — The compliance to requirements of Torremelinos convention, shall be 
ensured, where applicable. 



IS ; 10199 ^ 1982 

2«6 Sea Trials 

2.6.1 After successful completion of deck trials the ship will be taken 
out for sea trials to try out its main and auxiliary machinery, in relation 
to the type of the hull and the stern gear installed. 

2.6.1.1 Main engines' trials will consist of following: 

J hour at rpm corresponding to 50 percent MCR ( Maximum conti- 
nuous rating ), 

^ hour at rpm corresponding to 70 percent MCR, 

^ hour at rpm corresponding to 90 percent MCR, and 

4 hours at rpm corresponding to 100 percent MCR. 

Note- — This trial will apply to fishing vessels of 15 m length overall ( L.O.A. ) 
and above. For vessels of length less than 15 m, the engine power will be gradually 
built up and measurements recorded during a 4 hour run at rpm corresponding 
to 100 percent MCR. 

Engine RPM will be adjusted to achieve above propeller absorptions. 
During above runs, engine parameters like specific fuel consumption 
lubricating oil pressure, cooling water temperature exhaust gas tempera- 
tures, charge air pressure, etc, shall be monitored continuously, 

2.6.1.2 Alongwith the main engine the behaviour of important com- 
ponents of the asters gear like marine gear box, shaft bearings, etc, shall 
be watched, 

2*6.1«3 The other machinery driven by the main engine like gene- 
rators, hydraulic pumps shall be continuously watched. 

2.6.1.4 The auxiliary machinery shall be run continuously at full 
load under actual sea conditions to prove their reliability. 

2.6.2 Manoeuvrability Test — The manoeuvrability of the vessel shall be 
checked by conducting the following trials: 

a) Turning Circle — The vessel shall be turned to hard star-board 
and the time taken to make a full circle and the approximate 
diameter of the turning circle so made shall be recorded. The 
tests shall be repeated turning the vessel to hard port. The turn- 
ing circle dia shall not exceed 3*5 L, where L is the length of 
ship. 

While describing the turning circle, the vessel shall be going 
full ahead, that is, the engine control shall be set at the position 
which gives 100 percent rpm on a straight run. 



IS s 10199 -1982 

b) Crash Stop Ahead and Crash Stop Astern Test — The ability of 
the vessel to come to a stop in case of emergency shall be tested 
by suddenly stopping the engine and then putting it to full astern. 

c) Steering Gear — The steering gear shall be checked for its reli- 
ability by recording the time taken to go from hard port to 
hard star-board and vice-versa while the ship is going full speed 
ahead. Likewise the steering gear shall also be tested while going 
astern. 

Means shall be provided to operate the rudder directly by 
manual power in case of failure of the control mechanism, of the 
steering gear. 

2.7 Speed Trial 

2»7«1 The vessel shall be subjected to the speed trials in a condition as 
close to that defined in 2.5.1(b). 

2.7.2 Speed of the vessel shall be taken across the available measured 
mile. Two double runs shall be carried out and speed worked out using 
mean of means method. 

2.7.3 Speed obtained above shall be corrected for shallow water effect 
by calculation if depth of water below the heel in trial condition is less 
than 10 times the draft of the vessel. The value so obtained shall be 
compared with the guaranteed value. 

2.8 Fishiiig Trials — The fishing trials shall be carried out to ensure 
that the vessel has the capability to undertake the fishing operation for 
Avhich it is designed, 

2.8.1 Actual fishing operations at least for a period of 2 hours shall be 
done. During the fishing operation all deck equipment shall be checked 
for their proper functioning. In the case of trawl winch, the average 
heaving speed is to be checked. The capacity to tow and heave up the 
fishing gear shall be verified by the normal working of the deck equip- 
ment and fittings. The smoothness of various operations like shooting 
and hauling up the fishing gear, lifting the cod-end into the vessel and 
emptying it shall be checked. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base Units 



QjCJANTITY 


Unit 


Symbojc 




Length 


metre 


tp- 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








QUAlfTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








QUANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definitiok 


Force 


newt on 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W = 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb == 1 V.S 


Flux deiaity 


tesla 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m« 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-i) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S == 1 A'V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V= IWA 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = I N/m« 



