**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11718-1 (1986) : Characteristics and methods of 
measurement for audio-visual video and television equipment 
and systems, Part 1: General [LITD 7: Audio, Video and 
Multimedia Systems and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i imzzmn^a r^g amses 



£«> \\ i *>s*v2^nk^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS i 11718 ( Part 1 ) - 111! 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

CHARACTERISTICS AND METHODS OF 
MEASUREMENT FOR AUDIO-VISUAL, VIDEO 
AND TELEVISION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEM 

PART 1 GENERAL 



UDC 631 '114621 : 3974 i 371 6R7 : 620-16 




© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAYAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

G r 2 Febntaiy 1^87 



IS : 11718 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CHARACTERISTICS AND METHODS OF 
MEASUREMENT FOR AUDIO-VISUAL, VIDEO 
AND TELEVISION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEM 

PART 1 GENERAL 

Recording Sectional Committee, LTDG 23 

Chairman Representing 

ShriN.J. Naik Directorate General of All India Radio, 

New Delhi 

Members 

Sum V. N. Matkur ( Alternate to 
ShriN.J. Nair) 
Shri K. Chandrachudan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri M. P, Sama ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. P. Ganatra Vimal Enterprises Ltd, Umbergam 

Shri Y. P. Ganatra ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Garg Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shki R. V. Narayanan ( Alternate) 
Shri A. Das Gupta Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and 

Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers 
Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 
Shri T. S, Buxi ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Gupta (iramophone (Jo of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. MaitrA ( Alternate) 
Shri R. G. Gupta Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shri P. N. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Stds/S & T/Tele Railway Board 
Joint Director Stds/S & T/ 
Lab ( Alternate ) 
Manager ( Maintenance ) Film & TV Institute or India, Pune 

Dh V, Mohanah National Phvsical Laboratory (CSIR), 

New Delhi 
Shri B. C. Mukhekjeb National Test House, Calcutta 

Shki J. K, Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



€> Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 11718 (Parti) -1986 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Lt-Col S. P. Mubgai 

Shri K. Bera {Alternate) 
Shri S. G. Patel 
Shki Sunil Patel 

Shri K. D. Pavate 

Shri M. R. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri Virendra Vijay 



Representing 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Electronic Component Industries Association 

(ELGINA), New Delhi 
Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani 



Shri P. K. Choudhury ( Alternate ) 



Directorate General, Doordarihan, New Delhi 



Shri N. Srinivasan, 
Director ( Electronics ) 



Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member) 

Secretary 

Shri Pa van Kumar 
Deputy Director ( Electronics), IS! 



Panel for Video Recording Reproduction Systems, LTDC 23 ; P3 



Convener 
Shri A. K. Sen 



Research Department, AH India Radio, 
New Delhi 



Member* 
Shri V. N. Mathur ( Alternate to 



Shri A. K. Sen ) 
Shri V. S. Stjndara Rajan 

Shri Virbndra Vijay 

Shri S. S. Swanj ( Alternate) 
Representative 
Representative 
Representative 

Representative 
Representative 



Gujarat Communications & Electronics Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Directorate General, Doordarshan, New Delhi 

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Central Electronics Engineering Research 

Institute (CSIR), Pilani 
Electronic Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 
Centre for Development of Instructional 

Technology ( CENDIT ), New Delhi 



IS : 11718 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CHARACTERISTICS AND METHODS OF 
MEASUREMENT FOR AUDIO-VISUAL, VIDEO 
AND TELEVISION EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEM 

PART 1 GENERAL 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 18 June 1986, after the draft finalized by the Recording 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 The purpose of this standard is to facilitate the determination of the 
quality of audio-visual apparatus, the comparison of different types of 
apparatus and the determination of their proper application, by listing 
the characteristics which are useful for their specification. 

0.2.1 In this standard, the word 'quality* is intended to denote mainly 
electro-acoustical or visual quality and not quality from the point of 
view of safety, durability, resistance to environmental conditions, etc, 

0.2.2 Quality should be judged from the point of view of the user, 
who is concerned with the characteristics of the apparatus as a whole 
and not, as a rule, with details of the design of the apparatus or the 
characteristics of its components. 

0.2.3 The use of this standard, both by manufacturer and user, will 
facilitate comparison between the manufacturer's specification and the 
user's requirements for a particular system. 

0.3 The characteristics and its methods of measurement are covered by 
a series of standards consisting of the following individual parts: 

Part 1 General 

Part 2 Mechanical design features 

Part 3 Electrical matching requirements 

Part 4 Control, synchronization and address codes 

Part 5 Kind of records and software requirements 



IS t 11718 ( Part 1 ) * 1986 

Part 6 Safety requirements 

Part 7 Electronic learning systems 

Part 8 Audio cassette systems 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, 
it shall be done in accordance with IS ; 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) applies to audio-visual, video and television 
systems and to the parts of which they are composed or which are used 
as auxiliaries to such systems in the field of education, training and 
similar applications. 

1.2 These systems range from very simple general-purpose devices to 
highly professional equipment used, for example, for audio-visual 
distribution systems. 

1.3 No attempt is made in this standard to classify equipment with 
regard to its characteristics. The particular combination of characteristics 
specified for a given system is that required to ensure optimum 
performance under conditions of normal operation. 

1.4 This standard is confined to a description of the different 
characteristics and the methods of measurement; it does not attempt to 
specify performance. 

2. TERMINOLOGY AND EXPLANATION OF TERMS 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in 
IS : 1885 ( Part 3 )f and IS : 1885 ( Part 48 )J shall apply in addition to 
the following. 

2.1 A. P. System ( Audio-Passive ) — A system where the listener 
( student ) can reproduce only the pre-recorded information ( teacher ). 

2.2 A. A. System ( Audio-Active ) — A system where the listener 
(student) can reproduce the pre-recorded information (teacher), 
respond to it during the inter-posed gaps, if any, and simultaneously 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 
fElectrotechnical vocabulary; Part 3 Acoustics. 
JElectrotechnical vocabulary; Part 48 Recording. 



IS : 11718 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

hear his response by means of a microphone/headphone device 
( headset ), his response not being recorded. 

2.3 A. A. C. System (Audio-Active-Comparative) — A system 
where the listener ( student ) can reproduce the pre-recorded information 
( teacher ), respond to it during the interposed gaps, if any, and 
simultaneously hear his response by means of a microphone/headphone 
device ( headset ). The response is recorded so that the pre-recorded 
information ( teacher ) and the response ( student ) can both be 
reproduced. 

2.4 A. P V. System ( Audio-Passive- Visual ) — A system where the 
listener (student ) can reproduce only the pre-recorded information 
( teacher ), illustrated visually by means of synchronized film, filmstrip or 
slide projector, video tape or video disk player, or other visual display. 

2.5 A. A. V. System ( Audio-Active-Visual) — A system where the 
listener ( student ) can reproduce the pre-recorded information 
( teacher ), respond to it during the imterposed gaps, if any, and 
simultaneously hear his response by means of a microphone/headphone 
device (headset), his response not being recorded. The pre-recorded 
information (teacher ) is illustrated visually by means of synchronized 
film, filmstrip or slide projector, video tape or video disk player, or other 
visual display. 

2.6 A. A. G. V System ( Audio-Active-Comparative- Visual ) — A 

system where the listener ( student ) can reproduce the pre-recorded 
information (teacher ), respond to it during the interposed gaps, if any, 
and simultaneously hear his response by means of a microphone/ 
headphone device ( headset ). 

2.6.1 The response ( student ) is recorded so that the information 
(teacher) and the response (student) can both be reproduced. The 
pre-recorded information ( teacher ) is illustrated visually by means of 
synchronized film, filmstrip or slide projector, video tape or video disk 
player, or other visual disply. 

2.7 Pause/Temporary Programme Stop 

2.7.1 Temporary Programme Stop — A temporary interruption of the 
programme ( for example, to give time for finding an answer to a 
question ), caused by a cue tone on the tape at pre-determined points in 
the programme. 

2.7.2 Pause Control — Interruption of the tape transport mechanism 
without changing any of the function modes of the electronic controls 
such as record or play-back. 



IS: 11718 (Part 1) -1986 

2.8 Automatic End Stop — The tape motion is automatically stopped 
at the end of the magnetic tape. 

2.9 Automatic Switch-Off — The interruption of the power supply to 
the system caused by a cue tone on the tape at the end of the 
information ( teacher) or by the end of the tape. 

2.10 Random Access — An ability to locate a defined point in the 
programme on the tape, which is indicated by an address. 

2.11 Search — An ability to search rapidly backwards and forwards to 
other parts of the programme without loss of sound-picture 
synchronization. 

2.12 Programmed Instruction — A method of instruction in which 
the student is instructed by following a controlled programme of 
instruction, 

2.13 Multiple Choice — The possibility of making a choice from two 
or more answers to a question. 

2.14 Cue Tone — An audio frequency of specified duration recorded 
on the cue track so as to provide signalling system for functions as may 
be required. 

2.15 Master Cassette — This is normally a specially recorded cassette 
containing the information ( teacher ). 

2.15,1 The cassette may be used by a teacher to distribute information 
to students, either directly or on to library/student cassettes. It may be 
so constructed that the pre-recorded information (teacher) cannot be 
erased. 

2*16 Library/Student Cassette — A cassette intended for use by a 
student. 

3- FREQUENCIES OF MEASUREMENT 

3.1 If measurement are to be made at discrete frequencies, then these 
shall be the frequencies specified in IS : 2264-1963*. If a measurement 
relates to a 'reference frequency' then in the absence of a clear reason to 
the contrary, this shall be the 'standard reference frequency' of 1 000 Hz. 
Otherwise, it shall be one of the frequencies specified in IS : 2264-1963* 
so chosen that the result of the measurement is affected to the least 
possible extent by the setting of the tone controls. 



♦Preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements. 

6 



IS : 11718 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 
4. MARKING AND SYMBOLS FOR MARKING 

4.1 Marking 

4.1.1 Terminals and controls shall be adequately marked to give 
information regarding their function and characteristics. DC power 
terminals shall be marked with respect to polarity. 

4.1.2 The marking shall indicate the polarity between input and 
output signal terminals, connections of terminals to an established 
reference point ( earth ) and interconnections between terminals. 

4.1.3 The marking shall be such that it is possible to adjust the 
controls and to identify their positions with sufficient accuracy in 
connection with the characteristics given in the manual, 

4.1*4 The marking can be carried out in the following ways: at the 
terminals and controls, in a description with respect to their function, 
and in the instructions given in the manual. 

4.2 Symbols for Marking — Marking should preferably be composed 
of letter symbols, signs, numbers and colours which are internationally 
intelligible. The use of texts shall be avoided as fas as possible. 

5. ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 

5.1 Measurement and mechanical checks shall be carried out at any 
combination of temperature humidity and air pressure within the 
following limits: 

a) Ambient temperature: 15 to 35° C, preferably at ± 25° C; 

b) Relative humidity: 45 to 75 percent, and 

c) Air pressure; 860 to 1 060 mbar. 

6. GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION 

6.1 It is recommended that the relation between two or more quantities 
be presented in graphical form. 

6.2 The relation between two quantities may be given as a single graph. 
The relations between three quantities may be given as a family of graphs 
in a single diagram, two of the quantities being given as abscissa and 
ordinate and the third as a parameter. 

6.3 When the results of a point-to-point measurement for an individual 
device are presented as a continuous curve, the measuring points shall 
always be clearly indicated. 



IS : 11718 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

6.4 Extrapolated or intermediate curves based on theoretical expectations 
or other information presented, but not based on direct measurement, 
shall be clearly distinguished from measurement curves, for example, by 
another style of drawing. 

6«5 A quantity compounded from specific frequency components, or from 
an assembly of components in specified frequency bands, may be presented 
as a line or band spectrum of constant width or constant proportional 
width. The bandwidth used shall be stated. If specifications refer to 
frequency bands of constant proportional bandwidth, preference shall be 
given to octave and one-third octave hands according to IS : 6964-1973*. 

7. SCALES FOR GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION OF DATA 

7.1 General 

7.1.1 Linear or logarithmic scales are recommended for graphical 
presentation. Linear decibel scales are equivalent to logarithmic scales. 
Other kinds of scales, such as double logarithmic, shall be avoided. 
When using decibel scales, the zero of reference should, if possible, be the 
rated value. It is recommended that combinations of linear and 
logarithmic scales in the same graph be avoided. 

7,1-2 Where quantities represented by abscissae and ordinates are of 
the same kind, it is recommended that the same unit length be used for 
both. Linear scales with remote zero point should be avoided as far as 
possible. For further information, reference should be made to 
IS : 8159-19761*. 

7.2 Logarithmic Frequency Scales — For graphs in which a level 
( in decibels ) is plotted against frequency on a logarithmic scale, the 
scale proportions shall be those for which the length for a 10 : 1 
frequency ratio is equal to the length for a level difference of 25 dB or 
50 dB on the ordinate scale. 

7.3 Polar Level Diagrams — For polar plots in which a level ( in 
decibels ) is shown increasing outward along a radius, for whatever 
length is chosen to represent I dB, the length of radius of the circle near 
which maximum level is to be plotted shall be that which corresponds 
to a difference in level of 50 dB or 25 dB. For absolute response, the 
maximum level shall be plotted as near as is practicable to a radius 
corresponding to a difference in level of 50 dB or 25 dB. 



♦Specification for octave, half-octave and third-octave band filters for analysis of 
sound and vibrations. 

fScales and sizes for plotting frequency characteristics and polar diagrams. 

8 



