**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11793 (1986) : Guidelines for design of float-driven 
hoisting mechanism for automatic gated control [WRD 12: 
Hydraulic Gates and Valves] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; 11793 -1986 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 



GUIDELINES FOR 
DESIGN OF FLOAT DRiVEN HOISTING 
MECHANISM FOR AUTOMATIC GATED 

CONTROL 



UDC 62>833 6104 




® Copyright 1587 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARQ 

NEW DELHI J9OD02 

Gf ti Manh \%1 



IS : 11793 - 1986 



Indian Standard 



GUIDELINES FOR 

DESIGN OF FLOAT DRIVEN HOISTING 

MECHANISM FOR AUTOMATIC GATED 

CONTROL 

Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, BDC 56 

Chairmon 

SHR[ Y. ADiNA'tAVANA SasTRI 

26 Park Area, Karol Bagh, New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shri D. S, Ahuja Nangal Workshops, Irrigation Department, 

Government of Punjab, Nangal Township 
Shri Balwant Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Annig>;ri Tungbhadra Steel Products Ltd, P. O. Tungbhadra 

Dam 
Shki DHARMfNOER Cmaran Irrigation ]>epartment. Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Chief EwoiNHrR Irrigation Works, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Director ( M & E ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Chopra Texmaco Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. BHAXTArHARVA ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. C. Dhingra Haryana State Minor Irrigations ( Tubewells ) 

Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh 
ShiU R. S. Chauhan ( Alternate ) 
DiKHcTOR Central Water & power Research Station, Pune 

Shri A. V. Gopalakrishna ( Alternate ) 
DiRvnoR ( GArEs& Dksigns I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Shri C. L. Verma ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Julka Beas Project, Talwara BBMB, Chandigarh 

Shri V. P, Kaushal ( Alternate ) 
Shri K, V. S. Murthy Triveni Structural Ltd, Naini 

Shri M. K. V. Sarma ( Aliernate ) 
Shri Raj Kumar Hharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri N. Y. Narasimhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Ramakrishkan Public Works Department, Government of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri P. Arunvchalam ( Aliernate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



Copyright 1987 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri S. K. Sadhu 

Shri S. Nag ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer CDO, 

Nasik 
Shri R. Swarup 

Shri K. C, Bahety ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. C. Tewari 

Shri N. Viswanathan 

Shri G. S, SMarma ( Alternate ) 



Shri G. Raman, 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Representing 
Jessop & Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Irrigation & Power Department, Government of 

Maharashtra, Nasik 
Central India Machinery Manufacturing Co Ltd, 

Bharatpur ( Rajasthan ) 

Himachai Pradesh State Electricity Board, Govern- 
ment of Himachai Pradesh 

National Hydro-Electric Power Corporation, New 
Delhi 

Director General, IS! ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri Hemant Kumar 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 
DESIGN OF FLOAT DRIVEN HOISTING 
MECHANISM FOR AUTOMATIC GATED 
CONTROL 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 June 1986, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

0.2 Hoisting mechanism of gated-control may be driven by a *floaf instead 
of an electric motor. The float possesses twin self-opposing forces of 
gravity and bouyancy, one due to its weight and the other due to its sub- 
mergence in water in a float-well. It may be considered as a hydraulic 
counterweight. With no submergence, full weight of the float acts as a 
counterweight to operate the gate in one direction. With submergence, 
upthrust exerted by bouyancy decreases the effective weight of this counter- 
weight ( float ). With increase in submergence, the counterweight effect of 
the float is decreased to the extent that the gate gets operated in the opposite 
direction. When gravity and bouyancy are balanced, the gate stops in its 
position and gated opening does not change. Thus operation of the gate is 
effected by adjusting the water-level in the float-well. It is done by admit- 
ting water to or draining water from the float-well through suitable flow- 
control devices such as weirs, orifices or valves. By making operation of 
these flow-control devices automatic, the gated-control is made automatic. 

0.3 An automatic mechanism is a self regulating arrangement to keep the 
controlled-variable in a balanced equilibrium state within certain predeter- 
mined-limits without involving any external manual intervention. It com- 
prises of the following main components: 

a) Regulator — It provides control-action to regulate variations in the 
controlled-variable 

b) Operator — It provides control-power to operate the regulator. 

c) Sensor — It provides control-selection. It detects the difference be- 
tween actual and predetermined-limits, that is the deviation of the 



18:11793-1986 

controlled-variable from its predetermined-limits of the balanced 
state of equilibrium, and selects control to operate the regulator to 
restore the lost balance by bringing the controlled variable nearer 
possible to its predetermined limits. 

0.4 In case of an automatic gated-control, the regulator is the gate, the 
operator is the float-driven hoistmg-mechanism and the sensor is the flow- 
control device admitting water to or draining water from the float-well in 
response to deviation of the controlled-variables from its predetermined- 
limits of balanced equilibrium state. 

0*5 In case water-level in a hydro-electric channel is to be kept constant 
within the predetermined-limitSj water-level responsive sensors may be a 
control-weir and a pilot float operated drain valve. When water-level rises 
in the channel, water is admitted to the float-well through the control-weir 
to open the gate and thereby lowering the water-level in the channel to its 
predetermined-limit. When water level falls in the channel, water is drained 
from the float-well through a pilot-float operated drain valve to close the 
gate and thereby raising the water-level in the channel to its predetermined- 
limit. With water-level in the channel within the predetermined-limits, 
neither inflow to nor outflow from the float-well takes place and gated- 
opening remains constant. 

0.6 In case it is desired to close a forebay gate automatically in a power 
channel feeding a hydro-electric power house when a sudden load-tripping 
takes place and hydraulic turbines are endangered by run-away speed, the 
sensor may be a solenoid-valve which opens by an electric-signal responsive 
to load-tripping or run-away speed of the hydraulic turbine and drains 
water from the float well to close the gate. To obtain quicker gate closure, 
the solenoid-valve may be used as a pilot to open a larger float-operated 
drain valve to drain water from the float-well at a higher rate. 

0.7 Sometims an additional-drive such as an electric-motor may also be 
provided to operate the gate when float-driv^ is under maintenance or out 
of order or otherwise fails to meet any emergent requirements. Normally, 
the additional-drive is kept declutched or unoperative and gated-control is 
done by float-drive only. However, when the additional drive is brought 
into operation, the gated-control may entirely be done by the additional- 
drive alone or may be done together with the float-drive by suitable arrange- 
ments of the hoisting mechanism as shown in Fig. 4. 

0.8 The description given in 0.2 to 0.7, the float-driven hoisting-mechanism 
for the automatic gated-control, is adaptable for a wide range of applica- 
tions with wide range of arrangements due to a variety of types of gates and 
a variety of hoisting-mechanisms, as also a variety of a automatic flow- 
control devices ( sensors ) which admit water to or drain water from the 
float-well. However, float-well has its limitations also due to practicable 



IS: 11793- 1986 

size of the float-well and in general, its hoisting effort may be limited to 
20 tonnes unless float-well for larger size of float is conveniently practicable 
on the given project. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down guidelines for design of a float-driven hoisting- 
mechanism for automatic gated-control. 

1.2 This standard includes only typical arrangements commonly used, since 
possible arrangements are numerous due to a variety of types of gates, 
hoisting-mechanisms, float-drives and automatic flow-control devices 
( sensors ). This may be used to admit water to or drain water from the, 
float-well in response to deviation of the controlled-variable from its 
predetermined-limits. Design guidelines are therefore limited accordingly 
( see Fig. 1 to 11 ). 



-INTAKE WELL 



INLET 




DRAW PIPE-! 



Note — In the arrangements shown, float is moving up, gated-opening increases 
suitable to control water surface at U/S side of the gate. 

Fjg. 1 Typical Arrangement for Float Driven Hoisting Mechanism 
FOR Automatic Gated Control 



IS : 11793 - 1986 



AUXILIARY HOIST 



WEIR ADJUSTING 
HAND WHEELt 



WEIR WELL-\ 



CONTROLLED 



TING \ 

ll K /©toi> H , 

W I EXTENDED COUNTER- 

lAfl A WEIGHT^ j 



^INTAKE TO WEIR 
WELL WITH 
SCREEN OR 
TRASH RACK 



FLOAT 
PEDESTAL-" 




OUT FLOW 



FLOAT DRAIN (MAIN) 
FLOAT DRAIN (REGULATED) 



DRAIN REGULATING ORIFICE 



Note 1 — Tn the arrangements shown, float is moving up, gated-opening increases 
suitable to control water surface at U/S side of the gate. 

NoTR 2 — Float drain has been shown as controlled by an orifice for better sensiti- 
vity and stability of operation. Automatic drain valves may be provided. 

Fig. 2 Typical Arrangement for Float Driven Hoisting Mechanism 

( WITH Counterweight Supported on Extended Part of Gate Arm ) 

for Automatic Gated Control 



1.3 This standard includes typical arrangements to keep water-level con- 
stant in a hydro-electric and other locations channel at the upstream or 
downstream side of the gate. 

1.4 This standard includes typical arrangement for emergency closure of a 
power channel feeding a bydro-electric power-house, to prevent damage to 
the hydraulic turbine and generators by run-away speed conditions when 
sudden load-tripping takes place at the power house. 

1.5 This standard does not include the structural design of the gate, the 
hoisting-mechanism and the other components, for which relevant Indian 
Standards may be referred to. However, outlines of the structural arrange- 
ments of certain components, where considered necessary in the interest of 
functional reliability, are included. 



IS : 11793 - 1986 



c 



ELECTRIC 
MOTOR- 



^-i 






ROPE 

ROM 

FLOAT 



ff 



^LINE 
SHAFT 



^SPUR GEAR 
■RFniinTlQN 




-VVltiCJi- 



-DRAIN PIPE 
HAND RAIL 



GUIDE PULLEY 



WELL--\ 



x-^ OF WATER INLET 
y TRASHRACK AND 



GATE 



-DRAIN PIPE 
SLUICE GATE 



-FLOAT WELL INLET 
SLUICE GATE 



-MECHANICAL 
HOIST 



-DRAIN PIPE 
SLUICE GATES 



BRIDGE 




C OF BULK 

head gate 

Fig. 3 Float Driven Hoisting Mechanism for Automatic Gated 
Control of Flow Through By Pass Channel 



rAUXILtARY 
V HOIST 




Cft 



--a 

NO 



00 

OS 



Note — The arrangement shown above is same as that for Fig. 2 except that pilot float operated drain valve has been 
provided for automatic control of outflow from float-well. Alsoauxihary hoist is shown connected to the counter- 
weight through a pulley on the float instead of connecting to gate as shown in Fig. 2. This arrangement of auxiliary 
hoist allows it to function together with float without requiring clutch and can raise the gate or lower the gate as 
required. For its automatic operation, water level sensing contacts ( no-flote electrodes or pilot-float operated switches) 
may be installed in the intake-well but the setting may be kept bsyond the limits set for float-drive so that normal 
operation is done by float-drive only. 

Fig 4 Schematic Diagram of Float-Driven Hoisting Mechanism for Automatic Gated Control 



• RAOiAL GATE 
TRUNNION 




FLOAT WELL 



STAIR-WELL 
PtLOT FLOAT 



INLET WEIR 
CONTROL WELL' 



• WATER LEVEL IN 
ALL FLOAT WELLS 



- TO ALL FLOAT 
WELLS 



STAIRWELL 



COUNTERWEIGHT 



-BALANCING 
PIPE 

ELEVATION 



-CONTROL WELL ^ FLOAT WELL 

LONGITUDINAL SECTION 



Note — Hydraulic function is same as Fig. 3, 

Fig. 5 Float-Driven Hoisting Mechanism for Automatic Gated Control Provided Across the 

Main Hydel Channel 



C/) 



-4 



00 



SWITCH 
CROSSHEAD 



GEAR MOTOR 
WITH BRAKE 




Q OF 

TRUNNION 
BEARING 



cn 






OS 



NoT£ — Instead of piJot-iloat controlJed switches, non-float type switches may be provided for automatic gated control by 
auxiliary hoist. 

Fig. 6 Schematic Diagram of Pilot-Float Controlled Electric Motor Driven 

Automatic Gated Control 



TOROUE SHAFT 



TO AUXILIARY 
HOtST 



WEfR ADJUSTING 
HAND WHEEL 



COUNTER- 
WEIGHT- 




-MOSS SCREEN OR 

TRASHRACK INTAKE 

TO WEIR WELL 





-r 




'4,' 


■v 


'I* 
4' 


^ 


COUNTER 

WEIGHT 

WELL 




^>. 


••■^••■^ ••*•■■ 


< \» 



V-FLO 



float well drain 
at pedestal 

Fig. 7 Schematic Diagram of Automatic Float Operated Radial Gate ( Torque Type ) 



t/5 



-J 



£ 
^ 



K> 



FLOW 




Fig. 8 Double Seat Balanced Type 

Drain Valve ( Outflow at Top 

AND Bottom ) 



TO PILOT 
FLOAT 



SOCKET FOR 
DRAIN PIPE R 
OUTLET-, "* 

2ffi 




SECTION AA 



Fig. 9 Radial Type Drain Valve ( Outflow 
Horizontal ) 



^ 






ON 



LEVER ARM 



TO PILOT 
FLOAT 



AXLE 
^^BRACKET 




G. I- PIPE BEND 
VALVE SEAT 



VA 



LVE LEAF-^ 



Fig. 10 Radial Type Drain Valve ( Outflow 

Vertical ) 




RADIAL 
VALVE LEAF 



INSIDE 
VALVE 



n^^ OUTSIDE 
11 VALVE 



Fig. 1 1 Radial Type Drain Valve ( Outflow 
AT AN Angle ) 



W5 






so 

00 

9\ 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

2. MAIN COMPONENTS 

2.1 A typical arrangemenl of float-driven hoisting mechanism for automatic 
gated-control may comprise of the following components: 

a) Gate, 

b) Counterweight, 
c; Float, 

d) Float-well and control-piping, 

e) Control-well and common-header, 

f) Intake-tank and feed pipe/channel, 

g) Flow-control/sensors, 

h) Float-driven hoisting-mechanism, and 
j) Additional electric-drive. 

2.2 Gate 

2.2.1 Type of gate may be selected to make best use of the limited hoist- 
ing effort available from a float-driven mechanism and also to ensure good 
reliability of the automatic-operation. The following factors shall be 
considered: 

a) Minimum frictional resistance during operation to minimize the 
hoisting effort requirement; 

b) Minimum chances of jamming; 

c) Minimum variation in its effective weight due to uplift, downpuU^ 
bouyancy and silt deposit on its horizontal surfaces during opera- 
tion or submergence; 

d) Simplicity in construction and easy accessibility; and 

e) Good hydraulic performance at partial gate opening. 

2.2.2 A. radial gate satisfies the considerations outlined in 2.2.1 to a 
sufficient extent and may, therefore, be preferred for an automatic gated- 
control by float driven hoisting-mechanism. 

2.2.3 Gate of any other type may be provided where it is preferred due 
to other factors. Thus a vertical lift gate may be provided where available 
pier length is shorter than that required for a radial gate due to its long 
arms and deep anchorage. A fish belly type gate may be preferred, where 



14 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

excessive floating debris is to be passed above the top of the gate. How- 
ever, in such cases, it may be kept in view that vertical Hft gate of slide type 
has excessive frictional resistance, vertical lift gate of fixed wheel type has 
greater chances of jamming of its wheel-bearings, and the bearings of a fish 
belly gate remain submerged and are not easily accessible. Such factors 
necessitate hoisting effort requirement of greater value than that for a radial 
gate and therefore the size of float and float-well may be suitably increased 
to have sufficient reserve capacity to overcome the additional worst possible 
conditions during the automatic gated-operation. 

2.3 Counterweight 

2.3.1 The various types of counterweight provided for gated-control are; 

a) Balancing Counterweight — It is provided to balance the effective 
weight of the gate to the extent that the counterweight gate remains 
self-closing type. Its provision reduces the hoisting effect require- 
ment and therefore decreases the size of the float and the float-well. 

b) Hoisting Counterweight — It is provided to overcome the effective 
weight of the gate completely and to make the counterweighted gate 
self-opening type. In this case, weight of the float lifts the hoisting 
counterweight instead of the gate so that with float going down, the 
hoisting counterweight goes up and the gate goes down. In other 
words, the gate goes down as float goes down and gate goes up as 
the float goes up. 

c) Extended Counterweight — It is provided in case of radial gate with 
extended portion of gate arms beyond trunnion centre in such a way 
that it does not obstruct the flow for any gate opening to support 
the counterweight. Its effect is determined by the principle of levers 
with fulcrum considered at trunnion centre. 

d) Suspended Counterweight — it is kept suspended and is connected to 
the gate or the float through a rope or a chain. 

2.3.2 Counterweight may generally be of a steel frame or box containing 
slabs of cast iron or concrete or any other high density filling material. Suit- 
able provision shall be made to vary the weight of the counterweight for 
field adjustments to meet the actual requirements. 

2.4 Float 

2.4,1 As given in 0-2, the float is a hydraulic counterweight possessing 
twin self-opposing forces of gravity due to its weight and bouyancy due to 
the upthrust by its submergence in water in a float-well. After its full sub- 
mergency, its bouyancy is more than its gravity and it floats when left to 

15 



IS : 11793 . 1986 

itself. In case its bouyancy remains less than its gravity even after full 
submergence, it does not float when left to itself and such a hydraulic coun- 
terweight may be called a displacer instead of a float. 

2.4.2 Weight of the float ( or displacer ) may be so provided that under no 
submergence, it serves as a counterweight to operate the gate in one direction 
( open or close) according to the hoisting arrangement provided. Volume of 
the float ( or displacer ) may be so provided that under its 90 percent sub- 
mergence, its upthrust ( bouyancy ) reduces the eff'ective weight of the 
counterweight ( float or displacer ) to the extent that gate gets operated in 
the opposite direction (closes or opens respectively). 

2.4.3 Generally, float may be made of a hollow leak-proof steel box with 
its surfaces protected by water resistant paint conforming to relevant Indian 
Standards. As the float is a very critical item in the automatic functioning 
of the gate, design of float shall be such that it is leak-proof to ensure its 
intended functioning. 

2.4.4 If provided with a removable top cover, joints between the top 
cover and the hollow box may be made water-tight so that water does not 
enter the hollow space in case of full submergence. 

2.4.5 Provision may be made to change its weight to suit the actual opera- 
tional requirements in the field. 

2.4.6 Guide rollers may be provided at all the four top edges of the float 
or on the float-cover to facilitate easy movement of the float in the float- 
well. 

2.5 Float- Well and Control Piping 

2.5.1 The float shall be installed in the float-well. Area of the float-well 
may correspond to the area of the float with a httle clearance all around to 
facilitate easy movement of the float in it. Depth of the float-well may be 
so designed that the top of the float-well shall be above the maximum water 
level to be controlled and its bottom remains clear of the bottom of the 
float in its lowermost position to the extent that the silt deposit and direct 
flow from the control pipe may not interfere with the float travel such that 
there is eff*ective water pressure at the bottom to ensure floating action. 

2.5.2 Quantity of water to be changed in the float-well for gate operation 
by the float-drive may be determined as: 

Q^ '-^ Af X S{ 
where 

Qr Quantity of water to be changed in the float-well, 

16 



IS: 11793-1986 

Af = Area of the float-well, and 
5f ^^ Travel of the float. 

Generally, gate is operated at a speed of 0*3 to 0*6 metre/minute so 
that Qi may vary from 300 to 600 litres/minute for every square metre area 
of the float-well when speed of float is the same as that of the gate. Depend- 
ing on the hoisting arrangement, the speed of float may diff'er from the speed 
of the gate and Qt is varied accordingly. 

2.5.3 Size of control-piping at inlet to and outlet from the float-well may 
be determined to suit Q^ using principles of hydraulics. 

Thus gi -= Qt + Qo for increase of water level in the float-well, 
and 2o = 2f + Qi for decrease of water level in the float-well, 

where 

Qi ^^ Flow through control-piping at the inlet to the float-well, 
and 

go ==^ Flow through control-piping at the outlet of the float-well. 

Where Qi and Qo do not take place simultaneously, the arrangement 
becomes more sensitive, since Qi and go are not required to exceed Qt 
as required in the case under simultaneous flow conditions. 

2.5.4 Opening for inlet and outlet from the float-well may be located a 
little above the bottom of the float-wefl to account for any silt-deposit but 
these may be located a little below the bottom of the float in its lowermost 
position, to prevent interference of float travel with direct flow through 
control-piping- Additional dewatering pipe may be provided at the bottom 
of the float-well to enable complete dewatering of the float-well to facilitate 
silt-clearance. 

2.5.5 Location of the float-well may be so selected that a deeper float- 
well may be made, keeping its drain outlet level above the maximum level 
of the available drain to prevent backflow of water from the drain to the 
float-well. Lesser the value of Qt, quicker is the float-travel for the same 
flow through the control-piping or, in other words lesser is the flow required 
through the control-piping for the same float-travel. 

2.5.6 Top of float-well may be provided with removable cover so that any 
unwanted object may not fall into it which may interfere with the float- 
travel. 



17 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

2.6 Control-Well and Common-Header 

2.6.1 In case, a number of gates are operated simultaneously by float- 
drives, all the float-wells may be connected to control-well through a 
common-header so that water admitted to or drained from the control-well 
changes water-level in all the connected float-wells simultaneously. 

2.6.2 The quantity of water to be admitted to or drained from the control- 
well through the flow-control-sensors provided for it, may be determined by 
the combined requirement of all the float-wells connected to it. 

2.6.3 Shut-off" valves maybe provided between the common-header and 
the float-wells to enable isolation of any float-well, when required, for main- 
tenance/silt-clearance . 

2.7 Intake-Tank and Feed Pipe/Channel 

2.7.1 An intake-tank may be provided to serve as stilling well for 
installation of flow control sensors and a storage tank to feed water to the 
control-well through inlet-sensor. 

2.7.2 The intake tank may be connected to a water source such as the 
hydro-electric channel ( or reservoir ) through a feed pipe/channel having 
grating at its inlet and to prevent entry of trash into it and also provided 
with a shut-off device for its closure to facilitate maintenance/silt-ciearance. 

2.7.3 A drain outlet may be provided at the bottom of the intake tank 
which may normally be kept closed by a shut-off vahc and opened to faci- 
litate silt-clearance. 

2.8 Flow-Control-Sensors 

2.8.1 Flow-control-sensors for inflow and outflow are provided for auto- 
matic control of water to be admitted to or drained from control-well. 

2.8.2 The typical flow-control-sensors generally employed are: 

a) Crest-level controlled inlet-weir/orifice, 

b) Pilot-float operated drain valve, and 

c) Electric-signal controlled solenoid valve. 

2.8.2.1 Crest- level controlled inlet-weir /orifice — An inlet- weir may be a 
rectangular opening in a vertical plane with its crest-level controlled by top 
edge of an adjustable plate mounted over a steel-frame fixed around the 
rectangular opening. An inlet-orifice may be a circular opening in a hori- 
zontal plane with its crest-level controlled by an adjustable telescopic piping 
having rubber seals at the telescopic surfaces. Either of these may be 

18 



18:11793-1986 

installed in the intake tank with the crest-level adjusted to the predeter- 
mined-! imit of water-level to be controlled in the hydro-electric channel (or 
reservoir) at upstream or downstream side of the gate as required, to which 
the intake tank feed pipe/channel inlet end is connected making water-level 
in the intake tank to correspond to the water level being controlled. Where 
water level in the intake tank rises above the crest level, water is admitted 
to the control well so that the float moves up. In case, the water level at 
upstream of the gate is to be controlled, the float moving up operates the 
hoisting-mechanism to increase gated-opening so that greater discharge 
through it begins to lower the controlled water-level towards the crest level 
of the inlet-weir/orifice. In case, the water level at downstream of the gate 
is to be controlled, the float moving up operates the hoisting-mechanism to 
decrease gate opening so that lesser discharge through it begins to lower 
the controlled water-level towards the crest-level of the inlet-weir/orifice. 
With water level in the intake tank at or below the crest level, water is not 
admitted to the control well so that the float no longer moves up. Under 
this condition, the float stops moving or begins moving down according to 
closure or opening of the drain sensor so that gated-opening keeps un- 
changed or operated in the reverse direction respectively, 

2.8.2.2 Pilot-float operated drain valve — It is a drain sensor with the 
drain valve installed in out flow control piping and the pilot float installed 
in the intake tank. If water level in the intake tank is within or above the 
predetermined-limit, the pilot float keeps the drain valve closed. If water 
level in the intake tank is below the predetermined-limit, the pilot-float 
opens the drain valve and the float begins moving down. In case, the water 
level at the upstream of the gate is to be controlled, the float moving down 
operates the hoisting-mechanism to decrease gated opening so that lesser 
discharge through it begins to increase the controlled water level towards 
the predetermined-limit. In case, the water level at the downstream of the 
gate is to be controlled, the float moving down operates the hoisting- 
mechanism to increase gated-opening so that greater discharge through it 
begins to increase the controlled water level towards the predetermined-limit. 
In either case, the opening of the drain valve raises the controlled water level 
towards the predetermined-limit by suitable arrangement of the hoisting 
mechanism operating the gate. 

2.8.2.3 Electric-signal controlled by solenoid valve — It is a valve operat- 
ed by a solenoid which is energized by an electric current controlled by 
electric signals from a switching device. It may be provided for inlet sensor 
or drain sensor as per control function. Switching devices may be 'No 
flote' or static type electrodes or pilot-float operated switching contacts 
installed in the intake tank, with their operation so adjusted that the solen- 
oid valves serving as inlet sensor and drain sensor are energized and the 
gate is operated to keep the controlled water level within predetermined- 
limits. In case, the gated-control is required to be made automatic for any 

19 



18:11793-1986 

requirement other than keeping the water level constant, the switching 
devices may be provided accordingly. Thus, for emergency closure of the 
gate of a power channel, in the event of load tripping in a hydro-electric 
power house, the switching device may be selected responsive to the load 
tripping so as to energize or de-energize, the inlet sensor and the drain 
sensor as to control the float drain hoisting mechanism for closing the gate. 

2.9 Float Driven Hoisting-Mechanism 

2.9.1 Float driven hoisting-mechanism may be considered as the mechani- 
cal and functional arrangement through which the force of gravity/ 
bouyancy of the float ( hydraulic counterweight or displacer ) is processed 
to operate the gate. 

2.9.2 Mechanical Arrangements — It is provided for force/torque trans- 
mission such as: 

a) Directly coupled arrangement, 

b) Lever arm arrangement, 

c) Ropes and pulleys arrangement, 

d) Rope drum and line shaft arrangement, and 

e) Chain-sprockets and line shaft arrangement. 

Any or a combination of these arrangements may generally be provided 
keeping in view that it is made as simple as practicable for the given project 
layout and frictional resistances at the moving surfaces are kept to the 
minimum. 

2.9.3 Functional Arrangements — It is provided to suit the required gate 
operation by the float- drive such as: 

a) Gate lifted by weight of float and lowered by bouyancy of float — It 
may be termed as arrangement 'A'. In this arrangement, weight 
of the float serves as hoisting counterweight to lift the gate. When 
its effect is neutralized by upthrust due to the bouyancy of float 
under its submergence, the gate lowers under its own weight. The 
following operating conditions may be considered: 

i) Tg ~ Tbc =- \'5Tr or more, 

ii) Tr ^ (Tg - Tbc) + 1*5 Tr or more, 

where 

T{ji ^-= Efl'ective torque or tension due to weight of the gate including 
blast, if any, added to it; 

20 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

The = Effective torque or tension due to the balancing counter- 
weight; 

Tf = Effective torque or tension due to weight of the float; and 

Tr = Effective torque or tension due to all the frictional resistances 
and other forces opposing the gate operation. 

In case, Tbc = Tg — 1-5 Tr, Tr requirement reduces to 3 Tr which 
. indicates that reducing the frictional resistances to the minimum, 
the size of the float may be greatly reduced. 

b) Gate lowered by weight of float and lifted by bouyancy of float — It 
may be termed as arrangement *B'. In this arrangement, a separate 
hoisting-counterweight is provided to lift the gate and weight of 
float is applied to lift the hoisting-counterweight. Thus float mov- 
ing down lifts the hoisting-counterweight and gate moves down 
under its own weight. When the effect of float-weight is neutralized 
by upthrust due to the bouyancy of float under its submergence, the 
float moves up, the hoisting counterweight moves down and the 
gate is lifted up. The following operating conditions may, therefore, 
be considered: 

i) Tg= rbc-= 1-5 Tr 

n) The =- (^g — Tbc) + 1-5 Tr or more, 

iii) Tf --^ The - (^g - Tbc) + 1-5 Tr or more, 

where 

The =^ Effective torque or tension due to the hoisting-counter- 
weight. 

In case, The ^ (Tg — The) + 15 Tr, requirement of Tf reduces to 3 Tr 
which, as in the case of arrangement 'A' indicates that reducing the fric- 
tional resistance to the minimum, the size of the float may be greatly 
reduced. 

2,10 Additional Drive 

2.10.1 An additional drive electrically and/or manually operated shall 
be provided for the hoisting mechanism to operate the gate when the float 
drive is under maintenance or out of order, or otherwise fails to meet any 
emergent requirement. Normally, the additional drive may be declutched 
or be unoperative, so that the gated control is done by the float drive only. 
However, additional drive or the float drive can be operated independently 
or in conjunction with each other for controlling the gate movement. 

21 



IS : 11793 - 1986 

2.10.2 The electric control system of the electric-drive may be provided 
with a selector switch for manual-control selection or automatic control 
selection, as required- Generally, where automatic-control is provided for 
electric-drive as well, the hoisting mechanism with mechanical arrangement 
of a line-shaft type may be provided with electromagnetic clutch of suitable 
rating to have automatic-control for clutching and declutching of the 
electric-drive of the hoisting-mechanism. 

2.10.3 The electric control-circut may be provided as generally provided 
for a mechanical hoist with electric-drive. 

2.10.4 In case no flote or static electrodes of submerged type (that is 
having normally closed switching) are provided, gated control is activated 
when water kvcl lowers below the electrodes. The chances of gated-control 
getting wrongly activated by break of control-wiring, may be taken care by 
suitable design of electric-control-circuit, 

2.10.5 Where, simultaneous operationof electric-drive together with float- 
drive is to be provided, arrangement using ropes and pulleys may be so 
designed, instead of a line-shaft type requiring electromagnetic-clutch. 



22 



