**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12267-1 (1987) : Guidelines for stability for inland and 
harbour vessels^ Part 1 Decked vessels [TED 18: Inland, 
Harbour Crafts and Fishing Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629-122 : 620M69M 



IS: 12267 (Parti ) - 1987 



Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR STABILITY FOR 
INLAND AND HARBOUR VESSELS 

PART 1 DECKED VESSELS 



( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



1. Scope — This standard lays down the guidelines pertaining to stability of decked inland and 
harbour vessels, which fall under the purview of Inland Vessels Act 1977 and Coasting Vessels Act 
1838 ( as amended in 1952 ). 

2. Groups — The vessels shall be grouped into the following for the purpose of this standard: 

Description 



Group 
A 



B 

C 

D 
E 
F 
G 



a) Passenger ferries 

b) Vehicle and combined load ferries 

c) Tank vessels for liquid cargo 

d) Deck loading and container carrying vessels 

a) Floating cranes 

b) Grab dredgers with and without hopper 

a) Hopper type vessels ( open hoppers and without door) 

b) Dredgers with hoppers 

Towing tugs and fire floats 

Well decked vessels ( mainly for passenger ) 

All launches and similar crafts 

a) Dry cargo vessels 

b) Other types of vessels not falling under groups A to F above. 



3- Terms and Definitions ~ For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions 
shall apply. 

3-1 Capacity Plan and Tables — Applicab^e for cargo or high deadweight ( DWT/A == 0*4 or above) 
vessels and tank vessels. 

3.2 Consumable Stores — Fuel, fresh water and food. 

3.3 Deadweight {DWT) — Measure of the tonnage of a ship representing the weight of cargo, 
bunker fuel, water ( fresh and boiler feed ), passengers and crew which a ship can carry when 
loaded to her load line. 

3.4 DIsplacennent ( A ) — Weight in tonnes of water displaced by the ship. Light displacement is 
the weight exclusive of ballast and the items mentioned under loaded displacement. It includes 
boilers, if any, filled with water. Loaded displacement includes stores, fresh water, feed water, 
fuel, cargo, passengers and crew so that she is loaded to her summer load line. 

3.4.1 Draught ( T) — Mean draught at light or loaded condition as applicable. This will be 
draught at midship from upper edge of flat keel plate or in case of barkeel from intersection of bar- 
keel and garboard stake to waterline. 



Adopted 4 December 1987 



August 1988, BIS 



Gr 3 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12267 ( Part 1 ) - 1987 

ZA.Z Freeboard ( F ) — Vertical height at midship from wateriine to lower edge of maindeck 
plating at side. In other words, it is moulded depth less moulded draught ( Fig. 1 ). 

3.5 Heel Angle \6 ) — Angle of Inclining or listing in transverse direction due to wind pressure or 
shifting cargo or ballast ( Fig. 1 ). 



*Bm*BREADTH MOULDED 



FREE- 



9 HEEL ANGLE 




GMt=KB + BMt-KG 



GZ =DISPLACEMEMTxGMt >< SING 
Mid Ship Section of Inland Vessel in Upright Condition Vessel with Small Angle of Heel 

FIG. 1 NOMENCLATURE OF DECKED VESSEL ( TRANSEVERSE ) 



3.6 Hydro static Curves and lables — Data for different draughts consisting of Ai A extreme, KB, 
BMu KMu BML, MCT, TPCm^ LCB, LCF and co-efficients, 

3.6.1 KB ~ is height of centre of buoyancy of underwater volume from keel at centreline of 
vessel ( Fig. 1 ). 

3-6.2 KM — is height of metacentre (transverse) from top of keel at centreline of vessel 
( Fig. 1 ). 

3.6.3 KMt — is same as above but for longitudinal metacentre. 



3.6.4 BM — is KM less KB; similarly GM is KM less KG ( Fig, 1 ). 

3.6.5 Z.CB — is longitudinal distance of centre of underwater volume parallel to centreline of 
vessels, measured either from midship or from After Perpendicular ( Fig. 2 ). 



EVEN KEEL 
WATER LINE 




CENTRE OF FLOATATION/ ^ i LCF FROM MID SHIP 



FIG. 2 NOMENCLATURE OF DECKED VESSEL ( LONGITUDINAL ) 

2 



IS: 12267 (Parti ) - 1987 

3.6.6 Z.Cf — Is longitudinal distance of centre of floatation of any particular waterplane area, 
measured parallel to centreline of vessel either from midship or from After Perpendicular 
(Fig. 2). 

3.6.7 fPCm — Tonnes per centimetre immersion of vessel, variable for different waterlines or 
for different draught. 

3.6.8 MCr— IVIoment required in tonnes metres or kg-m required to change trim of the vessel 
for particular draught by 1 m or 1 cm, 

Z J Inclining Experiments and Vertical Centre of Gravity ~ Method of determining kg by inclining 
vessel more correctly than by calculation. 

3.8 Loading Conditions — As applicable for different types of vessels in loaded fully or partly or in 
ballast condition. 



3.9 Metacentric Height ( GM ) — Vertical distance between metacentre and centre of gravity of 
the ship. For stability, it must be positive, that is, metacentre must be above the centre of gravity. 



G/W = /Cfi -h BMt — KG 



4. Requirements 



4.1 Heeling During Turning — - The maximum angle of heel of all selfpropelled vessels durfng turn- 
ing at service speed with maximum loading shall not exceed 10**. 

4.1.1 The heel angle shall not exceed 6^ while stationary or plying in fair weather conditions for 
Groups A, E and F; and in case of Group D vessels when there Is maximum pull on the towing 
hook ( up to an angle of eo"" off centreline of vessel ) In case of Group B vessels, heel angle shall 
not exceed 3° or an angle as specified by the manufacturer with maximum load on hook and at 
maximum designed outreach of boom of crane or garb. 

4.2 Metacentric Height — The metacentric height ( in metres) shall be adequate for intended 
services; however, it shall, in any case, be not less than Oi5 m. 

4.3 The metacentric height shall be calculated for at least 3 different conditions of loadings as 
indicated in 5, 5.1, 5.1-1 and 5.2 for Groups A, B, C, D and G vessels. The hopper type vessels 
shall, in addition, be shown hopper spoils of 2 or 3 different specific gravities; similarly cargo 
carrying vessels with two more different cargo stowage rates. 

4.4 Freeboard (F ) — Minimum freeboard as per statutory requirements is to be maintained. 

4-5 Stability Data — The particulars pertaining to stability are given in Table 1. 

4.6 Subdivision — Vessels are to comply with statutory requirements of subdivision as applicable. 
However, there shall be minimum 3 watertight bulkheads for vessels up to 15 m length and 4 for 
vessels up to 25 m length. The longitudinal bulkhead for various types of vessels shall be as 
applicable. 

5. Loading Conditions 

5.1 The loading conditions shall be as follows: 

a) Light vessel with and without ballast, 

b) Light vessels with 90 percent stores and consumables, 

c) Light vessels with 100 percent full load and ballast as applicable, and 

d) Light vessels with 50 percent full load and ballast as required. 

5.1.1 In case of ballast being used, conditions without ballast shall be shown. Closed and open 
hopper conditions, as applicable, shall also be shown. 



18:12267 ( Part 1 )-1987 



SI 
No. 



TABLE 1 PARTICULARS PERTAINING TO STABILITY 

( Clause 4.5 ) 

Applicable To 



") 



Particulars 

General particuhars 

a) Length over aii 

b) Length b.p 

c) Breadth moulded 

d) Depth 

1) Depth moulded 

2) Depth freeboard deck 

e) Draught loaded mean and displacement 

f) No. of decks and names 

g) TDouble bottom tanks, height and total 

volume 

h) Number of transverse bulkheads and 
cargo holds 

j ) Deadweight in ho) ds and deck(s) 

k) Total height of superstructure with 
average length 

m) If self propelled — Speed (service) 

Capacity plan and tables 



All groups 



iii) Free surface moments table 



iv) Hydrostatic curves or tables 

V) Inclining experiment report 

vi) Record on heelings according to 5.1, 5.1.1 
and 5.2 

vii) Record on heelinjg according to 4.1.1 

viii) Metacentric height calculations for load- 
ing conditions 



All groups* 



All groups* 



All groups* 

All groups* 

Self-propelled 
vessels of all 
groups 

All groups 
All groups* 



Alternatrvefor Exemption, 
if any 

Nil 



ix) Trim calculation 



Those exempted are to submit gene- 
ral arrangement drawings with suffi- 
cient details 

Those exempted are to submit gene- 
ral arrangement dravving with suffi- 
cient details and capacity diagram 
with tables 

See Note 1 below 

Nil 

Dump vessel to be exempted 



Complete calculation in absence of 
demonstration 

Additional loading conditions accor- 
ding to 3.8 and 5.1 do not apply to 
vessels below 15 m in length 

Nil 



x) Cross curves of stability and GZ diagram 
with area under for all loading condi- 
tions 



Unless such vessels are already 
covered by appropriate Load Line 
Rules 



For vessels above 
15 m in length 
having trim exceed- 
ing 15 percent of 
mean draught 

Vessels to ply or 
occasionally ply in 
partial smooth 
waters and in the 
harbours subject 
to serve weather 
conditions 

Note 1 — Vessels which need not satisfy (ix) and (x), can submit hydrostatic data covering only displace- 
ment KS, BMt, KMi and TP cm along with block co-efficient and waterplane co-efficient when submitted in 
tabular form, data are to be for draughts of every 0*05 metres for vessels up to 1'25 times loaded draught or 
up to depth, whichever Is less. 

Note 2 — Items (vjii), (ix) and (x) can be covered in one sheet for each loading condition, 

*Group E wooden vessels andf Group G(i) dry cargo vessels up to 15*0 m length and Group F vessels up to 
10*0 m length may be exempted from submission of metacentric height {GMT) calculations and allied technical 
data. 



IS: 12267 ( Parti )-1987 



S.2 Unequal Loading for Satisfying Heel Angle Limit — Unequal loadings, other than the following 
may be determined by the respective statutory, authority and may be applicable to other types of 
vessels, if necessary. The centres between unequal weight or lever for moment distribution shall 
be reasonably correct depending upon load concentration, etc. 

Load Distribution 



Type of Vessel 

Passenger ferries of Group A 
or E and F 



Deck loading vessels and 
vehicle ferries, etc. 

Tank vessels for liquid cargo 



Two-thirds number of total passenger and crew 
on one side extreme, one-third on other ex- 
treme, distributed on decks. 

When loaded with 50 percent of full load, 10 
percent of full load or one large vehicle ( as 
applicable ) on one side extreme. 

a) One large tank (not greater than 10 percent 

of deadweight ) of any one side empty. 

b) Two tanks of any one side (each tank volume 

not greater than 15 percent of DWT ) 50 per- 
cent full in both conditions, remaining tanks 
are full. 

( Similarly for dry cargo with eccentric load- 
ing ). 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

An attempt has been made in this standard to lay down guidelines for stability for inland 
and harbour crafts. Some requirements such as heeling are somewhat common in some form or 
the other especially heeling during turning at service speed in most of the vessels. But Indian 
harbour vessels are so varied in type that it is difficult to stipulate minimum GMt, However, an 
attempt has been made to put down the common requirements in a simplified form. These are 
mainly based on the limit ranges of KA/ft and KG for different types of vessels having iL/fi up to 
4*5 and B/T = 4 to 5, when range of draught is from 075 to 1"8 m. Mostly, while designing, the 
lower limits are taken. However, precautions are required to be taken when the vessels become 
stiff. Thus, Upper limit of GMt may be as high as fi/4 — 0*25 m. 

At present, there are rules available which govern stability of such crafts though they vary 
from port to port depending upon local requirements; but a common set of rules can also satisty 
almost all conditions. It is a fact that maximum casualty takes place because of insufficient 
stability in passenger vessel. Sufficient practical precautions for safety are required to be taken. 
An attempt has been made in this standard towards this direction. 

Not withstanding what is stated in the standard, the rules and requirements laid down by the 
statutory authorities, as applicable in all respect, shall apply. 

This standard is being issued in the following two parts: 

Part 1 Decked vessels 

Part 2 Open vessels 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



