**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12754-1  (1989) :  Process  measurement  control  functions 
and  instrumentation  -  Symbolic  representation^  Part  1: 
Basic  requirements  [MED  17:  Chemical  Engineering  Plants  and 
Related  Equipment] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  f  7ui^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 

PROCESS  MEASUREMENT  CONTROL, 
FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTRUMENTATION  - 
SYMBOLIC  REPRESENTATION 

PART  1     BASIC  REQUIREMENTS 

STO»T  iTTqsT  fjwari  vw  jr?  ffm  qjsj  —  5r?ftfnc»iv  srwF?i 
wn  1    WT^^^cf  wqisnq 


IS  12754  (Part  1  )  :  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 

(Reaffirmed  2005) 


UDC     621-5:003-62 


<g)  BIS  1990 

BUREAU  OF    INDIAN   STANDARDS 

MANAK     BHAVAN.     9     BAHADUR     SHAH      ZAFAR     MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

March  1 990  Price  Group  6 


IS  12754  (Parti  )  :  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


Indian  Standard 


PROCESS  MEASUREMENT  CONTROL 

FUNCTIONS  AND  INSTRUMENTATION - 

SYMBOLIC  REPRESENTATION 

PART  1     BASIC  REQUIREMENTS 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (  Part  1  ),  which  is  identical  with  ISO  3611/1  :  1977  'Process  measurement 
control  functions  and  instrumentation  —  Symbolic  representation  —  Part  1:  Basic  requirements' 
issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (  ISO  ),  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau 
of  Indian  Standards  on  18  August  1989  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Chemical  Engineering 
Sectional  Committee  (  HMD  17/EDC  57  )  and  approval  of  the  Heavy  Mechanical  Engineering 
Division  Council. 

Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be  read 
as  'Indian  Standard'. 

CROSS  REFERENCE 

International  Standard  Indian  Standard  Degree  of 

Correspondence 

ISO  128  :  1982  (  iSO/R  128  )  Technical        iS  10714  :  1983  General  principles         Identical 
drawings  —  General  principles  of  presen-        of  presentation  on  technical  draw- 
tation  ings 

ALTERATIONS 

In  this  national  standard  only  the  preferred  symbols  mentioned  under  clause  B.I  are  applicable. 
Similarly,  In  clauses  5.1.3  and  6.1.4,  only  the  symbols  having  a  stroke  repeated  along  its  lengths 
are  applicable. 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  12764  (Parti  ) 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


1989 


0    INTRODUCTION 

This  International  Standard  has  been  devised  to  provide  a 
universal  means  of  communication  between  the  various 
interests  involved  in  the  design,  manufacture,  installation 
and  operation  of  measurement  and  control  equipment  used 
in  the  process  industries. 

Requirements  within  the  industries  vary  considerably,  and 
in  recognition  of  this,  this  International  Standard  is 
presented  in  three  parts  as  follows  : 

Part  I  :  Basic  requirements  {directed  towards  the  needs 
of  those  whose  prime  interest  is  in  basic  measurement 
and  control  means). 

Part  II  :  Extension  of  basic  requirements. 

Part  III  :  Detailed  symbols. 

The  three  parts  together  are  intendeo 

a)  to  meet  the  requirements  of  those  who,  possibly 
employing  more  sophisticated  measurement  and  control 
means,  may  wish  to  depict  such  aspects  as  the 
measurement  techniques  embodied  in  a  particular  ins- 
trument, or  the  means  -  hydraulic,  pneumatic,  electrical, 
mechanical    -  used  tor  its  actuation; 

b)  to  provide  standard  symbolic  representation  for 
process  measurement  control  functions  and  instrumen 
tation.  These  symbols  are  not  intended  to  replace 
graphic  symbols  for  electrical  equipment  as  contained  in 
lEC  Publication  117. 


1     SCOPE  AND  FIELD  OF  APPLICATION 

Part  I  of  this  International  Standard  establishes  a  symbols 
system  for  use  in  depfcimg  the  basic  functions  of 
measurement  and  control  equipment  in  roiation  to  the 
plant  with  which  ii  is  associated.  The  system  has  been 
intentionally  limited  to  the  identification  of  instrument 
functions  and  does  not  provide  means  of  illustrating 
specific  instruments 


2    DEFINITIONS 

The  following  definitions  are  used  solely  for  the  purpose  of 
this  International  Standard  to  assist  in  the  application  and 
understanding  of  the  symbol  system. 

2.1  point  of  measurement  :  The  point  in  a  process  at 
which  a  measurement  is  oi  may  be  made. 

2.2  instrument :  A  device  or  combination  of  devices  used 
directly  or  indirectly  to  measure,  display  and/or  control  a 
variable.  This  term  does  not  apply  to  internal  components 
of  the  instruments,  for  example  resistor  or  receiver  bellows. 

2.3  panel-mounted  instrument :  An  instrument  that  is 
mounted   in  a  group  normally  accessible  to  the  operator. 

2.4  locally  mounted  instrument  :  An  instrument  that  is 
not  panel  mounted. 

2.5  correcting  unit :  The  unit  comprising  those  elements 
(actuating  and  correcting)  which  adjust  the  correcting 
conditions,    in    response   to  a  signal   from    the  controller. 

2.6  actuating  element  :  That  part  of  the  correcting  unit 
which  adjusts  the  correcting  element,  for  example  a 
response  to  a  signal  from  the  controller. 

2.7  correcting  element  :  That  part  of  the  correcting  unit 
which  directly  adjusts  the  value  of  the  coriocting  conditions. 


to  a  defined  abnormal  condition  by  means  of  a  discreti' 
audible  and/or  visible  signal,  hu!  whict*  doei  not  itself 
institute  corrective  action. 

2.9  set  value  :  The  value  of  the  controlled  condition  tc^ 
which  the  controller  is  set. 


IS  12764  (Parti  ) 
180  3511/1  :  1977 


1989 


3    SIZE  AND  OUTLINE  OF  BASIC  SYMBOLS 

The  symbol  requirements  given  below  have  been  adopted 
to  provide  for  legibility  and  ease  of  drawing.  If  diagrams  are 
to  be  photographically  reduced,  then  these  sizes  should  be 
correspondingly  larger. 


When  the  type  of  correcting  element  is  known,  established 
symbols  depicting  particular  correcting  elements  may  be 


used,  for  example  for  a  valve 


^X} 


■y 


3.1    Point  of  measurement 

The  symbol  is  a  thin  line  connected  to  a  flow  line  or  to  a 
plant  equipment  outline.  If  not  connected  to  an  instrument 
symbol,  an  Identifying  letter  shall  be  placed  close  to  this 
to  designate  the  measurable  property.  The  letters  used  shall 
comply  with  the  table. 

The  location  of  the  symbol  shall  be  functionally  correct 
and  placed  in  the  correct  process  sequence  but  need  not 
illustrate  the  geographical  position. 

However,  where  it  is  desirable,  for  clarification,  to  Identify 
the  location  of  the  point  of  measurement  within  a  plant 
equipment  outline,  a  small  circle  of  approximately  2  mm 
diameter  may  be  used  at  this  point  at  the  end  of  the  thin 
line  as  shown  in  the  figures  in  6.1 .7  and  6.9. 


3.5    Actuating  element 

3.5.1    Automatic  actuating  element 

The  basic  symbol  is  a  thin  line  circle  of  approximately 
5  mm  diameter,  v-uh  a  thin  line  to  connect  it  to  the 
correcting  element  symbol. 


3.5.2  Automatic  actuating  element  with  integral  manual 
actuating  element 

The  letter  H  shall  be  inserted  In  the  circle  if  there  is  a 
manual  as  well  as  an  automatic  facility  for  positioning  the 
correcting  unit. 


3.2    Instrument 

The  symbol  comprises  :  . 

—  a  thin  line  circle  of  approximately  10  mm  diameter; 

—  a  letter  code  showing  the  property  measured  and 
function  (sec  clause  4). 

A  number  may  be  included  to  facilitate  identification. 
Where  the  letter  code/identification  number  cannot  be 
accommodated  within  the  circle,  the  circle  may  be  broken. 


3,5.3    Manual  actuating  element 

Where  there  is  only  a  manual  facility  for  positioning  the 
correcting  unit,  the  symbol  consists  of  a  semi-circle  of 
approximately  5  mm  diameter  beneath  a  letter  H,  with 
a  thin  line  to  connect  it  to  the  corrrecting  element. 


3.3    Panel-mounted  instrument 

The  symbol  is  a  thin  line  circle  of  approximately  10  mm 
diameter  with  a  horizontal  thin  line  across  it.  The  line  may 
be  located  at  any  height  wrthin  the  circle^ 


NOTE  —   For  an   instrument  mounted  inside  a  control  panel, 
above  symbol  may  include  a  second  horizontal  line. 


the 


H> 


3.6    Correcting  unit 

The   symbol   is  the  combination  of  the  symbols  for  the 
actuator  and  the  correcting  element,  for  example  : 


3.4    Correcting  element 

The  symbol  for  a  correcting  element  of  unspecified  type  is 
an  equilateral  triangle  with  sides  of  approximately  5  mm 
lenath. 


i 


IS  12764  (Parti  ) 
ISO  3511/1  :1977 


1989 


3.7    Actuating  element  operation 

Response  of  the  actuator  to  failure  of  the  actuating  energy 
may  be  rndicated  by  an  additional  symbol,  illustrated  here 
for  the  particular  example  of  a  control  valve. 

—    Control  valve  opens  on  failure  of  actuating  energy  : 


-    Control  valve  closes  on  failure  of  actuating  energy 


—    Control  valve  retains  position  on  failure  of  actuating 
energy  ; 


—    A  combination  of  the  above  symbols  could  be  used 
to  indicate  the  safe  and  permitted  direction  of  drift  : 


4.1.4  For  the  use  of  the  letter  H  to  denote  HAND 
(manual)  operation,  see  3.5. 

AJZ    Qualifying  letters 

Where  it  is  required  to  denote  HIGH  or  LOW,  the 
qualifying  letters  H  or  L  may  be  used  in  association  with 
the  instrument  symbol  (see  6.1.5  and  6.1.8). 


5    TYPES  OF  LINE  AND  ASSEMBLY  OF  SYMBOLS 

5.1  Types  of  line  (see  also  ISO/R  128,  Engineering 
drawing  —  Principles  of  presentation'^^) 

The  types  of  lines  used  in  the  symbol  system  shall  be  as 
follows,  it  being  conventional  for  a  continuous  thick  line 
to  represent  the  flow  line  of  a  process  or  the  outline  of  a 
plant  vessel,  etc. 

5.1.1  The  symbol  for  an  instrument  connection  to  a 
process  is  a  continuous  thin  line,  thinner  than  the  lines  used 
to  delineate  the  plant. 


4    LETTER  CODE 


5.1.2    The    preferred   general    symbol    for   an    instrument 
*  signal  line  is  a  continuous  thin  line,  having  a  stroke  repeated 
along  its  length.  These  strokes  are  inclined  at  approximately 
60°  to  the  line. 


4.1     Identifying  letters 

The  purpose  of  the  instrument  shall  be  defined  by  a  letter 
code  contained  within  the  instrument  symbol  circle;  this 
letter  code  shall   be  constructed  on  the  following  basis  : 

4=1.1  The  first  letter  shall  denote  the  measured  or 
initiating  variable,  and  shall  be  in  accordance  with  column  2 
of  the  table,  but  should  be  modified,  if  necessary,  by  the 
addition  of  a  tetter  in  accordance  with  column  3- 


4.1.2    Succeeding    letters    shal 
column  4  of  the  table. 


be     i  n    accordance    with 


4.1.3  Where  there  are  two  or  more  succeeding  letters,  they 
shall  be  placed  one  after  the  other,  in  the  sequence  I  R  C  T 
Q  S  Z  A.  {This  does  not  apply  to  the  letters  corresponding 
to  the  modifiers  in  column  3  of  the  table.)  (he  letter  I  may 
be  omttted  in  ihe  case  of  a  sell  indicating  recorde; . 


-y — ^ — / — ^- 

Alternatively,  a  continuous  thin  line  without  strokes  may 
be  used  where  there  is  no  risk  of  confusion. 

Instrument  signal  lines  shall  be  drawn  thinner  than  process 
lines. 


NOTE  -  No  atterr.pl  is  marte  m  this  pan  o\  this  InternationHl 
Standard  to  dtstingutsh  between  types  ot  insTrument  actuation 
{tor  example  electrical,  pneumatic  and  hydraulic),  such  a  distinction 
being  unnecessary  for  an  understanding  of  the  (u net) on  o1  the 
insTrumentdtion. 


1 )     At  present  under  revision 


IS  12754  {  Parti  ):  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


TABLE  —  Letter  code  for  identification  of  instrument  functions 


1 

2 

3 

4 

FirstletterlJ 

Succeeding  letter^  ^ 

Measured  or  initiating  variable 

Modifier 

Displey  or  output  function 

A 

Alarm 

B 

C 

Controlling 

D 

Density 

Difference 

E 

All  electrical  variables^) 

F 

Flow  rate 

Ratio 

G 

Gauging,  position  or  length 

H 

Hand  (manually  initiated)  operated 

1 

Indicating 

J 

Scan 

K 

Time  or  time  programme 

L 

Level 

M 

Moisture  or  humidity 

N 

Users'  choice^) 

O 

Users'  choice^) 

P 

Pressure  or  vacuum 

Q 

Quality2) 

For  example  Analysis, 

Concentration, 
Conductivity 

Integrate  or  totalize 

Integrating  or  summating 

n 

Nuclear  radiation 

r "' 

Recording 

s 

Speed  or  frequency 

Switching 

T 

Temperature 

Transmitting 

U 

Multivariable^* 

V 

Viscosity 

w 

Weight  or  force 

X 

Unclassified  variables^) 

v 

Users'  choice^* 

z 

Emergency  or  safety  acting 

II  Upper  case  letters  shall  be  used  for  the  measured  or  inltiatmg  variable  and  succeeding  letters  for  display  or  output  function.  Upper  case 
letters  are  preferred  for  modifiers,  but  lower  case  letters  may  be  used  if  this  facilitates  understanding. 

2)  A  note  shall  be  added  to  specify  the  property  measured. 

3)  Where  a  user  has  a  requirement  for  measured  or  initiating  variables  to  which  letters  have  not  been  allocated  and  which  are  required  for 
repetitive  use  on  a  particular  contract,  the  letters  allocated  to  Users'  Choice  may  be  used  provided  that  they  are  identified  or  defined  for  a 
particular  measured  or  mitiating  variable  and  reserved  for  that  variable.  Where  a  user  has  a  requirement  for  a  measured  or  initiating  variable  that 
may  be  used  either  once  or  to  a  limited  extent,  the  letter  X  may  be  used  provided  that  it  is  suitably  identified  or  defined. 

4)  The  tetter  U  may  be  used  instead  of  a  series  of  first  letters  where  a  multiplicity  of  inputs  representing  dissimilar  variables  feed  into  a  sirgle 
unit. 


IS  12764  (Parti  ):  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


5.1.3    Crossings  shall  be  shown  thus 


^v 


-^ — ^■ 


_/ — ^ 


and  junctions  thus 


-/ 7^^ 


-^ f~ 


« ♦ 


5.5    Position  of  qualifying  letters 

Qualifiying  letters,  when  used,  may  be  placed  inside  the 
symbol  circle,  or  outside  the  symbol  circle  and  adjacent 
to  it. 


6    EXAMPLES  OF  USE  OF  THE  SYMBOLS 
6.1    Indicating,  recording  and  alarm  instruments 

6.1.1     Flow  rate  indicator  -  locally  mounted. 


Fl 


The  diameter  of  the  connecting  dot  shall  be  approximately 
five  times  the  width  of  the  associated  lines. 


6.1.2    Flow  rate  recorder  -  locally  mounted. 


5.1.4  Where  it  is  necessary  in  illustrating  complex  systems 
to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  information  is  flowing, 
arrows  shall  be  added  thus  : 


■y — / — 7^ 


0 


5.2    Position  of  function-identtfying  letters 

These  shall  always  be  placed  inside  the  circle  and,  in  the 
case  of  panel-mounted  instruments,  normally  above  the 
horizontal  line  (except  as  provided  ifi  5.4).  They  shall 
be  arranged   in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  4.1. 


PC 


PC 


6,1.3    Conductivity  recorder  ~  panel  mounted. 


[    OR    \  Conductivity 


6.1.4    Pressure   differential    recorder    —    locally   mounted. 


5.3    Position  of  identifying  number 

if  required,  the  identifying  number  may  be  shown  either 
inside  the  circle  or  outside  the  circle  and  adjacent  to  it. 

When  shown  inside  the  circle,  the  number  shall  normally 
be  below  the  identifying  letters  and,  in  the  case  of  panel 
mounted  instruments,  below  the  horizontal  line  (except  as 
provided  in  5.4). 


5.4    Alternative  arrangement 

An  alternative  arrangement  of  identifying  letters  and 
numbers  within  the  circle  may  be  used  provided  that  the 
measured  or  initiating  variable  letter  is  placed  at  the  left 
side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  circle. 


6.1.5    High  pressure  alarm  -  locally  mounted. 


PA 


is  12764  (  Parti  )  :  1983 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


6.1.6     Level  indicator  -  locally  mounted. 

NOTE  -  The  symbol  illustrates  that  the  level  in  the  particular  vessel 
is  indicated.  No  inference  is  to  be  drawn  as  to  the  nature  or  position 
of  any  physical  connections  to  the  vessel. 


Otherwise   be  ambiguity  as  to  the  nature  of  the  property 
transmitted.  (See  also  examples  under  6,7.) 


■y^ — ^ 


0 


6.3    Automatic  controllers 

Flow  rate  recording  controller  adjusting  valve.  Instrument 
panel  mounted. 


6,1,7     Level    indicator    —    locally    mounted    —    point    of 
measurement  inside  vessel. 


6.4    Integrating  instruments 

Indication  and  control  of  quantity  transfer,  for  example 
a  rotary  water-meter  with  shut-off  device.  This  does  not 
control  the  rate. 


6.1 ,8    Local      low     pressure     alarm     with     simultaneous 
emergency  action  of  correcting  unit. 


PCZA, 


volume. 


(  FRCQ>r- 


6.2    Blind  transmitters   (neither  indicating  nor  recording) 
This    symbol    should    only    be    used   where   there   would 


i. 


^ — ^4- 


IS  12754  (  Part  1  ) 
JSO  3511/1  :1977 


1989 


6.5    Multiple  display 

Where  it  is  necessary  to  show  that  a  measured  value  is  to 
be  displayed  in  more  than  one  place,  the  instrument  symbol 
at  the  point  of  measurement  may  be  supplemented  by 
further  appropriate  symbols,  these  being  connected  to  the 
symbol  at  the  point  of  measurement  by  thin  lines. 


For  a  simple  system  the  symbol  may  be  connected  to  al 
individual  instrument  or  measurement  symbols. 


In  the  more  general  case  where  it  is  important  to  show 
multiple  measurement  and  control  functions  explicitly, 
these  may  be  represented  by  individual  instrument  and 
correcting  unit  symbols  with  appropriate  connections 
by  thin  lines.  Examples  of  this  procedure  appear  under 
6.7,  6.8,  6.9  and  6.10. 


6.6    Multipoint  instruments 

Where  a  multipoint  instrument  is  to  measure  the  same 
physical  property  at  a  number  of  points,  the  appropriate 
instrument  symbol  shall  be  showh  at  each  point  of 
measurement 

NOTE  -  A  numbering  system  is  necessary  to  relate  each  point 
of  measurement  to  the  particular  multipoint  instrument.  That 
shown  in  the  followmg  example  should  not  be  regarded  as  inter- 
nationally recommended,  but  has  been  included  to  indicate  one 
possible  method  of  numbermg. 


6.7    Multivariable  data 

6.7.1    General 

Where  a  single  instrument,  tor  example  a  3-pen  recorder  or 
a  data  logger,  ts  to  measure  a  number  of  different  physical 
properties,  it  can  be  included  in  the  diagram  in  one  of  two 
ways. 


In  a  more  complicated  installation  or  one  which  does  not 
lend  Itself  to  such  a  layout,  the  symbol  for  the  multivariable 
data  receiving  device  may  be  repeated  at  each  associated 
instrument  symbol,  being  connected  to  the  usual  symbol 
by  a  thin  line.  With  this  type  of  presentation,  explanatory 
notes,  which  may  or  may  not  be  on  the  flow  sheet,  are 
essential;  for  example,  PRC  in  the  following  diagram 
denotes  an  instrument  which  does  not  have  a  transmitting 
function. 


IS  12764  (  Part  1  )  :  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


6.7.2    Automatic  scanning 

Where  the  data  logger  has  automatic  scanning  facilities,  this 
shall  be  shown  as  follows  : 


6.8    Ratio  control  instruments 

A  controller  holding  a  constant  ratio  between  two  flow 
rates  both  recorded. 


6.9    Cascade  control 

Where  one  controller  provides  the  command  signal  to  one 
or  more  other  controllers,  the  instrument  symbols  shall  be 
connected  by  a  thin  line. 


6.10    Multtvariable  control  systems 

Where  a  combining  device  symboltzod,  tor  oxampte,  by  UC 
UIC  URC,  receives  signals  from  two  cr  n^ore  instruments 
and  selects  from  these  or  combines  ihem  to  operate  one  o^ 
more  correcting  units,  the  assembly  ot  the  symbols  naay  l)e 
arranged  in  one  of  two  ways 

NOTE  '  In  complex  systems,  explanatory  notes  on  the  itow  sheet 
are  usually  necessary. 


10 


IS  12754  (Parti  )  :  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


For  a  simple  installation  the  combining  device  symbol  may  be  connected  by  a  thin  line  to  other  instrument  symbols. 


In  d  more  complicated  installation  or  one  which  does  not  lend  itself  to  such  a  layout,  the  symbol  for  the  combining  controller 
may  be  repeated  at  each  instrument  and  correcting  unit  symbol,  being  connected  to  the  usual  symbol  for  these  elements  by  a 
thin  line.  With  this  type  of  presentation,  explanatory  notes,  which  may  or  may  not  be  on  the  flow  sheet,  are  essential. 


11 


IS  12754  {  Part  1  )  :  1989 
ISO  3511/1  :  1977 


6,11    Programme  control 

Flow    rate    recorder-controller    whose    set  value   is   auto- 
matically adjusted  to  a  predetermined  programme  in  time. 


-/■ A    FRCb' i- 


6.13.2    Local   (indirect)   adjustment  of  a  correcting  unit. 


H    yy ^ 


6.12    Time-cycle  operation 

Three  valves  automatically  actuated  according  to  a 
predetermined  programme  in  time,  two  valves  being 
actuated  simultaneously. 


-/■ — A  Kc   Y — ^t—^ — ^ — ^ — ^ 


6.13    Hand  operation 

6.13,1     Remote  adjustment  of  the  set  value  of  a  controller. 


-/(  FRG  \f i- 


6.13.3    Automatic  actuating  element  with  integral  manual 
actuating  element. 


6.14    Identification  of  points  of  measurement  only 

A  point  in  the  plant  where  provision  is  made  for 
measurement  {for  example,  of  temperature)  but  to  which 
no  instrument  is  permanently  attached. 


12 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to 
promote  harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality 
certification  of  goods  and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in 
any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in 
the  course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or 
grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any. 


I  Icarc      nf      Inrllan      Qta  nrlafrlc     ehonlrl   iaer«cirtiii  n     +Kot    tKfkv/   zirt\   ir 


possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition.   Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent 
to  BIS  giving  the  following  reference  : 

Doc:  No.     HMD17/EDC57    (5001) 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Isssue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones  :  331  01  31,    331  13  75 

Regional  Offices  ; 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI   110002 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Southern  :  C.  I.  T,  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001 13 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MiDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
BOMBAY  400093 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE,  FARIDABAD,  GHAZIABAD,  GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  PATNA.  TRIVANDRUM. 


Telegrams  ;  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  Offices) 


leu 

sphone 

(331 

01  31 

(331 

13  75 

37  86  62 

o 
Z. 

An     A  ^ 
1  O  H-O 

41 

29  16 

6  32  92  95 

Printed  at  Printograph,  Delhi.  India 


