***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 11884 (1986) : Fire-resistant Brattice Sheeting Made from 
Unsupported Plastics [PCD 13: Rubber and Rubber Products] 



C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11 384 « 1986 

T' 1' ^ Oi J J (Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FIRE-REilSTANT BRATTICE SHEETING 
MADE FROM UNSUPPORTED PLASI JCS 



UDC 67a'5/fl-4i : 622455-6 



© Cofiyrighi 1987 

BUREAU OF iNDlAt^ STANDARDS 

MAl^AK BHAVAN. 9 EAHADUE SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

IifEW DELE 11 I100Q2 

Gr 3 May 19S7 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FIRE-RESISTANT BRATTICE SHEETING 
MADE FROM- UNSUPPORTED PLASTICS 

Treated Fabrics Sectional Committee, PCDC 16 

Chairman 

Shri S. L. Gakdhi 
Flat No. 232, Narmbada Apartment, 
Alaknanda, Pocket D, New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shri R. L. Arora Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Shei S. C. Bate a ( Alternate ) 
Shei a. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

Ntw Delhi 

Shri P. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri BasaNt Kttmab Basant Pran Electric Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

SRriJ. S. Naeula ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Behbani Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Lt-Col R. G. Wastrad ( Alternate I ) 

Shri Rajender Singh ( Alternate 11 ) 
Shri D.J. Bharucha Bayer ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shei P. K. C hatter jee ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Biddafa National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Chakbavarty Modi Rubber Ltd, Modipuram 

Shri S. K. Mustafi ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Dutta Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Wahie ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. N. Goyal Fibreglass Pilkington Ltd, Bombay 

Shri G. K. Takiae ( Alternate ) 
Shri Z. S. Kajtji Caprihans India Ltd, Thane 

Shri M. K. Mam Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. L. Nag ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. P. Manik Railway Board, Ministry of Railways 

Shri J. R. Modi Ahmadabad Textile Industries' Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shhi Raman M. Patel Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay 



Shri K. L. Shah ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page- 2 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi K. R. Narayana Rao Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri George Kurtjvilla ( Alternate I ) 

Shei D. K. Sethi ( Alternate II ) 
Shri B. Roy , East India Rubber Works Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. P. Shabma * Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shbi N. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Trivedi Varma Industrials Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri R. Krishna Pillai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P- R. Vishwambharan Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri K. Gopinatha Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. S. Saxena, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( P & C ) 

Secretary 

Shri Dileep Kumar 
Assistant Director ( P & C ), BIS 



Protective Fabrics for Mining Industry Subcommittee, PCDG 16 : 3 

Convener 
Shri K. M. Kaiser Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad 

Members 

Shbi S. M. Vebma ( Alternate to 
Shri K. M. Kaiser ) 
Shbi G. S. Aoarwalla Swastik Mining Industries, Dhanbad 

Shri R. p. Agarwalla ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Bardhan Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi B. C. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Basant Kumar Basant Pran Electric Go Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. S. Nabula ( Alternate ) 
Da P. K. Chakravarty Central Mine Planning & Design Institute, Ranchi 

Shbi B. M. Ghorai Eastern Coalfields Ltd, Burdwan 

General Manager ( Safety ) ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director of Mines Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Safety 

Deputy Director of Mines 
Safety ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. KkishnamurThy Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad 

Shri S. P. Mondai Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Calcutta 
Shbi M. N. Shah F. Harley & Co, Calcutta 

Dr a. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Shah Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FIRE-RESISTANT BRATTICE SHEETING 
MADE FROM UNSUPPORTED PLASTICS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 25 July 1986, after the draft finalized by the Treated 
Fabrics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal 
and Related Products Division Council. 

0.2 The Committee had originally formulated IS : 4355-1977* for the 
requirements of fire-resistant brattice cloth. However, due to reported 
complaints from some mine users of this material, emitting ammonia 
under certain conditions causing irritation, it was decided to prepare an 
alternate specification. Accordingly, brattice sheeting made from un- 
supported thermo-plastics which is increasingly being used for coursing 
air around underground working faces in mines, was considered a 
suitable substitute. Since Directorate General of Mines Safety is increas- 
ingly approving this material, an alternate specification for fire-resistant 
brattice sheeting made from unsupported plastics has been formulated. 

0.3 This standard is essentially based on IS : 2076-19811 for the 
physico-chemical characteristics. Other requirements considered neces- 
sary for use of PVC sheeting as brattice cloth, have been included in 
this standard. 

0,4 Two tests for fire resistance requirement have been prescribed in 
this standard, namely, Barthel burner test and interim flame test. It 
has been found that certain types of fire-resistant brattice sheeting pass 
one of the tests but may fail in the other. As in the mines both condi- 
tions might exist, the sheeting is, therefore, required to pass both, Barthel 
burner test and interim flame test. 

0,5 The Committee felt the need for inclusion of a requirement for anti- 
static property specially in those cases where surface printing is done. 
However, in the absence of necessary test method and data, the Com- 
mittee decided to include the same in due course as and when the details 
in this regard are available. 

*Specification for fire-resistant brattice cloth {first revision ). 

fSpecification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting {first revision ). 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

0.6 In the preparation of this specification, assistance has been derived 
from the following publication: 

NCB Specification No. 440/1964 Brattice sheeting made from 
unsupported plastics. National Coal Board, London. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accord- 
ance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of 
sampling and test for brattice sheeting made from unsupported plastics 
for use in the coursing of air in mines. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 2828- 
1964 -f shall apply. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 General Requirements 

3.1.1 The sheeting shall be manufactured from suitable plastic 
materials and shall have a finished surface free from stickiness. 

3.1.2 The sheeting shall be supplied in rolls which shall unroll freely 
and retain flexibility during storage and in use. 

3.1.3 The material shall not contain such concentrations of substances 
as to introduce any significant danger of dermatitis. 

3.2 Thickness — The minimum thickness of sheeting shall be 0*3 mm. 
The value of the gravimetric thickness of the sample, determined in 
accordance with the method given in 4.2 of IS : 2076-1981+ and com- 
puted to the nearest 001 mm, shall not differ from the nominal 
thickness by more than ± 7*5 percent. 

3.3 Tolerance on Width — Unless otherwise agreed, the negative 
tolerance on nominal width of brattice sheeting at any point shall not 
be less than one percent. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

tGlossary of terms used in the plastic industry. 

JSpecification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting {first revision ). 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

3.4 Eyelets made of non-light metal alloys shall be fixed at an interval 
not exceeding 0"45 m. These eyelets shall be made of brass or thermo- 
plastic material in order to have anti-rust property. 

Note — Eyelets made of aluminium and other light metal alloys shall not be used. 

3.5 Performance Requlremeitts 

3.5.1 Breaking Load and Elongation at Break — The longitudinal and 
transverse breaking loads and elongation at break of the brattice sheeting 
when tested in accordance with the method described in 4.3 of IS : 2076- 
1981* shall be not less than 175 kg/cm and longitudinal and transverse 
elongation at break not less than 250 percent. 

3.5.2 Tear Strength — The tear strength in longitudinal and transverse 
directions of the brattice sheeting when tested in accordance with the 
method described in 4.4 of 18:2076-1981* shall be not less than 
32 kg/cm. 

3.5.3 Fire Resistance 

3.5.3.1 The brattice sheeting shall fulfil the following conditions 
when tested according to the method prescribed in Appendix A of 
IS : 4355-1977t. However, the leaching operation prior to the resistance 
test as prescribed in A-2.1.1 of Appendix A of IS : 4355-1977t may be 
omitted: 

a) The flame or the glow of the material at any time during the 
test shall not extend above the marker wire. 

b) After the burner flame has been removed, neither the mean 
persistence time of the flame on 6 test pieces shall exceed 3 
seconds nor the persistence time of the flame on any one test 
piece shall exceed 10 seconds. 

c) After the burner flame has been removed, neither the mean 
persistence time of the glow on 6 test pieces shall exceed 10 
seconds nor the persistence time of glow on any one test piece 
shall exceed 30 seconds. 

3.5.3.2 The brattice sheeting shall also fulfil the following conditions 
when tested in accordance with method prescribed in Appendix A of 
this standard: 

a) After the spirit lamp has been removed, neither the mean per- 
sistence time of the flame on 6 test pieces shall exceed 6 seconds 
nor the persistence time of the flame on any one test piece shall 
exceed 12 seconds. 



•Specification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting {Jirit revision ). 
t Specification for fire-resistant brattice cloth {Jirst revision ). 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

b) After the spirit lamp has been removed, neither the mean per- 
sistence time of the glow on 6 test pieces shall exceed 10 seconds 
nor the persistence time of the glow on any one test piece shall 
exceed 30 seconds. 

3.5.4 Electrical Resistance Test — When tested in accordance with 3.4.5 
of IS : 4355-1977*, .the electrical resistance of the plastic sheeting shall 
not exceed 3 x 10^ ohms. 

3.5.4.1 The required electrical resistance shall be achieved by- 
incorporation of suitable antistatic ingradients in the composition and 
not by surface treatment. 

4. PACKING AND MARKING 

4.1 The material shall be securely packed so as to ensure its safe 
transportation. 

4.2 Each roll of material shall be indelibly marked with the following 
information at an interval not exceeding 3 m throughout the roll: 

a) Manufacturer's name and trade-mark, if any; 

b) Length and width of the material in metres; 

c) Mass of the plastic sheeting per square metre; and 

d) Month and year of manufacture. 

4.2.1 Each roll may also be marked with the Standard Mark, 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance 
that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard 
under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised 
and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products 
are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 For testing, a full width representative sample of sheeting, sufficient 
for carrying out tests shall be taken, marking the longitudinal direction 
on the sample. The sample shall be preserved, rolled on a core of 
adequate diameter, away from any other plastics material that may 
cause contamination. 

5.2 In any consignment, all the rolls of unsupported flexible polyvinyl 
chloride sheeting of the same type, colour and finish shall be grouped 
together and each group shall constitute a lot ( roll is normally about 
50 metre length of the sheeting ). 

•Specification for fire-resistant brattice cloth {first revision ). 

6 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

5.3 The conformity of the lot to the requirements of this specification 
shall be ascertained for each lot separately. The number of rolls to be 
selected at random for this purpose shall be in accordance with Table 1. 

TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

Lot Size • No. of Rolls to be 

Selected 
JV n 

(1) (2) 

Up to 100 1 

101 to 500 2 

501 and above 3 

5.4 The rolls shall be selected at random and to ensure randomness of 
selection, the following procedure is recommended for use: 

Arrange all the rolls in the lot in a systematic manner and start- 
ing from any one, count them as 1, 2, .. , etc, up to r and so on, 
where r is the integral part of Njn ( ^ being the lot size and n the 
number of rolls to be selected ). Every rth rolls thus counted shall 
be withdrawn till the requisite number of rolls is obtained. 

5.5 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements for 
various characteristics referred in this specification if for each of the 
characteristics, the test results on all the individual specimens are found 
to be within limits of the specification. 

5.6 If the specimen, taken from the sample, fails in one or more tests, 
each such test shall be repeated twice. For this purpose, two more 
samples shall be taken from the roll, and the specimens cut from each 
of them so that duplicate tests may be conducted in respect of each 
failure. If all the specimens pass the duplicate tests, the lot shall be 
declared conforming to the specification, otherwise not. 

6. TEST METHODS 

6.1 Tests shall oe carried out as prescribed in 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 of 
IS : 2076-1981*, 3.4.5 and Appendix A of IS : 4355-1977t and 
Appendix A of this standard. 



*Specification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting {first revision ). 
fSpecification for fire-resistant brattice cloth {first revision ). 



IS : 11884 - 1986 



APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 3.5.3-1, 3.5.3.2 and 6.1 ) 

FIRE RESISTANCE TEST 

A-1. APPARATUS • 

A-1.1 A methylated spirit lamp of capacity 125 ml. The spirit lamp 
shall be supplied with 95 percent absolute alcohol and 5 percent methanol* 
and the fuel level shall be half the capacity of the lamp. 

A-1 .1.1 The visible flame shall be 32 mm high when measured from 
the top of the ceramic/metallic wick holder to the top of the flame. 

A-1.2 A suitable stand consisting of a framework and clamps to hold 
the sample in the required position during the test as shown in Fig. I. 



i J~t 



^ 



CLAMP 




1-13 



STAND- 



TEST PIECE 
(76x356) 



-CLAMP 



CERAMIC 
WiCK HOLDER 



Do 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Apparatus Used for the Interim Flame Test 



8 



IS : 11884 - 1986 

A-l.S A draught-free cabinet in which the test stand is placed to carry 
out the test. 

A-2. CONDITIONING OF TEST SPECIMENS 

A-2.1 Each of the six test pieces, 76 X 356 mm in size, shall in turn be 
bent around a fixed 5 mm diameter rod as shown at (a) in Yig. 2. Each 
test piece shall be pulled from one end to the other so that it is in the 
position shown at (b) in Fig. 2 and then back to the position shown 
at (a) in Fig. 2. During the whole operation, the test piece shall be in 
contact with 180° of the surface of the rod. The cycle of two move- 
ments shall then be repeated ten times for each test piece. Each test 
piece shall then be turned over and the procedure repeated to complete 
10 cycles. All loose material shall then be shaken off the test pieces. 




Fig. 2 



(a) (b) 

Method of Gonditionino Test Specimens 



A-3. TEST CONDITIONS 

A-3.1 The test shall be made in subdued light in a draught-free cabinet. 

A-4. PROCEDURE 

A-4.1 Six test pieces, each 76 mm wide and 356 mm long, immediately 
after conditioning in accordance with A-2, shall be suspended from the 
clamp so that they may hang vertically with their lower ends held by 
horizontal clamps, one on each side in such a way as to prevent move- 
ment of the test pieces during the application of the flame. The lower 
edge of the clamps shall coincide with the lower edge of the test piece 
and shall overlap the edges by 13 mm. 



A-4.2 The flame is positioned so that the top of the ceramic metallic 
wick holder is 19 mm below the middle of the lower edge of the test 
piece. 

A-4.3 Each test piece shall be held in the flame for 10 seconds and the 
lamp and flame shall then be withdrawn clear of the test piece. 



10 



