•••••••••••••••• 



^ is^ 





T-^^^i^ 






Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 




&^JfflA=gi^^^^/ffiAfc^icOv^ ^a^T^s^=^Ir t ^^l ^^ 



IS 12746-1-1 (1999) : Telecontrol equipment and systems. 
Part 1: General considerations, Section 1 General principles 
[LITD 10: Power System Control and Associated 
Communications] 



>^^lllfcJ^9>^^bv/ff^feial>^h:>^^Ts;>&^T^FS 



5?aiU I l>ft=55S5&'>S*^ 



^^:<xvvv^i^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



*Tsr- 





^^ 



iA*^*^ 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12746 (Parti/Sec 1) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 






/nd/an Standard 
TELECONTROL EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS 



PART 1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Section 1 General Principles 



ICS 33.200 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Ja/7t/a/y199d Price Group 10 



Power Systems Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee, LTD 25 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with lEC 870-1-1 ( 1988 ) 'Telecontrol equipment and systems 
— Part 1 : General considerations— Section 1 General principles' issued by the International Electrotechnlcal 
Commission (I EC) was adpoted by the Bureau of Indian Standsirds on the recommendation of Power 
Systems Control and Associated Communications Sectional Committee (LTD 25) and approval of the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

The text of the I EC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective 
places the following : 



International Standard 



Corresponding Indian Standard 



Degree of 
Equivalence 



lEC 50 (371) : 1984 International 
Electrotechnlcal Vocabulary (lEV) 

— Chapter 371 : Telecontrol 

I EC 870-1-2 : 1989 Telecontrol 
equipment and systems — Part 1 : 
General consideratior^ — Section 2 
Guide for specifications 

lEC 870-1-3 : 1990 Telecontrol 
equipment and systems — Part 1 : 
General considerations — Section 3 
Glossary 

lEC 870-2-1 : 1987 Telecontrol 
equipment and systems — Part 2 : 
Operating conditions — Section 1 
Environmental conditions and 
power supplies 

I EC 870-3 : 1 989 Telpcontrol equip- 
ment and systems — Part 3 : Inter- 
faces (Electrical characteristics) 

— Specifications 

I EC 870-4 : 1990 Telecontrol equip- 
ment and systems — Part 4 : Per- 
formance requirements 

I EC 870-5 : 1993 Telecontrol 
equipment and systems — Part 5 : 
Transmission protocols 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in this 
Indian Standard. 



IS 1885 (Part 50) : 1985 Electrotechnlcal 
vocabulary : Part 50 Telecontrol ( first 
revision ) 

IS 12746 (Part 1/Sec 2) : 1 993 Telecontrol 
equipment and systems : Part 1 General 
considerations, Section 2 Guide for 
specifications 

IS 12746 (Part 1/Sec 3) : 1 993 Telecontrol 
equipment and systems : Part 1 General 
consideration, Section 3 Glossary 

IS 12746 (Part 2) : 1989 Telecontrol equip- 
ment and systems : Part 2 Environmental 
conditions and power supplies 



IS 12746 (Part 3) : 1 995 Telecontrol equip 
ment and systems : Part 3 Interfaces 
(Electrical-characteristics) — Specifications 

IS 12746 (Part 4) : 1993 Telecontrol equip- 
ment and systems : Part 4 Performance 
requirements 

IS 12746 (Part 5) : 1992 Telecontrol equip- 
ment and systems : Part 5 Transmission 
protocols 



Technically 
Equivalent 

Identical 



do 



Technically 
Equivalent 



Identical 



do 



do 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



Indian Standard 
TELECONTROL EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS 



PARTI GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Section 1 General Principles 



INTRODUCTION 



Telecontrol systems serve for monitoring and control of processes 
which are geographically widespread. They include ail equipment and 
functions for acquisition, processing, transmission and display of the 
necessary process information. The performance of a telecontrol system 
is determined basically by: 



1) the data integrity of information transfer, from a source to its 
destination, and 

2) the speed with which information is transferred to Its destination. 



The data integrity is defined as the unchangeability of an informa- 
tion content from a source to its destination, while the speed of 
information transfer is measured by the overall transfer time. 



The high responsibility which is associated with the transmission of 
Information such as commands and the occurrence of adverse environ- 
mental conditions necessitate standards for data acquisition and of data 
transmission which fulfil stringent requirements of data integrity and 
transmission efficiency. 



It should be noted that although this series of standards has been 
produced specifically for telecontrol systems used in electrical power 
systems, they may also be applied to other fields of application, e.g. 
gas and water supply and distribution, etc. 



The aim of these standards is to provide adequate Information for 
correct planning and reliable operation of telecontrol systems. The 
standards are divided Into different parts, listed In Clause 2 of this 
report. 

This part of this series of telecontrol standards Is intended to give 
the user a general survey of the systems and their elements, thus 
presenting the necessary basic Information for a thorough under- 
standing of the following parts of these standards. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

1 . Scope 

This series of standards applies to telecontrol equipment and systems 
with coded bit serial data transmission for monitoring and control of 
geographically widespread processes. 

2. Object 

This series of standards describes configurations and functions of 
telecontrol systems and of related elements. It defines the functional 
requirements, logical characteristics and interface conditions of the 
basic elements and the rules those elements shall follow in co-existing 
with other elements. 

These standards do not define the internal physical characteristics of 
such elements nor the layout, construction or material used. 



The following subjects are outside the scope of these standards: 

ripple control systems; 

properties of transmission channels and local bus (highway) 
systems for communication between process input/output elements; 



teleprotection and locally automated functions even though they 
may sometimes be Implemented within a telecontrol system. 



These standards are subdivided into several parts, which are sub- 
divided into several sections and issued as separate publications 
bearing the following titles and scopes: 

I EC Publication 870-1-1: Part 1 : General considerations , Section One - 
General principles (which constitutes this report) 



This report explains the structural elements, configurations and 
basic functions of telecontrol systems. 



It gives an overview of functional elements which contribute to basic 
structures and possible choice of telecontrol systems configurations. 



It deals with functions which are typical for any process to be 
monitored and controlled but emphasizes the specific problems which 
characterize geographically widespread processes, such as the dominant 
influence of telecommunication links with restricted bandwidth and 
often low signal-to-noise ratio. 



However, this report shall only serve as an introduction to the 
detailed standards and recommendations laid down in Parts 2-5 quoted 
below. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

I EC Publication 870-1-2: Part 7; General considerations. Section Two - 
Guide for specifications (under consideration) 

This Section Two of Part 1 will describe guidelines for planning and 
defining specifications of telecontrol systems and equipment in order to 
accommodate individual application demands. 



I EC Publication 870-1-3: Part 1: General considerations. Section Three - 
Glossary (under consideration) 

This Section Three of Part 1 will present the specific terms of 
telecontrol techniques as defined in the International Electrotechnical 
Vocabulary [lEV] [lEC Publication 50 (371)] as well as other terms 
which are necessary for the understanding of this series of standards. 



I EC Publication 870-2-1: Part 2: Operating conditions , Section One - 
Environmental conditions and power supplies 

This Section One of Part 2 defines the environmental and power 

supply conditions to which the telecontrol equipment should be 

designed in order to fulfil its specifications. It establishes classes for 
different conditions and also defines test procedures. 



I EC Publication 870-2-2 will constitute Section Two and it will deal 
with electromagnetic compatibility as well as corrosive and erosive 
influences. 

lEC Publication 870-3: Part 3: interfaces (in preparation) 

This part will define the interface conditions that have to be met in 
order to correlate the different pieces of equipment needed to form a 
telecontrol system and to allow the user to manage such a system. 

I EC Publication 870-U: Part ^: Performance requirements (in pre- 
paration) 

This part will deal with those characteristics that have to be met by 
telecontrol equipment and systems to accomplish the functions for 
which they are intended in a continuous, secure and precise manner, 
and in addition to be flexible enough to accommodate future demands. 



lEC Publication 870-5: Part 5; Transmission protocols (in preparation) 



This part will describe the functional characteristics of data 
transmission that shall be met in order to implement a telecontrol 
system by means of links or networks. Data integrity requirements for 
information transmission, distinct data formats and transmission 
methods, which fulfil these requirements, will be defined. 



IS 12746 ( Pait 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1(1988) 

This part will include several sections. 

The standards listed above will be completed by additional parts and 
sections as appropriate. 



3. General aspects related to telecontrol systems 

The fundamental aspects relating to the operation of geographically 
widespread processes including the generation and optimum transport- 
ation and distribution of a product are very similar for the different 
kinds of products (e.g. gas, water, oil or electricity). Telecontrol 
systems employed in the operation of electric power systems have been 
developed to a very advanced state and often serve as examples for 
applications in other areas. For this reason, the general aspects 
relating to the operation of any geographically widespread process are 
explained in the following sub-clauses by reference where appropriate 
to the operation of an electric power system. 

3 . 1 The role of telecontrol systems in power systems operation 

The quality of the power supply, which includes its reliability, 
depends to a large extent on the existence of a coordinated telecontrol 
system which assures all the necessary supervisory and control func- 
tions. The structure of such a telecontrol system is dictated by the 
power system's architecture and by the strategy of operation adopted 
by the user(s). It is in essence a distributed process control system 
conforming to the hierarchical structure of the geographically wide- 
spread power transportation and distribution networks. A typical case 
olF a telecontrol system is depicted in Figure 1, page 25. 



A system can, from the operational point of view, service a whole 
power network or be split up Into different levels of responsibility or 
even into partially or fully independent subsystems. 



The local control systems of power stations are usually independent 
of the power network telecontrol system but certain monitored informa- 
tion is fed from the power stations control systems into the power 
network telecontrol system. Conversely, certain control information, 
such as set points for power generation, are transmitted into power 
stations (e.g. in the case of automatic load/frequency control). 



Telecontrol system configurations range from a few point-to-point 
monitoring and control functions up to multilevel systems covering vast 
geographic areas. The use of computer technology on all levels of the 
system allows telecontrol systems and architectures to use distributed 
intelligence with possibilities of preprocessing information to avoid 
superfluous data flow. Redundancy Is provided for vital functions in 
order to fulfil specified availability and reliability requirements. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Extended processing functions, such as load/frequency control, 
security analysis, state estimation and short-term predictive energy 
management, may be carried out either by a separate real-time 
computer system or by the telecontrol system itself, according to the 
choice of the systems architecture. 

It has also to be noted that equipment and subsystems are often 
manufactured by different suppliers and/or stem from different gene- 
rations of technology. Their integration into telecontrol systems thus 
creates interface problems which are sometimes difficult to solve. 

3.2 The role of the data transmission system 

One of the important factors which has to be taken into account in 
the planning stage of a telecontrol system is the specification of the 
data transmission system. 

Private or public communication cables, microwave channels and 
power line carrier (PLC) are most widely used. Since telecontrol 
systems have to operate in real-time mode, limitations imposed by the 
telecommunication channels may heavily impair the overall system 
efficiency. The implication is restricted bandwidth and hence restricted 
bit rates to be transmitted under noisy environmental conditions, which 
cause distortion of transmitted signal elements. Conversely specifica- 
tions of the overall channels have to be chosen to allow optimization of 
the overall system performance. The data transmission system has to 
be considered in this sense as an integrated part of the telecontrol 
system. 



In addition, all transmission equipment located in the vicinity of high 
voltage equipment such as circuit breakers and isolators, is prone to 
intermittent high noise levels of the burst type and transient voltages. 
This is especially true for PLC channels. 



The performance requirements and boundary conditions for some 
telecontrol applications, such as teletripping in transmission line 
protection, generation/load rejection schemes, etc., where instan- 
taneous response in real-time mode is critical, dictate the permanent 
direct logical connections between data sources and their destinations. 
This means that the application of store and forward techniques or 
packet switching are explicitly prohibited in such systems. 



There are however telecontrol functions with less demanding per- 
formance requirements which may adopt the general techniques and 
standards which have been developed for office automation applica- 
tions. Data exchanges among central stations for regions, districts or 
even nations may fall into that category. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

3.3 Requirements which determine the design of a telecontrol system 

For detailed information, see lEC Publication 870-4. 

3.3.1 Functional characteristics 

The system shall be designed so that the operators will obtain 
the correct information on actual operational status from strategic 
points of the power network and shall be able to respond quickly and 
accurately. 

3.3.2 Environmental conditions 

The installed equipment has to operate correctly under specified 
operational environmental conditions. Detailed specifications and a 
classification of environmental conditions are given in I EC Publi- 
cation 870-2-1. 

3.3.3 Reliability, availability and security (^RAS) 

RAS specifications depend on the particular application, and have to 
be met by the system and all its functional elements. These include 
uninterrupted power supplies which generally are not considered as 
being part of the telecontrol system itself. Electromagnetic compatibility 
has to receive close attention for all electronic equipment involved in 
telecontrol systems. 



Systems should be laid out to operate in a fail safe mode and compo- 
nent failures should be indicated immediately. 



3.3.4 Maintainability, serviceability and expandability, 
upwards compatibility 

Means for quick fault indication and location are required together 
with self-diagnosis of the equipment. Both hardware and software 
should ensure maintainability and expandability, to cope with suc- 
cessive alteration and expansion of the process. Design Improvement 
and changes of technology and of the methods of operation should also 
be taken into account. The organization of the software should be such 
as to permit operational control staff to carry out changes quickly and 
easily to cater for alterations in the power supply network. 



3.4 Main differences between telecontrol systems and local control systems 

The characteristics which differentiate telecontrol systems from local 
control systems are: 

The use of telecommunication links under restriction of bandwidth 
and under noisy environmental conditions, requires optimum trade- 
offs between transmission speed and reliable information transfer in 
order to cope with the amount of data to be transmitted and the 
overall transfer time needed. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
rEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Long distance data transmission links or networks^ sometimes 
composed of different transmission media, create problems with 
occasional high noise levels. The chosen data transmission protocol 
has to consider these circumstances. High data integrity rates 
have to be guaranteed at arbitrary high noise levels, whilst taking 
account of the fact that information transfer rates decrease 
gradually with increasing noise. 



Numerous geographically widespread plants (and telecontrol sta- 
tions) have to be controlled by the same centre. 



4. Structures and configurations of telecontrol systems 

A system's structure is understood as the hierarchic order of the 
basic elements and their interactions, which constitute and characterize 
that system. 

A system configuration is a specified arrangement of telecontrol 
stations and their interconnections. 

4.1 Interrelation of process network architectures 
and telecontrol system configurations 

In the planning stage, the system configuration has to be defined 
and tailored according to the user specifications. The configuration of 
the process, e.g. of a power grid, with the number of voltage levels 
involved, the number and geographical locations of power stations, 
control centres, substations and outstations, determines first of all the 
layout of the data transmission system which has to Interconnect these 
points. 



This strategy may differ from country to country and from utility to 
utility, being state or privately owned. 

Emphasis may be given to monitoring functions, leaving control 
functions partly or entirely to the local operators in substations but 
providing means for later upgrading of the system. Full operational 
facilities for remote monitoring and telecontrol functions may be 
implemented right from the beginning. Even in relatively simple 
systems, the monitoring and control functions may be quite complex 
in order to satisfy the many operational requirements for each 
hierarchical level of a power network. They may also be influenced by 
security requirements, statutory regulations and economic consider- 
ations. The trend to more power grid tie lines, either at company levels 
or at national levels, calls for high grade application control functions 
and hence highly sophisticated telecontrol system structures. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

For the sake of reliability and security, telecontrol systens are 
therefore often subdivided into a number of different levels of 
responsibility while still maintaining an overall operational trans- 
parency. 

4.2 Basic functional modules of a point-to-point telecontrol system 

A simple but typical point-to-point structure, with interfaces to be 
defined in I EC Publication 870-3 is represented in Figure 2, page 26. 
This serves to describe and explain briefly the basic functional 
modules of equipment or subsystems, namely: 

process input/output; 

information processing in the controlled station; 

data transmission; 

information processing in the controlling station; 

operator input/output. 

Table I, page 23, represents typical interrelations of these functional 
modules and possible types of related telecontrol modules and equip- 
ment. It should be noted that processing of local and special appli- 
cation functions in the controlled station as well as in the controlling 
station may be performed either in the telecontrol equipment itself or 
in separate equipment (i.e. in additional processors or in a process 
computer) which then has to be linked to the telecontrol equipment by 
a data bus. 



4.3 Functional software modules 

Telecontrol system software can be divided into the categories shown 
in Table 1 1 , page 24. 

In typical systems, the basic and application software consist of 
standard modules. New development work is normally restricted to 
project specific software. 

4.4 Configuration of telecontrol systems 

Data transmission network configurations can be broken down into 
the basic functional elements listed below, which constitute the basis of 
all composite network configurations. Details concerning data trans- 
mission and traffic methods are dealt with in Clause 6. However, some 
specific remarks concerning data transmission have to be formulated at 
this stage. The telecontrol equipment in the control centre usually 
communicates with more than one outstation and uses more than one 
link terminal (see Figure 2: DCE, modems, page 26) for this purpose. 
The number of link terminals used influences the organization of the 
data transfer. , 



The various types of data transfer suitable for telecontrol purposes 
are now illustrated, using the following symbols: 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



o 



Main control centre 



C) 



Control centre with one or more link 
terminals 



The small circles inserted into the symbols for stations symbolize the 
number of link terminals per control centre. 



A 



Outstation, controlled station, remote 
terminal unit (RTU) 



O 



Information collecting, concentrating and 
exchange points 



Data transmission line 



4.4.1 Point-to-point configuration 



^ 



A 



This configuration connects two telecontrol 
stations and is the simplest type possible 



4.4.2 Multiple point-to-point configuration 




The control centre is connected to the 
outstations by one link terminal per out- 
station. At any time, all outstations are 
allowed to transmit data to the control 
centre, which in return may transmit 
messages to one or more outstations 
simultaneously. 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

4.4.3 Multipoint-star configuration 




The control centre is connected to more 
than one outstation by one common link 
terminal. At any time, only one outstation 
is allowed to transmit data to the control 
centre. The central telecontrol equipment 
may transmit data either to one or more 
selected outstations or global messages to 
all outstations simultaneously. 



4.4.4 Multipoint- party line configuration 



■^ 



A 



A 



A 



The control centre is connected to more 
than one outstation by a common path. The 
restrictions imposed on the exchange 
between centra! and outstations is the same 
as in the multipoint-star configuration 
(Sub-clause 4.4.3). 



4.4.5 Multipoint- ring configuration (partyline-ring) 




The communication path bet- 
ween all stations forms a ring. 
This is a preferred method to 
improve the availability of the 
communication path. If the 
path is interrupted in some 
location, full communication is 
maintained, since every station 
can be reached from two sides 
of the ring. 



10 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



4.4.6 Composite (hybrid) configuration 



Configurations of the types indicated in Sub-clauses 4.4.1 to 4.4.5 
can be combined in a great variety of composite configurations. The 
most important variety is the meshed network configuration in which 
communication between any pair of stations is required. 




Information collection, concentration and exchange points may be 
inserted. 

Multirouting as shown in Sub-clauses 4.4.5 and 4.4.6 increases the 
reliability and availability of data transmission. 



5. Functions of telecontrol systems 

5.1 Layered structure of telecontrol functions 

The functions of data systems may be subdivided into seven layers 
as specified in the OSI (Open System Interconnection) reference model 
defined by ISO, This subdivision into modular layers is a useful 
theoretical model for defining standards. Each layer is essentially 
independent of the layers below and above it. It treats the layer below 
as a "service" function and the layer above as a "master" with which 
it exchanges data and to which it reports errors. It communicates, in 
general, with its corresponding layer on the other side of the trans- 
mission line. 



The independence of the layers gives a modularity to the system. It 
is possible to alter one layer without altering others, in particular 
some layers may be omitted. 

Telecontrol system functions are divided into the following layers: 



11 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Application functions 

Cover the special needs of the process to wnich a telecontrol 

system is applied, thus dealing with the types of information 

emanating from the process or from the operator. This information 

is transferred to the telecontrol system by signals and is handled 
within this system in the form of data. 

Operational processing functions including presentation functions 

Conversion of information into signals and data in the operational 
equipment. 

Data transport, network, linf< and physical transmission functions 

Application functions and associated operational processing 
functions are described in general in Sub-clauses 5.2 to 5.4 below. 
Standards for data transport, network and link functions (such as 
data format structures) are described in general in Clause 6 below 
and will be dealt with in detail in lEC Publication 870-5. 



5.2 Application functions 

Application functions are divided into the following two categories; 



Basic functions; 

Extended processing functions. 

5.2.1 Basic functions 

These deal with all types of individual information from and to the 
process and the operator. 

The information content of data resulting from basic application 
functions remains unaltered while being processed by the telecontrol 
system (i.e. the data integrity is maintained). 

The main subgroups are: 

Monitoring (information acquisition from the process) 

• Teleindication 

discrete state information (single, double or multipoint). 



• Telemetering 

continuous variable quantities. 

• Telecounting 

integrated variables or incremental information. 



12 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 ( 1988 ) 

Command and control (acting on the process) 

• Telecommand, teleswitching 

single or double commands, pulse type or maintained commands. 

• Teleregulation and teleadjusting 

continuous and discontinuous variable quantities. 

5.2.2 Extended processing functions 

They are derived from a set of basic functions acting on the input 
and/or output side of the process and operator by means of operational 
processing functions. 

Extended processing functions may alternatively be performed by the 
CPU of the telecontrol system or by separate computer systems. 

Typical examples are (in order of decreasing overall transfer time 
priority) : 

limit indication; 

automatic interpretation of alarms; 

display of faulty states; 

display of summated measured values; 

real time state estimation; 

fault location routines (process and telecontrol system); 

real time event logging for post mortem analysis; 

load/frequency control and economic energy management; 

security monitoring and analysis; 

display of integrated metered values; 

short-term energy management; 

contingency evaluation; 

automatic load shedding and restoration; 

hydro-thermal optimization and unit commitment. 

5.3 Operational processing functions 

Operational processing functions ensure correct data acquisition and 
provide appropriate data presentation. Typical operational processing 
functions are: 



matching of input/output signals which cross interfaces to man and 

to the process; 

suppression of contact bounces; 

detection of faulty state information; 

limit checks; 

plausibility checks; 

increment pulse validation; 

calculation of engineering values of measurands; 

summation and other arithmetic operations. 



13 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Modern technology allows the economic implementation of additional 
operational processing functions within stations where information is 
acquired and within information concentrators. This procedure is called 
preprocessing. Preprocessed information may also be further processed 
by the CPU of the controlling station (or a separate computer system). 



Preprocessing may also reduce the amount of data to be transmitted 
and may prevent, particularly in emergency situations, possible over- 
loading of transmission links, the CPU and the man-machine interface. 

5.4 Presentation of the process information to tiie operator 

The man-machine interface is defined as the shared boundary 
between the terminal of a data processing system and the operator. 
The type and form of information to be interchanged between man and 
machine and the hardware and software to accomplish this have to be 
specified accordingly. 

The basic requirement for optimum man-machine communication is 
therefore to provide operators and maintenance personnel with 
adequate and reliable information on the actual status of the power 
grid and the telecontrol system itself and to make use of central 
facilities to allow possible intervention in the process. 



The types of information mentioned in Sub-clauses 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 
are typically displayed by the following hardware: 

Mimic diagram 

Represents the topology and indicates the status of the power 
grid. Active and/or passive elements such as multi-aspect indi- 
cators, indication lamps, discrepancy switches, push buttons may 
be used to display the status and to initiate commands. 



Operator's consoie 

Usually consists of a combination of displays, especially visual 
display units and keyboards, which provide the operator with 
detailed information and control facilities. 



indicating instruments (analogue and/or digital) 

For measured and composite values (e.g. sums of analogue values 

or processed values). 

Visual display units (VDU) 

Usually serve for alphanumeric display of alarms, measurands and 
other information and for graphic display of process network 
status, etc. 

Recording equipment 

For alphanumeric and graphic recording such as teletype, line 

printers, hardcopying devices and plotters. 



14 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Acoustic signal/ zatlon 

For attracting the operator's attention to dangerous situations. 



Maintenance equipment 

For monitoring and maintenance of the telecontrol system itself. 



6. Transmission of telecontrol data 

6.1 Tlie role of data transmission standards 

Data transmission standards have been issued by international bodies 
such as CCITT and ISO. Existing standards are characterized by the 
fact that they cover commercial type data transmission. I.e. data 
transfer between scientific or commercial computer systems and remote 
terminals. Transmission paths may be circuits rented from the public 
telephone authority, covering distances from a few kilometres up to 
several hundred kilometres. Data handling of this type is typically 
optimized for office automation tasks. Message frames and protocols are 
mostly adequate for the degree of time requirements and data integrity 
required by those services. 



On-line, real-time telecontrol data transmission on the other hand, 
which is characterized by the fact that telecontrol systems cause 
material or energy to move, require standards which fulfil stringent 
data integrity requirements. 



The typical requirements of telecontrol data transmission are: 

very high availability; 

very high data integrity; 

short transfer time which allows real-time response to events; 

high information transfer efficiency; 

proper operation in the presence of high electromagnetic Inter- 
ference and differences in earth potential. 

The major obstacle in fulfilling these requirements is the fact that 
the two requirements, "high data integrity" and "low transmission 
delay", are two conflicting properties in transmission paths with 
restricted bandwidths and under inimical environmental conditions. 



Consequently it Is necessary to standardize transmission methods 
with fair compromises on these two properties. 



15 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Utility owned transmission media, such as underground and overhead 
cables, PLC and microwave links are very often put into operation in 
order to achieve high availability of the communication links. 

6.2 Data transport, network j link and physical transmission functions 

Data transport functions cover all functions involved in the 
management of efficient and reliable information transfer between 
stations. 

Requests for the transmission of messages with various priorities, 
lengths, dialogue types and destinations are accepted from the "appli- 
cation" layer in each station. Appropriate transmission procedures are 
delegated to the lower protocol layers which report on the successful 
performance or on observed errors to the higher layers. Automatic 
recovery procedures are initiated upon dynamic errors, while error 
reports to the higher layers are generated upon the detection of 
persistent errors. 



Typical functions which are managed in the higher layers in co- 
operation with the tower protocol layers "link" and "physical trans- 
mission" are: 

Priority organization for spontaneous and cyclic information 
transfers. 

Performance of maintenance and test routines upon request (e.g. 
activating or deactivating links, stations or system parts). 

Error recovery strategies. 

Generating and monitoring error-detecting codes. 

Generating and monitoring frame synchronization, acknowledgement 
of message frames and detecting frame size errors. 

Serializing and deserializing of message frames. 

Monitoring signal quality. 

Converting signal levels and data formats. 

6.3 Characteristics of telecontrol data transmission 

6.3.1 Telecontrol message structure 

The general structure of a telecontrol message is shown in Figure 3, 
page 27 (for details, see lEC Publication 870-5). Standard frame 
formats provide information field lengths which may vary only by 
multiples of octets. 



16 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



6.3.2 Transmission initiation modes of telecontrol devices 



Three basic transmission initiation modes are used for teiecontroi 
data transmission: 

Event initiated transmission (^spontaneous transmission] 



Data transmission is initiated by events in stations where they 
occur, such as changes of breaker positions, changes of measured 
values, etc. This method best meets real-time requirements. The 
proper operation of event initiated transmission is ascertained by 

•I- :__: ^f ^^^•,^^:^ 4.-.»4. i^t .^^4.: t'U^.^*.~u^ " r *: ^ 

VI ai i9iiiia»ivi I \jt ^ci i%^uiv> (.c^o v. i ii i vi ma liui i v wov^iiuv^ iuii^liuii^. 



Transmission on demand 

In this case the outstation is requested by the master station to 
transmit the actual information status. In the case of several 
outstations this mode is also called interrogative or polling mode. 



Cyclic transmission 

This mode is frequently used for transmission of measured values 
and binary information from outstation to the control station. Sets 
of measured values and/or binary status information are trans- 
mitted in a time division scheme. It has to be noted that cyclic 
transmission causes a time delay in updating which increases with 
the amount of information to be scanned in one cycle. A data path 
is needed in the direction of information flow only. 



Event initiated transmission and transmission on demand, where data 
is transmitted only once, call for transmission with very high data 
integrity. For the cyclic updating mode, where occasional wrong 
information is corrected during the following cycle, a lower data 
integrity class would be sufficient (for details, see lEC Publi- 
cation 870-5). 



6.3.3 Combinations of transmission initiation modes and dialog procedures 

Link configurations, initiation modes of transmission and types of 
traffic are principally independent of each other and a multitude of 
combinations would therefore theoretically be possible. Practical 
solutions, however, are limited by a series of restrictions imposed 
mostly by considerations of a partly technical and a partly economical 
nature. 

Combinations of transmission initiation modes are: 



17 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Event initiation and transmission on demand, polled status inform- 
ation from one or more outstations, or a set of specific measured 
values and/or single-point or double-point status information is 
scanned during a requested time period, etc. 



Event initiated and cyclic transmission. Cyclic transmission can be 
interrupted, thus enabling event transmission which has higher 
priority. Periodically initiated test data transmission may also be 
used as "watchdog" function. 



Combination of the three transmission initiation modes with the 
following priority allocation: 

1) event initiated transmission; 

2) transmission on demand; 

3) cyclic transmission . 

With regard to network configurations the following points have to be 
taken into consideration: 

Multiple point-to-point configurations can be broken up into the 
equivalent number of point-to-point link elements, all having 
independent link terminals on both ends. All three initiation modes 
of transmission and combinations thereof can be applied to each 
link individually. The data flow from n outstations will be limited 
by the throughput of the system's central processors and not by 
the capacity of the individual link terminals. 



Restrictions in data flow, especially for links with cyclic trans 
mission, are due to the imposed transmission priorities. 



All multipoint configurations, such as star and party line, restrict 
the possible data transmission rate from n outstations to less than 
^/n per outstation. 

Further restrictions are due to the choice of combinations of the 
three transmission initiation modes and the imposed transmission 
priorities. It has to be noted that the information handling strategies 
of multipoint configurations are equal to those of bit-serial data bus 
systems. Bus systems may operate in different initiation modes and 
therefore need sophisticated data transmission handling capabilities. 



Event initiated transmission may in the case of emergency suddenly 
cause an increasing amount of information to be transmitted in a short 
time (of the order of magnitude of 1 or 2 s duration) at one or all 
outstations. Multiple point-to-point configurations are more flexible in 
coping with an emergency than multipoint configurations. 



18 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870.1-1 (1988) 



6.4 Types of traffic in transmission c flannels 



The particular procedures for conveying data over the communication 
link, together with the direction and the chronological sequence in 
which communication links may be needed, are functions of the types 
of traffic carried by the link. 

6.4.1 Simplex traffic 

Simplex (one way) traffic may be used in the cyclic updating mode 
in point-to-point and multipoint telemonitoring systems or in systems 
using the channel selecting mode. 

6.4.2 Half duplex traffic 

Halfduplex traffic is characterized by a transmission link common to 
both directions, thus precluding simultaneous transmission in both 
directions. Compared to simplex transmission, it offers enhanced 
protection of event information against loss by defining appropriate 
dialogue procedures. 

6.4.3 Duplex traffic 

Independent transmission channels exist for the incoming and out- 
going directions, thus representing a four-wire transmission path 
having the possibility of simultaneous data transmission in both 
directions. 

6.5 Telecommunication systems 

Properties of telecommunication systems are mentioned in this context 
only in so far as they serve as a subsystem to a telecontrol system for 
data transmission. 



Transmission of telecontrol data is performed in most countries over 
fully or partly utility owned information transmission systems. Rented 
channels from telephone companies are also in use. 



The channels usually comprise the following facilities for internal 
use: 

telephone with private automatic branch exchange (PABX); 

teleprinter, facsimile; 

telecontrol data transmission; 

teleprotection; 

closed circuit video. 

Selections of existing transmission standards (CCITT, EIA and 
others) which fulfil the requirements of telecontrol systems are 
adopted . 

6.5.1 Transmission media 

The following transmission media are currently in use: 



19 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

radio (VHF, UHF); 
point-to-point microwave; 
power line carrier (PLC); 

communication cable embedded in earth wire | multiwire cables, 
suspended communication cable s coax cables, 

underground communication cable optical fibres. 



The transmission facilities form a more or less complete telecommu- 
nication network. Data transmission rates of telecontrol systems are 
usually in the range of 50 bits/s to 2 400 bits/s, infrequently as high 
as 4 800 bits/s and 9 600 bits/s. Signalling speeds in excess of 
9 600 bits/s generally require special broadband channels which can be 
provided using conventional telecommunication transmission techniques 
over various telecommunication media. 



6.5.2 Transmission methods 

Telecontrol systems rely exclusively on bit-serial binary data 
formats. The physical representation of the information units (bits) on 
the transmission path depends on the transmission medium used, on 
bandwidth limitations, and other environmental conditions. 



The most common transmission methods are: 

Pulse code modulation (PCM) in which binary information is repre- 
sented by two distinct signal levels of fixed duration, in the 
case of cablebound transmission over short distances (baseband 
transmission), or by two distinct frequencies of distinct duration 
for longer distances or other transmission media. In the case of 
low transmission rates (up to 1 200 bIts/s) ordinary "frequency 
shift" channels are used which convert the two distinct signal 
levels into two distinct frequencies. For higher transmission speeds 
various multilevel modulation techniques are applied which require 
and deliver, in addition to the binary data flow, "signal-element- 
timing" information and other data control information. 



Digital pulse duration modulation (DPDM) In which binary informa- 
tion is represented by signal pulses of two distinct durations. 
The number of pulses and pulse intervals represent a given 
number of bits. Frequency shift channels and modem techniques can 
be implemented with DPDM and PCM, 



6.6 Protection of messages against noise on the transmission channel 

With regard to telecontrol data transmission and its integrity the 
following characteristics of specific channel types are of Interest: 



available bandwidth per channel; 

20 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

planned signal/noise ratio figures which prevail during normal 
environmental conditions and extremely low signal/noise ratios 
during intervals of burst type noise; 

attenuation (db/km) and its variations due to external influences 
(weather, icing, etc.); 

transmission time delay (ms/100 km) . 

These characteristics are very different for the transmission media 
cited above and interrelated for specific channel type. 

Burst type noise, produced by operation of circuit breakers and 
isolators, is practically absent on microwave channels, although 
variations in attenuation due to atmospheric scattering may have to be 
compensated by diversity operation. PLC on the other hand is charac- 
terized by poor signal/noise ratios during the short periods of burst 
type noise but attenuation per kilometre is low, thus allowing increased 
repeater spacing. 

6.6.1 Protection of information against falsification 

Measures can be applied in all layers of telecontrol systems to reduce 
the possibility of information falsification. Examples of typical measures 
are: 

Improving the signat-to-noise ratio. Passive methods include 
screening of coaxial cables, proper choice of carrier and sub- 
carrier frequencies. Active methods include increase of the 
transmitter power, etc. 

By weighted superposition of redundant coding and signal quality 
supervision (pulse amplitude, signal distortion), maximum reduction 
of residual (undetected) errors in transmission links can be 
obtained. 

After error detection, the output of the falsified information has to 
be suppressed. 

Using plausibility checks, state estimators and extended inform- 
ation transmission procedures (such as "check before operate" for 
command transmission). 

6.6.2 Protection against loss of information 

Spontaneous telecontrol systems may lose information if the inform- 
ation is discarded after error detection on the transmission path. This 
can be avoided by different methods such as: 



Decision feed back 

Various methods are in use, for example positive acknowledgement 
and automatic repetition of transmission if the positive acknow- 
ledgement does not arrive. 



21 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
JEC 870-1-1 (1988) 

Information feed back 

This method combines error detection with protection against 
loss of information by performing an identity check between the 
information sent out and retransmitted to the initiating station. 

Provision of sequential numbers for subsequent message frames. 



22 



IS 12746 { Part 1/Sec 1 ) 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



1999 



TABLE I 

Interrelation of basic functional modules 

and typical systems functions wit/i typical hardware modules 

within a telecontrol system 



Basic functional 
modules 



Typical (application and tele- 
control 1 systems functions 



Type or related modules 
of equipment 



Process input/output 

- To convert actual physical states 
of the process into coded data 
(monitoring direction) 

- Act on the process 
(command direction) 



To ensure information transfer 

- From sensors In the process 

to CPU, e.g. to add up and to 
code metering pulses 

- From CPU via transducers and 
actuators to the process 



Process equipment 

- Sensors in the process 

- Input channels receiving 
(analogue or digital) data from 
the process 

- Transducers, actuators (n the 
process, operating valves, 
circuit-breakers, governors 



Specific telecontroi information 
processing 

in the controlled station 
- To process data according to 
predefined rules 



To process incoming and outgoing 
information, e.g. 

- To detect events by comparison 
of former and new status 
Information 

- To reduce data if needed 

- To react on comparison of set 
point and measurands by send- 
ing an actuator command 



telecontrol equipment 

- Central processor (CPU) 

- Associated front-end processors 

- Hard wired logic 

- Main memory devices 

- Internal bus subsystems 

- Input/output channels to process 
equipment 



Data transmission 



To transmit serial data between 
widespread stations of a tele- 
control system 



To ensure reliable transmission of 
all important process f'nformotion 

- Signal (and/or) format conversion 

- Error detection, e.g. by codes 
and signal quality monitoring 

- Data path performance monitoring 



Data circuit-terminating equipment 



- Standardized CCITT modems 

- Special modems, e.g. incorpor- 
ating channel switching and pro- 
cessing In case of sophisticated 
communications networks 



Specific telecontrol information 
processing 

in the controlling station 
- To process data according 
to predefined rules 



To process Incoming and outgoing 
information, e.g. 

- To prepare dear, comprehensive 
information for display 

- To derive automatic commands 
from information cominq from 
different stations of the tele- 
control system 



Telecontrol equipment 

- Central processor (CPU) 

- Associated front-end processors 

- Hard-wired logic (very rarely) 

- Main memory devices (Core, IC) 

- Auxiliary mass storage (disk, 
tape) 

- Internal bus subsystem 

- Input/output channels 



Operator's input/output 



Information display and 

recording 

To provide means for interacting 

with the process by operators 

To provide means for online 

testing and fault diagnosis of 

the telecontrol system Itself 



To convert data into information 
comprehensible by personnel and to 
convert human actions into data 

- Indication alarm and record 
functions on /off status 

- Digital and analog metering 

-- Control and command functions 

- Supervisory alarm functions 

- Fault diagnosis 



Operator's equipment 



Mimic diagram 

Visual display (VDU) 

Signalling lamps 

Recorders, line printers, data 

loggers 

Analog and digital indicating 

instruments 

Process operator consoles, 

keyboards 

Discrepancy (control) switches 

Light pen, trace ball or joystick 

for VDU 



Note.- The mark i Indicates that the reiated hardware equipment need not necessarily coincide fully with the 
basic functional modules. 



23 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec1) : 1999 
lEC 870-1.1 (1988) 



TABLE II 



Typical functional software modules of telecontrol systems 







TELECONTROL SYSTEMS SOFTWARE 






BASIC SOFTWARE 


1 
STANDARD APPLICATION 
SOFTWARE 


PROJECT SPECIFIC 
SOFTWARE 


DATA BASE 


apptic«tkm Independent 


system Independent 


project dependent 


system dependent 


- Operating system 

- Hardware drivers 


- Telecommunication and 
Interprocessor com- 
munication 

- Man-machine dialogue 


- Particular functions of 
of a system 
(e.g. arithmetic pro- 
cedures for analogue 
values) 


- System control tables 

- Tables for object des- 
criptions (software 
modules 


- Time and mathematical 
basic functions 


- Data input/output 
programs 




- Object status tables 
(process state) 


- Programs for maintenance 
and tests 


- Data processing and 
control pro^ramn 








- Data logging, display 
and long time storage 
programs 




- Data base maintenance 
software 




- Data base management 







24 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec1) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 




MCC 



Main (or national) 
control centre 



DCC 



District control centre 



RCC 



Regional or area 
control centre 



PS 



Power station 



Alternative (a power 
station may be 
controlled either to 
a regional control 
centre or to a dis- 
trict control centre) 



A 



Outstation, controlled 
station or remote 
terminal unit (RTU) 



Fig. 1. - Typical hierarchical structure of a telecontrol system 
for power transportation and distribution network. 



25 



IS 12746 ( Part 1/Sec1) 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



1999 



CONTROLLING STATION 



OPERATOR'S 
EQUIPMENT 



TELECONTROL 
EQUIPMENT 

DTE 




VDU 



Operator'! 
console 



Processor(s) 
for operational 
processing 
functions 



Special 
processor Is) 



DCE 



DCE 
(Modem) 



Transmission 

line 

(channel) 



Data circuit 



CONTROLLED STATION 



DCE 



DCE 
(Modem) 



-Telecontrol equipment . 
to DCE interface 



Telecontrol system in restricted sense 



TELECONTROL 
EQUIPMENT 

DTE 



Processor(s) 
for operational 
processing 
functions 



Special 
processor(s) 



Alarms 

Status 

Positions 

Meter 

values 



PROCESS 
EQUIPMENT 



Measured 
values 



Switch 
commands 



Set point 
commands 



Information 
input 

equipment 
(sensors) 



Information 
output 
equipment 
(actuators) 



Governor 



Telecontrol equipment 
to operator's 
equipment interface 



Telecontrol equipment 
to process 
equipment interface 



Telecontrol system ir> wide sense 



Man-machine 
interface 



VDU: Visual display unit 

DCE: Data circuit-terminating equipment 

DTE: Data terminal equipment 

Optional interface between telecontrol processorlsi and special processor(s) 



Fig. 2. - Typical structure of a telecontrol system 

(shown by a point-to-point configuration). 



26 



lo 12746 ( Part 1/Sec 1 ) : 1999 
lEC 870-1-1 (1988) 



FRAME 


ORGANI- 


IDENTIFI- 


STATUS- 


CHECK 


DELIMITER 


ZATION 


CATION 


CONTROL 




Start 


Type of 


Address 


User data 


Protection 


deiimiters 


message 
Serial number 


type: 




against 
error 




Specification 


' source 




Check bits 




of dialogue 


- destination 








elements, e.g. 










interrogation. 










answer, etc. 










< Information field - 


^ 




< 


< 


Block length --- 
-- Frame -^ 




> 

> 



Fig. 3.- General structure of a telecontrol message 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LTD 25 ( 965 ), 

Amendments Issued Since Publicatiun 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 323 3841 

Eastern ; 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 \ 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 L5 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhen (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 [ 832 78 9 1 , 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHAH, HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 



Primed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



