***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 14996 (2001) : Positive List of Constituents of Modified 
Poly (Phenylene Oxide) (PPO) in Contact with Foodstuffs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Drinking Water [PCD 12: Plastics] 



C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1814996:2001 

3ncR=rT^ ("^ ^ 3^) c^ ^HMechi cf^t ^ 

Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF MODIFIED 

POLY (PHENYLENE OXIDE) (PPO) IN CONTACT 

WITH FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS 

AND DRINKING WATER 



ICS 67.250; 83.080.20 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



October 20Q\ Price Group 3 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Plastics are being used on a large scale for packaging of foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. Where 
direct contact occurs between the packed commodity and the plastics, the high-molecular mass polymer itself 
does not pose a toxic hazard being inert and essentially insoluble in food. There is, however, a likelihood that 
some transfer of polymer additives, adventitious impurities such as monomers, residual catalysts remnants and 
residual polymerization solvents and of low molecular mass polymer fractions will occur from the plastics into 
the packaged material with consequent toxic hazard to the consumer. The occurrence of acute toxicity due to 
plastics material in contact with food is most unlikely, since only trace quantities of potentially toxic material 
are likely to migrate. However, the accumulation of these potentially toxic materials with time may lead to 
hazards which may be serious. 

Polyphenylene oxide (PPO) or poly[l,4-(2,6-dimethyl phenyl)] ether was discovered by John Hay in 1956 and 
was developed commercially by General Electric company under the trade name Noryl resins 1965-66.The 
chemical formulation is based on the oxidative coupling of substituted phenols and the elimination of a molecule 
of water. PPO resins are usually alloyed with polystyrene materials. It acts as a base for a large family of resins 
with typical heat distortion temperature ranging from 82°C to more than 150°C. The chemical resistance 
characteristics of PPO are fairly consistent. These resins are noted for their resistance to hydrolysis in acids, 
bases, salts and hot water ,but can be attacked by certain hydrocarbons, esters, ketones, amines and halogenated 
compounds. PPO resins offer the designer a combination of attractive properties including heat resistance, good 
impact strength, strong tensile and flexural properties at elevated temperatures and a wide processing range. 
They also feature low specific gravity and low moisture absorption rates. High energy radiation such as gamma 
or X-rays cause little loss of properties of the UV stabilized grades, even at high doses. Moulded articles can be 
sterilized by autoclave, gas or irradiation without any harm to the materials. 

PPO resins can be processed in a number of ways, but the bulk of applications are in injection moulding. PPO 
can also be extruded and thermoformed and various processes such as blow moulding, compression moulding, 
cold forming and rotational moulding have been used with varying degrees of success. Modified PPO resins 
find wide usage in food contact and health care applications. Some of the most important and known applications 
of modified PPO resins in this area are pump impellers and diffusers, filter press components, sterlizable trays, 
stopcocks, etc. 

Use of modified PPO resins is guided by EEC directives 90/128/EEC in Europe. In USA, it is regulated by FDA 
regulations 2 1 CFR 1 77.2460. For potable water applications several grades of modified PPO resins are registered 
under BVGW and Hygiene Institute, Gelsenkirchen (Germany). Institute d' Analysis et d' Essais du Centre- 
Quest (France) and WRC (UK). 

This standard is intended to be used with a series of Indian Standards on plastics for food contact applications 
which are given in Annex A. It is emphasized that these standards need to be used in combination to provide a 
system of control to the manufacturers of plastics as well as the fabricators of thermoplastics packaging materials 
to derive maximum benefit besides, it may also serve as basis for official agencies to frame suitable legislation 
to ensure effective safeguards for the safety and health of consumers where thermoplastics for food contact and 
related applications are concerned. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 



IS 14996 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

POSITIVE LIST OF CONSTITUENTS OF MODIFIED 

POLY(PHENYLENE OXIDE)(PPO) IN CONTACT 

WITH FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS 

AND DRINKING WATER 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers positive list of constituents 
of modified (polypheny lene oxide) (PPO), namely, the 
polymer raw materials, manufacturing residues and 
necessary additives which may be regarded as safe for 
use when properly processed in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water and when 
present only in the prescribed limits of concentration, 

1.2 It does not purport to establish the suitability of 
the ingredients singly in a particular foodstuffs from 
other than toxicological considerations. 

2 REFERENCE 

The following standard contain provisions, which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
the standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreement based on the 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

9833 : 1981 List of pigments and colourants for 
use in plastics in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Modified (Polyphenylene Oxide) (PPO) 

A polymeric alloy based on PPO resin produced by 
oxidative coupling reaction of 2,6-dimethyl phenol and 
other thermoplastics materials like high impact 
polystyrene (HIPS), acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene 
(ABS), polycarbonate (PC), polyamides (PA), etc. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Basic Resins 

4.1.1 Individual Modified PPO 

4.1.1.1 As defined in 3.1 in any mixing proportion. 

4.1.1.2 Modified PPO materials shall comply with the 
requirements such as raw material used, limit of 



manufacturing residues and additives and their 
acceptable level of addition as described in subsequent 
clauses. 

4.2 Raw Materials 

In manufacturing PPO to be used in modified PPO 
materials for safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinkuig water following reactive 
raw materials can be used: 

a) 2,6-dimethyl phenol; and 

b) Oxygen. 

4.3 Manufacturing Additives/Residues 

Following manufacturing additives can be used in the 
manufacture of PPO resin within specified limits. 

4.3.1 Initiators 

a) 2,2'azobis (/i^o-butyronitrile), Max 0.5 
percent; 

b) Tert, butylperoxy diethylacetate. Max 0.5 
percent; 

c) Copper 1 bromide. Max 1 .0 percent; 

d) Diacyl (C^- C,^ ) peroxides. Max 0.5 percent; 

e) DibenzoyI peroxide. Max 0.5 percent; 

f) Dibutral amine, Max LO percent; 

g) Dibutylethylenediamine, Max 0.2 percent; 
and 

h) Dimethylbutylamine, Max 0.2 percent. 

4.3.2 Emulsifier Residues 

a) Alkyl (Cg- C,g)benzene sulphonates, sodium 
salts, Max 1 .0 percent; 

b) Alkyl (Cg- C,g) sulphates, sodium salts. Max 
1.0 percent; 

c) Alkyl (Cj- C,g) sulphonates, sodium salts. 
Max 1.0 percent; and 

d) Polyethylene oxide (Cg- C,^) esterified with 
lauric, oleic, ricinolaic and/or stearic acid, 
Max i.O percent. 

4.3.3 Solvent Residues 

a) Methanol, Max 0.002 percent; and 

b) Toluene, Max 0.2 percent. 



1 



IS 14996 : 2001 

4.4 Following additives can be incorporated into basic 
PPO resin to manufacture modified PPO materials 
provided their level of addition is within the limit, 
where specified. 

4.4.1 Polymers 

Complying with the relevant Indian standards for its 
safe use in contact with food stuffs, pharmaceuticals 
and drinking water {see Annex A). 

4.4.2 Lubricants and Release Agents 

a) Fatty acids, linear, saturated and unsaturated 
with an even number of carbon atoms (Cg- 
C22 ),with Max 2 percent of unsaponified 
matter, Max 2 percent; 

b) Fatty acids as described above esterified with 
alcoliols, monohydric, primary linear, satu- 
rated, C, -C,,, as well as oleic alcohol and 
pentaerythritol. Max 2 percent; 

c) Fatty acids as described above, as salts with 
aluminium, calcium, potassium, magnesium, 
sodium and zinc. Max 2 percent; 

d) Liquid paraffin (refined mineral oil). Max 
3 percent; 

e) Microcrystalline paraffin. Max 3 percent; and 

f) Polydimethyl siloxane, Max 2 percent. 

4.4.3 Stabilizers and Antioxidants 

a) Bis (2,4-di-tert butylphenyl) pentaerytritol- 
diphosphites, Max 0.25 percent; 

b) 2,2-methylenebis (4-methyl-6-tert butyl 
pheno\),Max 0.3 percent; 

c) Octadecyl-3-(3,5-di-tertbutyl-4-hydroxy- 
phenyl) propionate, Max 0.3 percent; 



d) Phosphates of calcium and sodium, Max 
1 percent; 

e) Poly{6-(l,l,3,3-tetramethyl butyl)amino}- 
l,3,5-triazine-2,4-diyl]-[(2,2,6,6-tetramethy 
l-4-piperidyl)-imino]-h exam ethylene 
[(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidyl)imino], 
Max 3 percent; 

f) Tris (2,4-di-tert, butylphenyl) phosphite, Max 
0.3 percent; 

g) Zinc oxide, Max 0.3 percent; and 
h) Zinc sulphide. Max 0.3 percent. 

3.4.4 Antistatic Agent 

Polypropylene oxide, molecular weight > 400, Max 
1.0 percent. 

3.4.5 Pigments and Colourants 

The pigments and colourants used shall comply with 
list and limits prescribed in IS 9833. 

3.4.6 Other Additives 

a) Acetic anhydride; 

b) Carbonates and bicarbonates of calcium, 
potassium and sodium, Max 2.0 percent; 

c) Citric acid, calcium, potassium and sodium 
sahs. Max 2.0 percent; 

d) Copper (II) iodide. Max 0.1 percent; 

e) Magnesium oxide. Max 0.3 percent; 

f) Phosphates of calcium. Max 1 .0 percent; 

g) Potassium iodide, Max 0.5 percent; 
h) Salicylic acid; and 

j) Silicates of aluminium, calcium, potassium, 
magnesium and sodium including diato- 
maceous earth, glass fibres, kaolin, mica and 
talc, Max 3.0 percent. 



ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON PLASTICS SUITABLE FOR USE IN CONTACT 
WITH FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



IS No. Title IS No. 

9833 : 1981 List of pigments and colourants for 10141 : 2001 

use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

9845 : 1 998 Determination of overall migration 1 1 42 : 1 999 

of constituents of plastics materials 
and articles intended to come in 
contact with foodstuffs — Method of 
analysis (second revision) 10146: 1982 



Title 

Positive list of constituents of 
polyethylene in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 
Polystyrene (crystal and high 
impact) for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 
Polyethylene for its safe use in 



IS 14996 : 2001 



IS No. Title IS No. 

contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 12247 : 1988 
ceuticals and drinking water 

10148 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 

polyvinyl chloride and its copoly- 12248 : 1988 
mers for safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

10149 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 12252 : 1987 

polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

10151 : 1982 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 13449 : 1992 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

10171 : 1999 Guide on suitability of plastics for 13576 : 1992 
food packaging (second revision) 

1 0909 : 1 984 Positive list of constituents polypro- 

pylene and its copolymers for its safe 

use in contact with foodstuffs, 13577 : 1992 

pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

(first revision) 

10910 : 2001 Polypropylene and its copolymers for 

its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 13601 : 1993 

11434 : 1985 lonomers resins for its safe use in 

contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

11435 : 1985 Positive list of constituents of 14971 : 2001 

ionomer resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 14972 : 2001 

1 1 704 : 1986 Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) copoly- 

mers for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water . 14997 : 2001 

11705 : 1986 Positive list of constituents of 

Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) copoly- 
mers for their safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 14998 : 2001 
drinking water 
12229 : 1987 Positive list of constituents of 
polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 14999 : 2001 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 



Title 

Nylon-6 polymer for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of Nylon- 
6 polymer for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Polyalkylene terephthlates (PET& 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) copoly- 
mers in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Ethylene methacrylic and (EMAA) 
copolymers and terpolymers for their 
safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene methacrylic (EMAA) co- 
polymers and terpolymers in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) 
co-polymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Polycarbonate resins for its safe use 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
polycarbonate resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
melamine-formaldehyde resins in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Melamine-formaldehyde resins for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 



IS 14996 : 2001 



ANNEX B 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



Organization 
IntemetExchangeNext.com Liijiited, Mumbai 
Amines andPlasticizers Ltd, Mumbai 

Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, Chennai 

Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 

Gas Authority of India Ltd, Noida 

GE Plastics India Limited, Gurgaon 

Gharda Chemicals Ltd, Thane 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Polymers Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Centre for Plastics in Environment, Mumbai 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Plastics Institute, Mumbai 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd, Jalgaon 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), Kanpur 

Ministry of Defence, RDSO, Lucknow 

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, DGHS, New Delhi 

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 

National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuchem Ltd, Faridabad 
Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal 



Representath>e(s) 
Shri Sarup Chowdhary (Chairman) 
ShriV.V.Kulkarni 

Dr R. V. Utekar (Alternate) 
Dr C. S. Narasimhan 

Dr M. Balakrishnan (Alternate) 
ShriJ.Sengupta 
DrVuai Kumar 

Dr K. Palanivelu (Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Kumar 

Shri Baldev Raj (Alternate) 
ShriShivajiBasu 

Shri V. K. Sincm (Alternate I) 

Shri Manish Khandelwal (Alternate 11) 
General Manager 

Dr (Shrimati) Rashmi Bhardwaj (Alternate) 
DrB.K. Desai 

Dr U. M. Vakil (Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. p. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Shankar Banerjee 

Shri Amftava Sanyal (Alternate) 
ShriS.V.Parveen 

Shri N. C. Dhocendranath (Alternate) 
DrA.N.Bhat 
Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis (Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Narayanan 

DrN. G. Mokashi (Alternate) 
Shri D. R. Patel 

Shri R. K. Aggarwal (Alternate) 
DrV.P.Sharma 
Dr H. C. Mruthyunjaya 

Shri S. B. Joshi (Alternate I) 

Shri A. P. Choudhari (Alternate 11) 
ShriV.Mchian 

Shri R. Suba Rao (Alternate) 
Shri M. N. Saraf 

Dr L. D. Khandpal (Alternate) 
Joint DiREcroR (Rubber) 

Director (SS) (Alternate) 
Addl Director General (PFA) 

Shri Sundar Lal (Alternate) 
Shri O. P. Gera 
Dr S. S. Mahajan 

Dr S. S. Kulkarni (Alternate) 
DrR. S. Lathana 

Shri S. K. Khandelwal (Alternate) 
ShriV.K,Sharma 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria (Alternate) 
DrR-M-Mehta 
Shri C. C. Sakarda 

Shri S. K. Kodesia (Alternate) 



(Continued on page 5) 



IS 14996 : 2001 



{Continued from page 4) 

Organization 
Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Sjunt-Gobain Vetrotex India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Parwanoo (H.P.) 

Shriram Fertilizers & Chemcials, Kota 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

Tata Engg & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

The All India Plastics Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

The Plastics & Linoleums Export Promotion Council, Mumbai 
VIP Industries, Mumbai 

XPRO India Ltd, Faridabad 

BIS Directorate General 



Representative(s) 

DrY.B.Vasudeo 

Dr K. S. Jadhav {Alternate) 
ShriS.Sundaram 

Shri S. K. Ghosh {Alternate I) 

Dr B. J. C. Basu {Alternate II) 
ShriArunAnand 

Shri Yog Raj Kapur {Alternate) 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta {Alternate) 
DrR.C.Sood 
Shri R, Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi {Alternate) 
ShriU.K.Nath 

Shrimati A. D. SATHE(/4/temate) 
Shri R. K. Aogarwal 

Shri K. B. Easwaran {Alternate) 
Shri R. P. Kalyanpur 
Shri Siddhartha Roy 

Shri A. S. Dalve {Alternate) 
SHRiC.Bhaskar 

Shri Manmohan Krishan {Alternate) 
Shri Anjan Kar, Director & Head (PCD) 
[Representing Director General {Ex-officio)] 



Member-Secretary 

Shri T. KALAivA>f an 

Joint Director (PCD), BIS 

Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries Subcommittee, PCD 12:12 



Organization 
Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 
All India Plastic Industries Association, Delhi 
AS & T India Limited, New Delhi 
Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Mumbai 

Britannia Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Centre for Processed Food, Bangalore 

Central Committee for Food Standards (Directorate General 

of Health Services), New Delhi 
Central Food Laboratory, Kotkata 

Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Drugs Controller (India), New Delhi 
GE Plastics India Ltd, Distt Vadodara 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Co Ltd, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 

Hitkari Potteries Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 



Representativefs) 
Shri K. R. Kumar {Convenor) 
Shri Ravi Kumar 
Shri G. D. Agrawal 
DrC.Shankar 

Shri S. N. Murthy {Alternate) 
Shri G. S. Aurora 

Shri M. R. Sundar {Alternate) 
ShriR.Prakash 

Shri Chctan L. Hanchate {Alternate) 
The Asstt Director General (PFA) 

DrK.C.Guha 

Dr S. Vanchinathan {Alternate) 
Shri Aml Agarwal 

Shri A. N. Srivastava {Alternate) 
Dr P. Das Gupta 
Dr G. Mukhwadhyaya 

Dr (Shrimati) Rashmi Bhardwa; {Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. p. Singh {Alternate) 
Shri Amttava Sanyal 

Shri Raj Datta {Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Lahdu 

Shri P. S. Lakshmanan {Alternate) 
ShriMiundBhole 
MsM.C.Dordi 

Shri N. C. Saha {Alternate) 



(Continued on page 6) 



IS 14996 : 2001 

(Continued from page 5) 

Organization 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
National Dairy Development Board, Anand 
National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

RoUantainers Ltd, Faridabad 
Sriram Fertilizers & Chemicals, Kota 

Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

XPRO India, Faridabad 



Representative(s) 

ShmJ.B.Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis (/tltemate) 
DrP-K-Seih 
Senior ExEcunvE 
Shri J. K. Vadodaria 

Shri V. K. Sharma {Ahemate) 
Dr K. S. Jadhav 

Dr R. Rangaprasad (Alternate) 
Shri Sanjaya Varma 
ShriM-S-Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gvfta (Alternate) 
Shri R. Ranqarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
ShriPankaiMithel 

Shri ViNEET Gupta (^ ftemate) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 12 (1375). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 1 002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 1 3 1 , 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f323 76 17 

NEWDELHI110 002 \323 38 4I 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi r337 84 99, 337 85 61 

KOLKATA 700 054 L337 86 26, 337 9 1 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 f 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



{: 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 r254 12 16, 254 14 42 

\254 25 19, 254 13 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) r832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400 093 \832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed atPr.ibhal Offset Press, New Delht-2 



