**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 12071 (1987) : Guide for assembly of printed boards [LITD 
5: Semiconductor and Other Electronic Components and 
Devices] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS I n^l\ ^ 1917 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
ASSEMBLY OF PRINTED BOARDS 



UDC 62ia'(My75(026) 



® Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDtAN S T A N D A H 9 

hiATf^K HHAVAEV, 9 bAHAIlUH SHAH LhVk% MAkG 

NiiW DELHI 111)00(7 

Gr 7 JVpBiwfrw 1987 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
ASSEMBLY OF PRINTED BOARDS 

Printed Circuits Sectional Committee, LTDC 17 

Chairman Representing 

Dr J. Vaid Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri M. a. Godbole ( Alternate to 
Dr J. Vaid ) 
Shri R. Adinarayanan Ministry of Defence ( LGSO ) 

Shri K. Rangappa ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ajit Kumar Electronic Component Indusrties Association 

( ELGINA ), New Delhi 

Shri Ghanisham Dass ( Alternate ) 
Da AsHOK Kumar Partap Rajasthan Gopper Foils and Laminates 

Ltd, Jaipur 

Dr U. K. Rathi ( Alternate ) 
Shki R. K. Bhatia Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi 

Shri P. B. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. C. Chjiabra Ministry of Defence ; R&D ) 

Shri R. K. Chakravarti Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shri S. C. Duqoal National Airports Authority, New Delhi 

Shri H. S. Gbewal ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col B. G. Malhak Minislry of Deft nee ( DGI ) 

Shri S. G. Adhkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. Krishnan Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri Vbdu Mitteh Micropack Ltd, Uangalore 

Shri A. P. Vasudevan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. NaOesu Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri J. Skeb Ramachandua 
MukThy ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. W. Patwaudiian The Formica India Division ( The Bombay 

Burmah Trading Corpn Ltd ), Pune 

ShuI V. Ranoanathah ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Venkatbswara Rao Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri N. G. Naoarajan ( Alternate ) 
Representative Hedge & Golay Ltd, Bangalore 

Representative Research Designs & Standards Organization, 

Lucknow 

( Continiud On page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 12071 - ld87 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri M. K. SiiarMA Electronics Test & Development Centre, Chandi- 

garh 
Sum R. K, SiHGH Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri V. Subbamanian ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. Subbabaman Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shbi R. Ghellappa ( Alternate ) 
Shei S. N. Vyas Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

DiKECTOR ( Eleotbonics ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Secretary 

Shbi A. S. Raw at 
Deputy Director ( Electronics ), BIS 



IS 1 12071 • 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
ASSEMBLY OF PRINTED BOARDS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 24 March 1987, after the draft finalized by the Printed Circuits 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecom- 
munication Division Council. 

0.2 Assistance has been derived in preparation of this standard from lEG 
Doc: 52 ( United Kingdom ) 169 'Guide for the Assembly of Printed 
Board' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down guiding principles and practices to be applied 
to the assembly of components on printed wiring boards irrespective of 
their method of manufacture. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition in addition 
to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part 6 )-1978* shall apply. 

2.1.1 Taped Components — Components attached to continuous tapes. 

2.1.2 Screen Printing — A process for transferring an image on a surface 
by forcing a suitable media through a stencil screen with a squeegee. 

3. HANDLING OF COMPONENTS PRIOR TO ASSEMBLY 

3.1 Electrostatic Sensitive Components — ■ It is necessary to safeguard 
certain types of components and devices against possible damage which 
may be caused by an electro-static discharge ( static ). General guidelines 
are given below but for details IS : 10087-1981t shall be referred. 

3.1.1 The susceptibility of devices to static damage may vary consider- 
ably, but generally those devices constructed with thin oxide layers and 
extremely thin conducting paths only a few microns wide are most 
susceptible. 



♦Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 6 Printed circuits (first revision ). 
tCodc of practice for handling of electrostatic sensitive devices. 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

Table 1 illustrates some typical values of electrostatic discharge to 
which devices are reported susceptible. 

TABLE 1 SUSCEPTIBILITY TO ELECTROSTATIC DISCHARGE 

Device Type Range oe ESD Volts 

(1) (2) 

VMOS 30-1 800 

MOSFET 100-200 

GaAsFET 200-300 

EPROM 100 

JFET 140-17 000 

SAW 150-500 

OP-AMPS 190-2 500 

CMOS 250-2 000 

Schottky diodes 300-2 500 

Film resistors 300-3 000 

Bipolar transistors 380-7 000 

ECL ( Hybrid, PB level ) 500-1 500 

SCR 680-1 000 

Schottky TTL 1 000-2 500 

It is considered that, for practical purposes, if static potentials in 
the working environment may be held at less than 100 V, static problems 
shall be greatly reduced. 

3.1.2 When considering the handling of static sensitive devices, the 
following two general rules shall be observed: 

a) All work areas, manual or automated in which static sensitive 
devices are handled shall be static safeguarded areas. 

b) Static sensitive devices/components or assemblies require the 
use of static protected containers during transport or storage. 

3.1.3 In the assembly area, conductive items of equipment including 
tools, work stations, machinery and personnel may be grounded by a 
variety of methods obtainable from specialist suppliers. A resistance to 
ground of less than 1 GO is considered sufficient to discharge to a safe 
level in less than 1 Gi2. However, a minimum of 1 Mii is necessary to 
limit current flow to a safe level. 

Table 2 shows the maximum allowable resistances and discharge 
times for static safe operations involving personnel bearing in mind the 
capacitive effects of the human body. 



IS : 12071 - 1987 



TABLE 2 ALLOWABLE RESISTANCES AND DISCHARGE TIMES 

( Clause 3.1.3 ) 



Maximum Tolbbable 
Resistance 

(1) 
From operator to ground via: 
Floor mat — 1 Gii 
Table mat - 1 Gft 
Wriit strap - 100 M ft 



acobptablb discharob 

Time 

(2) 

1 s 
1 s 
01 s 



3.1.4 Shielding of components sensitive to static shall be carried out 
from the receipt of component stage. The protection supplied by the 
device supplier shall be maintained as long as practicable. Where 'dual 
in-line' (DIL) packages are supplied in static shielded shipping tubes, 
these may interface directly to automatic insertion equipment and the 
devices need not be handled, 

3.1.5 The likelihood of static damage is reduced but not eliminated 
once components are assembled to the printed board. 

Assembled boards shall be transported or stored in conductive con- 
tainers suitably groimded and boards with edge connectors shall be fitted 
with contact shunting shrouds to maintain board voltage levels constant. 

3.1.6 Where boards are to be packaged in plastic bags or containers 
the materials of the bag or container shall be capable of preventing a 
static charge existing across the package. 

Generally metalized film materials are more satisfactory as they 
provide true electrostatic shielding. 

3.2 Edge Connectors 

3.2.1 Edge connectors formed as part of a printed board ( integral ) or 
provided as a wired on ( discrete ) plug end are generally plated with a 
precious metal on the contact area. 

It is important that the surface of the contact area is protected from 
damage or contamination during assembly processes. 

3.2.2 Where the edge connector is integral with the board, it shall be 
necessary to protect the contact area with a heat resistant tape or shield 
during the mass soldering process. 



Is t mil - idst 

Typically, a stainless steel shield may be employed to surround the 
edge contacts and prevent solder wetting, however, this shall be combined 
with a tape or heat resistant plastic shroud which protects the contact area 
from flux creepage. Any tape used for this purpose must have a non- 
transferable adhesive. Specialist tapes are available but shall be checked 
for adhesive transfer before use. 

3.2.3 After processing any tape, etc, shall be removed from the contacts 
before the board is cleaned. 

3.2.4 Subsequent to cleaning operations the edge connector shall be 
protected preferably with a slip-on moulded plastic shroud which combines 
protection with easy availability for test, etc. 

The shroud shall be of a shape which clips on the board beyond the 
contact zone. To prevent the scratching of the contact zone by gift which 
may have contaminated the shroud, the shroud should be pushed onto the 
board from the side. 

Note — Only plastics with stable plasticizers shall be used to prevent transfer 
of plasticizers onto edge contacts. 

3.2.5 Discrete edge conductors, not subject to mass soldering, shall be 
protected either as in 3.2.4 above or by a tape having adhesive edges and 
a clear centre section to be positioned over the contacts. 

4. PREPARATION OF PRINTED WIRING BOARDS FOR 
COMPONENT ASSEMBLY 

4.1 Stoving — Boards shall be so placed that there is free circulation 
of air round each board, and stoved at 120 ± 5°G for a minimum of 2 h. 
Increasing the time of stoving is not normally detrimental and it may be 
convenient to stove overnight. 

4.2 Stoving Double Sided PWBs — In order to minimize blow holes 
in joints of mass soldered through plated hole printed boards, it is advi- 
sable to stove before assembly and within one week of the soldering 
operation. 

4.3 Stoving Multilayer and Flexible PWBs — It is recommended that 
multilayer and flexible circuits be stoved before being soldered. This action 
is necessary to drive out slowly the absorbed moisture and promote any 
gassification which may otherwise result in delamination or outgasslng 
during mass soldering. 

Note — 'Specifications for multilayer circuits and flexible circuits normally 
require specimens to be stoved at 125 ± S'Cfor 1 h min before test of interleminal 
bond using a thermal shock. 



IS : 12071 • 1987 



5. MOUNTING OF COMPONENTS 



5.1 Components shall be mounted on only one side of the board, generally 
opposite the major circuit pattern, unless otherwise dictated by design 
requirements, for example surface mounted chip capacitors. 

The projection of the outline of the component on the board shedl 
not extend over the edge of the board or interfere with board mounting 
and preferably shall be a minimum of 1"5 mm from the edge of the board 
and board guide or mounting hardware. The various factors that are 
important in mounting of components are discussed below. 

5.1.1 Orientations — Horizontally mounted, non-polarized components 
should be oriented so that component marking and colour codes may be 
'read' in the same direction. Non-polarized, vertically mounted components 
shall preferably be mounted so that the markings may be read from top to 
bottom. All polarized components shall be oriented so that their positive 
( + ) or negative (— ) symbols are visible. 

5.1.2 Accessibility — The placement of any component on the board 
shall not prevent the insertion or removal of any hardware (total clearance 
included ) used to mount the assembly, unless the assembly is considered 
disposable and is not intended for repair. 

5.1.3 Centering — The body of the component shall be approximately 
centered between lead span, whenever possible and practical. 

5.1.4 Horizontal Placement of Axial-lead Components — Axial-lead compon- 
ents shall be mounted so their axis is parallel to the mounting base. When 
not otherwise specified, components may have a portion of the body in 
direct contact with the printed wiring board. 

5.1.5 Components Mounted Over Conductors — Components shall not be 
placed in contact with more than one conductor unless the board surface 
is suitably protected from moisture traps. This requirement applies to 
components with or without sleeving. 

5.1.5.1 Care shall be taken when mounting metal cased components 
to ensure the casing does not come in contact with the conductive pattern. 
Sleevir g may be used to insulate metal cased components. The sleeving 
shall be sufficiently transparent so that the identification markings remain 
visible and legible. Sleeved components shall not be mounted over or in 
contact with sharp solder connection points. 

5.1.3.2 Adhesive pads of insulating material may also be placed 
under the component instead of sleeving but it is not good practice to rely 
on a solder resist film in this context. 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

5.1.5.3 Thermal degradation of components may result from contact 
with conductors on lands during mass soldering; adhesive pads may also 
be used as a thermal barrier. 

5.1.6 Vertical Component Mounting — A?cial-lead components mounted 
perpendicular to printed wiring boards should be installed with a minimum 
of 0-4 mm and a maximum of 30 mm clearance between the end of the 
component body and the surface of the circuit board to prevent entrap- 
ment problems. There should be no strain on the component lead when a 
snacer is used, 

5.1.6.1 Radial-lead components when vertically-mounted should 
have their leads T-»arallel to each other and T\er^endicular to the ed^e of 
the component-mounting base. Such components shall have their vertical 
axis within 5° of the plane that is perpendicular to the component-mount- 
ing base, unless otherwise restricted by design, 

5.1.7 Moulded or encapsulated ceramic or plastic components — Moulded or 
encapsulated ceramic or plastic components shall be mounted so that the 
coating or sealing material does not enter the solder joint. Components 
installed in plated-through holes, shall maintain a minimum clearance of 
1 "5 mm between the surface of the board and the end of the lead coating. 
When holes are non-PTH the minimum clearance can be reduced to 
0"75 mm. 

5.2 Components-Lead Forming 

5.2.1 Preforming — The purpose of preforming parts for retention to the 

through leads and the mechanical reliability of the clinched lead. Simple 
forms are used only to hold parts of the board prior to soldering; complex 
forms may be used for mechanical strength. 

The forming of leads may be from a minimum of simple offset to a 
complex compound form. The major factors affecting the forming of 
leads are board thickness, lead diamater, lead material, hole size, and 
tooling required. 

a) Simple offset method ( see Fig. I ) — This gives the appearance of 
a straight through lead. The advantages are ease of forming and 
ease of insertion. The disadvantage is a minimum of retention 
force, and the resilency of small or soft component leads, 

b) The dimple ( see Fig. 2 ) — This method increases the retention 
to the board and gives better contact to the board. The main 
disadvantages are the die sets required to form the leads and the 
hole size to dimple height requirements. With the variation of 



tS : 12071 - 1987 



r "It 


r 1 



Fig. 1 Simple Offset Preformed Leads 




Fig. 2 Dimple Preformed Leals 

5.3 Lead Bend — The lead shall extend approximately straight out from 
the body of the component a minimum of 15 mm prior to the start of any 
bend except when the space is limited by high density packing the 
minimum may be 10 mm. The end of the body in this application is 
defined to include any coating meniscus, solder seal or weld bead, or any 
other extension. 



i^ : 12071 - 198^ 

It is essential that extreme care be taken when forming bends to 
prevent nicking or damage to the component leads and damage to the 
component body or seals; exposed base metal of component leads shall be 
retinned. 

5.4 Mechanical Stress — The shock and vibration to which printed 
board assemblies are subjected during normal handling and testing can 
damage the lead terminations and lead-to-component body seals. 

5.4.1 Clips, Clamps and Brackets — The following are the basic require- 
ments which should be adhered to when components are mechanically 
secured by clips, clamps or brackets: 

a) All clips, clamps or brackets shall be secured to prevent their 
rotation, such as by using two fasteners or onef astener and non- 
turn device; 

b) Clamps and brackets which require their removal in order to 
rephice the component shall be secured with a threaded fastener 
or other non-permanent fastener, unless the sub-assembly in 
which they are used is considered to be disposable or non- 
repairable; 

c) The use of clips for glass envelope components shall be avoided. 
5.5 Special Consideration 

5.5.1 Hermetically-Sealed Components — Hermetically-sealed components, 
such as miniature relays, headers, glass eyelets, glass sealed capacitors, 
diodes and transformers, must be handled with caution to prevent damage 
to seals. The seals must not be chipped, cracked or crazed. Leads shall 
not be bent less than 1-5 mm from the seal. Hook and post type terminals 
sealed to headers shall not be bent closer than 1 -5 mm to adjacent 
terminals. 

5.5.2 Heat Dissipation — All parts dissipating 3 W or more ( for epoxide 
woven glass base material ) shall be mounted so that the body is not in 
contact with the board unless a clamp, heat sink, or other means is used to 
insure that the maximum allowable operating temperature of the board is 
not exceeded. 

6. BOARD ASSEMBLY-METHODS 
6.1 Manual 

6.1.1 Simple Layout Memorization — If the board is of fairly simple design 
and of relatively low volumes, the operator may be advised to learn the 
board layout and, thereby get to know which components are placed and 
where. 

10 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

6.1.1.1 Layout memorization is easier if the components to be 
mounted have easy distinguishing marks and are laid out on the board by 
the designer such that a sequence may be singled out. Reference points, 
such as silk screened legends, or positioning marks shall aid the operator. 

6.1.1.2 With this method of assembly, it is preferable for components 
to be arranged in sequence in bins to suit any one operator. However this 
method has its disadvantages also. Although the technique requires a low 
investment, it involves a fairly high possible insertion error rate especially 
if operators have to memorize the layouts of several boards. 

6.1.2 Stage Assembly — More complex boards may be assembled effici- 
ently with a memorization technique if they are divided into two or more 
zones, each of which may be considered as small boards for an operator to 
memorize. The entire board may be assembled on an assembly line with 
each operator assembling different zones of the board. 

6.1.2.1 It is generally accepted that in a line of this sort, the lost 
operator carries out a general inspection and that each assembly stage is 
worked out to take the same amount of time. 

6.1.2.2 To assist operators when the same line is used for assembling 
several different types of board, a template may be provided to be placed 
over the board area in which the operator must not insert components. 
With each board type change, the operators template set must be changed. 

6.1.2.3 The assembly line may be designed in such a way that each 
change of template provides for the corresponding components being 
offered from a gravity fed magazine or provide a visual indication against 
the relevant component bin. 

6.1.3 Sequence Assembly — Where it is possible to identify a logical 
sequence which forms a serial path touching all the components on a 
board, a rapid method of accurate insertion may be applied. 

6.1.3.1 A fixed board holder is used with as many bins as compon- 
ents, arranged in the same sequence as that identified on the board with 
the bins in a closed loop chain. The operator works through the board 
sequence taking sequentially from each bin ( the bins may be stationary 
or presented to the operator by a drum, wheel system or linear transport 
system ), until the entire board is completed. 

6.1.3.2 Board changes may be accommodated by making the bin 
conveyor quickly interchangeable. Where a sequence is not readily obvious 
on a board an alternative sequence placing system may be applied. 

11 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

6.1.3.3 A closed loop hopper chain is used to carry the boards and to 
present them one at a time to the operator. The boards shall be horizontal 
for this process and the mechanism is generally motor indexed but under 
the operators control. 

Component bins may be either fixed or on an adjacent mobile 
arrangement. 

6.1.3.4 The operator takes one component type at a time and loads 
the first board in all the appropriate positions, keeping to the same com- 
ponent type, the operator then indexes and loads every board. When all 
boards are loaded with that component, the operator selects a second type 
and repeats the operation. 

6.1.3.5 There are two main advantages to this process. 

a) Since the same component is inserted into the same position many 
times, learning the sequence requires minimal training. 

b) The ability of operators to maintain a handful of components 
while inserting with the other hand reduces operator fatigue by 
reducing the number of pick-ups from separate bins. 

6.1.4 Visual Assembly Aids 

6.1.4.1 The simplest form of visual aid to assembly is the screen 
printing technique used to display component placement and orientation. 

6.1.4.2 Where complex boards are to be normally assembled, an 
optical display may be used to provide guidance to the operator. A photo- 
graphic slide projector using a closed loop of film projects an image 
directly onto the board assembled. The film has a slide for each compo- 
nent to be assembled on the board. 

When an operator has assembled all the components of one type into 
the positions indicated by the projection, it is necessary to index the film 
to the next slide, which in the case of linked systems will also present a 
fresh bin of components, or provide an indicator lamp against the relevant 
bin. 

Continuing indexing displays subsequent component positions and 
the relevant components. 

6.1.4.3 Lamp and optical Jibre displays — By arranging a set of small 
stranded lamps beneath the board assembly fixture and having them lit 
according to a specific sequence, a simple yet efficient assembly aid may 
be created. Assembly is performed in sequence with all components of the 
same type being inserted at each step of the sequence, 

n 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

To begin with, the operator turns on the lamps for the first compon- 
ent type and completes insertion. Turning the lamps on for the second 
component type extinguishes the first set and displays in addition an indi- 
cator on the component bin for the second set. This process continues until 
the board is completed. 

Optical fibre displays operate in a similar manner to conventional 
lamp systems but only otie main lamp is required for each sequence, the 
pattern being carried to the assembly fixture by an optical fibre array. 

The demonstration panel for the fibres behind the board fixture is 
particular to each kind of board and may be produced using the holes of a 
base board of the type being assembled ( enlarged holes where necess- 
ary ). Component bins may be identified by an additional fibre from each 
array. 

Where components with full length leads are to be assembled it 
becomes difficult to position fibre optics closely enough to the board under- 
side for accurate siting but yet sufficiently far away to permit relatively 
long lead access. 

In this instance the fibre optic display may be arranged to project 
down onto a half silvered mirror ( dicroic mirror ) through which the 
operator views the assembly fixture. The lights are then superimposed on 
the board which has sufficient clearance to permit long leaded components. 
These displays may also have the advantage of colour to identify compo- 
nent polarity. 

6.2 Automatic Component Insertion (ACI) 

6.2.1 Any general purpose automatic component insertion machine must 
include at least the following items: 

a) An xy co-ordinate table with arrangements for holding one or 
more boards and driven through its co-ordinate dimensions in 
increments equal to the grid or sub-grid on which the board was 
originally designed, 

b) An insertion head which may accept a variety of types of compon- 
ents and place them in the relative holes in the board, 

c) A system by which the insertion head is fed with components in 
the correct sequence, and 

d) A programmable numerical control unit which controls the whole 

system. 

13 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

6.2.1.1 There are a number of basic problems facing assemblers 
using automatic insertion equipment. The main two are: 

a) method of presenting components to the insertion heads, either 
sequenced components or a self-sequencing machine, and 

b) accuracy of component placement, which depends on hole size, 
hole positioned tolerance, machine tolerances and laminate 
stability. 

6.2.2 There are two basic methods for feading the head with compo- 
nents in the correct sequence. The machine may either select the com- 
ponents itself and thus have a magazine or reel for each component type 
or the machine may accept components ready sequenced and loaded in a 
form suitable for the insertion head to accept. 

6.2.2.1 In the first method the machine will have to be provided 
with as many component stores as the board requires. This complicates 
the machine unless a minimum of component types are used. Where axial 
components tend to predominate, a pre-sequenced arrangement is pre- 
ferable. 

Usually dual in-line package ( DIP ) insertion machines operate by 
direct selection ( see 6.2.5 ). 

6.2.3 Sequencing — Sequencing equipment is designed to prepare a set 
of axial ( or other ) components, arranged in the correct order such that 
when fed to an automatic insertion machine the sequence matches the 
placement programme of the machine. The system of carrying components 
to the machine is known as lead taping and a sequence is composed of a 
sequencer and a taping unit. 

6.2.3.1 In automatic sequences the equipment is fed with reels of 
pre-taped components from the component supplier and under the control 
of a pre-set programme the machine will cut the component loose close to 
the tape and transfer it to a moving chain while other components are 
arranged in order as the chain moves step by step under the cutting heads. 
The chain with each component in the correct sequence carries them to 
the taping unit where the component leads are transferred from the chain 
to the tape. It must be remembered that axial lead components supplied 
on tape and subsequently arranged in position by a sequencer will have 
their leads cut twice ( once from the supply reel and once during 
insertion ). 

6.2.3.2 As tape is commonly 6-35 mm wide, each lead is reduced by 
approximately 12 7 mm at each cut. As a consequence of this and the 
tolerance on the cutting operation the maximum insertion span is much 
narrower than it shall be with manual insertion. 

14 



IS t 12071 • 1987 



Figure 3 illustrates this. The dimensions used are typical for popular 
axial lead devices but may vary in practice. Radial and other non-axial 
lead devices must be formed to approximate axial dimensions if auto inser- 
ted. Generally though these items are not taped from suppliers. 







( 












1 




I 


1 




PROM 




c^llPPI IP R 


.4 












' 


1 








F IRST 


1 


..-1 


i 




> 


CUT 


1 






























SEQUENCED 




+ TAPED 
































INSERTION 






L (TYPICALLY 36 




CUT 






mm) 








s 




J 


' 


1 








( 


!= 












vyj 


/T-A 


f////////?/ 


fJ////^. 


^ 


"7777 




1 ' 




- 


1 




I 


"iG. 3 GOMPO 


NEI 

1 


/MAXIMU 

SPAN=3 

IT SEquE^ 

5 


M INS 
6-2(1. 
ICING 


ERTK 

S)' 


3N 
D 



IS i 12071 . 1987 

The maximum insertion span ( MIS ) may be calculated from the 
sequenced component final cut length using the formula: 

MIS = L — 2 (/ + 5 ) + D 

where 

L = final cut lengh, 

/ = length of protrusion of lead through board, 
S = maximum board thickness, and 
D = maximum component diameter. 

This formula assumes approximate right angle lead bends ( see 5 on 
component lead forming ). 

6.2.4 Stability of Laminates — If large boards are to be automatically 
inserted ( >200 mm^ ), the stability of the laminate becomes important 
especially if paper based materials are used. Shrinking due to etching is 
often the only factor taken into account but subsequent operations involv- 
ing heat ( resist curing, etc ) can also cause shrinkage. 

6.2.4.1 No general guidance may be given on stability and this must 
be determined in conjunction with the laminate supplier. It is generally 
accepted however that glass epoxy materials do not suffer from significant 
dimensional changes. 

6.2.5 Dual in-line Package ( DIP ) Insertion — The DIP was originally 
designed to be simple and economic, easily handled and able to be auto- 
matically inserted. Irrespective of the supplier of the device the package 
was intended to conform to limiting outline dimensions, however the range 
of dimensional differences in body packages are sufficiently wide to make 
reference to pin positions the only practical point for an automatic inser- 
tion tool. 

6.2.5.1 Generally the devices arc supplied with the pin rows spread 
at the base such that they are wider than the drilled pitch holes for 
mounting. 

The ACI machine springs the pins towards the centre of the device 
to align them with the board holes and once entered the natural spring of 
the released pins retains the device. 

6.2.5.2 Dual in-line packages are supplied in magazine tubes and 
these interface directly to the ACI machines. A sequencer is not needed 
for dip's as the machine programme controls selection. 

16 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

7. SOLDERABILITY — PROCESS CONSIDERATIONS 

7.0 The solderability of a board is the most important characteristic which 
shall be maintained till it is fabricated. However, it easily gets effected by 
storage and calls for precautions during storage and special protective coa- 
tings of the metal surface. 

7.0.1 During storage or ageing, whether natural or artificial, deteriora- 
tion in solderability will occur. In the case of metallic coatings deteriora- 
tion may be brought about by tarnishing/oxidation of the surface coating, 
by tarnishing/oxidation of the substrate through pores in the surface 
coating, or by inter-diffusion between substrate and coating(s). In the 
case of organic coatings applied to protect the metal surface to be 
soldered, deterioration may be consequent upon mechanical damage, 
porosity of the organic coatings, or diffusion of moisture and aggressive 
atmospheres through the coating. 

7.0.2 The extent and rate of the deterioration of solderability with 
time vary greatly with the nature and thickness of the coating and the 
storage conditions encountered. It shall be noted however that after any 
period of storage exceeding three months solderability tests shall be carried 
out to ensure that the board is usable. 

7.0.3 A brief description of various coatings which have good soldera- 
bility as defined by the methods laid down in IS : 9000 ( Part 18/Sec 
3 )-1981* is given in 7.1 to 7.5. 

7.1 Organic Coating — ( Shelf life — four to eight months; Thick- 
ness — Varies with type ) . 

These coatings are usually applied as lacquers. They are used to seal 
the reactive solderable surface of the copper which has been produced by 
the surface treatment, and are based on resins which do not interfere with 
the soldering process. They may assist in the fluxing or be dispersed by 
the flux and solder during the soldering process. Factors to be considered 
are that thin coatings are susceptible to damage and have a limited shelf 
life of a few months, and thick coatings may age or polymerize on pro- 
longed storage and then may be difficult to disperse during the soldering 
operation, cheap but satisfactory if assembly is to be soldered in a short 
space of time. 

7.2 Roller Solder Coating — ( Shelf life — six to nine months; Thick- 
ness — 05 fj,m to 10 pm ). 

•Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 
18 Solderability test. 

17 



IS i 12071 ■ 1987 

Molten solder ( usually conforming to Sn 60 of IS : 193-1982* ) is 
coated onto the fluxed surface using a solder covered roller partially 
immersed in a solder bath. The coating is very thin and typically has a 
thickness of 0'5 mm. Such a coating has a shelf life of approximately six 
months but may not be applied in plated-through holes. 

7.3 Tin and Tin-Lead Plating — ( Shelf life — Plated six to twelve 
months. Fused twelve months minimum; Thickness — Plated 5 /xm mini- 
mum, fused 7 '62 nm before fusing ). 

Plated coatings of tin-lead alloy with 55 to 75 percent tin, normally 
63 percent tin 37 percent tin are used. A minimum of 5 [xm is required 
for good solderability, but when subsequent heat fusing operations are 
involved, a minimum of 10 ju.m is required to ensure that 5 /xm remains 
over all significant surface afterwards. The heat fusing may be carried out 
using infra-red radiation or hot oil, and during these operations a redistri- 
bution of the molten tin or tin-lead alloy takes place. Under these condi- 
tions the final thickness of the solderable coating on the edges of pads and 
at the rims of plated-through holes may fall locally as low as 1 ^m. 

The melting point of a tin coating is approximately SO'G above the 
melting point of a solder coating. 

Tin coatings are prone to whisker growth, and heat fusing of the tin 
lead plating will reduce the likelihood of whisker growth, as also will the 
co-deposition of small amounts of lead or copper. 

7.4 Solder Dip and Hot Air Levelling — ( Shelf life — Twleve months 
minimum; Thickness — 1 ^m at rims of holes, 5 /im minimum elsewhere ) . 

Printed boards are fluxed and dipped in molten solder ( usually 
conforming to Sn 60 of IS : 193-1982* ). On removal from the bath a hot 
air knife levels at the molten surface, and clears any plated-through 
holes if present, and provides a similar finish to that of a fused tinlead 
plating. 

7.5 Gold Plating — ( Shelf life — Six to twelve months; Thickness — 
0"5 ^m to I'O jj,m). 

Gold finishes are not ideal for solder purposes because of the danger 
of brittle joints with thick gold deposits and porosity when thin coatings 
are used. Nevertheless, it is accepted that gold coatings do have to be 
soldered from time to time. For mass soldering it is preferable to pre-tin 
gold plated components leads in a 60/40 or 63/37 tin-lead alloy. 

•Specification for soft solder [ fourth revision ). 

18 



IS : 12071 - 198i^ 

8. SOLDERING 

8.1 For soldering of componcHts to printed wiring boards, flux cored solder 
wire ( 60 percent tin ) ( see IS : 193-1982* ) shall be used. Controlled 
temperature soldering irons are essential in establishing correct technique 
and avoidance of excessive heat transfer to the board and components. 

8.2 It is permissible for solder resist to flow up to the edge of, or to cover 
via holes, or for a 'window' to be life free to allow the via hole to fill with 
solder. Dry film solder resist may also be used to tent over via holes pre- 
venting the Ingres of solder. This has the advantage of lengthening leakage 
paths over the surface of the board. 

9. CLEANING OF BOARDS AND ASSEMBLIES 

9.1 Solvents may be used to clean flux residue, etc, from printed boards 
but care shall be taken to ensure that the process used will not affect the 
term reliability of any component part of the assembly. 

9.2 It shall also be borne in mind that cleaning with a solvent chemical 
will form a dilute mix of the contaminant and spread it over the board 
surface. Therefore, it is advisable to clean only when absolutely necessary 
and not as a matter of course. 

10. FLATNESS 

10.1 Flatness of the printed board is important for the printed board 
assembly, that is the printed board with the components mounted and the 
soldering operation completed. Undue deviation from flatness may cause 
difficulties, for example: 

a) reduction of clearance distances where the printed board is mount- 
ed parallel to another board or to shielding parts, 

b) difficult or even impossible insertion into narrow guides, and 

c) mechanical stressing of components and solder joints ( with the 
danger of failure after some time ) . 

10.2 If necessary, particulary with large printed boards, provision should 
be made to prevent undue deviation from flatness, for example by using 
appropriate reinforcement or stiffening means. Since the soldering opera- 
tion influences the flatness, it is recommended that the stiffening needs be 
mounted prior to mounting and soldering the components. 

10.3 The flatness of a printed board depends on several factors, for 
example the material used, the production processes used, the hole 



'Specification for soft solder {fourth revision ). 

19 



Is : l20tl - 1989 

pattern, the conductive pattern ( even distribution of metal will normally 
give better flatness ), and the size and type of the board. Hence there is 
not a direct correlation between the deviation from flatness of: 

a) the metal-clad base material, 

b) the printed board, and 

c) the printed board assembly ( components mounted and soldered ). 

10.4 The reliability and operation of surface mounted components are 
particularly dependent on board flatness ( see 15.2 ). 

11. INSPECTION OF PRINTED BOARD ASSEMBLIES 

11.1 The assembled boards shall always be checked by visual inspection 
with particular reference to the mounting of electronic components and 
damage to the board. An optical aid having a magnification of about X3 
is usually adequate for visual inspection. 

11.2 Defects may be divided into three categories, that is: 

a) a defect which renders the item unsuitable for use, which if 
discovered during installation or when first put into use shall 
necessitate attention or corrective action; 

b) one which is likely to cause failure or additional maintenance; 
and 

c) one which is indicative of an unacceptable standard of workman- 
ship or production. 

11.3 Examples of common defects are as follows : 

a) Damage to component wires. These shall be free from cracks, 
nicks and other mechanical damage which causes a reduction in 
the cross-sectional area which, in turn, reduces the current carry- 
ing capacity of the wire; 

b) Damage to the encapsulation of components; 

c) Incorrect mounting of components, for example, 

i) less than r5 mm of wire after the component encapsulation; 

( see 5.3 ), 

ii) incorrect forming of component leads ( see 5,3 ), 

iii) incorrect seating of components ( see 5.1.5 to 5.1.7 ); 

d) Damage to the base material, that is blisters, chips or sciatches; 
and 

e) Poor quality solder joints. 

20 



IS : 12071 • 1987 

12. STORAGE CONDITIONS 

12il Severe deterioration can occur if printed boards and components are 
stored in unsuitable conditions. Basically all boards and components shall 
be stored in covered, well ventilated containers. Enclosing in air-tight 
plastic bags or containers shall be avoided. Ambient temperature shall be 
between 15 and 30°G at a relative humidity of 25 percent to 60 percent. 
If the boards are to be used for automatic component insertion ( ACI ) 
than they should be stabilized at 20 ± S'G at a R.H of 50 ± 10 percent. 
There must be no danger of corrosive atmospheres and the floor shall be 
non-dust generating. Cleaning shall be done by vacuum cleaner. 

12.2 A 'first in first out' rotation must be strictly observed. The maximum 
storage time is normally six months, where this is unavoidably exceeded 
further solderability tests should be carried out as at the inward goods 
stage. 

12.3 Printed wiring boards shall be stored flat and individually wrapped 
with a suitable low sulphur content tissue paper. When withdrawn from 
stores they shall be covered and protected from the weather if taken out- 
side. Any time spent in sub or pre-selection stores, when added to other 
storage time, shall not exceed six months { see 7 ). Handling of the tracks 
and other conductive surfaces shall be avoided. 

13. TERMINALS AND CONNECTOR JACKS 

13.1 Generally there is a broad range of devices used in or on a printed 
board. These devices are usually chosen for the following reasons: 

a) To aid quick repair or replacement of components or devices, 

b) For their ability to be automatically inserted, 

c) To connect printed boards to each other, 

d) To connect the board to other parts of the system external to the 
boards, and 

e) To allow for test access. 

13.2 These devices usually consist of pins or sockets which may be soldered 
into the board or alternatively, force-fitted. 

14. CONFORMAL COATINGS 

14,1 Assembled printed boards are frequently given a conformal coating 
to assist them in functioning under certain environmental conditions. 
Correctly chosen and carefully applied conformal coating will help to pro- 
tect the assembly from the following hazards: 

a) Humidity; 

b) Dust and dirt; 

21 



18112071-1987 

c) Airborne-contaminants, for example, smoke, and hemical vapours; 

d) Conducting particles, for example metal clips and filings; 
' e) Accidental short circuit by dropped tools, fasteners, etc; 

f ) Abrasion damage; and 

g) Vibration and shock ( to a certain extent ) . 

14.1.1 Gonformal coating is not a substitute for good design or the 
selection of adequate components and materials. It does, however, help 
to protect printed wiring boards which have to operate in hostile environ- 
ments. 

14.2 The conformal coating also help support the components so that the 
entire mass of the component is not carried by the solder joint. 

14.2.1 Certain limitations are inherent in conformal coatings. These are 
^s follows: 

a) Gonformal coating films, being permeable to water vapour and 
not being formulated with corrosion preventing fillers, such as 
chromates, will not prevent corrosion due to active electrolytic 
sites on the part being coated or salts trapped on the surface of 
the part under the coating. 

) : b) Conformal coating films being permeable to water will undergo a 
reduction in insulation resistance as the thickness of a film increa- 
ses. This is particularly the case in a fillet or resin around a 
' component ( such as, in integrated circuit ). 

c) Conformal coating resins, being organic and filling the voids bet- 
ween conductors, will cause a marked increase in interlead capaci- 
tance and consequent distortion of performance. 

d) Conformal coating resins, being formulated for transparency and 
flexibility have high coefficients of thermal expansion so they 
may exert a lifting force in certain components causing failure of 

i' : . solder joints. 

e) Conformal coating resins, being formulated for electrical charac- 
teristics, are not formulated with adhesion promoting additives 
( such as phosphates ), therefore they do not exhibit exceptional 
adhesion to jmetals, particulary so' der. 

f) Paraxylylene coatings excepted, most conformal coating resins, 
being similar to organic finishes, will exhibit pinholding and thin 
sport on sharp joints, edges of parti and conductor edges. 

g) The emission of noxious fumes when repairing with solder iron, 

22 



Is I 12071 - 1967 

14.2.2 The above, whilst limitations, may be overcome, and the situation 
optimized in the design of the assemblies, described in IS : 10424-1982* 
and by care in fabrication processes. 

14.3 Coating Selection 

14.3.1 The following coatings are typical of those that are acceptable 
for use with printed board assemblies ( see 14.3.2 ). 

a) Oleo resin varnish (.temperature range — 55°C to -|-125°C ) — A 
general purpose coating for non-demanding conditions. Easy to 
apply, may be removed by readily available solvents, xylene 
toluene. Easily repairable, good appearance. 

b) Acrylic varnishes (temperature range ~60°C to +135°C.) — A 
general purpose coating for use where excellent electrical proper- 
ties are required. May be removetj with solvents; MEK, easily 
repairable, good shiny appearance. 

c) Epxojy coatings ( temperature range — 60°G to +200°G ) — A 
general purpose coating for use where the best electrical properr 
ties are required. This coating may be 'soldered through', other- 
wise coating must be mechanically removed. May be patched, 
has a good appearance, is more difficult to apply. 

d) Polyurethane varnish ( temperature range --SS^C to -i-125''G ) — ^A 
good coating where resistance to moisture and abrasion is requir- 
ed. Usually specified for military applications. Thin coatings can 
be 'soldered through' with a very hot iron ( bit temperature 
approximately 420°G ), otherwise coating must be mechanically 
removed. Gan be patched, has a somewhat dull appearance, i? 
more difficult to apply. 

e) Silicone varnish (temperature range — 55°G to +260*0 ) ^^ A 
good coating where good dielectric and arc resistance properties 
are required. Also of value where higher temperature operation 
is necessary. May be patched, good appearance, easy to apply, i 

f) Silicone rubber coatings {XGvn.'peT^X.ureT&nge — 55°G to -1~260''G ) — 
A good high temperature coating, with good abrasive properties^ 
Primer required for optimum adhesion. Flexible, transparent, not 
easily repaired. Must be mechanically removed. Good appear- 
ance, not difficult to apply. 

g) Paraxylylene { parylene ) (temperature range —65° to +143"'G) 
— Vacuum deposited polymers a^-e available, which provide 
excellent protection against humidity and abrasion ( see 14.3.2.6 )|, 
Being deposited from a vapour they are true conformal coatings. 



•Guide for design and use of printed boards. 

23 



t& : 1^071 - I9d1 

penetrating all crevices, and coating all surfaces with al ayer of 
constant thickness. May be deposited in very thin films. Cannot 
be replaced using conventional techniques. 

h) Polystyrene and copolymers — Suitable for use where optimum diele- 
ctric properties are required. 

14.3.2 Precautions 

14.3.2.1 Trichloroethylene and other chlorinated solvents should not 
be used on glass-silicone laminated material. Delamination and surface/ 
component damage result with their use. 

14.3.2.2 When applying epoxy, polyurethane varnish, or polystyrene 
coatings in thicknesses greater than 0"1 mm to boards containing glass 
diodes, the glass diodes shall be fitted with soft vinyl sleevings prior to 
application of the coatings. Glass envelope style diodes shall have stress 
relieving bends in their leads so that at least 6 mm of lead length lies 
between the body junction and the point of solder application. 

14.3.2.3 Polyurethanes should have a minimum shelf life of three 
months: epoxies, silicones and polystyrene should have a minimum shelf 
life of six months when stored in original unopened containers in accord- 
ance with manufacturers recommendations. Date of manufacture shall be 
marked on the container. 

14.3.2.4 Coatings may contain toxic solvents and shall be used with 
caution and in well ventilated areas. Supplier shall include a 'Warning' 
on the label of containers of material wliich may have a toxic effect 
on user personnel. 

14.3.2.5 Gore shall be exercised when coating assemblies with flat 
base components with leads projecting straight through the board ( relays, 
crystal cans ). These components shall be mounted sufficiently high off the 
surface of the board so prevent the coating from completely filling the area 
between the component base and board surface. 

14.3.2.6 When thick layers of conformal coatings are used over 
brittle components, the differential expansion of coating, component and 
board, may cause cracking of the component or solder joint. For this 
reason, it is necessary to keep the coating thin. If there is any doubt as to 
the possibility of component damage, a buffer coating of pHant material 
may be used on the brittle components. A suitable material is heat shrin- 
kable sleeving, polyethelcne terephthalatc. 

24 



IS : 12071 • 1987 



14.4 Application 



14.4.1 With the exception of paraxylylene, which is applied by vacuum 
deposition all of these coatings may be applied by dipping, brushing or 
spraying. Spraying or vacuum depositions are the preferred system, where 
thin coatings are required. With reasonable operator skill an even and 
thin coating may be obtained, without runs or drips. With spraying, 
masking is easy, and may be carried out by taping or sleeving the required 
components or areas. Masking for paraxylylene requires more care. If 
quantities make it economical, tooling may be made to protect whose parts 
of the assembly that are not required to be coated. 

14.4.2 Brushing is a simple way of coating small numbers of boards. It 
is difficult to obtain thin coatings with this method, and coverage of densely 
packaged boards is not easy without getting blobs and runs. Care must be 
taken to see that no bare spots are left Masking is not usually required 
with this method of coatings, if the operator exercises care in applying the 
coating. 

14.4.3 Dipping gives good coverage and ensures that all cracks and 
crevices are adequately coated. Masking with the dipping method is very 
difficult and not likely to be fully effective. If the appropriate viscosity of 
the coating material is chosen, dipping may produce good results, but very 
thin films are not obtainable, and some blobs and runs are inevitable. 

14.4.4 Tapes, latex rubber, strippable polythylenes or vinyls may be 
used to mask required areas. If masking can be perfomed prior to cleaning 
( masks must be compatible with cleaning process ) it is advisable, as 
handling of the cleaned part shall be minimized. Masking materials must 
be compatible with solvents in the coating resin and they must not inhibit 
or interfere with the cure. 

14.5 Results 

14.5.1 When curing is completed, the coating shall have the following 
characteristics: 

A smooth homogeneous appearance, free from bubbles, pinholes, 
blistering, wrinkling, cracking and peeling. Unless the coating is delibera- 
tely made opaque, it shall not mask the colours or identification marks on 
components or the base laminate. The coating shall not discolour or 
damage any of the components, or other items coated. 

14.5.2 When processed according to the vendor's specification the coat- 
ing shall be fully cured with no signs of tackiness. 

25 



IS : 12071 - 1987 

14.6 Other Considerations — Conformed coating requires complete 
cleanliness of the surface before application if it is to be effective. Follow- 
ing measures may also be taken when necessary. 

14.6.1 Solder Cracking — Gonformal coating under a flat component may 
contribute to solder cracking of the joints of that component by virtue of 
the expansion of the coating. For this reason, mount flat components off 
the board and avoid filling the gap with conformal coating. 

14.6.2 Compatibility — Always check for compatibility between the 
components in the assembly, and the coating to be used. Also review the 
use of any cleaning liquids or solvents. It is also necessary to check that 
the cure cycle temperatures will not damage any components in the 
assembly. 

14.6.3 Measling — Problems associated with conformal coatings are 
invariably caused by inadequate cleaning prior to coating. One example 
of this is 'measling', which shows as small white spots under the coating. 
The white spots are areas where the coating has failed to bend to the 
substrate. The cure is to strip and recoat after a thorough cleaning cycle. 

15, ASSEMBLY OF SURFACE MOUNTED COMPONENTS (SMC) 
15.1 Adhesives 

15.1.1 Surface mounted leadless or surface mounted leaded devices 
including chip components, cylindrical tubular leadless, active devices and 
particular type of transistors require adhesive attachment to their mount- 
ing board at the automatic assembly stage. 

Ready mixed one part adhesives cured by ultra violet light and hot 
air ( 150°G ) are typical of the automatically applied fixatives used in 
automatic component placement ( AGP ) equipment. Dispensing is set 
according to component weight and may be typically from 0"3 mg to I'O 
mg per component. 

15.1.2 Different body shapes, such as chip capacitors require the 
adhesive dot to be able to reach the component body but not spill over 
onto the mounting lands when squashed by the component ( see Fig. 4 ). 
The minimum diameter of the adhesive dot is therefore a function of the 
design space between lands ( Di ), the tolerance on dot position around 
the ideal centreline between the lands ( t^ ) and the maximum positive 
tolerance (t^) on land position ( see Fig. 5 ). 

26 



Is : 12071 - 1987 



«1 



^"'" 



D 



OZZZL 



t 



tri ,,^/mn 



SO IC 



CHIP 



SOT 



■■.iWtiaM.kmi.Tiia^ -tifc^'^^g' J^^i— wr^tit ^\. miiniir. 



Condition for adequate dot height rf, + 1/3 < H. This must be considered for all 
component types. 'SOT' devices have greater rf, than chip components 'SO' mini 
'IC packages have base and leads co-planar. 

Fig. 4 Dot Height 




DMax = /i - 2^1 - iit 
Fig. 5 Maximum Diameter of Dot 

15.1.3 Excess adhesive may be removed by alcohol and acetone solvents 
however if conventional components are mounted on the same board or 
plastic moulded devices, such as connectors, then suitability to these 
solvents should be checked. 



27 



IS ! 12071 . 1989 

15.2 Flatness 

15.2.1 Due to the limitations of the leadless component in terms of 
mounting flexibility at the solder joint, the flatness of the printed board is 
very important. All types of components may be affected by bow and twist 
during equipment life but at the AGP stage the board flatness must be 
maintained between certain limits. Fig. 6 gives recommended flatness limits 
for unassembled boards for ACP. 



PLACEME^T DIRECTION 




0-OS 



m m max . 



(O-OOISmm/mni! 



(0003E mm/mm) 
6A 




6B 



Note — Where double-sided placement is planned the flatness figure must not 
exceed that shown in Fig. 6B for both directions of bow. 

Fig. 6 Board Flatness Rei^uirements for AGP 

15.3 Soldering 

15.3.1 Soldering of leadless components will be either by vapour- phase 
( condensation ) heating, conductive hot plate, hot gas or conventional 
wave soldering. 

15.3.2 With the exception of wave soldering, all methods depend on 
adequte solder being present on the board at the joint interface. 

15.3.3 It is difficult to provide sufficient solder via solder cream alone. 
Solder is best applied by electroplating the board surface using a solder 
mask confining the deposition of 0-15 mm to 02 mm of tin-lead ( 60/40 ) 
to the component footprint lands. 

For increased stand off spacing, solder preforms may be used to pro- 
vide a larger volume of solder. 

15.4 Solder Pastes and Creams 

15.4.1 Solder creams must be oxide-free to prevent the formation of 
solder balls. Defective solder creams will divide into discrete balls when 
melted on a non-solderable surface. Good creams will form a single sphere. 
For screening, 80 mesh is recommended for emulsion thicknesses ranging 
from 1 mm to 2 mm using 30 to 35 percent cream formulations. 



28 



is : 12071 - 1987 

15.5 Drying of Solder Pastes or Creams 

15.5.1 It is important that all volatile solvents are driven out of the 
solder paste or cream prior to soldering. Rapid outgassing of solvents may 
move unattached components off the land pattern. 

15.5.2 The preferred method is oven-bake out at 50 to 75°C. Solder 
manufacturers will advise on the recommended preparation of their 
product. 

15.6 Reflow Soldering Methods 

15.6.1 The preferred method for reflow soldering leadless components 
to boards is vapour-phase or 'condensation' heating. Vapour-phase 
machines are basically vapour degreasers which employ the condensation 
of per-fluorinated hydrocarbon vapour as a heat transfer medium. 

15.6.2 The liquid is inert and typically may boil at 215°G which is a 
suitable temperature for common-tin lead solders. The heavy vapours help 
to exclude air and thus permit the use of mild fluxes. 

15.6.3 Other soldering methods include hot plate heating, which works 
well for single sided ceramic boards, and belt transport systems using 
either radiant or convection heating. 

15.7 Gleaning After Soldering 

15.7.1 Vapour phase soldering greatly reduces polymerisation and 
charring of flux resins. Gleaning in a vapour degreaser using an active 
solvent ( freon-alcohol azeotrope ) with solvent-spray or agitation is usually 
satisfactory. 



29 



iNtIrnAtIOMal SVStEM dP UNltS (SI UNITS) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s» 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W = iJ/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb == 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesia 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m2 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-i) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volts 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = 1 N/m« 



