*••••••••••*•••• 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13675-1 (1993) : Remote Operations in Text Communication 
for Information Processing Systems, Part 1: Model, Notation 
and Service Definition [LITD 14: Software and System 
Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



gy^/f/raa^^^:^^ 



S?St^ * I |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 



\\V^:5^< 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




ic 



A- 



A 




BLANK PAGE 



^<*i^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13675 ( Parti ) • 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 : 1989 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

REMOTE OPERATIONS IN TEXT COMrviUNICATlON 
FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS 

PART 1 MODEL, NOTATION AND SERVSCE DEFJNiTiON 



UDC 68r327-801 



©813 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MAWAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARQ 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1993 Price Group 12 



Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee, LTD 36 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/IEC 9072-1 : 1989 'Information processing 
systems — Text communication — Remote operations — Part 1 : Model, notation and service 
definition', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ), was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computer Systems and 
Interconnection Sectional Committee ( LTD 36 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecom- 
munication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard, certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to 
those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 



In this Indian Standard, the following 
respective place the following: 

International Standard 



international standards are referred to. Read in their 



ISO 7498 : 1984 Information processing 
systems — Open systems interconnec- 
tion — Basic reference model 

ISO 8649 : 1988 Information processing 
systems — Open systems interconnec- 
tion — Service definition for the associa- 
tion control service element 

ISO 8650: 1988 Information processing 
systems — Open systems mterconnec- 
tion — Protocol specification for the 
association control service element 

ISO 8822: 1988 Information processing 
systems — Open systems interconnec- 
tion — Connection oriented presentation 
service definition 

ISO/IEC 9066-1 : 1989 Information process- 
ing systems — Text communication — 
Reliable Xransiex — Part 1 : Model and 
service definition 

ISO/IEC 9066-2 : 1 989 Information process- 
ing systems — Text communication — 
Reliable transfer — Part 2 : Protocol 
specification 

ISO/I EC 9072-2 : 1 989 information process- 
ing systems — Text communication — 
Remote operations — Part 2 : Protocol 



Indian Standard 

IS 12373 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 Basic reference model 
of open systems interconnection for information 
processing systems, Part 1 ( Identical ) 

IS 13615 : 1993 Service definition for the associa- 
tion control service element in open systems 
interconnection for information processing 
systems ( Identical ) 

15 13706:1993 Protocol specification for the 
association control service element in open 
s\stems interoonnetion for information process- 
ing systems ( Identical ) 

Doc LTD 36. ( 1636 ) PI Connection oriented 

presentation service definition in open systems 

interconnection for information processing 

systems ( under preparation ) ( identical ) 

IS 13707 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 Reliable transfer in text 

for information processing 

Model and service defintion 



communication 
systems : Part 1 
( Identical ) 

IS 13707 ( Part 2) 
communication 
systems : Part 
( Identical ) 

IS 13675 ( Part 2 ) : 1993 Remote operations in 
texr communication for information processing 
systems : Part 2 Protocol specification 
( Identical ) 



: 1993 Reliable transfer in text 

for information processing 

2 Protocol specification 



specification 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following ISO Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in 
conjunction with this standard: 

ISO/TR 8509 : 1987 Information processing system — Open systems interconnection — 
Service conventions 

ISO 8824 ; 1987 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnection — Speci- 
fication of abstract syntax notation one ( ASN. 1 ) 

ISO 8825 : 1987 Information processing systems — Open systems interconnection — Speci- 
fication of basic encoding rules for abstract syntax notation one ( ASN. 1 ) 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting 
It in this standard. 



IS13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 : 1989 



Indian Standard 

REMOTE OPERATIONS IN TEXT COMMUNICATION 
FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS 

PART 1 MODEL NOTATION AND SERVICE DEFINITION 



1 Scope 

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines a Remote 
Operation (R0-) notation for defining the services 
provided to interactive applications. This part of 
ISO/IEC 9072 also defines the services provided 
by the Remote Operation Service Element (ROSE) 
services. The ROSE services are provided by the 
use of the ROSE protocol (part 2 of ISO/IEC 9072) 
in conjunction with the Association Control 
Service Element (ACSE) services (ISO 8649) and 
the ACSE protocol (ISO 8650), optionally the 
Reliable Transfer Service Element (RTSE) 
services (ISO/IEC 9066-i) and the RTSE protocol 
(ISO/IEC 9066-2), and the presentation-service 
(ISO 8822). 

No requirement is made for conformance to this 
part of ISO/I EC 9072. 

2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this part of ISO/IEC 9072. At the 
time of publication, the editions were valid. All 
Standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this part of ISO/IEC 9072 are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below. Members of ISO and I EC maintain 
Registers of currently valid International 
Standards, 

ISO 7498: 1984, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference 
Model. 

ISO/TR 8509: 1987, Information processing 
systems - Open Systems Interconnection = Service 
Conventions. 

ISO 8649: 1988, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Service definition 
for the Association Control Service Element. 



ISO 8650: 1988, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection • Protocol 
specification for the Association Control Service 
Element. 

ISO 8822: [988, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Connection 
oriented presentation service definition. 

ISO 8824: 1987, Information processing systems - 
Open System.'i Interconnection - Specification of 
Abstract Syntax isolation One (ASN.l). 

ISO 8825: 1987, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Specification of 
basic encoding rules for Abstract Syntax Notation 
One (ASN.l). 

ISO/IEC 9066-1: 1989, Information processing 
systems - Text communication - Reliable Transfer 
• Part 1: Model and service definition. 

ISO/IEC 9066^2: 1989, Information processing 
systems - Text communication - Reliable Transfer 
- Part 2: Protocol specification. 

ISO/IEC 9072-2: 1989, Information processing 
systems - Text communication - Remote 
Operations - Part 2 Protocol specification. 

3 Definitions 

3.1 Reference Model definitions 

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 is based on the concepts 
developed in ISO 7498 and makes use of the 
following terms defined in it; 

a) Application Layer; 

b) application-process; 

c) application-entity, 

d) application-service-element; 

e) application-protocol-data-unit; 

f) application-protocol-control-information; 

g) Presentation Layer; 



IS1367S<Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 : 1989 



h) presentation-service; 

i) presentation-connection; 

'^ j) session-service; 

k) session-connection 

1) transfer syntax; and 

m) user-element. 

3.8 Service conventions definitions 

ThU part of ISO/IEC 9072 makes use of the 
following terms defined in ISO/TR 8509: 

a) service-provider; 

b) service-user; 

c) confirmed service; 

d) non-confirmed service; 

e) provider-initiated service; 

f) service-primitive; primitive; 

g) request (primitive); 
h) indication (primitive); 

iV response (primitive); and 
j) confirm (primitive), 

34 Presentation service definitions 

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 makes use of the 
following terms defined in ISO 8822: 

a) abdtyract syntax; . 

b) abstract syntax name; 
c> transfer syntax name; 
«l) presentation context. 

3.4 Association control definitions 

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 makes use of the 
following terms defined in ISO 8649: 

a) application-association; association, 

b) application context; 

c) Association Control Service Element. 



3.5 Reliable Transfer definitions 

This part of ISC)/IEC 9072 makes use of the 
following terms defined in ISO/IEC 9066-1: 

a) Reliable Transfer Service Element. 

3.6 ROSE definitions 

For the purpose of this part of ISO/IEC 9072 the 
following definitions apply: 

3.6.1 associatio n -initiating- application - 
entity; association-initiator: The application- 
entity that initiates the application-association. 

3.6.2 association-responding-application- 
entity; association-responden The application - 
entity that responds to the initiation of an 
application-association by another AE. 

3.6.3 invoking-appUcation-entity; invoker: 

The application-entity that invokes the Remote 
Operation. 

3.6.4 performing-application -entity; 
performer: The application-entity that performs 
a Remote Operation invoked by the other 
application-entity. 

3.6.5 requestor: The part of an application- 
entity that issues a request primitive for a 
particular ROSE service. 

3.6.6 acceptor: The part of an application- 
entity that receives the indication primitive for a 
particular ROSE service. 

3.6.7 linked-operations: A set of operations 
formed by one parent-operation and one or more 

child-operations. 

3.6.8 parent-operation: An operation during 
the execution of which the performer may invoke 
linked child-operations to be performed by the 
invoker of the parent-operation. 

3.6.9 child-operation: An operation which 
might be invoked by the performer of the linked 
parent-operation during the execution of the 
parent-operation, and which is performed by the 
invoker of the parent-operation. 



IS 13675 (Parti): 1993 
iSO/lEC 9072-1 :1989 



3.6.10 Remote Operations: 

(1) A concept and notation supporting the 
specification of interactive communication 
between application-entities. This includes the 
Remote Operation Service Element and the 
mapping of the notation onto the service 
primitives of used application-service-elements. 

(2) The set of bind-operations, unbind-operations 
and operations. 

3.6. tl RO-notation: The notation used for the 
specification of Remote Operations, defined in this 
part of ISO/IEC 9072. 

3.6.12 ACSE-user: The application-specific 
function that performs the mapping of the bind- 
operation and unbind-operation of the RO- 
notation onto ACSE, 

3.6.13 Remote Operation Service Element: 

The application-service-element defined in this 
part of ISO/IEC 9072. 

3.6.14 ROSE-provider: The provider of the 
Remote Operations Service Element services. 

3.6.13 ROSE-user: The application-specific 
function that performs the mapping of the 
operations and errors of the RO-notation onto 
ROSE. 

3.6.16 RTSE-user: The application specific 
function that performs the mapping of the bind- 
operation and unbind-operation of the RO- 
notation onto RTSE 

3.6.17 operation-interface: The interface 
within an application entity between the user 
element and the application service elements, 
defined as a set of application service element 



services (Remote Operations) available to the user 
element in RO-notation. 

4 Abbreviations 



AE 




application-entity 


ACSE 




Association Control Service 
Element 


ASE 




appiication-service-element 


APDU 




application-protocol-data-unit 


OSI 




Open Systems Interconnection 


RO (or ROS) 


Remote Operations 


ROSE 




Remote Operations Service 
Element 


RT (or 


RTS) 


Reliable Transfer 


RTSE 




Reliable Transfer Service Element 


5 ' 


Conventions 



This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines services for the 
ROSE following the descriptive conventions 
defined in ISO/TR 8509. In clause 10, the 
definition of each ROSE service includes a table 
that lists the parameters of its primitives. For a 
given primitive, the presence of each parameter is 
described by one of the following values. 



blank 


not applicable 


M 


mandatory 


U 


user option 


C 


conditional 



o 



presence is an ROSE service-provider 
option 



In addition, the notation ( = ) indicates that a 
parameter value is semantically equal to the 
value to its left in the table. 



IS13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



6 Remote Operations Model 

In the OSI environment, communication between 
application processes is represented in terms of 
communication between a pair of application 
entities (AEs) using the presentation service. 
Communication between some application- 
entities are inherently interactive. Typically, one 
entity requests that a particular operation be 
performed; the other entity attempts to perform 
the operation and then reports the outcome of the 
attempt. This clause introduces the concept of 
Remote Operations as a vehicle for supporting 
interactive applications. 

The generic structure of an operation is an 
elementary request/reply interaction. Operations 
are carried out within the context of an 
application-association. 

Figure 1 models this view. 

Operations invoked by one AE (the invoker) are 
performed by the other AE (the performer). 
Operations may be classified according to -.nether 
the performer of an operation is expected to report 
its outcome: 

in case of success or failure (a result reply 
is returned if the operation is successful, 
an error reply is returned if the operation 
is unsuccessful); 

in case of failure only (no reply is returned 
if the operation is successful, an error 
reply is returned if the operation is 
unsuccessful); 

in case of success only (a result reply is 
returned if the operation is successful, no 



reply is returned if the operation is 
unsuccessful); 

or not at all (neither a result nor an error 
reply is returned, whether the operation 
was successful or not). 

Operations may also be classified according to two 
possible operation modes: synchronous, in which 
the invoker requires a reply from the performer 
before invoking another operation; and 
asynchronous, in which the invoker may continue 
to invoke further operations without awaiting a 
reply. 

The following Operation Classes are defined: 

Operation Class 1: Synchronous, reporting 
success or failure (result or error). 

Operation Class 2: Asynchronous, reporting 
success or failure (result or error). 

Operation Class 3: Asynchronous, reporting 
failure (error) only, if any. 

Operation Class 4: Asynchronous, reporting 
success (result) only 

Operation Class 5: Asynchronous, outcome 
not reported. 

The Operation Class of each operation has to be 
agreed between application entities (eg in an 
Application Protocol International Standard). 

In some cases it is useful to group operations into 
a set of linked-operations which is formed by one 
parent-operation and one or more child 
operations. The performer of the parent operation 
may invoke none, one, or more child-operations 



application-association 



request 




reply 



Figure 1 - Remote Operations Model 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
IS0/1EC 9072-1 :198 



during the execution of the parent-operation. The 
invoker of the parent-operation is the performer of 
the child-operations. A child-operation may be a 
parent-operation of another set of iinked- 
operations in a recursive manner. Figure 2 models 
this concept. 

An application-association defines the 
relationship between a pair of AEs, and is formed 
by the exchange of application-protocol-control- 
information through the use of presentation- 
services. The AE that initiates an application- 
association is called the association-initiating AE, 
or the association- initiator, while the AE that 
responds to the initiation of an application- 
association by another AE is called the 
association-responding AE, or the association- 
responder. Only the association-initiating AE 
may release an established application- 
association. 

Application-associations are classified by which 
application-entity is allowed to invoke operations: 

Association Cla.SvS 1: Only the association- 
initiating application entity can invoke 
operations. 

Association Class 2- Only the association- 
responding application entity can invoke 
operations. 

Association Class 3: Both the association- 
initiating and the association-responding 
application entities can invoke operations. 



Linked-operations require Association Class S. 

The Association Class has to be agreed between 
application-entities (e.g. in an Application 
Protocol International Standard). 

The functionality of an AE is factored into one 
user-element and a set of application-service- 
elements (ASEs). Each ASE may itself be factored 
into a set of (more primitive) ASEs. The 
interaction between AEs is described in terms of 
their use of ASEs. 

The specific combination of a user-element and 
the set of ASEs which comprise an AE defines the 
application-context. 

Figure 3 illustrates an example of an 
application-context involving the Remote 
Operations Service Element (ROSE). Note that 
this figure^s not meant to imply that the 
application fs "symmetric. Interactive applications 
are often inherently asymmetric, that is, either 
one or both AEs may be permitted to invoke 
operations, and the operations that either AE may 
invoke may be different. The rules governing 
which AE may invoke operations, and which 
operations an AE may invoke, is defined using the 
RO-notation in an Application Protocol 
International Standard, and determines the 
application-context. 

The set of ASEs available to the user element of 
the AE at the operation-interface is defined using 



r 
I 



application-association 



AE 



-^ 



performer of linked 
child-operations 



mvocation oi 






parent-operation 




AE 


invocation of 




execution of 
*" parent- 


chiid-operation 


• 1 




• 1 


operation 


invocation of 






child-operation 


IJ 




performer of 




parent-operation 



Figure 2 - Linked-operations 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :198 



the Remote Operations (R0-) notation. The RO- 
notation is based on the macro concept defined in 
ISO 8824. The complexity of a particular set of 
ASEs is dependent upon the needs of the 
application, and is not limited by the Remote 
Operations concept. 

An important characteristic of Remote Operations 
is that they provide applications with 
independence from OSI communication services. 
Since the notation is based on established object- 
oriented programming principles, automatic tools 
can be developed to bind Remote Operations into 
the execution environment of applications. 

The ASEs available to the user-element require 
communication over an application-association. 
The control of that application-association 
(establishment, release, abort) is performed either 
by the Association Control Service Element 
(ACSE) defined in ISO 8649, or the Reliable 
Transfer Service Element defined in ISO/IEC 
9066-1 and the Association Control Service 
Element (ACSE). Communication over the 
application-association is performed by the 



Remote Operations Service Element (ROSE) 
defined in this part of ISO/IEC 9072. 

An application-specific function performs the 
mapping of the operations available to the 
user-element onto either the ACSE services, or 
the RTSE services; and the ROSE services. The 
mapping is defined in this part of ISO/IEC 9072. 
The function that performs the mapping of the 
operations onto the ACSE services, or the RTSE 
services, and the ROSE services is said to be the 
user of ACSE, RTSE and ROSE, or the ACSE- 
user, the RTSE-user, and the ROSE-user. 

If the RTSE is included in the 
application-context, the mapping function is an 
RTSE-user and a ROSE-user, the ROSE is an 
RTSE-user, the RTSE is an ACSE-user and a 
presentation service-user, and the ACSE is a 
presentation service-user. 

If the RTSE is excluded from the 
application-context, the mapping function is an 
ACSE-user and a ROSE-user, the ROSE is a 
presentation service-user, and the ACSE is a 
presentation service-user. 



Application 
Layer 



operation-interface 



(defined as a set of 

ASEs using the 

RO-notation) 



application-entity 



user-element 



X 



application-service-eleraent 

and mapping onto ROSE, 

and eventually onto 

ACSE or RTSE 



ACSE 


r- —————— 1 

i RTSE 
I optional 




ROSE 



Application Protocol 

over 

application-association 



application-entity 



user-element 



-L 



application-service-element 

and mapping onto ROSE, 

and eventually onto 

ACSE or RTSE 



ACSE 


r — — — —1 

i RTSE i 
1 optional I 
>.___—— — — J 


ROSE 



Presentation 
Layer 



presentation-connection 



Figure 3 - Model of an application context Involving Renoto Operations 



cn CO 
9-* 

ii 
s 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC9072-1:198 



7 Overview of notation and service 

7.1 Notation Overview 

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines the RO-notation 
for the specification of an application-context and 
the related abstract syntax component of the 
presentation context. 

The functionality of an application-context is 
provided to the user-element by means of Remote 
Operations and errors which form the 
operation-interface. 

The following types of Remote Operations form an 
operation interface: 

a bind-operation to establish an 
application-association; 

a set of operations and, for each 
operation, a list of error (negative 
reply) situations; 

an unbind-operation to release an 
application-association 

The abstract syntax notation of ISO 8824 is used 
for the definition of the following macros: 

a) BLXD; 

b) UNBIND; 

c) OPERATION; and 

d) ERROR. 

These macros provide both a type notation and a 
value notation for Remote Operations and errors 

The type notation of the BIND macro enables the 
specification of a bind-operation type and the 
types for user data values (if any) to be exchanged 
in the establishment phase of an application- 
association. The value notation of the BIND 
macro enables the specification of user data 
values (if any) to be exchanged in the 
establishment phase of an application association. 
The type notation of the UNBIND macro enables 
the specification of an unbind-operation type and 
types for user data values (if any) to be exchanged 
in the release phase of an application-association. 
The value notation of the UNBIND macro enables 
the specification of user data values (if any) to be 
exchanged in the release phase of an application- 
association. 



The type notation of the OPERATION macro 
enables the specification of an operation and user 
data types to be exchanged for a request and a 
positive reply. In addition , the type notation 
enables the specification of a list of valid negative 
reply situations. If the operation is a parent- 
operation, the type notation enables the 
specification of the list of linked child-operations. 
The value notation of the OPERATION macro 
enables the specification of the identifier of an 
operation. 

The type notation of the ERROR macro enables 
the specification of user data types to be 
exchanged in a negative reply situation. The 
value notation of the ERROR macro enables the 
specification of the identifier of an error. 

Additional macros supporting the notation for the 
specification of application-service-elements and 
application contexts are defined in annex A. 

7.2 Service overview 

This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines the following 
ROSE services: 

a) RO INVOKE 

b) RO- RESULT 

c) RO-ERROR 

d) RO-REJECT-U 

e) RO-REJECTP 

The RO-IN VOKE service enables an invoking AE 
to request an operation to be performed by the 
performing AE. 

The RO-RESULT service enables the performing 
AE to return the positive reply of a successfully 
performed operation to the invoking AE. 

The RO-ERROR service enables the performing 
AE to return the negative reply of an 
unsuccessfully performed operation to the 
invoking AE. 

The RO-REJECT-U service enables one AE to 
reject the request or reply of the other AE if the 
ROSE-user has detected a problem. 

The RO-REJECT-P service enables the ROSE- 
user to be informed about a problem detected by 
the ROSE-provider. 



IS 13675 (Parti ): 1993 
ISO/IEC 907^-1 :198 



7.3 Mapping of notation on to services 

Note that the function that performs the mapping 
of the OPERATION macros and ERROR macros of 
the RO-notation onto ROSE services is said to be 
the ROSE-user. While the function that performs 
the mapping of the BIND and UNBIND macros of 
the RO-notation onto ACSE services or RTSE 
services respectively is said to be the ACSE-user 
or RTSE-user respectively. 

The specification of the mapping of the RO- 
notation onto the used services of ACSE, RTSE, 
and ROSE is given in clause 11. Therefore 
International Standards using the RO-notation 
for the protocol specification need not to specify 
the mapping onto these used services. 

8 Relationship with other ASEs 
and lower layer services 

8.1 Other applicatiort-service-elements 

The ROSE is intended to be used with other ASEs 
in order to support specific interactive 
information processing tasks. Therefore it is 
expected that the ROSE will be included in a large 
number of application-context specifications. 

The collection of the ROSE and other ASEs 
included in an application context are required to 
use the facilities of the presentation-service in a 
co-ordinated manner among themselves. 

The ROSE requires an existing application- 
association controlled by ACSE. 

For some application context specifications a 
Reliable Transfer Service Element (RTSE) is 
included. 

An ROSE-user protocol specification uses the RO 
notation. It defines one or more abstract syntaxes 
and provides unique abstract syntax names of 
type object identifier for each abstract syntax. 

If a named abstract syntax specifies operations 
and errors, the ROSE APDUs defined in ISO/IEC 
9072-2 are included in that named abstract 



syntax. If multiple named abstract syntaxes are 
defined for operations and errors, the ROSE 
APDUs are included in each named abstract 

syntax. 

If a named abstract syntax specifies a bind- 
operation, the APDUs specified by the value 
notation of the BIND macro are included in that 
named abstract syntax, if the RTSE is included in 
the application context, the APDUs for the bind- 
operation share a single named abstract syntax 
with the RTSE APDUs defined in ISO/IEC 9066-2. 

If a named abstract syntax specifies an unbind- 
operation, the APDUs specified by the value 
notation of the UNBIND macro are included in 
that named abstract syntax. 

The APDUs resulting from the specification of a 
bind-operation, an unbind-operation, operations 
and errors and the RTSE APDUs may share a 
single named abstract syntax. 

8.2 Presentation-service 

If an application context including RTSE and 
ROSE is defined, ROSE services do not use the 
presentation-service. 

If an application context including ROSE but 
e.xcluding RTSE is defined, the ROSE services 
require access to the P-DATA service and require 
the use of the duplex functional unit of the 
presentation-service. The ROSE services neither 
use, nor constrain the use of, any other 
presentation service. 

A named abstract syntax associated with a 
compatible transfer syntax (negotiated by the 
Presentation Layer) constitutes a presentation 
context. 

The object identifier value {joint-i$o-ccitt35r.i{l) basic- 
erKoding{l)) specified in ISO 8825 may be used as a 
transfer syntax name. In this case the ROSE-user 
protocol specification need not to name and specify 
a transfer syntax. 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
^SO/IEC 9072-1 :198 



9 Remote Operations notation 

9.1 General 

The notation used in this part of ISO/IEC 9072 is 
defined as follows: 

the data syntax notation and macro 
notation are defined in ISO 8824; 

the Remote Operation macros are defined 
in 9.2 of this part of ISO/IEC 9072. 

A bind-operation deflnes where an object binding 
(establishment of an application-association) 
begins. If such a binding is established, operations 
may be invoked. An unbind-operation defines 
where an object binding is released. 

An interactive protocol is specified using the 
Remote Operation and error data types. This 
clause defines those types. It also explains the 
notational definitions of a particular Remote 
Operation, and of the particular errors it can 
report. The notation is defined by means of the 
macro facility defined in ISO 8824. This macro 
definition allows a generalized specification of the 
mapping onto various execution environments. 

The macros enabling the specification of bind 
operations, unbind-operations, operations and 
errors are listed in figure 4. 

9.2 Specification of bind-operations 

A single data value, the argument of the bind- 
operation, may accompany the request to 
establish the application-association. Some bind- 
operations report their outcome, whether success 
(i.e the normal outcome) or failure (i.e. the 
exceptional outcome). Other bind-operations 
report their outcome only if they fail, and still 
others never at all. A single data value, the result 
of the bind-operation, may accompany the positive 
response. A single data value, the bind-error of 
the bind-operation, may accompany the negative 
response. 

The notation for a bind-operation type is the 
keyword bind, optionally followed by the keyword 
ARGUMENT and the type of the bind-operation's 
argument, the reference name optionally assigned 
to it, and the nature of the operation's outcome 
reporting (if any). If the bind-operation reports 
success, the keyword result and the type- of its 
result and the reference name optionally assigned 



to it are specified. If the bind-operation reports 
failure, the keyword bind-errOR and the type of the 
error-information it reports and the reference 
name optionally assigned to it are specified. 

The value notation for a bind-operation is either 
an argument value, or a result value or an error 
value. The value notation for an argument value 
(if any) is the key word argument followed by a 
value of the argument type. The value notation for 
a result value (if any) is the key work result 
followed by a value of the result type. The value 
notation for an error value (if any) is the key word 
ERROR followed by a value of the error type. 

9.3 Specification of unbind-operations 

A single data value, the argument of the unbind- 
operation, may accompany the request to release 
the application-association. Some unbind- 
operations report their outcome, whether success 
(i.e the normal outcome) or failure (i.e. the 
exceptional outcome). Other unbind-operations 
report their outcome only if they fail, and still 
others never at all. A single data value, the result 
of the unbind-operation, or a single data value, 
the unbind-error of the unbind-operation, may 
accompany the response. 

The notation for an unbind-operation type is the 
keyword unbind, optionally followed by the 
keyword argument and the type of the unbind- 
operation's argument, the reference name 
optionally assigned to it, "and the nature of the 
unbind-operation's outcome reporting (if any). If 
the unbind-operation reports success, the 
keyword RESULT and the type of its result and the 
reference name optionally assigned to it are 
specified. If the Unbind-operation reports failure, 
the keyword unbind-error and the type of the 
error-information it reports and the, reference 
name optionally assigned to it are specified. 

The value notation for an unbind-operation i<; 
either an argument value, or a result value or an 
error value. The value notation for an argument 
value (if any) is the keyword argument followed by 
a value of the argument type. The value notation 
for a result value (if any) is the keyword RESULT 
followed by a value of the result type. The value 
notation for an error value (if any) is the keyword 
ERROR followed by a value of the error type. 



10 



IS13675( Parti): 1993 
ISO/lEC 9072-1 :1989 



Remote-Operation-Notation { joint-iso-ccitt remote-op€rations(4) notation (0) ) 

DEFINITIONS ::s 

BEGIN 

EXPORTS BIND, UNBIND, OPERATION, ERROR; 

-- macro definition for bind-operations 

BIND MACRO ::- 
BEGIN 

TYPE NOTATION : : - Argument Result Error 

VALUE NOTATION : : - Argument-value 1 Result-value ] Error-value 

Argument ::« empty | "ARGUMENT" Name type (Argument-type) 

-- Expects any AS^.l type and assigns it to the variable Argument 

"type 
Result ::= empty | "RESULT " Name type (ResuK-type) 

-- Expects any ASX 1 type and assigns it to the uariable Result-type 
Error :: «= empty j "BIND-ERROR" Name type (Error-type) 

" Expects any ASS. I type and assigns it to the uariable Error-type 
Name ::= empty j identifier 

Argument-value ;;* empty j "ARGUMENT" value (Arg-value Argument-type) 

-•Expects a value for the type in Argument-type, and assigns it to the 

-- variable Arg-value 

<VALUE 116] EXPLICIT Argument-type :: = Arg-value> 

-- Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type 
Result-value ::- empty | "RESULT" value (Res-value Result type) 

-- Expects a value for the type in Result-type and assigns it to the 

-' variable Res-value 

< VALUE 117] EXPLICIT Result-type ::= Res value > 

-- Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type 

Error-value ::= empty | "ERROR" value (Err-value Error-type) 

-- Expects a value for the type in Error -type, and assigns it to the 

-' uariable Err-value 

<VALUEI18] EXPLICIT Error-type :: = Err-value> 

-- Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type 
END 

•' Remote Operations Notation continued 

Figure 4 (Part 1 of 3) - Formal definition of Remote Operations data types 



11 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 : 198 



-- Remote Operations Notation continued 
-- macro dtefinitionfor unbind-operations 

UNBIND MACRO :: = 

BEGIN 

TYPE NOTATION : : = Argument Result Errors 

VALUE NOTATION : : = Argument- value ( Result-value | Error-value 

Argument : : = empty] "ARGUMENT" Name type (Argument -type) 

-- Expects any ASN.l type and assigns it to the variable Argument- 

- type 
Result : : = empty j "RESULT" Name type (Result -type) 

" Expects any ASN .1 type and assigns it to the variable Result-type 
Error :: = empty j"UNBIND-ERROR" Name type (Error-type) 

-- Expects any ASN.l type and assigns it to the variable Error -type 
Name ::^ empty | identifier 

Argument-value ::= empty | "ARGUMENT" value (Arg-value Argument-type) 

--Expects a value for the type in Argument-type, and assigns it to the 

-- variable Arg-value 

<VALUE [19] EXPLICIT Argument type ::= Arg-value > 

-- Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type 
Result-value :: = empty 1 "RESULT" value (Res-value Result-type) 

-- Expects a value for the type in Result -type and assigns it to the 

-- variable Res-value 

< VALUE [201 EXPLICIT Result-type :: = Res-value > 

-- Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type 
Error-value ::= empty i "ERROR" value (Err-value Error-type) 

-- Expects a value for the type in Error -type, and assigns it to the 

" variable Err-value 

•< VALUE 121] EXPLICIT Error-type :: = Err-value > 

-- Returns the final value as explicitly tagged type 

END 

-- Remote Operations Notation continued 

Figure 4 (Part 2 of 3) - Formal definition of Remote Operations data types 



12 



IS13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



9.4 Specification of operations 

A data value of type operation represents the 
identifier for an operation that a ROSE -user in 
or>e open system may request to be performed by a 
peer ROSE-user in another open system. A single 
data value, the argument of the operation, may 
accompany the request. Some operations report 
their outcome, whether success (ie the normal 
outcome) or failure (i.e. the exceptional outcome). 
Other operations report their outcome only if they 
fail, and still others never at all. A single data 
value, the result of the operation, accompanies a 
report of success; a report of failure identifies the 
exceptional condition that was encountered. 

The notation for an operation type is the keyword 
OPERATION, optionally followed by the keyword 
ARGUMENT and the type of the operation's 
argument, the reference name optionally assigned 
to it, and the nature of the operation's outcome 
reporting (if any). If the operation reports success, 
the keyword RESULT and optionally the type of its 
result and the reference name optionally assigned 
to it are specified. If the operation reports failure, 
the keyword errors and the reference names of 
the error values or error types it reports are 
specified. If the operation is the parent-operation 
of a set of linked-operations, the keyword linked- 
OPERATIONS and the reference names of the linked 
child-operation values or child-operation types are 
specified. The reference to error values or child- 
operation values is preferred, however the 
references to types shall be used if the values are 
defined elsewhere (see 9.6). 

The notation for an operation value is the 
operation's identifier. If a locally unique identifier 
(local value) is sufficient, the identifier is of type 
INTEGER. If a globally unique identifier (global 
value) is required to allow the unique 
identification of operations used in several 
abstract syntaxes, the identifier is of type object 

IDENTIFIER 

Child-Operations and errors referenced by a 
specific operation shall share a single named 
abstract syntax (see 8.1) with that operation, if 
the child-operations or errors are identified by 



local values. The use of global values is not 
restricted. 

9.5 Specification of errors 

A data value of type error represents the identifier 
for an exception condition that a ROSE-user in 
one open system may report to a peer ROSE-user 
in another open system, where the exception 
condition is reporting an exceptional outcome of a 
previously requested operation. A single data 
value, the parameter of the error, may accompany 
the report. 

The notation for an error type is the keyword 
ERROR, optionally followed by the keyword 
PARAMETER and the type of the error's parameter 
and the reference name optionally assigned to it. 

The notation for an error value is the error's 
identifier. If a locally unique identifier (local 
value) is sufficient, the identifier is of type integer. 
If a globally unique identifier (global value) is 
required to allow the unique identification of 
errors used in several abstract syntaxes, the 
identifier is of type object identifier. 

9.6 Export and import of operations and 
errors 

Operation values and error values have to be 
unique within a named abstract syntax. If 
operations and errors are specified in several 
ASNM modules and are imported to a module 
specifying a specific named abstract syntax, one of 
the following rules apply: 

a) If local values are used and exported, it is 
in the responsibility of the designer of the 
importing module to ensure uniqueness. 

b) A module may specify and export 
operation types and error types. The 
operation values and error values are 
assigned in the module importing the 
types. A single value shall be assigned for 
each operation type or error type. 

c) If global values are assigned and exported, 
uniqueness is ensured. 

However different named abstract syntaxes might 
be used for conflicting local values. 



13 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
!SO/!EC 9072-1 : 198 



-- Remote operations 
- macro definition for 


Notation continued 
operations 


OPERATION MACRO ::» 

BEGIN 

TYPE NOTATION 

VALUE NOTATION 


:: s Argument Result Errors LinkedOperations 
:: a value (VALUE CHOICE{ 

locaivalue INTEGER. 

gtobafValue OBJECT IDENTIFIER)) 


Argument 


: : « "ARGUMENT" NamedType j empty 


RdC'jit 


:■= "BESULT''Ra«ultType! empty 


ResultType 


: : =s NamedType | empty 


Errors 


;:s "ERRORS" "{" ErrorNames ")'* [empty 


liokedOp«^rations 


::a "LINKED" "{" LmkedOperationNames ")" j empty 


ErrorNames 


::= ErrorList I empty 


ErrorList 


;: a Error | ErrorList "," Error 


Error 


:; = value ( ERROR ) -- shall reference an error value 

1 type -- shall reference an error type if no error value is specified 


LinkedOperationNames 


: : a OperationList | em pty 


OperatiortLJst 


: : K Operation | OperationList "," Operation 


Operation 


: : s value { OPERA T!ON ) = - shall reference an operation value 

1 type -- shall reference an operation type if no operation value is 
-• specified 


NamddType 


: : = identifier type [ type 


END 




— macro definition for 


operations errors 


ERROR MACRO :: = 

BEGIN 

TYPE NOTATION 

VALUE NOTATION 


::= Parameter 

:: * value (VALUE CHOICE ( 

iocaivaiue INTEGER, 
globatValue OBJECT IDENTIFIER}) 


Parameter 


: : s "PARAMETER " NamedType 1 empty 


NamedType 


:: s identifier type j type 


END 




END - - end of Remote Gperations Notation 



Figure 4 (Part 3 of 3) - Formal definition of Remote Operations data types 



14 



IS 13675 (Parti): 1993 
ISO/IEC9072-1:1989 



10 Service definition 

The ROSE services are listed in table 1. 

Table 1 - ROSE services 



Service 


Type 


RO-INVOKE 

RO-RESULT 

RO-ERROR 

RO-REJECT-U 

RO-REJECT-P 


Non-confirmed 
Non-confirmed 
Non-confirmed 
Non-confirmed 
Provider-initiated 



Identification of the named abstract syntax in use 
is assumed for all ROSE services, however this is 
a local matter and outside the scope of this part of 
ISO/IEC 9072. 

10.1 ROINVOKE service 

The RO-INVOKE service is used by one ROSE- 
user (the invoker) to cause the invocation of an 
operation to be performed by the other ROSE-user 
(the performer). This service is an non-confirmed 
service. 

The related service structure consists of two 
service-primitives, as illustrated in figure 5. 



ROSE-user 

RO-INVOKE 

request 



ROSE- 
provider 



ROSE-user 



RO-INVOKE 

indication 



Figure 5 - RO-INVOKE service-primitives 

10.1.1 RO-INVOKE parameters 

Table 2 lists the RO-INVOKE service parameters. 

10.1.1.1 Operation -value 



This parameter is the identifier of the operation to 
be invoked. The value has to be agreed between 
the ROSE-users. This parameter has to be 
supplied by the requestor of the service. 



Table 2 - RO-INVOKE parameters 



Parameter name 


Req 


Ind 


Operation-value 

Operation-class 

Argument 

Invoke-ID 

Linked-ID 

Priority 


M 
U 
U 
M 

U 

u 


M(-) 
C( = ) 

M(=:) 

C(-) 



10.1.1.2 Operation-class 

This parameter defines whether a synchronous or 
an asynchronous reply is expected and the nature 
of the expected reply, i.e. result and/or error or 
none (see clause 6). This parameter has to be 
supplied by the requestor of the service. This 
parameter is used solely to optimize the turn 
management (see 8.1.1 of part 2 of ISO/IEC 9072). 

10.1.1.3 Argument 

This parameter is the argument of the invoked 
operation. The type has to be agreed between the 
ROSE-users. This parameter has to be supplied by 
the requestor of the service. 

10.1.1.4 Invoke-ID 

This parameter identifies the request of a RO- 
INVOKE service and is used to correlate this 
request with the corresponding replies (RO- 
RESULT, RO-ERROR, RO-REJECT-U, and RO- 
REJECT-P services) or the invocation of linked 
child-operations (RO-INVOKE). This parameter 
has to be supplied by the requestor of the service 

This parameter distinguishes several requests of 
the service the requestor may have in progress 
(asynchronous operations). The requestor may 
begin to reuse Invoke-ID values whenever it 
chooses, subject to the constraint that it may not 
reuse an Invoke-ID value that wp.s previously 
assigned to a request of the service for which it 
expects, but has not yet received, a reply or the 
invocation of a linked child-operation. 



15 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :198 



The ROSE-user to which an RO-INVOKE 

indication is issued, assumes that an Invoke- ID 
value violating the above rule is a duplicate; and 
therefore, it does not perform the invoked 
operation. Instead, it rejects the duplicate 
invocation. 

If Operation Classes 3, 4 or 5 are used, the 
requestor of this service may reuse an Invoke-ID 
value after a reasonably long period of time, or if 
the reply is carried by other means (e.g. result of a 
have-you-finished operation). 

In some application contexts peer ROSE-users 
may communicate Invoke-ID values. To support 
this the type of the Invoke-ID parameter is 
exported by the module defining the abstract 
syntax of Remote Operations in clause 9 of part 2 
ofISO/IEC9072 

10.1.1.5 Linked-ID 

If this parameter is present, the invoked operation 
is a child-operation and the parameter identifies 
the invocation of the linked parent-operation. 
This parameter has to be supplied by the 
requestor of the service. The value is that of the 
invoke-ID parameter of the RO-INVOKE 
indication primitive of the parent-operation. 

10.1.1.6 Priority 

Th!s parameter defines the priority assigned to 
the transfer of the corresponding APDU with 
respect to the other APDUs to be exchanged 
between the AEs. The lower the value, the higher 
the priority. If several APDUs with the same 
priority are awaiting transfer, they are 
transferred "first in, first out" 



10.2 RO-RESULT service 

The RO-RESULT service is used by a ROSE-user 
to reply to a previous RO-INVOKE indication in 
the case of a successfully performed operation. 
This service is an non-confirmed service. 

The related service structure consists of two 
service-primitives, as illustrated in figure 6. 



ROSE user 

RO-RESULT 
request 



ROSE 
provider 



ROSE-user 



RO RESULT 
indication 



Figure 6 - RO-RESULT service primitives 

10.2.1 RO-RESULT parameters 

Table 3 lists the RO-RESULT service parameters. 

Table 3 - RO-RESULT parameters 



Parameter name 


Req 


Ind 


Operation- value 
Result 
Invoke ID 
Priority 


U 
U 
M 

U 


M( = ) 



NOTES 



The Priority parameter has an effect in the case of a two- 
way alternate association in that it prioritizes the sending 
of APDUs, and may be used to determine when to request 
the Turn to send APDUs. The Priority parameter may 
also have a local effect in the case of a two-way 
simultaneous association. 

The Priority of a reply (RO-RESULT, RO-ERROR, and 
RO-REJECT-U) should normally be higher (lower in 
value) than the priority of the corresponding invocation. 



10.2.1.1 Operation-value 

This parameter is the identifier of an invoked and 
successfully performed operation. This parameter 
has to be supplied by the requestor of the service. 
The value is that of the corresponding RO- 
INVOKE indication primitive. This parameter 
shall be present only if the Result parameter is 
present. 



16 



IS 13675 (Parti ): 1993 
ISO/»EC 9072-1 : 1989 



10.2.1.2 Result 

This parameter is the result of an invoked and 
successfully performed operation. The type has to 
be agreed between the ROSE users. This 
parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of 
the service. 

10.2.1.3 Invoke-ID 

This parameter identifies the corresponding 
invocation (see 10.1.1.4). This parameter has to be 
supplied by the requestor of the service. The value 
is that of the corresponding RO-INVOKE 
indication primitive. 

10.2.1.4 Priority 

This parameter defines the priority assigned to 
the transfer of the corresponding APDU (see 
10.1.1.6). 

10.3 RO-ERROR service 

The RO-ERROR service is used by a ROSE-user to 
reply to a previous RO-INVOKE indication in the 
case of an unsuccessfully performed operation. 
This service is an non-confirmed service. 

The related service structure consists of two 
service-primitives as illustrated in Figure 7. 



ROSE-user 

RO-ERROR 
request 



ROSE 

provider 



ROSE user 



RO ERROR 
indication 



10.3.1 RO-ERROR parameters 

Table 4 lists the RO-ERROR service parameters. 

Table 4 - RO ERROR parameters 



Parameter name 


Req 


Ind 


Error-value 
Error-parameter 
Invoke-ID 
Priority 


M 
U 
M 
U 


M( = ) 
C(-) 

M( = ) 



10.3.1.1 Error-value 

This parameter identifies the error that occurred 
during execution of the operation. The value has 
to be agreed between the ROSE-users. This 
parameter has to be supplied by the requestor of 
the service. 

10.3.1.2 Error-parameter 

This parameter provides additional information 
about the error. The type (if any) has to be agreed 
between the ROSE-users. This parameter has to 
be supplied by the requestor of the service. 

10.3.1.3 Invoke-ID 

This parameter identifies the corresponding 
invocation (see 10.1.1.4). This parameter has Lo be 
supplied by the requestor of the service. The value 
is that of the corresponding RO-INVOKE 
indication primitive. 

10.3.1.4 Priority 

This parameter defmes the priority assigned to 
the transfer of the corresponding APDU (see 
10 It. 6). 



Figure 7 - RO ERROR service-primitives 



17 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
I SO/I EC 9072-1 :1989 



10.4 RO-REJECT-U 

The RO-REJECT-U service is used by a ROSE- 
user to reject a request (RO-INVOKE indication) 
of the other ROSE-user if it has detected a 
problem. The RO-REJECT-U service may also be 
used by a ROSE-user to reject a reply (RO- 
RESULT indication, RO-ERROR indication) from 
the other ROSE-user. However, to avoid violating 
the sequencing rules of other ASEs in some 
application contexts, a ROSE-user may choose not 
to use the RO-REJECT-U service to reject replies. 
This service is an non-confirmed service. 

The related service structure consists of two 
service-primitives, as illustrated in figure 8. 



ROSE-user 

RO REJECT- U 
request 



ROSE- 
provider 



ROSE user 



RO-REJECT-U 
indication 



Figure 8 - RO-RE JECT-C service primitiv es 

10.4.1 RO-REJECT-U parameters 

Table 5 lists the RO-REJECT^U service 
parameters. 

Table 5 - RO-REJECT-U parameters 



Parameter name 


Req 


Ind 


Reject-reason 

Invoke-ID 

Priority 


M 
M 
U 


M( = ) 
M( = ) 



10.4.1.1 Reject-reason 



This parameter specifies the reason for rejection 
as follows: 

a) Invoke-problem : user-reject of an RO- 
INVOKE indication primitive with values: 

duplicate-invocation: signifies that the 
invoke-ID parameter violates the 
assignment rules of 10.1.1.4; 

unrecognized-operation: signifies that the 
operation is not one of those ajgreed 
between the ROSE-users; 

mistyped-argument: signifies that the 
type of the operation argument supplied is 
not that agreed between the ROSE-users 

resource-limitation: the performing 
ROSE-user is not able to perform the 
invoked operation due to resource 
limitation, 

initiator-releasing: the association- 
initiator is not willing to perform the 
invoked operation because it is about to 
attempt to release the application- 
association; 

unrecognized-lLnked-ID: signifies that 
there is no operation in progress with an 
invoke-ID equal to the specified linked-ID; 

linked-response-unexpected: signifies that 
the invoked operation referred to by the 
linked-ID is not a parent-operation 

unexpected-child-operation: signifies that 
the invoked child-operation is not one that 
the invoked parent-operation referred to 
by the linked-ID allows. 

b) Re turn- result- problem : user-reject of an 
RO-RESULT indication primitive with 
values: 

unrecognized-invocation: signifies that no 
operation with the specified invoke-ID is 
in progress; 

result-response-unexpected: signifies that 
the invoked .operation does not report a 
result; 

mistyped-result: signifies that the type of 
the result parameter supplied is not that 
agreed between the ROSE-users. 



18 



!S13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 .-1989 



c) Return-error-problem : user-reject of an RO- 
ERROR indication primitive with values: 

unrecognized-invocation: signifies that no 
operation with the specified Invoke-ID is 
in progress; 

error-response-unexpected; signifies that 
the invoked operation does not report 
failure; 

unrecognized-error: signifies that the 
reported error is not one of those agreed 
between the ROSE-users; 

unexpected-error: signifies that the 
reported error is not one that the invoked 
operation may report; 

mistyped-parameter; signifies that the 
type of the error parameter supplied is not 
that agreed between the ROSE-user. 

This parameter has to be supplied by the 
requestor of the service. 

10.4.1.2 Invoke ID 

This parameter identifies the corresponding 
invocation (see 10. 1 . 1 .4). This parameter has to be 
supplied by the requestor of the service. The value 
is that of the rejected RO-INVOKE indication, 
RO-RESULT indication, or RO-ERROR indication 
primitive. 

10.4.1.3 Priority 

This parameter defines the priority assigned to 
the transfer of the corresponding APDU (see 
iO.1.1.6). 

10.5 RO-REJECT-P 

The RO-REJECT-P service is used to advise a 
ROSE-user of a problem detected by the ROSE- 
provider. This service is a provider-initiated 
service. 

The related service structure consists of a single 
service-primitive, as illustrated in figure 9, 



ROSE user 

RO-REJECT-P 

indication 



ROSE- 
provider 



ROSE- 
user 



Figure 9 - RO-REJECT-P service-primitive 

10.5.1 RO-REJECT-P parameters 

Table 6 lists the RO-REJECT-P service 
parameters. 

Table 6 - RO-REJECT-P parameters 



Parameter name 


Ind 


Invoke-ID 

Returned-parameters 

Reject-reason 








10.5.1.1 Invoke-ID 

This parameter identifies the corresponding 
invocation (see 10.1.1.4). This parameter is 
supplied by the ROSE-provider. The value is that 
of the rejected RO-INVOKE request, RO- 
RESL'LT request, RO ERROR request or RO- 
REJECT-U request primitives. This parameter 
may be omitted if an invokelD is not available. 

10.5.1.2 Returned-parameters 

This parameter contains the parameters of the 
RO-INVOKE request, RO RESULT request, RO- 
ERROR request or RO-REJECT-U request 
primitives, if the corresponding APDU could not 
be transferred by the ROSE-provider. This 
parameter and the parameter reject-reason are 
mutually exclusive. 



19 



IS 13675 (Parti ): 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 : 1989 



10.5.1.3 Reject-reason 

This parameter specifies the reason for rejection 
as follows: 

d) General-problem : provider reject of an APDU 
with values: 

unrecognized-APDU: signifies that the 
type of the APDU, as evidenced by its type 
identifier, is not one of the four dinned by 
ISO/IEC 9072-2; 



mistyped-APDU: signifies that the 
structure of the APDU does not conform to 
ISO/IEC 9072-2; 

badly-structured-APDU; signifies that the 
structure of the APDU does not conform to 
the standard notation and encoding, 
defined in ISO 8824 and ISO 8825. 

This parameter is supplied by the ROSE-provider. 
This parameter and the parameter returned- 
parameters are mutually exclusive. 



20 



IS13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



11 Mappingof notation on service 11.2.1.1.1 Invocation of a bind-operation 



11.1 Application context and operations 

This clause describes how an application-context 
is specified by means of the notation provided by 
the macros defined in clause 9. 

Such an application-context specification consists 
of 

a) a bind-operation specified by means of the 
BIND macro, and 

b) an unbind'Operation specified by means of 
the UNBIND macro, and 

c) a set of operations specified by means of 
the OPERATION macro, and 

d) a set of errors related to operations and 
specified by means of the ERROR macro. 

The Remote Operations (i.e. bind-operation, 
unbind-operation and operations) may be invoked 
by the user-element. 

An association-initiating user-element 
establishes an application-association by invoking 
a bind-operation If the application-association is 
established, operations may be invoked by the 
user-element. When the association initiating 
user-element wishes to release the 
application-association, it invokes an unbind- 
operation. 

11.2 Mapping of Remote Operations on 
ACSE services, RTSP] services, and 
ROSE services 

The bind-operation and the unbind-operation are 
mapped either on ACSE services, or the RTSE 
services. 

The operations are mapped on the ROSE services. 

11.2.1 Mapping on ACSE services 

The bind-operation is mapped on the A- 
ASSOCIATE service and the unbind-operation 
mapped on the A RELEASE service. 

11,2.1.1 Mappingof a bind-operation 

A bind-operation is mapped on the A- 
ASSOCIATE service. 



The invocation of a bind-operation is mapped on 
the A-ASSOCIATE request and A-ASSOCIATE 
indication service primitives. 

The argument value of the bind-operation is 
mapped on the user information parameter of the 
service primitives. 

11,2.1.1,2 Reply of a bind-operation 

The reply of a bind-operation is mapped on the A- 
ASSOCIATE response and A-ASSOCIATE 
confirm service primitives. 

If the bind-operation was successfully performed, 
the result parameter of the service primitives is 
"accepted", and the result value of the bind- 
operation is mapped on the user information 
parameter of the service primitives. 

If the bind-operation was not successfully 
performed, the result parameter value of the 
service primitives is "rejected (permanent)", and 
the error value of the bind-operation is mapped on 
the user information parameter of the service 
primitives. 

11.2.1.2 Mappingof an unbind-operation 

An unbind-operation is mapped on the A- 
RFjLEASE service. 

11.2.1.2.1 Invocation of an unbind-operation 

The invocation of an unbind-operation is mapped 
on the A-RELEASE request and the A-RELEASE 
indication service primitives. 

The argument value of the unbind-operation is 
mapped on the user information parameter of the 
service primitives. The reason parameter value of 
the service primitives is "normal" 

11.2.1.2.2 Reply of an unbind-operation 

The reply of an unbind-operation is mapped on the 
A-RELEASE response and A-RELEASE confirm 
service primitives. 

If the unbind-operation was successfully 
performed, the reason parameter value of the 
service primitives is "normal", the result value of 
the unbind-operation is mapped on the user 
information parameter of the service primitives, 
and the result parameter of the service primitives 



21 



IS 13075 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



is "affirmative". 

If the unbind-operation was not successfully 
performed, the reason parameter value of the 
service primitives is "not finished," the error 
value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the 
user information parameter of the service 
primitives, and the result parameter of the service 
primitives is "affirmative". 

1 1.2.2 Mapping on RTSE services 

The bind-operation is mapped on the RT-OPEN 
service and the unbind-operation mapped on the 
RT-CLOSE service. 

11.2.2.1 Mapping of a bind -operation 

A bind-operation is mapped on the RT-OPEN 
service. 

11.2.2.1.1 Invocation of a bind-op«ratlon 

The invocation of a bind-operation is mapped on 
the RT-OPEN request and RT-OPEN indication 
service primitives. 

The argument value of the bind-operation is 
mapped on the user-data parameter of the service 
primitives. The dialogue-mode parameter value is 
"two-way-alternate". 

11.2.2.1.2 Reply of a bind-operation 

The reply of a bind-operation is mapped on the 
RT-OPEN response and RT-OPEN confirm 
service primitives. 

If the bind-operation was successfully performed, 
the result parameter of the service primitives is 
"accepted", and the result value of the bind- 
operation is mapped on the user-data parameter 
of the service primitives. 

If the bind-operation was not successfully 
performed, the result parameter value of the 
service primitives is "rejected (permanent)", and 
the error value of the bind-operation is mapped on 
the user-data parameter of the service primitives. 

1 1.2.2.2 Mapping of an unbind-operation 

An unbind-operation is mapped on the RT-CLOSE 
service. 



U.2.2.2.1 Invocation of an unbind-operation 

The invocation of an unbind-operation is mapped 
on the RT-CLOSE request and the RT-CLOSE 
indication service primitives. 

The argument value of the unbind-operation is 
mapped on the user-data parameter of the service 
primitives. The reason parameter value of the 
service primitives is "normal" 

U.2.2.2.2 Reply of an unbind-operation 

The reply of an unbind-operation is mapped on the 
RT-CLOSE response and RT-CLOSE confirm 
service primitives. 

If the unbind-operation was successfully 
performed, the reason parameter value of the 
service primitives is "normal", and the result 
value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the 
user-data parameter of the service primitives. 

If the unbind-operation was not successfully 
performed, the reason parameter value of the 
service primitives is "not finished", and the error 
value of the unbind-operation is mapped on the 
user-data parameter of the service primitives, 

1 1.2.3 Mapping on ROSE services 

An operation is mapped on the ROSE services. 

1 1.2.3. 1 Invocation of an operation 

The invocation of an operation is mapped on the 
RO-INVOKE service. 

The value assigned to the operation is mapped on 
the operation-value parameter of that service. The 
value of the Named Type in the ARGUMENT 
clause of the OPERATION macro is mapped on 
the argument parameter of that service, 

1 1.2.3.2 Reply of an operation 

If an operation was successfully performed, the 
reply is mapped on the RO-RESULT service. 

The value of the Named-Type in the RESULT 
clause of the OPERATION macro is mapped on 
the result parameter of that service. 

If an operation .was not successfully performed, 
the reply is mapped on the RO-ERROR service. 

In this case one of the errors in the Identifier List 
of Error Names in the ERROR clause of the 



22 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1: 198 



OPERATION macro may be applied. The value 
assigned to the applied error is mapped on the 
error-value parameter of that service. The value 
of the Named'Type in the PARAMETER clause of 
the ERROR macro of the applied error is mapped 
on the error-parameter parameter of that service. 

12 Sequencing information 

This clause defines the interaction among the 
Remote Operations, and the interaction among 
the ACSE services and the ROSE services. 

12,1 Sequencing information for Remote 
Operations 

12.1.1 Bind-operation 

12.1.1.1 Usage restrictions 

A bind-operation is not used on an established 
application-association. A successfully performed 
bind-operation establishes an application- 
association. 

12.1.1.2 Disrupted Remote Operation 

The bind-operation does not disrupt any Remote 
Operation. 

12.1.1.3 Disrupting Remote Operations 

There are no disrupting Remote Operationis, 

12.1.1.4 Collisions 

A bind-operation collision results when the 
user-elements in both AEs simultaneously invoke 
a bind-operation on each other, In this case two 
independent appUcation-dssociations are 
established. 

12.1.2 Unbind-operation 

12. 1.2. 1 Usage restrictions 

An unbind-operation is only used on an 
established application-association. It is only used 
by the user-element which invoked the bind- 
operation. It is only used when no replies from 
Operation Class 1 or 2 operations are outstanding. 

The application-association ceases to be 
established no matter whether the unbind- 
operation is performed successfully or not. 



12.1.2.2 Disrupted Remote Operations 

An unbind-operation does not disrupt Remote 
Operations in the case of Association Class 1 and 
Operation Class 1 or 2 operations. 

In all other cases an unbind-operation may 
disrupt operations. However if in a specific 
application-context Operation Classes 3, 4 or 5 
and/or Association Class 2 or 3 are used, it is 
assumed that either the disruption is acceptable 
or the application-context provides operations to 
avoid the disruption, 

12.1.2.3 Disrupting Remote Operations 

There are no disrupting Remote Operations. 

12.1.2.4 Collisions 

Because only the association-initiator may 
release the application-association, there is no 
collision, 

12.1.3 Operations 

12.1.3tl Usfige restrictions 

Operations are only used on an established 
application-association. 

12.1.3.2 Disrupted Remote Operations 

Operations do not disrupt any Remote Operations. 

12.1.3.3 Disrupting Remote Operations 

Operations may be disrupted by an unbind- 
operation (see 12.1.2.2). 

12.1.3.4 Collisions 

There are no collisions of operations. 

12. 1.4 Further sequencing information 

Disrupting services are not visible at the 
operation- interface. However operations may be 
disrupted by services (see 12.2). 

Bind-operations and unbind-operations are 
disrupted by the A-ABORT, A-P-ABORT. 
RT-U-ABORT and RT-P-ABORT services. 

Operations are disrupted by the A-ABORT, A-P- 
ABORT, RT-U-ABORT, RT-P-ABORT, 
EO-REJECT-U and RO-REJECT-P services. 



2S 



IS13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



In addition an operation may be disrupted by the 
A-RELEASE service. But this reflects only the 
disruption of an operation by an unbind- 
operation. The disrupted operations are not 
considered in the disrupted services of 12.2. 

Because all Remote Operations are mapped on 
services, and disrupting Remote Operations 
(unbind-operation) are represented by services, no 
disrupting Remote Operations are considered in 
the disrupting services subclauses of 12.2. 

12.2 Sequencing information for services 

12.2.1 ACSE services 

The sequencing information for ACSE services is 
described in ISO 8649. Additional information is 
provided in this subclause. 

12.2.1.1 Disrupted ROSE services 

In addition to the disrupted services defined in 
ISO 8649 all ROSE services except the RO- 
REJECT-P service are disrupted by the A- ABORT 
and A-P-ABORT services and may be disrupted by 
the A-RELEASE service (see 12.2.3 6). 

12.2.1.2 Disrupting ROSE services 

There are no disrupting ROSE services 

12.2.2 RTSE services 

The sequencing information for RTSE services is 
described in ISO/IEC 9066-1. Additional 
information is provided in this subclause. 

12.2.2.1 Disrupted ROSE services 

In addition to the disrupted services defined in 
ISO/IEC 9066-1 all ROSE services except the RO 
REJECT P service are disrupted by the RT U- 
ABORT, RT-P-ABORT and the negative 
RT-TRANSFER confirm services. 

12.2.2.2 Disrupting ROSE services 

There are no disrupting ROSE services. 

12.2.3 ROSE services 

This subclause describes the interaction among 
the ROSE services. Interactions with ACSE 
services are described in 12.2.1, and interactions 
with RTSE services are described in subclause 
12.22. 



12.2.3. 1 RO-IN YOKE service 

12.2.3.1.1 Type of Service 

The RO-INVOKE service is an non-confirmed 
service. 

12.2.3.1.2 Usage restriction 

The RO-INVOKE service is only used on an 
established application-association. 

12.2.3.1.3 Disrupted services 

The RO-INVOKE service does not disrupt any 
services. 

12.2.3.1.4 Disrupting services 

The RO-INVOKE service is disrupted by the RO- 
REJECT-P service. 

12.2.3.1.5 Collision 

There are no collisions of the RO-INVOKE 
service. 

12.2.3.2 RO-RESULT 

12.2.3.2.1 Type of service 

The RO-RESULT service is an non-confirmed 
service. 

12.2.3.2.2 Usage restriction 

The RO-RESULT service is only used on an 
established application-association and in reply to 
an RO-INVOKE service. 

12.2.3.2.3 Disrupted services 

The RO-RESULT service does not disrupt any 
services. 

12.2.3.2.4 Disrupting services 

The RO-RESULT service is disrupted by the RO- 
REJECT-P service. 

12.2.3.2.5 Collisions 

There are no collisions of the RO-RESULT 

service. 

12.2.3.3 RO-ERROR 

12.2.3.3.1 Type of service 

The RO-ERROR service is an non-confirmed 
service. 



24 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



12.2.3.3.2 Usage restriction 

The RO-ERROR service is only used on an 
established application-association and in reply to 
an RO-INVOKE service. 

12.2.3.3.3 Disrupted services 

The RO-ERROR service does not disrupt any 
service. 

12.2.3.3.4 Disrupting services 

The RO-ERROR service is disrupted by the RO- 
REJECT-P service. 

12.2.3.3.5 Collisions 

There are no collisions of the RO-ERROR service. 

12.2.3.4 RO-REJKCT-U 

12.2.3.4.1 Type of service 

The RO-REJECT-U service is an non-confirmed 
service. 

12.2.3.4.2 Usage restriction 

The RO REJECT-U service is only used on an 
established application-association and in reply to 
RO-INVOKE, RO RESULT and RO ERROR 
services. 

12.2.3.4.3 Disrupted services 

The RO-REJECT-U service does not disrupt any 
service. 

12.2.3.4.4 Disrupting services 

The RO-REJECT-U service is disrupted by the 
RO-REJECT-P service. 

12.2.3.4.5 Collisions 



There are no collisions of the RO-REJECT-U 
service. 

12.2.3.5 RO-REJECT-P 

12.2.3.5.1 Type of service 

The RO-REJECT-P service is a provider initiated 
service. 

12.2.3.5.2 Usage restriction 

Not applicable. 

12.2.3.5.3 Disrupted services 

The RO-REJECT-P service disrupts all other 
ROSE services. 

12.2.3.5.4 Disrupting services 

The RO-REJECT-P service is not disrupted by any 
other service. 

12.2.3.5.5 Collision 

If the ACSE service or an RTSE service causes an 
abort or the release of an application-association, 
it is a local matter to inform the service-user 
about outstanding RO-REJECT-P services for 
Returned-parameters. 

12.2.3.6 Additional Sequencing Information 

The usage restrictions for unbind-operations 
(12.1 2 1) and the mapping of unbind-operation on 
to the A-RELEASE service prevent the disruption 
of ROSE services, if only Association Class 1 and 
Operation Classes 1 and 2 are used. 

If Association Classes 2 or 3, or Operation Class 3, 
4 or 5 are used, the A-RELEASE service may 
disrupt ROSE services. In this case it is the 
responsibility of the application-context designer, 
either to accept this disruption or to provide 
means (e.g. operations) to prepare for the release 
of an application-association. 



25 



IS13675(Part1): 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :198 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Notation supporting the specification of 

application-service-elements and application-contexts 



This annex provides a notation supporting the 
specification of applieation-service-elements and 
application contexts which are specified by means 
of the RO-notation. The RO-notation may be used 
to specify the bind-operation and the unbind- 
operation of an application context. Additionally 
the RO-notation may be used to specify operation 
types and error types of several applieation- 
service-elements (ROSE-user ASEs). If the RO- 
notation is combined with other notations, other 
specification tools defined elsewhere might be 
used. 

This annex defines two macros supporting the 
specification of application-service-elemeats and 
application contexts. The formal definition of 
these macros is shown in figure A.l. 

A.l AppUcation-service-elements 

The notation supports the unique identification of 
anASE. 

If an ASE is an ROSE-user, the notation 
additionally supports the specification of the 
characteristics of the ASE. The operation- 
interface and the protocol of an ROSE-user ASE 
are specified by a set of operation types and a set 
of error types. 

The protocol specified for a specific ASE may be 

inherently: 

a) symmetric, or 

b) asymmetric. 

In the symmetric case both ASE-users may invoke 
the same set of operation types. 

In the asymmetric case one ASE-user (called 
supplier in the context of this annex) provides 
some information-processing functionality which 
is used by the peer ASE-user (called consumer in 
the context of this annex). In this case a specific 
operation type may be 

a) invoked by the consumer, and/or 



b) invoked by the supplier 
of the information-processing functionality. 

NOTE A particular allocation of the terms "supplier" and 
"consumer" is often intuitive. One might naturally 
consider a file system, e.g, to be called a supplier and 
its user to be called a consumer. Strictly speaking, 
however, the assignment of the two terms is 
arbitrary. 

If an ASE uses the concept of linked-operations, a 
specific operation type may be invoked as a child- 
operation. The invoker of the child-operation is 
the performer of the linked parent operation. 
Operation types solely invoked as child-operations 
shall not be included in the ASE specification, 
they are listed in the type specification of their 
parent-operations. 

The error types the operations may report are not 
included in the ASE specification, they are listed 
in the type specification of the operations. 

The set of the remaining operations (operations 
not solely invoked as child-operations), and who is 
allowed to invoke this operations may be reflected 
by a formal notation specifying the ROSE-uaer 
ASE. 

A.l. I Specification of an application- 
service-element 

An ASE may be specified by a formal notation 
supported by the application-service-element 
macro (see figure A.l). 

The type notation of the application-service- 
ELEMENT macro enables the specification of an 
ASE. The value notation of the application-SERvke- 
ELEMENT macro enables the specification of an 
unique identifier for the ASE. 

The notation for an ASE type is the keyword 
application-Service-element optionally followed by 
the specification of operations. 



26 



IS13675(Part1):19»3 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



Remote-Operations-Notation-extension { joint-iso-ccitt r€mote-op«rations(4) notation-extension (2) } 

DEFINITIONS ::=: 

BEGIN 

EXPORTS APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT, APPLICATION-CONTEXT. aCSE; 

IMPORTS OPERATION, BIND, UNBIND FROM 



Remote-Operation-Notation 

{ joint-iso-ccitt remote-operations(4) notation(O)}; 



-- macro definition for ASEs 

APPLtCATlON-SERVICE-ELEMENT MACRO :: - 
BEGIN 



TYPE NOTATION 
VALUE NOTATION 

SymmetricAse 

Consumerlnvokes 

Supplierlnvokes 

Opera tionlist 

Operation 



: = SymmetricAse | Consumerlnvokes Supplierlnvokes | empty 
: = value (VALUE OBJECT IDENTIFIER) 

: = "OPERATIONS" "{" OperationLlst "}" 

:= "CONSUMER INVOKES" "{" OperationLlst ")" | empty 

; - "SUPPLIER INVOKES" "{" OperationList "}" | empty 

: = Operation | OperationList "," Operation 

:= value {OPERATION) 



END 

aCSE APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT:: = {joint iso-ccitt remote operations(4) aselD-ACSE (4)} 

-- Remote Operations Notation extension continued 



Figure A.KPart 1 of 2) - Formal definition of ASE and application-context data types 



If the protocol specified for the ASE is symmetric, 
the keyword operations and the reference names 
of the operations are specified. 

If the protocol specified for the ASE is 
asymmetric, the keywords consumer invokes and 



the reference names of the operations the 
consumer may invoke, and/or the keywords 
supplier invokes and the reference names of the 
operations the supplier may invoke, are specified. 



27 



IS 13675 (Parti ): 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



A.2 Application contexts 

!n the context of this annex an application context 
explicitly identifies: 

a) a bind-operation, 

b) an unbind-operation, and 

c) a set of application-service-elements 

and requires one or more identified abstract- 
syntaxes. 

The set of application-service-elements contains 

a) ASEs not using the RO-notation, i.e the 
ACSE, optionally the RTSE, and 
optionally others; and 

b) optionally the ROSE and ROSE-user 
ASEs. 

If the application context contains ROSE-user 
ASEs with an asymmetrical protocol, the notation 
supports the specification whether the 
association-initiator or the association-responder 
is the consumer of such an ASE. 

The identification of the bind-operation, the 
unbind-operation, the appUcation-service- 
elements, and the abstract-syntaxes may be 
reflected by a formal notation specifying the 
application context. 

A.2.1 Specification of an application 
context 

An application context may be specified by a 
formal notation supported by the application- 
context macro (see figure A.l ). 

The type notation of the application-context 
macro enables the specification of the application 
context. The value notation of the application- 
context macro enables the specification of an 
unique identifier for the application context. 



The notation for an application context type is the 
keyword application-context, followed by the 
keywords application sep.vsce elements and the 
reference names of ASEs not using the RO- 
notation, followed by the keyword bind and the 
reference name of the bind-operation type, 
followed by the keyword unbind and the reference 
name of the unbind-operation type, optionally 
followed by the specification of ASEs using 
operations, followed by the keywords absTRA^CT 
SYNTAXES and the reference names of the abstract 
syntaxes. 

If the application context contains ROSE-user 
ASEs, the keywords remote operations and the 
reference name of the ROSE, followed by the 
specification of ASEs with a symmetrical protocol, 
and/or the specification of ASEs with an 
asymmetrical protocol are used. The specification 
of ASEs with a symmetrical protocol is the 
keywords OPERATIONS OF and the reference names 
of that ASEs. The specification of ASEs with an 
asymmetrical protocol is the keywords initiator 
CONSUMER OF and the reference names of ASEs the 
consumer of which is the association-initiator, 
and/or the keywords responoer consumer of and 
the reference names of ASEs the consumer of 
which is the association-responder. 

A.2.2 Mapping of notation on to service 

The application context identifier and the list of 
abstract syntax names specified by means of the 
application-context macro are mapped either on 
the RT-OPEN services of RTSE, if RTSE is 
included in the application context; or else on the 
A-ASSOCIATE services of ACSE. 

The application context value is mapped on to the 
Application Context Nam6 parameter of the RT- 
OPEN or A-ASSOCIATE services. 

The abstract syntax names are mapped on to the 
Presentation Context Definition List parameter 
and the Presentation Context Definition Result 
List of the RT-OPEN or A-ASSOCIATE services. 



28 



!S13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



-- Remote Operations 


Notation extension continued 


-- macro definition for application contexts 


APPLICATION-CONTEXT MACRO :: = 


BEGIN 




TYPE NOTATION 


:: - NonROelements Binding ROelements AbstractSyntaxes 


VALUE NOTATION 


::s value (VALUE OBJECT IDENTIFIER) 


NonROelements 


: : = "APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS " "{" AseList "} " 


Binding 


::s "BIND" type -- shall reference a oind-operation type 




"UNBIND" type -- shall reference an unbind-operation type 


ROclements 


: : = "REMOTE OPERATIONS " "{ " AseiD "}" -- identifying ROSE 




SymmetricAses AsymmetricAses 1 empty 


SymmetrJcAses 


::= "OPERATIONS OF" "{"AseList")" | empty 


AsymmetricAses 


::= InitidtorConsumerOf ResponderConsumerOf 


initiatcrCcnsumerOf 


::- "INITIATOR CONSUMER OF" "{" AseUst "} " {empty 


ResponderConsumerOf 


;:= "RESPONDERCONSUMEROF" "{"AseList"}' (empty 


AbstractSyntaxes 


:: = "ABSTRACT SYNTAXES" "{" AbstractSyntaxList ")" 


AseList 


:: = AscID | AseList "," AselD 


AselO 


::= value (APPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT) 


AbstractSyntaxList 


::= AbstractSyntax 1 AbstractSyntaxList "," AbstractSyntax 


AbstractSyntax 


::= value (OBJECT IDENTIFIER)-- identifying abstract syntax 


END 




END 


-' end of Remote Operations Notation extension 



Figure A.l (Part 2 of 2)- Formal definition of AS£ and application-context data types 



29 



IS13675 (Parti): 1993 
ISO/TEC 9072-1 : 1989 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Guidelines for application protocol designers on the use of ROSE 



This annex provides examples and guidelines for 
application protocol designers on the use of ROSE. 

B.l Examples for operations and 
errors 

This subclause provides examples for the 
definition of operations and errors. 

B.1.1 Operation classes 

This subclause provides examples for the 
definition of operations of Operation classes 1 to 
5. 

The operation operationExamplel2 of Operation 
classes 1 or 2 (see example below) reports success 
(result of type ArgumentType12) or failure (errors 
errorExamplel or errorExdmple2). The argument of the 
operation operattonEi(aniplel2 is of type 
ArgumentTypel2. The value of the operation 
operationExample12 is 1 . 



operationExample4 OPERATION 

ARGUMENT ArgumentType4 

RESULT ResultType4 
::=3 

The operations operationExampleSi and 
operationExampie52 of Operation Class 5 (see 
example below) reports no outcome. The 
argument of the operation operationExampleSi is of 
type ArgumentType4, the operation 

operationExample52 has no argument. The value of 
the operation operationExampleSi is 4, the value of 
the operation operationExample52 is 5. 

operationExampleSi OPERATION 
ARGUMENT ArgumentType4 
:;= 4 



OperationExampleSi 
::= 5 



OPERATION 



operation E xa m pte 1 2 
ARGUMENT 
RESULT 
ERROR 
::= 1 



OPERATION 

ArgumentType12 

Re$ultType12 

{errorExamplel, errorExample2} 



The operation operationExampleS of Operation Class 

3 (see example below) reports failure (error 
errorExamplel) only, if any. The argument of the 
operation operationExample3 is of type ArgumentTypeB. 
The value of the operation operatlonExamplea is 2. 

operation Examples OPERATION 

ARGUMENT ArgumentTypeS 

ERROR {errorExamplel} 
::= 2 

The operattonExample4 operation of Operation Class 

4 (see example below) reports success (result of 
type ResultType4) only. The argument of the 
operation operationExample4 is of type ArgumentType4. 
The value of the operation operationExample4 is 3. 



B.1.2 Linked-operations 

The example below shows the definition of a set of 
linked-operations consi&ting of the parent- 
operation parent-opl2 and the child-operations 
OperationExampleSi and operationExampleS2 . 

parent-op12 OPERATION 

ARGUMENT ArgumentType12 



RESULT 

ERROR 

LINKED 

:■.= 6 



ResuttType12 

{errorExamplel, errorExample2} 
{ OperationExampleSi, 
operationExample52 } 



B.1.3 



Errors 



Errors (see errorExamplel and errorExample2 below) 
reports failure. The parameter of the error 
errorExamplel is of type ParameterTypel, the error 
errorExample2 has no parameter. The value of the 
error errorExamplel is 1, the value of the error 
errorExamplel is 2. 



30 



IS 13675 ( Part 1):ig»3 
ISOyiEC 0072-1 :1080 



error Exam pie 1 ERROR 

PARAMETER ParameterTypel 
::= 1 



of the bind-operation BindExample3 to establish an 
application-association nor the response to the 
application-association establishment are 
accompanied by any user data. 



errorExamplel ERROR 

::= 2 

B.2 Examples for bind-operations 
and unbind-operations 

This sul?clause provides examples for the 
definition of bind-operations and unbind- 
operations. 

B.2.1 Bind-operations 

Bind-operations are used to establish an 

application-association. 

The request of the bind-operation BindExamplel to 
establish an application-association is 
accompanied by the argument of type 
BmdArgumentTypel. The positive response to the 
application-association establishment is 
accompanied by the result of type BindResuitTypei . 
The negative response to the application- 
association establishment is accompanied by the 
bind-error of type BindErrorTypel . 

BindExampiel ::= BIND 

ARGUMENT BindArgumentTypel 
RESULT BindResuitTypei 

BinD-ERRCR BindErrorTypel 

The request of the bind-operation BindExample2 to 
establish an application association is 
accompanied by the argument of type 
BindArgumentTypel. The positive response to the 
application-association establishment is not 
accompanied by any user data. The negative 
response to the application-association 
establishment is accompanied by the bind-error of 
type BindErrorTypel . 



BindExampleS :: » BIND 

B.2.2 Unbind-operations 

Unbind-operations are used to release an 
application-association. 

The request of the unbind-operation 
UnbindExamplel to release an application- 
association is accompanied by the argument of 
type UnbindArgumentTypel. The response to the 
application-association release is accompanied 
either by the result of type UnbindResultTypel or by 
the unbind-error of type UnbindErrorTypei. 

UnbindExamplel : : ^ UNSiND 

ARGUMENT UnbindArgumentTypel ' 

RESULT UnbindResultTypel 

UNBIND-ERROR UnbindErrorTypel 

The request of the unbind-operation 
UnbindExampie2 to release an application- 
association is accompanied by the argument of 
type UnbindArgumentTypel. The response to the 
application-association release is optionally 
accompanied by the unbind-error of type 
UnbindErrorTypel. 

UnbindExample2 : : = UNBIND 

ARGUMENT UnbindArgumentTypel 

UNBIND-ERROR UnbindErrorTypel 

Note that argument, result and unbind-error of an 
unbind-operation are optional. Neither the 
request of the bind operation UnbindExamplel to 
release an application-association nor the 
response to the application-association release are 
accompanied by any user data 



BindExampte2 :: = BIND 

ARGUMENT BindArgumentTypel 
BIND-ERROR BindErrorTypel 



Note that argument, result and bind-error of a 
bind-operation are optional. Neither the request 



UnbindExample3 : : = UNBIND 



31 



IS 13675 (Parti): 1993 
ISO/IEC 9072-1 :1989 



B.3 Export and import of operations 
and errors 

This clause gives examples of how to export and 
import operations and errors. 

The example below shows how to export 
operations and errors. The operation I O and errorio 
have local values. OperationTypeA and ErrorTypeA are 
types, and specific values have to be assigned in 
the importing modules. The operationli and errorii 
have globally unique values. 

ExportingModule{objectidentifier1 } DEFINITIONS :: - 
BEGIN 

EXPORTS operationIO, OperationTypeA, operation 1 1, 

errorl 0, ErrorTypeA, errorl 1 ; 
IMPORTS OPERATION, ERROR.BIND.UNBIND 

FROM Remote-Operation-Notation 
{ joint-iso-ccitt remote- 
operations{4) notation(O)}; 



The example below shows how to import 
operations and errors. The operationIO and errorio 
have local values defined in the exporting module. 
The designer of the importing module is 
responsible for the uniqueness of these values 
within the abstract syntax. The operation 
operation13 is of type OperationTypeA and has the 
value 13 assigned. The error errort3 is of type 
ErrorTypeA and has the value 13 assigned. The 
operationli and errorii have globally unique values 
defined in the exporting module. 

ImportingModule {objectidentifier3 } DEFINITIONS :: = 
BEGIN 

IMPORTS OperationIO, OperationTypeA, operationl 1 , 
errorio, ErrorTypeA, errorl 1 
FROM EKportingModule { 
objectidentifierl ); 

operation13 OperationTypeA ::=: 13 
errorl 3 ErrorTypeA ::= 13 



OperationIO OPERATION 

ARGUMENT ArgumentTypelO 
RESULT ResultTypelO 

ERROR {errorio} 

::= 10 

OperationTypeA :: = 
OPERATION 

ARGUMENT ArgumentTypeA 
RESULT ResultTypeA 

operationli OPERATION 

ARGUMENT ArgumentTypell 
RESULT ResultTypell 

ERROR {errorii} 

: : = { objectidentif ier2component 1 1 } 

errorio ERROR 

PARAMETER ParameterTypelO 
::= 10 

ErrorTypeA ::- 

ERROR 
PARAMETER ParameterTypeA 



END 



B.4 



Definition of Application- 
service-elements 



This clause gives examples on how to define 
application-service-elements. The examples refer 
to the operations and errors defined in the 
examples of clause B. I . 

The application-service-element elementl includes 
the operations operationExamptel 2 and 
operationExample3 and the errors errorExamplel and 
errorExampieZ. Note, the errors are included 
indirectly by the definition of the operations. The 
application-service-element elementl is symmetric, 
i.e. both user-elements may invoke the operations 
operationExample12 and operationExamp1e3. 

elementl APPLICATION SERVICE-ELEMENT 

OPERATIONS {operdtionExample 12, 

operationExample3 } 

;: = { objectidentif ierOf Elementl } 



errorlt ERROR 

PARAMETER ParameterTypell 

:: = { objectidentifier2component 12} 



END 



32 



IS13675(Part1):1993 
ISO/lEC 9072-1 :1989 



The application-service-element element2 includes 
the operations operationExampleS and 
operationExampleA and the error errorExamplel. The 
application-service-element element2 is 
asymmetric, i.e. only one user-element (that in 
the consumer role) may invoke the operations 
operationExampleS and operationExample4. 



as a child-operation, or outside a set of linked- 
operations (as a non-child-operation). 

element5APPUCATI0N-SERVICE;ELEMENT 

CONSUMER INVOKES {parent-op12 } 
SUPPLIER INVOKES {operationExample52} 
: : = { objectidentifierOf Elements } 



element2APPLICATlON-SERVICe-ELEMENT 

CONSUMER INVOKES {operationExample3, 

operationExampleA } 

: : = { objecttdentif ierOf El€ment2 } 

The application-service-elenient element3 includes 
the operations operationExamplel 2 and 
operationExampleSi and the errors errorExamplel and 
errorExample2. The application-service-elemcnt 
elements is asymmetric, i.e. only one user-clement 
(that in the supplier role) may invoke the 
operations operationExdmpte12 and operationExampleSI . 

elementSAPPLICATION-SERVICE ELEMENT 

SUPPLIER INVOKES {operationEKample12, 

OperationExampleSI } 

: ; = { objectidentifierOf Elements } 

The application-service element elementa includes 
the operations parent-op12, operationExampleSI and 
op€;rationExample52 and the errors errorExamplel and 
errorExampte2. Note, the child-operations 
operationExampleSI and operationExample52 are 
included indirectly by the definition of the parent- 
operation parent-opl2 . The application-service- 
element element4 is asymmetric, i.e. only one user- 
element (that in the consumer role) may invoke 
the operation parent-opi2 and only the other user- 
element (that in the supplier role) may invoke the 
child-operations operationExampleSI and 
operationExample52 during the execution of the 
parent-operation parent-op12 

elementdAPPLICATION-SERVICE-ELEMENT 

CONSUMER INVOKES {parent-op12} 
: : = { objectidentifierOf E!ement4 ) 

The application-service-element elements includes 
the same operations and errors as the appUcation- 
service-element elementA. The only difference 
being, that the user-element in the supplier role 
may invoke the operation operationExampleS2 either 



B.5 Definition of application 
contexts 

This clause gives examples of how to define 
application contexts for several Association 
Classes. The examples refer to the application- 
service elements defined in the examples of clause 
B.4, and the bind-operations and unbind- 
operations defined in the examples of clause B.2. 

The application context contextl includes the 
application-service-elements ACSE, RTSE, 
ROSE, and element2; the bind-operation 
BindExamplel and the unbi nd-operation 
UnbindExampleS. The association-initiator may 
invoke the operations operationExample3 and 
operationExample4 The association responder is not 
allowed to invoke any operation (Association 
Class 1). 

contextl APPLICATION-CONTEXT 

APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS {aCSE, rTSE} 
BIND BindExamplel 

UNBIND Unb(nd£xampte3 

REMOTE OPERATIONS {rOSE} 

INITIATOR CONSUMER OF {element2} 

ABSTRACT SYNTAXES 

{{joint-iso-ccitt a$sociation-control(2) 
abstractSyntaxO) 4pdus(0) versionl(l))- 
objectidentifierOfAbstractSyntaxI} 
::= {objectidentifierOfContextl } 

The application context context2 includes the 
application-service-elements ACSE, ROSE, 
e!ement2, and elcment3; the bind-operation 
BindExamplel; and the unbind-operation 
UnbindExample3 The associationresponder may 
invoke the operations operationExample3, 
operationExample4, operationExamplel 2 and 
operationExampleSI. The association-initiator is not 
allowed to invoke any operation (Association 
Class 2). 



33 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 
ISO/IEC9072-1:1989 



context2 APPLICATION-CONTEXT 

APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS {aCSE} 



BIND BindExamplel 

UNBIND UnbindExample3 

REMOTE OPERATIONS {rOSE} 

INITIATOR CONSUMER OF (e)ement3} 

RESPONDER CONSUMER OF {element2} 

ABSTRACT SYNTAXES 

({joiat-iso-ccHt asso€iatton-control(2) 

at>$tractSyntax(1}apdu5(0}version1(1)}. 

0bj«ctidentifier0fAbstractSyntaN2} 
::« ( objectidentifierOfContext2 } 

The application context tontext3 includes the 
application-service-elements ACSE, RTSE, 
ROSE, and etement2; the bind-operation 
BindExamplel; and the unbind-operation B.6.1 
UnbtndExample3. The association-responder may 
invoke the operations operationExamp)e3 and 
operationExaniple4. The association-initiator is not 
allowed to invoke any operation (Association 
Class 2). 



contexts APPLICATION-CONTEXT 

APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS {aCSE, rTSE} 
BIND BindExamplel 

UNBIND UnbindExample3 

REMOTE OPERATIONS {rOSE} 

RESPONDER CONSUMER OF {element2} 

ABSTRACT SYNTAXES 

{objectidentifierOfAbstractSyntax3} 
::= { objectidentif ierOfContext3 } 

The application context contextA includes the 
application-service-elements ACSE, ROSE, and 
element2; the bind-ope ration BindExdmple3; and the 
unbind-operation UnbindExaniple3. The application 
context contexts is symmetric, i.e. both the 
association-initiator and the association- 
responder may invoke the operations 
operationExample12 and operationExampleS 
(Association Class 3). 



context* APPLICATION-CONTEXT 

APPLICATION SERVICE ELEMENTS {aCSE} 
BIND BJnd£xanip)e3 

UNBIND UnbindExampVe3 

REMOTE OPERATIONS {rOSE} 

OPERATIONS OF {elementl} 

ABSTRACT SYNTAXES 

{objectidentifierOfAb$tractSyntax4} 
: : =s { objectidentif ierOfContextA } 

The last two examples assume a single named 
abstract syntax. 

B.6 Releasing application- 
associations in an orderly way 



Introduction 



This part of ISO/IEC 9072 defines five Operation 
Classes based upon the outcome they report, and 
three Association Classes based upon whether the 
association-initiator, the association-responder, or 
both may invoke operations. This subclause 
defines the rules that ensure orderly release of 
application-associations and the Operation 
Classes invoked over it. 

B.6.2 Objectives 

The rules of this subclause are intended to achieve 
one of the following two objectives, depending 
ui>on the situation: 

a) The Exactly-Once Objective: Ideally an 
application entity should be able to count 
on the invocation of an operation causing 
that operation to be performed only once. 

b) The At-Most-Once Objective: In some 
circumstances the Exactly-Once Objective 
cannot be achieved. A lesser but still 
useful objective is that invoking an 
operation which will cause that operation 
to be performed once or not at all. 



34 



IS 13675 ( Part 1 ) : 1d«3 
ISO/IEC 9072-1: 198 



B.6.3 



Definition of rules 



The following general rules apply in all 
circumstances: 

Gl.The performer shall report the result or 
error of each confirmed operation over the 
same application-association by means of 
which the operation was invoked. 

G2.The initiator shall not release the 
application-association until all 
operations it invoked have been 
confirmed. 

The following specific rules apply in certain 
circumstances: 

51. Each time it exercises the RO INVOKE 
service, the invoker shall supply a 
different Invoke-ID (unless reattempting 
an invocation) even across a succession of 
application-associations. This enables the 
performer to achieve the At-Most-Once 
Objective by suppressing duplicates. 

52. If the performer encounters a duplicate 
Invoke-ID in the RO-INVOKE service, it 
shall exercise the RO-REJECT-U service 
with duplicate-invocation as the Reject- 
reason. This helps to achieve the Exactly- 
Once Objective. 

53. The association-initiator shall reject any 
invocations it has not performed before 
releasing the application-association. 

54. The association-initiator shall respond to 
any invocations it has performed before 
releasing the application association. 

B.6.4 Application of rules 

The general rules always apply. The specific rules 
govern application-associations of particular 
Association Classes, and operations (invoked by 
means of such associations) of particular 
Operation Classes, as follows: 

a) Application-associations of Association- 
Class 1: For operations of Operation 
Classes 1 and 2, no specific rules apply. 
For operations of Operation classes 3, 4, 
and 5, specific rules SI and S2 apply. 



b) Application-associations of Association 
classes 2 and 3: For operations of 
Operation Classes 1 and 2, specific rules 
S3 and S4 apply. (Any invocation issued 
by the association-responder after the 
association-initiator has issued a release 
are lost. Response-rejects may be lost as 
well). For operations of Operation classes 
3, 4, and 5, specific rules SI, S2, S3 and S4 
apply- 

For protocols containing only operations of 
Operation Classes 1 or 2, the only constraint upon 
the values of the Invoke-IDs the invoker supplies 
to the RO-INVOKE service is that they be distinct 
over the life of the application-association. 

Application-entities make Invoke-IDs unique to 
an invoker and across consecutive application- 
associations by exchanging presentation- 
addresses at application-association 
establishment time and, for each presentation- 
address, making Invoke-tDs integers that 
increase monotonically over some reasonable long 
period of time. 

To ensure that an operation of Operation Classes 
3, 4, or 5 has been performed exactly once, an 
application-entity shall elicit the duplicate 
invocation Reject-reason by invoking the 
operation twice (or more) with the same Invoke- 
ID. Otherwise, the At-Most-Once Objective is all 
that is assured, suggesting that, on average, the 
invoker does not care whether an non-confirmed 
operation is performed. 



B.6.5 



Observations 



Every operation of Operation Classes I or 2 is 
performed exactly once. 

The usefulness of non-confirmed operations or 
conditionally confirmed operations may depend on 
the specific application. Protocol designers are 
recommendet to define only operations of 
Operation Classes 1 or 2 unless some very 
specialized requirements exist. 



35 



Printed M Doe Kay Prinien. New Delhi. India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Boreau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, \986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
< Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. LTD 36 ( 1563 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 |33l 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 {37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 



{ 



53 38 43, 53 16 40 
53 23 84 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 j^ss ^5 lo' T 23 ^^ 

Western : ManakaJaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 |632 78,91, 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printeis, Aligarh, India 



