•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 14997 (2001) : Modified Poly (Pheneylene Oxide) (PPO) 
Resins for its sage use in Contact with Foodstuffs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Drinking Water [PCD 12: Plastics] 



* 



<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 



" 



* 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14997 : 2001 

^d^TcT vSMii)J| # fen? hI-^^i^^ qtefr 

(f^TT^fa 3llehHI$<si) ("ft $\ 3TT) — RlR l fe 

Indian Standard 

MODIFIED POLY (PHENYLENE OXIDE) (PPO) RESINS 

FOR ITS SAFE USE IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER— 

SPECIFICATION 



ICS 67.250; 83.080.20 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



October 200 1 p r j ce Group 4 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



FOREWORD 



This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Plastics are being used on a large scale for packaging of foodstuffs and pharmaceuticals. Where direct contact 
occurs between the packed commodity and the plastics, the high-molecular mass polymer itself does not pose a 
toxic hazard being inert and essentially insoluble in food. There is, however, a likelihood that some transfer of 
polymer additives, adventitious impurities, such as monomers, catalyst remnants and residual polymerization 
solvents and of low molecular mass polymer fractions will occur from the plastics into the packaged material 
with consequent toxic hazard to the consumers. The occurrence of acute toxicity due to plastics materials in 
contact with food is most unlikely, since only trace quantities of potentially toxic materials are likely to migrate. 
However, the accumulation of these materials with time may lead to hazards which may be serious. 

Poly (phenylene oxide) (PPO) or poly [l,4-(2,6-dimethyl phenyl) ether] was discovered by John Hay in 1956 
and was developed commercially by General Electric Co, under the trade name 'NORYL RESIN' in 1965-66. 
The chemical formulation is based on the oxidative coupling of substituted phenols and the elimination of a 
molecule of water. PPO resins are usually alloyed with polystyrene materials. It acts as a base for a large family 
of resins with typical heat distortion temperature ranging from 82°C to more than 1 50°C. The chemical resistance 
characteristics of PPO are fairly consistent. These resins are noted for their resistance to hydrolysis in acids, 
bases, salts and hot water, but can be attacked by certain hydrocarbons, esters, ketones, amines and halogenated 
compounds. PPO resins offer the designer a combination of attractive properties including heat resistance, 
good impact strength, strong tensile and flexural properties at elevated temperatures and a wide processing 
range. They also feature low specific gravity and low moisture absorption rates. High energy radiation such as 
gamma or X-rays causes little loss of properties of the UV-stabilized grades, even at high dosages. Moulded 
articles can be sterilized by autoclave, gas or irradiation without any harm to the material. 

PPO resins can be processed in a number of ways, but the bulk of applications are in injection moulding. PPO 
can also be extruded and thermoformed and various processes such as blow moulding, compression moulding, 
cold forming and rotational moulding have been used with varying degrees of success. 

Modified poly(phenylene oxide) (PPO) resins find wide usage in food contact and health care applications. 
Some of the most important and known applications of modified PPO resins in this area are pump impellers and 
diffusers, filter-picals and drinking water. 

Use of modified PPO-resins is guided by EEC Directives 90/128/EEC in Europe. In USA it is regulated by 
FDA, 21, CFR 177.2460. For potable water application several grades of modified PPO resins are registered 
under DVGW and Hygiene Institute, Gelsenkirchen (Germany), Institute d' Analysis et d' Essais du Centre - 
Ouest (France) and WRC (UK). 

This standard is intended to be used with the series of Indian Standards on plastics for food contact application 
which is given in Annex A. 

It is emphasized that these standards need to be used in combination to provide a system of control to the 
manufacturers of plastics as well as the fabricators of thermoplastics packaging materials to derive maximum 
benefits. Besides it may also serve as basis for official agencies to frame suitable legislation to ensure effective 
safeguards for the safety and health of consumers where thermoplastics for food contact applications are concerned. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified values in this standard. 



IS 14997 : 2001 

Indian Standard 

MODIFIED POLY (PHENYLENE OXIDE) (PPO) RESINS 

FOR ITS SAFE USE IN CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, 

PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER — 

SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test for modified poly 
(phenylene oxide) (PPO) for the manufacture of items 
used in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water. 

1.2 This standard does not purport to establish 
suitability of modified poly (phenylene oxide) (PPO) 
in contact with particular foodstuff, pharmaceutical 
or drinking water, from other than toxicological 
considerations. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revisions, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 

Title 
Methods for random sampling 
List of pigments and colorants for 
use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Determination of overall migration 
of constituents of plastics materials 
and articles intended to come in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water — 
Method of analysis {second revision) 
Positive list of constituents of 
modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Modified Poly(Phenylene Oxide) (PPO) 

A polymeric alloy based on PPO resin produced by 
oxidative coupling reaction of 2,6-Dimethyl phenol 
and other thermoplastic materials like polystyrene, 



IS No. 


4905: 


: 1968 


9833: 


: 1981 


9845: 


: 1998 



14996:2001 



HIPS, ABS, polycarbonate, polyamides, etc. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Basic Resin 

As defined in 3.1 in any mixing proportion. 

4.2 Material 

The material shall also comply with the threshold 
limits of the manufacturing residues, polymerization 
ingredients and auxiliary items as prescribed in 
IS 14996. 

4.3 Pigments and Colourants 

In case the coloured material is used for food contact 
applications it shall comply with the list and limits of 
the pigments and colourants prescribed in IS 9833. 

4.4 Overall Migration 

The material shall also comply with the overall 
migration limits to 60 mg/1, Max of the simulant and 
10 mg/dm 2 , Max of the surface of the material or 
article, when tested by the method prescribed in 
IS 9845. 

4.5 Storage and Control 

4.5.1 Storage 

Modified PPO intended for food contact use shall be 
stored separately from other materials in closed, 
properly identified containers. 

4.5.2 Control 

An authorized person shall supervise and control the 
issue of modified PPO to the process or manufacturing 
area and shall maintain appropriate written records 
of the issue of such materials. 

4.5.3 Adequate standards of hygiene shall be 
maintained at all times and plant operator and store 
men shall be trained in proper hygiene practices. 

5 PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing 

The material shall be packed in suitable plastic, paper 
or laminated paper bags, as agreed to between the 



IS 14997 : 2001 



purchaser and the supplier, in a manner so as to ensure 
that the items do not become contaminated during 
storage. 

5.2 Marking 

5.2.1 Each package shall be clearly marked with the 
following: 

a) Name and type of the material; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture and 
recognized trade-mark, if any; 

c) Date of manufacture; 

d) Batch No. or Code No.; and 

e) 'Food-grade' material. 

5.2.2 The packages shall also carry the symbol 
(see Fig. 1) clearly embossed/printed on it (in 
accordance with the EEC Directive 80/590/EEC 
'Symbol' that shall accompany materials and articles 
intended to come into contact with foodstuffs). 

5.2.3 BIS Certification Marking 

The package may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 

5.2.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 




Fig. 1 Symbol 

the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers, may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

6 SAMPLING 

The method of drawing representative sample of the 
material and the criteria for conformity shall be as 
prescribed in Annex B. 



ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON PLASTICS SUITABLE FOR USE IN CONTACT WITH 
FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



IS No. Title IS No. 

9833 : 1981 List of pigments and colourants for 10146 : 1982 

use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 10148 : 1982 

9845 : 1998 Determination of overall migration 
of intended to come into contact with 
foodstuffs — Method of analysis 
(second revision) 

10141 : 2001 Positive list of constituents of 10149 : 1982 

polyethylene in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water (first revision) 

10142 : 1999 Polystyrene (crystal and high 10151 : 1982 

impact) for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 



Title 

Polyethylene for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 

Positive list of constituents of 
polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 



IS 14997 : 2001 



IS No. Title IS No. 

10171 : 1999 Guide on suitability of plastics for 
food packaging (second revision) 

10909 : 2001 Positive list of constituents of 

polypropylene and its copolymers in 1 3449 : 1 992 
contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
(first revision) 

10910 : 1984 Polypropylene and its copolymers for 

its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 13576: 1 992 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

11434 : 1985 lonomers resins for its safe use in 

contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 13577 : 1992 

11435 : 1985 Positive list of constituents of 

ionomer resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

11704:1986 Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) 13601:1993 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

11705 : 1986 Positive list of constituents of 14971 : 2001 
Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) 
copolymers for their safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, 14972 : 2001 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

12229 : 1987 Positive list of constituents of 
polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 14996 : 2001 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

12247 : 1988 Nylon-6 polymer for its safe use in 

contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 14998 : 2001 

12248 : 1988 Positive list of constituents of Nylon- 

6 polymer for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 14999 : 2001 

12252 : 1 987 Polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 



Title 

PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) 
copolymers in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Ethylene methacrylic acid (EMAA) 
copolymers and terpolymers for their 
safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene methacrylic acid (EMAA) 
copolymers and terpolymers in 
contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Polycarbonate resins for its safe use 
in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Positive list of constituents of 
polycarbonate resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Positive list of constiuents of 
modified poly (phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Positive list of constituents of 
melamine-formaldehyde resins in 
contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Melamine-formaldehyde resins for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 



IS 14997 : 2001 



ANNEX B 

{Clause 6) 

SAMPLING OF MODIFIED PPO RESINS 



B-l GENERAL 



B-l.l In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 
samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed . 

B-l. 2 Samples shall not be taken in an exposed place. 

B-l. 3 The sampling instrument, wherever applicable, 
shall be made of stainless steel or any other suitable 
material on which the material shall have no action. 
The instrument shall be clean and dry. 

B-l. 4 Precautions shall be taken to protect the 
samples, the material being sampled, the sampling 
instrument and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination. 

B-l. 5 The samples shall be placed in suitable, clean , 
dry, air-tight metal or glass containers on which the 
material has no action. The sample containers shall 
be of such a size that they are almost completely filled 
by the sample. 

B-1.6 Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight 
with a stopper after filling and marked with full details 
of sampling, such as, the date of sampling, the month 
and year of manufacture of the material, etc. 

B-l. 7 Samples shall be stored in such a manner that 
the temperature of the material does not vary unduly 
from the normal temperature. 

B-2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2.1 Lot 

In a single consignment all the packages of the same 
class, same type, same form and belonging to the same 
batch of manufacture shall be grouped together to 
constituent a lot. If a consignment is known to consist 
of packages belonging to different batches of 
manufacture or different forms, the packages 
belonging to the same batch of manufacture and same 
form shall be grouped together and each such group 
shall constitute a lot. 

B-2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
to the requirements of this specification, samples shall 
be tested from each lot separately. The number of 



packages to be sampled shall depend on the size of 
the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table 1. 

Table 1 Scale of Sampling 

{Clause B-2.2) 



Number of Packages 


Sample Size 


in the Lot 




(1) 


(2) 


Up to 15 


2 


16 to 50 


3 


51 to 100 


4 


101 to 300 


5 


301 to 500 


6 


501 to 1 000 


8 


1 001 and above 


10 


NOTE — When the number of packages in the lot is less than 


three, all the packages shall be sampled. 





B-2.2. 1 These packages shall be selected at a random 
from the lot and in order to ensure the randomness of 
selection, procedures given in IS 4905 may be 
followed. 

B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

B-3. 1 From each of the packages of material selected, 
small portions of material shall be drawn with the help 
of a suitable sampling instrument. The total quantity 
of material collected from each package shall be 
sufficient to test all the requirements given in 4. 

B-3.2 In the case of packages consisting of containers, 
vials, rolls or films, the number of items to be selected 
from a package, for testing each of the requirements 
given in 4 shall be one. 

B-4 NUMBER OF TESTS 

Tests for determining all the requirements given in 4 
shall be carried out on the individual test samples. 

B-5 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of this specification if all the test results 
on individual samples meet the relevant specification 
requirements. 



IS 14997 : 2001 



ANNEX C 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



Organization 
Internet Exchange Next.com Limited, Mumbai 
Amines and Plasticizers Ltd, Mumbai 

Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, Chennai 

Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 

Gas Authority of India Ltd,Noida 

GE Plastics India Limited, Gurgaon 

Gharda Chemicals Ltd, Thane 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Polymers Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Centre tor Plastics in Environment, Mumbai 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Institute ofl'ackaging, Mumbai 

Indian Plastics Institute, Mumbai 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd, Jalgaon 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), Kanpur 

Ministry of Defence, RDSO, Lucknow 

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, DGHS, New Delhi 

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 

National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuchem Ltd, Faridabad 
Permaii Wallace Ltd, Bhopal 



Representative(s) 
Shri SarupChowdhary [Chairman) 
ShriV.V.Kulkarni 

Dr R. V. Utekar {Alternate) 
Dr C. S. Narasimhan 

Dr M. Balakrishnan {Alternate) 
ShriJ.Sengupta 
DrVijai Kumar 

Dr K. Palanivelu {Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Kumar 

Shri Baldev Raj (Alternate) 
Shri Shivaji Basu 

Shri V. K. Singh {Alternate I) 

Shri Manish Khandelwal (Alternate II) 
General Manacer 

Dr (Shrimati) Rashmi Bhardwaj (Alternate) 
DrB. K.Desai 

Dr U. M. Vakil (Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. P. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Shankar Banerjee 

Shri Amitava Sanyal (Alternate) 
Shri S. V. Parveen 

Shri N . C . Dhocendran ath (A Itemate) 
DrA.N.Bhat 
Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C'Francis (Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Narayanan 

Dr N. G. Mokashi (Alternate) 
Shri D. R. Patel 

Shri R. K. Aggarwal (Alternate) 
DrV.P.Sharma 
Dr H. C. Mruthyunjaya 

Shri S. B. Joshi (Alternate 1) 

Shri A, P. Choudhari (Alternate II) 
Shri V. Mohan 

Shri R. Sub a Rao (Alternate) 
Shri M. N. Saraf 

Dr L. D. Khandpal (Alternate) 
Joint Director (Rubber) 

Director (SS) (Alternate) 
Addl Director General (PFA) 

Shri Sundar Lal (Alternate) 
Shri O. P. Gera 
Dr S. S. Mahajan 

Dr S. S. Kulkarni (Alternate) 
Dr R. S. Lathana 

Shri S. K. Khandelwal (Alternate) 
Shri V. K. Sharma 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria (Alternate) 
DrR.M.Mehta 
Shri C. C. Sakarda 

Shri S. K. Kodesia (Alternate) 



(Continued on page 6) 



IS 14997 : 2001 

(Continued from page 5) 

Organization 
Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Saint-Gobain Vetrotex India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Parwanoo (H.P.) 

Shriram Fertilizers & Chemcials, Kota 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

Tata Engg & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

The AH India Plastics Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

The Plastics & Linoleums Export Promotion Council, Mumbai 
VIP Industries, Mumbai 

XPRO India Ltd, Faridabad 

BIS Directorate General 



Representative(s) 

Dr Y. B. Vasudeo 

Dr K. S. Jadhav (Alternate) 

SHRI S. SliNDARAM 

Shri S. K. Ghosh (Alternate I) 

Dr B. J. C. Basu (Alternate II) 
Shri Arun Anand 

Shri Yog Raj Kapur (Alternate) 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta (Alternate) 
DrR.C.Sood 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
ShriU.K.Nath 

Shrtmati A. D. Sathe (Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Aggarwal 

Shri K. B. Easwaran (Alternate) 
Shri R. P. Kalyanpur 
Shri Sidohartha Roy 

Shri A. S. Dalve (Alternate) 
SHRiCBhaskar 

Shri Manmohan Krishan (Alternate) 
Shri Anjan Kar, 
Director & Head (PCD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio Member)] 



Member-Secretary 

Shri T. Kalaivanan 

Joint Director (PCD), BIS 



Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries Subcommittee, PCD 12:12 



Organization 
Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 
All India Plastic Industries Association, Delhi 
AS & T India Limited, New Delhi 
Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Mumbai 

Britannia Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Centre for Processed Food, Bangalore 

Central Committee for Food Standards (Directorate General 

of Health Services), New Delhi 
Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata 

Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Drugs Controller (India), New Delhi 
GE Plastics India Ltd, Distt Vadodara 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Co Ltd, Vadodara 

Haldta Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 

Hitkari Potteries Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 



Representative(s) 
Shri K. R. Kumar (Convenor) 
Shri Ravi Kumar 
Shri G. D. Agrawal 
DrCShankar 

Shri S.N. Murthy (Alternate) 
Shri G. S. Aurora 

Shri M. R. Sundar (Alternate) 
ShriR.Prakash 

Shri Chetan L. Hanchate (Alternate) 
The Asstt Director General (PFA) 

DrK.C.Guha 

Dr S. Vanchinathan (Alternate) 
Shri Anil Agarwal 

Shri A. N. Srtvastava (Alternate) 
Dr P. Das Gupta 
Dr G. Mukhopadhyaya 

Dr (Shrimati) Rashmi Bhardwaj (Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. P. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri Amitava Sanyal 

Shri Raj Datta (Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Lahsu 

Shri P. S. Lakshmanan (Alternate) 
Shri Milind Bhole 
Ms M. C Dordi 

Shri N. C. Saha (Alternate) 



(Continued on page 7) 



IS 14997 : 2001 



(Continued from page 6) 

Organization 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
National Dairy Development Board, Anand 
National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Reliance Industries Ltd,Mumbai 

Rollantainers Ltd, Faridabad 
Sriram Fertilizers & Chemicals, Kota 

Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

XPRO India, Faridabad 



Representattve(s) 

Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis (Alternate) 
DrP.K.Seth 
Senior Executive 
Shri J. K. Vadodaria 

Shri V. K. Sharma (Alternate) 
Dr K.S.Jadhav 

Dr R. Rangaprasad (Alternate) 
Shri Sanjaya Varma 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta (Alternate) 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
Shri Pankaj Mtthel 

Shri Vineet Gupta (Alternate) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 12 (1376). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 



Regional Offices 
Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

f 323 76 17 
\323 38 41 

f337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1.337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



254 12 16,254 14 42 
254 25 19,254 13 15 

f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
L832 78 91, 832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZJABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed atPrabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



