**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13900 (1993) : Generic specification for colour picture 
tube with electrostatic focussing and electromagnetic 
deflection for colour television receivers [LITD 4: 
Electron Tubes and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13900: 1993 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

GENERIC SPECIFICATION FOR COLOUR 
PICTURE TUBE WITH ELECTROSTATIC 
FOCUSSING AND ELECTROMAGNETIC 

DEFLECTION FOR COLOUR TELEVISION 

RECEIVERS 



UDC 621-397-331-242 : 621-397-446 



© BIS 1993 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI HOOoiV 

November 1993 Prf«e Group 3 



Electron Tubes Sectional Committee, LTD 9 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of 
Electron Tubes Sectional Committee ( LTD 9 ) and approval of Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council. 

This standard is derived from the provisional specification PQC 97 'Generic specification for 
colour picture tube with electrostatic focussing and electromagnetic deflection for colour 
television receivers' which was prepared by India under International Quality Assessment 
System for Electronics Components ( IECQ ). 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ 



IS 13900 : 1993 



Indian Standard 



GENERIC SPECIFICATION FOR COLOUR 
PICTURE TUBE WITH ELECTROSTATIC 
FOCUSSING AND ELECTROMAGNETIC 

DEFLECTION FOR COLOUR TELEVISION 

RECEIVERS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard contains: 

— Measurement procedure for electric and 
photometric parameters, 

— Environmental testing procedure, and 

— Operating endurance test procedure; 

for colour picture tubes ( CPT ) with electro- 
static focussing and electromagnetic deflection 
for colour television receivers, 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are 

necessary adjuncts to this standard. 

3 GENERAL 

3.1 Marking 

3.1.1 The picture tube shall be attached with a 
label containing the following data: 

— Identification of the picture tube, allotted 
to it by the manufacturer; 

— Serial number; 

— The date of manufacture of the picture 
tube ( the year and the month ), in code 
or otherwise; 

— Trade mark; 

— Country of manufacture; and 

— Safety warning. 

3.1*2 The following data shall be indicated on 
the package: 

— Identification of the picture tube allot- 
ted to it by the manufacturer; 

— Trade mark; and 

— The number of inspection lot. 

4 QUALITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
4.1 Primary Stage of Manufacture 

The primary stages of manufacture are the 
process of deposition of the material of the 
viewing screen, assembly of electron gun struc- 
ture and the activition of the cathode. 



These processes shall be under the control of 
the manufacturer but need not be carried out at 
the same location. 

4.2 Structurally Similar Components 

When simultaneous or successive production is 
proceeding on several types of tubes having 
common features, those common features may 
be sampled from each lot of each type. 

4.3 Qualification Approval Procedures 

The manufacturer shall 

— meet the requirements for the primary 
stage of manufacture contained in 4.1 of 
this document. 

— produce evidence of conformance to the 
specification requirements on three con- 
secutive lots for lot-by-lot inspection and 
on one lot for periodic inspection and 
qualification approval. 

Samples shall be taken from the lots in accor- 
dance with IS 10673 : 1983. Normal inspection 
shall be used, but where the sample size is that 
which would give acceptance on zero defectives, 
additional specimens shall be taken to meet the 
sample size to give acceptance on one defective. 

4.4 Quality Conformance Inspection 

The blank details specification ( see IS 13899 : 
1993 ) shall prescribe the minimum test schedule. 
This schedule shall also specify the division into 
subgroups for the purpose of lot-by-lot and 
periodic inspection. 

4.5 Alternative Test Methods 

The test and measurement methods given in the 
relevant specification are not necessarily the 
only methods which can be used. However, the 
manufacturer shall satisfy the Inspection 
Authority that any alternative method which 
he may use will give results equivalent to those 
obtained by the methods specified. In case 
of dispute, for referee and reference purposes 
the specified methods only shall be used. 



1 



JS 13900 : 1993 



5 TEST AND MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES 

5.1 Standard Conditions for Test 

Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be 
carried out under standard atmospheric condi- 
tions for testing as specified below: 



15 



35 °C 



45^75 % 



Temperature 

Relative humidity 

Atmospheric pressure 86 — 106 kPa 

5.2 Visual Inspection 

Visual inspection shall be carried out under 
standard atmospheric conditions of test and 
show that: 

— Marking is legible; 

— There are no freely moving particles 
available; 

— There is no corrosion occurring on metal 
surface; and 

— External conductive coating quality is 
satisfactory. 

5.3 Marking 

The markings shall not become illegible on 
storage and during service through normal 
handling. 

5.4 Check of Dimensions 

The dimensioned outline drawing shall be as 
stated in IS 5840 ( Parts 1, 2, and 3 ) : 1970. 

5.5 Test and Measurement Procedures 

Measurement conditions shall be as stated in 
IS 10503 : 1983. 

5.5.1 Total Cathode Current 

Purpose — To measure total cathode current 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to 
the tube electrodes and if specified, apply scan 
deflection. Adjust g2 voltage to given visual 
cut-off of spot or raster. The cathode current 
shall be equal to or greater than the value 
calculated as follows: 

Cathode current 1=K ( Cut off voltage ) 3/2 
where K is cathode factor specified. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable; 

— Deflection/raster screen requirements; and 

— Cathode factor K. 



Procedure— Apply the specified voltage (current) 
to the heater and measure the current ( voltage)- 
When specified, the test shall be made at a 
point in time after application of the supply. 
In the absence of any specified preheat time, 
the heater voltage ( current ) shall have stabi- 
lized. In case of dispute, d.c. supply shall be 
used. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Heater voltage or current; and 

— Pre-heat time, if required. 



5.5.2 Heater Voltage and/or Current 

Purpose — To measure the heater 
( current ). 



voltage 



5.5.3 Heater-Cathode Leakage 

Purpose — To measure the leakage current flow- 
ing between the heater and the cathode. 

Procedure — Apply the specified heater voltage 
or current. Apply the heater to cathode 
voltage with the neater at a ( 1 ) positive and 
(2) negative potential with respect to the 
cathode. Measure the stable current between 
the heater and the cathode for each condition. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Heater voltage or current, and 

— Heater to cathode voltage. 

5.5.4 Anode Voltage Breakdown /Voltage Break- 
down ( Flashover ) 

Purpose — To verify that when the tube is 
operated with the maximum rated voltages there 
is no evidence of flashover. 

Method A 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Display the specified raster 
over the useful screen area and adjust g2 vol- 
tage to give the specified screen luminance or 
to cut-off value as required. There shall be no 
sign of flashover within a specified period. 

If required, adjust the g2 voltage to cut-off 
value and remove the deflecting fields. Tap 
the tube neck using a forked, rubber covered, 
wooden hammer for a specified, duration un- 
less otherwise specified, the periodicity shall 
be four taps per second. A suitable design for 
a hammer is given in Fig. 1. 

The tube shall be deemed not to comply with 
the requirements if flashover causes visible 
excitation of the screen after the first 5 s of 
tapping, and for 15 s after tapping has ceased 
or continuous arcing is observed. 

Method B 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. The circuit shall include a 



IS 13900 : 1993 



specified impedance in the cathode lead and a 
counting device suitable for counting the vol- 
tage pulses which develop over the cathode 
impedance as a result of flashover. Display 
the specified raster over the useful screen area 
and adjust g2 voltage to give the specified screen 
luminance or to cut-off value as required. The 
tube shall be deemed not to comply with the 
requirements if more than a stated number of 
flashes are counted during a specified period 
or continuous arcing is observed. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable; 
■ — Raster scan requirements; 

— Screen luminance, if required; 

— Duration and periodicity of tapping, if 
required; 

— Input impedance of the counting device, 
if applicable; 

— Sensitivity of the counting device, if 
applicable; 

— Time discrimination between successive 
pulses of the counting device, if appli- 
cable; and 

— Period of observation for signs of flash- 
over. 

5.5.5 Stray Emission 

Purpose —To verify that, when the tube is 
operating with the maximum rated voltages, 
there is no evidence of stray emission. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes and adjust g2 voltage to the 
cut-off value. The ambient illumination 
measured at the screen shall not exceed 5 lux. 

= 2 OFF RUBBER TUBE 
k OD 11x10 7*9x46 LONG 




- 55-5 - 



If required, tap the tube neck using a forked, 
rubber covered, wooden hammer for a specified 
duration. Unless otherwise specified, the 
periodicity shall be four taps per second. A 
suitable design for a hammer is given in Fig. 1. 

The tube shall be deemed not to comply with 
the requirements if stray emission causes visible 
excitation of the screen within a specified 
period after the first five seconds of operation. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable; 

— Duration and periodicity of tapping, if 
required; and 

— Period of observation for visible excita- 
tion, if required. 

5.5.6 Current Ratio for R/G and R/B 

Purpose — To determine anode current ratios 
between R/G and R/B. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Display the specified raster 
over the useful screen area and adjust g2 vol- 
tage to give the specified screen luminance or 
to cut-off voltage as required. Measure red 7 
green and blue component of anode current. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltage, as applicable; 

— Raster screen requirements; and 

— Screen luminance, if required. 

5.5.7 Focussing Voltage 

Purpose — To measure the focus electrode 

voltage. 



RUBBER 50-60 SHORE 
DiA 8x42*4 LONG 



STEEL SPRING 00 9*5 x 0IA M9 

38 LONG FITTING TIGHTLY IN HANDLE 



-27- 



-2 OFF WOOD SCREW 
TO SECURE SPRING 



* 2-4 x 45° 



1 



MATERIAL 
HARDWOOD 



-tQ2 ■ 



- 184-5 - 



0SA 17 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. I Hammer for Colour Picture Tube Stray Emission Test 



IS 13900 : 1993 



Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes and produce the specified dis- 
play. Adjust the g2 voltage to the specified 
value or to give the specified screen luminuous 
intensity/luminance or the specified beam 
current. Optimize the focus in two axes at 
right angles by adjustment of the focus. Unless 
specified otherwise this optimization of focus 
shall be performed at the centre of the tube face. 
A convenient magnifier may be used. Measure 
focus electrode voltage as specified. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltage, as applicable; 

— Type of display; and 

— g2 voltage screen luminous intensity/ 
luminance or beam current. 

5.5.8 Cathode Spot CuUoff Voltage 

Purpose — To determine cathode spot cut-off 
voltage. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Measure cathode voltages for 
specified beam current ( typically 0*1 microamps, 
if not specified ). 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable; and 

— Beam current for cut-off. 

5.5.9 Maximum Ratio of Cathode Cut-off 
Voltages, Highest Gun to Lowest Gun 

Purpose — To determine the maximum ratio of 
cathode cut-off voltages. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Switch off the horizontal and 
vertical deflection to get a spot over the screen. 
Measure minimum and maximum cathode spot 
cut-off voltage to determine the ratio. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable. 

5.5.10 Photometric Parameters 

If required inspection conditions of lumi- 
nance, grow chromaticity co-ordinates, non- 
conformity of luminance, non-uniformity of 
screen glow chromaticity, the white colour 
dynamic balance quality shall be specified or 
taken as specified in IS 9883 : 1981- 

5.5.11 Raster Centering Shift 

Purpose — To verify raster centering shift, hori- 
zontal and vertical. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Switch off the horizontal and 



vertical deflection to get a spot over the screen. 
Measure the shift of the spot from the mecha- 
nical centre of the screen vertically and hori- 
zontally separately. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltage, as applicable. 

5.5.12 Centre Resolution 

Purpose — To verify centre resolution 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Display the specified raster 
over the useful screen area and adjust g2 vol- 
tage to give specified screen luminance or to 
cut off value as required. Measure resolution 
at the centre of the tube. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable; 

— Raster scan requirements; and 

— Screen luminance, if required. 

5.5.13 Capacitance Between External Coating to 
Anode 

Purpose — To measure capacitance between 
external coating to anode. 

Procedure — Measure the capacitance between 
the anode button and external conducting coat- 
ing shorted with implosion protection band. 

5.5.14 Centre Beam/Outer Beam Convergence 

Purpose — To measure centre beam/outer beam 
convergence. 

Procedure — ~ Apply the specified voltages to 
the tube electrodes. Display the specified ras- 
ter over the useful screen area and adjust 
g2 voltage to give the specified screen lumi- 
nance or to cut-off voltage as required. Mea- 
sure centre beam convergence ( or outer beam 
convergence ). 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltage, as applicable; 

— Raster screen requirements; and 

— Screen luminance, if required. 

5.5.15 Interelectrode Capacitances 

Purpose — To measure interelectrode capaci- 
tance. 

Procedure — Measure capacitance between 
specific electrode and all other electrodes 
shorted together. 

5.5.16 Resistance Between Metal Hardware and 
Conductive Coating 



IS 13900 : 1993 



Purpose — To measure the resistance between 
external conducting coating and metal hard- 
ware. 

Procedure — Measure the resistance between 
metal hardware, that is, implosion protection 
band and external conductive coating. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— DC supply voltage 1-5 V to 3-0 V. 

5.5.17 Ionizing Radiations 

Purpose — To measure X-ray radiation. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Display the specified raster 
over the useful screen area and adjust g2 vol- 
tage to give the specified screen luminance or 
to cut-off value as required. All controls 
accessible from the outside by hand or by a 
screw driver or any other tool, and those 
internal adjustments or presets which are not 
locked in a reliable manner { solder joints and 
paint locking are examples of adequate lock- 
ing ) are adjusted so as to give maximum radia- 
tion while maintaining an intelligible picture 
for 1 hour at the end of which measurement is 
made. Measure the amount of radiation at 
any readily accessible point using a radiation 
monitor with an effective area of 10 cm 2 at a 
distance of 5 cm from the outer surface of 
the tube. The procedure shall be prescribed 
as in IS 616 : 1986. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Electrode voltages, as applicable; 

— Raster scan requirements; and 

— Screen luminance, if required. 

5.5.18 Quality of Fluorescent Screen and Face- 
plate 

Purpose — To verify that the quality of the 
fluorescent screen and faceplate is within the 
specified limits. 

Procedure — Apply the specified voltages to the 
tube electrodes. Display the specified raster 
( unfocussed ) over the useful screen area and 
adjust g2 voltage to give the specified screen 
luminance. 

Examine the screen for blemishes in accordance 
with the appropriate blemish specification 
( see description of screen blemishes ). A cali- 
brated microscope shall be used where accurate 
measurement is required. Where the screen is 
divided into zones, these may be determined 
either by direct measurement or by the use of 
an engraved graticule or frame. 



Examine the screen for uniformity of brightness 
either by visual inspection or by using a photo- 
meter with a specified aperture to compare 
areas of differing brightness against the speci- 
fied ratio of non-uniformity. 

Description of screen blemishes — The diameter 
of diagonals of the quality zones in the screen 
area shall be specified. Zones are identified 
by letter, zone A being the central quality 
zone, surrounded by zone B, etc. For each zone, 
the maximum number of classified blemishes 
permitted within stated ranges of size and the 
minimum permissible separation between them 
shall be specified. 

The size of the blemish is defined as the sum of 
its length and width divided by two. The per- 
missible separation between any two blemishes 
lying in adjacent quality zones is the sum of the 
permissible separation allowed for each blemish 
in its own zone divided by two. 

Ctasssification of Screen Blemishes 

Dead spots — Areas of no effective luminance, 
including particles of opaque foreign matter in 
the glass faceplate or phosphor, pinholes in the 
phosphor; etc. Diffuse or translucent spots are 
permitted up to twice the size of a sharply 
defined spot. 

Bubbles — Blisters of gas within the thickness 
of the glass. 

Colour spots — Areas of phosphor having a 
colour response markedly different from the 
rest of the screen. Diffuse colour spots are 
permitted up to three times the size of a sharply 
defined spot. 

Cords — Narrow bands of non-homogeneous 
glass having a visibly different index of refrac- 
tion from the surrounding glass. They are 
permitted provided that: 

1) When viewed they do not distort the 
trace on the screen. 

2) They are not visible when the screen is 
viewed with the eye normal to the screen 
and the screen is illuminated with a 
tungsten filament lamp mounted in a line 
in front of, and at approximately 45 degree 
to the screen face. 

Internal etching — An area of the internal 
screen face etched during the chemical cleaning 
process during manufacture. 

T-checks — Fissures in the glass extending 
partially through the thickness. 

Cracks — Fissures in the glass extending through 
the thickness. 



IS 13900 : 1993 



Bruises — Fissures caused by impact. 

Scratches — Elongated abrasion in the surface 
of the glass. 

Chips — Small fragments of glass broken out of 
an otherwise regular surface. 

Shear marks — Scar appearing on the surface of 
the glass. These shall not be permitted within 
the quality zones. 

5.5.19 Dry Heat Test 

The tube shall be subjected to a temperature 
value listed in IS 9000 ( Part 3 ) : 1977. 

5.5.20 Damp Heat Test 

The tube shall be subjected to test prescribed in 
IS 9000 ( Part 4 ) : 1979. 



5.5.21 Cold Test 

The tube shall be subjected to a temperature 
value listed in IS 9000 ( Part 2/Sec 2 ) : 1977. 

5.5.22 Vibration Test 

The tube shall be subjected to test prescribed 
in IS 9000 ( Part 8) : 1981. 

5.5*23 Implosion Protection Test 

The tube shall be subjected to test prescribed 

in 18.2 of IS 616 : 1986. 

5.5.24 Operating Endurance 

The tube shall be operated as specified for 
1 000 hours. 

Conditions to be mentioned 

— Operating conditions, and 

— Parameters for post measurements. 



IS No, 
616 : 1986 



5840 ( Part I ) : 
1970 

5840 ( Part 2 > : 
1970 

5840 ( Part 3 ) 
1970 

9000 



9000 ( Part 2/ 
Sec 1 to 4 ) : 
1977 

9000 ( Part 3/ 
Sec 1 to 5 ) : 
1977 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 2 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



Title 

Safety requirements for mains 
operated electronic and relat- 
ed apparatus for household 
and similar general use 

Dimensions of cathode ray 
tubes : Part 1 Tube out-lines 

Dimension of cathode ray 
tubes : Part 2 Bases 

Dimensions of cathode ray 
tubes : Part 3 EHT terminals 

Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic 
and electrical items 

Part 2 Cold test 



Part 3 Dry heat test 



IS No. 

9000 ( Part 4 ) 
1979 

9000 ( Part $ ) 
1981 

9883 : 1981 



10503 : 1983 
10673 : 1983 

13&99 : 1993 



Title 
Damp heat ( steady 



Part 4 
state ) 

Part & Vibration ( sinusoi- 
dal ) test 

Photometric and calorimetric 
methods of measurements of 
the light emitted by a 
cathode-ray tube screen 

Methods of measurement of 
colour picture tubes 

Sampling plans and proce- 
dures for inspection by attri- 
butes for electronic items 

Blank detail specification for 
colour picture tube with 
electrostatic focussing and 
electromagnetic deflection 
for colour television recie- 
vers 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which isdevised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
produceres may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmoious development of the activities of .standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of- the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 



Doc : No. LTD 9 ( 850 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



T37 

137 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

J331 01 31 

1331 13 75 

84 99, 37 85 61 

86 26, 37 86 62 

T53 38 43, 53 16 40 

J53 23 84 

f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

|235 15 19, 235 23 15 

T632 92 95, 632 78 58 

^632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



