**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^viiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 


•^■•■^^^■r 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14910:2001 
ISO  8727 :  1997 

Indian  Standard 

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION  AND  SHOCK  —  HUMAN 
EXPOSURE  —  BIODYNAMIC  COORDINATE 

SYSTEMS 

ICS  13.160 


©  BIS  2001 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELH1 110002 

February  2Q0^  Price  Group  7 


Mechanical  Vibration  and  Sliocl<  Sectional  Committee,  ME  28 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO  8727: 1997 'Mechanical  vibration  and  shock- 
Human  exposure — Bbdynamic  coordinate  systems'  issued  by  the  Intemational  Organization  for  Stand- 
ardization (ISO)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendations  of  the 
Mechanical  Vibration  and  Shock  Sectional  Committee  and  approval  of  the  Mechanical  Engineering 
Division  Council. 

The  text  of  ISO  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without 
deviations.  In  the  adopted  standard,  certain  conventions  are  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian 
Standards.  Attention  is  especially  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words 'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be 
read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker,  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  cun'ent  practice  is 
to  use  a  point  (.)  as  the  decimal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appears  to  the  following  International  Standard  for  which  Indian 
Standard  also  exists.  The  corresponding  Indian  Standard  which  is  to  be  substituted  in  its  place  is  given 
below  along  with  its  degree  of  equivalence  for  the  edition  Indicated: 

Intemational  Corresponding  Indian  Degree  of 

Standard  Standard  Equivalence 

ISO  5805 : 1 997  IS  1 3281  : 1 999  Mechanical  vibration  Identical 

and  shock  affecting  man — Vocabulary 

The  concerned  technical  committee  has  reviewed  the  provision  of  ISO  1503  :  1977  'Geometrical 
orientations  and  directions  of  movements'  referred  in  this  adopted  standard  and  has  decided  that  it  Is 
acceptable  for  use  in  conjunction  with  this  standard. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final 
value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  2  : 1 960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  {revised).  The  number  of  signifi- 
cant places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard. 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


Indian  Standard 

MECHANICAL  VIBRATION  AND  SHOCK  —  HUMAN 
EXPOSURE  —  BIODYNAMIC  COORDINATE 

SYSTEMS 


1   Scope 

This  International  Standard  specifies  anatomical  and  basicentric  coordinate  systems  for  biodynamical 
measurements,  for  reference  purposes  in  cognate  standards  development,  and  for  precisely  describing  human 
exposure  to  mechanical  vibration  and  shock.  The  segmental  anatomical  coordinate  systems  defined  in  this 
International  StandaTd  are  for  the  head,  root  of  the  neck  (driving-point  for  the  head  and  neck  system),  pelvis,  and 
hand.  General  principles  are  stated  for  the  establishment  of  corresponding  anatomical  coordinate  systems  for  other 
skeletal  body  segments.  The  biodynamic  coordinate  systems  defined  in  this  International  Standard  can  serve  as 
frames  of  reference  for  the  description  and  measurement  of  both  translational  and  rotational  vibration  and  shock 
motion  affecting  humans. 

NOTES 

1  Although  defined  for  human  subjects,  these  anatomical  coordinate  systems  are  adaptable,  using  a  knowledge  of 
comparative  anatomy,  to  non-human  primates  or  to  other  animal  species  whose  skeletal  anatomy  is  recognizably  comparable, 
radiographicaliy,  with  the  relevant  anatomy  of  humans. 

2  When  the  need  arises  for  other  segmental  anatomical  coordinate  systems  (e.g.  for  the  arm,  wrist,  leg  or  foot),  these  should 
be  defined  according  to  corresponding  principles  of  anatomy  and  of  standardization,  and  may  be  proposed  for  inclusion  in 
subsequent  revisions  of  this  International  Standard. 

3  This  International  Standard  recognizes  no  difference  between  male  and  female  skeletal  anatomy  bearing  upon  the  definition 
and  use  of  biodynamic  coordinate  systems.  Moreover,  the  same  principles  apply  when  defining  anatomical  coordinate  systems 
for  children,  and  for  non-human  mammalian  species  used  in  ethical  biodynamics  research,  development,  testing  and 

evaluation. 


2  Normative  references 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions  which,  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of  this 
International  Standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  editions  indicated  were  valid.  Ail  standards  are  subjected  to 
revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this  International  Standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standards  indicated  below.  Mehibers  of  lEC  and  ISO  maintain 
registers  of  currently  valid  International  Standards. 

ISO  1503:1977,  Geometrical  orientation  and  directions  of  movements. 

ISO  5805:1997,  Mechanical  vibration  and  shocl<  —  Human  exposure  —  Vocabulary. 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 

3  Biodynamic  coordinate  systems 


standard  biodynamic  coordinate  systenns  shall  be  used,  if  practicable,  whenever  collecting,  transforming,  analysing, 
reporting,  describing,  comparing,  or  evaluating  human  mechanical  vibration  and  shock  input  data  and  consequent 
human  body  structural  and  system  responses. 

NOTES 

1  A  biodynamic  coordinate  system  may  be  oriented  with  respect  to  a  hierarchy  of  coordinate  systems  within  inertia!  space  (see 
figures  A.I  and  A.2).  Such  inertia!  reference  systems  may  be  geocentric,  in  which  the  principal  or  normal  axis  lies  in  the 
direction  of  earth's  gravity,  or  basicentric,  originating  in  the  contacting  surface  (or  some  fully  orientatable  structure  connected 
rigidly  thereto)  through  v/tiich  the  force  or  motion  of  interest  is  transmitted  to  the  body.  Basicentric  coordinate  systems  may,  for 
example,  be  defined  with  respect  to  the  stmcture  of  a  vehicle,  a  workplace,  or  a  laboratory,  to  an  immediate  source  of  vibration 
or  shock  affecting  persons,  such  as  a  vibrating  tool  or  appliance,  or  to  a  research  vibration  machine,  motion  simulator  or  impact 
device.  For  research  and  evaluation  purposes,  a  biodynamic  coordinate  system  may  itself  provide  the  external  frame  of 
reference  for  an  instrumentation  coordinate  system,  used  to  define  inertial  measurements  made  upon  or  within  the  human 
body. 

2  Geometrically  speaking,  the  human  body  may,  for  any  given  posture,  be  treated  as  a  fully-oriented  object  (see  figure  A.3). 

3  The  use  of  coordinate  systems  originating  in  amorphous  or  flexible  soft-tissue  or  surface  anatomical  features  which  are 
defomnable  or  freely  mobile  within  the  body  (e.g.  coordinate  systems  loosely  defined  as  centred  in  the  heart  or  the  buttocks) 
precludes  the  precise  acquisition  or  comparison  of  biodynamic  data,  and  is  accordingly  deprecated.  The  anatomical  systems 
defined  in  this  Intemational  Standard  all  originate  in,  and  are  oriented  with  respect  to,  radiographically  or  stereotactically 
determinable  (including  palpable)  bony  landmarics.  Moreover,  these  systems  are  adaptable,  for  the  purpose  of  comparative 
biodynamics,  to  mammalian  species  other  than  humans,  £uid  to  mechanical  analogue  models  (dummies  or  manikins)  of 
humans. 

4  A  radiographically  determinable  landmari(  means  one  that,  for  research  or  reference  purposes,  can  be  visualized,  and  its 
position  measured,  by  methods  of  X-ray  or  ultrasonic  radiographlcal  anthropometry.  It  may  also  be  (but  not  necessarily  is) 
detenninable  stereotactically,  if  it  is  palpable  (or  reliably  related  to  structures  that  are  palpable)  in  the  surface  anatomy.  It  is  of 
course  recognized  that  in  many  areas  and  applications  it  may  be  impossible  or  impractical  to  define  the  relevant  bony  anatomy 
by  radiographical  methods.  Nevertheless,  the  applicable  anatomical  coordinate  system  or  systems  should  be  identified  when 
inertial  measurements  are  made  on  humans,  and  the  measurements  related  to  the  standard  anatomical  coordinate  system(s) 
to  the  extent  practicable. 

3.1  Direction 

All  orthogonal  coordinate  systems  adopted  in  biodynamics  shall  be  defined  as  right-handed  (see  figure  A.4). 
Definitions  of  x-,  y-  and  z-axes  for  anatomical  coordinate  systems  shall  be  in  accordance  with  ISO  5805  (see 
figures  A.5  and  A.6  for  examples  of  these  axes).  Definitions  of  orientations  and  axes  for  basicentric  systems  (e.g.  in 
vehicles)  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  ISO  1 503. 

NOTE  —  An  exception  to  the  rule  regarding  right-handedness  of  the  coordinate  system  may  be  made  in  the  case  of  the 
anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand)  adopted  specifically  for  measurements  in  the  left  hand  (see  3.4.1). 

3.2  Biodynamic  coordinate  systems  for  the  wliole  body 

3.2.1   Whole-body  anatomical  coordinate  system 

For  most  purposes  (for  example,  when  considering  force  or  motion  inputs  to  the  whole  body  from  a  contact  or 
supporting  surface  upon  which  the  person  is  standing,  sitting  or  lying),  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  of  choice 
shall  be  that  defined  for  the  pelvis  (see  3.3.4). 

NOTES 

1  When  practical  considerations  cleariy  dictate  that  it  is  more  appropriate  to  do  so,  whole-body  inputs  may  be  defined  with 
reference  to  an  alternative  system  within  the  torso,  which,  together  with  the  posture  and  the  orientation  of  the  body  with  respect 
to  the  source  of  the  vibration  or  shock,  should  be  defined  unambiguously  when  reporting  data  referenced  to  this  alternative 
coordinate  system.  For  example,  whole-body  inputs  applied  mainly  to  a  person's  back,  as  from  a  vibrating  seat-back  or  a 
motorized  backpack  appliance,  may  be  related  to  the  upper  torso  anatomical  coordinate  system.  Unless  otherwise  specified, 
whole-body  vibration  or  shock  shall  be  deemed  to  be  applied  to  persons  in  the  (conventional)  "normal"  anatomical  position,  that 
Is,  with  the  2-axis  of  the  principal  axial  segmental  (i.e.  head  and  trunk)  anatomical  coordinate  systems  approximately  parallel, 
the  limbs  aligned,  and  the  palms  facing  fonward.  When  a  particular  posture  is  adopted  (e.g.  sitting)  during  human  vibration 


IS    14910  :  2001 
JSO   8727  :1997 

measurements,  as  precise  an  attempt  as  possible  should  be  made  to  specify  the  relative  orientation  of  segmental  coordinate 
systems  relevant  to  the  measurement.  This  rrrny  be  done  by  quantifying  the  extent  of  rotation  of  the  principal  axes  of  each 
segmental  anatomical  coordinate  system  (and,  if  appropriate,  displacement  of  the  system's  origin)  with  respect  to  its  normal 
anatomical  position. 

2  Bilateral  (left-right)  skeletal  symmetry  of  the  human  body  is  an  assumption  implicit  in  the  adoption  of  the  anatomical 
coordinate  systems  recommended  in  this  International  Standard. 

3.2.2  Basicentric  coordinate  systems  for  the  whole  body 

3.2.2.1  Basicentric  coordinate  system  for  standing  persons 

Origin:  The  midpoint  of  a  line  in  the  plane  of  a  contact  surface  (e.g.  a  ship's  deck  or  the  floor  of  a  vehicle  containing 
standing  crew  or  passengers)  supporting  the  standing  pei^on,  passing  beneath  the  lowenTK>st  points  of  the  heel 
bones  (catcanei). 

NOTE  —  The  orientation  of  this  line  in  the  plane  of  the  contact  surface  can  be  defined  with  respect  to  the  coplanar  orientation 
of  that  surface  as  a  practical  matter,  when  there  is  a  habitual  stance  upon  it  (e.g.  of  a  human  operator  at  a  worietation). 

Orientation:  The  y-axis  is  the  line  defined  above,  with  the  positive  direction  lying  to  the  subject's  left.  The  x-axis 
passes  through  the  origin,  lies  in  the  plane  of  the  contact  surface,  and  is  perpendicular  to  the  y-axis.  The  z-axis  is 
mutually  perpendicular  to  the  other  two  axes  (hence,  normal  to  the  contact  surface). 

NOTE  —  The  orientations  of  a  basicentric  coordinate  system  with  respect  to  the  direction  of  gravity  (or  to  a  geocentric 
coordinate  system)  varies  with  the  orientation  of  a  vehicle  and  with  the  relative  orientation  of  a  vehksle  and  with  the  orientation 
of  supporting  surfaces  within  the  vehicle.  It  may  from  time  to  time  happen  that  the  z-axes  of  the  major  anatomical  (head, 
pelvis),  basicentric  and  geocentric  coordinate  systems  are  all  approximately  aligned,  as  when  a  person  stands  on  a  ship's  deck 
In  a  calm  sea  and  gazes  ahead  at  the  horizon.  However,  non-alignment  is  mote  frequently  the  rule  (for  example,  when  a 
person  reclines  in  a  car  seat  while  the  vehicle  is  climbing  a  hill,  see  3.2.2.2). 

3.2.2.2  Basicentric  coordinate  system  for  seated  persons 

Origin:  The  midpoint  of  a  line  in  the  plane  of  a  contact  surface  (e.g.  a  vehicle  seat)  supporting  a  seated  person, 
passing  through  the  pressure  area  of  the  buttocks  and  beneath  the  lowermost  points  of  the  ischial  tuberosities. 

NOTE  —  The  orientation  of  this  line  in  the  plane  of  the  contact  surface  can  be  defined  with  respect  to  the  coplanar  orientation 
of  that  surface  as  a  practical  matter,  when  there  is  a  habitual  sitting  position  and  seat  alignment  (e.g.  of  a  human  operator  at  a 

workstation). 

Orientation:  Defined  with  respect  to  the  origin  and  the  plane  of  the  contact  surface  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in 
which  a  basicentric  system  for  standing  persons  is  defined  above.  The  direction  of  the  /-axis  is  positive  to  the 
subject's  left. 

NOTES 

1  In  a  normal  sitting  posture,  the  orientation  of  the  principal  axis  of  the  basicentric  coordinate  system  for  persons  seated  on  a 
flat  seat  may  be  assumed  to  approximate  to  that  of  the  corresponding  axis  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (pelvis). 

2  For  some  applications,  a  basicentric  cc/ordinate  system  for  a  vehicle  driver  (or  a  mechanical  human  analogue)  originating  at 
the  seat  index  point,  SIP,  (see  ISO  5353)  is  used  as  a  frame  of  reference,  for  example,  in  ergonomic  or  human  factors 
engineering  evaluations  of  tractor  seats  and  the  like.  Its  use  presupposes  that  the  seat  is  normally  positioned  and  centred  in  its 
ranges  of  adjustment  with  respect  to  the  vehicle  frame,  and  relates  measurements  to  the  geometry  of  the  vehicle.  Reference  to 
the  H-point  (equivalent  to  the  SIP  for  a  normal  adjustment  of  a  tractor  operator's  seat)  is  sometimes  used  for  human 
engineering  purposes  in  the  automotive  industry.  This  practice,  which  has  not  been  generally  accepted  Internationally,  is 
generally  not  used  in  the  context  of  biodynamical  evaluations  of  human  exposure  to  vehicle  vibration  and  shock  motion. 

3  When  whole-body  vibration  measurements  are  taken  from  a  suitable  fonnned  instrumentation-mount  interposed  at  the 
Interface  between  a  rider  and  his  seat  (see  ISO  10326-1),  the  mount  serves  as  the  contact  surface  In  which  the  origin  and 
orientation  of  the  basicentric  coordinate  system  for  the  seated  person  may  be  defined,  that  in  tum  provides  the  frame  of 
reference  for  the  related  instrumentation  coordinate  system. 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 

4  When  analysing,  comparing  and  reporting  biodynamical  data  or  interpreting  hiuman  vibration  and  sliock  standards  applying 
to  seated  subjects,  due  allowance  should  be  made  (or  any  significant  angle  that  may  stand  between  the  seat  and  the 
geocentric  (or  vehicular)  and  instrumentation  coordinate  systems. 

3.3  Segmental  anatomical  coordinate  systems 

NOTE  —  An  assumption  implicit  in  the  definition  and  adoption  of  the  following  anatomical  coordinate  systems  is  that  the 
respective  body  segment  for  which  each  system  is  established  obeys  to  a  sufficient  approximation  the  laws  of  rigid-body 
mechanics.  (This  has  been  demonstrated  for  certain  biodynamically  important  skeletal  segments,  namely,  the  head  and  the 
pelvis.)  For  examples,  see  figures  A.I  to  A.6. 

3.3.1  Anatomical  coordinate  system:  liead 

Origin:  The  midpoint  of  a  line  connecting  the  superior  margins  of  the  right  and  left  external  auditory  ineatus  of  the 
skull. 

NOTE  —  In  classical  anatomy,  that  line  is  the  base  of  a  triangle  defining  the  transverse  plane  of  the  human  skull  (the  apex,  i.e. 
the  third  point  defining  that  plane,  is  conventionally  the  left  infraorbital  notch). 

Orientation:  The  x-axis  of  this  system  passes  posteroanteriorly  through  the  origin  and  lies  in  the  transverse  plane 
of  the  head.  The  y-axis  passes  through  the  origin,  is  directed  positively  to  the  left,  lies  in  the  same  plane,  and  is 
perpendicular  to  the  x-axis.  The  z-axis  is  mutually  perpendicular  to  the  other  two  axes  and  is  directed  approximately 
through  the  vertex  of  the  skull. 

3.3.2  Anatomical  coordinate  system:  root  of  necl( 

Origin:  The  anterior  superior  border  of  the  body  of  the  first  thoracic  vertebra  (T1)  in  the  midplane  of  that  vertebra. 

Orientation:  The  x-axis  of  this  system  passes  through  the  origin  and,  posteroanteriorly,  through  the  midpoint  of  a 
line  in  the  midplane  of  T1  connecting  the  posterosuperior  and  posteroinferior  points  of  the  posterior  spinous  process 
of  T1 .  The  y-axis  passes  through  the  origin  and  is  mutually  perpendicular  to  the  x-  and  z-axes.  The  z-axis  passes 
through  the  origin,  lies  in  the  midplane  of  T1 ,  and  is  perpendicular  to  the  x-axis. 

NOTE  —  The  axes  of  this  system  are  not  necessarily  exactly  parallel  with  the  corresponding  axes  of  the  major  axial  segmental 
anatomical  coordinate  systems  (head,  pelvis)  in  the  normal  anatomical  position,  and  there  will  in  any  case  be  divergences  with 
changes  in  posture.  However,  for  the  purposes  of  describing  force  and  motion  inputs  to  the  upper  torso  and  the  root  of  the  neck 
in  the  normal  anatomical  position,  a  sufficient  approximation  may  be  presumed  to  exist  between  the  orientation  for  the 
midplane  of  T1  and  the  midsagittal  plane  of  the  trunk.  A  precise  description  of  the  postural  relationships  between  body 
segments  is  needed  to  define  the  orientation  of  these  systems  in  inertial  space. 

3.3.3  Anatomical  coordinate  system:  upper  torso 

Origin:  The  anterior  superior  border  of  the  fourth  thoracic  vertebra  (T4)  in  the  midsagittal  plane. 
Orientation:  Defined  in  the  corresponding  manner  as  for  T1  above. 
NOTE  —  Note  in  3.3.2  applies  equally  to  this  system. 

3.3.4  Anatomical  coordinate  system:  pelvis 

Origin:  The  midpoint  of  a  line  connecting  the  right  and  left  anterior  superior  iliac  spines.  That  imaginary  line  forms 
the  base  of  an  inverted  triangle  connecting  the  anterior  superior  iliac  spines  with  the  most  superior  anterior  point  of 
the  symphysis  pubis  (which  accordingly  fomns  the  apex  of  the  triangle). 

Orientation:  The  x-axis  of  this  system  projects  anterioriy  from  the  origin,  it  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the 
triangle  defined  above.  The  y-axis  is  the  line  passing  from  right  to  left  that  connects  the  anterior  superior  iliac 
spines.  The  z-axis  of  the  system  passes  through  the  origin  and  is  mutually  perpendicular  to  the  other  two  axes,  it 
lies  in  the  plane  of  the  triangle  and  bisects  it. 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 

NOTES 

1  The  z-axis  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (pelvis)  is  approximately  vertical  in  humans  standing  upright  on  a  horizontal 
surface  or  sitting  erect  on  a  horizontal  flat  seat. 

2  The  pelvic  anatomical  reference  points  defining  the  basic  triangle  used  to  establish  this  coordinate  system,  although  they  are 
normally  palpable  in  the  living  human  subject  and  in  the  cadaver  (and  are  identifiable  radiographically),  cannot  yet  be  defined 
with  complete  precision,  for  they  are  irregularly  rounded  bony  prominences.  They  may  in  due  course  be  superseded  by  more 
exactly  determinable  pelvic  reference  points  if  such  can  be  established  by  anatomists.  Moreover,  biodynamical  applications  of 
this  coordinate  system  assume  approximate  bilateral  symmetry  of  the  pelvis. 

3  In  biodynamical  measurements  in  which  the  motion  of  the  pelvis  is  assumed  to  generate  the  mechanical  input  to  the  lumbar 
spine,  it  Is  necessary  in  any  final  analysis  to  define  the  location  and  orientation  of  the  interface  between  the  sacrum  and  the 
body  of  the  fifth  lumbar  vertebra  (L5). 

4  Although  in  reclining  and  recumbent  postures,  substantial  fractions  of  the  weight  of  the  person  may  be  distributed  through 
the  upper  body  and  the  limbs,  impressed  vibration  or  shock  may  nevertheless  be  deemed  to  act  through  the  pelvis  or  the 
body's  approximate  centre  of  mass  for  the  purposes  of  evaluating  human  exposure  to  whole-body  vibration  or  shock. 
Significant  exceptions  to  this  general  rule  should  be  reported. 

3.4  Biodynamic  coordinate  systems  for  the  hand 

3.4.1    Anatomical  coordinate  system:  hand 

Origin:  The  centre  of  the  head  of  the  third  metacarpal  bone  (middle  knuckle)  of  either  hand. 

Orientation:  This  system  is  oriented  to  the  bony  anatomy  of  the  hand  by  the  z-ax\s,  the  z-axis  passes  proximally 
through  the  origin  and  is  the  long  axis  of  the  third  metacarpal  bone.  The  x-axis  of  the  system  is  approximately 
normal  to  the  palm  of  the  hand,  projecting  anteriorly  from  the  origin  when  the  hand  ties  open  in  the  normal 
anatomical  position,  i.e.  palms  facing  fon/vard  (see  figure  A.3).  The  y-axis  passes  through  the  origin,  approximately 
from  the  root  of  the  first  to  that  of  the  little  finger,  and  is  mutually  perpendicular  to  the  x-  and  z-axes. 

NOTES 

1  As  part  of  a  right-handed  orthogonal  coordinate  system,  the  y-axis  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand)  is  defined  as 
running  from  right  to  left  (i.e.  from  the  root  of  the  forefinger  towards  the  root  of  the  little  finger  of  the  right  hand  in  the  normal 
anatomical  position).  The  mirror  image  of  this  system  may  be  applied  specifically  to  measurements  in  the  left  hand,  but  such 
usage  should  be  unambiguously  identified  when  used  as  the  basis  for  reporting  hand-transmitted  vibration  data  (see 
ISO  5349).  Use  of  a  left-handed  anatomical  coordinate  system,  while  reasonable  for  application  to  symmetrical  parts  on  the  left 
side  of  the  body,  can  lead  to  anomalies  in  vector  algebra  if  resulting  data  are  compared  directly  with  those  derived  using  a 
right-handed  system  (e.g.  incorrect  sign  of  vector  cross-products). 

2  The  absolute  orientation  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand)  necessarily  varies  with  the  position  and  posture  of  the 
hand,  wrist  and  upper  limb.  Accordingly,  it  is  rarely  parallel  with  the  correspondingly  designated  coordinate  systems  of  the  axial 
body  segments  (head,  thorax,  pelvis).  The  posture  of  the  arm  and  hand  should  be  defined  as  precisely  as  practicable  when 
reference  is  made  to  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand).  The  orientation  of  the  system  may  for  many  practical  purposes 
be  independently  defined  with  reference  to  an  appropriate  basicentric  coordinate  system  originating,  for  example,  in  a  vibrating 
appliance,  a  workpiece,  or  a  handle  or  control  device  held  by  the  hand  in  question.  Such  a  basicentric  system  may 

^simultaneously  serve  as  the  frame  of  reference  for  the  instrumentation  coordinate  system  when  instrumentation  is  fixed  to  the 
object  grasped,  for  the  purpose  of  measuring  vibration  transmitted  to  the  same  hand. 

3  When,  as  Is  commonly  done  in  handling  vibrating  tools  or  hand-held  appliances,  the  hand  is  used  to  grasp  a  cylindrical  or 
approximately  cylindrical  handle,  the  y-axis  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand)  may  not  necessarily  be  assumed  to  lie 
parallel  with  the  axis  of  the  handle,  although  such  an  assumption  may  be  a  sufficient  approximation  for  some  measurement 
purposes.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  orientation  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand),  being  defined  by  the  orientation  of 
the  third  metacarpal  bone,  is,  over  a  wide  range  of  movement,  essentially  independent  of  flexion  or  extension  of  the  fingers 
(see  figure  A.6). 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 

3.4.2  Basicentric  coordinate  system  for  hand-transmitted  force  or  motion 

3.4.2.1  In  the  case  of  appliances  grasped  by  one  or  both  hands 

Origin:  A  defined  point  on  a  line  in  the  surface  of  the  handle  or  barrel  of  the  appliance  lying  parallel  with  the  axis  of 
the  cylinder  approximated  by  the  handle  or  barrel  from  which  measurements  are  to  be  taken  or  standards  applied, 
or  on  a  line  defined  by  two  recognizable  points  on  the  handle  or  barrel. 

NOTE  —  Alternatively,  the  origin  of  the  basicentric  system  may  be  identified  as  the  midpoint  of  the  axis  of  the  cylinder 
approximated  by  the  handle  or  barrel  of  the  appliance,  when  that  axis  is  accessible  as  a  measurement  point  for  direct 
instrumentation  or  by  geometrical  transformation  of  the  data.  In  every  case,  however,  and  whichever  method  is  adopted,  the 
location  of  the  origin,  and  the  orientation  of  the  basicentric  coordinate  system  (hand),  should  be  carefully  reported.  Precision  in 
this  regard  is  of  particular  importance  in  the  measurement  of  hand-transmitted  vibration. 

Orientation:  The  x-axis  of  this  system  passes  through  the  origin  and  projects  in  the  line  containing  the  origin,  as 
defined  above.  When  the  x-axis  approximates  the  principal  functional  axis  of  the  appliance  (e.g.  as  in  the  barrel  of 
an  electric  drill  or  a  pneumatic  chipping  hammer)  or  a  line  parallel  to  it,  the  positive  direction  of  the  x-axis  shall  be 
deemed  to  lie  in  the  direction  of  action  of  the  appliance  (mostly  towards  the  workpiece).  In  the  case  of  a  handle  lying 
athwart  the  direction  of  action  or  making  a  large  angle  with  it  (e.g.  the  handles  of  chain-saws),  the  positive  direction 
of  the  X-axis  shall  be  deemed  to  lie  in  the  thenar  direction  (towards  the  placement  of  the  root  of  the  thumb)  as 
defined  by  the  customary  method  of  holding  or  guiding  the  appliance  in  normal  operation  when  the  handle  or  barrel 
is  grasped  by  a  right-handed  user.  The  y-axis  of  the  basicentric  system  (hand)  intersects  the  x-axis  at  the  origin,  is 
perpendicular  to  it,  and  is  normal  to  the  surface  of  the  handle  or  barrel  at  the  notional  point  of  input  to  the  user's 
hand  or  an  instrumentation  mounting.  The  z-axis  passes  through  the  origin  and  is  mutually  perpendicular  to  the 
X-  and  y-axes. 

NOTE  —  The  system  here  defined  is  most  appropriate  to  measurements  on  appliances  (bearing  a  general  resemblance  to  the 
form  of  a  handgun)  in  which  one  hand  holds  a  handle  having  an  axis  approximately  at  right  angles  to  the  principal  geometric 
axis  or  line  of  action  of  the  machine,  while  the  other  hand  may  be  used  to  support  or  guide  the  body  or  barrel  of  the  appliance. 
In  many  such  machines  (e.g.  electric  drills,  pneumatic  chippers,  riveting  machines),  the  body  of  the  appliance  approximates  a 
cylinder  with  the  principal  axis  lying  in  the  direction  of  action  of  the  tool.  Similar  basicentric  systems  may  be  defined  for  the 
handles  or  other  contact  surfaces  of  power  saws,  road-breakers  and  most  appliances  normally  grasped,  guided  or  supported 
by  both  hands,  and  also  for  separately  held  tools  (e.g.  chisels  struck  with  a  hammer)  and  wori<pieces. 

3.4.2.2  In  the  case  of  appliances  or  workplaces  guided  or  pressed  upon  by  the  palm  and  fingers  without 
grasping 

Origin:  The  centre  (as  precisely  as  can  be  determined  or  defined  when  the  palm  or  fingers  are  applied  to  the  tool  or 
workpiece  in  nonnal  operation)  of  a  surface  circumscribing  the  pressure  area  of  the  contact  surface  between  the 
hand  and  the  tool  or  workpiece. 

Orientation:  The  x-axis  of  this  system  passes  through  the  origin  and  is  normal  to  the  above-mentioned  surface. 
The  positive  direction  of  the  x-axis  shall  be  deemed  to  lie  in  the  direction  of  applrcation  of  the  hand  to  the  appliance. 
The  y-axis  passes  through  the  origin,  is  perpendicular  to  the  x-axis,  and  accordingly  lies  in  the  surface  of  the 
pressure  area.  The  y-axis  is  oriented  to  be  as  closely  parallel  as  can  be  determined  with  the  y-axis  of  the 
anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand)  of  the  applied  hand,  in  its  customary  or  most  frequent  position  of  use,  or, 
alternatively,  in  a  line  detemnined  by  two  recognizable  points  on  the  appliance.  The  z-axis  of  the  basicentric  system 
(hand)  passes  through  the  origin  and  is  mutually  perpendicular  to  the  x-  and  y-axes.  Alternatively,  a  basicentric 
system  may  be  used  that  is  centred  in  the  face  of  the  appliance  or  workpiece  to  which  the  hand  is  applied  and 
oriented  geometrically  with  respect  to  the  structure  of  the  appliance  or  workpiece.  In  all  cases,  the  respective  origins 
and  orientations  of  the  basicentric  and  instrumentation  coordinate  systems  used  should  be  clearly  and  precisely 
reported. 

NOTE  —  Whenever  practicable,  the  orientations  of  the  axes  of  a  machine-based  coordinate  system  should  be  defined  with 
respect  to  the  worthing  axis  or  the  general  functional  geometry  of  the  appliance,  in  accordance  with  the  principles  established  in 
ISO  1503.  In  some  applications,  the  basicentric  coordinate  system  may  usefully  be  deemed  to  originate  at  a  point  lying  on  the 
working  axis  of  the  machine  or  in  a  recognizable  position  on  a  worKpiece. 


6 


iS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


Annex  A 

(informative) 

Diagrammatic  iilustrations  of  biodynamic  coordinate  systems 

Diagrams  of  biodynamic  coordinate  systems  are  shown  in  figures  A.  1  to  A.6.  Figures  A.5  and  A.6  illustrate  the 
approximate  directions  of  the  x-  and  z-axes  defined  for  the  major  anatomical  segments  addressed  in  this 
International  Standard.  In  each  case,  the  y-axis  must  be  imagined  as  projecting  normally  to  the  plane  of  the 
illustration.  Note  that  these  diagrams  are  to  illustrate  principles  only,  they  are  not  drawn  to  scale,  nor  intended  to  be 
anatomically  exact. 


Key 

1  Geocentric  coordinate  system  (laboratory  frame  of  reference) 

2  Origin  of  basicentric  coordinate  system  (e.g.  a  vibration  test  table) 

3  Origin  of  an  anatomical  coordinate  system  (head) 

4  Origins  of  instrumentation  coordinate  systems  (e.g.  head-mounted  and  seat  reference  accelerometers) 


Figure  A.I  —  Diagrammatic  illustration  of  a  hierarchy  of  biodynamic  coordinate  systems  in  a  fixed  location, 

such  as  a  laboratory 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


Key 

2  Origins  of  basicentric  coordinate  systems  (e.g.  seat  datum  and  aircraft  centre  of  gravity) 

3  Origin  of  an  anatomical  coordinate  system  (iiead) 


NOTE  —  The  example  sliown  represents  the  pilot  in  an  aircraft  climbing  in  flight.  Note  that,  although  not  illustrated  here,  it 
would  be  possible  to  include  both  person-  and  aircraft-mounted  instrumentation,  with  each  mount  having  a  defined 
instrumentation  coordinate  system,  referenceable  to  the  human  anatomy  or  to  the  airframe,  respectively,  and  to  define 
instantaneously  the  orientation  of  the  aircraft's  (basicentric)  coordinate  systems  with  respect  to  the  geocentric  vertical  (direction 
of  gravity). 

Figure  A.2  —  Diagrammatic  illustration  of  a  hierarchy  of  blodynamic  coordinate  systems  in  a  freely  moving 

vehicle 


8 


IS   14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


—  y 


^.yWT'//// 


Figure  A.3  —  Diagram  of  the  normal  anatomical  position  (anterior  view,  i.e.  the  figure  is  looking  In  the 

x<ilrection) 


Figure  A.4  —  Diagrammatic  Illustration  of  the  directions  of  the  three  axes  of  a  right-handed  orthogonal 
coordinate  system,  denoting  the  order  of  the  ji^,  y-  and  zwces 


9 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


a)  Head 


b)  Thoracic  vertebra 
(e.g.T1orT4) 


/ 

-J' 

1 

1/ 

■''' 

> 

c)  Pelvis 


d)  Person  standing  on  the  floor  or 
deck  (baslcentric  coordinate 
system  for  the  whole  body) 


NOTE  —  The  first  three  diagrams  a),  b)  and  c)  illustrate  anatomical  coordinate  systems  defined  in  this  international  Standard. 
The  last  diagram  d)  illustrates  a  baslcentric  coordinate  system  for  standing  persons,  in  all  four  diagrams,  the  >«-axis  must  be 
imagined  to  point  away  from  the  observer. 


Figure  A.5  —  Diagrammatic  illustrations  (not  to  scale  or  mutually  oriented)  showing  blodynamic  coordinate 

systems  relating  directly  to  persons 


10 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


anatomical  coordinate  system 
baslcentric  coordinate  system 
alternative  basicentric  coordinate  system 


■)'Handgrlp'pM)tlon 


7  — 


b)  "Rat  palin'  petition 


NOTE  —  The  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand),  oiiginating  in  the  head  of  the  third  metacarpal  bone  (middle  knucltle) 
remains  independent  of  hand  posture  and  function  (compare  both  diagrams)  and  rotates  with  the  paim  of  the  hand  (see 
clause  B.2) 


Figure  A.6  —  Blodynamic  coordinate  syetems  for  the  hand 


11 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 

Annex  B 

(informative) 

Explanatory  notes  concerning  the  anatomical  frame  of  reference  and  the 
biodynamic  coordinate  systems  for  the  hand 


B.I  Biodynamic  coordinate  systems  are  by  convention  defined  as  right-tianded  and  orthogonal.  Anatomical 
coordinate  systems  are,  whenever  practicable,  related  to  the  principal  (cephalocaudal)  anatomical  axis  of  the 
human  body,  visualized  to  be  in  the  'normal  anatomical  position"  adopted  in  classical  anatomy.  In  that  position 
(illustrated  in  any  standard  textbook  of  anatomy),  the  body  is  seen  as  standing  erect  (or  lying  supine  on  a  plane 
surface),  with  the  legs  adducted,  the  head  erect  and  looking  to  the  front,  the  arms  adducted,  and  the  open  hands 
supinated  (palms  facing  forwards)  on  each  side  (see  figure  A.3).  Of  course,  such  a  posture  is  rarely  adopted  in  life 
but  it  serves  as  the  starting  reference  position  from  which  the  relationship  between  organe  and  structures  are 
defined,  and  from  which  alt  other  postures  can  be  defined  as  variations  and  measured  using  the  methods  of 
anthropometry. 

In  a  right-handed  orthogonal  coordinate  system  (see  figure  A.4),  the  three  axes  (x,  y  and  z)  are  mutually 
perpendicular  and  share  a  common  origin.  Moreover,  their  directions  in  space  are  uniquely  related  to  one  another. 
Such  a  system  may  be  visualized  by  holding  the  thumb,  forefinger  and  middle  finger  of  one's  right  hand  in  the 
positions  illustrated  in  figure  A.4.  By  convention,  the  first  axis  of  an  anatomical  coordinate  system,  designated  the 
X-axis,  is  defined  as  the  axis  lying  closest  in  parallel  alignment  with  the  anterior  (fonvard-pointing)  direction  of  the 
human  body  in  the  nomnal  anatomical  position  (e.g.  along  the  line  of  sight  from  the  head,  or  normal  to  the  palm  of 
the  hand).  The  second  axis  (y)  passes  conventionally  from  right  to  left  through  the  common  origin,  while  the  third 
axis  (2),  being  mutually  perpendicular  to  the  other  two,  runs  superiorly.  The  directions  in  whk:h  the  digits  of  the  right 
hand  point  when  demonstrating  such  a  system,  as  in  figure  A.4,  are  the  positive  directions  for  each  axis. 

B.2  In  a  typical  handgrip  position,  as  when  grasping  the  handle  of  many  kinds  of  hand-held  tool,  handlebars,  or 
steering-wheel,  a  fist  is  mslde  around  a  cylinder,  commonly  of  radius  approximately  20  mm  in  most  kinds  of  handle 
that  are  ergonomically  well  designed  for  the  human  grip.  Note  In  figure  A.6  a)  that,  in  such  a  grip,  there  is  normally  a 
small  included  angle  between  the  jf^axis  of  the  anatomical  coordinate  system  (hand)  and  the  definitive  axis  of  the 
handle  (basicentric  coordinate  system).  That  included  angle  should  be  allowed  for  (e.g.  by  computational  rotation  of 
the  anatomical  coordinate  system)  when  transfomiing  data  referenced  to  such  a  basicentric  system. 

In  many  jobs,  the  hand  is  pressed  onto  a  surface  of  relatively  large  radius,  or  one  that  is  flat,  to  advance  or  guide  a 
power  tool.  For  standard  measurement  purposes,  many  such  surfaces  may  be  approximated  by  a  sphere  of  radius 
50  mm,  whose  centre,  or  a  point  in  a  tangent  plane  circumscribing  the  area  pressed  upon  by  the  user's  palm,  may 
be  deemed  to  be  the  origin  of  the  basicentric  coordinate  system  (see  3.4,2.2). 


12 


IS   14910:2001 
ISO   8727  :1997 


Annex  C 

(informative) 

Bibliography 


[1  ]      ISO  2041 : 1 990,  Vibration  and  shocic  —  Vocabulary. 

[2]  ISO  2631 -1:1 997,  Meclianical  vibration  and  shock —  Evaluation  of  human  exposure  to  whole-body 
vibration  —  Part  1:  General  requirements. 

[3]  ISO  5349:1986,  Mechanical  vibration —  Guidelines  for  the  measurenwnt  and  the  assessment  of  human 
e)qx)sure  to  hand-transmitted  vibration. 

[4]  ISO  5353:1995,  Earth-moving  machinery,  and  tractors  and  machinery  for  agriculture  and  forestry  —  Seat 
index  point. 

[5]       ISO  5982: 1 981 ,  Vibration  and  shock  —  Mechanical  driving  point  impedance  of  the  human  body. 

[6]  ISO  6897:1984,  Guidelines  for  the  evaluation  of  the  response  of  occupants  of  fixed  structures,  especially 
buildings  and  off-shore  structures,  to  low-frequency  horizontal  motion  (0,063  to  1  Hz). 

\7]      ISO  7096:1 994,  Ear^-mowng  machinery  —  Laboratory  evaluation  of  operator  seat  vibration. 

[8]  ISO  7962:1987,  Mechanical  vibration  and  shock  —  Mechanical  transmissibility  of  the  human  body  in  the  z 
direction. 

[9]      ISO  8041 : 1 990,  Human  response  to  vibration  —  Measuring  instrumentation. 

[10]  ISO 8662-1:1988,  Hand-held  portable  power  tools  —  Measurement  of  vibrations  at  the  handle—  Part  1: 
General. 

[11]  180  9996:1996,  Mechanical  vibration  and  shock—  DisturiaatKe  to  human  activity  and  performance  — 
Classification. 

[1 2}  IS0 1 0326-1 : 1 992,  Mechanical  vibration  —  Laboratory  method  for  evaluating  vehicle  seat  w'bration  —  Part  1: 
Basic  requirements. 

[13]  Anonymous.  Vibration  Syndrome.  Current  Intelligence  Bulletin  38.  US  Department  of  Health  and  Social 
Services,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health.  Ctncinatti,  Ohio:  NIOSH  Publication  83-110, 
29  March  1983. 

[14]  Becker,  E.B.  and  Willems,  G.C.,  An  experimentally  validated  3-D  inertial  tracking  package  for  application  in 
biodynamic  research,  In:  Proceedings  of  the  19th  Stapp  Car  Crash  Conference,  Society  of  Automotive 
Engineering  Transactions,  Warrendale,  Pennsylvania,  1975,  pp  899-930. 

[15]  Brammer,  A. J.  and  Taylor,  W.  (Eds),  Vibration  effects  on  the  hand  and  arm  in  industry  (edited  presentations 
at  the  Third  International  Conference  on  Hand-Arm  Vibratton,  Ottawa,  May  1981),  New  York:  John  Wiley  and 
Sons,  1982. 

[16]  Ewing,  C.L.  and  Thomas,  D.J.,  Human  head  and  neck  response  to  impact  accelerathn.  United  States  Army 
and  Navy  Joint  Report,  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Monograph  21  and  US  Army 
Aeromedical  Research  Laboratory  Report  73-1,  Pensacola,  Florida,  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research 
Laboratory,  August  1972. 


13 


IS    14910  :  2001 
ISO    8727  :1997 

[17]  Gierke,  H.E.  von,  Nixon,  C.W.  and  Guignard,  J.C,  Noise  and  vibration,  in:  Foundations  of  space  medicine 
and  biology.  M.  Calvin  and  O.G.  Gazenko  (Eds),  Joint  USA/USSR  Publication.  Washington,  DC:  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  and  Moscow:  Academy  of  Science  of  tlie  USSR,  Vol.  II,  Book  I,  Ch  9, 
1975. 

[18]  Griffin,  M.J.,  Vibration  injuries  of  ttie  hand  and  arm:  Their  occurrence  and  the  evolution  of  standards  and 
limits.  United  Kingdom  Safety  and  Health  Executive  Research  Report  No.  9,  London:  HM  Stationary  Office, 
1980. 

[19]     Griffin,  M.J.,  Handbook  of  human  vibration.  London  and  New  York:  Academic  Press,  1990. 

[20]  Guignard,  J.C,  Vibration.  In:  Gillies,  J.A.  (Ed),  A  textbook  of  aviation  physiology.  Oxford:  Pergamon,  1965, 
Ch29. 

[21]  Guignard,  J.C,  Vibration.  In:  Guignard,  J.C  and  King,  P.P.,  Aeromedical  aspects  of  vibration  and  noise. 
AGARDograph  AG-151.  Neuilty-sur-Seine,  France:  NATO/AGARD,  1972,  Part  1,  pp  2-113. 

[22]  Guignard,  J.C,  Vibration.  In:  Patty's  industrial  hygiene  and  toxicology.  Vol  3B,  Theory  and  Rationale  of 
Industrial  Hygiene  Practice:  Biological  responses,  L.J.  Cralley  and  L.V.  Cralley  (Eds),  Ch  15,  New  York:  John 
Wiley  and  Sons,  1985. 

[23]  Korhonen,  O.,  Vibration  and  work.  Proceedings  of  the  Finnish-Soviet-Scandinavian  Vibration  Symposium, 
Helsinki,  10  to  13  March  1975,  Helsinki:  Institute  for  Occupational  Health,  1976. 

[24]  Taylor,  W.  and  Pelmear,  P.L.,  Vibration  white  finger  in  industry.  London  and  New  York:  Academic  Press, 
1975. 

[25]  Thomas,  D.J.  (Chairman)  and  Committee  Members:  Robbins,  D.H.,  Eppinger,  R.H.,  King,  A.I.,  Hubbard,  R.P. 
and  (in  1975)  Reynolds,  H.M.,  Guidelines  for  the  comparison  of  human  and  animal  analogue  biomechanical 
data,  first  and  second  annual  reports  of  an  ad  hoc-committee.  Chairman,  D.J.  Thomas,  Head,  Biomedical 
Research  Department,  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Detachment  (now  the  Naval 
Biodynamics  Laboratory),  New  Orleans,  Louisiana,  6  December  1974  and  19  November  1975,  respectively. 
(Requests  for  copies  of  these  reports  should  be  addressed  to:  Commanding  Officer,  Naval  Biodynamics 
Laboratory,  New  Orleans,  LA  70189-0407,  USA.) 

[26]  Wassermann,  D.E.,  Human  aspects  of  occupational  vibration.  Advances  in  human  factors/ergonomics,  G. 
Salvendy  (Ed)  -  8.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier,  1987. 


14 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  ME  28  (0539). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110  002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110  002 

Eastern     :  1/14  C.  I.T.  Scheme  VH  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA  700  054 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 
Southern   :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113 


Western    :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400  093 


Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


{ 


Telephone 

323  76  17 
323  38  41 


{ 


{ 
{ 


337  84  99,  337  85  61 
337  86  26,  337  91  20 


{ 


60  38  43 
602025 


235  02  16,  235  04  42 
235  15  19,  235  23  15 

832  92  95,  832  78  58 
832  78  91,  832  78  92 


Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.BHUBANESHWAR.COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.GHAZIABAD.GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  PATNA.  PUNE.RAJKOT.THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  :  Prabhat  Offset  Press,  New  Delhi-2 


