**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14595 (1998) : Food Hygiene - Microbiological Criteria - 
Principles for Establishment and Application [FAD 15: Food 
Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14595 : 1998 






Indian Standard 

FOOD HYGIENE — MICROBIOLOGICAL 

CRITERIA — PRINCIPLES FOR 

ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICATION 



ICS 67.020 



© BIS 1998 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

M y 1998 Price Group 2 



Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, FAD 45 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

Safety oi" food is principally assured by control at the source, product design and process control, and the 
application of good hygienic practices during production, processing (including labelling), handling, distribution, 
storage, sale, preparation and use, in conjunction with the application of the HACCP system [see IS 15000:1998 
'Food hygiene — Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP) — System and guidelines for its 
application']. The preventive approach offers more control than microbiological testing because the effectiveness 
of microbiological examination to assess the safety of foods is limited. 

Microbiological criteria should be established according to these principles and be based on, scientific analysis 
and advice, and where sufficient data are available, a risk analysis appropriate to the foodstuff and its use. 
Microbiological criteria should be developed in a transparent fashion and meet the requirements of fair trade. 
They should be reviewed periodically for relevance with respect to emerging pathogens, changing technologies 
and new understanding of science. 

Microbiological criteria may be used to formulate design requirements and to indicate the required microbiological 
status of raw materials, ingredients and end-products at any stage of the food chain as appropriate. They 
may be relevant to the examination of foods, including raw materials and ingredients, of unknown or uncertain 
origin or when other means of verifying the efficacy of HACCP-based systems and good hygienic practices 
are not available. Generally, microbiological criteria may be applied to define the distinction between 
acceptable and unacceptable raw materials, ingredients, products, lots, by regulatory authorities and/or food 
business operators. Microbiological criteria may also be used to determine that processes are consistent 
with the general principles of food hygiene [see IS 2491:1998 'Food hygiene — General principles — Code 
of practice (second revision)']. 

Microbiological criteria are not normally suitable for monitoring critical limits as defined in IS 15000:1998. 
Monitoring procedures must be able to detect loss of control at a critical control point (CCP). Monitoring 
should provide this information in time for corrective actions to be taken to regain control before there 
is a need to reject the product. Consequently, on-line measurements of physical and chemical parameters 
are often preferred to microbiological testing because results are often available more rapidly and at the 
production site. Moreover, the establishment of critical limits may need other considerations than those 
described in this standard. 

To provide the needed guidelines, this Indian Standard has been formulated based on the Codex Standard 
Principles for the establishment and application of microbiological criteria for foods CAC/RCP-22 (1997), 
and is identical to it. 

The standard is subject to the provisions of the appropriate food safety legislations, such as Prevention 
of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and Rules framed thereunder. 



IS 14595 : 1998 



Indian Standard 



- MICROBIOLOGICAL 
PRINCIPLES FOR 
ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICATION 



FOOD HYGIENE 
CRITERIA - 



IS No. 


2491 : 


1998 


15000 


: 1998 



1 SCOPE 

This standard provides guidance on the establishment 
and application of microbiological criteria for foods 
at any point in the food chain from primary production 
to final consumption. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 

Title 

Food hygiene — General 
principles — Code of practice 
(second revision) 

Food hygiene — Hazard analysis 
and critical control point (HACCP) 
— System and guidelines for its 
application 

3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard the following 
definition shall apply. 

3.1 Microbiological Criteria 

Acceptability of a product or a food lot, based on 
the absence or presence, or number of microorganisms 
including parasites, and/or quantity of their toxins/ 
metabolites, per unit(s) of mass, volume, area or lot. 

4 PRINCIPLES FOR ESTABLISHING AND 
APPLYING MICROBIOLOGICAL CRITERIA — 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

4.1 A microbiological criterion should be established 
and applied only where there is a definite need and 
where its application is practical. Such need is 
demonstrated, for example, by epidemiological 
evidence that the food under consideration may 
represent a public health risk and that a criterion is 
meaningful for consumer protection, or as the result 
of a risk assessment. The criterion should be 
technically attainable by applying good manufacturing 
practices (codes of practice). 



4.2 To fulfil the purpose of a microbiological 
criterion, consideration should be given to: 

a) the evidence of actual or potential hazards 
to health; 

b) the microbiological status of the raw 

material(s); 

c) the effect of processing on the microbiological 
status of the food; 

d) the likelihood and consequences of microbial 
contamination and/or growth during 
subsequent handling, storage and use; 

e) the cost/benefit ratio associated with the 
application of the criterion; and 

f) the intended use of the food. 

4.3 Components of Microbiological Criteria for 
Foods 

4.3.1 A microbiological criterion consists of: 

a) a statement of the microorganisms of concern 
and/or their toxins/metabolites and the reason 
for that concern (see 4.4); 

b) the analytical methods for their detection and/ 
or quantification (see 4.5); 

c) microbiological limits considered appropriate 
to the food at the specified point(s) of the 
food chain (see 4.6); 

d) a plan defining the number of field samples 
to be taken, size of the analytical unit (see 
4.7.1 and 4.7.2); and 

e) the number of analytical units that should 
conform to these limits (see 4.7.3). 

4.3.2 A microbiological criterion should also state: 

a) the food to which the criterion applies, 

b) the point(s) in the food chain where the 
criterion applies, and 

c) any actions to be taken when the criterion 
is not met. 

4.3.3 When applying a microbiological criterion for 
assessing products, it is essential, in order to make 
the best use of money and manpower, that only 



IS 14595 : 1998 



appropriate tests be applied to those foods and at 
those points in the food chain that offer maximum 
benefit in providing the consumer with a food that 
is safe and suitable for consumption. 

4.4 Microorganisms of Concern 

4.4.1 For the purpose of this standard, the 
microorganisms, parasites and their toxins/ metabolites 
of concern in a particular food include bacteria, 
viruses, yeasts, moulds, and algae, parasitic protozoa 
and helminths and their toxins/metabolites. 



4.6.1 Limits used in criteria should be used on 
microbiological data appropriate to the food and should 
be applicable to a variety of similar products. They 
should therefore be based on data gathered at various 
production establishments operating under good 
hygienic practices (see IS 2491) and applying the 
HACCP system (see IS 15000). 

4.6.2 In the establishment of microbiological limits, 
any changes in the microflora likely to occur during 
storage and distribution, such as decrease or increase 
in numbers should be taken into account. 



4.4.2 The microorganisms included in a criterion 
should be widely accepted as relevant - as pathogens, 
as indicator organisms or as spoilage organisms- to 
the particular food and technology. Organisms whose 
significance in the specified food is doubtful should 
not be included in a criterion. 

4.4.3'The mere finding, with a presence-absence test, 
of certain organisms known to cause foodborne illness, 
such as Clostridium perfringens, Staphylococcus 
aureus and Vibrio parahaemolyticus does not 
necessarily indicate a threat to public health. 

4.4.4 Where pathogens can be detected directly and 
reliably, consideration should be given to testing for 
them in preference to testing for indicator organisms. 
If a test for an indicator organism is applied, there 
should be a clear statement whether the test is used 
to indicate unsatisfactory hygienic practices or a health 
hazard. 

4.5 Microbiological Methods 

4.5.1 Whenever possible, only methods for which 
the reliability (accuracy, reproducibility, inter-and 
intra-laboratory variation) has been statistically 
established in comparative or collaborative studies 
in several laboratories should be used. Moreover, 
preference should be given to methods which have 
been validated for the commodity concerned 
preferably in relation to reference methods. While 
methods should be most sensitive and reproducible 
for the purpose, methods to be used for in-plant testing 
might often sacrifice to some degree of sensitivity 
and reproducibility in the interest of speed and 
simplicity. They should, however, have been proved 
to give a sufficiently reliable estimate of the 
information needed. 

4.5.2 Methods used to determine the suitability for 
consumption of highly perishable foods, or foods 
with a short shelf-life, should be chosen wherever 
possible so that the results of microbiological 
examinations are available before the foods are 
consumed or exceed their shelf-life. 

4.5.3 The microbiological methods specified should 
be reasonable with regard to complexity, availability 
of media, equipment, ease of interpretation, time 
required and costs. 

4.6 Microbiological Limits 



4.6.3 Microbiological limits should take into 
consideration the risk associated with the 
microorganisms, and the conditions under which the 
food is expected to be handled and consumed. 
Microbiological limits should also take account of 
the likelihood of uneven distribution of 
microorganisms in the food and the inherent variability 
of the analytical procedure. 

4.6.4 If a criterion requires the absence of a particular 
microorganism, the size and number of the analytical 
unit as well as the number of analytical sample units 
should be indicated. 

4.7 Sampling Plans, Methods and Handling 

4.7.1 A sampling plan includes the sampling 
procedure and the decision criteria to be applied to 
a lot, based on examination of a prescribed number 
of sample units and subsequent analytical units of 
a stated size by defined methods. A well-designed 
sampling plan defines the probability of detecting 
microorganisms in a lot, but it should be borne in 
mind that no sampling plan can ensure the absence 
of a particular organism. Sampling plans should be 
administratively and economically feasible. In 
particular, the choice of sampling plans should take 
into account the following: 

a) risks to public health associated with the 
hazard, 

b) the susceptibility of the target group of 
consumers, 

c) the heterogeneity of distribution of 
microorganisms where variables sampling 
plans are employed, and 

d) the acceptable quality level and the desired 
statistical probability of accepting a non- 
conforming lot. 

NOTE — For many applications, 2-or 3-class attribute plans 
may prove useful. 

4.7.2 The statistical performance characteristics or 
operating characteristics curve should be provided in 
the sampling plan. Performance characteristics provide 
specific information to estimate the probability of 
accepting a non-conforming lot. The sampling method 
should be defined in the sampling plan. The time 
between taking the field samples and analysis should 



IS 14595 : 1998 

be as short as reasonably possible, and during transport and should not be modified. However, a lot should 
to the laboratory the conditions, such as temperature not be subjected to repeated testing in order to bring 
should not allow increase or decrease of the numbers the lot into compliance. 
of the target organism, so that the results reflect, 
within the limitations given by the sampling plan, 



4.8 Reporting 



the microbiological conditions of the lot. The test report shall give the information needed for 

complete identification of the sample, the sampling 
4.7.3 The number and size of analytical units per pj a n, the test method, the results and, if appropriate, 
lot tested should be as stated in the sampling plan their interpretation. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 45 (903). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

{ 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 1 10 002 " i 323 38 41 



Eastern : 1/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700 054 1 337 86 26, 337 91 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 f 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

235 15 19,235 23 \5 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95,832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400 093 \ 832 78 91, 832 78 92 



{ 
{ 



Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.GHAZIABAD.GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE.THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printograph, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847 



