**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10230-1 (1982) : IF, RF transformers and inductors 
(coils) : Part 1 General requirements and tests (Superseding 
IS:1512-1969) [LITD 5: Semiconductor and Other Electronic 
Components and Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



is J 10230 ( tart I ) - 1982 
( Superseding IS : 1512-1969 ) 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

IF AND RF TRANSFORMERS AND 

INDUCTORS ( COILS ) 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 

( Firsl Reprint OCTOBER 1995 ) 



UDC 621.314,21: 62 1.3 18. 43: 621. 38/. 39. 038 



© Copyright 1983 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 9 May 1983 



is : 10230 ( tart 1 ) - 1982 
( Superseding IS : 1512-1969 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

IF AND RF TRANSFORMERS AND 

INDUCTORS ( COILS ) 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 



Transformers and Inductors for Electronic Equipment 
Sectional Committee, LTDG 8 

Chairman Representing 

Shri C. K, Sbeenivas Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 

Shri M. S. K. Rao ( Alternate to 
Shri G. K. Sreenivas ) 
Shei R. p. Bahati Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri B. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. P. Balsara Electronic Component Industries Association 

( ELGINA ), New Delhi 
Shri M. Dayal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. P. Bhargava National Research Development Corporation of 

India, New Delhi 
Shri R. Krishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Das Gxtpta Pieco Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. M. Bapat ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Km K, R. Jaya Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri T. G. Vasudevan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Krishnamurthy Railway Board, New Delhi 

Shri V. Jayaraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Majumdar The Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries, New Delhi 
Shri P. P. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, Y. Phatak The Radio Electronic & Television Manufac- 

turers' Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 
Dr p. B. Parikh ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. Ramesh NGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri Roy Abraham ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1983 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS!l0230(PartI)-198a 



{ Continued from page I ) 

Members 
Shri p. K. Rao 



Jiefirfisenting 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Shri S. N. Mohammed ( Alternate ) 
SsBi M. K. Rev/al Posts & Telegraphs Department, New Delhi 

Shri Satyamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Sankaralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri D. R. Ghanbrak ( Alternate ) 



Shri L. K. Shah 

Shri B. M. Shankar Prasad 
Shri K. K. Tbant>aiu 

Shri Vishwanath 

Shri R. S. Sandhu (Alternate ) 
Shri R. G. Jain, 
Head ( Electronics ) 



ELCOMPO Electronics Industries Pvt Ltd, 

Madras 
Ministry of Defence ( LCSO ) 
National Physical Laboratory ( GSIP* ), New 

Delhi 
Civil Aviation Department, New Delhi 

Director General, ISI {Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri Y. S. Arya 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Panel for TV Transformers and Coils, LTDC 8 : P3 



Members 
Shri J. P. Bhargava 

Shri M. S, Murthy 
Shri S. Y. Phatak 

Db p. B. Paries ( Alternate ) 
Shri Abdul Razzaqub 

Representative 

Shri L, K. Shah 

Shri S. Subba Rao 
Db R. K. TBEHA:Kf 



National Research Development Gorporation of 

India^ New Delhi 
Suchitra Electronics Ltd, Hyderabad 
The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers* 

Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 

Gentral Electronics Engineering Research Insti- 
tute ( GSIR ), Pilani 

All India Radio & Electronics Association, 
Bombay 

EhCOMVO Electronics Industries Pvt Ltd, 
Madras 

Electronics Gorporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

M. G, Electronics Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) • 1982 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

IF AND RF TRANSFORMERS AND 

INDUCTORS (COILS) 

PART I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 May 1982, after the draft finalized by the Trans- 
formers and Inductors for Electronics Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division 
Council. 

0.2 IS : 1519-1969* does not cover the professional grade intermediate 
frequency ( IF ) and radio frequency ( RF ) transformei;s and inductors 
( coils ), The Sectional Committee, therefore, decided to cover the require- 
ments and tests for professional grade IF and RF transformers and induc- 
tors ( coils ) in addition to those for existing types covered by IS : 1512- 
1969* in a series of standards and to supersede IS : 1512-1969* by this 
series. This standard forms ( Part I ) of the proposed series. 

0.3 The object of this standard is to establish uniform requirements for 
the mechanical properties of IF and RF transformers and inductors (coils) 
and their tolerance of climatic conditions to describe test methods and to 
classify these methods into groups according to environmental conditions 
in which they are performed. 

0.4 In the case of components like IF and RF transformers and inductors 
( coils ), the performance requirements are largely related to the design 
of the perticular circuit for which they are intended and it would, there- 
fore, be difficult to lay down at this stage a uniform set of requirements, 
irrespective of the equipment design. Therefore, this standard (Part I) 
covers only general requirements and testing methods, leaving the specific 
performance requirements to be specified while the intending purchaser 
furnishes additional details of the components. At a later stage, it may be 
possible to specify performance requirements and, in that case, these 



♦Tests and general requirements for IF transformers and RF coils ( first revision ). 

3 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

would be covered in subsequent parts of this series. A list of items on 
which the purchaser will have to specify the requirements is given in 
Appendix A. 

0.5 This standard lays down a single method of measurement for each 

characteristic. It is, however, not intended to exclude other alternative 

methods of measurement for which necessary equipment may be 

available. 

0.6 While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from JSSi 

54600 ' General requirements for intermediate frequency, radio frequency, 

transformers and cojls ' issued by the Ministry of Defence. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 

this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 

expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 

IS : 2-1960*. The numb^er of significant, places retained in the rounded 

off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 

standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers general requirements and tests appli- 
cable to IF and RF transformers and inductors ( coils ) used in electronic 
and telecommunication equipment. 

1.1.1 The following components arc mainly covered by this standard: 

a) IF and RF transformers — Single tuned or double tuned, and 

b) IF and RF inductors {coils) — Coils of single or double winding 
meant for use in tuned circuits, such as antenna coils and 
oscillator coils. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity with the require- 
ments of this specification. These are intended to prove the general 
qualities and design of a particular type of IF transformer or RF coil. 

2.2 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on samples of transformers or 
coils selected from a lot for the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 

2.2.1 Lot — All transformers or coils of the same grade and rating, 
manufactured by the same factory, during the same period, 

2.3 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each transformer or coil to 
check the requirements which are likely to vary during production. 



♦Ruleg for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

4 



16: 10230 (Parti)- 1982 

2.4 Inductor ( Coils ) — An electromagnetic device consisting of a con- 
ductor wound in cylindrical or spiral form, or in a variation of these 
forms, to obtain a concentrated magnetic fidd parallel to the axis of the 
coil. 

2.5 Coil Assembly — Two or more coils on a common mounting or 
mounted on each other, 

2.6 Distributed Capacitance of a Coil — The resultant of capacitances 
between turns within the coil. It may be determined by measuring the self- 
resonant frequency of the coil. 

2.7 Equivalent Series Resistance ( ESR ) — The real ( power cons- 
uming ) portion of the coil impedance. 

2.8 Inductance Tolerance — The permissible deviation of the manufac- 
tured inductance value usually expressed in percent, from the specified 
nominal inductance value at standard ( or stated ) atmospheric conditions. 

2.9 Intermediate Frequency Transformer — It consists of two or more ' 
windings designed to pass a specific band of radio frequencies which 
results from heterodyning a local oscillator signal with a radio frequency 
signal, 

2.10 Insulation Working Voltage — The maximum instantaneous 
voltage stress that may appear under normal rated operation across the 
insulation being considered. This insulation may be between windings or 
between a winding and t\\G case or core, 

2.11 Insertion Loss — The ratio of the power delivered to the land 
before insertion of the transformer to the power delivered to the load after 
insertion of the transformer. 

2.12 Parallel Resonant Frequency -^ The frequency at which the 
input impedance is a maximum ( only approximately true when Q is 10 
or above. ) 

2.13 Quality Factor — The factor Q, expresses the ratio of reactance to 
effective resistance of a circuit element. 

2.14 Radio Frequency Coil — Designed to develop inductive reactance 
at radio frequencies, 

2.15 Radio Frequency Transformer — A transformer so designed as 
to operate at a frequency range above 20 kHz. 

2.16 Resonant Frequency — The frequency ( or frequencies ) of a com- 
ponent, circuit, or system where the capacitive and inductive reactances 
are exactly equal. 



IS : 10230 ( Part t ) - 1982 

2.17 Series Resonant Freqjuency — The frequency at which the input 
impedance of a circuit is a minimum. 

2.18 Transformer Assembly — Two or more separate transformers on 
a common mounting or mounted on each other, 

2.19 Grade —- The grade indicates the following environmental charac- 
teristics: 

a) Grade 1 — Resistant to immersion and humidity, 

b) Grade 2 — Resistant to humidity, and 
c) Grade 3 — For use in sealed assemblies. 

3. CLIMATIC CATEGORIES AND TYPES 

3.1 Climatic Categories — The IF and RF transformers and coils shall 
belong to one of the following three categories based on their ability to 
withstand the climatic severities: 



Climatic Test 


Category I 


Category 2 


Category 3 


Dry heat { Duration : 16 hours ) 


+ 100^C 


+85^C 


+ 70^G 


Cold 


-55^C 


-40^C 


-lO^C 


Damp heat ( steady state ) 


56 days 


56 days 


21 days 


Damp heat ( cyclic ) 


6 cycles 


6 cycles 


2 cycles 


Rapid change of temperature 


+ 100 to 

-55^G 


+85 to 
-40"G 


Not appli- 
cable 


Low airprcssure 


4-4 kPa 


30 kPa 


60kPa 



Note 1 — A recovery period of 24 hours after the damp heat accelerated and 
damp heat long term tests is necessary for Category 3 components. 

Note 2 — In special cases, where the above categories are not applicable, other 
combinations of severities may be agreed to, provided such severities are chosen 
from IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977*. 

4. MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 

4,1 General — The materials, construction and finishes shall be specified 
in the relevant detail specification, as they are mandatory. The trans- 
formers and inductors shall be manufactured and processed in a careful 
workmanlike manner, in accordance with good design and sound engin- 
eering practice. The transformers ajid coils shall be uniform in quality 
and shall be free from cracks, rough edges, loose mountings, broken 
leads, and other defects that may affect life, serviceability and/or 
appearance, 

♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part I 
General. 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

4.2 Materials — The IF and RF transformers and inductors shall be 
constructed from materials which shall be free from flaws and other 
defects and shall, as far as practicable, conform to the relevant detail 
specification. In so far as practicable, materials used in the construction 
of transformers and inductors shall be non-explosive, non-flammable, not 
susceptible to out-gassing, non-nutrient to corrosive atm.osphere and shall i 
meet the requirements of this specification. ' 

4.3 Terminations 

4.3.1 Solder-Type Terminations— Solder termination may be of any shape. 
The height of the solder terminal shall be considered as the maximum 
distance from the terminal mounting surface to the highest point, including 
the additional height obtained if semiflexible terminals are straightened. 
( It is not intended that the «hook' in the hook-type terminal be straight- 
ened from its normal hooked position. ) 

4.3.2 Pin-Type Terminations for Printed Circuit Applications— The preferred 
diameter for the terminal pins of printed circuit transformers is 0*7 mm. 
The grid metrix shall conform to a 2*54 mm grid with centres to a toler- 
ance of ± 0*5 mm. Uninsulated solid wire terminals not greater than 25'4 
mm in length shall be considered to be pins. 

4.3.3 Pin-Type Terminations for Electron Tube Type Sockets -— Pins for use 
with electron tube type sockets shall conform with standard 7 pin base 
E7-1 or standard 9 pin base E9-1, as shown in Fig. I. Uninsulated solid 
wire terminals not greater than 25*4 mm in length shall be considered to 
be pins. 

4.3.4 Screw-Type Terminations — When specified, external screw terminals 
shall be supplied with 2 nuts, 2 flat washers, and one lock washer. For 
Grades 1 and 2 transformers, the height of the terminal assembly shall 
be the distance froni thfP free end of the screw to the terminal mounting 
surface. The type of ^''terminal, size of screw thread and the exposed 
length ± 1 6 mm shall be as specified ( for example, 0*164 UNC9'54 mm 
long). 

4.3.5 SolderablejWeldable Lead Terminations — The terminations shall 
be tin-lead coated copper wire havi^jg the composition and plating given 
below : 

Chemical Composition — The chctnical composition of the copper wire 
shall be as follows: 

Copper plus silver trace 99*900 percent, Min 
Oxygen 0*015 percent, Max 

Silver 0*052 percent, Max 

Phosphorous 0*015 percent, Max 

Total of all impurities 0*100 percent. Max 



IS t 10230 ( Part I ) . 1982 



DIAVO2t0-O5,9 PtNS 




36° 




7»U f^~ ^DIA PC 11'89 

STANDARD 9-PIN BUTTON BASE E 9-1 



DtA V02tO-05,7 PINS 





i»75 

''•''^ ' ^DIA PC 9-53 

STANDARD 7-PIN BUTTON BASE E 7-1 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Pin- Type Terminations for Electron Tube Type Sockets 



4.4 Winding Ends — The ends and end turns of layer-wound coil and 
the finish turns of universal-wound coils shall be secured in such a manner 
as to anchor them securely in place. The length of leads from winding* 
shall be as. short as practicable and, when necessary, shall be supported 
to prevent vibration. The termination of element to terminal shall not 
dfepend on solder or welding alone to attain mechanical strength. 

4.5 Design and Construction — Transformers and coils shall be of the 

design, construction and physical dimensions as specified. 

4.5.1 Threaded Parts — Threaded parts shall be of corrosion- resistant 
material or shall be protected against corrosion. 



a 



IS: 10230 (tartl) -1982 

4.5.2 Screw, Nuts and Washers — All mountings and terminal screws, 
nuts and washers shall be of corrosion-resistant materia] or shall be pro- 
tected against corrosion. 

4.5.3 Engagement of Threaded Parts — All threaded parts shall be engaged 
by at least three full threads. 

4.5.4 External Can Shields ( When Applicable ) — External can shields 
shall be so constructed that they can be effectively mounted mechanically 
and grounded electrically by their normal mounting means. 

4.6 Magnet Wire ~ Magnet wires shall be of types and sizes as specified 
in IS: 4800 Series dealing with enamelled round winding wires. 

4.7 Resistors and Capacitors — Resistors and capacitors shall be in 
accordance with Indian Standards, except when the size, design and 
environmental characteristics of the transformer prohibit this. They will 
be of the same grade and category as required for the component, 

4.8 Solder and Soldering Flux — The solder used shall be soft soldfer 
conforming to Grade Sn 60 of IS : 193-1977* and the soldering flux shall 
be 25 percent by weight of water white rosin and 75 percent by weight of 
99 percent isopropyl alcohol, 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each transformer or coil shall be indelibly and clearly marked with 
the following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade mark, 

b) Type designation, and 

c) Identification of terminations (see Note ). 

Note — A circuit diagram of the transformer or coil with appropriate markings 
and connections shall also be made available with the component, 

5.2 In addition to the markings specified in 5.1, the following information 
shall be provided either on the carton or in the catalogue along with the 
circuit diagram: 

a) Nominal frequency of operation or frequency range of operation; 

b) Inductances of the individual windings; 

c) Q, factor ( of the tuned circuit or of the individual winding); 

d) — 3 dB bandwidth; 

♦Specification for soft solder ( third revision ), 



IS s 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

e) Selectivity: 

1) For amplitude modulation : as response at 4- 5 kHz at ± 10 

kHz or at any other frequency range off resonance, and 

2) For frequency modulation : as response at i 200 kHz or at 

any other frequency range off resonance; 

f) Transfer voltage ratio ( gain factor ); 

g) Factor KQ^ with recommended external impedances for double I 
tuned IF transformers; 

h) Factor A for aerial coils; 1 

j) Self-capacitance for IF and RF coils or recommended external 
capacitance values ( minimum and maximum values ); 

k) Overall dimensions, grade and category; 
m) Any other information as agreed; and 
n) Country of manufacture. 

5.2.1 Any additional marking on the component or its carton shall be 
so applied as not to cause confusion. 

5«2.2 The transformer or coil or its carton may also be marked with 
the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions 
of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The iSI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuousjy checked by ISI for conformity to that 
itandard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

6. COLOUR CODE 

6.1 For Leads — The standard colour code for leads of IF transformers 
or RF coils shall be as follows: 

Circuit Function Colour 
a) Valve Electrodes: 

Anode Blue 

Cathode YelJow 

Control grid Green 

Screen grid O.ange 

Suppressor grid Grey 
( or modulator grid ) 

!0 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 



Circuit Function Colour 

b) Transistor Electrodes: 



Collector 




Blue 


Emitter 




Yellow 


Base 




Green 


c) dc Supplies: 






Chassis 




Black 


Positive to chassis 


Red 


Negative to chassis 


Violet 


d) Terminals to 


special connections 


As agr< 



purchaser and the manu- 
facturer 

Note — Wherever it is not practicable to use leads or terminals of the recomm- 
ended colours, they may be suitably coated with paint corresponding to the 
appropriate colour code. 

6.2 For Cylindrical Coils — Cylindrical coils shall be marked with four 
coloured bands of equal width, three indicating the inductance in micro- 
henries and the fourth band indicating the tolerance in percent. Colour 
code shall be in accordance with the colour code shown in Table 1. When 
either the first or second of the three bands is gold, this band shall repre- 
sent the decimal point for inductance values less than 10, and the other 
two bands shall represent significant figures. For inductance value of 10 
or more, the first two bands shall represent significant figures, and the 
third band shall represent the multiplier. When specified for small units, 
dots may be used instead of bands. Typical colour code for units with 
inductance values less than 10 and for 10 or greater is shown in Fig. 2. 
The marking shall be legible after completion of each examination or 
test. 

6.3 Terminal Identification — Unless otherwise specified, terminals 
shall be identified by appropriate numbers or, where space does not permit 
numbering, by colour code in accordance with Table 2» 

7. TESTS 

7.1 General Conditions for Tests 

7.1.1 General — The tests shall be carried out on the components as 
received from the manufacturer or supplier. In no case shall the contact 
parts be cleaned or otherwise prepared prior to the tests, unless explicitly 
so agreed. 

11 



IS I 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 





TABLE 


1 COLOUR CODE 

(Clause 6,2 ) 




Colour 


Significant 
Figure 


Multiplier* 


Inductance 
Tolerance ( Percent ] 


(i) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


Black 





1 


— 


Brown 


1 


10 


— 


Red 


2 


100 


- 


Orange 


3 


1 000 


±3 


Yellow 


4 


„ 


— 


Green 


5 


_- 


— 


Blue 


6 


— 


— 


Violet 


7 


— 


— 


Grey 


8 


— 


— 


White 


9 


— 


__ 


Nonet 


— 


— 


±20 


Silver 


— 


— 


± 10 


Gold 


Decimal 
point 


— 


±5 



♦The multiplier is the factor by which the two significant figures are multiplied to 
yield the nominal inductance value, 
tindicates body colour. 



FIRST SIGNIFICANT 
FIGURE (BLUE) 



-DECIMAL (GOLD) 

-SECOND SIGNIFICANT FIGURE (GRAY) 
-TOLERANCE (SILVER) 




6-8 MICROHENRIES HO PERCENT 



FIRST SIGNIFICANT 
FIGURE (RED) 



-SECOND SIGNIFICANT FIGURE ( VIOLET ) 
MULTIPLIER (BROWN) 

TOLERANCE ( GOLD) 




270 MICROHENRIES t5 PERCENT 
f\G. 2 Typical Colour Code 



1:2 



Is : 10230 ( l>art t ) - l98^ 





TABLE 2 


TERMINAL COLOUR CODE 










{Clause G,3) 




COLOUli 


NUMBEil 




COLOUB 


Number 


(1) 




(2) 




(1) 


(2) 


Black 









Green 


5 


Brown 




1 




Blue 


6 


Red 




2 




Violet 


7 


Orange 




3 




Grey 


8 


Yellow 




4 




White 


9 



7»1.2 Selection of Samples — The samples for testing shall be so selected 
as to be representative of each category and rating. 

7. 1.3 Atmospheric Conditions for Testing — Unless otherwise' specified, all 
tests shall be carried out under standard atmospheric conditions specified 
in IS: 9000 ( Part I )-1977* 

7.1.4 Preconditioning — Before measurements are made, the components 
shall be stored at the measuring temperature and the relative humidity 
for a time sufficient to allow the entire component to reach these condi- 
tions. The recovery period called for after conditioning is adequate for 
this purpose. 

7.1.5 Correction to be Applied — When measurements are made at an 
ambient temperature other than the specified temperature, the results 
shall, where necessary, be corrected to the specified temperature. The 
ambient temperature during the test shall be stated in the test report. 

7.1.6 Drying — Where drying before measurement is required, it shall 
be done in accordance with 3.5 of IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977*. 

7.1.7 Other Precautions — During measurements, the components shall 
not be exposed to draughts, direct sun-rays or other influences likely to 
cause errors. 

7.2 Classification of Tests 

7.2.1 Type Tests — The procedure for type approval shall be in accord- 
ance with IS : 2612-19651. 

a ) Number of samples — The number of samples for type tests shall 
be 12 of each category and rating of the components, unless 
otherwise specified, stated in the relevant specification. 

♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part I 
General. 

tRecommendation for type approval and sampling procedures for electronic com- 
ponents. 



13 



IS 1 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

b) Sequence of type tests — The sequence of type tests shall be in 
accordance with Table 3, unless otherwise specified in the rele- 
vant specification. 







TABLE 3 TYPE TESTS 




Group 


Number of 


Tests 


Clause ' 




Specimen 




Number 


(I) 




(2) 


(3). 


(4) 







AH 


Visual examination 

Dimensions 

Continuity of winding 

DC resistance 

Inductance rJ 

Magnification factor, Q, 

Coupling 

Incremental current induc- 
tance reduction 

Effective parallel resistance 

Self-resonant frequency 

Impedance 

Bandwidth and gain 

Voltage transfer ratio 

Voltage proof 

Induced voltage 

Insulation resistance 

Overload 

Bandwidth and salectivity 

Factor Kd (for double 
tuned IF transformer ) 

Checking the adjustment 
facilities 

Sealing ( when applicable ) 

Immersion 


7.3.1 

7.3.3 

7.4.11 

7.4.1 

7.4.2 

7.4.3 

7.4.4 

7.4.5 

7.4.6 

7.4.7 

7.4.8 

7.4.9 

7.4.10 

7.4.12 

7.4.13 

7.4.14 

7.4.15 

7.4.16 

7.4.17 

7.4.18 

7.5.1 
7.5.2 


} 


3 




Core rotation 

Solderability 

Robustness of terminations 

Vibration 

Bump 

Change of temperature 

Climatic sequence 


7-5.7 

7.5.3 

7.5.4 

7.5.5 

7.5.6 

7.8 

7.6.1 


2 


3 




Damp heat (steady state ) 


7.7 


3 


3 




Endurance 
Flammability 


7.11 
7.13 


4 


1 




Mould growth 


7,10 


5 


1 




Temperature rise 


7.12 


6 


1 




Salt mist 


7.9 



14 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

7.2.2 Routine Tests — The routine tests shall be performed in the follow- 
ing order: 

Test 



Clause Number 
7.3.1 
7.4.12 
7,4.10 
7.4.17 



a) Visual examination 

b) Voltage proof 

c) Voltage transfer ratio 

d) Factor Kd (for double tuned IF 

transformers and Factor if or Q^ 
for other components as applicable ) 

e) Sealing t^st ( for sealed type only ) 7.5,1 

7.2.2.1 If during the routine tests more than 10 percent of the lot 
fails, the entire lot may be rejected. 

7.2.3 Acceptance Tests — The acceptance tests shall be carried out on a 
limited number of samples selected in accordance with the sampling 
procedure given in IS : 2612-1965* from a lot which has passed the 
routine tests as specified in ?-2.2. 

Two groups of samples shall be selected and each group shall be 
subjected to the tests specified in the order in Table 4, unless otherwise 
specified in the individual relevant specification. 



TABLE 4 

Clause 
Number 

(2) 

7.3.2 
7.4 



7.3.3 

7.5.4 

7.5.3 
7.6 



AQL ( Percent 
Defective ) 



ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

Inspection* 
Level 

(3) (4) 



n 



D/Nt 
N 



Tbst 

(1) 
GROUP A TEST 
Dimensions 

All th« electrical 
tests 

GROUP B TEST 
Subgroup 1 
Detail dimensions 
Subgroup 2 

Robustness of 
termination 

Soldering 

CluDstic sequences 

^Sampling plans and procedurps for inspection by attributes for electronic items, 
DoexLTDCS (88)F. 

fD ■■ Destructive; N ~ Non^destructive, 



S3 



^R«eoinmeodation for type approval and sampling procedures for electronic compo* 



15 



IS; 10230 (Part I). 1982 

7.3 General Tests 

7«3,1 Visual Examination ( External ) - Each transformer or inductor 
( coils ) shall be visually examined for conformity to the following: 

a) The markings shall be in accordance with 5; and 

b) The construction, workmanship, finish, conditions and assembly 
shall be satisfactory. 

There shall be no deterioration in the above features after electrical, 
mechanical and climatic tests. 

7.3.2 Outline Dimensions — The outline dimensions shall be checked for 
compKance with the outline drawings, as specified in the relevant specifi- 
cation or manufacturers' drawings. 

7.3.3 Detail Dimensions — The components shall be checked for compli- 
ance with the drawings specified in the relevant specification or manufac- 
turers' drawings: 

a) For type tests — The dimensions and materials used shall be in 

accordance with the relevant specification or manufacturers' 

drawings. This should be recorded, 
b ) For acceptance tests — The dimensions shall conform to the detail 

drawings as specified in the relevant specification or supplied 

by the manufacturer. 

7.3.4 Visual Examination ( Internal ) — The components shall be disse- 
mbled and examined to verify that materials, internal design, construction, 
workmanship and finish are in accordance with the requirements of 
relevant specification or the reqirements specified by the manufacturer, 

7.3.5 Mass — Six components shall be cxmined to verify the mass of 
the component, if specified in the relevant specification. 

7.4 Electrical Tests 

7.4.1 DC Resistance -- The DC resistance shall be measured with a 
resistance bridge or other suitable test equipment. The test current 
through the specimens shall be as small as possible considering the 
sensitivity of the indicating instruments, unless the test current or voltage 
is specified. When it is important that the temperature of the specimens 
shall not rise appreciably during the measurement, the test voltage shall 
be applied uninterruptedly for as short a time as practicable, but in no 
case for more than 5 seconds, unless otherwise specified* The measure- 
ments shall be made at or corrected to 20°C, 

Note 1 — The current of the measuring instrument shall hot cause a saturation 
effect, when measuring transformers with ferrite cores. 

16 



IS: 10230 (Parti ) - 1982 

Note 2 — DC mensurempntsof ferrite core coils shall be made after inductance, 
Q., and self-resonant frequency ( SRF) are measured because dc affects inductance 
and d in testing. Time shall be allowed for return to the initial electrical 
properties. 

The values shall be within the limits as specified in the relevant 
specification. 

7»4.2 Inductance — Unless otherwise specified, inductance of each wind- 
ing or between stated terminals shall be measured at the frequency speci- 
fied. When true inductance is specified, the test procedure or equivalent 
listed below shall be used, A calibrated capacitor shall be used to tune 
the winding to resonance at several frequencies. These points shall des- 
cribe a straight line of added capacitance, one point of which shall be 

-3— as abscissa versus the reciprocal of the frequency square, as ordi- 
nate; the true inductance shall be calibrated as: 

True inductance = KN 
wher^ 

K - -rir- = 0-025 3, 

471* 

jV= Slope of the line representing added capacitance, and 

/■q = Self-resonant frequency of the coil at the abscissa of zero 
capacity. 

The inductance shall be as specified in the relevant 
specification. 

7.4.2*1 Effective inductance for cylindrical coils ( inductance 010 to 10 \iH 
inclusive) — The effective inductance shall be measured using a Q;-meter, 
such as Hewlett Packard Q-meter Model 4342A or equivalent. The 
frequency dial of the Q-meter shall be calibrated within ± O'l percent 
for the applicable test frequency by any suitable means. The various 
ranges of inductance shall be tested according to the frequencies given 
below: 



Inductance Range 


Test Frequency 
MHz 


0-10 to 10 


25-0 


Above 1-0 to 10-0 


7-9 



Allowance shall be made for the internal inductance of the Q-meter 
and the test fixture as determined in 7.4.2.2. 

7.4.2.2 Effective inductance — The effective inductance shall be deter- 
mined when using a test fixutre such as TF-A or TF-B, as applicable, 

17 



IS : 10230 ( Part t ) - 1982 

shown in Fig. 3 and 4 or any suitable fixtures. The appropriate test fixture 
shall be inserted in the Q-meter coil terminations with the side showing 
the test fixture letter facing the capacitance terminations. The appro- 
priate shorting bar conforming to Fig. 5 or 6 shall be inserted in the chips 
of the test fixture in such a manner that the terminals rest firmly against 
the stops, and the bar is centred between the test fixture terminations. 
The Q-meter capacitance dial shall be set at 400 pF and the vernier 
capacitance dial at zero. The Q-meter shall then be resonated, using the 
frequency dial, until a peak reading is obtained. This frequency shall be 
monitored in order to obtain an accuracy of 01 percent.. This resonant 
frequency value in MHz shall be recordad. The main capacitance dial 
shall be calibrated periodically in accordance with a routine calibration 
programme for test equipment. The sum of residual inductance of the 
Q-meter and the inductance of the test fixture shall be calculated from: 



^of = 



I 



^n^pc 



-L 



bar 



where 



Lqi = inductance in microhenries of the test fixture and the 
residual inductance of the Q-meter; 

/ = frequency in MHz; 

c = capacitance in ^^F; and 

Lbar = calculated inductance in microhenries of the shorting 
bar as determined from the following formula: 

Zbar- 0-0021 (2*303 log 10 -1~ - 1 + ^ + -^) 



where 



(T = a quantity as a function of X and is between 000 1 
and 0*007 which can be considered negligible, 

Z= 0-1405 ^VlZl 



where 

d = diameter of cross-section ( cm ), 

fi = permeability of the material of the wire, 1 for brass or 

copper, 
P «= volume resistivity of wire in nucrocentimetres, and 
/= frequency in cycles. 

After removing the shorting bar from the test fixture, the Q-meter 
frequency shall be set to the frequencies specified above. The coil under 



18 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

test shall then be inserted in the test fixture in such a manner that the 
loads are straight and rest tirmly against the stops, and the iunit is centred 
between the test fixture terminations. The L-G dial of the Q- meter shall 
then be turned until the resonance meter indicates a peak reading. The 
inductance { Ld ) shall be read directly on the L-G dial, using the induc- 
tance scale and the effective inductance of the coil shall be calculated from 
the formula: 



L = Ld'h 



cf 



where 



L — effective inductance in microhenries 

Ld = inductance dial reading, in microhenries, and 

Lcf = correction factor for inductance of test fixture and 
residual inductance of the O-meter in microhenries. 

The inductance shall be as specified in the relevant specification, 

7.4.2.3 Effective inductance for cylindrical coils (inductance greater than 
10 microhenries ) — The coils shall be tested in accordance with 7.4*2.1 
and 7.4-2,2 except that no allowance shall be made for residual inductance 
of the Q-meter and that of the test fixture. The various ranges of induc- 
tance shall be tested according to the frequencies given below: 

Inductance Range Test Frequency 

liH MHz 

Above 10 to 100 2'5 

Above 100 to 1 000 0-790 

Above 1 000 to 10 000 0*250 

Above 10 000 to 100 000 0-079 

7.4.2.4 Effective inductance for radial lead coils {inductance O'lO to 100 
microhenries inclusive) — The effective inductance for radial lead coils 
shall be measured as specified in 7.4.2.2 except that test fixtures TF-C, 
TF-D or TF-E shown in Fig. 7, or any other suitable device, shall be 
used. The shorting bar for use with these test fixtures shall be made of 
1*02 mm solid copper wire approximately 31*75 mm long. The induc- 
tance shall be as specified in the relevant specification. 

7.4.2.5 Effective inductance for radial lead coils (inductance greater than 
10 microhenries ) — The test shall be performed as specied in 7.4.2.3. 
The inductance shall be as specified in the relevant specification. 

19 



IS: 10230 (Part I). 1982 



BLOCK,LUC.TE.PtEX.GLAS ^,,^3^,^ # ,oO 



OR EQUAL 



PLUGS OR EQUAL 



23-62 



T-fl 



£5 



25-iO 
60-80 



TEST CLIPS— ^ 
(SEE DETAIL IN 



^ 



— H 22-23 



160-80 (SEE DETAIL IN 




A 



•35 J 




SHALL BE USED WHEN 
COIL BODY LENGTH IS 
U*30mm OR LESS 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 3 Test FixtureTF-A ( for Axial Leads ) 



BIRNBACH #400 
PLUGS OR EQUAL- 



76-20 




COPPER 'STRiP 
BR»OGE 6-35 



TEST CLIPS 
(SEE DETAIL IN 
FIG.7) 




SHALL BE USED WHEN COIL BODY 
LENGTH IS GREATER THAN U09mm 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 4 Test Fixture TF -B { for Axial Leads ) 



20 



IS : 102^0 (Part I ).1S82 

DlA6-35tO-25- 



6-35iO*25-^ 



■ 23-83:0-13 - 
36'53:0-25 




D!AV02tO-15 



COPPER OR BRASS 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 5 Shorting Bar for Test Fixture TF-A 
( FOR Axial Leads ) 



DlA6-3StO-25 



6-35 
tO-25 



--/,9-23l0-13 
--6V93 10-25 




DtA V02t0-15 



COPPER OR BRASS 
A31 dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 6 Shorting Bar Test Fixture TF-B 
( for Axial Leads ) 



V 



DRILL f'OR ROD- 



4'' 



-SOiOER 






DEIAtL 



UiA 1-60 BfML^j kOL> 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 7 Test Fixtures TF-C, TF-D and TF-E 
( for Radial Leads ) 



21 



t$ 2 102^0 (Parti ) . 19*2 

7.4.3 Magnification Factor^ Q^ — The test shall be performed using a Q,- 
meter. The frequency dial of the Q;meter shall be suitably calibrated 
and the Q^-standard within i 0*1 percent of the applicable test frequency. 
Frequencies to be used for testing the various ranges of inductance shall 
be as specified. The appropriate test fixture as applicable^ as shown in 
Fig. 3, 4 or 7, shall be assembled io the coil terminations of the Q-meter, 
with the side shown in the test fixture letter facing the capacitance termi- 
nations. The unit under test shall then be inserted into the test clip in 
such a manner that the leads are straight and rest firmly against the stop, 
and the unit is centred between the terminations. The Q^ shall then be 
read on the Q-meter. 

The value of Q, shall be as specified in the relevant specification. 

7.4.4 Coupling 

7.4.4.1 Coupling coefficient — The coupling coefficient shall be njeas- 
ured using an impedance bridge, or equivalent, at the frequency specified, 
and ac test voltage shall be the lowest voltage across the coil which will 
permit the bridge to operate satisfactorily. When the coupling coefficient 
is greater than 9, the open and short-circuited method shall be used. 
When the coupling coefficient is equal to or less than 9, the series aiding 
series bucking method, or a mutual inductance bridge, shall be used^ on 
the same inductance range and same voltage level. Units having variable 
coupling shall be measured at the specified extreme of the coupling range, 
and units having permeability tuning shall be measured, at the middle 
and at the specified end points of the tuning range. The coupling coeffi- 
cient shall be calculated as: 

^ . M 

Coupling coeflBcient 



^L,L^ 



where 



^ ^ — L^ 2^ = coefficient of mutual inductance ( ^H ), 

Li ^ total inductance series aiding ( /iH ), and 
r. s= total inductance series bucking ( uH ) 

The inductance values Lj and L^ in micrenohries are the measured 
values of the two coils under measurements at the specified frequency given 
inTabIe.5. 

22 



IS : 10230 ( Paat I ) . 1982 



TABLE 5 TEST FREQUENCY 

{Clause 7 AAA ) 



' BLOCK , LUCITE, PLE XIGLAS 
OR EQUAI 




Inductance 

Less than and equal to 1 
1 to 100 
Above 100 



Tkst Frequency 
kHz 

100 
10 

1 



The coupling coefficient shall be as specified in the relevant specifi- 
cation* 

1AA.2 Coupling coefficient ( alternate method ) — The coupling coeffi" 
cient between two radio frequency coils is to be determined by measuring 
the voltage induced in a coil when a voltage is applied to an adjacent 
coil. In order to maintain reasonable impedance levels, the measure- 
ment is to be performed at 100 kHz for nominal inductances of 10 |xH 
or less, at 10 kHz for nominal inductances less than or equal to 100 /iH 
but greater than 10 ^H and at 1 kHz for inductances greater than 100 
(xH. The measurement circuit is shown in Fig. 8. 

Equipment for IkHz and 10 kHz consists of H.P, Model 200 audio 
oscillator and Model 400 vacuum tube voltmeter; for 100 kHz, Model 606 
signal generator and Model 400 vacuum tube voltmeter, or equivalent. 



23 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 



(^ 


p> ® E 






OSCILLATOR 




\ 



1-2 V 



Fig. 8 Test Circuit for Coupling Coefficient 

The coils to be tested shall be tajped or otherwise secured, such that 
the bodies of the coils are kept parallel and in contact with each other to 
insure maximum coupling. The voltage levels shall be as low as possible 
to permit reliable reading of Fg. The inductance L should be measured 
at the same voltage level so that any saturation effect is taken into 
account. 

The coupling coefficient is to be calculated using the equation: 



Coupling coefficient 



-l 



U V^. 



where 

Lx = effective inductance of primary coil ( measured at test 
frequency ), 

Zg = effective inductance of secondary coil, 

Fi ^^ voltage measured across primary, and 

Fa = voltage measured across secondary. 

Note — This test may also be performed using the Q-meter for the oscillator 
at the standard test frequency, allowing simultaneous reading of Lj. Reversing the 
coils allows reading of Z.2 and also a second measurement of coupling for verification 
or averaging. 

The coupling coefficient ( when Vx = 0*02 ) is to be calculated using 
the equation: 

50 Fs 



Coupling coefficient = 



Q. 



i 






where 

Lx = effective inductance of primary coil ( measured at test 

frequency ), 

Zg = effective inductance of secondary coil. 



24 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

F2 = voltage measured across secondary, and 
Q^= as measured. 

The coupling coefficient shall be as specified in the relevant specifi- 
cation* 

7.4.4.3 The coupling factor for which Rd measurements are made 
{'see 7.4,8.3 ) shall be calculated as follows: 

^« = 4':;- = 1 + 4;^ = 1 + /r« ap es 

where 

p^ = coupling factor, 
K = actual coefficient oi coupling, 
Kq = coefficient at critical coupling, 
Q,p = (iof the primary, and 
0,8 = Q, of the secondary. 

The coupling factor shall be as specified in the relevant specification. 

7,4.5 Incremental Current Inductance Reduction — Incremental current 
inductance change is the dc current required to cause a change from the 
inductance measured with zero dc current and the inductance measured 
with the specified value of incremental current. The test shall be per- 
formed using an equipment, incremental bridge or equivalent, at 10 kHz 
for inductance values between 10 and 100 microhenries and at 1 kHz for 
inductance values greater than 100 microhenries, and by using the induc- 
tance bridge, or equivalent, at 10 kHz for inductance values less than 10 
microhenries. 

The ac test voltage for incremental current testing shall be the lowest 
voltage across the coil which will permit the bridge to operate satisfac- 
torily. The inductance of the coil under test with the determined ac test 
voltage applied shall be measured and recorded with zero dc current in 
the coil at I or 10 kHz, as applicable. 

The ac test voltage to be used across the coil for bridge operation, 
Bhall be dcternaincd by the following formula: 

where 

E «8 voltage ( rms ) in millivolts, 

/« frequency in kHz^ And 

X^ ta nominal value of inductance in millihenries. 

25 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) -1982 

This voltage is to be measured with a vacuum tube voltmeter connec- 
ted directly across the coil. This voltmeter is disconnected prior to 
making the inductance measurement. The dc current through the coil 
shall be adjusted to the value indicated under incremental current for the 
specific nominal inductance, and with this incremental current flowing 
through the coil the inductance shall be measured and recorded. 

The inductance value shall represent a reduction of 5 percent or less 
than the inductance measured with zero dc current. 

7,4.6 Effective Parallel Resistance — In this test, the oscillator controls 
shall be set at the specified measuring frequency, followed by the insertion 
of a suitable work coil attached to the Q-meter coil terminations and 
the capacitor adjusted for resonance. The capacitance-dial reading ( C\ ) 
and Q,-dial reading ( Q^x ) shall be recorded, along with the ^multiply Q 
by' meter dial, when it is other than x 1 which is preferable. The 
coil under test shall be connected to the capacitance, terminations and 
the resonance restored by adjusting the capacitor. The Q-dial reading 
( 0,2 ) with the test coil connected to the ;.Q;circuit shall be recorded. 
The effective parallel resistance of the inductor is calculated as: 

p 150 aid. 



where 

(2,1 = Q. of the Q-circuit alone, 

0,2 = 0, of the Q-circuit with the test coil connected to the Q- 

circuit, 
/?p = effective resistance in kilo-ohms, 
F = frequency in MHz, and 
Ci = capacitance in picofarads. 

The effective parallel resistance shall be as specified in the relevant 
specification. 

7.4.7 Self-resonant frequency — Unshielded coils shall be placed in the 
field of a variable-frequency oscillator, such as Measurements Corporation 
Megacycle Meter, Model 59, or equivalent. The oscillator shall include 
a device for indicating the relative amount of power absorbed from the 
field ( for example a grid-dip meter ). The unit under test shall be placed 
on the appropriate test fixture shown in Fig. 9 or 10. Units shall be suspen- 
ded or supported at a minimum of 38 mm from any surface other than 
the test fixture supports or oscillator coil. The frequency of the oscillator 
shall be varied through the frequency specified. At any frequency in the 

26 



is t 102^0 ( f»art t ) . 1982 

frequency range, where an abrupt increase in power absorption is indica- 
ted, the coupling between the oscillator coil and the unit under test shall 
be decreased by increasing the separation between the coils, until a 
moderate dip in grid current results when tuning to this resdnance. 

This frequency shall be considered the self-resonant frequency of the 
unit, and shall be accurately determined by suitable means to within 
Jc 0'2 percent. A check shall be made for surplus indications due to a 
resonance not associated with the unit under test by removing the unit 
from the field ( at frequencies below 2 '5 MHz, any suitable method may 
be used ). Coils which cannot be resonated in this manner shall be tested 
as specified in 7.4.7.1. Shielded coils shall be tested in a similar manner. 
However, when electrostatic shielded coils are tested, the shield of the 
coil shall be grounded. 

The self-resonant frequency shall not be less than 90 percent of the 
self-resonant frequency specified. However, when a minimum value of 
the self-resonant frequency is specified, the minimum value shall govern. 

7.4.7.1 Alternate test method ^ When units under test cannot be 
resonated by the method specified in 7.4.7, the test shall be performed 
using a suitable Q-meter. The units shall be mounted in a appropriate test 
fixture, as applicable, as shown in Fig. 3, 4 or 7, with the test fixture letter 
facing the inductance terminations. The tuning capacitor of the Q-meter 
shall then be set to approximately 400 pF, and the Q-circuit shall be 
resonated by adjusting the oscillator freqtiency of the Q-meter, The unit 
under test shall then be placed with a coil that will be resonated in the 
Q-circuit at a frequency about 10 times the initial resonant frequency, 
and the Q-circuit shall then be resonated at this new frequency. { This 
factor of 10 is based on the distributed capacitance of the unit under test 
being in the region of 4 pF. which is common for small coils. Higher 
distributed capacitance will lower the resonant frequency of the unit 
under test, and a factor smaller than 10 will prevail. ) The unit under 
iest shall then be connected across the capacitance terminations of the 
Q-meter taking care to avoid coupling between the unit under test and the 
comparison coil. The Q-circuit shall then be re-resonated by means of 
the Q;tuning capacitor or the vernier-tuning capacitor, observing whether 
the capacitance has to be increased or decreased from its previous value, 
in order to restore resonance. If the capacitance has to be increased, the 
oscillator frequency shall be increased by 10 to 20 percent. If the capaci- 
tance has to be decreased, the oscillator frequency shall be decreased by 
the same amount. The unit under test shall then be disconnected from 
the Q-meter, and the Q-circuit shall be resonated to the new frequency 
by means of the Q-tuning capacitor. The previous procedure shall then 
be repeated, while at the same time changing the oscillator frequency by 

27 



tS:io:^3Q(l^artl) - 198^ 



smaller inc^ments as it approaches the resonant frequencyof the unit under 
test, until thq. frequency reaches a value at which the Q-circuit capacitance 
is unchanged when the unit under test is connected or disconnected. The 
self-resonant frequency of the unit under test will then be the frequency 
of the oscillator and shall be accurately determined to within ± 0'2 percent. 

The self-resonant frequency shall not be less than 90 percent of the 
self-resonant frequency specified. However, when a minimum value of 
self-resonant frequency is specified, the minimum value shall govern. 



RODS,LUCITE,PLEXIGLAS 

OR EQUAL OR PHENOLIC 



BLOCK, LUCITE>PLEXI6L AS 
OR EQUAL 



^ 



f 



60011/2° 
NOTCH 



A 



I 38-10 
22-23 



I > i 



12'70 



76-20 



— ^ 
12-70 



L 



3-18 




COIL UNDER 
TEST 



AH dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio, 9 Test Fixture for Self-resonant Frequency Test 
( FOR Axial Leads ) 



28 



IS : 10230 { Part I ) - 1982 





^ ~" 


-*-6-35 
-»-0-79tO-0 


76 

i 

93 


-^ 


■^— 31*75 - 
15-88 Hfr- 


' 






9-53 


t 1 

22-23 
|3. 










r~ 


x—EFO 






12-70 






- 


76-20 


12-70 

^ 


J 




-* 38-10 ^ 

^ 75-20 " 


^ 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig, 10 Test Fixture for Self-resonant Freq^uency Test 
(for Radial Leads ) 

7.4.8 Impedance 

7*4.8.1 For untuned RF transformer ( primary impedance ) — Transfor- 
mers primary impedance shall be as measured with all secondaries loaded 
with their specified impedances, and with specified dc currents flowing in 
the windings. The resistance and reactance of the primary shall be 
measured at the specified input frequency and voltage by a bridge or equi- 
valent method. 

The impedance shall be as specified in the relevant specification. 

7*4.8«2 For variable- frequency units • — The impedance of variable- 
frequency transformers shall be measured using an impedance bridge, or 
equivalent, at the frequency specified. 

The impedance shall be as specified in the relevant specification, 

7.4.8.3 Forjixed'iuned, resonant units — The impedance of fixed-tuned, 
resonant transformers shall be measured using an impedance bridge, or 
equivalent, at the frequency specified. When specified, the following 
measurements shall be made: 

R^ «= anti-resonant impedance; 

^ds = anti-resonant secondary impedance with primary short- 
circuited; 

/?dp = anti-resonant primary impedance with secondary short- 
circuited; and 



29 



IS I 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

/?(jpg = anti-resonant primary impedance with secondary untermi- 

nated, but resonated to the specified frequency. 
The impedance shall be as specified in the relevant specification. 

7.4.9 Band Width and Gain — When specified, the bandwidth and gain 
of transformers shall be measured at the points specified, using the speci- 
fied circuit. 

Note — The use of* insertion loss ' rather than ' gain ' is preferred. The word 
* gain ' has no meaning in a passive device. The test procedure for insertion loss is 
a matched condition; the test is performed in circuitry and is repeatable. 

The bandwidth and gain shall be as specified in the relevant specifi- 
cation, 

7.4.10 Voltage Transfer Ratio 

7.4.10.1 Setting the variable element of single tuned IF transformer — The 
IF transformer winding with the associated condenser is coupled to the 
RF signal generator and the electronic voltmeter as shown in Fig 11. The 
frequency of the signal generator shall be adjusted to the IF frequency. 
By adjusting the variable element ( the core of the winding or the 
condenser ) the circuit is tuned to resonance by obtaining maximum deflec- 
tion on the electronic voltmeter. 







II 


















11 

C 








c 






RF 

SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 


-o — 






ELECTRONIC 
VOLTMETER 


4 


A 


c 


1 




B 


"n 




r 












^EXTERN 
CAPACITO 


AL 

R Ca 





Fig. 11 Set-up for Measurement of Coupling Factor k 

7.4.10.2 Setting the variable element of RF coils — The RF coil ( where 
inductance is variable ), with a recommended external capacitance, i^ 
coupled to the RF signal generator and electronic voltmeter as shown in 
Fig. 12. The frequency of the signal generator is set to the value at which 
the coil is operated during normal usage. By adjusting the core the 
circuit is tuned to resonance by obtaining the maximum deflection on the 
electronic voltmeter. 



30 



tS : 10230 ( Part I ) - 19^2 







L ; 








1 TO 10 K 

r V 1 






z 

L „ 


1 

( 




1 l\ 


J^ 






z, 












RF 

SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 














ELECTRONIC 
VOLTMETER 


A c 


^^ 


B 




D 


# -z 























Fig. 12 Set-up for Setting the Variable Element 

Setting the variable element of the double tuned IF transformer — The IF 
transformer, terminated with the specified external impedances, is conne- 
cted, with the first circuit to be tuned coupled to the RF signal generator, 
as shown in Fig. 12. With the switch ' S' closed, the variable element of 
the circuit to be tuned ( either the core or the condenser ) shall be adjusted 
for maximum voltage reading on the electronic voltmeter. With the 
switch ' S ' open, the variable element on the other side is adjusted for the 
minimum voltage reading on the electronic voltmeter, 

IS[oTE — The adjustment may have to be done more than once with the switch 
* S ' closed and open alternately till final adjustment is arrived at. The core or 
condenser is then locked in position by wax or by other suitable methods. If this 
adjustment is disturbed during subsequent measurements, the component shall be 
set again as detailed* 

7.4»10.3 Voltage transfer ratio measurement — Voltage transfer ratio is 
defined as the ratio of the secoadary voltage to the primary voltage, under 
normal operating conditions when terminated with specified external 
impedances. The set-up for the measurement of voltage transfer ratio is 
given in Fig. 13. The transformer or coil shall be set up as given in 
Fig. 13. /^i and ^2 ^^^ external impedances recommended by the manu- 
facturer to be used with the transformer or coil. In the case of an aerial 
coil, Zi is the artificial aerial. With the RF signal generator frequency 
adjusted to the test frequency, the voltage developed across the input and 
output circuits are measured. The ratio of output voltage to input voltage 
expressed in dB gives the voltage transfer ratio. 

7.4.11 Continuity of Winding — Each winding of specimens shall be tested 
for electrical continuity by any suitable means that will not introduce 
currents in excess of the rated value. 

Each winding shall be electrically continuous. 



31 



ISt 10236 ( l*art t ). I9d2 





1 


J L. 


1 
















1 ' '_ 










3 , 




t 


Zi"^' 






* s 


-L. 

R 

T 


RF 

SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 




A 


c 






ELECTRONIC 
VOLTMETER 


\t2 





































^i and ^2 ^^^ t^^ internal impedances. R is the isolating resistance whose value 
shall be such that connecting the electronic voltmeter does not detune the secondary* 

Fig. 13 Set-up for the Measurement of Voltage 
Transfer Ratio 

7-4.12 Voltage Proof — Unless otherwise specified, an ac test potential 
> of frequency 50 Hz shall be applied across the specified points of appli- 
cation. For type approval, the period of application of voltage is one 
minute and for acceptance test 2 seconds. 

The magnitude of the test voltage shall be, unless otherwise specified, 
as given in Table 6. For voltages greater than 1 000 V, the rate of appli- 
cations shall not exceed 500 V per second. 

7.4.12. 1 Method of mounting — Specimens shall be mounted by normal 
mounting means. Cylindrical insulated coils shall be clamped in the 
trough of a 90 degree noncorrosive metallic V-block of such size that the 
body of the coil does not extend beyond the extremities of the block. The 
surface of the V-block shall be free from contamination. The coil leads 
shall be so positioned that the distance between the leads and any point 
of the V-block shall be not less than the radius of the coil minus the radius 
of the lead wire. 

7.4.12.2 Points of application of test voltage — The test voltage shall be 
applied between each winding and the case or mounting hardware. 
Windings not under test shall be grounded to the case or mounting hard- 
ware. 

Unless otherwise specified, the test voltage shall be applied between 
the leads of the coil connected together and the V-block. 



32 



IS: 10230 (Parti)- 1982 



TABLE 6 VOLTAGE PROOF TEST VOLTAGE AT NORMAL PRESSURE 

(Clause 7 AA2) 

Insulation Working RMS Test 

Voltage Voltage 

25 and below 50 

25 to 50 100 

50 „ 100 300 

100 „ 175 500 

175 „ 700 2*8 X working voltage 

Above 700 1*4 x working voltage 

+ 1000 

7.4.12.3 At reduced voltage — The specimens shall be subjected to the 
voltage proof test specified in 7.4.12 except that the test voltage shall be 
90 percent of the values shown in Table 6 and shall be applied for a 
period of 5 seconds or 75 percent of the values shown in Table 6 applied 
for a period of one minute. 

7.4.12.4 Two seconds duration — A proof voltage as specified in Table 6 
shall be applied for 2 seconds between the points as stated above for 
acceptance test. 

There shall be no arcing, flashover, breakdown of insulation or other 
evidence of damage. For IF, RF and discriminator transformer, leakage 
current shall not exceed in excess of one milliampere. 

7.4.13 Induced Voltage — Unless otherwise specified, for ac ratings of 
25 V rms and above, a voltage sufficient to cause twice the rated voltage 
to appear across any winding shall be applied. Windings shall begrounded, 
as they would be in service. The frequency shall be at least twice the 
minimum frequency of the specified frequency range and shall be remote 
from any resonant frequency, such that the operational flux density of the 
core will never be reached. The test potential shall be applied for 5 ± I 
seconds or 7 200 ± 200 cycles, whichever is greater. 

There shall be no evidence of continuous arching or breakdown of 
insulation. Nor shall there be any abrupt changes in the input current or 
Q,, as applicable. 

7.4.14 Insulation Resistance — Unless otherwise specified, the insulation 
resistance shall be measured with the application of dc test voltages given 
in Table 7 for a period of one minute ± 5 seconds. 

7.4.14.1 Points of measurements — Unless otherwise specified, measure- 
ments shall be made between insulated points. 

a) For cylindrical coils, the measurements shall be made between 
the coil winding and the metal strap in the coil-connecting 
assembly as shown in Fig. 14. 

33 



IS : 10230 ( Part I ) . 1982 

b) Measurements shall be made between mutually insulated points. 
Each winding shall be tested with all other windings connected 
together and to the shield. 

The insulation resistance shall not be less than 100 mega-ohms. 



TABLE 7 INSULATION RESISTANCE TEST VOLTAGE 



Maximum Insulation 
WoKKiNG Voltage 

25 and below 
25 to 175 
Above 175 



DC Test 
Voltage 

50 
100 
500 



-METAL STRAP 

-CONDUCTIVE RESILIENT MATERIAL 
A 




COIL UNDER TEST 

SECTION AA 



-NON-CONDUCTIVE ROD 



Fig. 14 Coil-contacting Assembly for Mounting 
During Polarization 

7.4.15 Overload — A dc current equivalent to one and a half times the 
specified rated current shall be applied to the windings for 5 minutes. 

There shall be no evidence of cracked cases, 
distorted or softened insulation or terminations. 



charred windings, 



7.4.16 Bandwidth and Selectimty — The components shall be adjusted as 
specified in 7.4.10. Using the set-up given in Fig. 13, the voltage across 
the input circuit is measured at resonance frequency ^o- Keeping the out- 
put of the RF signal generator constant^ the frequency is varied on either 



34 



tS : 10230 ( Part 1 ) - 1982 

side of the resonance Irequency till the voltage across the input circuit is 
l/\/ 2 times tlie voltage at resonance. The frequency djfTerence l\f bet- 
ween these two points gives tiie bandwidth. The frequency of tiie single 
generator is further varied on either side of ihe rc^orance frequency to 
the value specified for selectivity limits, and tlie voltage across the input 
circuit measured. The ratio of the voltage at resonance to the voltage off 
resonance expressed in dB gives the selectivity. 

7.4.17 Factor KQ. {for Double Tuned IF Transformer ) — The set-up 
given in Fig. 12 is used for the measurement. The transformer shall be 
adjusted as described in 7.4,10. The voltage across the input side of the 
transformer is measured with the switch ' S ' closed ( Ei ) and open (E^ ). 
The factor KQ^is then given by: 



ra= V- 



E, 



^2 

7.4.18 Checking the Adjustment Facililies — The object of this test is to 
vary the variable element between the maximum and minimum value to 
ensure the frequency coverage specified. The component shall be tuned 
as specified in 7.4.10. The irequency of the RF signal generator shall be 
set at the maximum frequency specified and the variable element tuned 
to observe a maximum deflection. Similarly, with the frequency of the 
RF signal generator set at the minimum frequency specified, the variable 
element shall be adjusted to observe the maximum deflection. 

7.5 Mechanical Tests 

7.5.1 Sealing Test — In the case of hermetically sealed transformers or 
coils, the components shall be subjected to. sealing test in accordance with 
Sec 3 ( Method I or Method 2 ) or Sec 4 of IS : 9000 { Part XV )-l982*. 

In the case of sealing test according to Sec 4 of IS : 9000 ( Part XV )- 
1982*, the duration of conditioning shall be 10 min and there shall be no 
evidence of leakage of impregnant when examined under ultraviolet 
radiation. 

7.5.2 Immersion Test 

7.5.2.1 The object of this test is to determine the efTectiveness of 
seals of components when subjected to specified immersion conditions. 

7.5.2.2 The components shall be subjected to successive cycles of 
immei^ion in suitable hot and cold baths of salt or tap water capable of 
providing the specified conditions. 

Note — This procedure may be used to detect a defective terminal assembly, 
or a partially closed seam or moulded enclosure of a component by subjecting it to 
alternate thermal stresses. 



♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part XV 
Sealing test. 



35 



IS: 16230 ( Part I).} 982 

7.5,2-3 The components shall be subjected to successive cycles of 
immersion, each cycle consisting of immersion in hot water bath at a 
temperature of 65 JIq ^G followed by an immersion in a cold bath. The 
number of cycles shall be 2 and the duration of each immersion shall be 
15 minutes. The cold bath shall contain saturated solution of sodium 
chloride and water at 25 + ^^ "G. The transfer of the components from 
one bath to the other shall be accomplished as rapidly as practicable. 

Note — When electrical measurements 'are made after immersion cycling lo 
obtain evidence of leakage, the use of salt solution instead of tap water will facilitate 
detection of water penetration. 

7.5.2.4 After the test, the components shall be thoroughly and quickly 
rinsed in tap water and thoroughly dried externally by wiping or by 
applying a blast of air at atmospheric conditions for testing as required by 
the relevant component specification. The components shall then remain 
under recovery conditions for 2 to 24 hours, or as required by the relevant 
component specification, 

7.5.2.5 After recovery, the component shall be visually examined. 
There shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The com- 
ponents shall also be subjected to insulation resistance tests and high* 
voltage test in accordance with 7AA2 and 7.4.14, respectively. The insul- 
ation resistance shall not be less than 100 magohms. 

7.5.3 Solderability — Transformers and coils provided with tag and lead 
type terminations shall be subjected to the soldering iron test ( Method 3 ) 
with a soldering iron of suitable size in accordance with Sec 1 of IS : 9000 
( Part XVIII )-1981*. The period of recovery shall be in 10 minutes. 

At the end of the test, the component shall be visually examined. It 
shall not show any loosening of connections^ melting or seepage of sealing 
material or any other deterioration. The countinuity of all the windings 
shall also be checked. 

7.5.4 Robustness of Terminations — The test shall be carried out in accord- 
ance with IS: 9000 (Part XlX/Sec 1 to 5).l978*. The loading 
weight shall be 0*5 kg or equal to the weight of the component, whichever 
is more. The duration of this test shall be 10 seconds. There shall be no 
evidence of loosening or rupturing of the terminals or other mechanical 
damage. Bends shall not be considered. 

7.5.4,1 Tensile — The test shall be carried out in accordance with 
Sec I of IS : 9000 ( Part XlX/Sec 1 to 5 )-1978*. 

a) Wire and tag termination — The loading shall be specified in the 
relevant detail specification and the force shall be applied in any 
direction including the weakest. 

♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : 
Part XVIII Solderability test. 
Part XIX Test for robustness of terminations and integral mounting devices. 

36 



IS s 10230 ( Part I )« 1982 

b) Printed circuit and pin-type termination — The terminations shall be 
tested by gradually applying a force of 11 N to each termination 
in the direcdon of the axis of the terminations. Except for flexible 
leads, there shall be no rotation of flexible terminals. 

7*5.4.2 Bending — The test shall be carried out in accordance with 
Sec 3 of IS: 9000 ( Part XlX/Sec 1 to 5 )-I978*. 

a) Wire termination — The terminal components shall be tested by 
gradually applying a force equal to half of that specified in 
7.5«4.1> or any other value specified. 

Note — This test is applicable to solid-vyire lead terminations of limited ducti- 
lity, such as nickel-alloy type lead and those used in hermetically sealed com- 
ponent parts. 

b) Tag and strip — The terminations shall be tested 5 times through 
an angle of 90 degrees ( 45 degrees each side of the centre ). Any 
terminal that shows permanent deformation greater than 15° of 
the metal portion of the terminal in the terminal tensile test as 
given in 7.5.4.1 shall be tested. This test does not apply to 
terminals which shows permanent deformation, but are not 
designed to bent 45 degrees, 

7.5.4.3 Tortion — The test shall be carried out in accordance with 
Sec 4 of IS : 9000 ( Part XlX/Sec 1 to 5 )-1978*. 

a) Axial wire terminations ( other than printed terminations ) — The body 

. of the component part or the clamped terminal shall be rotated 

through 360 degrees about the original axis of the bent terminal, 

in alternating directions, for a total of 5 rotations, at the rate of 

approximately 3 seconds per rotation. 

7.5.4.4 Torque — The test shall be carried out in accordance with 
Sec 5 of IS : 9000 (Part XlX/Sec 1 to 5 ).1978*. 

a) Screw thread terminations — The torque shall be applied to the ter- 
minal at the point where the external lead wires are normally 
connected to it. The motion shall be applied clockwise and 
counter-clockwise in a plane perpendicular to the axis of the 
terminal. The equivalent diameter is equal to two times the 
distance from the terminal centre to the point of wire connection 
after the maximum permanent deflection has taken place due to 
the tensile test given in 7.5.4.I. The equivalent diameter for 
* hook* type terminals is the diameter of the wire from which 
the terminal is formed.* 

7«5.4.5 The continuity of ajl windings shall be checked after this test. 



♦Basic environmentaJ testing procedures for electronic and electrical items; Part XIX 
Test for robustness of terminations and integral mounting devices. 

37 



IS t 10230 ( iPart I ) - 1982 

7.5*5 Vibration Test — The transformer or the coils shall be subjected 
to vibration test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part VIII ).I981* to the 
severity specified. The transformer or the coils, shall be mounted, taking 
care that the terminations are not stressed and that equal number of 
samples are vibrated along each of the three principal axes. 

Each specimen shall be monitored to determine electrical discontin* 
uity by a method which shall at least be sensitive enough to monitor or 
register automatically any electrical discontinuity of 0*1 milliseconds or' 
greater duration. 

After the test, the samples shall be visually examined and shall show 
no apparent damage or deterioration. The continuity shall also be checked. 

7.5.6 Bump Test — The transformers and coils shall be subjected to the 
bump test in accordance with Sec 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part VII/Scc 1 to 5 )- 
1979*. The samples shall be mounted as specified in 7.5.4 and in such a 
manner that equal number of samples are bumped in each of the three 
principal axes. 

After the test, the component shall be visually examined and shall 
not show any apparent damage or deterioration. The magnification factor 
shall be measured and shall conform to the specified value. 

7.5.7 Core Rotation Torque — Where the core is held in place in the coil 
by a spritig arrangement, the torque required to rotate the core shall be 
within 20 to 350 g/cm. 

7.6 Climatic Tests 

7.6.1 Climatic Sequence 

7.6.1.1 Dry heat — The components shall be subjected to this test in 
accordance with Sec 5 of IS : 9000 ( Part Ill/Sec 1 to 5 )-l977*, the 
temperature of the test chamber being maintained at the appropriate 
maximum value for the category. 

At the end of the period of conditioning and while still at the high 
temperature, the insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance 
with 7.4.14. 

The components shall then be removed from the dry heat chamber 
and allowed to remain under standard recovery conditions. 

After recovery, the component* shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no damage or deterioration. 

♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : 
Part VIII Vibration. 
Part VII Impact test. 
Part III Dry-heat test. 

38 



IS: 10230 (Pattl)- 1982 

The insulation resistance shall be measured after recovery and shall 
not be less than 100 megohms. The magnification factor Q, shall be 
measured after the test and this shall conform to the specified value. 

7*6«1.2 Damp heat ( cyclic ) {first cycle ) — The components shall be 
subjected to the first cycle of this test in accordance with Sec 2 of IS : 9000 
( Part V )-198l*. After the specified period of conditioning, the com- 
ponents shall be removed from the chamber and allowed to remain under 
standard recovery conditions for a period of one and a half hours. 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The marking shall 
be legible. 

7.6.1.3 Cold — The components shall be subjected to this test in 
accordance with Sec 4 of IS : 9000 ( Part II )-1977*, the temperature of 
the chamber being maintained at the appropriate value for the category 
of components under test. The duration of exposure shall be 2 hours. 
After the specified period of conditioning, the components shall be removed 
from the chamber and allowed to remain under standard recovery condi- 
tions for a period of 2 hours. 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The insulation 
resistance shall be not less than 100 megohms. The magnification factor 
Q, shall be measured and this shall conform to the specified value. 

7*6. 1 .4 Low air pressure — The components shall be subjected to this 
test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part XIII )-1981*, the test chamber 
being maintained at a pressure appropriate to the category of the com- 
ponents. The duration of the exposure shall be 5 minutes. 

During the period of exposure, a test voltage equal to 120 percent of 
the working voltage shall be applied across the primary under the follow- 
ing conditions: 

a) All secondary windings shall be open-circuited, and 

b) If any winding(s) of the transformer is ( are ) specified for work- 
ing with a dc or ac voltage between the windings or core, case 
or other windings, 120 percent of this voltage shall be applied 
between the windings and other appropriate points. 

In the case of coils, the high voltage test shall be carried out in ac- 
cordance with 7.4.12* During and after this test, there shall be no sign 
of glow, discharge, breakdown or flashovcr. 



'Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: 
Part V Damp heat ( cyclic ) test. 
Part II Cold test. 
Part XIII Low air pressure test. 

?9 



tStl0230(I»artl)-19ft2 

7«6.1.5 Damp heat ( cyclic ) ( remaining cycles ) — The components shall 
be subjected lo the remaining number of cycles of this test in accordance 
with Sec 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part V )-198l*. 

After the specified period of conditioning, the components shall be 
removed from the chamber and allowed to recover under recovery condi- 
tions appropriate to this test. 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be no visible damage or mechanical deterioration. The marking shall 
be legible. The insulation resistance and voltage proof ( high voltage ) 
tests shall be carried out in accordance with 7.4.14 and 7.4.12. The insul- 
ation resistance shall not be less than 100 megohms. 

After a further period of recovery of 24 hours, the insulation resist- 
ance shall be measured in accordance with 7.4.14 and shall not be less 
than 100 megohms. 

The magnification factor Q, shall be measured and shall conform to 
the specified value. 

7.7 Damp Heat ( Steady State ) — The components shall be subjected 
to this test in accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part IV )-1979*. The duration 
of the exposure shall be appropriate to the category of the components. 
During exposure, the normal polariziiig voltage to which the components 
will be subjected in the actual usage shall be applied. After the specified 
period of conditioning, the components shall be removed from the chamber 
and allowed to recover under recovery conditions appropriate to this test. 

After recovery, the components shall be visually examined. There 
shall be visible damage or mechanical deterioration. Marking shall be 
legible. The insulation resistance shall be measured in accordance 
with 7.4.14 which shall not be less than 100 megohms. 

After a further period of recovery oi 24 hours, the insulation resis- 
tance shall be measured in accordance with 7.4.14 and it shall not be less 
than 100 mtgdhms. 

The magnification factor Q^ shall be measured after the test and this 
shall conform to the specified value. 

7.8 Change of Temperature — This test shall be carried out in accord- 
ance with Sec 1 of IS : 9000 (Part XIV )-1978*. The maximum and 
minimum temperatures shall be appropriate to the category of the com- 
ponents. The total number of cycles shall be 5. The period of exposure to 
iDOth maximum and minimum temperature shall be one hour each. 



♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: 
Part V Damp heat ( cyclic ) test. 
Part IV Damp heat ( steady state ), 
part XIV Change of temperature. 

40 



IS I 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

After the exposure, the components shall be removed from the cham- 
ber and allowed to recover under conditions appropriate to this test* The 
components shall be visually examined and there shall be no visible 
damage or mechanical deterioration. 

Aftei recovery, the components shall be subjected to high voltage 
test and insulation resistance test in accordance with 7.4.12 and 7.4.14, 
respectively. The insulation resistance shall not be less than 100 megohms. 

7.9 Salt Mist — The components shall be subjected to salt mist test in 
accordance with 7.10 of IS : 589-1961*, the period of exposure shall be 
4 days. 

After the specified period of conditioning, the components shall be 
removed from the chamber and allowed to recover under recovery condi- 
tions appropriate to this test. 

After recovery and cleaning, the components shall be visually exa- 
mined. There shall be no corrosion or machanical deterioration or any 
other visible damage. The marking shall be legible. The continuity of all 
windings and the robustness of terminations shall be checked. 

7.10 Mould Growth — The components shall be subjected to this test in 
accordance with IS : 9000 ( Part X )- 19791. 

After the expiry of the specified period of exposure, there shall be 
no mould growth on the components visible to the naked eye. 

7.11 Endurance — The components shall be operated at the maximum 
category temperature for the rated voltage and frequency for 2 000 hours. 
The loads shall be those for which the component is designed. After 
completion of the specified duration of operation, the transformer or coil 
shall be exposed to recovery conditions for 24 hours and shall be subjected 
to the following tests: 

a) Visual examinatiofi — There shall be no deterioration so as to impair 
operations and the markings shall be legible. 

b) Insulation resistance — The values shall be not less than those 
specified in 7.4.14. 

7.12 Temperature Rise — Unless otherwise specified, the temperature 
rise test shall only be performed on transformers rated at more than 0'8 
Watt average output. The temperature rise of cylindrical insulated coils 
shall be determined as specified in 7.12«1. The temperature rise of the 



♦Basic climatic and mechanical durability tests for components for electronic and 
electrical equipment ( revised ). 

fBasic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part X 
Mould growth test, 

41 



IS t 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

winding of transformers and coils shall be determined by change in resis- 
tance method. The test shall be performed at the specified ambient 
temperature and with rated dc current applied. When specified, an 
alternating voltage of the frequency and magnitude specified, shall be 
superimposed on the direct current. When the resistance of the winding, 
measured at 5-minute intervals, remains constant, the temperature of the 
winding shall be considered as stabilized It the method used for deter- 
mining the resistance of the winding requires the removal of power, the 
measurement shall be made within 30 seconds after the removal of power. 

7.12.1 For Cylindrical Insulated Coils — The coil under test shall be con- 
nected to a test fixture conforming to Fig. 15 with each wire lead wrapped 
one turn around the test fixture terminal and shall be soldered to the 
terminal for uniform low contact resistance. The test fixture, with the 
attached coil, shall then be placed in a test chamber which allows forced- 
air circulation to be shut off during test. The test chamber shall be free 
of test area draughts and direct thermal radiation. A temperature 
indicating device with an accuracy of i 05 ^C shall be located in the 
area surrounding the coil under test, but no where it will be influenced 
by the temperature rise of the coil. The test chamber temperature shall 
than be stabilized at the specified ambient temperature. The dc resistance 
(r) shall be measured with one-tenth rated dc applied at the specified 
ambient temperature ( /). 

When the resistance of the coil is stabilized, the resistance value shall 
be recorded. The ammeter-voltmeter method may be used for determin- 
ing this resistance, provided that the accuracy of these metres is ± 5 per- 
cent or better and the resistance of the voltmeter is at least 1 000 ohms 
per Volt. The rated dc shall then be applied to the coil under test, using 
a stable current source such as a storage battery. Forced-air circulation 
shall be shut oflFwhen rated current is applied. When the resistance of 
the specimen under test is stabilized with rated current applied, the 
resistance { R ) and the test chamber temperature ( T) shall be recorded. 
The temperature rise ( A ^ ) shall be calculated as: 

AT- A^ (/ + 234-5 ) - ( T- O 

where 

AT « temperature rise in ""C above the specified ambient temper- 
ature, 
R ^ resistance of winding ( in ohms ) at temperature ( T + 

AT), 
r = resistance of winding ( in ohms ) at temperature ( / ), 
/ = specified initial ambient test chamber temperature (in^C ), 

and 
T a= maximum ambient test chamber temperature (in ""C ) at 
the time of power shut off. T shall not differ from it by 
more than 5 °C* 

42 



is : 102^0 ( Part t ) -1962 



6*35 



0*63 mm 
COPPER 
WIRE 



CURRENT 
LEADS 




CAMBRIDGE THERMIONIC CORP 1990 
OR EQUAL, FEED THROUGH 
TERMINALS, 12 REQD 
-^1-55 [^ 177-80 



COIL UNDER TEST 



50-81V55 

-0- 



50-8iV55 
f 



50-8tV55 



POTENTIAL 
LEADS 



TOP VIEW 

J3BO0U- 



CURRENT 
TERMINALS 




-CAMBRIDGE THERMIONIC CORP x 
2045-X3, OR EQUAL, STANDOFF 
TERMINALS, 6 REQD 

REAR VIEW 



POTENTIAL / \ 
TERMINALS ( | 

HANDLE-^ QJP 



FRONT VIEW 

All dimensionsjn millimetres, 

Fio. 15 Test Fixture for Temperature Rise on Insulated Coils 



43 



IS 1 102^0 ( ^art I ) . 1982 

There shall be no evidence of physical damage. The temperature 
rise of any winding above the specified maximum ambient temperature 
shall not exceed the value specified. 

7.13 Flammability — The test shall be carried out in accordance v^ith 
the procedure given in Appendix B. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.4 ) 

INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN BY THE PURCHASER 

A-1. The following information shall be furnished by the purchaser with 
his enquiry or order: 

i) Grade; 
ii) Category; 

iii) Nominal frequency of operation ( for IF transformers ) or frequ- 
ency range of operation ( for RF coils ); 
iv) dc resistance; 

v) Inductance of the individual winding; 
vi) Current rating; 

vii) Self-resonance frequency ( RF coils ); 

viii) Required external capacitor values ( maximum and minimum ); 
ix) Magnification factor and the limits of variation during various 

climatic and mechanical tests; 
x) Coupling factor k ( for aerial coils ); 
xi} Voltage transfer ratio ( or gain factor ); 
xii) — 3 dB bandwidth and selectivity; 
xiii) Adjustment range required; 
xiv) Maximum working voltage; 
xv) External circuit impedances; 
xvi) Whether temperature rise test is ap]plicable: 

a) Maximum ambient temperature, 

b) Maximum allowable temperature rise, and 

c) Characteristics of current to be applied; 
xvii) Overload test rated current; 

3?viii) Applicable measurements for stability at temperature extremes; 

44 



iS ; 10230 ( Fart i ) - 1982 



xix) Insulation requirements; 
xx) Voltage proof voltage: 

a) At normal pressure, 

b) For special design featureSj 

c) Air pressure ( low ), 

d) Insulation working voltage; 

xxi) Factor KQ^ ( for double tuned IF transformer ); 

xxii) Shielding, if any; 
xxiii) Sealing, if any; 
xxiv) Overall dimensions and mass; 

xxv) Type, mounting and terminations; 
xxvi) Length of the leads; and 
xxvii) Any other information. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 7.13 ) 

FLAMMABILITY TEST 

B-1. OBJECT 

B-1.1 This test is intended to determine whether components will support 
combustion. 

B-2. TEST CHAMBER 

B-2.1 The chamber used for this test shall have the following provisions: 

a) An enclosure protected from air currents, but provided with 
means of venting fumes and admitting an adequate supply of 
fresh air at the bottom; 

Note 1 — A metal box about 600 mm wide, 900 mm high and 600 mm deep, 
with a detachable front, a viewing window and suitable holes for intake of air and 
venting of fames shall be used. 

Note 2 — Adequate safety precautions shall be taken to protect personnel from 
possible explosion of the components. 

b) A suitable stand or support for the components involving a 
minimum of heat transfer; and 

45 



IS t 10230 ( Part I ) - 1982 

c) A spirit burner of the pattern shown in Fig. 16 or of any other 
pattern. The fuel for the burner shall be good quality 66** OP 
industrial methylated spirit containing not more than 5 percent 
of wood naptha ( see IS : 324-1959* ). The burner and the flame 
are considered satisfactory if a bare copper wire of 71 mm 
diameter having a free length of not less than 100 mm in the 
flame in the position to be occupied by component melts in less 
than 6 seconds. 

Note — The melting point of copper is I 083*C. 

FLAME TUBE 19 mm DIA 




Fig. 16 Spirit Burner 

B.3. MOUNTING 

B-3.1 The components shall be mounted on the stand placed within the 
test chamber in such a manner that they are not shielded from the flame 

♦Specification for ordinary denatured spirit ( remtd ). 



46 



IS 1 102dO ( t»art I ) - ld82 

by the support. The precise orientation of the components relative to 
the flame, if not stated in the relevant specifications, shall be that judged 
to be the most unfavourable or which presents maximum surface to the 
test flame, 

B-3.2 The height of the components shall be so adjusted that the lowest 
part of the component body is 51 mm from the top of the burner as shown 
in Fig. 17, 

TYPICAL COMPONENT 
SECURED TO STAND 




TAN 

n 



^~ CTA» 



STAND 



TOP OF FLAME TUBE 
SPIRIT BURNER 

Fig, 17 Relative Position of Burner and Component 
B.4. TESTING 

B-4.1 After confirming that the flame is satisfactory and as specified 
in B-2.1 (c), the burner shall be placed underneath the component in such 
a manner that they are enveloped by the flame. The component shall be 
exposed to the flame for either ope minute or any less time necessary to 
cause ignition. 

B-4.2 If ignition has occurred, it shall not continue for more than 15 
seconds, or any other period specified in the relevant specification, after 
withdrawal of the flame. 

B-5. REQUIREMENT 

B-5.1 Burning particles shall not detach from the components. 



47 



lNt>tAN StANbAki>$ 

ON 

TRANSFORMERS AND INDUCTORS FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 

IS: 

1512-1969 Tests and general requirements for IF transformers and RF coils {first 
revision ) 

6297 Transformers and inductors ( power, audio, pulse, and switching ) for electronic 
equipment : 

( Part I )-1971 General requirements and tests 

( Part II )-1973 Power transformers 

( Part in )-1974 Audio frequency transformers and chokes 

( Part IV )-1974 Pulse and switching transformers 
8201-1976 High frequency wideband matching transformer 
9187 Deflection coil units used with TV picture tubes : 

( Part I )-1979 General requirements and ttists 

( Part II )-1980 Type DCUlS for 470 mm, 510 mm, 590 mm, and 610 mm TV 
picture tubes 

{ Part III )-1980 Type DGUIH for 470 mm, 510 mm, 590 mm and 610 mm TV 
picture tubes 

( Part IV )-1980 Typ DCU25 for 310 mm and 340 mm TV picture tubes 
9229-1979 Inductors for radio interference suppression 
9819 Line output transformers ( EHT ) used with TV picture tubes : 

( Part I )-1981 General requirements and tests 

(Part II )-1982 Type LOTlS for 470 mm, 510 mm, 590 mm and 610 mm TV 
picture tubes 

( Part III )-1982 Type LOTIH for 470 mm, 510 mm, 590 mm and 610 mm TV 
picture tubes 

10076 ( Part I )-1981 Linearity control units used with TV picture tubes: Parti 
General requirements and tests 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HBadquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHM10002 
Telelphones : 331 01 31 
331 13 75 

Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all Offices) 

RegSona! Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 110002 331 01 31 

331 13 75 
•Eastern : 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 70005437 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 60 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road. MADRAS 6001 13 235 23 1S 

tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 832 92 95 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 30 13 48 

tPeenya Industrial Area, "Jst Stage, Bangalore- Tumkur Road,, 39 49 55 

BANGALORE 650058 

Gangotrl Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 55 40 21 

Plot No. 21 Satyanagar. BHUBANESHWAR 751007 40 36 27 

Kalaikathir Building, 6/4S Avanashi Road, GOIMBATORE 641037 21 01 41 

Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 8-28 88 01 

Savitri Complex. 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 8-71 19 96 

53/5 Ward No. 29, p.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 54 11 37 

5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 20 10 83 

R 14 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme. JAIPUR 302005 38 13 74 

1 17/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 21 68 76 

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Lssia Cinema, Naval KIshore Road, 23 89 23 

*LUCKNOW 226001 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 26 23 05 

C/o Smt. Sunlta Mlrakhur,, — 

66 D/C Annexe, Gandhi Nagar, JAMMU TAWI 180004 

T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O.. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 6 21 17 

Inspection Offices {W\Vh Sale Point): 

Pushpanjali, 1st floor. 205-A. West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 525171 

NAG PUR 440010 

Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivajt Nagar, 32 36 35 

PUNE411005 



* Sales Office is at 5 Chowrtnghee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, 27 99 65 

CALCUTTA 700072 
tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY 400007 309 65 28 

^Sales Office is at 'F' Block, Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 39 71 

BANGALORE 560002 



Printed at Printograph, Karot Bagh, New Delhi. 



