**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


IS  2720-11  (1993):  Methods  of  test  for  soils,  Part  11: 
Determination  of  the  shear  strength  parameters  of  a 
specimen  tested  in  unconsolidated  undrained  triaxial 
compression  without  the  measurement  of  pore  water  pressure 
[CED  43:  Soil  and  Foundation  Engineering] 


a^v  j  i  imzzmn^a  rafrgamsBs 


£«>  \\  i  %^sfi^^^>9i^: 


^^CVVVfa^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  2720  (  Part  11   \  ?  1<*M 

(  Reaffirmed  2002 ) 

utt  11     £*«M-g?re  mrr  %  fspn  sntafaa  sftr  an^rf^r  tfk-arcrta 

(  Ti^rr  grrteiT ) 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR  SOILS 

PART  11     DETERMINATON  OF  THE  SHEAR  STRENGTH  PARAMETERS 

OF  A  SPECIMEN  TESTED  IN  UNCONSOLIDATED  UNDRAINED  TRIAXIAL 

COMPRESSION  WITHOUT  THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  PORE  WATER  PRESSURE 

(First  Revision) 

Firsl  Reprint  NOVEMBER  1998 
UDC    624-131-376-5 


©  BIS  1993 

BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK     BHAVAN,     9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR     MARG 
NEW     DELHI  110002 

October  1993  Price  Group  j 


Soils  and  Soil  Engineering  Sectional  Committee,  CED  23 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (  First  Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after 
the  draft  had  been  finalized  by  the  Soils  and  Soil  Engineering  Sectional  Committee  had  been 
approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering  Division  Council* 

With  a  view  to  establish  uniform  procedures  for  determination  of  different  characteristics  of 
soils  and  also  for  facilitating  the  comparative  study  of  the  results,  an  Indian  Standard  Method 
of  test  for  soils,  IS  2720  has  been  published  in  41  parts.  This  part  covers  the  determination  of 
the  compressive  strength  of  a  specimen  of  saturated  cohesive  soil  in  the  triaxial  compression 
apparatus  under  conditions  in  which  the  cell  pressure  is  maintained  constant  and  there  is  no 
change  in  the  total  water  content  of  the  specimen. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1971.  In  this  first  revision  apart  from  general  updation, 
the  three  amendments  issued  have  been  incorporated  and  the  quantities  and  dimensions  have 
been  given  in  SI  units. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with 
the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be 
rounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  )\ 
The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that 
of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  2720  (  Part  11  )  :  1993 


Indian  Standard 


METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR  SOILS 

PART  11     DETERMINATON  OF  THE  SHEAR  STRENGTH  PARAMETERS 

OF  A  SPECIMEN  TESTED  IN  UNCONSOLIDATED  UNDRAINED  TRIAXIAL 

COMPRESSION  WITHOUT  THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  PORE  WATER  PRESSURE 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  11  )  describes  the  test 
for  the  determination  of  the  compressive 
strength  of  a  specimen  of  saturated  cohesive 
soil  in  the  triaxial  compression  apparatus  under 
conditions  in  which  the  cell  pressure  is  main- 
tained constant  and  there  is  no  change  in  the 
total  water  content  of  the  specimen  (  see  Notes 

1  and  2  ). 

NOTES 

1  In  this  standard  the  term  'sample'  is  used  to 
denote  the  soil  submitted  to  the  laboratory  for  the 
testing  and  the  term  'specimen'  refers  to  a  portion 
of  the  sample  upon  which  the  test  is  performed. 

2  The  result  of  any  test  made  in  accordance  with 
this  standard  requires  interpretation  in  relation  to 
the  nature  of  the  soil  and  the  way  in  which  the 
specimen  was  obtained  and  prepared. 

1.1.1  This  test  is  limited  to  specimens  in  the 
form  of  right  cylinders  of  nominal  diameter  38, 
50,  70  and  100  mm  and  of  height  approxi- 
mately equal  to  twice  the  nominal  diameter 
(  see  Note  ).  In  case  of  remoulded  samples; 
ratio  of  diameter  of  specimen  to  maximum 
size  of  particle  in  the  soil  should  not  be  less 
than  5. 

NOTE  —  The  diameter  of  the  specimen  is  to  be 
selected  having  regard  to  the  character  of  the  soil 
and  the  maximum  size  of  the  particles  present 
in  the  sample.  Generally,  a  diameter  of  38  mm 
will  be  suitable  for  homogeneous  fine-grained   soils. 

2  REFERENCES 

2.1  The  Indian  Standard  listed  below  is  nece- 
ssary adjunct  to  this  standard: 


IS  No. 

2720 

(  Part  2  )  :  1973 


Title 

Methods  of  test  for  soils:  Part. 
2  Determination  of  water 
content  (  second  revision  ) 


a  test  specimen  are   listed   in   3.2   and   3.3  to 
cover  the  three  possible  following  procedures: 

a)  Procedure  1  —  For  obtaining  a  specimen 
from  a  sampler  tube  of  the  same  internal 
diameter  as  the  required  specimen. 

b)  Procedure  2  —  For  obtaining  a  specimen 
from  a  sampler  tube  of  larger  diameter 
than  the  required  specimen. 

c)  Procedure  3  —  For  obtaining  a  specimen 
from  a  block  sample. 


a  Sample  Preparation 


3.2  Articles  Common  to 
by  all  Three  Procedures 

3.2.1  Split  Mould 

Of   diameter    and    length    to     suit     the    test 
specimen. 

3.2.2  Trimming  Knife 

Sharp-bladed  for  example  a  spatula   or  pallet 
knife. 

3.2.3  Piano  Wire  Saw 

3.2.4  Metal  Straightedge 

3.2.5  Metal  Scale 


Metal    or     Plastic    End- 


3  APPARATUS 

3.1  Apparatus  required  for  the  preparation    of 


3.2.6  Non-Corrodible 

Caps 

Of  the  same  diameter  as  the  test  specimen. 
The  upper  end  cap  is  to  have  a  central  spheri- 
cal seating  to   receive   the   loading   ram   (  see 

Note  ). 

NOTE— A  plastic  upper  end  cap,  20  mm  thick,  is 
normally  satisfactory  for  use  on  soft  or  very  soft 
soils.  Metal  end  caps  are  considered  preferable  for 
use  on  stiff  soils.  A  metal  upper  end  cap  12  to 
20  mm  thick  is  normally  satisfactory. 

3.2.7  Seamless  Rubber  Membrane 

In  the  form  of  a  tube,  open  at  both  ends  of 
internal  diameter  equal  to  the  specimen  dia- 
meter and  of  length  50  mm  greater  than  the 
height     of   the     specimen.      The    membrane 


1 


IS  2720  (  Part  11  )  :  1993 


thickness  should  be  selected  having  regard 
to  the  size,  strength  and  nature  of  the  soil  to 
be  tested.  A  thickness  of  02  to  0*3  mm  is 
normally  satisfactory. 

3.2.8  Membrane  Stretcher 

To  suit  the  size  of  the  specimen. 

3.2.9  Rubber  Rings 

Of  circular  cross  Action  to  suit  the  diameter 
of  the  end  caps. 

3.2.10  Apparatus  for  Moisture  Content  Deter- 
mination 

As  described  in  section  1  of  IS  2720  (  Part  2  )  : 
1973. 

3.2.11  Balance 

Readable  and  accurate  to  0-5  g. 

3.3  Additional  Items  for  the  Specific  Procedures 

3.3.1  Extruders  [  For  Procedures  (a)  and  (b) 
of  3.1  Extruders  ] 

3.3.2  Thin-walled  Tubes  [  For  Procedure  (b) 
of  3 A  ]  (for  obtaining  test  specimens  ) 

The  tubes  shall  be  smooth  inside  and  out 
and  turned  at  one  end  to  form  a  cutting  cdgQ  at 
the  inner  surface  of  the  tube.  The  area  ratio 
(  see  Note  )  shall  be  kept  as  low  as  posibie 
consistent  with  the  strength  requirements  of 
the  specimen  tubes  and  its  value  shall  not 
exceed  10  percent.  The  length  of  the  tubes 
shall  be  at  least  50  mm  more  than  the  required 
length  of  the  specimens. 

NOTE  —  The  area  ratio  is  defined  as  the  volume  of 
soil  displaced  by  the  sampler  in  proportion  to  the 
volume  of  the  sample  and  is  defined  as: 


.  .         Do2  -  2>c2 

Area  ratio  = 


Dc* 


x  100  percent 


where 

Do  =  outside  diameter  of  the  tube,  and 
Dc  =  inside  diameter  of  the  cutting  edge. 

3.3.3  Soil  Lathe  [  For  Procedure  (c)  of3A  ] 
For  preparing  test  specimens. 

3.3.4  Meier  Box  [  For  Procedure  (c)  0/3.1  ] 

For  cutting  the  ends  of  the  specimen   perpendi- 
cular to  their  axes. 

3.4  Apparatus  Required  for  Triaxial  Test 

3.4.1  Triaxial  Test  Cell 

A  triaxial  test  cell  of  dimensions  appropriate  to 


the  size  of  the  specimen,  capable  of  being  open- 
ed for  the  insertion  of  the  specimen,  suitable 
for  use  with  the  fluid  selected  for  use  at  internal 
pressures. up  to  1  MPa  and  provided  with  a 
means  of  applying  additional  axial  compressive 
load  to  the  specimen  by  means  of  a  loading 
ram.  A  transparent  chamber  is  recommended. 
The  base  of  the  ceil  shall  be  provided  with  a 
suitable  central  pedestal  with  drainage  outlets 
with  valves. 

3.4.2  An  Apparatus  for  Applying  and  Maintain- 
ing the  Desired  Pressure  on  the  Fluid  Within 
the  Cell 

To  an  accuracy  of  10  kPa  (  preferably  5  kPa  ) 
with  a  gauge  for  measuring  the  pressure.  The 
gauge  shall  be  regularly  calibrated. 

3.4.3  Machine  Capable  of  Applying  Axial  Com- 
pression  to  the  Specimen 

At  convenient  speeds  to  cover  the  range  005 
to  5  mm  per  minute.  The  machine  should 
have  a  capacity  of  50  KN.  A  means  of 
measuring  the  axial  compression  of  the  speci- 
men to  an  accuracy  of  0*01  mm  shall  be 
provided  and  the  machine  shall  be  capable  of 
applying  an  axial  compression  of  about  one- 
third  the  height  of  the  specimen  tested. 

NOTE  — Incase  the  travel  of  the  dial  gauges  is 
not  sufficient  a  magnetic  spacer  of  known  thickness 
may  be  used. 

3.4.4  Provision  shall  be  made  for  measuring  the 
additional  axial  load  on  the  specimen.  Proving 
ring  of  1  KN  capacity  with  sensitivity  cf2N 
for  low  strength  soils  and  one  of  10  KN  capa- 
city with  sensitivity  of  10  N  for  high  strength 
soils  are  found  suitable. 

4  PREPARATION  OF  SPECIMENS 

4.1  Undisturbed  Specimens 

4.1.1  The  object  of  the  specimen  preparation  is 
*  to  produce  cylindrical  specimens  of  height 
twice  the  specimen  diameter  with  plane  ends 
normal  to  the  axis  and  with  the  minimum 
change  of  the  soil  structure  and  moisture 
content. 

The  method  of  preparation  will  depend  on 
whether  the  sample  is  received  in  the  labora- 
tory in  a  tube  or  as  a  block  sample  and  any 
one  of  the  procedures  given  in  4.1.1.1,  4.1.1.2 
or  4.1.1.3  may  be  used. 


1  kPa  =  lOOkgf.m* 
1  KN  -  100  kgf 


IS  2720  (Part  11)  :  1993 


4.1.1*1  A  specimen    from  a  sampler   tube  of  the 
same  interna!  diameter  as  the  required  specimen 

May  be  obtained  as  given  in  (a)  to  (e): 

a)  When  the  ends  of  the  sampling  tube  are 
not  flat  and  normal  to  the  axis  of  the 
tube,  a  length  of  the  sample  sufficient 
to  form  a  specimen  shall  be  extruded 
from  the  tube  and  cut  off.  This  speci- 
men shall  then  be  placed  in  the  split 
mould  and  the  ends  trimmed  flat  and 
normal  to  its  axis. 

b)  As  an  alternative  to  (a)  when  the  tube 
enclosing  the  sample  is  in  good  condition 
and  the  ends  are  plane  and  normal  to 
the  axis  of  the  tube,  the  specimen  may 
be  prepared  in  the  tube  and  extracted. 

c)  Any  wax,  used  for  sealing,  shall  be 
removed  and  the  cutting  edge  end  of 
the  sample  smoothed  so  that  it  is  approxi- 
mately normal  to  the  axis  of  the  tube. 
The  extruder  shall  then  be  used  to  push 
the  sample  through  the  tube  so  that  the 
other  end  may  be  cut  normal  to  the  axis 
and  finally  smoothed  with  the  metal 
straight  edge.  The  sample  should  be 
extruded  from  the  tube  pushing  from 
the  cutting  edge  side  and  cut  to  the 
required  length.  During  this  operation 
the  sample  tube  shall  be  held  vertical. 
Precautions  shall  be  taken  to  prevent 
adhesion  between  the  soil  and  the 
extruder,  for  example,  by  interposing 
oiled  paper  discs  or  lightly  oiling  the 
face  of  the  extruder. 

d)  The  length,  diameter  and  mass  of 
the  specimen  shall  be  measured  to  an 
accuracy  enabling  the  bulk  density  to  be 
calculated  to  an  accuracy  of  ±  10 
percent. 

e)  The  specimen  shall  be  placed  on  one  cf 
the  end  caps  and  the  other  end  cap  shall 
be  put  on  top  of  the  specimen.  The 
rubber  membrane  shall  then  be  placed 
around  the  specimen  using  the  membrane 
stretcher  and  the  membrane  sealed  to 
the  end  caps  by  means  of  rubber  rings. 
The  specimen  is  then  ready  to  be  placed 
on  the  pedestal  in  the  triaxial  cell.  The 
pedestal  should  be  either  covered  with 
a  solid  end  cap  or  the  drainage  valve 
should  be  kept  closed. 

4.1.1.2  For  obtaining  a  specimen  from   a   sample 
tube  of  larger  diameter  than  the  required  specimen 

Two  methods  are  available,  either  the  specimen 
may  be  cut  to  size  by    means    of    thin    walled 


tubes  or  by  hand  trimming  on  a  soil  lathe. 
Specimens  of  sensitive  clays  and,  in  some 
cases,  of  stifT  fissured,  clays,  may  be  best 
prepared  by  the  latter  method.  The  prepara- 
tion of  specimens  on  the  soil  lathe  is  dealt 
with  in  4.1.1.3.  To  prepare  specimens  by 
means  of  thin-walled  tubes  the  sample  shall  be 
extruded  from  the  sample  tube  directly  into  a 
number  of  thin-walled  specimen  tubes  rigidly 
clamped  with  their  cutting  ends  a  short'dis- 
tancc  from  the  end  of  the  sampling  tube.  Test 
specimens  shall  be  prepared  from  the  thin- 
walled  specimens  tubes  in  the  manner  described 
in  4.1.1.1. 

4.1.1.3  A  specimen  from  a  block  sample 

May  be  obtained  as  given  in  (a)  to  (c)  : 

a)  A  rectangular  prism  slightly  larger  than 
the  required  final  dimension  of  the 
specimen  shall  be  cut  from  the  block 
sample.  The  rectangular  prism  shall  be 
cut  either  on  a  required  orientation  or 
an  orientation  as  best  suited  to  the 
sample.  The  ends  of  the  prism  shall  be 
made  plane  and  parallel  using  the  meter 
box  and  the  prism  shall  b?  placed  in  the 
soil  lathe.  The  excess  soil  shall  be  cut 
off  in  this  layer.  The  trimming  opera- 
tion, rotating,  the  sample  between  each 
cutting  operation,  shall  be  continued 
until  a  cylindrical  specimen  results. 

b)  The  specimen  shall  be  removed  from 
the  soil  lathe,  placed  in  the  split  mould 
and  cut  to  the  correct  length  and  the  ends 
made  plane  and  normal  to  the  axis  of 
the  specimen. 

c)  The  remainder  of  the  preparation  shall 
be  as  described  in  4.1.1.1. 

4.2  Remoulded  Samples 

Remoulded  samples  prepared  at  the  desired 
moisture  and  density  by  static  and  dynamic 
methods  of  compaction  or  by  any  other  suita- 
ble method,  where  necessary. 

5  TESTING 

5.1  The  specimen  prepared  as  described  in  4 
shall  be  placed  centrally  on  the  pedestal  of 
the  triaxial  cell.  The  cell  shall  be  assembled 
with  the  loading  ram  initially  clear  of  the  top 
cap  of  the  specimen  and  the  cell  containing 
the  specimen  shall  be  placed  in  the  loading 
machine.  The  operating  fluid  shall  be  admitted 
to  the  cell  and  the  pressure  raised  to  the 
desired  value. 


IS  2720  ( Part  II  )  :  1993 


5.2  The  loading  machine  shall  be  adjusted  to 
bring  the  loading  ram  a  short  distance  away 
from  the  seat  on  the  top  cap  of  the  specimen 
and  the  initial  reading  of  the  load  measuring 
gauge  shall  be  recorded.  The  loading  machine 
shall  then  be  further  adjusted  to  bring  the 
loading  ram  just  in  contact  with  the  seat  on 
the  top  cap  of  the  specimen  and  the  initial 
reading  cf  the  gauge  measuring  the  axial 
compression  of  the  specimen  shall  be  recorded. 
A  rate  of  axial  compression  shall  be  selected 
such  that  failure  is  produced  within  a  period 
of  approximately  5  to  15  minutes.  The  test 
shall  be  commenced,  a  sufficient  number  of 
simultaneous  readings  of  the  load  and  com- 
pression measuring  gauges  being  taken  to 
define  the  stress  strain  curve  ( see  Note). 
The  test  shall  be  continued  until  the  maximum 
value  of  the  stress  has  been  passed  or  until  an 
axial  strain  of  20  percent  has  been  reached. 
The  specimen  shall  then  be  unloaded  and  the 
final  reading  cf  the  load  measuring  gauge  shall 
be  recorded  as  a  check  on  the  initial  reading. 

NOTE —  It  is  often  convenient  to  make  a  plot  of 
load  versus  compression  as  the  rest  proceeds,  to 
enable  the  point  of  failure  to  be  determined. 

5.3  The  cell  shall  be  drained  of  fluid  and  dis- 
mantled, and  the  specimen  taken  out.  The 
rubber  membrane  shall  be  removed  from  the 
specimen  and  the  mode  of  failure  shall  be 
noted  ( see  Note  1  ).  The  specimen  shall  be 
weighed  ( see  Note  2  )  and  samples  for  the 
determination  of  the  moisture  content  of  the 
specimen  shall  be  taken  [  see  Section  1  of  IS 
2720  (  Part  2)  :  1973  ].  If  there  is  a  moisture 
change  in  the  specimen  it  should  be  recorded 
and  discretion  used  with  regard  to  accepta- 
bility of  the  test. 

NOTES 

1  The  most  convenient  method  of  recording  the 
mode  of  failure  is  by  m?ans  of  sketch  indicating 
the  position  of  the  failure  planes.  The  angle  of 
the  failure  plan  (s)  to  the  horizontal  may  be  recor- 
ded, if  required.  These  records  should  be  comple- 
ted without  undue  delay  to  avoid  loss  of  moisture 
from  specimen. 

2  Comparison  with  the  recorded  mass  of  the  speci- 
men before  testing  provides  a  check  on  the  imper- 
meability of  the  rubber  membrane  if  water  has  been 
used  as  th^  operating  fluid  in  the  cell. 


6  CALCULATIONS 

6.1  According  to  the  procedure  given  in  this 
standard  the  difference  between  the  initial 
reading  and  any  subsequent  reading  of  the 
loading  measuring  device  is  the  axial  load 
applied  to  the  specimen  in  addition  to  that  due 
to  cell  pressure. 


6.1.1  The  area  of  the  specimen  normal  to  its 
axis  at  any  stage  of  the  test  shall  be  computed 
on  the  assumption  that  the  sample  deforms  as 
a  right  cylinder.  This  area  at  any  strain  is 
given  by: 

1  —e 

where 

A0  =  initial  area  of  the  specimen 
normal  to  the  axis,  and 

e       =  (  L0  -  L  )/L0 

where 

L0  =  initial  length  of  the  specimen, 
and 

L  =  length  of  the  specimen  at  the 
stage  of  test  at  which  area  is  to 
be  determined. 

6.1.1.1  The  principal  stress  difference  (  Oi  —  an) 
for  any  stage  of  the  test  shall  be  determined 
by  dividing  the  additional  axial  load  by  the 
corresponding  area  A. 

6.1.1.2  A  correction  to  allow  for  the  restrain- 
ing effect  of  the  rubber  membrane  shall  be 
made  as  given  below: 


Correction   =  AM 


1 


D 


where 
M 


D 


the  compression  modulus  of  the 
rubber  membrane  in  kg/cm  of 
width  (  see  6.1.1.4  ), 

the  axial  strain  at  the  maximum 
principal  stress  different,  and 

initial  diameter  of  the  sample 
in  cm. 


6.1.1.3  The  value  of  the  correction  calculated 
as  given  in  6.1.1.2  shall  be  deducted  from  the 
measured  maximum  principal  stress  difference 
to  give  the  collected  value  of  the  maximum 
principal  stress  different. 

6.1.1.4  The  compression  modulus  of  the  rubber 
membrane  cannot  be  measured  directly  but 
may  be  assumed  to  be  equal  to  the  modulus 
measured  in  extension.  The  extension  modulus 
of  a  circumferential  strip  (  25  )  mm  wide  cut 
from  the  membrane  may  be  determined  by 
means  of  the  arrangement  shown  in  Fig.  I. 
The  contact  faces  between  the  rubber  and  the 
glass  rods  should  be  dusted  with  talc  powder 
to  reduce  friction. 

7  REPORTING  OF  RESULTS 

7.1  The  dimensions  of  each  test  specimen, 
the    bulk  density,   the   moisture    content,  the 


IS  2720  (  Part  11 )  :  1993 


cell  pressure,  the  value  of  the  maximum 
principal  stress  difference  (<Ji  — a3),  and  the 
corresponding  strain  and  time  to  failure  and 
the  rate  of  strain  at  which  the  test  was  condu- 
cted shall  be  reported. 

7.1.1  When  required  the  stress-strain  curve  of 
the  test  shall  be  plotted  with  the  axial  strain 
as  abscissa  and  the  principal  stress  difference 
as  ordinate. 


7.1.2  The  type  of  sampler  and  method  of 
sampling  in  the  field  shall  be  reported. 

7.2  The  shear  parameters  shall  be  obtained 
from  a  plot  of  Mohr  circles  for  which  purpose 
peak  values  of  principal  stress  difference  or 
principal  stress  ratio  or  the  ultimate  value  as 
desired  may  be  used. 

7.3  A  proforma  for  the  record  of  the  test 
results  is  given  in  Annex  A. 


GLASS 
ROD 


<J 


m 


25  mm  W/OE 
CIRCUMEERENTIAL 

STRIP  OF  RUBBER 
MEM8BANE   — 


MEAN  LENGTH  OF 
MEMBRANE*  2  (l-  d-2t)  +  n(d*t) 

LOAD  PER  25mm.  £ 

EXTENSION  LOAD  PER  cm 

MODULUS(M)   * 


STRAIN  * 


WEIGHTS 


STRAIN 
EXTENSION, 
MEAN  LENGTH 


SCALE   PAN 


Fig.  1    Apparatus  for  Measuring  The  Extension  Modulus 
of  Rubber  Mbmbrane 


JS  2720  (  Pan  11  )  :  1993 

ANNEX     A 

(  Clause  7.3  ) 

UNCONSOLIDATED  UNDRAINED  TRIAXIAL  COMPRESSION  TEST  WITHOl  1 
THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  POREWATER  PRESSURE 


Operator 


Site 

Specimen  preparation  procedure 

Initial  length  of  specimen 

Initial  diameter  specimen 

Initial  weight  of  specimen 

Load  gauge  No. 

Cell  pressure  (  aa  )  = 

Description  of  sample 

Mode  of  failure 

Angle  of  shear  plane  with  vertical  axis 


Date 
Borehole  No. 
Sample  No. 


Depth 


Bulk  density 

Moisture  content 

Load  gauge  constant 

Rate  of  strain 

Sketch  of  specimen  after  failure 


Comp- 

Load 

Comp- 

Strain 

Cor- 

Load    Deviator 

Vertical 

ression 

Gauge 

ression 

rected 

Stress 

Stress 

»1 

Gauge 

Reading 

of  Sample 

Area 

(<*i  —  ^3) 

<*i 

<*3 

Reading 

(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5)         (6) 


(?) 


(8) 


(9) 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and 
attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publication),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  CED  23  (  4992  ) 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones:  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices: 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern      :  1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.I.P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern    :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern    :  CI.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113 


Western     :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400093 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
PATNA.     PUNE.    THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

323  76  17,323  38  41 


f337  84  99,337  85  61 
1337  86  26,337  9120 


{ 


60  38  43 
60  20  25 


f  235  02  16,235  04  42 
123515  19,235  23  15 

f  832  92  95, 832  78  58 
183278  91,832  78  92 


Printed  by  Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi 


