**************** 


*■  *Z**K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 
Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


m»>!5sss^^ft^: 


,_A» 


**************** 


BLANK  PAGE 


<_<ii££ 


UJ> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  2974  {  Part  3  }  :  1992 

( Reaffirmed  2006 ) 

(  3STCT   tRtftfol  ) 

Indian  Standard 

DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF  MACHINE 
FOUNDATIONS  —  CODE  OF  PRACTICE 

PART  3     FOUNDATIONS  FOR  ROTARY  TYPE  MACHINES 
(MEDIUM  AND  HIGH  FREQUENCY) 

(  Second  Revision  ) 


First  Reprint  NOVEMBER  1993 


UDC  6241591  :  62F313-218-2 


©    BIS  1992 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,    9   BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI   110002 

August  1992  Price  Group  4 


Foundation  Engineering  Sectional  Committee,  CED  43 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by 
the  Foundation  Engineering  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering 
Division  Council. 

The  installation  of  heavy  rotary  machines,  namely,  steam  turbo-generators,  turbo-compressors  and 
blowers,  involves  design  of  their  foundations  taking  into  considerations  the  vibration  characteristics 
of  the  foundations  system.  While  many  of  the  special  features  relating  to  the  design  and 
construction  of  such  machine  foundations  are  guided  by  the  manufacturers,  still  a  large  part  of  the 
details  shall  have  to  be  according  to  certain  general  principles  of  design  covering  machine 
foundations  This  code  of  practice  for  design  and  construction  of  machine  foundations  (IS  2974) 
is  being  published  in  parts.  This  part  lays  down  the  general  principles  for  frame  foundations  for 
rotary  machines  of  medium  to  high  frequencies.     The  other  parts  of  this  code  are: 

IS  2974  Code  of  practice  for  design  and  construction  of  machine  foundatians: 

Part  1  :  1982  Foundations  for  reciprocating  type  machines 

Part  2  :  1980  Foundations  for  impact  type  machines  (  hammer  foundations  ) 

Part  4  :  1979  Foundations  for  rotary  type  machines  of  low  frequency 

Part  5  :  1987  Foundations  for  impact  type  of  machines  other  than  hammers  (  forging  and 
stamping  press,  pig  breakers,  drop  crusher  and  jolter ) 

In  the  design  and  construction  of  foundations  for  rotary  machines,  a  proper  coordinations  between 
the  different  branches  of  engineering,  including  those  dealing  with  erection  and  commissioning  is 
essential. 

Coordinated  efforts  by  the  different  branches  would  result  in  satisfactory  performance,  convenience 
of  operation,  economy  and  a  good  general  appearance  of  the  complete  unit.  The  main  unit  with 
all  its  auxiliaries  and  adjacent  piping  must  be  provided  for,  when  making  the  foundation  plans  and 
all  the  details  should  be  well  worked  out,  before  going  ahead  with  the  design. 

This  standard  first  published  in  the  year  1967  and  subsequently  revised  in  1975.  This  revision  has 
been  prepared,  based  on  a  numbers  of  comments  received  on  this  standard,  keeping  in  view  the 
current  design  practices  followed  in  India  and  abroad.  The  sizes  and  capacities  of  turbo-generators 
have  increased  (  up  to  500  MW  )  since  the  last  revision  of  the  code.  There  have  been  fundamental 
changes  in  the  design  philosophy  of  turbogenerator  foundations,  for  example  use  of  slender  columns, 
long  and  flexible  top  decks,  etc.  With  the  advent  of  powerful  computers  and  finite  element  analysis 
computer  programmes  the  use  of  three-dimensional  space  frame  models  for  static  and  dynamic 
analysis  has  become  common  in  design  offices.  The  code  has  been  made  more  relevant  to  design 
office  use.  Aspects  such  as  preliminary  sizing  of  the  foundations  and  loading  combinations  are 
expected  to  be  useful  to  the  less  experienced  designers. 

For  large  sized  foundations  with  complex  structural  arrangement,  it  has  been  observed  that  two- 
dimensional  plane  frame  models  are  not  possible  to  use.  For  such  foundations  three-dimensional 
space  frame  model  is  recommended  for  analysis. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the 
final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  oil  in  accordance 
with  IS  2:  1960 'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'.  The  number  of  significant 
places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard. 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 


Indian  Standard 


DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF 
MACHINE  FOUNDATIONS  —  CODE  OF  PRACTICE 

PART  3    FOUNDATIONS  FOR  ROTARY  TYPE  MACHINES 
(MEDIUM  AND  HIGH  FREQUENCY) 

(  Second  Revision  ) 


1    SCOPE 

1.1  This  code  is  primarily  meant  for  designing  framed 
lype  foundations  for  turbo-generators  machinery. 
However,  the  provisions  of  this  code  may  be  used 
suitably  for  other  machine  foundations  of  similar  types, 
forexample,  foundations  of  turbo-compressors,  boiler 
feed  pumps,  etc. 

1.2  The  following  classification  shall  apply  to 
machines  based  on  their  operating  speeds: 


Medium  frequency 
High  frequency 

2    REFERENCES 


25Hz<>i<50Hz 
>50hz 


2.1  The  Indian  Standards  listed  in  Annex  Aare  neces- 
sary adjuncts  to  this  standard. 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

3.0  The  common  terminology  used  in  structural  dy- 
namics and  machine  foundation  design  is  given  below 
for  reference.  For  a  more  comprehensive  list  of  terms, 
refer  to  IS  2974  (Parts  1  and  2). 

3.1  Natural  Frequency 

The  dynamic  property  of  an  elastic  body  or  system  by 
which  it  oscillates  repeatedly  from  a  fixed  reference 
point  when  the  external  force  is  removed. 

3.2  Free  Vibration 

Vibration  process  of  a  system  excited  initially,  which 
may  be  in  the  form  of  initial  displacement  or  velocity, 
but  no  more  time-varying  force  acting  on  it. 

3.3  Forced  Vibration 

Vibration  process  of  a  system  which  is  caused  by 
external  time-varying  loads  acting  on  it. 

3.4  Damping 

Damping  is  dissipation  of  energy  in  a  vibratingsystem. 

3.5  Resonance 

Resonance  of  a  system  in  forced  vibration  is  a  condi- 
tion when  any  change,  however  small,  in  the  frequency 
of  excitation  causes  a  decrease  in  the  response  of  the 
system. 


3.6  Mode  of  Vibration 

In  a  system  undergoing  vibration,  a  mode  of  vibration 
is  a  characteristic  pattern  assumed  by  the  system 
in  which  the  motion  of  every  particle  is  simple 
harmonic  with  the  same  frequency.  Two  or  more 
modes  may  exist  concurrently  in  a  multi-degree  free- 
dom system. 

4  NOMENCLATURE  OF  FOUNDATION 
COMPONENTS 

4.0  The  following  nomenclature  shall  apply  to  the 
components  of  the  foundation  in  this  code  (sec 
Fig.  1). 

4.1  Top  Deck 

The  top  portion  of  the  machine  foundation  consisting 
of  transverse  and  longitudinal  beams. 

4.2  Transverse  Beams 

The  members  that  support  the  turbine-generator  that 
are  transverse  to  the  axis  of  the  machine. 

4.3  Longitudinal  Beams 

The  members  that  support  the  turbine-generator  that 
are  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  machine. 

4.4  Columns 

The  vertical  members  that  support  the  top  deck. 

4.5  Base  Mat 

The  part  of  the  foundation  which  supports  the  columns 
and  rests  on  soil/piles. 

4.6  Foundation 

The  entire  structure,  including  the  deck,  columns  and 
mat. 

5  ISOLATION  FROM  ADJOINING 
STRUCTURES 

The  foundation  structure  shaM  be  isolated  from  the 
main  building  and  also  from  other  structures  in  the 
plant.  An  air  gap  shall  be  provided  between  the  foun- 
dation and  adjoining  structures  at  all  levels  above  the 
base  mat  to  avoid  the  transfer  of  vibrations  to  the 
adjoining  structures. 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 

6  NECESSARY  DATA 

6.1  Machine  Data 

The  following  data  shall  be  made  available  to  the 
designer  by  the  machine  manufacturer  (see  Fig.  2): 

a)  Loading  diagram  of  the  machine  showing  the 
location,  magnitude  and  direction  of  all  loads 
including  dynamic  loads; 

b)  Speed  of  the  machine; 

c)  Critical  speeds  of  the  machine; 

d)  Outline  dimensions  of  the  foundation; 

e)  Mass  moment  of  inertia  of  the  machine  com- 
ponents; 

f)  Details  of  inserts  and  embedments; 

g)  Layout  of  piping,  ducting,  etc,  and  their  sup- 
porting details; 

h)  Temperatures  in  various  zones  during  op- 
eration; and 

j)  Allowable  displacements  at  the  machine  bear- 
ing points  during  normal  operation. 

6.2  Geotechnical  Data 

Investigation  of  the  site  where  the  foundation  is  to 
be  located  shall  be  done  to  evaluate  the  following 
parameters: 

a)  Allowable  bearing  pressure/pile  capacities. 

b)  In-site  dynamic  soil  properties  as  per 
IS  5249  :  1992. 

7  LOADING  ON  THE  FOUNDATION 

The  following  loads  shall  be  considered  for  the 
foundation  design  (see  Annex  B): 

a)  Dead  loads  which  include  the  self  weight  of 
the  foundation  and  dead  weight  of  the  ma- 
chine; 

b)  Operation  loads  supplied  by  the  machine 
manufacturer  which  include  friction  forces, 
power  torque,  thermal  elongation  forces, 
vacuum  in  the  condenser,  piping  forces, 
etc; 

c)  Unbalance  forces  during  normal  operation; 

d)  Temperature  forces  caused  by  uniform  tem- 
perature change  and  gradient  temperature; 

e)  Short  circuit  breaker; 

f)  Loss  of  blade  unbalance  forces/bearing  failure 
load; 

g)  Seismic  forces;  and 
h)  Erection  loads. 


8   SIZING  OF  THE  FOUNDATION 

8.1  The  preliminary  sizing  of  the  various  elements  of 
the  TG  foundation  are  to  be  done  to  arrive  at  a 
foundation  configuration  which  will  need  least  changes 
after  detailed  analysis  and  design. 

It  is  convenient  and  preferable  to  provide  the  same 
soffit  level  for  all  the  girders  from  the  point  of  view  of 
design  and  detailing. 

8.2  The  geometric  layout  of  the  foundation,  the  shape 
of  the  girder  cross  sections  and  columns  shall  be 
arranged,  as  fast  as  possible,  symmetrically  with 
respect  to  the  vertical  plane  passing  through  the  longi- 
tudinal axis  of  the  machine. 

8.3  Sizing  of  the  Top  Deck 

The  proportioning  of  the  deck  is  basically  governed 
by  the  machine  manufacturer's  drawing  giving  the 
sole  plate  locations  and  opening  details  for  the  various 
parts  of  the  machine. 

While  fixing  the  depth  of  the  girders  the  following 
guidelines  may  generally  be  used: 

Girders  Supporting  the  Turbine: 

Clear  span-to-depth  ratio      =  ranging  from  2  to  3 

Depth  to  width  ratio  =  ranging  from  1  to  3 

Girders  Supporting  the  Generator: 

Clear  span-to-depth  ratio      =   ranging  from  2.5  to  3.5 

Depth  to  width  ratio  =  ranging  from  1  to  1.5 

8.4  Sizing  of  Columns 

The  following  guidelines  may  be  followed  for  column 
sizing: 

a)  As  far  as  possible  pairs  of  columns  should  be 
provided  under  each  transverse  girder; 

b)  Compressive  stresses  and  elastic  shortening 
should  be  kept  uniform  in  all  the  columns  as 
far  as  possible;  and 

c)  The  first  two  natural  frequencies  of  column 
with  its  top  and  bottom  ends  fixed  shall  be 
away  from  the  operating  frequency  of  the 
turbo-generator  by  at  least  20  percent. 

8.5  Sizing  of  Base  Mat 

The  base  mat  shall  be  sufficiently  rigid  to  preserve  the 
shaft  alignment.  Following  are  some  guidelines  forthe 
base  mat  sizing: 

a)  The  mass  of  the  machine  plus  top  deck, 

b)  The  ratio  of  the  bending  stiffness  of  the  base 
raft  and  largest  columns  in  the  transverse 
direction  should  be  at  least  two,  and 

c)  The  thickness  of  the  base  raft  should  not  be 
less  than 007  LV3  in  which  L  is  the  average  of 


the  two  adjacent  clear  spans.  This  is  appli- 
cable to  rafts  supported  directly  on  soil.  This 
shall  not  be  used  for  piled  foundations. 

8.5.1  The  guidelines  given  in  8.5  shall  be  used  for  the 
initial  sizing  of  the  raft.  The  final  raft  thickness, 
however,  would  depend  on  the  design  forces. 

8.6  As  far  as  possible,  the  foundation  shall  be  so 
dimensioned  that  the  resultant  force  due  to  the  weight 
of  the  machine,  the  deck,  intermediate  slabs  (if  any) 
and  the  base  mat  together  with  the  weight  of  the 
columns  passes  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
base  area  in  contact  with  the  base  mat.  In  cases,  where 
small  eccentricities  are  unavoidable,  an  eccentricity 
of  up  to  3  percent  of  the  base  dimension  along  which 
the  centre  of  gravity  gets  displaced  may  be  allowed. 

9   STRUCTURAL  ANALYSIS 

9.1  Modelling 

The  analysis  shall  be  done  using  a  simulated  mathe- 
matical model  of  linear-elastic  properties.  For  turbo- 
generator foundations  of  more  than  100  MW  capacity, 
a  three-dimensional  space  frame  model  is  recom- 
mended. The  modelling  should  take  into  account  the 
basic  characteristics  of  the  system,  that  is,  mass,  stiff- 
ness and  damping.  Special  attention  is  required 
while  idealing  the  points  of  excitation.  The  model 
should  simulate  the  vibration  characteristics  of  the 
machine  foundation  system  to  a  sufficient  degree  of 
accuracy  (see  Fig.  3). 

For  smaller  foundations  (for  example,  turbo-genera- 
tor foundations  of  less  than  100  MW  capacity)  with 
a  regular  framing  arrangement,  plane  frame  models 
may  be  used  in  the  transverse  and  longitudinal 
direction. 

9.1.1  The  following  points  shall  be  considered  while 
constructing  the  model  for  dynamic  analysis: 

a)  The  foundation  shall  be  modelled  as  a  three- 
dimensional  space  frame  in  which  the  col- 
umns and  beams  are  idealised  as  3-D  beam 
elements  with  six  degrees  of  freedom  at  each 
node.  Slabs  and  walls,  if  present,  may  be 
modelled  using  thin  shell  (plate  bending)  ele- 
ments. The  columns  shall  be  assumed  to  be 
fixed  at  the  base,  disregarding  the  base  mat. 

b)  Nodes  shall  be  specified  to  all  bearing  points, 
beam-columnjunctions,  mid-points  and  quar- 
ter points  of  beams  and  columns  and  wherever 
the  member  cross-sections  change  significantly. 
Generally,  the  number  of  modes  specified  on 
any  member  should  be  sufficient  to  calculate 
all  the  modes  having  frequencies  less  than  or 
equal  to  the  operating  speed. 

c)  Lumped-mass  approach  shall  be  used  for  com- 
puting modal  masses  of  the  foundation.  The 
machine  shall  be  modelled  to  lump  its  mass 
together  with  the  mass  of  the  foundation.  The 
stiffness  and  damping  of  the  shaft  and  casing 
shall  generally  be  disregarded. 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 

d)  Uncracked  sections  may  be  used  for  calculat- 
ing moments  of  inertia  of  the  members.  The 
rotational  inertia  may  be  disregarded.  Shear 
rigidity  shall  be  considered. 

e)  Young's  modulus  shall  be  computed  as  per 
IS  456  :  1978.  (E  *  5  700  Jfck)  for  static 
analysis.  For  dynamic  analysis  the  following 
range  of  elastic  modulus  may  be  used: 


Grade  of 

Dynamic  Elastic  Modulus 

Concrete 

N/mm2 

M20 

25  590  -   30  000 

M25 

28  500  -    34  000 

M30 

31200  -    37  000 

f)  Damping  shall  be  assumed  to  be  2  percent  of 
critical  damping  under  normal  operating  loads. 
A  higher  damping  of  5  percent  may  be  used 
under  emergency  loads  like  blade  failure,  short- 
circuit,  bearing  failure,  etc. 

9.2  Free  Vibration  Analysis 

Free  vibration  analysis  shall  be  carried  out  to  calculate 
the  natural  frequencies  and  mode  shapes  of  the  founda- 
tion. The  highest  natural  frequency  calculated  should 
be  at  least  10  percent  higher  than  the  operating  fre- 
quency of  the  machine.  Damping  may  be  neglected  for 
the  purpose  of  free  vibration  analysis. 

9.2.1   Frequency  Criteria 

The  following  frequency  criteria  shall  be  checked: 

The  fundamental  natural  frequency  shall  be  at 
least  20  percent  away  from  the  machine  operating 
speed. 

that  is,  fn<  0.8  fin 

or 

fit  >  1.2  fin 

where 

fh   =  fundamental  natural  frequency  of  the 
foundation,  and 

fin  =  operating  speed  of  the  machine. 

However,  it  is  preferable  to  maintain  a  frequency 
separation  of  50  percent. 

9.3  Forced  Vibration  Analysis 

Forced  vibration  analysis  shall  be  performed  at  the 
operating  speed  and  also  at  frequencies  corresponding 
to  certain  selected  modes  for  transient  resonance.  The 
calculated  displacement  shall  be  checked  against  the 
specified  criteria. 

9.3.1  Forcing  Function 

Generally,  the  unbalance  forces  are  furnished  by  the 
machine  manufacturer  at  each  bearing  location  under 
different  operating  conditions. 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 

A  sinusoidal  forcing  function  of  the  form 

F(t)  =  F0  sin  (<ot  +  <t>) 

shall  be  used  for  analysis.  In  the  absence  of  data  from 
the  manufacturer  the  unbalance  forces  may  be  derived 
from  the  balance  quality  grade  of  the  machine  (see 
Annex  C). 

9.4  Seismic  Analysis 

Response  spectrum  analysis  shall  be  carried  out  as  per 
IS  1893  :  1984.  At  least  the  first  five  modes  shall  be 
considered  for  mode  superposition. 

9.5  Static  Analysis 

A  detailed  static  analysis  of  the  foundation  shall  be 
performed  to  ensure  that  the  foundation  carries  all  the 
loads  safely.  The  same  model  which  has  been  used  for 
dynamic  analysis  may  be  used  for  static  analysis. 

9.5.1  Load  Cases 

a)  Dead  loads  (DL) 

b)  Operating  loads  (OL) 

c)  Normal  machine  unbalance  load  (NUL) 

d)  Temperature  loads  in  the  foundation  (TLF) 

1)  Uniform  temperature  change 

2)  Temperature  gradients  across  members 

e)  Short  circuit  forces  (SCF) 

f)  Loss  of  blade  unbalance  (LBL)  or  bearing 
failure  load  (BFL) 

g)  Seismic  loads  (SL) 

9.5.2  Loads  Combinations 

a)  Operating  condition 
DL  +  OL  +  NUL  +  TLF 

b)  Short  circuit  condition 

DL  +  OL  +  NUL  +  TLF  +  SCF 

c)  Loss    of    blade    condition/Bearing    failure 
condition 

DL  +  OL  +  TLF  +  LBL/BFL 

d)  Seismic  condition 

DL  +  OL  +  NUL  +  TLF  +  EQL 

10  SOIL-STRUCTURE  INTERACTION 

The  effects  of  soil-structure  interaction  on  the  dy- 
namic response  of  the  TG  foundation  may  be  ignored 
under  steady  state  dynamic  loading.  However,  if  the 
TG  foundation  is  located  in  zones  of  high  seismicily, 
soil-structure  interaction  shall  be  considered  for  seis- 
mic analysis.  No  soil-structure  interaction  need  be 
considered  for  static  analysis  and  it  is  sufficient  to 
model  the  foundation  fixed  at  the  base  raft  level. 


11  BASE  MAT  ANALYSIS 

The  base  mat  may  generally  be  modelled  with  plate 
bending  elements  or  as  a  grillage  of  beams.  The  soil  or 
piles  beneath  the  base  raft  shall  be  idealised  as  spring 
elements. 

11.1  The  bearing  pressure  on  soil  or  the  load  on  the 
heaviest  loaded  pile  shall  not  exceed  80  percent  of 
the  net  allowable  bearing  pressure  or  the  safe  load 
capacity  of  piles  respectively. 

12  DESIGN 

12.1  Working  stress  method  as  per  IS  456 :  1978  shall 
be  used. 

12.2  Increase  in  Permissible  Stresses 

Where  stresses  due  to  either  earthquake,  short-circuit 
or  loss  of  blade  unbalance  forces/bearing  failure  loads 
are  combined  wiih  those  due  to  dead  and  permanent 
load,  the  permissible  stresses  as  specified  in  IS  456  : 
1978  may  be  increased  by  25  percent. 

12  J    Fatique  Factor 

A  fatique  factor  of  2  shall  be  used  for  the  dynamic 
forces  caused  by  normal  unbalance. 

12.4  Grade  of  Concrete 

The  following  grades  of  concrete  shall  be  used: 

Top  deck  :  M  20  or  higher  grade 
Columns  :  M  20  or  higher  grade 
Base  mat      :   M  20  or  higher  grade 

For  turbo-generator  foundations  of  capacities  higher 
than  100  MW,  the  minimum  grade  of  concrete  for  the 
end  columns  shall  be  M  25. 

12  J  Reinforcement  Steel 

12 .5. 1  Mild  steel  bars  conforming  to  IS  432  (Parts  1 
and  2)  :  1982  or  high  yield  strength  deformed  bars 
conforming  to  IS  1786  :  1985  may  be  used. 

12.5.2  Minimum  dia  of  reinforcement  bars  used  as 
main  reinforcement  shall  be  12  mm. 

12.5.3  Minimum  Reinforcement 
Beams  of  top  deck 

Top  and  bottom   :   0.25  percent  (each)  of  gross  sec- 
tional area 


Sides 


Columns 


0. 1  percent  gross  sectional  area  on 
each  side 


Longitudinal         :   0.8  percent  of  gross  sectional  area 
reinforcement 


Base  mat 

Top  and  bottom 

Intermediate 
layer 


0.12  percent  (each)  of  gross  sec- 
tional area  in  each  direction 

Shrinkage  reinforcement  of  0.06 
percent  in  each  direction  if  the  raft 
thickness  is  more  than  two  metres 


12.5.4  The  maximum  spacing  of  the  reinforcement 
bars  shall  not  exceed  300  mm  and  the  minimum 
spacing  shall  not  be  less  than  150  mm. 

12.5.5  Splices  in  the  reinforcement  bars  shall  be  stag- 
gered and  shall  be  given  in  the  compression  zone  as  far 
as  possible. 

12.6  Concrete  Cover 

Minimum  clear  cover  to  reinforcement  shall  be  50  mm 
fortop  deck  and  columns  and  100  mm  forthe  base  mat. 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 

12.7  Reinforcement  Detailing 

Care  should  betaken  while  detailing  to  facilitate  ease 
of  concreting.  The  clear  spacing  between  bars  should 
be  at  least  5  mm  more  than  the  sum  of  aggregate  size 
and  the  largest  bar  diameter  used. 

12.8  Construction  Joints 

12.8.1  The  base  mat  shall  be  cast  in  a  single  uninter- 
rupted operation.  Properly  designed  construction 
joints  shall  be  provided  between  the  base  mat  and 
columns  and  between  columns  and  the  top  deck. 
Construction  joint  may  also  be  provided  approxi- 
mately at  the  mid-height  of  columns  if  the  length  of  the 
column  exceeds  8  metres. 

12.8.2  The  top  deck  shall  be  cast  in  a  single  uninter- 
rupted operation. 


RANSVERSE 
BEAMS 


LONGITUDINAL 
BEAM 


TOP 
DECK 


OLUMNS 


BASE  MAT 


Fig.  1    Typical  Framed  Foundation  for  a  Turbo-Generator 


IS  2974  (  Part  3 )  :  1992 


"STF 


jEL 


s&-£ira-<a 


°L       / 


ga^cJIgxT 


EE3  ~  LOAD   POINT 
Fig.  2  Typical  Loading  Diagram 


Z    r*r 


Fig.  3    Space  Frame  Model  of  the  Foundation  Shown  in  Fig.  1 

6 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 


ANNEX A 
(  Clause  2.1 ) 

LIST  OF  REFERRED  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


IS  No. 

432 
(Part  1) 


1982 


432 
(Part  2) :  1982 


456 :  1978 


1786 :  1985 


Title 

Specification  for  mild  steel  and 
medium  tensile  steel  bars  and 
hard-drawn  steel  wire  for 
concrete  reinforcement:  Part  1 
Mild  sieel  and  medium  tensile  steel 
bars  ( third  revision ) 

Specification  for  mild  steel  and 
medium  tensile  steel  bars  and  hard- 
drawn  steel  wire  for  concrete 
reinforcement:  Part2Hard -drawn 
steel  wire  ( third  revision  ) 

Code  of  practice  for  plain  and 
reinforced  concrete  ( second 
revision ) 

Specification  for  high  strength 
deformed  steel  bars  and  wires  for 


IS  No.  Title 

concrete    reinforcement 
revision  ) 


(  third 


1893  :  1984  Criteria  for  earthquake  resistant 


2974 
(Part  1) :  1982 


2974 
(Part  2) :  1980 


revision  ) 


ctni/^tiiTpc       (  frnirth 
~ — ~ v^ ~" 


Code  of  practice  for  design 
and  construction  of  machine 
foundations:  Part  1  Foundations 
for  reciprocating  type  machine 
( second  revision  ) 

Code  of  practice  for  design  and 
construction  of  machine 
foundations:  Part  2  Foundations 
for  impact  type  machine  (  hammer 
foundations  )  (first  revision  ) 


ANNEX  B 
(Clause  7) 

ABNORMAL  LOADING 


B-l  LOSS  OF  BLADE  UNBALANCE 

The  turbine  rotor  is  balanced  dynamically  to 
enable  smooth  operation  of  the  machine.  An  emer- 
gency condition  can  occur  when  one  or  more  turbine 
blades  break  loose  from  the  rotor,  which  would  im- 
pose a  large  dynamic  force  on  the  foundation  at  the 
bearing  locations.  The  forces  corresponding  to  a 
massing  last-row  blade  for  each  turbine  section  are 
supplied  by  the  machine  manufacturer  in  the  form 
of  unbalance  forces  or  equivalent  static  forces. 
Since  the  turbo-generator  is  tripped  in  such  a  condition 
these  forces  occur  for  a  short  time  required  for  the 
coasting  down  time  of  the  machine.  It  is  sufficient  to 
check  the  foundation  for  strength  under  these  forces. 

B-2  SHORT  CIRCUIT  FORCE 

When  a  line-to-line  or  line-to-ground  short  circuit 
occurs  at  the  generator  terminal,  it  imposes  a  huge 
torque  on  the  TG  foundation.  The  short-circuit  mo- 
ment has  the  form  (see  Fig.  4). 


A/(t)  =  Ae  1/0-4  sin  v>t  -  Be  t/0-4  sin  2cof  +  Ce  ■v015 

where 

to     =      angular  frequency  of  the  mains. 

A,  B,  C     =     coefficients  specific  to  generator 
design. 

The  forcing  function  is  generally  supplied  by  the 
Machine  Manufacturer.  It  is  advisable  to  perform  a 
dynamic  analysis  of  the  foundation.  Sometimes,  only 
the  equivalent  static  force  is  supplied  which  assumes 
an  infinitely  rigid  foundation  and  can  make  the  foun- 
dation design  highly  conservative. 

In  the  absence  of  vendor  supplied  data,  the  following 
information  may  be  used. 

In  the  short  circuit  equation,  the  coefficient  A,  B,  and 
C  may  be  assumed  as: 

A     =     10  times  normal  power  torque 
B    =     5  times  normal  power  torque 
C    =     normal  power  torque 


IS  2974  (  Part  3  )  :  1992 


-50  Hz  OSCILLATING 
-100  Hr  OSCILLATING 
-  UNIPOLAR  TORQUE 


0333 


TIME(SEC)-^ 


Fig.  4    Short-Qrcuit  Moment  Diagram 


ANNEX  C 
(Clause  9.3.1) 

NORMAL  UNBALANCE  FORCE  ON  TURBO-GENERATOR  FOUNDATION 


The  unbalance  forces  caused  by  the  machine  during 
the  normal  operating  condition  are  supplied  by  the 
machine  manufacturer.  However,  in  the  absence  of 
such  information,  the  following  method  may  be  used 
to  calculate  the  unbalance  forces. 

Turbo-generator  and  other  similar  machines  are  clas- 
sified undertbe  balance  quality  grade  of  G2.5.  Consid- 
ering one  grade  higher  for  the  foundation  design,  that 
is,  G6.3,  the  eccentricity  of  the  rotor  mass  can  be 
obtained  from 

G    =    Co 

where 

G    =    balance  quality  grade  in  mm/sec, 


e     =    eccentricity  of  rotating  mass  in  mm,  and 
o)     =    operating  speed  of  the  machine  in  rad/ 
sec. 

Example : 

G    -    6.3  mm/sec 

o)     =    3  000  rpmor  314.16  rad/sec 

consequently, 

e     =    0.02  mm 

unbalance  force  =  meo>2  sin  cat 

where 

"t     =     mass  of  the  rotor 


Standard  Mark 


The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on 
products  covered  by  an  Indian. Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced 
to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the  pro- 
ducer. Standard  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity  to 
that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the  use 
of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained  from 
the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  ihe  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publication),  BIS 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions'.  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent  to  BIS 
giving  the  following  reference: 

Doc  :  No,  CED  43  (4898) 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 

Telephones  :  331  01  31,  331  13  75  Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 

Common    to    all    offices) 

Regional  Offices  :  Telephone 

Central       :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  f331  01  31 

NEW  DELHI  110002  1331  13  75 

Eastern      :  1/14  C.LT.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I.P.  Road,  Maniktola  /37  84  99,  37  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700054  137  86  26,  37  86  62 

Northern    :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036  /53  38  43,  53  16  40 

53  23  84 


{ 


Southern    :  C.LT.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001 13  f235  02  16,  235  04  42 

\235  15  19,  235  23  15 

Western     :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  f  632  92  95,  632  78  58 


G 


BOMBAY  400093  1632  78  91,  632  78  92 

Branch  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  PATNA. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Dee  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi-1 10015,  India 


