**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  3016  (1982) :  Code  of  practice  for  fire  precautions  in 
welding  and  cutting  operations  [MTD  11:  Welding  General] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  3016  -  1982 

( Reaffirmed  2006 ) 


Indian  Standard 


CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR 

FIRE  PRECAUTIONS  IN  WELDING  AND 

CUTTING  OPERATIONS 


( First  Revision ) 


First  Reprint  AUGUST  1993 


UDC    62l-791'555-624-014-2  :  006-76 


©  Copyright  1982 

BUREAU       OF      INDIAN       STANDARDS 

MANAK     BHAVAN,    9     BAHADUR     SHAH     ZAFAR     MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Cr  5  December  1982 


IS  t  3016  .  19S2 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR 

FIRE  PRECAUTIONS  IN  WELDING  AND 

CUTTING  OPERATIONS 


( First  Revision ) 


Welding  General  Sectional  Committee,  SMDG  14 

Chairman  Representing 

Shri  a.  K.  Bhattaoharyya  Ministry  of  Railways 

Members 

Chemist  &  MBTALLtTBOiST-IIy 
RDSO,  LucKNOW  (  Alternate  I  to 
Shri  A.  K.  Bhattacbaryya  ) 
Pboduotion  Enqinebb,  ICF, 
Madbas  (  Alternate  II  to 
Shri  A.  K.  Bhattacharyya  ) 
ShbiJ.  K.  AHLTJWAiiiA  Stcwarts  &  Lloyds  of  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  T.  K.  Bastj  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  Balasubbahmanyam  Binny  Ltd,  Madras 

Shbi  K.  Balmanohab  Hindustan  Shipyard  Ltd,  Vishakhapatnam 

Shbi  R.  V.  Kalk  ( Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Basu  Indian  Oxygen  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  R.  Banebjeb  (  Alternate ) 
Shbi  S.  N.  Basu  Directorate  General   of  Supplies   and  Disposals, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  S.  Bhatia  Peico  Electronics  &  Electricals  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  E.  K.  Vbnkataramani  ( Alternate ) 
ShbiJ,  N.  Bhattaoharyya  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shbi  K.  L.  Barui  ( Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Burman  M.  N.  Dastur  &  Co  Pvt  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  D.  B.  Ghosh  (  Alternate  I ) 
Shri  B.  B.  Saha  ( Alternate  II  ) 
Shri  S.  G,  Dby  Central  Boilers  Board,  New  Delhi 

Shri  C.  C.  GiROTBA  Association  of  Indian  Engineering  Industry,  New 

Delhi 
Shri  R.  S.  Aqgabwal  (  Alternate) 

%  ( Continued  on  page  2  ) 


@  Copyright  1982 

BURFAIJ  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected   ui^der  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )   and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  pa  t  by  any  means  except  with  written  perminion  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS:  3016 -1982 

( Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shki  V.  GujRAL  Indian  Iron  &  Steel  Go  Ltd  (  SAIL  ),  Burnpur 

Shki  D.  S.  Honavab  D  &  H  Secheron  Electrodes  Ltd,  Indore 

Shri  S.  R,  Jana  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  KuiSHNAMUBTiiY  Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Hyderabad 

Snm  N,  K.  Sethi  (  Alternate  I  ) 
Shri  K.  Pooranchandra  Rao 
(  Alternate  II  ) 
Shri  A.  V.  Mulay  Tata     Engineering    and     Locomotive     Co     Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Shri  P.  S.  Joshi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  Mum  Moorthy  Engineer-in-Chief*s  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 

Shri  M.  K.  Tadani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  M,  Pole  Walchandnagar  Industries  Ltd,  Walchandnagar 

Shri  G.  D.  Apte  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  H.  L.  Prabhakar  Larsen  &  Toubro  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  J.  K.  Nanda  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  R.  Prashkr  Engineers  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  B.  Ramaswamy  Indian  Hume  Pipes  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  A.  Vijay  Keebthi  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  V,  Ramaswamy  Research  and  Development  Centre  for  Iron  and 

Steel  (  SAIL),  Ranchi 
Dr  S.  K.  Choudhury  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  B.  Rao  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI ) 

Shri  A.  L.  Lala  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  S.  G.  Rao  Department  of  Atomic  Energy,  Bombay 

Shri  L.  M.  Tolani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  a.  p.  Sanyal  Bharat  Heavy  Plate  and  Vessels  Ltd,   Vishakha- 

patnam 
Shbi  R.  D.  Pennathur  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Sabanoarajan  Directorate   General   of  Technical  Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  S.  K.  Bhatia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  S.  Sethi  Directorate  General  of  Employment  and  Training, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  P.  P.  Shbivastava  Bokaro  Steel  Plant  (  SAIL  ),  Bokaro 

Shbi  Anil  Pandya  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  G.  N.  Swamy  Mukand  Iron  &  Steel  Works  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  R.  K.  Srivastava  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  H.  K.  Taneja  Indian  Register  of  Shipping,  Calcutta 

Shri  S.  Chandra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  J.  R.  Upadhyay  Apar  Pvt  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  Patwardhan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  S.  Visvanath  Advani-Oerlikon  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  C.  R.  Rama  Rao,  Director  General,  ISl  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 

Director   (  Struc  &  Met  ) 

Secretary 

Shri  P.  Dakshina  Murty 
Deputy  Director  (  Metals  ),  ISI 

( Continued  on  page  19  ) 


IS  !  3016  -  1982 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR 

FIRE  PRECAUTIONS  IN  WELDING  AND 

CUTTING  OPERATIONS 

(  First  Revision  ) 


0.     FOREWORD 

0«1  This  Indian  Standard  (  First  Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Indian 
Standards  Institution  on  1  June  1982^  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the 
Welding  General  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Struc- 
tural and  Metals  Division  Council. 

0*2  This  standard  was  first  published  in  1965.  In  this  revision  the  concept 
of  *  hot  work  '  permit  system  has  been  introduced  with  a  view  to  establish- 
ing some  control  over  welding  and  cutting  operations  using  naked  flame 
or  producing  sparks.  The  provisions  relating  to  general  precautions  have 
been  amplified. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  the  recommendations  for  the  practices  for  preven- 
tion of  loss  of  life  and/or  property  by  fire  or  explosions  arising  out  of  the 
use  of  gas  and  electrical-equipments  for  the  purposes  of  welding,  cutting 
and  similar  operations. 

1.2  General  precautions  recommended  cover  the  normal  work  area  desig- 
nated for  the  fabrication  and  maintenance  activities  using  welding,  cutting 
and  allied  processes  and  also  special  situations  having  potential  fire 
hazards. 

1.3  Special  precautions  recommended  cover  the  situations  or  locations 
which  are  susceptible  to  fire  or  explosion  hazards  arising  out  of  the 
presence  of  naked  flame  or  sparks,  capable  of  igniting  the  combustible 
materials  present  in  the  area, 

2.  GENERAL  PRECAUTIONS 

2.1  Hot  Work  Policy  —  It  is  recommended  that  the  management  of 
industrial  establishments  should  consider  the  necessity  of  preparation  of  a 


IS  13016.  1982 

policy  statement  for  introducing  *  hot  worjc'  permit  system.  The  purpose 
of  introducing  the  *  hot  work  '  permit  system  is  to  establish  some  control 
over  welding  and  cutting  operations  using  naked  flame  or  producing 
sparks,  capable  of  igniting  combustible  materials  in  areas  outside  the 
normal  specified  ones  for  carrying  out  such  activities  regularly. 

2.1»1  The  type  and  extent  of  such  a  system  should  be  prepared  keeping 
in  view  the  following: 

a)  The  size  and  facility  of  the  plant, 

b)  The  complexity  of  the  operations,  and 

c)  The  degree  of  hazards  present  at  the  work  site  and  in  surrounding 
areas. 

2.2  Hot  Work  Permit  System 

2.2.1  Identification  of  Hazardous  Areas  —  In  introducing  the  hot  work 
policy  and  the  permit  system,  it  should  be  ensured  that  the  specific  areas 
throughout  the  plant  considered  as  hazardous  by  the  Competent  Authority, 
for  any  type  of  hot  work,  should  be  identified  and  prominently  marked  as 
*  hazardous  area  '  in  consultation  with  the  various  departmental  heads. 

2.2.2  Application  for  Hot  Work  Permit  —  For  conducting  hot  work  of  any 
type,  inside  the  designated  hazardous  areas,  or  in  close  proximity  to  the 
hazardous  areas,  or  near  that  area  for  prolonged  period  or  in  any  new 
locations,  the  departmental  head  or  this  authorised  person  should  put  up 
application  for  '  Hot  Work  Permit '  filling  in  a  suitable  Hot  Work  Permit 
form. 

2*2.2.1  Hot  work  permit  form  —  A  suitable  form  should  be  developed 
specifically  for  the  purpose  of  considering  the  plants  operations,  and  degree 
of  hazards  present.  It  should  incorporate  specifically  the  type  and  nature 
of  precautions  that  should  be  taken  in  performing  the  hot  work  at  the 
particular  location  and  time.  It  should  also  mention  the  Competent 
Authorities  through  whom,  the  application  should  be  corroborated  before 
seeking  permission  from  the  person  incharge  of  the  plant,  by  designation, 
such  as  Plant  Manager,  Works  Manager,  Site  Incharge,  etc.  In  Appendix  A, 
an  example  of  Hot  Work  Permit  form  has  been  included  for  reference. 

2.2.3  Accordance  of  Permission  —  The  person  incharge  of  the  plant  shall 
make  a  thorough  inspection  of  the  place,  if  possible,  accompanied  by  a 
fire  officer,  before  cutting  or  welding  operations  are  commenced,  parti* 
cularly  in  (  a )  any  new  place  where  hot  work  is  proposed  for  the  first  time, 
and  (  b  )  where  the  work  is  to  be  extensive  in  proximity  to  the  marked 
hazardous  area*  He  shall  then  cither  accord  his  sanction  with  or  without 
conditions  or  insist  upon  the  adoption  of  alternative  methods  of  carrying 
out  the  work,  should  he  find  the  conditions  unsafe  for  hot  work  operations. 


tSt30]6.l982 

2.2«4  Supervision  of  the  System  —  The  Competent  Authority  should  super- 
vise the  working  of  the  system  by  issuing  clear  instructions  regarding  the 
precautions  required  to  be  taken  at  different  hazardous  areas  marked, 
periodically  checking  the  hazardous  areas,  notice  boards,  equipments  for 
fire  fighting  and  extinguishing  and  training  of  personnel  for  handling 
small  fires  and  alarm  systems. 

2.3  General  Precautions  Before  Welding  and  Catting 

2.3*1  Catting  and  Welding  Equipment  —  All  cutting  and  welding 
apparatus  shall  conform  to  relevant  Indian  Standards  where  available  and 
also  fulfil  the  requirements  laid  down  in  IS  :  818-1968*. 

2«3.1*1  Installation  of  cutting  and  welding  apparatus  —  The  installation  of 
all  cutting  and  welding  apparatus  shall  fulfil  the  requirements  laid  down 
in  IS:  818-1968*  and  in  respective  Indian  Standards. 

2.3.2  Operators  of  Cutting  and  Welding  Equipment  —  Only  responsible 
operators,  fully  trained  in  the  care  and  use  of  cutting  and  welding  equip- 
ment, shall  be  permitted  to  carry  out  cutting  and  welding  operations  in  or 
near  hazardous  locations. 

2.3.2.1  Cutting  or  welding  operators  shall  not  work  alone  in  or  near 
any  hazardous  location,  but  shall  be  provided  with  an  assistant  trained  in 
safety  precautions.  Implements  necessary  for  ensuring  safety  and  for 
carrying  out  rescue  operations  should  be  provided  wherever  necessary. 

2.3.3  Protective  Clothings  and  Seat  for  Operators 

2.3.3.1  Protective  clothings  —  Wherever  necessary,  the  operators  of 
welding  and  cutting  equipments  should  wear  protective  clothings,  such 
as  gloves,  aprons,  foot  guards,  goggles,  helmets,  etc.  The  clothings  of 
operators  should  be  free  from  oil  or  grease  and  from  open  pockets,  trouser 
Baps,  cuffs,  etc. 

2.3.3.2  Seat  —  The  usage  of  empty  thinner  or  oil  drums  as  a  seat 
for  operator  or  as  a  support  for  job  shall  be  avoided  to  avoid  fire  and 
explosion  risk. 

2.3.4  Protection  of  Flooring 

2*3.4.1  Wooden  flooring  —  Where  any  cutting  or  welding  is  to  be  done 
over  a  wooden  flooring  it  shall  be  swept  clean  and  protected  by  such 
means  as  (  a  )  thoroughly  wetting  with  water,  (  b  )  covering  with  damp 
sand,  and  (  c  )  sheet  metal,  asbestos  or  similar  heat  resistant  materials  at 
points  where  sparks  or  hot  metal  shall  fall.     Provision  shall  be  made  to 


•Code  of  practice  for  safety  and  health  requirements  in  electric  and  gas  welding 
and  cutting  operations  (first  revision  ). 


IS  1 3016.  1982 

protect  the  welders  and  operators  from  the  hazards  of  electric  shock  when 
the  floors  are  wet  or  covered  with  metallic  sheets. 

2*3*4.2  Protection  of  floors  covered  with  oil,  grease  dirts,  etc — ^  Some 
installations  of  machineries,  for  example  rolling  mills,  oil  reservoir  and 
burner  installations  in  melting  shops,  floors  are  very  often  covered  with 
grease,  oil,  dirts,  etc.  During  cutting  or  welding  operations  for  maintenance 
purposes,  adequate  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  oil,  grease, 
dirts  may  not  catch  fire  from  sparks,  flame  or  hot  metal  droplets  or  hot 
metal  pieces.  The  floor  shall  be  swept  clean  before  starting  any  welding 
or  cutting. 

2«3«5  Protection  of  Rope  and  Cordage  —  During  cutting  or  welding  opera- 
tions, rope  and  cordage  shall  be  protected  from  the  heat  of  cutting  or 
welding  blowpipes  and  from  sparks,  slags,  and  hot  metal  particles.  Parti- 
cular care  shall  be  exercised  in  the  case  of  ropes  supporting  loads,  guy 
ropes  and  ropes  securing  scaffolding, 

2«3.6  Protective  Guards  —  In  all  protective  guards  for  covering  the  flooi^ 
or  other  combustible  materials,  only  non-flammable,  fire-resistant  materials 
should  be  employed  for  shielding  sparks,  hot  metals,  etc. 

2*3*6*1  All  protective  guards  shall  be  sufficiently  large  and  fit  tightly 
enough  not  to  permit  any  sparks,  slags  or  hot  metal  droplets  to  roll  under- 
neath or  bounce  through  any  openings.  Curtains  shall  be  weighted  dis'mx 
against  the  floor  or  ground  with  such  things  as  angle  iron,  pipe,  bricks  Oj^ 
sand  so  that  sparks  cannot  possibly  get  underneath. 

2.3«6.2  Wherever  there  are  floor  openings  or  holes  in  walls  opening 
doorways,  or  open  or  broken  window  which  cannot  be  closed  or  covered 
readily,  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  no  sparks  or  hot  metal 
droplets  pass  through  such  openings  to  the  adjacent  locations  or  the  floor 
below  which  may  cause  fire  or  explosions. 

2*3.6.3  When  welding  or  cutting  very  close  to  a  wooden  construc- 
tion, it  shall  be  protected  from  direct  heat.  Wooden  beams,  partitions, 
floorings  or  scaffoldings  shall  be  protected  always  from  the  direct  heat  or 
the  welding  flame  by  sheet  metal  or  asbestos  curtain  guards. 

2*3.7  Disposal  of  Off-Cuts  and  Electrode  Ends  —  Before  any  cutting  opera- 
tion is  commenced,  arrangements  shall  be  made  to  prevent  the  cut-off 
pieces  from  dropping  into  a  place  where  there  is  any  possibility  of  starting 
a  fire.     This  shall  be  done  by: 

a)  welding  a  rod  or  bar  to  the  piece  to  be  cut  off, 

b)  securing  the  piece  to  be  cut  off  with  wire  or  chain,  or 

c)  having    a   helper   to   hold   the   piece   or   catch   it  in  a  suitable 
receptacle. 


IS  13016-1982 

2.3.8  Fire  extinguishing  equipments  suitable  to  fight  the  type  of  hazards 
shall  be  kept  ready  within  easy  reach  of  the  welding  and  cutting  operators 
and  their  assistants.  Such  equipments  may  consist  of  pails  of  water,  sand 
filled  buckets,  portable  extinguisher?,  etc,  depending  upon  the  nature  and 
quantity  of  the  combustible  materials  exposed  to  fire  hazards. 

2.3.8.1  Special  provisions  shall  be  made  to  deal  with  any  outbreak 
of  fire  as  follows: 

a)  Cutting  and  welding  operators,  and  every  other  person  concerned, 
shall  be  instructed  to  watch  for  and  be  ready  immediately  to 
extinguish  any  fire  that  may  occur  and  know  how  to  transmit  a 
call  to  the  nearest  fire  station; 

b)  Ample  supply  of  dry  sand  in  suitable  containers  shall  be  provided; 

c)  Suitable  extinguishers  conforming  to  IS  :  1648-1961*  shall  be 
available  for  immediate  use; 

d)  Hoses  connected  to  an  effective  water  supply,  or  where  such 
supply  is  not  available  an  ample  supply  of  water  in  suitable 
containers  shall  be  available;  and 

e)  All  persons  concerned  should  be  instructed  and  trained  where 
necessary  in  using  efficiently  all  the  equipment  and  devices  listed 
in  2.3.8.1(a)  to  2.3.8.1(d). 

Note  —  Appropriate  fire  authorities  should  be  consulted  to  ensure  that  the  type 
of  extinguisher  provided  is  suitable  for  the  kind  of  fire  which  may  be  anticipated  in 
any  particular  location. 

2.4  General  Precautions  During  Welding  and  Gutting 

2.4.1  Detection  of  Fire  —  With  the  exception  of  explosions  most  fires 
start  as  small  ones.  At  the  beginning  extinction  of  small  fires  seldom 
presents  much  of  a  problem,  but  once  a  fire  begins  to  gain  headway  it 
may  develop  into  a  conflagration  of  disastrous  proportions.  Therefore, 
prompt  detection  of  fire^during  welding  and  cutting  is  of  prime  importance. 

2.4.2  Signalling  of  Fire  Alarm  —  The  first  impulse  of  many  individuals 
on  discovering  a  fire  is  only  to  try  to  extinguish  it.  This  has  frequently 
led  to  long  delays  in  sending  the  alarm. 

2.4.3  The  welding  and  cutting  operators  and  their  helpers  shall  be 
instructed  and  practically  trained  to  sound  the  alarm  as  soon  as  the  fire  is 
discovered,  and  to  handle  fire  extinguishers  of  different  types. 

2.4.4  Somebody,  other  than  the  welding  or  cutting  operator,  shall 
always  be  put  on  the  watch  for  sparks  or  hot  metals  which  may  cause  small 
fires  beyond  the  protective  guards  and  give  immediate  alarm  if  small  fires 
break  up. 

♦Code  of  practice  for  fire  safety  of  buildings  (  general  )  ;  Fire  fighting  equipment 
and  its  maintenance. 


IS  t  3016 -1982 

2.4.5  Oxygen  gas  from  gas  cylinder  should  not  be  used  as  cooling  agent 
or  vented  out  near  any  naked  flame. 

2.4.6  In  operating  oxyfuel  gas  cutting  apparatus,  the  oxygen  pressure 
shall  be  set  appropriately.  An  oxygen  pressure  greater  than  necessary 
increases  the  amount  of  sparks  and  slag  flow  over  and  above  the  cost. 

2.4.7  The  detection  of  fire,  signalling  promptly  an  alarm  and  acting 
immediately  to  try  to  extinguish  the  fire  require  training  to  the  workers 
and  their  assistants  to  act  effectively  under  such  circumstances.  Where  the 
welders  and  their  assistants  are  not  trained  in  handling  small  fires,  they 
should  have  means  to  call  the  attention  of  other  people  trained  in  fire 
fighting, 

2.4.8  Backfire  and  Flashback 

2.4.8.1  Backfire  is  caused  by  the  return  of  the  flame  into  the  blow- 
pipe, the  flame  being  either  extinguished  or  reignited  at  the  nozzle. 

2.4.8.2  Flashback  is  much  more  severe  and  potentially  more  hazar- 
dous. In  this,  flame  returns  through  the  blowpipe  into  the  hose  and  even 
regulators.  It  may  also  reach  the  fuel  gas  cylinder,  causing  heating  and 
decomposition  of  the  contents. 

2.4.8.3  The  main  reason  is  the  feeding  of  high  pressure  gas  into  the 
low  pressure  line  forming  a  highly  combustible  gas  mixture  through 
which  the  flame  can  propagate  at  a  very  high  speed.  This  can  happen 
due  to  a  number  of  reasons,  for  example  nozzle  becoming  partially  blocked, 
the  control  valves  not  being  fully  closed  or  leaking,  incorrect  pressure 
settings  and  overheating  of  the  blowpipe. 

2.4.8.4  The  welding  or  cutting  operator  should  check  before  com- 
mencement of  work  that  there  is  adequate  supply  of  gas,  pressure  settings 
are  correct  and  there  is  no  leakage  in  the  equipment  that  is  regulators 
and  blowpipes  and  all  the  gas  connections.  Damaged  or  defective  nozzles 
should  not  be  used.  When  working  on  heavily  scaled  material,  the  surface 
should  be  cleaned  prior  to  welding  and/or  cutting  to  prevent  scales  flying 
off  and  blocking  the  tip  nozzle.  The  use  of  properly  designed  hose  check 
valves  can  minimise  the  risk  of  flame  travelling  into  the  hoses. 

2.4.8.5  Where  gases  are  drawn  from  pipelines,  flashback  arrestori 
must  be  used  at  the  outlets  of  acetylene  pipelines. 

2.4.8«6  In  spite  of  precautions  mentioned   at  2.4.8.4   and   2.4.8.5 

sometimes  backfire  or  flashback  occurs.  The  operator  shall  be  alert  and 
take  the  following  actions  promptly  as  necessary  in  the  sequence  given 
below: 

a)  The  oxygen  control  valve  on  the  blowpipe  shall  be  closed  quickly 
followed  by  closing  of  the  other  control  valve; 

8 


IS  I  3016  .  1982 

b)  In  case  of  flashback  travelling  towards  regulators,  the  pressure 
adjusting  screw  of  the  oxygen  regulators  shall  be  lessened  quickly 
followed  by  loosening  the  pressure  adjusting  screw  of  the  other 
regulator; 

c)  The  oxygen  cylinder  valve  shall  be  closed  quickly  followed  by 
closing  the  other  cylinder  valve; 

d)  If  there  is  a  suspicion  that  the  fire  has  reached  the  regulators, 
both  the  regulators  shall  be  taken  out; 

e)  After  backfire  or  flashback  is  over  and  if  it  is  not  severe  enough 
to  damage  the  equipment,  the  blowpipe  should  be  cooled  by 
immersing  in  a  bucket  of  water  with  a  trickle  of  oxygen  flow 
through  the  nozzle;  and 

f)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  flashback  or  backfire  has  been  quenched 
properly  before  relighting  the  blowpipe. 

2*5  General  Precautions  After  Welding  and  Cutting 

2.5«1  Watch  Against  Smouldering  Fires  —  When  cutting  and  welding  opera- 
tions are  carried  out  in  such  locations  where  sparks,  molten  slag  or  hot 
metal  pieces  may  start  smouldering  fires  in  slow  burning  inflammable 
material  such  as  cotton  waste  soaked  with  lubricating  oil  or  grease,  wood 
chips,  paper  bags  or  rags,  etc,  it  is  necessary  that  a  watchman  be  deputed 
at  the  scene  of  the  work  at  least  one  hour  after  the  job  is  through.  The 
watchman  shall  look  carefully  for  smoke  or  fire  before  leaving  the  site. 

2*5.1,1  When  a  watchman  is  deputed,  a  60  minute  per  hour  watch 
on  the  spot  where  the  job  was  done  is  needed  and  not  just  a  casual  tour  of 
the  plant.  This  is  considered  to  be  the  most  dependable  method  of 
precaution  against  smouldering  fires,  particularly  in  smaller  workshops  or 
other  premises. 

2*5*1 .2  The  more  dangerous  the  surroundings  is,  the  greater  shall 
be  the  frequency  and  longer  the  period  during  which  the  surrounding 
should  be  checked  for  suspicious  heat,  smoke  or  glowing  spots.  According 
to  the  rules  in  force  in  some  countries,  the  possibility  of  a  smouldering  fire 
shall  be  guarded  against  for  at  least  eight  hours  at  the  scene  of  the  work. 

2.5.2  Fire  Detection  Device  —  When  it  is  desirable  to  instal  in  big  plants, 
storehouses,  etc,  a  fire  detection  device  which  automatically  actuates  the 
alarm,  one  of  the  following  two  most  familiar  types  may  be  selected: 

a)  The  fixed  temperature  type,  designed  to  operate  when  the  temper- 
ature in  the  vicinity  of  the  alarm  reach  a  predetermined  level. 
Such  an  alarm  can  be  set  to  operate  when  the  temperature  reach 
135"G,  150''Gor200°C;and 


IS  13016 -1982 

b)  The  rate  of  rise  type,  designed  to  operate  when  there  is  a  rapid 
rise  of  temperature, 

2*5»2.1  The  decision  as  to  which  type  to  use  for  a  certain  location 
should  be  taken  only  by  competent  authorities  after  careful  analysis  of 
needs.  Each  of  these  systems  has  its  own  advantages  for  particular 
installations. 

2.5«2.2  When  an  automatic  alarm  system  is  installed,  certain  general 
requirements  must  be  met: 

a)  A  reliable  signal  must  be  transmitted; 

b)  The  signal  must  reach  all  personnel,  including  those  trained  for 
fire  protection,  no  matter  where  thtey  are  located; 

c)  The  signal  must  be  of  such  a  nature  that  it  will   be   instantly 
recognised;  and 

d)  The  signal  must  be  used  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  sound  the 
alarm  for  fire, 

3.  SPECIAL  PRECAUTIONS 

3.1  Special  precautions  shall  be  taken  in  conducting  any  cutting  and 
welding  operations: 

a)  In  hazardous  locations; 

b)  In  close  proximity  to  hazardous  locations;  and 

c)  Near  hazardous  locations  for  prolonged   period,   and  any  new 
locations, 

3.1.1  As  specified  in  2.1  and  2.2.2  hot  work  permit  should  be  obtained 
before  conducting  any  hot  work  in  hazardous  locations, 

3.1.2  In  the  hot  work  permit,  the  special  precautions  required  to  be 
taken'  before,  during  and  after  the  cutting  and  welding  work  shall  be 
indicated  clearly. 

3.1.3  The  persons  entrusted  in  doing  the  hot  work  at  the  particular 
location  shall  ensure  implementation  of  the  special  precuationary  measures 
indicated  in  the  permit  with  meticulous  care  and  sincerity, 

3.2  Welding  and  cutting  operations  using  naked  flames  of  any  kind  or  red 
hot  glowing  objects  of  any  kind,  such  as  sparks,  hot  molten  metal  globules, 
etc,  should  not  be  carried  out  for  purpose  of  repair,  additions  or  alterations 
of  any  kind,  in  the  hazardous  locations,  if  the  proposed  work  can  be 
carried  out  by  suitable  alternative  methods, 

10 


IS  I  3016  .  1982 

3.2.1  If  the  work  pieces  have  to  be  welded  or  cut  in  the  hazardous 
locationSj  endeavour  should  be  made,  cither,  to: 

a)  remove  the  movable  work  pieces  to  a  designated  safe  location 
where  there  will  be  no  possibility  of  any  fire  hazards,  or 

b)  remove  all  the  movable  hazardous  materials  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
work  pieces  to  safe  location  for  a  temporary  period  where  there 
will  be  no  possibility  of  fire  hazards. 

3.2.2  The  safe  distance  between  flammable  material  and  the  working 
place  should  be  as  decided  by  the  Competent  Authority  having  regard  to 
the  flammability  of  such  materials,  approach  of  the  source  of  ignition  and 
the  confinement  of  the  space.  It  is  recommended  that  the  safe  distance 
should,  generally,  be  not  less  than  15  metres. 

3.2.3  If  the  work  piece  to  be  welded  or  cut  cannot  be  moved  and  if  all 
the  fire  hazards  cannot  be  removed,  then  guards  must  be  used  to  confine 
the  flame,  heat,  sparks  and  slag^  and  to  protect  the  immovable  material 
adequately  ensuring  safety  from  explosion  and  fire  hazards  (  see  also  2.3 ). 

3.2.4  In  conducting  welding  and  cutting  operations  in  close  proximity 
to  hazardous  locations,  it  should  be  considered  unsafe,  unless  there  is 
absolutely  no  chance  of  the  source  of  ignition  getting  into  the  hazardous 
location,  or  flammable  vapour  or  gas,  liquid  or  dust  coming  in  contact 
with  the  3purce  of  ignition  from  the  adjacent  hazardous  location.  Adequate 
protective  measures  should  be  taken  using  effective  guards  to  ensure  safety, 
under  such  situations. 

3.2.5  Before  starting  welding  or  cutting  in  any  new  locations,  it  is  always 
necessary  to  collect  information  from  the  nearest  Shop  Superintendents  or 
Foremen,  on  the  flammable,  combustible  or  explosive  materials  that  might 
be  existing  and  might  lead  to  a  fire  or  explosion  in  the  presence  of  a  source 
of  ignition. 

3.2.5.1  Only  after  satisfactory  investigation  carried  out  by  a  Compe- 
tent Authority,  hot  work  permit  should  be  endorsed  with  or  without 
conditions  for  the  special  precautions  that  should  be  observed  to  ensure 
safety  from  fire  hazards. 

3.2.6  Special  situations  having  potential  fire  hazards  should  be  consi- 
dered in  detail  and  special  precautions  that  should  be  taken  to  ensure 
safety,  should  be  worked  out.  Prescribed  special  precautions  for  special 
situations  should  be  informed  to  all  concerned  and  if  deemed  fit,  exhibited 
on  notice  boards.  The  persons  concerned  should  strictly  follow  the 
prescribed  special  precautions  and  periodic  checks  should  be  carried  out 
by  the  Competent  Authority, 

11 


IS  t  3016  .  19B2 

3*3  Recommended  Precautions,  for  Special  Situations 

3.3J  Location  Having  Combustible  Material  or  Dust  —  Welding  and  cutting 
operations  shall  not  be  carried  out  in  or  near  hazardous  location  having 
combustible  material  or  dust,  for  example  any  ventilation  or  other  duct 
system.  Welding  and  cutting  operations  may  be  carried  out  only  after  any 
accumulated  combustible  material  or  dust  has  been  completely  removed 
from  the  place.  Where  practicable,  a  section  of  the  duct  in  which  such 
work  is  to  be  done  should  be  isolated  from  the  remainder  of  the  system, 
the  fans  should  be  shut  down  so  that  they  cannot  be  started  again  till  the 
work  is  complete  and  declared  safe  to  start  the  fan. 

3.3«1*1  Where  it  is  impracticable  to  clear  up  the  combustible  dust 
from  the  location  as  in  case  of  a  dusty  room  or  tunnel,  any  inert  dust,  such 
as  limestone,  gypsum,  etc,  may  be  used  for  general  dusting  around  the 
operational  area  before  commencement  of  the  operation.  It  is  necessary 
to  ensure  that  more  than  80  percent  of  the  inert  dust  Js  in  suspension 
depending  on  the  nature  of  the  combustible  dust,  to  assure  reasonable 
safety  from  the  explosion  hazards. 

3.3.2  Drums,  Barrels,  etc  —  Cutting  or  welding  shall  not  be  done  on  any 
drum,  barrel,  tank,  or  other  container  until  it  has  been  cleaned  so  thoro- 
ughly as  to  make  absolutely  certain  that  no  flammable  materials  or 
substances  such  as  acids  which,  under  the  action  of  heat,  may  produce 
flammable  gases  or  vapours  are  present  in  them, 

3.3*2.1  Where  steam  is  available  this  may  be  used  to  remove  materials 
which  are  easily  volatile.  Washing  with  strong  soda  solution  will  remove 
heavier  oils.  After  thorough  cleaning,  the  container  should,  wherever 
possible,  be  filled  with  water  before  any  cutting  or  welding  operation  is 
performed. 

3.3.2.2  In  practically  every  case  it  will  be  found  possible  to  place 
the  container  in  such  a  position  that  it  may  be  filled  with  water  to  within 
a  few  centimetres  of  the  point  where  cutting  or  welding  is  to  be  done.  In 
doing  this,  however,  care  shall  be  taken  to  make  sure  that  there  is  a  vent 
or  opening  to  provide  for  the  release  of  heated  air  from  inside  the 
container, 

3.3.2.3  Where  it  is  not  practicable  to  fill  the  container  with  water, 
a  protective  gas  such  as  carbon  dioxide  or  nitrogen  can  be  used,  feeding 
in  a  continuous  stream  at  low  pressure,  at  the  commencement  of  the  work. 
Care  should  be  taken  in  using  carbon  dioxide.  If  carbon  dioxide 
flows  with  great  speed  from  the  container  into  the  space  to  be  washed, 
there  is  a  possibility  of  it  being  loaded  with  static  electricity  and  sparks 
may  easily  be  given  off.  The  carbon  dioxide  should,  therefore,  be  gradually 
introduced  so  that  no  dimness  or  frost  is  observed  at  the  outlet  of  the  g&s 
container.  Further,  the  protective  gas  ( carbon  dioxide  or  nitrogen  )  should 

12 


IS:  3016.  1982 

not  be  introduced  into  the  tanks  or  the  vessel  at  the  commencement  of  the 
work  but  there  should  be  a  constant  stream  of  the  gas  introduced  during 
the  work  so  as  to  prevent  iniet  of  unsuspected  dangerous  gases  from  outside 
and  to  rinse  out  any  possible  dangerous  mixture  that  might  be  formed  on 
the  inside  of  the  tank.  The  use  of  carbon  tetrachloride  for  this  purpose 
is  not  recommended,  as  it  gives  off  poisonous  vapour  when  heated.  If 
possible,  periodic  examination  of  the  air  contents  of  the  vessel  should  be 
made  wherever  possible  by  means  of  a  detector  of  combustible  gases, 
where  such  an  instrument  is  available. 

3«3.2*4  While  purging  a  container  with  carbon  dioxide  or  steam, 
care  should  be  taken  to  purge  for  sufficient  length  of  time  to  ensure 
complete  removal  of  volatile  liquid  or  vapour.  Purging  gas  should  not  be 
used  at  high  velocity  which  may  generate  static  electricity  and  cause 
concern  for  fire  hazards. 

3»3«3  Any  plant,  drum,  barrel,  tank  or  other  container  on  which  welding 
or  cutting  has  been  carried  out  should  be  allowed  to  cool  down  sufficiently 
to  obviate  the  risk  of  ignition  or  explosion  when  the  flammable  material 
is  let  inside  the  container. 

3.3.4  Cutting  During  Rescue  Operations  —  Before  resorting  to  cutting  during 
rescue  operations,  a  check  shall  be  made  to  determine  whether  explosive 
or  flammable  liquids,  gases,  or  vapoury  are  present,  and  no  cutting  shall 
be  done  until  these  are  absorbed  or  expelled. 

3.3.5  Cutting  or  Welding  in  Confined  Spaces  —  When  cutting  or  welding  is 
being  carried  out  in  any  confined  space,  suitable  precautions  shall  be  taken 
to  prevent  the  ignition  of  any  timber  or  other  flammable  material  that 
may  be  present.  Furthermore,  sufficient  ventilation  shall  be  provided.  No 
oxygen  shall  be  blown  in.  The  escape  path  shall  be  kept  at  safe  location 
with  means  of  easy  reach,  such  as>  ladder. 

3«3«€  Gas  Mains  and  Apparatus  - —  No  cutting  shall  be  carried  out  on  any 
gas  main  pipe  or  apparatus  unless  such  main,  pipe,  or  apparatus  is  totally 
isolated  from  live  gas  plant  and  completely  purged  of  gas  and  relieved  of 
pressure. 

3.3.7  Coal  Bunkers  —  Where  practicable,  no  cutting  or  welding  shall  be 
carried  out  in  or  near  coal  bunkers  or  other  fuel  storages,  without  the 
removal  of  the  fuel;  however,  where  this  is  not  practicable,  special  precau- 
tions shall  be  taken  to  prevent  ignition  of  the  fuel  itself  or  any  gases  giVen 
off  by  the  fuel. 

3«3«8  Sprinkler  Installations  —  Sprinkler  installations  if  provided  shall  be 
checked  before  commencing  any  welding  or  cutting  operations  to  ensure 
that  it  is  in  working  order  and  shall  be  maintained  in  good  v,'orking 
condition  even  during  extensive  repairs  or  alterations  of  the  building  while 

13 


tSs  3016-1982 

cutting  and  welding  operations  are  in  progress  and  at  least  half  an  hour 
after  such  operation  ceases.  If  the  sprinkler  system  must  be  shut  down  for 
certain  period  of  time,  this  shall  be  done  when  welding  and  cutting  oper« 
ations  are  not  in  progress, 

3.3.8.1  Where  cutting  or  welding  operations  are  to  be  carried  out  on 
a  sprinkler  installation  itself,  such  work  shall  be  done  by  an  approved 
sprinkler  contractor.  All  fire-prevention  precautions  required  by  these 
clauses  shall  be  taken,  and  in  addition,  in  hazardous  locations,  an  officer 
of  the  fire  station  shall,  where^  possible,  be  in  attendance.  Where  possible 
the  water  shall  be  cut  off  only  from  that  portion  of  the  installation  which 
is  actually  under  repair.  Further,  alternate  water  supply  arrangement  shall 
be  provided  for  the  period  of  the  water  supply  system  is  out  of  commission. 

3.3.9  Stores  and  Depots  of  Inflammable  Liquids  and  Gases 

3.3«9.1  When  no  other  suitable  means  of  carrying  out  the  required 
repair,  addition  or  alteration  is  available,  cutting  and  welding  may  be 
carried  out  in  the  installations  for  storage  of  inflammable  liquids  and  gases. 

3.3«9.2  After  all  necessary  investigations  and  tests,  the  Site-Inchargc 
or  Superintendent  of  the  installation  or  Officer  Incharge  of  fire  precautions 
shall  issue  the  permit  for  carrying  out  the  required  work  at  scheduled 
time.     The  permit  shall  be  renewed  daily  when  required. 

3.3*9,3  Officer  Incharge  of  fire  precautions  shall  ensure  that  the 
portion  in  the  circuit  of  the  liquid  or  gas  circulation,  for  example,  the 
storage  tank,  pipelines,  valves,  pumps,  etc,  where  welding  and  cutting 
work  shall  be  carried  out,  is  blanked  or  isolated  and  purged  with  steam  or 
inert  gas  or  washed  thoroughly  so  as  to  make  absolutely  certain  that  no 
inflammable  liquid  gas  is  present  in  an  amount  which  can  catch  fire  under 
the  action  of  heat,  spark,  flame,  welding  spatter  or  red  hot  objects.  A 
combustible  gas  indicator  shall  be  used  to  determine  the  cdncentration 
of  combustible  gas  in  the  air,  and  if  this  concentration  is  greater  than 
0*2  percent,  the  hot  work  permit  shall  not  be  signed  by  the  Officer 
Incharge  of  fire  precautions  until  the  concentration  is  obtained  below  that 
limit. 

3.3.9.4  Before  cutting  and  welding  on  any  part  of  the  supporting 
structure  for  inflammable  liquid  or  gas  storage  vessels  precautionary 
measures  similar  to  3.3*9.3  shall  be  observed.  Where  necessary,  the  storage 
vessels,  pipeline,  etc,  shall  be  propped  up  adequately  to  support  the  load 
while  the  supporting  structure  is  cut  or  welded  for  required  modification 
or  repair. 

3.3.10  On  Wharfs  and  Ships 

3.3.1t).l  Master  responsible  for  precautions  —  Wherever  a  ship  may  be, 
the  Master  shall  be  responsible  for  taking  adequate  precautions  against 

14 


IS  I  3016  •  1982 

explosion  or  fire  during  and  after  all  cutting  and  welding  operations,  and 
no  such  operation  shall  be  carried  out  except  with  the  permission  of  the 
Master  or  Officer-Incharge, 

3,3.10*2  Provision  of  fire-fighting  facilities  —  During  cutting  and  weld- 
ing operations  ships  at  whari's  or  in  docks  shall  have  their  hydrant  and 
hose  system  in  good  working  order  and  connected  to  a  water  supply  which 
shall  be  adequate  and  frequently  tested.  If  the  ship's  pumps  cannot  be 
used,  arrangements  shall  be  made  to  obtain  supply  from  shore,  preferably 
by  connecting  the  ship's  hydrant  and  hose  system  to  an  effective  shore 
supply.  Pumps  shall  not  be  put  out  of  action  until  the  shore  supply  is 
assured.  Supply  trom  shore  shall  be  tested  frequently  to  make  certain 
that  the  supply  is  immediate  and  of  sufficient  pressure  to  enable  distribu- 
tion all  over  the  ship.  In  addition,  fire  extinguishers  and  buckets  of  water 
or  sand  shall  be  laid  out  ready  in  the  vicinity. 

Note  —  Spaces  under,  over,  or  adjacent  to  the  cutting    and   welding  operations 
shall  be  treated  as  being  *  in  the  vicinity  *, 

3.3.10.3  Provision  of  guards  —  When  cutting  or  welding  where  sparks 
might  lodge  in  wooden  parts  or  drop  through  pipes  or  openings  to  the 
space  below,  sheet  metal  guards,  asbestos  or  fireproof  millboard  curtains 
or  similar  non-combustible  devices  shall  be  used  to  keep  sparks  close  to  the 
work  being  done.  The  guards  shall  be  large  enough  and  sufficiently  tight 
not  to  permit  sparks  to  roll  imderneath  flammable  material  or  slide 
through  openings.  Curtains  shall  be  weighted  to  the  deck  floor,  or 
ground,  so  that  sparks  do  not  possibly  get  underneath. 

3.3.10.4  Cutting  or  welding  shall  be  performed  only  after  consulta- 
tion between  the  Master  of  the  vessel  and  the  responsible  Official  Incharge 
of  the  arrangements  for  securing  the  goods.  The  greatest  consideration 
shall  be  given  to  the  commodity  immediately  beneath  the  deck,  and  the 
work  proceeded  with  when  it  ha?^  been  ascertained  that  there  is  no  risk 
involved.  Welding  cleats  and  ring  bolts  to  secure  heavy  goods  on  weather 
decks  shall  be  carried  out  before  the  ship  is  loaded.  Gutting  cleats  and 
ring  bolts  on  weather  decks  shall  be  carried  out  after  the  'tween  deck 
cargo  has  been  discharged* 

3*3.1 0.3  Cutting  or  welding  in  tanks,  etc -—^^^^  cutting  and  welding 
operations  arc  being  done  in  a  ship's  tank  or  similar  locations,  an  assistant 
should  be  stationed  at  the  manhole  entrance  to  the  tank  to  cut  off  the  gas 
supply  to  cutting  and  welding  equipment  quickly  on  hearing  the  slightest 
backfire  explosion.  Provision  should  be  made  for  adequate  ventilations 
of  such  confined  locations.  Lifting  tackles  should  be  kept  ready  at  hand 
in  case  the  operator  needs  to  be  rescued  from  inside  the  confined  space 
against  dangerous  accumulations  of  harmful  gases  or  fumes  formed  during 
hot  work  operations. 

15 


IS  t  3016  - 1982 

In  case  of  an  oil  tank  on  board,  containing  flammable  oil,  welding 
and  catting  operations  shall  not  be  carried  out  unless  the  oil  tank,  and 
any  compartment  or  space  adjacent  to  the  oil  tank  have  been  made  ifrec 
of  flammable  gases  by  draining  out  or  removing  the  contents  and  by 
thoroughly  washing  with  hot  water  or  by  steaming  to  remove  all  traces 
of  flammable  liquid.  Proper  tests  should  be  carried  out  to  check  the 
absence  of  flammable  vapours  in  ext)losive  concentrations,  before 
commencement  of  any  hot  work. 

3.3.10.6  Cutting  or  welding  on  decks  or  bulkheads  —  When  cutting 
through  or  at  edges,  suitable  receptacles  containing  a  layer  of  sand  should 
be  provided  in  such  a  manner  as  to  collect  all  the  molten  slag,  sparks 
and  hot  metal  particles  generated  during  the  hot  work  operations.  In  the 
vicinity  of  wooden  decks,  damp  sand  may  be  employed  as  a  fire  arrester 
and  to  protect  the  deck. 

3«3.10.7  Cutting  or  welding  in  engine  rooms  —  When  cutting  or  weld- 
ing in  an  engine  room,  particular  care  shall  be  taken  to  see  that  the  space 
where  the  work  is  carried  out  is  clear  of  oily  waste,  and  the  OfBcer-In- 
charge  shall  make  an  inspection  after  the  workmen  leave,  and  satisfy 
himself  that  there  is  no  Are  hazard, 

3.3.10.8  Cutting  or  welding  near  magazines  —  Gutting  or  welding  shall 
not  be  carried  out  in  close  proximity  to  a  magazine,  or  any  other 
compartment  containing  explosives.  There  shall  be  at  least  the  space  of 
a  compartment,  or  two  bulkheads,  between  the  operations  and  the 
explosives.  This  shall  refer  also  to  decks  above  and  below  a  magazine. 
If  necessary,  the  explosives  shall  be  removed  to  another  compartment  in 
a  safe  place  and  carefully  guarded. 

3«3a0,9  Vvatch  to  be  kept  —  Where  cutting  or  welding  operations  arc 
being  done  on  or  about  a  ship  a  watch  shall  be  maintained  in  the  vicinity, 
irrespective  of  any  precaution  undertaken  by  those  responsible  for  such 
operations.  After  cutting  or  welding  in  the  work  vicinity  of  flammable 
cargo  or  ship's  fittings,  when  finishing  work  or  knocking  off  for  the  day, 
the  ship's  watchman  shall  be  instructed  to  keep  a  strict  watch  during  the 
night  in  the  vicinity  where  the  work  was  carried  out.  The  watchman 
should  report  immediately  in  case  any  smoulding  fire  is  detected  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  area  where  hot  work  operations  were  carried  out  earlier, 

3.3.10.10  Mineral  oil  on  water  surfaces  —  Special  care  shall  be  taken 
to  prevent  sparks,  slag,  or  hot  metal  particles  coming  into  contact  with 
mineral  oil  on  water  surfaces,  particularly  in  the  vicinity  of  wharfs  and 
ships. 

Note  —  Cases  are  on  record  where  thin  layers  of  oil  discharged  from  ships  or 
accidentally  from  tankers  or  waterside  oil  tanks  have  been  ignited  during  cutting 
operations,  even  under  severe  winter  conditions  with  ice  on  the  surface  of  the 
water, 

16 


16:3016^1982 

APPENDIX     A 

(  Clause  2X2 A  ) 

WORK  PERMIT 

HOT  WORK  AND  SAFETY  PERMIT 
Special  Instructions  Permit  valid  from    AM 

Inside  refinery  PM  Date 

1.  No  smoking 

2.  Safety  hat  must  be  worn  To  AM 

3.  In  case  of  liquid/gas  release.     Stop  work  PM  Date 
and  immediately  advise  process  supervisor 

concerned 

4.  In  case  of  fire  alarm.  All  welding  machi- 
nes/mobile equipment  must  be  stopped. 
Gas  cylinders  closed,  everybody  leaves  the 
work  site.  Contractor  personnel  to  go  to 
designated  safe  areas. 

PERMISSION  IS  HEREBY  GRANTED  TO 

NATURE  OF  WORK 

EXACT  LOCATION  OF  JOB ^ ^ 

TFIE  FOLLOWING  ITEMS  MUST  BE  CHECKED  BEFORE 
ISSUING  PERMIT 

Item  Done         Not  Required 

1.  Personally  inspected  equipment/work  area 

2.  Surrounding  area,  hot  lines  checked  and 
covered 

3.  Equipment  properly  drained  and  wedged 
open 

4.  Equipment  properly  steamed  and  gas  freed 

5.  Equipment  water  flushed 

6.  Proper  ventilation  and  lighting  provided 

7.  Gas  test  made  and  found  gas  free/gassy 

17 


IS  :  3016  .  1982 

Item  Done  Not  Required 

8.  Following     precautions     taken     against 
release  of  oil  or  gas  in  the  area 

Equipment  Blinded  j  Disconnected  I  Isolated 

9.  Sewer  openings  covered 

10.  Control  for  welding  sparks  provided 

a)  Outside  the  equipment 

b)  Inside  the  equipment 

11.  Following  standby   fire   equipment   pro- 
vided: 

Fire/Water  Hose/Extinguisher 

12.  Following  personal  protective  equipment 
provided: 

Safety  Hat/Glovcs/Goggles/Safety  Shoes/ 
Boiler  Suit/Dust  Respirator/Face  Shield/ 
Air  Mask/Apron 

13.  Proper  means  of  exit  available 

14.  Equipment  properly  tagged 

15.  Portable  equipment/Hose  Nozzles  properly 
grounded 

16.  Checked  for  trapped  oil/gas  behind  lining 
in  equipment 

17.  Life  line  provided 

18.  Process/Mechanical/Gontractor     standby 
provided 

19.  Area  cleaned  up;  oil,  rags  removed 

20.  Iron  sulfide  removed  or  kept  wet 

GAS  TEST  RESULTS 

HYDROCARBON  GASES  Percent  of  Lower  Explosive  Limit 

CARBON  MONOXIDE  Percent 

GAS  TEST  MADE  BY  OXYGEN  DEFICIENCY        Yes/No 

HYDROGEN  SULPHIDE  % 

18 


ISi30l6.19t2 


( Continiudfiom  page  2  ) 


Subcommittee  for  Safety  Health  and  Hygiene  Aspects  of 
Welding,  SMDG  14  :  5 


Convener 
Shki  N.  V.  Kbishnan 
Members 

Snai  S.  BAtiARAMAN 

Shbi  a,  K.  Das 

Shri  M.  K.  Sen  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  A.  Dobaiswamy 
Db.  R.  C.  Panjwani 


Representing 
Central  Labour  Institute,  Bombay 

Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Bombay 
Oxygen  Ltd,  Calcutta 


Bbarat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Hyderabad 
Larsen  &  Toubro  Ltd,  Bombay 
Shbi  S.  K.  Bhattacharya  (  Alternate  ) 
Prof  V.  Raman  National    Environmental    Engineering    Research 

Institute  (  GSIR  ),  Nagpur 
Rbpbbsentativk  Chief  Inspectorate  of  Explosives,  Nagpur 


19 


r218  43 


L316  41 
24  42 
2519 
2916 
6  32  92  96 


r4i 

^41 
Ul 


BUREAU      OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  110002 
Talephonss  :  331  01  31,  331  13  75  Telegrams  :  Manaksanatha 

(  Common  to  ail  offices ) 
Regional  Offices:  Telephones 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  [331  01  31 

NEW  DELHI-1 10002  L331  13  76 

•Eastern    :  1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road.  36  24  99 

Manlktola,  CALCUTTA  700054 
Northern  :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C, 

CHANDIGARH  160036 

Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  MADRAS  600113 

tWestern  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East), 

BOMBAY  400093 
Branch  Offices: 
'Pushpak'  Nurmohamed  Shaikh  Marg,  Khanpur, 

AHMEDABAD  380001 
4:Peenya  Industrial  Area,  1st  Stage,  Bangalore  Tumkur  Road 

BANGALORE  560058 
Gangotrl  Complex,  5th  Floor,  Bhadbhada  Road,  T.  T,  Nagar, 

BHOPAL  462003 
Plot  No.  82/83,  Lewis  Road,  BHUBANESHWAR  751002 
63/5,  Ward  No.  29,  R.  G.  Barua  Road,  5th  Byslane, 

QUWAHATI  781003 
5-8-56C  L  N.  Gupta  Marg  (  Nampally  Station  Road  ), 

HYDERABAD  500001 

R14  Yudhlster  Marg,  C  Scheme,  JAIPUR  302005 

117/418  B  Sarvodaya  Nagar,  KANPUR  208006 

Patllputra  Industrial  Estate,  PATNA  800013 
T.C.  No.  14/1421,  University  P.O.,  Palayam 

TRIVANDRUM  695035 
Inspection  Office  (With  Sale  Point)  : 
Pushpanjali,  1st  Floor,  205-A  West  High  Court  Road, 

Shankar  Nagar  Square,  NAGPUR  440010 
Institution  of  Engineers  ( India  )  Building,  1332  Shivajl  Nagar, 

PUNE  411005 


\2  63  48 

L2  63  49 

r38  49  55 

L38  49  56 

66716 

6  36  27 
3  3177 

23  1 0  83 

r6  34  71 
16  98  32 
68  76 
82  92 
6  23  06 
r6  21  04 
l6  21  17 

2  61  71 
6  24  36 


[21 
L2I 


*Salei  Office  In  Calcutta  It  at  5  Chowrlnghea  Approach,  P.O.  Prlneap  17  68  00 

Street,  Calcutta  700072 

tSalea  Office  In   Bombay   la  at   Novelty   Chambers,    Crant   Read,  89  65  28 

Bombay  400007 

tSalet  Ofnce  In  Bangalore  li  at  Unity  Building,  Narasimharaja  Square  22  86  71 

Bangalore  560002  ■ 

Printed  at  8lmee  Prinlino  Preai.  Delhi,  Indit 


