**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  436-1-2  (1976) :  Methods  for  sampling  of  coal  and  coke, 
Part  I:  Sampling  of  Coal,  Section  2:  Mechanical  sampling 
[PCD  7:  Solid  Mineral  Fuels] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  436  (  Part  I  /Sec  2  )  -  1976 

(  Reaffirmed  2000 ) 


Indian  Standard 

METHODS  FOR  SAMPLING  OF 
COAL  AND  COKE 

PART  I     SAMPLING  OF  COAL 
Section  2   Mechanical  Sampling 

(  Second  Reprint  MAY  1990   ) 
UDC      662.66  :  620.113 


©  Copyright   1977 

BUREAU       OF       INDIAN       STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  ]  10002 

Gr4  March    1977 


IS :  436  (  Fart  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  FOR  SAMPLING  OF 
COAL  AND  COKE 

PART  I     SAMPLING  OF  COAL 
Section  2  Mechanical  Sampling 

Solid  Mineral  Fuck  Sectional  Committee,  CDG  14 

Chairman  Representing 

Dr  M.  G.  Krishna  Central  Fuel  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Dhanbad 

Members 
Shri  A.  Banerjee  Coal  Controller,  Calcutta 

Shri  D.  Basu  Coal  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  S..K.  Bose  National  Test  House,  Calcutjta 

Shri  N.  C.  Chatterjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Mining  Adviser,  Railway      Ministry  of  Railways 
Board,  Dhanbad 
Joint  Director,  Mechanical 
Engineering  (  Fuel  ),  Railway 
Board,  New  Delhi  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  A.  N.  Chowdhury  Geological  Survey  of  India,  Calcutta 

Shri  A.  K.  Das  Gupta  Steel  Authority  of  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Dr  S.  R.  Ghosh  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  (  TMD )  Central     Electricity    Authority     (Thermal      Power 

Division  ),  New  Delhi 
Deputy  Director  (  TMD  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  A.  K.  Ghosh  Central  Mining  Research  Station  (  CSIR),  Dhanbad 

Shri  S.  K.  Mandal  Steel  Authority  of  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  N.  Wazir  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  Ramamoorthy  Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  Srinivasan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  Seshagiri  Rao  Regional  Research  Laboratory  (  CSIR  ),  Hyderabad 

Shri  L.  Narasimhan  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  S.  M.  M.  Safvi  The  Tata  Iron  &  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 

Dr  M,  L.  Saha  Coke  Oven  Manager?'  Association  ( Indian  Section  ), 

Calcutta 
Shri  R.  N.  Kaul  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  B.  Sarkar  Institute  of  Fuels   ( Indian  Section  ),  Calcutta;  and 

Coal  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 
Shri  Banamali  Sen  Bharat  Coking  Coal  Ltd,  Dhanbad 

Shri  C.  L.  Seshadri  Neyveli  Lignite  Corporation  Ltd,  Neyveli 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


<§)  Copyright  1977 
BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (XIV  of  1957)  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the' said  Act. 


IS:436(PartI/Sec2)-19?6 


(  Continued  from  page  1 ) 

Members 

Shri  S.  S,  Subramanian 

Shri  V.  V.  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  G.  M.  Saxena, 
Director  (  Chcm ) 


Representing 
Indian  Iron  &  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Director  General,  ISI  ( Ex-officio  Member) 


Secretaries 

Shri  G.  P.  Sarawat 
Deputy  Director  (  Chem ),  ISI 

Shri  A.  K.  Talwar 
Assistant  Director  (Stat),   ISI 


Sampling  of  Solid  Mineral  Fuels  Subcommittee,  CDC  14 : 1 


Convener 

Shri  S.  B.  Sarkar 

Members 

Shri  S.  Baochi 
Shri  S.  K.  Bose 
Chemist    &     Metallurgist, 

Eastern  Railway,  Jamalpur 
Shri  P.  V.  Dharmadhikari 

Shri  A.  K.  Misser  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  (TMD) 


Coal  Inaia  Ltd,  Calcutta 


Central  Mining  Research  Station  (  CSIR  },  Dhanbad 
National  Test  House,  Calcutta 
Ministry  of  Railways 


Associated  Cement  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 


Central    Electricity    Authority 
Division ),  New  Delhi 
Deputy  Director  ( TMD )  (  Alternate  ) 


( Thermal     Power 


Shri  M.  W.  Goklany 
Shri  B.  C.  Mathur 
Shri  P.  D.  Nath 

Shri  D.  Basu  (  Alternate  ) 
ShriS.K,  Pande 
Dr  J^NVSharma 

Shri  A.  G.  Saha  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  C.  Sisha 

Shri  B.  K.  Sinha  ( Alternate ) 


Damodar  Valley  Corporation,  Durgapur 
Hindustan  Steel  Works  Construction  Ltd,  Calcutta 
National  Coal  Development  Corporation,  Ranchi 

Bharat  Coking  Coal  Ltd,  Dhanbad 
Hindustan  Steel  Ltd,  Ranchi 

Central  Fuel  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Dhanbad 


IS  1 436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  •  1976 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  FOR   SAMPLING  OF 
COAL  AND  COKE 

PART  I    SAMPLING  OF  COAL 
Section  2    Mechanical  Sampling    * 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  (Part  I/Sec  2)  was  adopted  by  the  Indian* 
Standards  Institution  on  30  August  1976,  after  the  draft  finalized  by 
the  Solid  Mineral  Fuels  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the 
Chemical  Division  Council. 

0.2  In  view  of  increasing  use  of  coal  as  fuel  as  a  substitute  for  petroleum 
products  in  power  generation  and  transport,  and  maintaining  the  tempo  of 
industrialization  in  the  country,  it  has  become  necessary  to  move  and 
handle  large  quantities  of  coal.  This  calls  for  use  of  mechanical  handling 
and  sampling  systems  on  a  wide  scale.  Accordingly,  a  new  section 
( Section  2 )  has  been  added  to  Part  I  which  covered  only  manual 
procedures,  to  prescribe  procedures  for  incremental  sampling  from  moving 
stream  of  coal.  Original  Part  I  has  been  redesignated  as  Part  I/Section  1. 
Wherever  necessary,  this  standard  should  be  used  in  conjunction  with  its 
Section  1. 

0.3  In  view  of  the  possibility  of  use  of  various  designs  of  equipment  that 
could  be  used  for  the  purpose,  no  specific  designs  have  been  recommended 
in  this  standard  but  only  a  few  illustrations  of  increment  samplers  and 
sample  dividers  have  been  incorporated  for  the  guidance  of  users.  It  is, 
however,  felt  that  widespread  use  of  mechanical  sampling  systems  in 
coming  years  will  make  it  possible  to  arrive  at  an  optimum  design  of  such 
an  equipment,  which  would  ensure  maximum  precision  for  a  given  supply 
of  coal. 

0.4  In  the  formulation  of  this  standard  assistance  has  been  derived  from 
the  following  publications: 

ISO  1988-1975     Sampling  of  hard  coals.     International  Organiza- 
tion for  Standardization. 

Draft  BS  1017  :  Part  1:  Sampling  of  coal  and  coke:  Part  1  Sampling 
of  coal.    British  Standards  Institution. 

3 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 

0.5  In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with 
this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded 
off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  prescribes  the  methods  of  sampling  and 
sample  preparation  of  coal  using  mechanical  systems  and  lays  down  a 
procedure  for  the  reporting  of  test  results. 

Note  —  Sampling  and  sample  preparation  of  coal  using  manual   methods    have 
already  been  given  in  IS  :  436  ( Part  I/Sec  1  )-1964f. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  definitions  given  in  IS  :  3810-1977$ 
shall  apply. 

3.  MECHANICAL  SAMPLING  SYSTEMS 

3.0  General  —  An  essential  condition  of  sampling  is  that  the  whole  bulk 
of  coal  to  be  sampled  should  be  exposed,  so  that  all  parts  are  equally 
accessible  to  the  sampling  implement  and  have  the  same  chance  of  being 
included  in  the  sample.  The  most  favourable  situation  in  which  the  whole 
of  the  coal  is  exposed  for  sampling  is  when  it  is  being  conveyed  on  a  belt 
or  similar  device  so  that  it  passes  the  sampling  point  in  a  stream.  If  the 
belt  is  stopped  and  a  section  of  adequate  length  is  taken  across  the 
whole  width  of  the  belt,  all  the  coal  particles  in  this  section  can  be  taken 
so  that  there  will  not  be  any  significant  bias.  Sampling  from  a  stopped 
belt  is  therefore  the  most  satisfactory  way  of  ensuring  that  the  sample  is 
free  from  bias  and  it  is  recommended  as  the  reference  method. 

3.0.1  In  many  installations  it  is  not  possible  to  stop  the  belt  without 
considerable  interference  with  the  work  in  the  installation  and  other  methods 
of  sampling  have  therefore  to  be  used.  Alternatively,  samples  from  the 
cross  section  of  a  moving  stream  are  collected,  to  ensure  that  each  incre- 
ment is  a  representative  of  the  cross  section.  It  is  this  principle  on  which 
most  of  the  mechanical  sampling  systems  work. 

3.1  Requirements  of  Mechanical  Sampling  Systems 

3.1.1  The  design  of  the  systems  for  sampling  and  sample  preparation 
should  be  guided  by  the  type  of  coal  to  be  sampled,  test  requirements  to  be 


♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 

t Methods  for  sampling  of  coal  and  coke  :  Part  I  Sampling  of  coal,  Section  1  Manual 
sampling  ( revised). 

^Glossary  of  terms  relating  to  solid  mineral  fuels:  Part  I  Terms  relating  to  coal  and  its 
preparation  {first  revision  )  and  Part  II  Terms  relating  to  coal  sampling  and  analysis. 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 

performed  by  the  system,  desired  precision  of  test  results  and  absence  of 
significant  bias. 

3.1.2  The  method  of  checking  results  of  samples  collected  by  any 
mechanical  installation  is  by  comparing  the  results  of  samples  taken 
manually  by  skilled  personnel  to  ensure  freedom  from  bias. 

3.1.3  From  the  initial  stage  of  designing  and  constructing  the  system, 
due  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  safety  of  the  operators. 

3.1.4  To  maintain  good  control  during  the  full  period  of  sampling  and 
sample  preparation  from  a  consignment,  human  surveillance  should  be 
available  at  all  times.  In  the  case  of  breakdown  of  the  sampling  installation, 
provision  should  be  made  for  the  mechanical  operation  to  be  replaced  imme- 
diately by  an  alternate  procedure  within  the  framework  of  relevant  methods. 

3.1.5  It  is  recommended  that  the  mechanical  installation  is  arranged  in 
such  a  way  that  the  principal  units  may  be  operated  individually. 

3.1.6  The  mechanical  installation  should  be  designed  in  a  manner  as 
would  take  care  of: 

a)  spillage  of  sample  material, 

b)  possibility  of  the  sample  clogging  the  equipment, 

c)  possible  impedance  in  the  flow  of  the  sample  material  through  the 
equipment, 

d)  retention  of  residual  material,  and 

e)  introduction  of  materials  other  than  the  sample. 

3.1.7  Each  part  of  the  apparatus  with  which  the  sample  comes  in  contact 
should  be  designed  in  such  a  way  that  the  construction  materials  do  not 
change  the  quality  of  sample  either  chemically  or  physically. 

3.2  Working  of  Mechanical  Samplers  —  Coal  from  the  stockyard  or 
unloading  station  moves  on  one  or  two  parallel  conveyor  lines.  At  the 
transfer  point  prior  to  a  special  weighing  belt  an  automatically  operated 
sampler  cuts  increments  from  the  main  flow.  This  apparatus  which  collects 
the  increments  is  called  primary  sampler  and  consists  generally  of  auto- 
matically operated  bucket  moving  with  uniform  speed  into  the  falling  coal 
stream  at  adjustable  intervals  of  time.  The  primary  sample  taken  from  the 
passing  flow  is  continuously  prepared  by  crushing  and  dividing  in  3  or  4 
stages.  The  final  sample  is  dried  and  ground  to  212-micron  size  for  chemi- 
cal analysis.  Sampling  for  the  purpose  of  size  determination  is  done  by  fully 
automatic  equipment  in  conjunction  with  primary  sampler  which  supplies 
batches  of  coal  weighing  200  to  250  kg  to  the  screens.  The  weighing  of  the 
§ized  fractions  is  done  during  no-load  times  of  the  screen, 


IS  ?  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 
4.  SAMPLING  EQUIPMENT 

4.0  Sampling  machine  always  behaves  in  the  same  way  and  eliminates  the 
subjective  influence  of  the  sampler.  There  are  a  number  of  designs  for 
mechanical  sampling  and  sample  preparation  equipment.  It  is  important 
that  machines  have  their  performance  tested  against  a  reference  method 
( stopped  belt  method  in  this  case )  before  they  are  put  to  actual  use 
(see  3.0). 

4.1  A  composite  mechanical  sampling  equipment  consists  of  appropriate 
sample  collecting  and  sample  preparation  machines  combined  into  a  single 
unit  by  means  of  which  coal  increments  are  collected  and  prepared  into 
samples  as  a  continuous  chain  of  operations.  It  is  possible  to  have  a  large 
number  of  combinations  of  such  equipment  and  hence  a  variety  of  composite 
designs.  The  optimum  design  has  to  be  decided  on  the  basis  of  a  number 
of  factors,  such  as  cost,  space  available,  volume  of  coal  to  be  handled  and 
the  expected  efficiency  of  the  system. 

4.2  Automatic  Samplers  for  Collection  of  Increments 

4.2.0  General  —  It  is  desirable  to  use  a  sampler  which  cuts  through  the 
full  width  of  a  falling  stream  of  coal.  However,  where  it  is  not  possible, 
an  alternate  method  is  to  scoop  the  sample  from  a  moving  conveyor  belt. 
While  using  the  alternate  method  it  is  important  to  have  the  sampler  pro- 
perly adjusted  to  the  belt  curvature  across  its  width  so  that  true  cross  section 
of  trie  conveyed  material  is  removed,  including  fine  particles  which  segregate 
to  the  bottom  of  the  material  on  the  belt  while  in  motion.  The  cutter 
employed  should  also  not  cause  turbulence  while  sweeping  through  the 
stream  of  coal  pushing  aside  large  coal  pieces  and  thus  rejecting  them. 
Therefore,  its  speed  has  also  to  be  carefully  adjusted  to  avoid  taking  a 
biased  sample. 

4.2.1  Sampling  from  Falling  Stream  —  Machines  for  sampling  from  falling 
streams  should  have  a  bucket  of  width  equal  to  the  full  width  of  the  stream 
and  cutting  through  it  in  a  direction  either  parallel  or  at  right  angles  to  the 
movement  of  the  belt.  It  is  essential  that  the  box  passes  through  the  stream 
at  uniform  speed  and  that  the  slotted  width  is  properly  related  to  the  size 
of  coal.  Further,  in  this  type  of  sampling  system,  the  box  usually  passes 
through  the  stream  twice  to  collect  an  increment  ( from  front  to  back  and 
reverse  ) .  Therefore,  the  container  has  to  be  of  such  a  size  that  it  is  not 
completely  filled  at  the  end  of  its  travel.  The  point  of  travel  of  the  bucket 
in  the  reverse  should  be  located  where  there  is  no  falling  coal.  In  this 
system  the  bucket  usually  tips  at  the  end  of  each  cycle  of  movement  empty- 
ing the  sample  into  a  chute.  Alternatively,  the  bucket  may  fill  on  one 
movement  and  then  tip,  or  close  on  its  return.  Some  of  the  common 
types  of  devices  for  sampling  from  the  falling  stream,  ^re  described  below. 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2 )  -  1976 

4.2.1.1  Breeches  chute  type  sampler —  This  device  is  designed  to  collect 
increments  from  a  falling  stream  of  coal  by  diverting  the  whole  stream  into 
the  one  or  the  other  leg  of  the  Breeches  chute  ( see  Fig.  1  ).  Movement  of 
the  flap  governing  the  direction  of  flow  of  coal  stream  is  usually  time- 
controlled  and  the  ratio  of  the  mass  of  the  sample  to  that  of  the  consignment 
depends  on  the  period  for  which  the  flap  is  allowed  to  remain  in  a  parti- 
cular position.  In  the  case  of  erratic  rate  of  flow  it  may  be  necessary  to 
control  movement  of  the  flap  with  the  help  of  a  belt  weighing  machine 
according  to  the  specified  masses  of  coal.  In  this  type  of  sampler,  the  flap 
moves  with  a  rapid  c  snap  '  action  so  that  the  time  taken  by  it  to  traverse 
the  stream  of  qoai  is  negligible.  Such  action  is  achieved  either  by  the  use 
of  compressed  air  or,  for  full  sized  coal,  by  electromagnetic  means. 


Fig.  1     Falling  Stream  Breeches  Chute  Type  Sampler 


4.2.1*2  Swinging  arm  type  sampler — This  device  is  designed  to  collect 
increments  from  the  discharge  end  of  a  conveyor  and  is  suitable  where 
vertical  height  or  head  room  is  limited.  In  this  arrangement  (  see  Fig.  2  ) 
a  heavy  bucket  is  allowed  to  swing  once,  like  a  pendulum,  through  the  full 
width  of  the  stream  of  coal.  Power  for  the  operation  of  this  type  of 
sampler  is  sometimes  derived  from  the  drum  of  the  conveyor.    The  device 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 

may  be  set  to  operate  automatically  cither  at  equal  intervals  of  time  or,  if 
a  belt  weighing  machine  is  incorporated,  after  specified  masses  of  coal  have 
passed. 


Fig.  2    Falling  Stream  Swinging  Arm  Type  Sampler 

In  another  arrangement  of  this  type  of  device  a  rectangular  frame, 
with  a  number  of  holes  of  sufficient  dimensions,  is  provided.  The  arm 
swings  across  the  full  width  of  the  stream  and  the  coal  passing  through  the 
holes  falls  on  to  a  small  conveyor  belt  carried  with  the  frame.  This  belt 
discharges  coal  into  a  chute  or  storage  hopper. 

4.2.1.3  Chain  bucket  type  sampler — This  device  consists  basically  of  a 
sampling  bucket  attached  to  a  pair  of  roller  chains  ( see  Fig.  3  )  and  is 
powered  by  an  electric  motor  through  reduction  gears.  In  its  rest  position, 
the  sampling  bucket  is  clear  of  the  coal  stream  at  its  sample  discharge 
point.  When  a  sample  is  to  be  taken,  the  bucket  travels  inverted  through 
the  stream  of  coal  on  the  lower  strand  of  the  roller  chain.  It  then  travels 
on  the  upper  strand  of  the  chain  with  cutting  edges  uppermost  thus  taking 
the  sample.  The  sample  is  automatically  emptied  into  the  collecting  drum 
at  the  end  of  its  run  on  the  top  strand  of  the  chain. 

4.2.2  Sampling  from  Moving  Belt  —  Machines  for  sampling  from  moving 
belt  should  have  a  scraper  arm  which  operates  by  sweeping  off  increments 
across  the  width  of  a  conveyor  belt.  In  this  case  the  mass  of  the  incre- 
ment depends  on  the  load  on  the  belt  and  the  width  of  the  scraper.  The 
device  may  be  set  to  operate  automatically  either  at  equal  intervals  of 
time  or,  if  a  belt  weighing  machine  is  incorporated,  after  specified  masses 
of  coal  have  passed.     A  suitable  device  is  illustrated  in  Fig,  4, 

8 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 


vi>,,,^M$^^m^&^ 


SAMPLE  ^"'•■""':'"'i;""!'" 

Fig.  3     Chain  Bucket  Type   Sampler 


SAMPLE  I 
Fig.  4    Scraper  Arm  Type  Sampler 

9 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 

4,3  Mechanical  Equipment  for  Sample  Preparation  —  Sample  pre- 
paration equipment  (  excluding  dryers  )  may  be  divided  into  the  following 
three  classes: 

a)  Size  reduction  apparatus, 

b)  Sample  mixing  apparatus,  and 

c)  Sample  dividing  apparatus. 

4.3-1  Size  Reduction  Apparatus  —  The  equipment  for  reducing  particle 
size  is  generally  called  '  mills  '.  High  speed  mills  are  desirable  to  ensure  a 
product  of  specified  size  even  from  hard  coals  of  high  ash  content  or  coals 
with  shale.  Reduction  mills  vary  in  type  from  jaw  crushers  to  roll  crushers 
and  from  plate  mills  to  high  speed  impact  pulverizers  which  are  particu- 
larly suitable  for  the  finer  milling  (  0*2  mm  ). 

4.3.1.1  All  types  of  mills  should  be  made  of  heat-resistant  material. 
Those  parts  of  mills  coming  into  contact  with  coal  should  be  of  wear  resistant 
material  in  order  to  prevent  contamination  of  the  samples  and  to  avoid  over- 
heating, which  would  induce  oxidation  of  the  coal  or  loss  of  moisture  from  it. 
Mills  should  be  easy  to  clean.  High,  speed  mills  tend  to  become  heated  and 
samples  shall  not  be  allowed  to  remain  in  them  long  enough  to  be  affected. 
If  a  mill  is  used  for  a  series  of  samples,  it  should  be  allowed  to  cool  be- 
tween samples  in  order  to  avoid  oxidation  and  loss  of  moisture  in  subsequent 
samples.  Modern  high  speed  mills  are  likely  to  be  seriously  damaged  by 
presence  of  extraneous  iron  or  other  ferrous  material  in  the  sample.  A 
magnetic  separator  placed  in  the  chute  leading  to  the  machine  is  a  con- 
venient safeguard  against  this. 

4.3.1.2  Although  high  speed  pulverizers  are  most  efficient  with  a  wide 
range  of  coals,  they  entrain  air  with  the  samples  due  to  the  fanlike  effect  of 
the  rotating  hammer.  To  avoid  the  loss  of  fine  coal  particles  or  dust  it  is 
essential  either  to  limit  the  air  flowing  through  the  mill  by  using  closed 
inlet  and  outlet  hoppers  or  by  fitting  a  breather  bag  to  the  mill  outlet. 

4.3.1*3  The  efficiency  of  mills  used  for  grinding  to  0*2  mm  should 
ensure  that  at  least  99  percent  of  the  sample  will  pass  the  size.  The 
efficiency  of  the  mills  will  be  hampered  if  they  are  not  cleaned  periodically. 
It  is  also  desirable  to  clean  mills  before  use  for  a  different  coal.  The 
use  of  a  stream  of  compressed  air  or  an  industrial  type  vacuum  cleaner  may 
be  suitable  for  this  purpose. 

4.3.2  Sample  Mixing  Apparatus — The  apparatus  should  neither  cause  brea- 
kage of  coal  nor  produce  dust  or  allow  loss  of  moisture.  It  should  be 
conditioned  with  the  coal  being  used  or  with  another  coal  of  similar  mois- 
ture content*  Three  types  of  mixers  have  been  found  satisfactory,  namely, 
the  paddle  mixer,  the  drum  mixer  and  the  double  cone  mixer. 

4.3.3  Sample  Dividing  Apparatus  —  Most  mechanical  sample  dividers  are 
of  the  rotary  type  in  which  a  receiver  is  placed  on  a  turntable,  so  as  to 

10 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  • 1976 

intercept  a  falling  stream  of  coal  once  or  twice  in  each  revolution  or,  alter- 
natively, to  collect  a  continuous  ribbon  from  a  falling  stream  of  coal  pro- 
duced by  allowing  the  coal  to  fall  from  the  hopper  on  to  the  vertex  of  the 
cone.  The  slot  or  dimensions  where  the  coal  passes  from  the  reservoir 
should  be  at  least  2*5  times  the  upper  particle  size.  Some  of  the  common 
types  of  sample  dividers  are  described  below. 

4.3.3.1  Rotary  sample  divider  —  This  device  consists  of  a  number  (  for 
example  12  )  of  containers  shaped  like  segments  (  see  Fig.  5  A  )  mounted  on  a 
rotating  turntable,  revolving  at  about  60  rev/min.  The  bottom  edge 
of  the  input  reservoir  should  be  large  enough  to  prevent  coal  bridging  the 
outlet.  The  minimum  size  of  the  opening  at  the  point  where  it  intercepts 
the  coal  should  be  at  least  5  times  the  upper  particle  size  of  the  coal. 
Thus  a  number  of  separate  increments  are  collected  in  each  revolution  and 
the  proportion  of  the  sample  retained  may  be  chosen  by  taking  the  relevant 
number  of  containers.  Thus  to  take  1/12  fraction  one  container  is  retained, 
and  for  \  fraction,  three  containers  are  retained. 

4*3.3.2  An  alternative  device  consists  of  two  circular  rotating  plates. 
The  feed  is  introduced  on  the  top  plate  and  spread  by  a  number  of  baffles 
and  finally  discharged  by  another  baffle.  The  lower  plate  ( see  Fig.  5B ) 
has  segment-shaped  apertures  cut  into  it.  As  the  sample  falls  from  the 
upper  plate  on  to  the  lower  plate,  part  of  it  passes  through  the  apertures  in 
the  lower  plate  and  forms  the  reduced  sample  and  that  retained  on  the 
lower  plate  is  rejected.  The  reduced  sample  is  discharged  into  chutes  for 
further  preparation  while  the  remains  are  carried  round  on  the  lower  plate 
to  a  point  diametrically  opposite  where  they  are  swept  by  a  brush  into 
another  chute. 

4.3.3*3  Slotted  belt  sample  divider —  This  device  is  suitable  for  bulk 
sample  reduction  at  the  sampling  point.  A  stream  of  coal  is  fed  to  a 
conveyor  belt  at  a  constant  rate.  The  belt  has  slotted  apertures  in  it  (  see 
Fig.  6  ).  The  material  falls  freely  for  a  short  distance  before  it  reaches  the 
belt.  A  complete  cross  section  of  the  stream  of  coal  passes  through  the 
slots  in  the  belt  and  is  collected  as  reduced  sample  for  further  processing. 
Goal  falling  on  the  unslotted  part  of  the  belt  is  conveyed  away  and  rejected. 

5.  METHODS  OF  COLLECTING  SAMPLES 

5.1  Lot  —  Supply  of  coal  is  made  either  in  the  form  of  an  isolated  consign- 
ment or  in  a  regular  series  of  consignments.  When  the  nature  of  coal 
supplied  is  not  known  or  when  it  is  known  to  be  heterogeneous,  each 
consignment  should  be  treated  as  a  lot  and  should  not  be  mixed  with  pre- 
vious or  subsequent  supplies.  However,  when  coal  is  supplied  in  a  regular 
series  of  consignments  from  the  same  source  and  is  moved  continuously,  it 
is  convenient  to  define  lot  in  terms  of  time  limit  such  as  the  coal  moved 
during  a  specified  period  of  supply. 

u 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 


LIP   PROVIDES 
HANDLE 


5  TIMES   THE   SIZE 
OF    THE    LARGEST 
PARTICLE 


SIDE  PLATE 
BENT  OVER 
TO   FORM    CLIP 


LARGE    SAMPLE 
DIVIDER   WITH 
HOPPER   SUITABLE 
FOR    HAND    FEEDING 


STAND  TO    ADAPT 
LARGE    TURNTABLE 
FOR   USE    WITH 
MEDIUM    SIZEO 
RECEIVER 


HIGH    SPEED    SAMPLE 
DIVIDER    FED    FROM 
CRUSHER    VIA   A  CHUTE 


GUIDE  TO  DIMENSIONS 


Capacity 
kg 

Height  of 

Receiver 

mm 

Diameter  of 

Receiver 

mm 

Height  op 

Container 
mm 

35 

450 

450 

400 

7 

280 

300 

190 

1 

150 

130 

150 

5A  Rotary  Sample  Divider 
Fig.  5    Sample  Dividers  (  Contd ) 
12 


IS  :  436  (  Part  I /Sec  2  )  -  1976 


5B  Rotary  Sample  Divider 
Fig.  5     Sample  Dividers 

5.2  Sub-lots  —  For  the  purpose  of  sampling,  a  lot,  while  it  is  being  dis- 
charged over  a  conveyor  shall  be  divided  into  a  number  of  sub-lots  of 
approximately  equal  mass  as  specified  in  Tabic  1.  In  mechanical  system 
of  handling  coal,  the  rate  of  discharge  could  be  quite  high  and  hence  the 
size  of  the  sub-lot  should  also  be  reasonably  large  to  facilitate  mechanical 
sampling. 

5.3  Number  of  Increments  —  Under  mechanical  sampling  the  number 
of  increments  is  subject  to  the  limitation  imposed  by  the  mechanical 
system  in  terms  of  the  fast  rate  of  discharge,  large  increment  size  and 
minimum  time  interval  between  two  consecutive  increments.  This  time 
limit  may  vary  from  system  to  system.  Table  2  gives  the  number  of 
increments. 


13 


*S:436(PartI/Sec2)-1976 


rREJECT 


FEEO 

CHUTE 


&    ^iiVr^i^iiMM^infiiVrn:^ 


Fig.  6     Slotted  Belt  Sample  Divider 

5.4  Mass  of  the  Increments  —  The  mass  of  increments  depends  on  the 
type  of  mechanical  sampling  system  installed  at  the  site  of  sampling. 
However,  the  increment  shall  not  be  less  than  10  kg  in  mass  for  both 
unwashed  and  washed  coal.  Further,  the  increments  shall  be  taken  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  ensure  that  they  have  an  almost  uniform  mass.  A 
measure  of  uniformity  of  mass  is  CV  which  is  defined  as  the  percentage  of 
standard  deviation  relative  to  the  mean  value  of  the  mass.  For  routine 
sampling  purpose  increments  are  considered  to  be  uniform  if  the  GV  of 
their  mass  is  less  than  or  equal  to  20  percent.  It  is  essential  to  check  the 
uniformity  of  the  mass  periodically  by  weighing  at  least  20  consecutive 
increments. 

5.5  Collection  of  Increments  by  Mechanical  Samplers 

5.5.1  The  most  convenient  method  of  taking  increments  from  the  flow  of 
coal  is  by  systematic  sampling  where  the  increments  are  spaced  evenly  in 
time  or  in  position  over  the  sub-lot.  Care  has  to  be  taken,  however,  that 
periodic  variation,  if  any,  in  the  quality  of  coal  does  not  coincide  with 
the  frequency  of  taking  increments.  There  are  two  modes  of  taking  syste- 
matic samples.  One  is  the  mass-basiss  ampling  and  the  other  is  time-basis 
sampling.  Under  mass-basis  sampling,  increments  are  taken  at  a  fixed 
mass  interval  and  under  time-basis  sampling,  increments  are  taken  at  a 
fixed  time  interval. 

5.5.2  Mass-Basis  Sampling  —  If  T  denotes  the  mass  interval  between  two 
successive  increments,  the  following  relationship  shall  always  be  satisfied: 


14 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  *  1976 

where 

T  =  mass-interval  between  taking  increments  in  tonnes, 

Q,  «=  mass  of  the  sub-lot,  and 

n  =■  number  of  increments  given  in  Table  2. 

Example  1: 

A  consignment  of  3  600  tonnes  of  run-of-mine  coal  is  to  be  sampled 
on  the  mass-basis  sampling. 

According  to  Table  1  the  number  of  sub-lots  should  be  6.  Hence 
the  consignment  should  be  considered  to  be  made  up  of  6  sub-lots  each 
weighing  about  600  tonnes.  For  this  size  of  coal,  the  number  of  increments, 
according  to  Table  2,  should  be  35. 

600 
Hence  the  sampling  interval  on  mass-basis  sampling  is  -rr-  =17 

tonnes  approximately. 

TABLE  1    NUMBER  OF  SUB-LOTS/GROSS  SAMPLES 

(  Clattses  5.2  and  5.5.2  ) 

Mass  of  the  Lot  No.  of  Sub-lots/Gross 

Sample 

(1)  (2) 

tonnes 
Up  to    3000  5 

3001    ,,5  000  6 

5  001    „  10000  7 

10  001  and  above  8 

TABLE  2    MASS  OF  GROSS  SAMPLE  AND  NUMBER  OF  INCREMENTS 

(Clauses  5.3  and  5.5.2) 

Sl  Consignment 

No. 

(1)  (2) 


i) 

Run-of-mine  coal 

H) 
iii) 

Large  coal 
Small  coal 

iv) 

Washed  coal: 
0*75  mm 
0  to  10  mm 

Mass  of 

Gross  Sample, 

Min 

Mass  of 

Increments, 
Min 

Number  of 

Increments, 

Min 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

t* 

kg 

350 

10 

35 

180 

10 

18 

80 

10 

8 

200 
50 

10 
10 

20 
5 

15 


IS :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  2  )  -  1976 

5.5.3  Time-Basis  Sampling  —  If  t  is  the  time  interval  between  two  incre- 
ments by  mechanical  sampler,  the  following  relationship  shall  be  satisfied: 

**  Gn 

where 

t  =  time  interval  between  two  increments,  in  minutes; 
0,=  mass  of  the  sub-lot  in  tonnes; 
G  =  maximum  flow  rate   of  belt '  conveyor  in  tonnes/hour; 

and 
n  =  the  number  of  increments. 

Example  2: 

If  the  consignment  given  in  Example  1  is  to  be  sampled  on  time-basis, 
and  if  the  maximum  flow  rate  of  coal  is  known  to  be  800  tonnes/hour,  then 
the  sampling  interval  on  time-basis  sampling  shall  be: 

#    ,60x600  . 

f<800x35*"13mmutes 

5.5.4  From  practical  point  of  view,  time-basis  sampling  is  easy  to  operate 
and  will  be  adequate  if  the  flow  of  coal  is  fairly  uniform.  If  the  flow  rate 
is  not  uniform  and  is  subject  to  wide  fluctuations,  the  increments  collected 
on  time-basis  will  not  be  representative  and  their  mass  also  is  likely  to  be 
varying. 

5.5.5  Increments  under  either  mode  of  sampling  shall  be  taken  from  the 
whole  width  and  thickness  of  the  coal  stream.  The  width  of  the  section  of 
sampler  shall  be  at  least  2*5  times  the  maximum  size  of  the  coal.  Incre- 
ments shall  be  taken  while  there  is  a  normal  load  on  the  belt  at  the  point 
of  sampling.  For  this  reason  they  shall  not  be  drawn  just  at  the  beginning 
or  at  the  end  of  the  flow. 

6.  SAMPLE  PREPARATION 

6.1  The  increments  collected  from  a  sub-lot  as  described  in  5  shall  be 
mixed  together  to  form  the  gross  sample  for  the  sub-lot.  The  gross  sample 
so  formed  may  be  prepared  either  manually  or  mechanically  or  a  combina- 
tion of  these  two  methods. 

6.1.1  For  the  general  procedure  for  reduction  of  gross  sample  and  pre- 
paration of  moisture  and  laboratory  samples,  IS  :  436  (  Part  I/Sec  1  )-1964* 
shall  be  followed. 

7.  REPORTING  OF  TEST  RESULTS 

7.1  For  reporting  of  test  results,  reference  shall  be  made  to  IS  :  436  (  Part  1/ 
Sec  1  )-1964*. 

•Methods  for  sampling  of  coal  and  coke:  Part  I  Sampling  of  coal,  Section  1  Manual 
sampling  (revised). 

16 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  1 10002 

Telephones:  331  01  31,  331  13  75  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

(  Common  to  all  Offices ) 

Regional  Offices:  Telephone 

Central  .  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  (331  01  31 

NEW  DELHI  110002  J331  13  75 

♦Eastern    :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  36  24  99 

Maniktola,  CALCUTTA  700054 
Northern   :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  (   2  18  43 

CHANDIGARH  160036  I   3  16  41 

T41  24  42 
Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  MADRAS  600113  \  41  25  19 

(41  29  16 
tWestern  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (  East ),  6  32  92  95 
BOMBAY  400093 

Branch  Offices: 

•Pushpak',  Nurmohamed  Shaikh  Marg,  Khanpur,  f    2  63  48 

AHMADABAD  380001  \    2  63  49 

JPeenya  Industrial  Area  1st  Stage,  Bangalore  Tumkur  Road  (38  49  55 

BANGALORE  560058  {38  49  56 

Gangotri  Complex,  5th  Floor,  Bhadbhada  Road,  T.  T.  Nagar,  6  67  16 

BHOPAL  462003 

Plot  No.  82/83,  Lewis  Road,  BHUBANESHWAR  751002  5  36  27 

53/5  Ward  No  29,  R.G.  Barua  Road,  5th  Byelane,  3  31  77 

GUWAHATI  781003 

5-8-56C  L.  N.  Gupta  Marg  (  NampaUy  Station  Road  ).  23  1 0  83 

HYDERABAD  500001 

R1  4  Yudhister  Marg,  C  Scheme,  JAIPUR  302005  J   6  98  32 

117/418  B  Sarvodaya  Nagar,  KANPUR  208005  {|j  ||  J| 

Patliputra  Industrial  Estate,  PATNA  800013  6  23  05 

T.C.  No.  14/1421.  University  P.O..  Palayam  /6  21  04 

TRIVANDRUM  695035  \6  21  17 

Inspection  Offices  (  With  Sale  Point  )\ 
PushpanjalL  First  Floor,  205- A  West  High  Court  Road,  2  51  71 

Shankar  Nagar  Square,  NAGPUR  440010 
Institution  of  Engineers  ( India  )  Building,  1 332  Shlvaji  Nagar,    5  24  35 

PUNE  411005 


'Sales  Office  in  Calcutta  it  at  5  Chowringhee  Approach,  P.  O.  Princep  27  68  00 
Straet.  Calcutta  700072 

fSales  Office  in  Bombay  ie  at  Novelty  Chambers,  Grant  Road,  89  65  28 
Bombay  400007 

{Sales  Office  in  Bangalore  is  at  Unity  Building,  Narasimharaja  Square,  22  36  71 
Bangalore  560002 

Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


