**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 5253 (1969) : Guidelines for cleaning and sterilizing 
dairy equipment [FAD 19: Dairy Products and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 5253-1969 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



Indian Standard 



GUIDELINES FOR CLEANING 
AND STERILIZING DAIRY EQUIPMENT 

( First Reprint NOVEMBER 108ft } 



UDC fi37.13.O0i^.55 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK. liWWAN, « PAl^rADLm SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

KEW DELHI I10(X)2 



IS: 5253- 1969 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR CLEANING 
AND STERILIZING DAIRY EQUIPMENT 

Dairy Equipment Sectional Committee, AFDC 35 

Chairman Representing 

Db N. N. Dastuk National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Members 
AGRictTi.TtJBAi. Maeketing Ad- Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 
visER TO TfiE Government OF Food, Agriculture, Community Development & 

Ikdia Co-operation ), Na^pur 

Shri B. S. Dat^^I Alternate ) 
Shri a. S. Bhathena National Steel Equipment Company, Bombay 

Bkig Chandan Singh Directorate of Military Farms, New Delhi 

Shri Shahid Ali ( Alternate ) 
Shri CD. Dastoob l^rsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi H. W. Ramchandaki ( Alternate ) 
Shbx V. A. Datar Vulcan Laval Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi P. V. Sonalkar (Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Godbolb Dairy Development Commissioner, Government of 

Maharashtra 
Shri Laxminabayan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Gurbhagwant Singh The Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd, 

Punjab 
Shri A. K. Hajba The Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi A. K. Capbihan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. N. Khan Delhi Milk Scheme, New Delhi 

Shbi M. R. Konab Milk Commissioner, West Bengal 

Shri J. P. Pal (Alternate) 
Shbi A. R. A. Kbishnan Directorate General of Inspection ( DGI ) ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Kanpur 
Shbi B. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri Anil M. Mazijmdar Can Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shkj P. Viswanatha Mknon Milk Commissioner, Madras 

Shbi K. H, Moobe Nestle's Products ( India) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi F, J. Ryan ( Alternate ) , ^ , 

Shbi A. B. Mullick Directorate General of Technical Development 

( Ministry of Industrial Development & Company 
Affairs ), New Delhi 
Shbi J. Pabmanabhan The A. P. V. Engineering Company Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri B. Banerjee ( Alternate) 
ShriB. p. Palkhiwalla Poison Limited, Bombay 

Shri L. V. Dhbuve ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. U. Pereiba Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Puri ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITtTTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 



18:5253-1969 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri B. K. Ramchandani Mahalakshmi Glass Works Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. F. Kachwalla ( Alternate ) 
Representative Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Representative Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Develop- 

ment & Co-operation 
Dr K. C. Sen Indian Dairy Science Association, Bangalore 

Shri V. H. Shah- Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producers* Union 

Ltd, Anand 
Shri T. C. Chandran ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. K. Somany Hindusthan National Glass Manufacturing Co Ltd 

Calcutta 
Shri A, Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R, Srinivasan National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Dr I. S. Verma Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. K. Pathak ( Alternate ) 
Dr Hari Bhagwak, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K. Sitd 

Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Dairy Detergents Subcommittee, AFDC 35:3 

Convener 
Shri M. R. Srinivasan National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Members 

Dr N. R. Bhow Swastik Oil Mills Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. T. Mtjnim ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Kalyakam Mettur Chemical and Indiistrial Corporation Limited, 

Mettur Dam R. S. ( Dist Salem ) 
Dr H. Laxminarayana National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Dr V. K. N. NaMboodripad ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Puri Hindustan Lever Ltd, Etah 

Dr a. K. Sen Gupta Milk Commissioner, West Bengal 

Shri V. H. Shah Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producers' Union 

Ltd, Anand 

Db I. M. Patel ( Alternate) 



IS > 5253- 1969 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR CLEANING 
AND STERILIZING DAIRY EQUIPMENT 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 7 October 1969, after the draft finalized by the Dairy Equipment 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food 
Products Division CounciL 

0.2 All dairy equipment should be properly cleaned and sterilized as 
milk provides an excellent medium for the growth of micro-organisms. AX 
the same time detergents and sanitizers used for cleaning and sterilization 
should be so selecteid as not to affect the material of the equipment. 
This standard provides guidelines for such selection. It also includes 
information {see Appendix A) on the types of soils, general requirements o^ 
detergents and sanitizers, their storage, and precautions necessary for 
their use. Gleaning of the dairy floors and walls has also been covered. 
The code also prescribes limits of residual micro-organisms for various 
equipment so as to help in checking proper cleaning and sterilization. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived fromB. S, 2756: 1956 ^Recommendations for the use of detergents 
in the dairying industry ' issued by British Standards Institution. Full 
use has also been, made of the information received from the National Dairy 
Research Institute, Karnal. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard recommends the choice of detergents and sterilizers, 
cleaning and sterilizing procedures, and tests for checking for the cleaning 
of dairy equipment, dairy floors and dairy walls. These recommendations 
are applicable at all levels of milk handling and processing, namely, village 
level, fluid milk handling plant, and special dairy equipment in milk 
products manufacturing establishments. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 Before selecting the particular detergent, consideration should be given 
to the type of soil, the quality of water supply, the materials of the surface 



IS: 5253 « 1969 

to be cleaned, the washing equipment, and the method of cleaning, namely, 
whether it be by soaking, brushing, and spraying and recirculation or by 
both. The water generally available is hard and should be treated to make 
it soft to maximize the efficiency of detergents. The availability and cost 
should also be examined during the choice of detergents/sanitizers. 

2.2 The usual procedure for cleaning and sterilization/sanitization of major 
dairy equipment should consist of: 

a) draining to remove any residual loose milk and other matter; 

b) pre-rinsing, with cold or tepid water to remove as much of milk 
residue and other matter as possible; 

c) warm to hot detergent washing to remove remaining milk solids; 

d) hot water rinsing to remove traces of detergents; 

e) sterilization/sanitization to destroy ail pathogens and most of the 
non-pathogens, usually also done just before the use of equipment; 
and 

f ) draining and drying to help prevent bacterial growth and corrosion. 

2.3 Cleaning and sterilization/sanitization of dairy equipment may be 
broadly classified into: 

a) hand cleaning and sanitization, 

b) mechanical cleaning and sanitization, and 

c) in-place cleaning and sanitization. 

2.3.1 Hand cleaning arid sanitization will apply to small equipment. It 
should be generally adopted in small dairies or milk collection/chilling 
centres, where it is uneconomical to have costly machine-cleaning. The 
temperature of detergent solution in hand cleaning should be such that it 
does not affect the hands. A bucket of cleaning solution and a hand brush 
besides some warm water should serve the purpose of cleaning. Sanitiza- 
tion should be effected with the help of steam jet, or steam chest, or 
chlorine solution. 

2.3.2 Mechanical cleaning should be generally adopted for milk cans 
and milk bottles in milk plants. 

2.3.3 In-place cleaning is increasingly used because of its several advan- 
tages. Besides being labour-saving and preventing damage to equipment 
(due to daily dismantling and assembling), this method of cleaning ensures 
that all equipment receives uniform treatment day after day. In-place 
cleaning should not be adopted for all equipnaent, its success depends upon 
several factors, such as proper lay-out and installation, proper temperature, 
adequate velocity of the detergent solution, use of detergents designed 
specifically for recirculation cleaning and sufficient cleaning time. 



IS: 5253-1969 

3. VILLAGE LEVEL 

3.1 Choice of detergent/sanitizer 

3.1,1 The detergent mixtures suitable for use in villages are given in 
Table!. 

TABLE 1 DETERGENT MIXTURES FOR USE AT VILLAGE LEVEL 



For general use 



For general use exclud- 
ing aluminium utensils 



Sl Inobedients Quantity per Remarks 

No. 1 000 g 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Washing soda ( commercial hydrated sodium 850 g] 

carbonate ) 

Tri-sodium phosphate 100 g 

Sodium metasilicate 50 gj 

ii) Washing soda ( commercial hydrated sodium 850 g^ 

carbonate ) 

Sodium sulphite 50 g 

Tri-sodium phosphate 150 g^ 

Note — For every 1 000 g of the detergent mixtures specified in this table, 10 g of a 
wetting agent, for example, Acinol-N, Idet-10, Teepol, or equivalent compound, should 
be added. [ Wetting agents comprise sodium alkyl/aryl sulphonates ( anionic ). ] 

3*1.2 The sanitizer may be either scalding water (QO"" to 95*^0 ) or 
chlorine solution (200 ppm available chlorine). 

3.2 Procedure 
3.2J Cleaning of utensils should be done as follows: 

a) Mix the ingredients in proportion mentioned and add sufficient 
water to make a paste. About 15 g of the mixture will be required 
for cleaning a utensil of lO-litre capacity. 

b) Rinse the utensil with cold water (tepid water in cold season) and 
drain out the rinsings. 

c) Scrub the utensil (inside and out) with the above detergent paste 
using a clean brush or coir to loosen and remove all milk residues. 

d) Wash the utensil again with enough cold water ( tepid water in co^d 
season ) to remove traces of detergent, and allow them to drain and 
dry. 

3.2.2 The cleaned utensils may be sanitized by rinsing with either scald- 
ing Water, or chlorine solution, just prior to use. 



18:5253-1969 

4. MILK HANDLING AND PROCESSING EQUIPMENT (IN A 
FLUID MILK HANDLING PLANT) 

4.1 Choice of Detergent/ Sanitizer 

4,U The general purpose detergent mixtures for use in dairies are eiven 
in Table 2. 

TABLE 2 GENERAL PURPOSE DETERGENT MIXTURE FOR 
USE IN DAIRIES 



Sl 
No. 

(1) 



IXGT^EDTEXTS 



(2) 



Quantity per 
1 000 g 

(3) 



i) Tri-sodmm pliosphate 
Wetting agent* 

ii) Tri-sodium phosphate 
Sodium metasilicate 
Wetting agent* 

iii) Tri-sodium phosphate 
Sodium sulphite 
Wetting agent* 



850 g\ 
150 g/ 

650 gl 
200 gj. 
150 gj 

750 g1 
100 gl. 
150 gJ 



Remarks 

(4) 
For general use 

For aluminium utensils 
for general use 

For tinned utensils 



*Wetting agent like Acinol-N, Idet-10. Teepol, or equivalent compound, may be used. 

Note 1 • — Tri-sodium phosphate is recognized to have better detergent properties 
compared to washing soda. Wherever it is not available it may be replaced partly or 
fully by washing soda. 

Note 2- — It is preferable to add 200 g of sodium hexametaphosphate per kilogram 
of the mixtures specified in this table, where water is not otherwise softened. 



4.1.2 The sanitizer may be steam or scalding water (90° to 95°C) or 
chlorine solution ( 150 to 200 ppm available chlorine). 

4.2 General Procedure for Handwashing 

4.2.0 Wherever handwashing is involved, it is recommended that the 
hands and eyes of the operator be adequately protected by the use of gloves, 
goggles, etc. 

4.2.1 The normal cleaning and sanitizalion of handwashed dairy equip- 
ment should be done as follows: 

a) Prepare 0*8 to I'O percent solution of the detergent mixture (any 
set in Table 2 ) in water, so as to give a minimum caustic alkali- 
nity of 0*5 percent {pH over 11*0) in a wash-up tank and maintain 
the ttniperaturo at about 50°C. 



IS: 5253 -1969 

b) Thoroughly rinse the utensils with clean cold water (tepid water 
in cold season), 

c) Introduce the detergent solution into the equipment ( quantity of 
solution to be determined by requirement and experience ). Brush 
the equipment surface ( inside and out ) thoroughly with a clean 
brush. 

d) Wash the utensil with enough of fresh cold water (tepid water in 
cold season), using clean brush again if needed to remove all 
traces of detergent. 

e) Allow the equipment to drain thoroughly for drying ( 1 to 2 h). 

f ) Sanitize the equipment surface by steam or hot water soon after 
cleaning; or by rinsing with chlorine solution (200 ppm available 
chlorine ) just before using. 

4.2»2 The equipment normally handwashed include the following: 

a) Milk cans; 

b) Weighing bowls/pans and receiving tanks/vats; 

c) Milk pumps; 

d) Pipe lines; 

e) Storage, holding and transport tanks;' 

f ) Batch-type holding pasteurizers; 

g) Bottle filling machines; 
h) Surface coolers; 

j ) Plate type heat exchangers; 

k) Milk bottles; 

m) Milk crates; and 

n) Cotton filter cloths. 

4,2,3 Some salient points in the cleaning and sanitization of the equip- 
ment mentioned in 4.2.2 are given in Table 3. 

5. SPECIAL DAIRY EQUIPMENT 

5.1 Rail/Road Milk Tanks — Daily cleaning of the milk tanks/tankers 
should be carried out in the following manner: 

a) Wash with a hot detergent solution having 3 percent sodium 
hydroxide at 60° to 70°C. 

Note — -In the case of alummium tankers, the detergent solution should 
compose of a mixture of sodium metasilicate and sodium hydroxide to liave 
alkalinity of about 0*5 percent as sodium hydroxide. 



IS: 5253 -1969 

b) Follow by a washing with enough hot water at 85°C. 

Note — The washing is conveniently carried out by using detergent tanks 
having a capacity to hold 2 000 to 2 500 litres of detergents. 

c) Before filling, the tank/tanker should be sanitized by circulating 
chlorine solution (50 to 100 ppm) and drained off completely. 

TABLE 3 SALIENT POINTS FOR CLEANING OF SOME 
HANDWASHED EQUIPMENT 

( Clause 4.2.3 ) 



No. 



Namts of the 
Equipment 



(1) (2) 

i) Milk cans 



ii) Weighing bowls/pans and 
receiving tanks/vats 

iii) Milk pumps 
iv) Pipe lines 



V) 



Storage/holding/transport 
tanks ( see also 5.1 ) 



vi) 



Batch-type holding 
teurizers 



pas- 



SALiENt Points 



(3) 

Can and lid should be treated in the same way for 
cleaning. Milk cans should be cleaned within 30 
minutes of emptying in hot season before milk film 
dries up. Hand-operated steam jet is desirable for 
sterilization. When the cans are machine- washed, 
they should be cleaned from outside using the same 
sequence of detergents at least once in a week to 
ensure maintenance of attractive appearance. 

The covers, strainers, outlet valves and fittings should 
be dismantled and manually cleaned daily. 

Should be dismantled for cleaning and then reassem- 
bled for sterilization. 

Normally cleaned-in-place, but should be dismantled 
at intervals of once in a month for inspection and 
thorough cleaning. A long enough tank/trough is 
needed to completely submerge the pipes in the 
detergent solution. Pipes should be brushed inter- 
nally with a long-handled brush. Washed pipes 
should be placed on clean rack ( preferably mounted 
on wheels. The pipes are best sterilized after assem- 
bling with steam or scalding water. 

Normally cleaned-in-place. If necessary, operator 
should enter large tanks for proper cleaning. Then 
he should wear clean rubber boots and goggles and 
use clean long-handled brush. For sterilization, 
clean live-steam hose pipe should be introduced into 
the tank ( after closing all other openings ). Steam- 
ing should be done till all parts of the tank are 
scalding hot. 

Long-handled brush should be used. Sterilization 
with live steam as in the case of tanks is the best. 



( Continued ) 



18:5253-1969 



TABLE 3 SALIENT POINTS FOR CLEANING OF SOME 
HANDWASHED ZQIJIPMENT — Contd 



Sl Name oip the 

No. Equipment 

(1) (2) 

vii) Bottle filling machines 



viii) Surface coolers 



ix) Plate-type heat exchangers 



x) Milk bottles 



xi) Milk crates 



xii) Cotton filter cloths 



Salient Points 



(3) 

All valves, air pipes and other removable fittings 
should be dismantled and washed and sterilized 
separately. After re-assembling the plant, it should 
be sterilized again before use, this time preferably 
with chlorine. 

The surfaces should be scrubbed with a brush, while 
water/ detergent solution is flowing down. Chlorine 
sterilization is the best. 

Normally cleaned-in-place. The exchanger should be 
slackened until it begins to leak slightly during 
circulation of hot liquids. At regular intervals 
( determined by requirement and experience), the 
exchanger should be completely opened up and 
individual plates thoroughly scrubbed clean with 
brush. Scalding water sterilization is the best. 

Brushing with the help of small-scale power-driven 
brushes is advantageous. All brushes should be 
thoroughly cleaned and sterilized daily after use. 
Chlorine sterilization of bottles is the best. 

Washing by thorough scrubbing with warm detergent 
solution and hot water; final rinse should be satis- 
factory 

Dirty filter cloths should be placed on a clean surface, 
hosed hard to wash off the dirt, then brushed with a 
soft brush. The cloths should then be boiled in a 
weak detergent solution. Detergent should be 
completely removed from cloths by couple of rinses 
in warm water, followed by couple of rinses in cold 
water. The cloths should be carefully squeezed and 
spread out to dry. The cloths should then be 
sterilized by boiling in fresh water. 



5.2 HTST Plate-Type Pasteurizer — normally cleaned-in-place. The 
cleaning of heat exchangers should be carried out in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions. Typical instructions for the daily cleaning o£ 
heat exchangers are given in 5.2.1 and for periodic cleaning of heat exchan^ 
gers are given in 5,2«2. 

5.2.1 Daipt Cleaning — Daily cleaning of heat exchangers should be 
carried out in the following manner: 

a) At the close of the milk run and after all services have been shut 
down, cold water should be run through the tip tank and pumped 
through the heat exchanger to flush out the icmaining milk. 



18:5253-1969 

b) To avoid unnecessary pressure on the plate rubbers due to expan- 
sion during the circulation of hot liquids, the heat exchanger should 
be slackened until it begins to leak slightly. 

c) In the case of stainless steel brine sections, the brine side of the 
plates should be flushed out with cold water which should be 
admitted at the bottom of the section, 

d) A solution of the acid detergent (O'l percent nitric acid or 0*5 per- 
cent phosphoric acid ) should be circulated within a closed circuit at 
a temperature of 65*^0 for 20 minutes at a rate of flow not less than 
10 percent more than the milk flow. 

e) The acid cleaning is followed by a solution of the detergent 
( caustic soda+trisodium phosphate and wetting agent having alka- 
linity of not less than 0*5 percent, and not more than 1*0 percent, 
as sodium hydroxide. Alkalinity higher than 0*5 percent should be 
maintained when the length of run is more ), This solution should 
be circulated within a closed circuit at a temperature of 70°C for 
20 minutes at a rate of flow not less than 10 percent more than the 
milk flow. 

f) The tightness should then be checked and the heat exchanger 
slackened still further, if necessary, until a slight leakage of deter- 
gent occurs, 

g) The detergent solution should be ejected from the heat exchanger 
by pumping cold water throijgh. The detergent solution should be 
allowed to cool to 38°C before ejection. 

h) When the heat exchanger has been cooled to 38^0, it should he 
opened up, the plates brushed down and Anally hosed with clean, 
cold, water ready for reassembly and sterilization. 

5.2.1«1 Materials for cleaning heat exchangers are available by means 
of which the plates may be cleaned and maintained bright and scale-free 
with virtually no brushing. These methods rely on the circulation of nearly 
neutral and alkaline solutions only, involving the use of polyphosphates. 

5.2*1*2 The methods depend to a certain extent on a good rate of 
detergent circulation. Although it may not be necessary to brush the 
plates after circulation of the detergent, yet it is essential that attention 
should be paid to parts of the plant which are not subjected to the full flow 
of the detergent. This should particulary apply to thermometer pockets 
and pressure gauge fittings, which should be thoroughly brushed after 
detergent circulation. 

It is recommended that these special methods of cleaning should not 
be attempted without prior reference to the plant manufacturer. 

10 



18:5253-1969 

5.2.2 Periodic Descaling ^-Y/hen the heat exchanger is being used for 
heating milk above 38°C, it may occasionally be necessary to circulate 
descaling solution to remove milk-stone that may have accumulated. 
Dilute solutions of phosphoric or nitric acid free from harmful impurities 
may be used for this purpose^ but the plant manufacturer should be consult- 
ed or a special cleaner recommended by the manufacturer should be used. 
Such periodic descaling with acid should be carried out as follows: 

a) An alkaline detergent solution should first be circulated according 
to the instructions given in 5«2«2, after which all traces of the solu- 
tion should be flushed from the plant with cold water. 

b) The descaling solution at the recommended concentration and 
temperature should be circulated. 

c) The descaling solution should then be ejected from the plant by 
flushing through with cold water, 

d) When the plant has cooled below 38°C, it should be opened up and 
the plates brushed down with a weak solution of an alkaline deter- 
gent and finally hosed down with cold water. 

Note — The strengths of the detergent solutions used for descaling are 
generally recommended to be double the strength of the detergent solutions used 
for daily cleaning. 

5.2.2.1 The following precautions should be taken in the use of an 
acid descaling solution: 

a) When the milk contact surfaces of the plant are not all of stainless 
steel, means should be provided to exclude these surfaces from the 
system while the descaling solution is being circulated, unless it has 
been ascertained that the solution will not affect these surfaces. 

b) It is important that the circulation of acid should always be 
preceded by the normal alkali circulation. Circulation of acid before 
alkalli may lead to serious corrosive damage to the stainless 
steel plates of a heat exchanger due to the acid reacting with the 
chlorides in the milk deposits on the plates and forming hydro- 
chloric acid. The danger is that this acid may not be removed 
from the stainless steel surface and diluted in the circulating clea- 
ner as fast as it is formed, with the result that hot hydrochloric acid, 
which is very corrosive to stainless steel, may momentarily remain 
in contact with the plate surfaces. This is especially so if the rate 
of circulation is allowed to fall. 

c) During the circulation of detergents, it is important to ensure that 
the inlet of the circulating pump is fully covered with liquid to 
avoid air being drawn into the pump. 

11 



IS: 5253-1969 

5.3 Can Washer— Mechanical washers, automatically or manually 
operated, are constructed on either the rotary or straight-through principles. 

5.3.1 The following stages of treatment may be provided, and the treat- 
ment should include both can and lid: 

a) Drainage stage for liquid milk residues: 

b) Pump-fed pre-rinsing with cold or warm water; 

c) Drainage stage or stages; 

d) Pump-fed jetting with detergent at not less than 70°C; 

e) Drainage stage or stages; 

f ) Rinsing stage, pump fed or by steam and water ejector at not less 
than 88°C; 

g) Final fresh water rinsing with steam and water ejector at 88° 
to 93°C. 

h) Live-steam injection; and 

j) Hot-air drying at 95° to 1 15° C. 

5.3.1.1 Although with freshly emptied cans used foi farm collection 
work it is possible, with careful operation of the machine, to obtain good 
washing results by means of very hot water alone in the fourth stage, 
it should be the normal practice and generally it is desirable that in this, 
the first washing stage, a detergent solution should be used. The detergent 
should be suitable for use with tinned steel, and a concentration of between 
0'5 and 1*0 percent (as caustic alkalinity) is desirable. The concentration 
should be regularly checked and maintained during the period of operation 
of the machine. 

5.3.1.2 Soft water should preferably be used to supply to a can-wash- 
ing machine. When the use of hard water is unavoidable, scale in the 
tanks and jetting system may be minimized by the addition of a sequester- 
ing agent [for example, sodium hexametaphosphate or ethylenediamine 
tetra acetic acid ( EDTA )] to the water supply or the detergent solution. 
Tanks should be emptied and thoroughly rinsed each day after use. 

5.4 Bottle Washer 

5.4.1 Soaker-Hydro Machines — The sequence of treatment in machines of 
this type varies widely. The treatment may, however, be summarized as 
follows: 

a) Pre-rinsing by jetting or soaking in water at a temperature between 
35° and 40°G; 

12 



IS: 5253 -1969 

b) Soaking with or without jetting in detergent solution ^t 60° 
toGS^'C; 

c) Rinsing by jetting and sometimes soaking with warm water; and 

d) Final jetting with mains water. 

5.4«1.1 Strongly alkaline detergents should be used, and the tempera- 
ture should reach at least 60*^0. Concentrations of detergent solution vary 
from 1 to 3 percent; usually an alkalinity of 1 percent as sodium hydroxide 
is regarded as a minimum. Where the main detergency effort is in 
soaking, concentrations higher than those in jetting or hydro machines 
should be used. Surface-active agents may often be used for those 
machines, but their concentration depends upon the extent of the deter- 
gent jetting which accompanies the soak and, also, the pressure at which the 
solution is circulated through the jets. Where jetting is used, an excessive 
content of surface-active agents irM. the solution v,'ill cause FGantkig in the 
detergent tank and consequent loss of detergent solution through the tank 
overflow. 

5*4,2 Hydro Machine — The sequence of treatment may be as follows: 

a; Pre-rinsing with water at a temperature between 35^C and 40°C; 

b) Jetting with detergent solution at 60° to 65°G; 

c) Rinsing with warm water; and 

d) Final rinsing with cold water. (Hot water is generally used when 
washing bottles for sterilized milk. ) 

5.4.2>.l In this type of machine the pre-rinse should be usually fed 
from the warm rinse tank except in certain machines where no warm rinse 
tank is incorporated. The final mains water rinse should continuously run 
into the warm rinse tank, while the excess volume is pumped away to the 
pre-rinse. The detergent tank should remain isolated from this sequence, 
and losses in strength may be due to interaction with milk residues and 
milk acids, dilution by water brought forward by the bottles from the pre- 
rinse and carry-over by the bottles from the detergent section into the warm 
rinse. Strongly caustic alkalis should be used. Mixtures of sodium hydro- 
xide, sodium silicate, sodium phosphates and sodium poiy-metaphosphates 
are commonly used for this purpose. Different types of machines often 
need a different balance of detergent constituents in order to provide 
satisfactory cleaning, sterilization and lubrication. Detergent concentra- 
tions should usually be of the order of 2 to 3 percent. Where sterilization 
depends solely on the alkalinity of the detergent solution, an alkalinity 
equivalent to not less than 2*5 percent sodium hydroxide at a temperature 
of not less than 60°C is recommended. !f for any reason, it is not possible 

13 



IS 1 5253 -1969 

to maintain a temperature less than 60°C, the caustic alkalinity should 
be correspondingly increased. A pump pressure of between 1*05 and 1*40 
kg/cm^ is usually most satisfactory for the detergent section, although 
limitations may be imposed by the type of jet. 

5«4,3 General Observations 

5*4.3*1 The efficiency of all automatic bottle-washing machines depends 
on correct mechanical maintenance to ensure that each bottle receives its 
full quota of treatment on: (a) adequate pre-rinsing to prevent fouling of 
the detergent solution by milk residues, (b) maintaining the detergent 
solution at the correct temperature and concentration, and (c) preventing 
recontamination of the bottles from the rinses which follow the detergent 
treatment. 

5*4.3.2 Detergent solutions in all bottle-washing machines should be 
completely changed at regular intervals, usually once a week. This is 
particularly important during the summer months. It is recommended 
also that, when the solution is changed, all tanks should be thoroughly 
cleaned and under daily observation to ensure - operation at maximum 
efficiency. 

5.4.3.3 Tn addition to cleaning the bottles, the detergent solution should 
be relied upon to sterilize them. Temperature and concentration and 
period of contact are the factors in the killing power of the detergent 
solution. The period of contact should generally be fixed by the type of 
machine and accordingly only the temperature and concentration are within 
the control of the operator. The temperature of the detergent solution 
should be held as high as possible, bearing in mind the risk of damage to 
the bottle. Regular titration or automatic metering to gauge the concentra- 
tion is essential, refresher charges of the detergent being added as required. 
For routine testing, testing equipment, which may be supplied by the deter- 
gent manufacturer, could be used. 

5.4.3.4 Bottles should be filled with milk and capped as soon as 
practicable after cleaning and sterilization. 

5.4.3.5 Although the bottled should be in a bacteriologically satisfactory 
condition when they leave the detergent section, subsequent contamination 
often takes place in the rinsing sections, particularly those sections which 
utilize re-circulated water and normally operate at a temperature between 
32^C and 45^C. The warm rinse should be renewed, every day with fresh 
water, and kept as clean as possible; the water in it should be dosed with 
60 ppm of available chlorine from a solution of an approved sodium hypo- 
chlorite, and this concentration maintained. It is recommended that the 
rinsing section be cleaned and sterilized regularly, daily if possible. 

14 



IS: 5253- 1969 

5.4*3«6 Water samples should be taken occasionally from final mains 
rinse jets, as chese frequently develop. high populations of micro-organisms 
which may recontaminate the finished bottle. Where final rinse jets are 
founo to be infected, they should be taken down and thoroughly boiled 
out witn a general-purpose detergent before being replaced, 

5.4.3,7 The bacteriological state of the whole bottle-washing process 
should be constantly checked. To this end washed bottles and samples of 
water from the warm rinse and cold mains rinse sections sKould be regularly 
re-examined bacteriologically. Samples of the mains w^ter at the point 
of entry to the machine should similarly be examined. The bacteriological 
condition of water softeners of the ion-exchange type should be checked 
periodically and they should be sterilized, if necessary, according to the 
manufacturer's instructions, 

5*4.3*8 In fully automatic machines it is desirable that the detergent 
solutions used should have adequate lubricating properties, and further, that 
it should not contain an excess of certain materials which may themselves be 
the cause, either directly or indirectly, of considerable mechanical friction. 
This may be caused by the use of the detergent mixture of too great a pro- 
portion of silicates or polyphosphates, or too low a caujstic alkalinity, and/or 
by the too liberal use of surface-active agents which may result in the 
rollers and pins of the main chains and other bearings in the machine 
becoming completely drained of their lubricating coat of detergent. Such 
an undesirable condition is likely to be more noticeable in soaking type 
machines where links, pins and bearings are actually immersed in the 
solution. 

5.4.3«9 The use of unsuitable detergents will cause undue mechanical 
friction and possibly overloading where the machine is of a soaker or 
sprayer type and, irrespective of the type of drive whether it be mechanical 
or hydraulic. It is, however, more readily seen on machines incorporating 
hydraulic drive. 

5.5 Homogenizers — The homogenizer is a particularly difficult piece of 
equipment to wash and sterilize adequately. The piston rods of such 
machines are generally provided with a type of packing gland which it 
is not possible to remove daily for cleaning purposes, and this part of the 
equipment may, therefore, be a source of trouble. The following cleaning 
procedure is recommended, it being assumed that the inlet side of the 
machine is connected to a hopper of feed tank which is normally used to 
provide an adequate head of milk to the machine: 

a) The control valve should be adjusted to give reduced pressure. 

b) The feed tank should be filled or partly filled with warm water 
and all milk residues flushed out. This would involve starting up 
the machine. 

15 



IS 1 5251. 1969 

c) The above procedure should be repeated with a solution of a 
general purpose detergent (of caustic alkalinity 0*5 percent contain- 
ing no undissolved material at a temperature of 60^ to GS^'C). 

d) The homogenizer should be flushed through with warm fresh 
water. 

e) The inlet and outlet manifolds should be dismantled and the 
suction valves and pressure control valve removed. These parts 
should be washed and scrubbed in a solution of a general-purpose 
detergent, rinsed and reassembled for sterilization. Sterilization is 
effected by circulation of chlorine solution (150 to 200 ppm) at 
60° to 70^C for 15 minutes. 

5.5.1 The following precautions should be taken in cleaning the homo- 
zenizer: 

a) Before commencing the operation specified in 5.5, the locking 
rings of each piston pacjcing gland should be loosened to allow 
as much leakage as possible without actually blowing out or damag- 
ing the packing. The glands should be kept loose throughout all 
the subsequent operations. 

b) When using fresh water alone, the machine should be run for as little 
time as is necessary to carry out each operation, because of the ab- 
sence of adequate lubrication of the piston rods and bores. When 
using an alkali-based detergent the machine may be run without 
fear of damage occurring due to this factor. 

c) Whenever acid cleaning is required to be done, circulate dilute acid 
(0*3 percent nitric acid or 0*5 percent phosphoric acid) at 60"" to 
65°G for 5 to 10 minutes through the homogenizer, followed by 
alkali circulation. 

5.6 Cream Separator — The following procedure should be adopted: 

a) Flush out thoroughly with clean cold water ( tepid water in cold 
season) while the separator is still running. 

b) Dismantle the separator completely. 

c) Wash each part by thorough scrubbing with a clean brush using hot 
detergent solution. 

d) Rinse well each part with hot water to remove trace of detergent. 

e) Arrange neatly on a clfean rack for drying. 

f) Re-assemble and sterilize with scalding water or chlorine solution 
before use. 

16 



IS:5253-1969 

5.7 Gleaning and Sterilization df Ice-Cream Freezer — The cleaning 
and sterilization of freezers pose certlain special problems not encountered 
in other items of equipment and as far as possible the instructions furnished 
by the manufacturer with each freezing machine shall be followed. How- 
ever, the general procedlire th^X is normally adopted for cleaning horizontal 
batch freezers is given below: 

a) At the end of the day's operations, the main refrigeration and ther- 
mostat controls should be turned off. The freezer should be warm- 
ed up gradually to prevent any strain on the machine and in no 
case shall hot water be used initially. Fill the freezer (one-half to 
two-thirds full ) with cold water, allow the blades to rotate a few 
turns and drain out the rinse water. This should be repeated 
several times using increasingly warm water up to a temperature of 
about 60°C until the hopper and freezer have been rinsed free from 
the mix and tampered. 

b) Fill the hopper with the hot detergent solution (60° to 65°G). 
Wash the exterior of the freezer, the hopper valves and strainers, 
using a stiff brush. Run the washing solution into the freezer drum 
(two-thirds full) with cold water, allow the blades to rotate a few 
turns. Remove the head and dasher assembly from the freezer care- 
fully and brush them thoroughly with the detergent solution in a 
sink or in the wash-up tank. The freezer door should also be 
removed and washed similarly. Examine the inside of the freezer to 
ensure that it is free from pieces of fruits, nuts, etc. 

c) Re-assemble the freezer and rinse with water at 60** to 65°C to 
remove the detergent. 

d) For sterilization, fill the hopper with hot water (85**G) so that the 
screen is immersed and allow it to stand for 2 minutes. Drain the 
water into the freezer and add more hot water so that the freezer is 
two-thirds full, turning the dasher 3 to 4 times and then drain out 
the water. If more stringent treatment is required, steam may be 
blown into the freezer for 5 minutes ( with the gate partially open ) 
so that the condensate that drips from the gate is at 85°C. The 
freezer should then be allowed to stand with the gate open for dry- 
ing until ready for use. Alternatively, the washed freezer may be 
sterilized by filling the hopper and chamber with chlorine solution 
( 200 ppm ), agitating for one to two minutes and then draining out. 
Immediately after this treatment the chamber should be rinsed 
with chlorine water (5 to 10 ppm). It is desirable to re-sterihze 
the freezer by running chlorine solution (200 ppm) and then 
rinsing with chlorine water (5 to 10 ppm) if the machine is to be 
used the next day. 

17 



I$4 5253*1969 

5.8 Butter Gbums ( Wooden vind Metal) 

5A1 Wooden Churns — The following procedure should be adopted: 

a) Using a sharp but ter y trowel, remove butter adhering to the wood of 
the churn (and the worker). 

Note — The practice of ateanung the churn to remove adhering butter should 
be avoided, since it allows the fat to penetrate into the wood and make the 
churn more difficult to clean. 

b) Partially fill the churn with water .at about 80°G. If considered 
necessary, add a small quantity of a suitable wetting agent. Rotate 
the churn ( with the worker ) for 3 to 5 minutes. Drain off this 
water as rapidly ^possible, and flush out any remaining fat from 
the bottom of the churn (and worker) by rinsing with hot water. 

c) Fill the churn to one-fourth capacity with 0*5 percent general-pur- 
pose alkaline detergent solution at 80°G, Close the churn door. 
Remove sight glass. (This is necessary to avoid development of 
pressure when the churn is rotated, with possible cracking of the 
sight glass. ) Rotate the churn for 5 to 10 minutes, first slow then 
fast. Stop the churn and drain as quickly as possible, again flush- 
ing the residue from the bottom of the churn with hot water. 

d) Fill the churn to one-fourth capacity with hot water at 95°C. 
Rotate the churn for 15 to 20 minutes, first slow then fast. Drain 
off the water as rapidly as possible. 

e) Open the churn door, as soon as water has drained off. Position the 
churn with open drain cocks at top. This will induce a draught 
which will carry off the steam and dry the surface of wood. ( Cover 
door opening with a wire mesh screen to prevent possible entrance 
of birds and rodents. ) 

f ) Use clean long handled brushes, preferably of nylon and of various 
shapes and sizes, to clean the interior surfaces, opening, etc. 

g) Chemical sanitization of the churn, if needed, is best done before the 
churn is used. Add chill water and then chlorine solution to give 
50 to 200 ppm available chorine in water. Rotate the churn for 
15 to 20 minutes. Before adding cream to churn, drain off the 
chlorine solution. 

5.8.2 Metal Churns — The procedure for woodep churns may be adopted. 
In addition steaming may be employed as the first treatment. 

5.8.3 ' Idle ' Churns — Wooden churns left unused for long time should be 
treated with hot lime water at intervals during the idle period. The churn 

18 



ISi5253.19« 

at each treatment should be washed with the hottest water avaaable, and 
then be dried out. Metal chums do not require treatment during the idle 
period. 

Note — Lime water may be prepared as follows: 

Place half a sack of burnt lime in a barrel or drum, and fill with water daily, 
with stirring. Allow to settle. This provides a saturated solution of lime. The 
lime water is of sufficient strength when 35 ml will neutralize 9 ml of a 0*1 N 
sulphuric acid. Replenish the container with fresh lime as is required to maintain 
the strength of the lime water. 

5.9 Steam-Jacketed Ghee Pans 

5.9. 1 Ghee Pans of Stainless steel — Usually cleaned by using both 
alkali ?iiid acid detergents. The frequency of cleaning depends upon the 
amount of 'soil' formation. Usually after every two batches, fill the pan 
about two-thirds with water and boil for 10 to 15 minutes. Hand-clean 
the inside surface with a clean, long-handled brush. Drain out completely. 
Fill the pan about one-half with 0*5 percent acid detergent solution, prefer- 
ably phosphoric acid. If nitric acid is used on stainless steel surface, the 
strength should not be more than O'l percent and boil it for 10 to 15 minutes. 
Again hand-clean the inside and outside surfaces thoroughly with a clean, 
long-handled brush. Drain out completely. Fill the pan again about one- 
half with 0*5 percent alkaline detergent solution and repeat the cleaning 
procedure as for acid cleaning. A small amount of surface active agent 
(wetting agent) may be added to help the cleaning. Finally hose out 
inside and outside surfaces of pan thoroughly with tap water and drain. 

5.9.2 Oliee Pans of Aluminium — Usually cleaned by using only acid 
detergents together with a small amount of surface active agent. The 
process is similar to the one described in 5*9«1. 

5.10 Evaporators and Vacuum Pans 

5.10.1 Usually cleaned by circulating both alkali and acid detergents. 
Flush the pan with warm water ( 45°C ) till the outlet water is clear. Two 
types of (ietergents/cleaners are recommended: (a) Alkaline cleaner to 
dissolve protein and saponify fat, and (b) acid cleaner to eliminate films of 
water hardness. Make alkaline solution in the fore warmer of 0'5 percent 
with alkaline detergents, preheat to 75° to 80° C, draw into the pan and boil 
under vacuum of 305 to 355 mm Hg. Boil for 30 minutes, the rate of 
intake should be adjusted to the rate of evaporation; drain and rinse with 
warm water. Follow the procedure with 0*5 percent acid detergent solution. 
Drain the rinse. Sterilize with steam for about 30 minutes. Remove 
manhole cover or sight glass and bottom outlet for air circulation for 
drying 

19 



IS: 5253* 1969 

For very heavy milkstone deposits, first circulate hot (50° to GO^C) 
dilute phosphoric acid as 1 percent solution with 400 ppm wetting agents. 
Boil for half an hour as above, drain, rinse and then circulate alkali as 
above followed by acid detergent circulation and lastly by hot ( 50° to 60°C ) 
water rinse. Drain and dry. 

5.11 Roller Drier 

5.11.1 After milk is finished, shut off the steam and flush the rollers while 
rotating with plenty of warm ( 45°G ) water till all milk particles are removed 
from the roller, followed by hand-cleaning with a clean brush and detergent 
solution of 1 percent strength. Flush the rollers once again. Stop the 
rollers. Then remove the scrapper blades, soak them in the detergent 
solution and scrub them thoroughly with a clean brush followed by rinsing 
with warm water. Allow them to dry. The connecting milk pipe lines 
can be cleaned in the normal way by in-place cleaning method or by 
dismantling and hand^cleaning. 

5.12 Spray drier 

5.12.1 As soon as milk drying is over, the spray drier should be stopped 
and the chamber door opened, and with a long-handled clean brush, the 
powder sticking to the sides thoroughly removed. The connection to the 
cyclones should be removed, opening closed, and the chamber flushed with 
warm water (45°C), I percent general-purpose detergent solution and final 
rinsing with hot water (50° to 60°G). The atomizer disc should be first 
dismantled and soaked in warm 1 percent general-purpose detergent solution 
to soften the milk film, and then followed by vigorous hand brushing with a 
clean brush and rinsing with hot water. 

The milk feed line should be cleaned by connecting it to the return 
line and circulating detergent solution from the feed tank as in the in-place 
cleaning system. 

6. CHECK FOR PROPER CLEANING AND SANITIZATION 

6.1 In dairy plants, various equipment should be subjected to regular 
checking of their proper cleaning and sanitization. The limits of residual 
micro-organisms at three levels ( Satisfactory, Fairly satisfactory and Unsatis- 
factory) are given in Table 4 along with the corresponding methods of test 
and frequency of checking. 

6.2 WallSj floors and milk crates should be checked for general cleanliness. 
They should be free from visible dirt and mould growth. 

7. DAIRY FLOORS AND WALLS 

7.1 Dairy Floors — The cleaning of dairy floors (cement concrete, stone 
or tile) is a simple process if done daily. Flooding with hot soap-and- 
cleaner (or wetting-agent-and-cleaner ) solution, followed by scrubbing with 
clean, hard floor-brush, should be generally used. After giving a final hot 
water rinse, mop off with a rubber squeeze to ensure rapid drying, 

20 



IS 1^253^1969 



TABLE 4 LEVELS OF PROPER CLEANING AND SANITIZATION 

{Clause 6.1) 






Equipment 



1) (2) 

i) Milk cans/pails 

il) Milk bottles 

iii) Milk receiving tanks/vats 

iv) Weighing bowls or pans 

v) Storage/holding/transport tanks 

vi) Batch type holding pasteurizer 

vii) Surface cooler 

viii) Plate type heat exchanger 

ix) Cotton filter cloths 

x) Evaporators 

xi) Ice-cream freezer 

xii) Roller drier 

xiii) Bottle filling machine 



xiv) HTST plate pasteurizer 

xv) Homogenizer 

xvi) Cream separator /clarifier 

xvii) Spray drier 



Method 

(3) 
Rinse method 

—do- 
Swab method 

— dp — 

—do— 
— do — 
--do — 
-do— 
— do— 
— do— 

—do— 

— do— 

Circulation Method: 
Sterile or boiled and cooled 
water or skim milk shall be 
allowed to pass through the 
unit and the first one litre 
of water or milk coming out 
shall be collected in sterile 
container and tested for 
SPCf and Goliform count§ 

— do — 

~-do— 

— do— 

— do— 



Ref to Cii No. OF 

IS : 1479 ( Part 

V ).1962* 

(4) 
4.3 and 6 

4.3 and 5 



Results to be 
Expressed as 



Levels 



Satisfactory 



(5) 



4.2 

— do — 
— do — 
— do— 

-do- 



es) 

SPCf per litre of Not more than 
holding capacity 1 000 

—do- --do— 

SPCf for 900 cm« Not more than 
of surface 5 000 



Fairly 
Satisfactory 

(7) 

Over 1 000 up to 
5 000 



Over 5 000 up to 

25 000 



— do — 

— do— 



—do— 
— do — 

— do— 
— do— 



—do— 
— do — 
— do — 
— do— 

-dp- 

— do — 

Counts per litre of 
capacity 



— do— 
—do— 
— do — 
— do — ' 



— do — 
—do — 
-do— 
-dq- 
— do — 
—do— 
— do^' 

— do— 

—do— 

# 

SPCt not more 
than 25 000 
and Goliform 
count§ not 

more than 10 



— do — 
— do— 
• — do — 
— do^ 




Un- 
satisfactory 

(8) 
Over 5 000 

Over 1 000 

Over 25 000 

— do — 
— do— 
— do- 
— do — 
-do- 
— do— 



Frequenct of 
Chbckino 



(9) 
JOne in every batch of 50 

JFour bottles just before the ad- 
dition of fresh lot of detergent 

Once every day immediately 
after the preparation of equip- 
ment for operation 
—do — 



SPCtover25000 
up to 100 000 
Goliform countg 
over 10 up to 
100 



—do— 

— do — 

SPCt over 100000 
and Goliform 
count§ pver 100 



— do — 

-do- 
Once every week 
Every time the equipment is 
cleaned for operation 

— do — 



— do- 






♦Methods of test for dairy industry: Part V Methods of dairy plant control. 

tStandard plate count [See 5 of IS : 1479 ( Part III )-1962 < Methods of test for dairy industry: Part III 

JTo be seleted at random, 

ISee 8 of IS : 1479 ( Part III )-1962. 



Bacteriological analysis of milk ' ]. 



21 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS: 5253 -1969 

7.1.1 Some areas where fat has worked into the floor surface require 
special attention daily. At such places, a floor cleaner mixture (consisting 
of sodium metasilicate 60 percent and trisodium phosphate 40 percent) 
should be sprinkled dry on the floor and scrubbed thoroughly with a floor 
brush; alternatively, a solution of a suitable wetting agent may be used. 
This should be followed by hot water rinse as described in 7.1. 

7.L2 Cement concrete floors, or tiled floors fixed with cement, should not 
be cleaned with solutions of sulphuric acid (even waste Gerber acid). 
Acid removes grease by dissolving the surface layer of concrete to which 
the fat is adhering. The acid treatment effectively cleans the floors, but it 
leaves the surface in a rough and porous condition permitting rapid 
absorption of dirt and fat, which becomes increasingly difficult to remove. 
Continual use of acid for the cleaning of concrete thus destroys the surfacing 
and greatly shortens the wearing life of the floor. 

7.2 Dairy Waits — The cleaning of dairy walls (cement concrete or tile) 
should be done on similar lines as for floors mentioned in 7.1. 

8. COLD STORES 

8.1 Floors^ Walls, and Roof 

8.1.1 Cleaning — Clean the roof and the side walls of the cold store with 
a long-handled brush. Hose down the dirt and the soil on the floor and 
the side walls to the floor drain with ta*^ water. Cleanin*' mixture consist- 
ing of sodium metasilicate ( 60 parts ) and trisodium phosphate ( 40 parts ) 
may be used at 1 *5 percent concentration in tap water for cleaning the floors 
and walls for market milk cold store daily. 

For cleaning the greasy rooms of butter and cheese cold stores 
5 percent soap powder may be compounded in this cleaning mixture and 
used at the same rate. The walls (tiled portion ) and the floors should be 
thoroughly cleaned with brush and squeezed before sanitization. 

8.1.2 Sanitizing — Sanitizing is recommended by swabbing with 0-73 per- 
cent solution of 8-hydroxyquinoline tartrate or quaternary ammonium 
compounds (QAC), such as Acifix, Cetavlon or equivalent compounds 
(1:1 000 parts of water). For disinfection of air in the cold store, a spray 
of QAC ( lOpercent ) or aerosols containing resorcinol and glycerol should 
be used. Ozone generators, and ultra violet lamps (2 537°A) for continuous 
sanitization of cold stores may be used, if available. Both swabbing and 
air disinfection should be done daily. 

8.1.3 Fumigation — If the facilities exist for storing dairy products in 
alternative cxild rooms, then the cold store may be completely emptied by 

23 



18:5253-1969 

transferring the stored products in the other cold rooms. After turning off 
the cold, carbon dioxide in the form of dry ice maybe used for fumigating 
at the rate of 15 percent concentration of 0*5 kg/m* for 24 hours as a rodent 
preventive measure. 

8.1«3.1 Frequency of fumigation — Fumigation may be carried out at 
least thrice in a year at suitable intervals. Fumigation should be followed 
by thorough cleaning and sanitization of cold stores as mentioned in 8.1.1 
before storing the products. 

8.2 Shelves and Racks — Clean them with hot 1'5 percent solution 
comprising of sodium metasilicate ( 60 parts )+ trisodium phosphate (40 
parts) H- soap powder (5 parts) and then wipe them dry. Sanitize them 
with 0-73 percent solution of 8-hydroxyquinoline tartrate or QAG (1:1 000 
parts of water ) . 

Note — The walls, roof and the doors should be painted with antifungal asjents. 
Agents like cunilate, copper-8-quinolinate or similar compounds at the rate of 90g/l 
are quite effective. The worn out rubber gaskets of the doors should be replaced in 
time. 



APPENDIX A 

{Clause 0.2) 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON DETERGENTS 
AND SANITIZERS 

A-l* CLEANING AND STERILIZATION 

A-l*l Gleaning — Cleaning of dairy equipment implies the removal of the 
soil from the surface of the equipment. Soil is primarily milk or milk 
product residues which may be more or less modified by processing treat- 
ment or by interaction with water or with cleaning materials previously 
used, or by dust, dirt or other foreign matter. 

A-l*2 Sterilization — Sterilization or sanitization, which is more generally 
used in modern dairy practice, implies the destruction of all pathogenic 
(disease producing) and almost all non -pathogenic organisms. 

A-L3 Cleaning and sterilization are complementary processes; either of 
them alone will not achieve the desired end result^ which is to leave 
surfaces as free as possible from milk residues and from viable organisms. 

24 



IS 15253- 1969 

A-2. TYPES OF SOILS 

A-2.1 In the dairy industry, the soil ( A-1.1 ) that has to be removed from 
plant and equipment during cleaning operation may be in one, or a 
combination of more than one of the following forms: 

a) Liquid milk films, 

b) Air-dried films, 

c ) Heat-precipitated films, 

d) Heat-hardened films, 

e ) Milk stone, and 

f ) Miscellaneous foreign matter. 

Thus soil may range in composition from normal milk film to residues 
consisting largely of fat and protein matter frequently mixed with hard 
water scale of calcium and magnesium salts. 

A-3. DETERGENTS AND STERILIZERS 

A-3*l Detergents — Detergents or cleaning/ washing compounds are subs- 
tances capable of assisting cleaning; they include soaps, alkaline materials, 
acids, organic surface active wetting agents^ etc. 

A-3.2 Sterilizers or Sanitizers — They consist of substances capable of 
destroying all pathogenic organisms and almost all non-pathogenic organisms 
adhering to the cleaned surface. 

A.4. PROPERTIES OF DETERGENTS AND STERILIZERS 

A-.4.I Detergents — Detergents or cleaning/ washing compounds should 
have the following properties: 

a) Wetting and penetrating power — breaking the bond between the 
soil and the surface to which it adheres; 

b) Emulsifying power — holding unsapohifiable oils and fats in 
solution; 

c) Saponifying power — making soaps out of the fatty acids of oils 

and fats; 

d) Deflocculating power — holding insoluble particles in suspension; 

e) Sequestering and chelating power — making water soft by tying 
up metallic ions in a manner to prevent precipitation; 

f ) Quickly and completely soluble; 

g) Relatively non-corrosive to metal surfaces; 
h) Free rinsing; 

j) Economical; 

25 



18:5253-1969 

k) Stable during storage; 

m) Mild on hands if used for washing hands; and 
n) Possess germicidal action, if possible, 

A-4.1«l It is obvious that no single detergent will possess all the proper- 
ties mentioned in A-4.1, and so at present there is no single * all-purpose * 
detergent. The varying types of soils encountered, the different surfaces to 
be cleaned and the varying water supplies available make it difficult to 
compound such universal materials. It is inevitable, therefore, that most 
dairies should use two or more detergents for their different operations if 
cleaning efficiency combined with safety is to be obtained, 

A-4.2 SteriliaGcrs — Dairy sterilizers/sanitizers should be: 

a) non-toxic, 

b) quick acting, 

c) relatively non-corrosive to hands and equipment, 

d) easily and quickly applied, and 

e) relatively inexpensive. 

A-5. TYPES OF DETERGENTS AND STERILIZERS 

A-5.1 Detergents — The detergents generally used are broadly classified 
into the following four groups: 

a) Alkalis — most commonly used. 

b) Adds — increasingly used. 

c) Polyphosphates, and Chelating Chemicals — added to alkalis/acids, 

d) Surface Active or Wetting Agents — added to alkalis/acids or used 
alone. 

A<*5.1.1 Detergents composed principally of inorganic alkalis at suitable 
/>H are generally based on one or more of the following: 

pH {approx) 

a) Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) 13*1 

b) Sodium carbonate (soda ash) 8*4-11*4 

c) Sodium phosphates 12 

d) Sodium silicates 12 '5 

A-5.1.1.1 The following ingredients among others may be added for 
special purposes: ^ 

a) Sodium bi-carbonate and/or sodium sesquicarbonate, and 

b) Sodium sulphite. 

26 



18:5253-1969 

A-5.1.2 By careful choice from the above materials it is possible to prepare 
mixtures possessing the desired degrees of alkalinity, causticity, buffering 
power, rinsing power and ability to prevent the formation of scale from the 
hardness constituents of water. Thus if a high degree of caustic alkalinity 
is required, sodium hydroxide will form a large proportion of the mixture. 
If good rinsing properties are desired, then sodium metasilicate and the 
phosphates will feature prominently. Sodium metasilicate and silicates in 
general are more effective than other alkalis in reducing the adhesion 
between the soil and the surface. In view of its cheapness, sodium 
carbonate is invariably used. Because of their low alkalinity, sodium 
bicarbonate and/or sodium sesquicarbonate are used in preparing detergents 
which may come in contact with the hands. Sodium sulphite acts as a 
corrosion inhibitor, that is, it helps to protect tinned/aluminium surfaces 
from attack by alkalis. 

A-5.1.3 Mild acids have been found most satisfactory for milkstone 
removal. Those used are phosphoric, tartaric, citric, gluconic and 
hydroxyacetic acids in strengths of approximate O'l percent. Most acid 
cleaners are combined with wetting agonts to provide the greatest possible 
penetration of soils. Strong acids like aitric are also used only with stainless 
steel surfaces in strength not exceeding 0*1 percent. 

A-5.1.4 Polyphosphates and chelating chemicals are used, in conjunction 
with alkalies and acids, for their ability to prevent precipitation of 
hardness salts from the water. This sequestering property becomes more 
important where hard water is used than where water is already soft or 
softened, Tetra-phosphate, hexa-meta-phosphate, tripoly-phosphate and 
pyro-phosphate are all used in commercial dairy cleaners. 

A-5.1.5 Surface active or wetting agents improve the wetting of particles 
and penetration of the solution into minute spaces between and under soil 
particles and equipment surfaces. They also assist in forming st?ble 
dispersions and emulsions. Common soaps, Acinol-N, Idet-10, Teepol, or 
equivalent compounds, belong to this category. 

A-5.1.6 The emulsifying, wetting, foaming, dispersing and overall deter- 
gent properties of a cleaning solution are to a large extent dependent on 
the conditions existing at the interfaces between liquid and air, liquid 
and oil, and liquid and metal or other solid surfaces, for example, milk 
deposits. 

Substances which, when used in quite small concentrations, are capable 
of profoundly influencing the interfacial conditions or surface activity are 
known as surface active agents. Some of these agents may be designed 
essentially as wetting agents, others as emulsifying agents, dispersing agents 
detergents and so on. Some possess all these properties to some degree 
whilst others possess only one or two. It should, however, be appreciated 

27 



18:5253-1969 

that these individual properties are to a large extent interrelated, particulary 
under the very varying conditions of use to which surface active agents are 
put. 

An important additional characteristic of modern surface active agents 
is that, in general, they possess excellent chemical stability. In this respect 
they differ fundamentally from soap, which may be regarded as the oldest 
surface active agent. They are effective, for instance, under acid as well 
as alkaline conditions and, perhaps of still greater importance, they may be 
used satisfactorily in hard and saline waters. Because of this, they may be 
added to solutions of alkahs or acids, thereby increasing their effectiveness, 
or they may be used alone where conditions do not permit or require the 
use of acids or alkalis. 

The many surface active agents now available and in use generally 
fall into one of the following chemical types: 

i) Sodium alkyl aryl sul- RCgH^SOaNa 

phonPtfs 

ii) Sodium primary alkyl ROSOgNa 

sulphates 

iii) Sodium secondary alkyl RiRaCHOSOgNa 

sulphates 

iv) Sulphated mono-glycer- RCOOCH2CH( OH )CH2S030lSra 

ides, sodium salts 

v) Sodium amide sulpho- R CONHCaH^OGHaSOaNa 

nates 

vi) Polyethenoxy com- R O CgH^ (OCgH^)!! OH 

pounds 

vii) Quaternary ammoni- (R1R2R3R4) N. halogen 

um compounds 

Note — R, R^, etc, in the above formulae represent organic radicals. Types (i) to 
(v) are known as anionic agents because in aqueous solution they dissociate to give, for 
example, the sodium cation ( Na )+ and a surface active anion ( R O SO3 )". 

Type (vi) agents are known as non-ionic agents because in aqueous solution ioni- 
zation is negligible and the whole molecule is hydrated. 

Type (vii) agents are known as cation ic agents because in aqueous solution they 
dissociate tp give a halogen anion. 

While cationic agents have useful detergent properties, they are at present primarily 
used for their bactericidal properties. 

A-5.2 Sterilizers /Sstnitizers 

A-5.2.1 The sterilizers/sanitizers commonly used are: 

a) steam, 

b) hot water, and 

c) chemicals. 

28 



IS; 5253 -1969 

A-5.2.2 With steam or hot water sanitizing all surfaces should be heated 
to at least Tl^'C for not less than 16 seconds. With steam, every part of 
the surface should be bathed in live steam. With hot water, the initial 
temperature should be such that at the time of/ leaving the equipment its 
temperature should be Tl'^G or above and this 71°C water should be in 
contact with all parts of the equipment for at least 5 minutes. 

A-5.2,3 The chemical sanitizers used in the fluid milk plants may be 
chlorine compounds, iodine compounds or quaternary ammonium com- 
pounds. These are applied in solution from over the equipment surfaces. 
A thin continuous film over the clean surfaces is all that is needed to 
produce satisfactory results. Temperature is not a critical factor, for chemi- 
cal solutions are effective over a wide range of temperatures. Chlorine 
compounds have a high sanitizing efficiency at low cost when used in 
proper concentration and at a suitable />H. Generally speaking, chlorine is 
used in concentrations of from 50 to 300 ppm available chlorine. Among 
the chlorine compounds used in the dairy plant are the following: calcium 
hypochlorite (bleaching powder), sodium hypochlorite, etc. 

A.6. ftUALITY OF WATER 

A-6.1 Since water is the solvent used for carrying the detergents and effici- 
ency of cleaning depends on the quality of water, it is desirable that the 
water used should preferably have no hardness or when it is not softened 
earlier it should be treated with chemicals to offset the effects of natural 
hardness. Water used in dairy plants should correspond to 0** hardness. 
Under village conditions, it is not possible to prescribe any limit for 
hardness of water but it is advisable to check the hardness periodically. 

A-6.2 Hardness of water may be checked in accordance with 16 of 

15:3025-1964*. 

A-7. PRINCIPLES OF THE CLEANING AND STERILIZING 
PROCESSES 

A-7.1 Essentially all cleaning processes, such as those involved in dairy 
Work, comprise the following stages; 

a) Wetting of the soiled surface; usually it is not possible to do this 
effectively by water alone, 

b) Removal of the soil from the surface by solution, emulsification 
saponification and/or mechanical action, 

c) Dispersion of the undissolved soiling matter. 



♦Methods of sampling and lest [ physical and chemical ) for water used in industry. 

29 



IS: 5253 -1969 

d) Removal of the used detergent solution together with the soil. 

e) Removal of the last traces of detergent solution by adequate 
rinsing. 

A-7,2 The well-cleaned surface is then sterilized/sanitized with steam, hot 
water or chemicals. For successful use of sanitizer, the surface to be 
sanitized should be absolutely free from organic matter (fat, milk film, 
milkstone and other such materials). Sanitizers, to be most effective, 
should be used just prior to use of the equipment so that surviving organisms 
will not have time to multiply. 

A-7.3 The method of cleaning broadly consists of soaking, brushing, spray- 
ing and re-circulation or by both. Among the cleaning aids and tools are 
included light weight hose, shut-off valves (attached to end of the hose), 
different types of brushes (nylon fibre being preferred now-a-days), etc. 

A-7.4 The methoci of chemical sanitization broadly consists of flushing, 
spraying and brushing, fogging and submersion. 

A-8. STORAGE, MEASUREMENT AND INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 

A-8.1 Storage — Detergents/ sanitizers should be stored in covered con- 
tainers in a dry place. 

A-8.2 Measurement — Detergents/ sanitizers should be carefully measured 
or weighed when solutions are being made up. Careless measuring of 
detergents may lead to unnecessary waste, ineffective cleaning or damage 
to plant. 

A-8.3 Instructions on Use — Detailed instructions should be given to the 
plant operators on the use of detergents/sanitizers, and a regular check 
should be made to see whether these instructions are being followed. 

A-9. NATURE OF SURFACE 

A-9.1 Milk contact surfaces in the dairy plant should be polished or smooth. 
Rough surfaces are difficult to clean and deposits may adhere tenaciously 
and harbour bacteria. It is for this reason that the use of even finely 
divided soft abrasives on smooth surfaces should be restricted to an absolute 
minimum. 

A-9.2 Materials used in dairy equipment include stainless steel, mild steel, 
tinned steel and tinned copper, nickel alloys, aluminium, glass, vitreuos 
enamal, plastics and rubber. The precautions necessary to take with these 
materials are given in Table 5. Organic surface active agents as normally 
used will not affect these materials. 

30 



IS: 5253 -1969 



TABLE 5 PRECAUTIONS WHILE USING IN USE OF DETERGENTS 

AND STERIUZERS/SANITIZERS FOR DIFFERENT MATERIALS 

USED IN DAIRY EQUIPMENT 



Matekial 

(1) 

Stainless steel 
Mild steel 



Tinned steel and tin- 
ned copper 



Bronze or gunmetal 

Galvanized metal 
Nickel alloys 

Aluminium 

Glass 

Vitreous enamel 

Plastics 



( Clause A-9.2 ) 

Cleaning 
(2) 



All alkalis may be used, 
taken with acid. 



Care should be 



All alkalis may be used. When it is 
necessary to use acid solutions for descal- 
ing purposes, they should be effectively 
inhibited against corrosive action. 

Some alkalis are liable to corrode tin 
coatings. The effect may be mitigated 
by the use of alkaline detergents of low 
alkalinity, based on silicates, phosphates 
and carbonates with sodium sulphite. It 
is desirable that the detergent solution 
should contain at least 0*25 j>ercent of 
sodium sulphite. 

Some alkalis may attack these metals. 
Detergents based on silicates, phosphates 
and carbonates are more suitable. 

Some alkalis will attack zinc. 
All alkalis may be used. 

Some alkalis will attack aluminium. 
Detergents of low alkalinity incorporat- 
ing sodium silicate or other inhibitor are 
essential. 

Alkalis may be used. Strength of deter- 
gent depends on method of operation. 

Strong caustic alkalis attack vitreous 
enamel. Detergents of low alkalinity 
and high silicate content are suitable. 

Care should be taken to ensure that clean- 
ing temperatures are not above the 
softening point of the material. Advice 
of the plastics manufacturer should be 
sought. 



Sanitization 

(3) 

All sanitizers may 
be used. 

— do— 



—do— 

— do — 
— do — 

— do — 
—do- 



Only chemical sani* 
tizers should be 
used. 



( Continued ) 



31 



18:5253.1969 



TABLE 5 PRECAUTIONS WHILE USING IN USE OF DETERGENTS 

AND STERIUZERS/SANITIZERS FOR DIFFERENT MATERIALS 

USED IN DAIRY EQUIPMENT — Conf^/ 



MateutAl 

(1) 

Rubber ( natural and 
synthetic ) 



Cleaning 

(2) 

When rubber has been in contact with 
fatty materials, strong alkalis should be 
used to remove this fat. 



Sanitization 

(3) 

Only cheniical sani- 
tizers should be 
used. 



Note 1 — In the case of metal or other surface coatings, the advice of the equipment 
or detergents/sanitizer manufacturer should be sought. 

Note 2 — Chlorine sanitizers have a tendency to cause corrosion when left in 
contact with all dairy metals. This tendency towards corrosion may be overcome by 
using the chlorine sanitizing solution just before processing so that the chlorine will be 
in contact with the metals for a minimum period of time before being neutralized by 
the product. Chlorine solutions function most efficiently at a/>H of 8 to 9. Ranges 
above this pH value result in slower germicidal action and lower corrosion rates. 
Values below />H 8 provide very rapid germicidal action, but corrosion rates are 
excessive. 



32 



w 




INDrAN STAMDARDSIMSTITUTIQN 



Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadjr ShshZatsr Marg, NEW DaHl 110002 
TeJ«phan>6s ■ 3 SI 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Telegrams : Manaks^nslhi 

( CoiTimiQn to all Off koi ) 
ftaofonH OffiC0!i : T^hphof^ 

*W«&ifim : Msnakalaya, E3 MLDC, Marol Ar>dhsri ( E*$1 ]. 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 
tEsstefn : 1/14 C. I. T. SthemB Vll M. V, \. P. Hoad, 3G 24 3^ 

ManiklDlB, CALCUTTA 700054 
l4mlh$Tn : SCO 445-44&. SBclor 35-c: 

CHANDIGARH 160036 
Sourhftfn : C I- T. Campus, MADRAS 6001 13 



{ 



2 IB 43 

3 1€41 

41 24 42 
41 2R 19 
41 2916 



Pushoflk.' f^urmohnmed Shiiikh Mnrg, Khanpur, 
AHMAOABAD 380001 

'F' Black. Un^ry BttiQ. ^^AfB<iifnharaja Squarfl^ 

BANGALORE 560002 
G9in(]DtTi CcimfilnK, 6th F^Aor, SherlbhAii;^ Hoad, T- T- Nag'sr, 

B HO PAL 462003 
f'lQl Ho. |j2/g3. Law IS Ro^icl, EiNUBANESHWAn 7B10QZ 
63/5 Ward t*o. 29, R G. Barua Rci^jjd. 

5th Bveiane, GUWAHATI 7fll003 

6-8-56C L Ni, GLOia Marg., {NAmpalriv Stniion Road). 

HYDERABAO SOOOOl 
ni 4 Yudhtsler M^rg, C Schflm*, JAIPUR 302005 



{ 



2 B3 48 
2 63 43 

22 48 06 



i27 16 



6 36 27 



27 10 83 



{ 
{^1 



1 17-41 BB Sarwodava Neeaf, KANPUR 20&005 

Patlipulra Industrial E si ale. PA IN A &00013 
Ha men ntrfft { Jncl ftoor ), Rly Stall on Road, 
TRIVANOHUM 635001 

ifj^pettiQfi Office {With Sflla Point ): 

InsiiTution of En^inears ( India ) Building. 1 332 Shiirajj N^gar, e 24 35 
PLIM€ 410005 



6 34 71 
6 86 32 

68 76 
82 92 

6 23 06 

62 27 



<Sll>l CNl^l in BombiV ^i it HDVttl^ Ch4fflt!«r|, Gunl Koati. S3 W 20 

ts« •■ oirtcia 4rt Calcurif k» ft B ChB'^'Jnghtt Apprdich, p. 0. Piincvp 27 ^a dO 




fliPiodiK«il tryRiP'onripitf Unil. I SI N*w OtHhr 



•■■'- 



Lii-i: 



