**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 5299 : 2001 

( ww^m') 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TESTS FOR 
DYE INTERMEDIATES 

(First Revision) 



ICS71.080.80 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



DecemherlOOl 



Price Group 9 



Dyes Intermediate Sectional Committee, PCD 1 1 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Dyes Intermediate Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products 
Division Council. 

This standard was issued in 1969 when it was prepared taking into consideration the views of the manufacturers, 
consumers, testing laboratories as well as the technologists in the field. The methods of test incorporated were 
mainly those which were routinely used in industrial laboratory for assessing quality of dye intermediates. 

The Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard decided to revise it in the light of the experience 
gained during the long span of period. In the present version, instrumental methods of testing have been 
incorporated to keep pace with the present trends in the industry. 

The details of test methods for determination of purity/assay of various dye intermediates and estimation of 
impurities present by GC, HPLC, TLC and Paper chromatography methods have been incorporated. For 
determination of ash, primary amines, coupling value and purity of nitro and azo compounds, modified test 
methods have been incorporated in this version. Reference has been given to the existing latest standards for 
determination of melting point and distillation range/yield. Determination of crystallizing or freezing point has 
been aligned with ISO 1392 : 1977 'Determination of crystallizing point — General method, on the subject'. 

A complied ISO standard on methods of sampling and tests for dye intermediates do not exist at present. 

The Compostion of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)'. 



IS 5299 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TESTS FOR 
DYE INTERMEDIATES 

(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the methods of sampling and 
tests for dye intermediates. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreement based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards given below: 

IS No. Title 

264 : 1976 Nitric acid (second revision) 
265 : 1993 Hydrochloric acid (fourth revision) 
266 : 1993 Sulphuric acid (third revision) 
695 : 1986 Acetic acid (third revision) 
1574 : 1980 Glass weighing bottles (first revision) 
2362 : 1993 Determination of water by Karl Fischer 

method (first revision) 
4730 : 1994 Method for determination of density of 

liquids (first revision) 
4905 : 1%8 Methods for random sampling 
5298 : 1983 Method for determination of distillation 

range and of distillation yield (first 

revision) 
5762 : 1970 Methods for determination of melting 

range/temperature 
8883 (Part 1) : Methods of sampling of chemicals and 
1978 chemical products: Part 1 General 

requirements and precautions 
8883 (Part 2/ Methods of sampling of chemicals and 
Seel): 1978 chemical products: Part 2 Sampling 

equipment. Section 2 For solids 
8883 (Part 2/ Methods of sampling of chemicals and 
Sec 2): 1978 chemical products: Part 2 Sampling 

equipment. Section 2 For liquids 
8883 (Part 2/ Methods of sampling of chemicals and 
Sec 3) : 1978 chemical products: Part 2 Sampling 

equipment. Section 3 For gases 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 



3.1 Approved Sample 

The sample accepted by the indentor or inspection 
authority as the basis for supply. When a sample is 
tested and approved by the purchaser or inspection 
authority, the result of such tests as permits the supplier 
to meet the limits imposed by specification for deliveries 
shall be made available to the supplier. 

32 Composite Sample 

The quantity of material obtained by mixing portions 
of material taken from each of the sample units shall be 
termed as a composite sample representing the lot as a 
whole and meant for testing to ascertain the conformity 
of the lot to the specified requirements. 

33 Increment 

The quantity of material taken by a single operation of 
the sampling implement. 

3.4 Individual Sample 

The material collected from a single sample unit and set 
apart as representing that unit for the purpose of testing 
to ascertain the conformity of unit to specified 
requirements. 

3 J Lot 

All the units of the same size and type in a single 
consignment of the material and belonging to the same 
batch of manufacture shall constitute a lot. If 
consignment is known to consist of different batches 
of manufacture or of different sizes or types of unit, the 
units belonging to the same batch and of the same size 
and type shall be grouped together and each such 
group shall constitute a separate lot. 

3.6 Sample Unit 

Any unit withdrawn from a lot for the purpose of testing 
the quality of the lot. 

3.7 Tender Sample 

The sample submitted by the supplier with his tender. 

3.8 Unit 

Any form of packing of the material, such as a can, a 
carboy, a cask, a barrel, a drum, a bag, a crate, a tank or 
a tanker. 



1 



IS 5299 : 2001 



3.9 Initial Boiling Point 

The temperature at the instant the first drop falls from 
the end of the condenser. 

3.10 Dry Point 

The temperature at the instant the last drop of liquid 
evaporates from the lowest point in the distillation flask, 
any liquid on the side of the flask being disregarded. 

4 SAMPLING 

4.1 General Requirements of Sampling 

In drawing, preparing, storing and handling test 
samples the precautions and directions as given in 
IS 8883 (Parti) shall be observed. 

4.2 Scale of Sampling 

4.2.1 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
to the requirements of relevant material specifications, 
each lot as defined in 3.5 shall be examined separately. 

4.2.2 For this purpose, from all the units comprising 
the lot, the number of sample unit shall be chosen in 
accordance with Table 1 and 4,23. 

Table 1 Sampling of Dye Intermediates 



Total Number of Units 
in the Lot 

N 
(1) 


Number of Sample Units 
to be Selected 

n 
(2) 


2 to 15 




2 


16" 25 




3 


26 " 50 




4 


51 '• 100 




5 


101 ■• 150 




6 


151 " 300 




7 


301 and above 




8 



4.2.3 The sample units shall be selected at random 
from the lot and to ensure the randomness of selection, 
random number tables {see IS 4905) shall be used. In 
case such tables are not available, the following 
procedure may be adopted. 

Starting from any unit, count them in one order as 1, 2, 
3,... up to r and so on, where r is the integral part of 
N/n {N being the total number of units in the lot and n 
being the number of sample units to be selected). Every 
r th unit thus counted shall be withdrawn to constitute 
a sample. 

43 Preparation of TestSamples and Referee Sample 

The preparation of test samples and referee sample 
may be done in line with IS 8883 (Part 2/ Seel); IS 8883 
(Part 2/Sec 2); and IS 8883( Part 2/Sec 3) depending 
upon the form of the material. 



4.4 Sample Containers 

4.4.1 The sample containers used for storing an 
individual sample or a composite sample shall have a 
suitable cap, stopper or lid. 

4.4.2 The sample container shall be made of a materia! 
(glass metal or any other) which is suitable for 
preserving the properties of the material without itself 
affecting them in any manner. The size of the sample 
container shall be such that it shall be almost but not 
completely filled by the individual sample or composite 
sample as the case may be. 

4.4.3 Labelling of Sample Containers 

Each sample container shall carry a label with particulars 
necessary for clear identification of the source of the 
sample, such as consignment number, the lot number, 
the name of the product, the batch number, and the 
like. In addition it will carry the date of sampling and 
the signatures of the supplier and the purchaser or 
their representatives in whose presence the samples 
had been taken. 

5 DETERMINATION OF DENSITY 

5.1 General 

Density shall be determined with a density bottle or 
pyknometer as per procedure given in IS 4730. The 
temperature at which the relative density is determined 
shall be 27/27°C or at specified temperature as 
mentioned in the relevant specification. 

6 DETERMINATION OF BULK DENSITY 
6.1 Apparatus 

6.1.1 The apparatus is shown in Fig . 1. The base of 
the measuring cylinder A shall be ground flat and the 
empty measuring cylinder A together with the rubber 
bung shall weigh 250 ± 5 g. It shall be accurately 
calibrated to 250 ml with an error of less than 1 ml. The 
distance between zero and 250 ml graduation on the 
measuring cylinder shall be not less than 220 mm and 
not more than 240 mm. The distance between the flat 
ground part of the base of the measuring cylinder Aand 
the rubber base pad B, when the measuring cylinder A 
is raised to the full height, shall be 25 ± 2 mm. 

6.1.2 Balance or Scales 

Of a type providing easy access to the pans being at 
least 10 cm in diameter. It is necessary that the pointer 
should show a significant deflection for a change in 
load of 0.25 g. 

6.1.3 The rubber base pad B shall have a Shore 
hardness of 35 to 50. 

6.1.4 A timing device to indicate seconds. 



IS 5299 : 2001 



130 




All dimensions in miirimetres. 
Fig. 1 Apparatus for the Determination of Bulk Density 



6.2 Procedure 



Weigh M g (see Note) of the material, which has been 
freshly pulverised, sieved and collected in the 
containers (or drums) of the pulverising or the sieving 
machine. The weighing should be done on a piece of 
black glazed paper (25cm x 25 cm), with two parallel 
creases to form a channel 12.5 mm down the middle of 
the paper. Counterpoise the paper on the balance before 
weighing the material. Pick up the paper and form it 
into a chute. Allow it to lie between the thumb and 
fingers on the palm of the hand and introduce it into 
the cylinder held at 45° to the vertical. Slip the powder 
gently and smoothly into the measuring cylinder 
without knocking or squeezing. Assemble the 
measuring cylinder as shown in Fig. 1. With the thumb 
and forefinger of one hand, gently grasp the upper part 
of the cylinder and within one second, lift it as far as 
25 mm, do not jerk the cylinder by knocking it against 
the upper stop. At the start of the next second, release 
the cylinder smoothly. Continue lifting and dropping 
until 50 complete drops have been given. Once in every 



two seconds, a gentle twist of about 10 degrees should 
be given to the cylinder. When 50 drops are completed, 
raise the cylinder to the eye level and read the volume 
of the material (V). 

NOTE — The mass M may vary from substance to substance. 
It will be less for a very light (fluffy) material and more for 
a very heavy material. An arbitrary figure may be chosen 
by taking a preliminary rough reading of volume falling 
from 250 to 150 ml. 

63 Calculation 

M 
Bulk density, g/ml = — 

where 
M = mass in g of the material taken for test, and 
V = volume in millilitres of the material after tapping. 

7 DETERMINATION OF DISTILLATION 
(BOILING) RANGE/ YIELD 

Determine the distillation range/yield by the method as 
prescribed in IS 5298. 



IS 5299 : 2001 



8 DETERMINATION OF CRYSTALLIZING 
OR FREEZING POINT 

8.1 Scope 

Method for the determination of crystallizing points in 
the range from about -50 to about + 250 C. 

The crystallizing point can be determined directly on 
the sample as received, or on the dried sample, or on 
both. In which of these conditions the sample is to be 
tested and, if the determination is to be made with the 
dried sample, what method of drying is to be used, will 
be stated in the specific test method for each material. 

8.2 Principle 

Cooling the liquid or liquefied sample, and 
determination of the crystallizing point by observadon 
of the temperature during crystallization under defined 
conditions. 

8.3 Reagents 

8.3.1 Acetone 

8.3.2 Solid Carbon Dioxide 

8.3.3 Ice 

8.3.4 Calcium Sulphate 

Dried at about nO°C. Dry calcium sulphate dihydrate 
(CaS0^.2H20) for 24 h at about 170°C, allow to cool in a 
desiccator and then store it in an air-tight container. 

8.4 Apparatus 

Ordinary laboratory apparatus and the apparatus 
shown in Fig. 2, 3, 4 and 5 comprising the following 
items. 



-THERMOMETER 



26 OD 

-CRYSTALLIZING 

TUBE 

Z8 ID OUTER 
PROTECTION 
TUBE 



8.4.1 Crystallizing Tube 

External diameter approximately 25 mm and length 
approximately 150 mm. 

8.4.2 Outer Protection Tube 

Internal diameter approximately 28 mm, length 
approximately 120 mm and wall thickness approximately 
2 mm. 

8.4.3 Stirrer 

Of glass or stainless steel, with a loop approximately 
20 mm in diameter; it may be operated by hand or 
mechanically, to provide approximately one 30-mm 
stroke per second. 

8.4.4 Precision Thermometer 

Graduated at intervals of 0. 1 C with a known maximum 
scale error of 0.1 C, and with the range stated in the 
specific test method for the particular material. 

8.4.5 Dewar Vessel 

Of approximately 500 ml capacity, containing the 
appropriate cooling mixture (carbon dioxide/acetone 
or ice water or water) and provided with a suitable 
laboratory thermometer. An example of such a Dewar 
vessel is given in Fig. 3, but other vessels of the same 
capacity may also be used. 




BATH 
THERMOMETER 




Al! dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 3 Dewar Vessel 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Apparatus for Determination of 

Crystallizing Point 



8.4.6 Dewar Vessel 

As shown in Fig. 4 (It is not necessary for the inner 
surfaces of the vessel to be silvered). 

8.4.7 Heating Bath 

As shown in Fig. 5, containing silicon oil or other 
suitable liquid heating medium, and provided with a 
suitable laboratory thermometer. 



IS 5299 : 2001 



8.5 Procedure 

8.5.1 Preparation of the sample for the direct 
determination of the crystallizing point on the sample 

as received. 



055 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 4 Dewar Vessel 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 5 Heating Bath 

8.5.1.1 Liquid products 

Fill the crystallizing tube (8.4.1) to a depth of 
approximately 60 mm with the untreated sample and 
proceed as specified in 8.5.3. 

8.5.1.2 Solid products 

Before the determination of the crystallizing point of 
these products, they shall be melted in a water bath, 
drying oven or oil bath [this can be carried out in the 



crystallizing tube (8.4.1), using the heating bath (8.4.7)], 
care being taken to ensure that the temperature of the 
molten product does not exceed its melting point by 
more than a few degrees. Fill the crystallizing tube to a 
depth of approximately 60 mm with the molten sample 
and proceed as specified in 8.5.3. 

8.5.2 Preparation of the sample for the determination 
of the crystallizing point on the dried sample. 

8.5.2.1 Liquid products 

Liquid products of normal water content [that is, less 
than or equal to 2 percent (w/w)] shall be dried in the 
crystallizing tube (8.4.1) by addition of calcium 
sulphate. Fill the crystallized tube to a depth of 
approximately 60 mm with the liquid sample, add the 
calcium sulphate (8.3.4) (2 to 5 g are usually required) 
and proceed as specified in 8.5.3. 

In some cases, other methods of drying may be 
required; these will be specified in the specific test 
method for the particular material. 

8.5.2.2 Solid products 

The drying method for solid products depends on the 
water content of the sample and on the value of the 
crystallizing point. 

a) Products with a lower water content [that is, 
less than or equal to 2 percent (m/m)]. 
Solid products w'*h melting points below 
approximately 1 50 C shall be dried with calcium 
sulphate. Fill the crystallizing tube (8.4.1) to a 
depth of approximately 60 mm with the molten 
sample, add the calcium sulphate (8.3.4) (2 to 5 g 
are usually required) and proceed as specified in 
8.5.3. 

Solid products with melting points above 
approximately 150 C shall be dried in an oven at 
60 C, or under vacuum, or by air drying, and the 
determination of the crystallizing point then 
carried out on the molten sample. Fill the 
crystallizing tube (8.4.1) to a depth of 
approximately 60 mm with the molten sample and 
proceed as specified in 8.5.3. 
For these higher melting point samples, the 
method and time of drying will be indicated in 
the specific test method for the particular material; 
in some cases, alternative drying methods may 
be given for a material, whatever its melting point. 

b) Products with higher water content 
Samples with ahigher water content (for example, 
pastes) shall in every case be dried before 
determination of the crystallizing point, for 
example, in an oven at 60 C or under vacuum, 
etc. The determination is then carried out on the 



IS 5299 : 2001 



molten sample. Fill the crystallizing tube (8.4.1) 
to a depth of approximately 60 mm with the molten 
sample and proceed as specified in 8.5.3. 

In addition, with products melting below 
approximately 150 C add some calcium sulphate 
(8.3.4) (normally 2 to 5g), in the crystallizing tube 
before commencing the determination. 
The method of drying, the time of drying or 
alternative drying methods will be indicated in 
the specific test method for the particular material. 

NOTE — Before the determination of the crystallizing 
point, solid samples shall be melted in a water-bath, drying 
oven or oil bath [this can be carried out in the crystallizing 
tube using the heating bath (8.4.1)], care being taken to 
ensure that the temperature of the molten sample does not 
exceed its melting point by more than a few degrees. 

8.5.3 Preparation of the Apparatus 

Insert the stirrer (8.43) into the crystallizing tube (8.4.1) 
prepared as specified in 8.5.1 and 8.5.2. Secure the 
specified thermometer (8.4.4) vertically in the liquid or 
molten product with its bulb approximately 15 mm above 
the bottom of the crystallizing tube. Fit the outer tube 
(8.4.2) to this assembly (if necessary by means of a 
cork shive or a rubber sleeve), and place the whole in 
position as follows: 

a) for crystallizing points in the range from room 
temperature down to approximately - 50 C: in the 
Dewar vessel (8.4.5) filled with the appropriate 
cooling mixture (carbon dioxide acetone or ice 
water or water) at a temperature 3 to 5 C below 
the crystallizing point to be determined; 

b) for crystallizing points in the range from room 
temperature up to approximately 100 C : in the 
Dewar vessel (8.4.6); and 

c) for crystallizing points in the range from 
approximately 100 to 250 C : in the heating bath 
(8.4.7) at a temperature 5 to 7 C below the 
crystallizing point to be determined. 

8.5.4 Determination 

Check that the sample is still liquid at this stage; stir 
the sample and take temperature readings. These 
should decrease uniformly at first, then rise suddenly 
as the substance crystallizes; sometimes the 
temperature remains constant for a short time. If the 
temperature rise exceeds 1 to 2 C, this indicates that 
excessive supercooling has occurred. In this case, the 
determination should be repeated, seeding the liquid 
or the melt to prevent excessive supercooling. Read 
the highest temperature attained after crystallization 
and adjust the reading for scale error and emergent 
stem correction. Record this temperature to the nearest 
0.1 C as the crystallizing point of the product under 
test. 



NOTES 

1 The stirrer may be omitted and the stirring carried out by 
hand using the thermometer but care should be taken that 
the thermometer does not touch the walls of the crystallizing 
tube. 

2 For the correct determination of the crystallizing point 
of a solid sample, it is necessary that the product should 
melt during the test without any decomposition. That this 
condition is fulfilled may be checked by repeating the test 
and comparing the two results. If the two crystallizing 
temperatures are the same, this indicates that the above 
condition has been met. 

8.6 Results 

Record the crystallizing point thus determined to the 
nearest 0.1°C, indicating the condition of the sample, 
that is, whether tested in the dried or the undried 
condition, or in both. 

9 DETERMINATION OF MELTING POINT 

Determine the melting point by method as prescribed 
in IS 5762. 

10 DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 

10.0 General 

Three methods are given, the choice of the method 
depends upon the material of which the moisture 
content is to be estimated. 

10.1 Dean and Stark Method 

10.1.1 Apparatus 

The apparatus consists of a glass flask heated by 
suitable means and provided with a reflux condenser 
discharging into a trap and connected to the flask. The 
connections between the trap, the condenser and the 
flask should be interchangeable ground-glass joints. 
The trap serves to collect and measure the condensed 
water, and to return the solvent to the flask. The 
assembly of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 6 and the 
various components are described belo^w: 

a) Flask— A 500 to 1 000-ml capacity flask of the 
shape shown in Fig. 6, made of hard resistance 
glass well-annealed and as free as possible from 
striae and similar defects. 

b) Condenser — A glass water-cooled reflux type 
condenser, of the design and dimensions shown 
in Fig. 7. The only mandatory dimensions for the 
condenser are the external diameters of the inner 
tube and of the jacket, which shall be 16 to 17 mm 
and 23 to 25 mm respectively. The joints A and B 
should be neatly finished as shown in Fig. 7 
particularly the bore atB shall have the minimum 
disturbance. The shoulder above the cone of 
joint D shall be elongated as shown in the figure 
to avoid a sharp re-entrant shape which may 
restrict the free flow of liquid down the inner 
wall. The cone shall be extended beyond the 



IS 5299 : 2001 



length appropriate to the joint D and the lower 
end ground at an angle of approximately 60° to 
the axis. The drainage tip shall be at the front of 
the condenser when the lower water connection 
IS to the left, and the finish shall be either smooth 
or fire-polished. When inserted into the trap, the 
tip of the condenser shall be 6 to 7 mm above the 
surface of the liquid in the trap after distillation 
conditions have been established. The nominal 
dimensions of the joint D are given below. 



Nominal Dia of 
Lfirge End of 
Grauiul Zone 

mm 
18.8 



Nominal Dia of Nominal Length 

Small End of Ground Zone 

Ground Zone Measured Axially 

mm mm 

J 6.2 26 



CONDENSER 




DIST ILATI ON 
FLASK 



Fig. 6 Typical Assembly of Dean and Stark 
Apparatus 

c) Receivers — Also called the trap, made of hard 
resistance glass, weil-annealed and as free as 
possible from striae and similar defects, provided 
with ground-glass joints, with the shape, 
dimensions and tolerances given in Fig. 8 and 
consisting essentially of the upper chamber, 
together with the tube and ground joint leading 
to the flask, and the graduated tube. 
The receiver shall be of two sizes, namely, 2-ml 
capacity and 10-ml capacity {see Fig. 8 and 9 ). 
The mandatory dimensions and tolerances for 
the receiver shall be as given in Table 2. 




23 TO 25 OD 
WALL 1 TO 1.5 THICK 




16 TO 17 OD 

WALL 0.7 TO 1 THICK 




( 



kl 



) 



AH dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 7 Condenser 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 8 2-ml Receiver 



IS 5299 : 2001 



The shoulder of the upper chamber of the 
receiver immediately below the conical joint shall 
be finished square, as shown in Fig. 8 and 9. 
The graduated portion of the receiver shall be 
cylindrical throughout its length. The bottom of 
the graduated tube of the 2-ml receiver shall be 
sealed, the end of the tube being approximately 
hemispherical in shape. The graduated scales 
on the receivers shall be numbered and 
subdivided as shown in Fig. 8 and 9. The 
graduation marks shall be fine cleanly etched 
permanent lines of uniform thickness lying in the 
planes at right angles to the axis of the tube. The 
graduation marks shall be confined to the 
cylindrical portion of the tube and there shall be 
no evident irregularity in their spacing. In these 
receivers the numbered graduation marks shall 
be carried completely round the tube, the shortest 
graduation marks shall be carried halfway round 
the tube, and the graduation marks of 
intermediates length shall be carried 
approximately two-thirds of the way round the 
tube and shall project equally at each end beyond 
the shortest graduation marks. 




All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 9 10-ml Receiver 

The capacity corresponding to any graduation 
mark is defined as the volume of water at 27 C, 
expressed in millilitres, required to fill the 
graduated portion to that mark at 27 C, the axis 
of the graduated portion being vertical and the 
lowest point of the water meniscus being set on 



the graduation mark. In the case of 1 0-ml receiver, 
the volume of the bore of the stop-cock key and 
the volume of the jet below the stop- cock shall 
not be included as part of the measured volume. 
The error at any point on the receiver scale, and 
also the difference between the errors at any two 
points on the scale, shall not exceed the figures 
given for the receiver in Table 2. 
For the 10-ml receiver, the stop-cock shall be of 
the 2 mm oblique bore having the general design 
shown in Fig. 8 and 9. The rate of leakage, tested 
with the stop-cock free from grease, the barrel 
and key wetted with water, the receiver filled 
initially with water to the top of the scale, and the 
key in either of the fully shut-off position, shall 
not exceed the figures given in Table 2. 

Each receiver shall have permanently and legibly 
marked on it. 

1) the abbreviation, ml; 

2) the inscription '27''c' to indicate that the 
receiver is graduated for content at 27 C; and 

3) an identification number shall also appear on 
the key. 

d) Heat source — The source of heat may be either 
an oil-bath or an electric heater provided with a 
sliding rheostat or other means of heat control. 
The temperature of the oil in the bath should not 
be very much higher than the boiling point of 
xylene or toluene, whichever solvent is used. 

e) Copper wire — Long enough to extend through 
the condenser, with one end twisted into a spiral. 
The diameter of the spiral should be such that it 
fits snugly within the graduated portion of the 
receiver and yet may be moved up and down. 

Table 2 Dimensions and Tolerances For Receiver 

[aaM5el0.1.1(c}] 



SI Characteristic 


Receiver 


Nn 


mt\ 






2 ml 


10 ml 


(1) (2) 


(3) 


(4) 


i) Volume, equivalent to 
smallest subdivision, ml 


0.05 


0.1 


ii) Scale length, mm 


95 ± 10 


no + 10 


iii) Length of cylindrical tube above 
upper graduation mark, mm 


10 to 15 


10 to 30 


iv) Tolerance on capacity, ml 


+ 0.02 


+ 0.06 


v) Maximum permissible leakage 
rate of stop-cock, mt/min 


— 


0.004 



10.1.2 Reagent 

10.1. 2 J Xylene or toluene 

Saturate the xylene or toluene by shaking with a small 
quantity of water, and distil. Use the distillate for the 
determination of moisture. 



IS 5299 : 2001 



lO.U Procedure 

Clean the entire apparatus with chromic acid cleaning 
solution to minimize the adherence of water droplets to 
the sides of the condenser and the receiver. Rinse 
thoroughly with water and dry completely before using. 
The quantity of material taken for the test is determined 
by the amount of moisture present (m/m), as indicated 
below: 



Moisture Range 

Less than 1 percent 
1 to 5 percent 
Moisture in excess of 
5 percent 



Quantity of Material 

(Approximately) 
200 g 
lOOg 

Proportionally smaller 
quantity 



Place the specified quantity of material, accurately 
weighed, in the distillation flask, add an equal volume 
of xylene or toluene, as desired or at least 100 ml if less 
than 100 g of the material is used, and swirl well to mix. 
Assemble the apparatus and fill the receiver with the 
solvent by pouring it through the condenser until it 
begins to overflow into the distillation flask. Insert a 
loose cotton plug at the top of the condenser to prevent 
condensation of atmospheric moisture within the tube. 
In order that the refluxing may be under control, wrap 
the flask and the tube leading to the receiver with 
asbestos cloth. Heat the flask so that the distillation 
rate is about 100 drops per minute. When the greater 
part of the water has distilled over, increase the 
distillation rate to about 200 drops per minute and 
continue until no more water is collected. Purge the 
reflux condenser occasionally during the distillation 
with 5 ml portions of xylene or toluene to wash down 
any moisture adhering to the walls of the condenser. 

The water in the receiver may be made to separate from 
the xylene or toluene by moving the spiral copper wire 
up and down in the condenser and receiver 
occasionally, thus causing the water to settle at the 
bottom of the receiver. Reflux until the water-level in 
the receiver remains unchanged for 30 minutes and 
then shut-off the source of heat. Flush the condenser 
with either xylene or toluene, as required, making use 
of the spiral copper wire to discharge any moisture 
droplets. Immerse the receiver in water at about 27 C 
for at least 15 minutes or until the xylene or toluene 
layer is clear, and then read the volume of water. 



10.1.4 Calculation 



Moisture content, percent by mass = 



lOO xVxD 
M 



where 

V = volume in millihtres of water, 
D = density of water at the temperature at which 
the volume of water is read, and 



M = mass in g of the material taken for test. 

10^ Karl Fischer Method 

This method shall be used for determination of water 
content up to 0.5 percent according to procedure 
prescribed in IS 2362, 

10 J Air-Oven Method 

10.3.1 Apparatus 

10.3.1.1 Weighing bottle 

squat type, conforming to IS 1574. 

10.3.1.2 Desiccator 

containing an efficient desiccant, such as phosphorous 
pentoxide. 

10.3.1.3 Air-oven 

preferably electrically heated, with temperature control 
device. 

10.3.2 Procedure 

Weigh accurately about 10 g of the material into a 
weighing bottle which has been dried, cooled in the 
desiccator and then weighed. Place the weighing bottle 
in the air-oven for approximately one hour at 105 + 1 ° C. 
Remove the weighing bottle from the oven, cool in the 
desiccator to room temperature and weigh. Repeat this 
procedure but keep the weighing bottle in the oven 
only for half an hour each time until the difference 
between the two successive weighings does not exceed 
one milligram. 

10.3.3 Calculation 



Moisture content, percent by mass 



A/; X 100 

A/, 



where 
M, = mass in g of the material taken for the test, and 
Mj = loss in mass in g of the material upon drying. 

11 DETERMINATION OF SOLUBILITY/ 
MATTER INSOLUBLES 

11.1 Solubility in Acid 

Prepare 2 percent solution of the sample in 10 percent 
hydrochloric acid (v/v) or according to the procedure 
described in the individual material specification. Heat 
to specified temperature or to about 75 to 80 C to 
dissolve. Observe the opalescence. If the insoluble 
matter is more than a trace, filter through previously 
weighed sintered crucible of porosity G4, wash free of 
acid, dry and weigh. 

11.1.1 Calculation 

M 
Acid insoluble matter, percent by mass = ~jT' ^ ^^ 



IS 5299 : 2001 



where 
M| = mass in g of the material taken for the test and 
Mj = mass in g of the residue. 

11.2 Solubility in Alkali 

Prepare 2 percent solution of the sample in 10 percent 
sodium carbonate or sodium hydroxide solution or 
according to the procedure given in the individual 
material specification. Heat to specified temperature of 
about 75 to 80 C to dissolve. Observe the opalescence. 
If the insoluble matter is more than a trace, filter through 
a sintered crucible of porosity G4, wash thoroughly, 
dry, weigh and calculate the percentage of the 
alkali-insoluble matter according to the formula 
given in 11.1.1. 

11.3 Solubility in Solvent 

Dissolve the sample as prescribed in individual material 
specification in 2 percent concentration in specified 
solvent. Warm, if necessary, and observe the clarity of 
solution. If the insoluble matter is more than a trace, 
filter through a sintered crucible of porosity G4, wash 
thoroughly with the solvent, dry, weigh and calculate 
the percentage of solvent insolubles according to 
formula given in 11.1.1. 

12 DETERMINATION OF ASH 

12.0 General 

Two methods are given. The first method gives the 
ash left on ignition whereas the second method gives 
the sulphated ash left on ignition. 

12.1 Method A 

Heat a silica or platinum crucible, cool it in a desiccator 
and weigh. Weigh accurately about 2 g of sample into 
the crucible and heat it gently on a burner until most of 
the sample has burnt into ash. Then ignite it in a muffle 
fiimace maintained at about 800 C, until no more carbon 
particles are visible. Cool in a desiccator and weigh. 
Heat again in a muffle fiimace, then cool in a desiccator 
and weigh. Repeat the process until constant mass is 
obtained. 



12.2.1.1 Concentrated sulphuric acid (See IS 266). 

12.2.1.2 Concentrated nitric acid (See IS 264). 

12.2.2 Procedure 

Heat a silica or platinum crucible. Cool in a desiccator 
and weigh. Then weigh accurately about 2 g of the 
sample into the clean, dry crucible. Add to this 1 ml of 
concentrated nitric acid and a few drops of concentrated 
sulphuric acid just enough to wet the sample. Cover 
the crucible partly with a lid, if necessary to avoid 
spurting. Heat the crucible gently on a small flame till 
evolution of fiimes ceases. Cool the residue, add a few 
more drops of concentrated sulphuric acid and heat 
slowly, gradually raising the temperature till evolution 
of fumes has stopped. Repeat this procedure, namely, 
the addition of sulphuric acid and heating until the 
residue in the crucible is free from carbon particles. Put 
the crucible in a muffle furnace at SOO'^C for one hour. 
Cool in a desiccator and weigh. Repeat heating cooling 
and weighing till constant mass is obtained. 



12.1.1 Calculation 



Ash, percent by mass 



M| X 100 



where 
A/, = mass in g of ash, and 
Mj = mass in g of the sample taken for test. 

12.2 Method B 

In this method heating of the material is carried out in 
the presence of concentrated sulphuric acid and the 
resulting ash is determined as sulphated ash. 

12.2.1 Reagent 



12.2.3 Calculation 



Sulphated ash, percent by mass 



A/, X 100 



where 
M, = mass in g of the sulphated ash, and 
A/j = mass in g of the sample taken for test. 

13 DETERMINATION OF AROMATIC PRIMARY 
AMINES 

13.0 General 

Aromatic primary amines react quantitatively with 
nitrous acid in acid medium to form diazonium salts. 
The amount of nitrous acid thus used up may be 
expressed in terms of amount of the amine present. 

13.0.1 For strongly basic amines, such as 
aminophenols, halogenated amines, benzidines, 
toluidine, xylidines napthylamines, etc, the direct 
diazotization method is frequently used. Here a 
standard solution of sodium nitrite is added from a 
burette to the solution or slurry of the amine in mineral 
acid maintained cold between to 5 C till end point is 
reached. 

13.0.1.1 The strength of sodium nitrite solution, to be 
used depends on several factors, such as speed of 
reaction, sharpness of end point, loss of nitrous acid, 
etc (5ee Note). 

NOTE — A 0.1 N solution gives poor end point, whereas 
with IN solution of sodium nitrite, there is too much loss of 
nitrous acid 

13.0.2 For weakly basic amines, such as naphthionic 
acid and aminobenzoic acid, the indirect diazotization 
method is frequently used. Here a known excess of 



10 



IS 5299 : 2001 



sodium nitrite is mixed with the amine solution and 
then quickly acidified. After allowing time for 
completion of reaction, excess sodium nitrite is back 
titrated with a standard solution of an amine. 

13.0.2.1 For weakly basic mononitroanilines and 
halonitroanilines, it is necessary to first dissolve the 
amine in sulphuric acid. The amine is then reprecipitated 
by adding ice. The finely precipitated amine is 
redissolved in hydrochloric acid and then it is titrated 
against the standard solution of sodium nitrite. 

1 3. 1 Direct Diazotization Method 

13.1.1 Apparatus 
13.1.1.1 Mechanical stirrer 
13.1.U2 Burette 

13.1.1.3 Beakers 

13.1.1.4 Thermometer 

13.1.1.5 Thistle funnel 

13.1.2 Reagents 

13.1.2.1 Sodium nitrite solution 

of suitable strength {see 13,0.1,1). This solution shall 
be freshly standardized against pure sulphanilic acid 
following the procedure given in 13.1.3. 

13.1.2.2 Concentrated hydrochloric acid — See 

IS 265. 

13.1.2.3 Acetic acid — See\S695. 



13.1.2.4 Starch iodide test papers 

13.1.2.5 Potassium bromide solution 

(m/v). 

13.1.3 Procedure 



25 percent 



13.1.3.1 Take an accurately weighed sample of an 
amine, large enough to give about 30 ml titration reading 
with standard sodium nitrite solution of chosen 
strength, into a one-litre beaker. Dissolve in 500 ml of 
water and 50 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid with 
heating, if necessary. If an amine contains an acid 
group, such as sulphonic, dissolve by adding requisite 
quantity of sodium carbonate and water and then add 
concentrated hydrochloric acid equivalent to sodium 
carbonate added and 50 ml more. If the amine is not 
soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid or dilute sodium 
carbonate solution, dissolve first in glacial acetic acid 
and then add hydrochloric acid and water. 

13. 1 .3.2 Immerse the beaker containing sample within 
about 2.5 cm of the rim in crushed ice and water. Keep 
the beaker immersed until the temperature is about 
to 5 C. While stirring mechanically, add through thistle 
funnel, as shown in Fig. 10, the solution of standard 



sodium nitrite from the burette as rapidly as the spot 
test permits keeping the temperature of the solution 
below 5 C. Test the solution by spotting on starch- 
iodide paper. If the rate of diazotization is slow, add the 
solution of nitrite slowly, avoiding a large excess of 
nitrite at any stage. In many cases where diazotization 
is slow, it may be considerably accelerated by addition 
of few millilitres of potassium bromide solution and 
sharper end-point may be obtained. The end-point is 
reached when an immediate faint blue coloured ring 
appears when spotted on starch-iodide paper and 
persists for a period of 1 minutes or so without further 
addition of nitrite solution. 



Vx Nx M 



13.1.4 Calculation 

Aromatic primary amine, 
percent by mass 

10 Wx A 
where 

V = volume in millilitres of sodium nitrite solution 

used, 
A'^ = normality of the sodium nitrite solution, 
M = molecular mass of the amine, 
W — mass in g of the sample taken for the test, and 
A = number of amino groups per molecule of the 
amine. 

13.2 Indirect Diazotization Method 

13.2.1 Apparatus — same as in 13.1.1. 

13.2.2 Reagents — same as in 13.1.2. 

13.2.2.1 Sodium sulphanilate solution 

0.5 N. Standardize against a standard sodium nitrite 
solution following the procedure given in 13.1.3. 

13.2.3 Procedure 

Take an accurately weighed sample which is large 
enough to give about 30 ml titration reading with 
standard sodium nitrite solution of chosen strength 
and transfer to a well-stoppered flask. Add water and 
sodium carbonate necessary to dissolve and to make 
the solution slightly alkaline. Add standard sodium 
nitrite solution in excess but not more than 3 to 5 ml. 
Cool the flask in a ice bath. Add about 50g of ice and as 
quickly as possible, 50 ml of concentrated hydrochloric 
acid. Stopperthe flask immediately. Mix well, allow the 
flask to stand for 10 to 15 minutes in the ice-bath and 
shake the contents of the flasks at intervals. Titrate 
the excess sodium nitrite solution with standard sodium 
sulphanilate and add 2 to 3 ml in excess. Finally back 
titrate the excess sodium sulphanilate with standard 
sodium nitrite solution to a distinct blue coloured ring 
test on starch-iodide paper that can be repeatedly 
obtained during a period of 10 to 15 minutes without 
further addition of nitrite solution. 



11 



IS 5299 : 2001 



BURETTE 

MECHANICAL 
STIRRER 



THISTLE FUNNEL 
OR LONG STEM 
FUNNEL 



cvv==v'|ki 




Fig 10 Titration Assembly 



13.2.4 Calculation 



{V,N,-V,N,)M 



ffxlOx A 



Aromatic primary amine, 

percent by mass 
where 

V^ = total volume (initial and final) in millilitres of 

sodium nitrite solution used, 
A'l = normality of sodium nitrite solution, 
K, = volume in millilitres of sodium sulphanilate 

solution used, 
A^, = normality of sodium sulphanilate solution, 
M = molecular mass of the compound, 
W = mass in g of the sample taken for the test, and 
A = number of amino groups per molecule. 

1 4 DETERMINATION OF COUPLING VALUE 

14.0 General 

Most of phenols, naphthols, aromatic amines and 
compounds with active methylene groups couple in 
either alkaline or acidic medium quantitatively with a 
diazonium compound and from the consumption of 
diazonium compound, purity of above compound may 
be estimated and this estimated value is known as 
coupling value. 

14.0.1 The coupling takes place in the para position 
on the phenol or amine unless this position is occupied 
in which case the coupling may take place on ortho 
position, though the reaction at the ortho position will 
usually be considerably slower. Some phenols and 



amines will couple first in para position and then will 
commence to couple in ortho position. The compounds 
containing active methylene groups will couple at these 
positions. The coupling procedures vary somewhat 
depending on the reactivity of the compounds 
involved. Some compounds couple in a solution atpH 
5, others will couple only in very alkaline solution, the 
faster the coupling, better the analysis; since the 
diazonium compound is unstable. The more alkaline 
the solution, the faster the coupling. However, the 
more alkaline the solution, the faster the diazonium salt 
will decompose. In general, salts like sodium acetate 
and sodium bicarbonate will be sufficiently alkaline for 
most couplings. Sodium carbonate is sometimes used 
while sodium hydroxide is seldom resorted to, since it 
decomposes the diazonium salt too readily. 

14.1 Apparatus 

14.1.1 Mechanical Stirrer 

14.1.2 Beakers 

14.1.3 Burette — Amber coloured, jacketed. 

14.1.4 Pipettes 

14.1.5 Graduated Flasks 

14.2 Reagents 

14.2.1 Tetrazodianisidine Solution 

Dissolve 2 g of dianisidine hydrochloride in 7 ml of 
hydrochloric acid. Heat, if necessary. Cool to Cand 
titrate with 1 N sodium nitrite solution to just complete 
the reaction. Make up the solution to 100 ml in a 
volumetric flask. Store this solution in an amber- 
coloured bottle at a cool place. 

14.2.2 H-Acid (l-Amino-S-Hydroxy-Naphthalene-'i, 
6-Disulphonic Acid) Indicator Solution 

Dissolve 0.5 g H-Acid in 100 ml of 1 percent sodium 
carbonate solution. 

14.2.3 Standard Diazonium Solution 

Either of the following diazonium solutions described 
in 14.2.3.1 and 14.2.3.2 may be used depending on 
the;?H of the coupling medium. 

14.2.3.1 p-Toluene diazonium chloride standard 
solution (OAK) 

Dissolve 53 g of /7-toluidine in 131 ml of concentrated 
hydrochloric acidand dilute to 1 litre. Add 100 ml of 0.5 
N/7-toluidine solution into a 500-ml volumetric flask, 
and cool the flask to 15 to 20°C. Add 50 ml of 1 N 
sodium nitrite solution maintained at a temperature of 
1 5 to 20 C and dilute the resultant solution to 500 ml. 
Shake solution to assure thorough mixing. A slight 
excess of nitrous acid should be indicated on starch- 



12 



IS 5299 : 2001 



iodide paper. Store the solution in the dark in an ice- 
bath. After 30 minutes, it is ready for use. Standardize 
the solution by using resublimed /n-toluilenediamine 
orrecrystallized l-phenyl-3-inethyl-pyrazolone-5. The 
solution of diazonium salt should not be used after 5 h 
because of its instability. 

14.2.3.2 p-Nitrobenzene diazonium chloride 

standard solution (0. 1 N) 

Take 6.9 g ofp-nitroaniline in 500-nil beaker, add 20 ml 
of concentrated hydrochloric acid and about 50 ml of 
water. Heat to 85 to 90 C to dissolve completely. Dilute 
the contents to approximately 200 ml with water. Add 
about 100 g ice to cool it to 5 C. Keep the contents 
under mechanical stirring and to it add previously 
cooled 50 ml of sodium nitrite solution (1 N) in one lot. 
Stir for 15 to 20 minutes. It should give positive test on 
starch-iodide paper and congo red paper. Remove the 
excess sodium nitrite by adding few ml of sulphamic 
acid solution. Filter the diazo solution. Make up the 
volume to 500 ml with ice water in volumetric flask. 
Store the solution in ice-bath in the dark. Standardize 
the solution freshly before use. p-Nitrobenzene 
diazonium chloride solution is preferred for coupling in 
weakly acidic medium. 

14.2.3.3 p-Chloroaniline diazonium chloride 
standard solution (0.1 N) 

Take 6.5 g of p-chloroaniline in 500-ml beaker. Add 
20 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid and about 50 
ml water and heat to 80 to 85 C to dissolve it completely. 
Dilute the content to approximate 200 ml with water 
and add 100 g ice to cool it to 5 C. Keep the content 
under mechanical stirring and add previously cooled 
50 ml of sodium nitrite (IN) rapidly in one lot. Stir for 
30 minutes, cool it externally, if needed to maintain the 
temperature. It should give positive test on starch- 
iodide paper and congo red paper. Remove the excess 
sodium nitrite by adding few ml of 10 percent (m/v) 
sulphamic acid solution. Filter the diazo solution and 
make up the volume with ice cold water to 500 ml in a 
volumetric flask. Store the diazonium chloride solution 
in ice-bath in the dark. Standardize the solution freshly 
before use,p-chloroaniline diazoniunn chloride solution 
is preferred in weakly alkaline to a moderately alkaline 
coupling reaction up to 8 to 9f»H. 

14.2.3.4 Standardization of diazonium solution 

Weigh accurately about 0.6 g of resublimed m- 
toiuilenediamine or about 0.7 g of recrystallized 1- 
phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone into 1 -litre beaker. Add 
20 ml distilled water. Dissolve with the help of few ml of 
10 percent hydrochloric acid or 10 percent sodium 
hydroxide solution respectively. Clear solution. Add 
to this 100 ml water. Neutralize with soda ash solution 
or acetic acid respectively. Add 10 ml of saturated 



sodium acetate solution and 10 ml of 1 N acetic acid. 
Cool the solution to about 10°C. 

Agitate the solution with a mechanical stirrer, and add 
the diazonium solution from a burette equipped with a 
water jacket through which water is circulating at about 
10 C. The burette or the glass jacket should be of amber 
glass to minimize any decomposition of the diazonium 
salt by light. Add the diazonium solution as rapidly as 
coupling takes place, but never in excess since there is 
danger of decomposition, which leads to high results. 
To test for excess diazonium salt in the solution, place 
a few drops of the solution on a piece of filter paper. 
About a centimetre away from the edge of the liquid 
mark, place a few drops of //-Acid indicator solution. 
Where the two liquid portions meet on the filter paper, 
a colour will develop if excess diazonium salt is present. 

To test for excess coupling agent (m-toluilenediamine 
or l-phenyl-3-methyl-5-pyrazolone) in the reaction 
mixture place a few drops of tetrazodianisidine 
hydrochloride solution on a piece of filter paper about 
a centimetre away from the edge of a drop of reaction 
mixture, also placed on the filter paper. If a colour is 
developed, presence of unreacted coupling agent is 
indicated in the reaction mixture. 

Add the diazonium standard solution in portions, 
depending on the rate of coupling with the particular 
compound contained in the sample. Test the reaction 
mixture for excess coupling agent and diazonium salt 
after each addition. The additions of diazonium solution 
should be in the increments of 0.5 ml when near the end 
point. The end point is taken as the point at which 
negative test for coupling agent and a negative test for 
diazonium salt are obtained. When this point is 
reached, read the burette, add a few drops more of 
diazonium solution and test for diazonium salt. If a 
positive test is obtained, take the previous reading. If 
the reaction product is water soluble and the colour 
interferes with the spot tests, add sodium chloride to 
salt it out to show clear end point. 

143 Procedure 

14.3.1 Analyze the samples in the same manner in 
which the diazonium solution are standardized except 
that the sample is substituted for the m-toluilenediamine 
or the pyrazolone. The sample should contain 0.003 to 
0.005 moles of coupling material. Also, if the acetate- 
acetic buffer is not sufficiently alkaline for a satisfactory 
coupling rate, use 100 ml of 2 N sodium carbonate. Use 
sodium hydroxide for materials which couple very 
slowly or for samples soluble only in sodium hydroxide. 
Use the same base for standardization and analysis. 



14.4 Calculation 



Coupling value, percent by mass = 



VxNxM 
WxlO 



13 



IS 5299 : 2001 



where 

V = volume in millilitres of diazonium solution 

consumed, 
A^ = normality of diazonium solution used, 
M = molecular mass of coupling component 

(sample), and 
W = mass in g of the sample taken for lest 

NOTE — For the compounds known to couple at both 
ortho and para positions, the calculation shall be modified 
by a factor of 0.5. 

15 DETERMINATION OF PURITY OF NITRO 
COMPOUNDS 

15.0 Principle of the Method 

Aromatic nitro compounds are quantitatively reduced 
to amino compounds with zinc dust and from the 
amount of sodium nitrite solution consumed, purity of 
nitro aromatic compounds may be calculated. 

15.1 Apparatus 

15.1.1 Round- Bottomed Flask 

15.1.2 Graudated Flask 

15.1.3 Pipettes 

15.2 Reagents 

15.2.1 Zinc Dust 

15.2.2 Hydrochloric Acid— See IS 265. 

15.2.3 Sodium Nitrite Solution — 0.1 N. 

15.2.4 Potassium Bromide 

15.2.5 Starch-Iodide Paper 

15.2.6 Methanol 

15.3 Procedure 

15.3.1 Weigh accurately about 1.0 j of the sample 
into the round-bottomed flask. Add 25 ml of methanol 
and shake to dissolve. Place the flask in the heating 
mantle, fix it with the condenser through which cold 
water is circulated. Through the other opening add 5 g 
of zinc dust with the help of a funnel. Then add 20 ml 
of hydrochloric acid. Close the opening with a ground 
glass stopper and reflux. When the zinc dust is 
consumed stop heating and allow the flask to cool. 
Add another installment of zinc dust and hydrochloric 
acid and reflux again. Continue the same operation for 
a third time. Observe the colour of the mixture. It 
should be colourless or light reddish but not yellow. 
Cool and filter. 

15.3.2 Wash the residue three to four times with 
distilled water. Collect the filtrate and washings 
quantitatively. Add 2 g of potassium bromide and titrate 
against 0.1 N sodium nitrite using starch-iodide paper 



as an external indicator. The end point is reached when 
a drop of the reaction mixture placed on the starch- 
iodide paper strip produces an instantaneous light blue 
colour which persists for five minutes. 

15.4 Calculation 



V X N xM 



Assay, percent by mass = \qxM 

where 

V = volume in millilitres of sodium nitrite solution 

used, 
N = normality ofsodium nitrite solution, 
M| = molecular mass of the nitro compound, and 
Mj = mass in g of the sample taken for test. 

16 DETERMINATION OF AZO COMPOUNDS 

16.0 Principle of the Method 

The material is boiled with an excess of titanous chloride 
solution in presence of hydrochloric acid and the 
excess titanous chloride solution is back titrated with 
standard ferric ammonium sulphate solution using 
ammonium thiocyanate solution as indicator. The 
reaction is indicated by the following equation: 



RN = NR, + 4H- 



RNH, + R,NH^ 



16.1 Apparatus 

16.1.1 Reduction Flask — as shown in Fig. 11. 



N2ORC02 




Fig. 1 1 Reduction Flask 

16.1.2 Graduated Flask 

16.1.3 Pipettes 
16.2 Reagents 

16.2.1 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid 

16.2.2 Concentrated Sulphuric Acid 

16.2 J Ammonium Thiocyanate Solution — 20 percent 
(m/v). 

16.2.4 Titanium Trichloride Solution 

Take 100 ml of 15 percent titanium trichloride solution 
and filter through a thick pad of glass wool. Add this 



14 



18 5299:2001 



titanium trichloride solution to a previously boiled (to 
remove dissolved oxygen) mixture of 100 ml of 
concentrated AR grade hydrochloric acid, and VOOinl 
of distilled water. Mix by passing the current of an 
inert gas, such as carbon dioxide or nitrogen for some 
time. Adjust the final volume to 1 litre with distilled 
water. Store the reagent in a bottle coated with black 
paint (outside) to protect the solution from sunlight. 

1 6.2.5 Standard Ferric Ammonium Sulphate Solution 

Dissolve 50 g of ferric ammonium suIphate(Ar Grade) 
in a mixture of 300 ml of water and 6 ml of concentrated 
(AR grade) sulphuric acid. Dilute to 1 000 ml with 
distilled water. 

16.2.5.1 Standardization of the solution 

Measure accurately about 40 ml of the solution into a 
glass stoppered flask. Add 5 ml of 5 N hydrochloric 
acid, mix and add a solution of 4 g of potassium iodide 
dissolved in 10 ml of distilled water. Stopper, allow to 
stand for 10 minutes. Then titrate the liberated iodine 
with sodium thiosulphate solution (0. 1 N), adding starch 
as indicator, as the end point is approached. Correct 
for a blank run on the same quantities of the same 
reagents, and calculate the normality. Store the 
standard ferric ammonium sulphate solution in tight 
containers protected from light. 

1 6.2.6 Potassium Iodide — AR Grade. 

16.2.7 Sodium Thiosulphate — AR Grade. 
16.3 Procedure 

1 6.3. 1 Accurately weigh 1 .0 g sample and dissolve in 
cold or hot water or ethyl alcohol or acetic acid as 
required and dilute to 500 ml with the same solvent at 
room temperature. 

16.3.2 Pipette a 50 ml aliquot in case of water soluble 
compounds and 10-ml aliquot in case of water insoluble 
compounds into a 500-ml reduction flask containing 
50 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid and 50 ml water which 
have been previously brought to boil. Start passing 
carbon dioxide gas over the solution and heat to boiling 
again. Pass carbon dioxide gas in the storage bottle 
containing titanium trichloride solution and immediately 
draw 50 ml titanium trichloride solution by pipette 
through which carbon dioxide gas has been passed 
previously, and add it to the dye solution. Note the 
time when titanium trichloride solution is completely 
added. Boil the contents of the flask for 10 to 15 
minutes for complete reduction. Then cool it in an ice- 
bath maintaining a continuous flow of carbon dioxide 
throughout the experiment. Add 10 ml of ammonium 
thiocyanate indicator solution and back titrate the 
mixture against standard ferric ammonium sulphate 
solution to a permanent colour change. Record volume 
of ferric ammonium sulphate solution zsA, 



NOTE — This reading should preferably be not less than 
10 ml. 

16.3.3 Determine blank reading exactly following the 
procedure as stated in 16.3.2 with 50 ml of water or 
10 ml of solvent in place of sample solution and taking 
the same amount of all the reagents and the same 
reduction time. Record the volume of titre as B. 



iB-A)xNxM 



16.4 Calculation 

Azo compound, 

percent by mass = 

4x£'xfFxl0 
where 

A = volume in millilitres of ferric ammonium sulphate 

solution required for the sample, 
B = volume in millilitre^offerric ammonium sulphate 

solution required for the blank, 
A'^ = normality of ferric ammonium sulphate 

solution, 
M = molecular mass of the material, 
E = number of azo groups present in the compound, 

and 
W = mass in g of the sample present in the aliquot 

taken for the test. 

17 DETERMINATION OF ASSAY/PURITY OF 
DYE INTERMEDIATES AND ESTIMATION 
OF THEIR IMPURITIES 

17.0 Four methods, namely, Gas Liquid 
Chromatography (GLC), High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC), Thin Tayer Chromatography 
(TLC) and Paper Chromatography have been stipulated 
for the -determination of purity/assay of various dye 
intermediates as well as estimation of the impurities 
present. 

17.1 Gas Liquid Chromatography Method 

17.1.1 Principle of the Method 

In GLC the mobile phase is an inert gas and the 
stationary phase is either a solid or a fixed liquid coated 
on a solid support with the help of solvents. The carrier 
gas drives the mixture through the column wherein the 
solutes partition between the gas and the stationary 
liquid. In addition to partition, adsorption of the solutes 
on the solid support and at the gas liquid surface is 
also a factor in many cases. Differential migration 
results if the distribution coefficients of the solute are 
different enough to allow the sorbent to selectively 
retard them. However, the mobile phase selection and 
variable temperature conditions aid in achieving 
resolution in gas chromatography. 

17.1.2 Apparatus 

Any gas chromatograph with: 

a) High pressure gas cylinder for carrier gas; 



15 



IS 5299 : 2001 



b) Pressure regulator and flow control valves to 
obtain a uniform rate of gas flow; 

c) Injection port with self sealing septa for injecting 
the sample; 

d) Oven which can accommodate glass and stainless 
steel columns; 

e) A high sensitive detector having a linear 
response over a large concentration range and 
relatively insensitive to flow and temperature 
variations, like Flame ionization and Thermal 
conductivity; and 

f) A recorder or an integrator to record the signal 
generated by the detector and computing the 
area under each peak. 

17.1.2.1 Injection system 

The injection port is kept hot enough to vaporize the 
sample rapidly but not so hot as to decompose it. The 
temperature of 10 to 50°C above that of the column is 
often recommended. 

17.1.2.2 Column selection 

The choice of the column packing is the most critical in 
GC. The column can be one of two types, either packed 
or capillary. Packed columns contain an inert solid 
support with a thin coating of liquid phase. Small and 
unifom particle sizes (40-60 to 100-120 mesh) give the 
highest efficiency. The support is usually diatomaceous 
earth according to their polarity. The, polar ones 
(for example, FFAP, Carbowaxes, etc), and the non-polar 
ones (for example SE-30, OV-1, Squalene, etc). 
Separations are best achieved by matching the solute 
and liquid types. Some liquid phases react chemically 
with certain solutes and are very selective for these 
compounds. Selective liquid phases give larger 
differences in retention time and require shorter 
columns to achieve a desired separation. Capillary 
columns can be used depending upon the compounds 
to be separated. 

17.1.2.3 Column temperature 

Lowering the oven temperature usually improves 
resolution while increasing the temperature will 
decrease the analysis time. The temperature chosen 
for an isothermal separation must therefore be a 
compromise. If the liquid coating is reduced a lower 
temperature can be used, a condition which could be 
beneficial for the separation of heat-labile solutes. The 
column temperature should never be high enough to 
either change the sample or to decompose or cause 
excessive vaporization of the stationary liquid. A 
column temperature around the average boiling point 
of the major component of the mixture can be tried. For 
wide boiling range mixtures, better resolution at the 
low end and faster elution at the higher end is obtained 
if temperature progragiming is employed. This method 



which usually involves a controlled linear increase in 
temperature during a run, sharpens the later peaks and 
makes the sensitivity of the analysis the same for high 
and low boiling components. 

17.1.2.4 Detector 

The most widely used detectors are: 

a) Flame Ionization Detector (FID), and 

b) Thermal Conductivity Detector (TCD). 

17.1.2.5 Flame ionization detector 

Components in the column effluents are ionized by 
burning in hydrogen-air flame. This allows the gas in 
the detector to conduct an electrical current. Above 
the flame, a collector, electrode, to which a DC potential 
is applied, measures this conductivity. The combustion 
of organic compounds increases the conductivity and 
the resultant current is amplified and fed to a recorder 
or a computing integrator. The detector is highly 
sensitive and its range of linear response to increasing 
concentration is very wide. It responds to almost all 
compounds, except inorganic gas, and Carbon- 
disulphide. The response is based on carbon weight 
percentage in the molecule. 

17.1.2.6 Thermal conductivity detector 

This detector consists of two identical metal cells, each 
containing a tungsten, rehenium-tungsten or gold 
sheathed wire filament or a thermistor. The column 
effluent flows through one-cell and pure carrier gas 
with a high thermal conductivity (hydrogen or helium) 
through the other. The temperature of the wires, and 
their resistance, depends upon the composition of the 
gas flowing over them. When pure gas flows through 
both cells, the teraperatue are same and the detector is 
balanced. This is initially arranged as a part of a 
balanced wheatstone bridge circuit; so that the 
resistance increase will cause an imbalance in the bridge 
and give rise to an electrical signal which is amplified 
and fed to a recorder or computing integrator. 

17.1.3 Quantification 

Calculate the peak areas of individual components and 
quantification can be done by the following methods: 

a) Area percentage, 

b) Area normalization, 

c) Internal standard, and 

d) External standard. 

17.1.4 Typical analysis by gas chromatography and 
calculations by area percentage is as follows: 

Column material : Stainless steel 

Length : 2 m. 

Outer Diameter: 1/8" 

Column : 10percentxE60 on chromosorbWAW/DMCS 



16 



IS 5299 : 2001 



(MESH 80/100) 
Carrier gas : Nitrogen 
Flow Rate : 30 ml/min 

o 

Injector temperature : 200 C. 
Detector temperature : 200 C. 
Oven temperature: 

o 

Initial temperature: 50 C isothermal for 3 minutes and 
Final temperature: 100 C with a programming rate of 
3 C per minute. Detector: Flame ionization 
Chart speed: 5 mm/min. Sample size: 0.5 micro litre of 
1 percent solution in solvent. 

17.1 •4.1 Procedure 

Conduct the flow of the carrier gas and inject 0.5 micro 
litre of the sample at the injection port where it is 
vaporized and well mixed with the carrier gas. It then 
passes into the chromatographic column wherein the 
vaporized constituents of the sample are separated by 
the virtue of their dLffering interaction with the 
stationary phase. For an efficient separation, the column 
should be maintained at the temperature suggested 
through the time required for the resolution of the 
constituents. As each component enters the detector, 
it gives a signal corresponding to the amount of the 
particular component leaving the column. The detector 
signal after amplification is transmitted to the integrator 
or a recorder for plotting the curves. From the specific 
area under various peaks corresponding to specific 
components the quantities of different components are 
determined. 

17.1.4.2 Calculations 

Calculate the peak area of individual component and 
calculate the amount of each component as given 
below: 

A I = area under peak 1 , 

A , = area under peak 2, and 

A ^ = area under peak 3 , etc. 



Assay, percent = 



A, + At + A-.+ An 



X 100 



n = number of peaks. 

1 7.2 High Performance Liquid Chromatography 

17.2.1 Principle of the Method 

HPLC is a liquid chromatographic technique involving 
a liquid mobile phase and a soHd stationary phase. The 
high performance here refers to rapid separation and 
quantification of many components at trace level and 
involving only few microlitres of sample volume. This 
process is achieved, in principle, by having very small 
particles with a diameter of few micrometers, typically 
in the range 5 to 10 \xm., packed uniformly into small 
coUimns of stainless steel (typically 10 to 25 cm in length 
and 4-5 mm i.d.) which can withstand high pressures. 



A high pressure solvent delivery system is required to 
have a reasonable flow through the column and is 
achieved with the help of a peristalic pump. The sample 
is injected on the top of the column (sample volumes 
typically 5 to 25 |il) and eluted out by pumping the 
desired solvent under pressure. The eluent passes 
through a flow through detector (typical capacity 
20 1^1) which continuously monitors the concentration 
of separated components. The detector then feeds 
the data to a recorder and a plot of detector response 
against time is recorded and is called a chromatogram. 

In the conventional liquid chromatography, a polar 
stationary phase is used and the mobile phase is non- 
polar. This is known as normal phase in HPLC when a 
polar stationary phase is used. In the reverse phase 
chromatographic process (/? ), the stationary phase 
used is non-polar and a polar mobile phase is used. 
The order of elution of the components in the reverse 
phase is opposite of normal phase chromatography, 
that is, the polar component is eluted first. 

17.2.2 Equipment for HPLC 

The essential features of a liquid and chromatographic 
system consists of : (a) A solvent delivery system 
consisting of a pump, pressure and flow controls and 
a filter in the inlet to remove suspended particles; 
(b) A sample delivery system; (c) The column; 
(d) The detector; and (e) Data handling device. 

The entire system is available commercially and the 
main characteristics of the individual components of 
the system are briefly given below. However, the 
manufacturer's instructions must be consulted for exact 
details of the particular system. 

a) Solvent delivery system 

The solvent is to be delivered to the system at 
high pressure with a constant flow and is 
achieved by using a pulse-free pump. Variation 
of flow rate generally affects the separation speed 
and the retention time. In general, the 
commercially available pump systems easily meet 
the requirements of flow rate and pressure, A 
combination of more than one pump can be used 
for using two or more solvents for separation. 
Both constant volume and constant pressure 
pumps are available commercially and the most 
commonly used being single or multihead 
reciprocating pumps of constant volume type. 

b) Sample delivery system 

Introduction of sample on the column is 
generally done either by using a syringe or by 
using a sample delivery valve. Septum injectors 
allow sample introductions by a high pressure 
syringe through self sealing elastor septum. 



17 



IS 5299 : 2001 



However, the most common system used is 
microvolume sampling valves which give better 
reproducibility into pressurized columns. The 
sample is introduced into an external loop in the 
valve at atmospheric pressure and by 
appropriate rotation the same is introduced into 
the mobile phase. The volume of the sample 
introduced normally is small and ranges in the 
5 to 25 Hi range. 

c) The column 

The columns employed in HPLC are normally 
made from precision bore polished stainless steel 
tubing with typical dimensions of 10 -30 cm long 
and 4 to 5 mm i.d. The stationary phase is 
retained at each end by thin stainless steel frits 
with a mesh size of 2 |a^m or less. The packings 
consist of small rigid particles (diameter less than 
10 jxm and with a narrow particle size range) are 
normally used as column packings. To overcome 
some of the problems associated with 
conventional silica gel or coatings of other 
mateials on porus packings, the stationary phase 
can be chemically bonded to supporting material 
(silica gel are reacted with substituted 
chlorosilanes and di and tri chlorosilanes 
producing either monomeric or polymeric 
bonded phases. In analytical HPLC the most 
important bonded phase are the non-polar C-5 
and C-18 type in which the modifying groups are 
either octyl or octadecyl hydrocarbon chain. 

d) Detectors 

The function of detector in HPLC is to monitor 
mobile phase as it comes out of the column. As 
in GLC, there is no universal detector in HPLC. 
The available HPLC detectors are based on either 
bulk property of the mobile phase or on the 
property of components to be separated. The 
bulk property detectors are based on the principle 
of measuring the differences of the property of 
added components in the mobile phase compared 
to the mobile phase alone. These type of 
detectors, in principle, can be used for all types 
of applications but the sensitivity is very poor. 
The detectors based on measurement of 
refractive index and conductivity fall in this 
category. The second type of detectors based 
on the property of components to be separated, 
are ultraviolet / visible spectrophotometric and 
flourescence detectors which is based on the 
property of ultraviolet/visible light absorption 
and light emission in the case of flourescence 
detectors. Both UV and flourescence detectors 
have high sensitivity and their response is 
independent of nature of the mobile phase. The 



most commonly employed detector is UV detector, 
both single and double beam instrument are 
commercially available and cover the wavelength 
range of210- 800 nm. 

e) Data handling device 

The quantitative analysis by HPLC requires that 
a relationship is established between the 
magnitude of the detector signal and the 
concentration of a particular product in the 
sample. The plot of response of detector signal 
against time, leads to different peaks for different 
components present in the sample. The peak 
height and peak area are both related to the 
concentration of the component present through 
the relative response of the detector for that 
particular component. Quantitative analysis can 
be done by first establishing the response of the 
component relative to that of a similar compound 
added in a known amount as an internal 
standard. Alternatively the system can be 
calibrated for each component by injecting 
known amounts of pure components separately 
(external standard quantification). 

17.2.3 General Procedure for Operation 

a) Phase selection 

The LC mode of separation to be followed is 
normally chosen according to the solubility of 
the substance, its molecular weight and ionic 
behaviour. Organic samples that are soluble in 
hexane or chloroform but not in water can be 
separated in the reverse phase mode whereas 
water sensitive substances and substances 
soluble in organic solvents can be separated by 
the normal phase mode. 

b) Column selection 

The type of the column required for a particular 
separation depends on the polarity of the 
substance to be separated. Silica gel columns 
are most commonly employed in the normal phase 
and bonded silica gel phases are commonly 
employed in the reverse phase. 

c) Solvent selection 

The solvent or the mobile phase used must be 
specially purified and free from all impurities. The 
presence of dissolved gases in the solvent also 
affect the separation process and hence must be 
removed by degassing. Separations sometime 
can be improved by using mixture of more than 
one mutually compatible solvents. By using 
gradient mixers the composition of mobile phase 
can be continuously changed during analysis. 
The flow rate of the solvent also affects 



18 



IS 5299 : 2001 



separation and should be adjusted to obtain a 
good separation in a reasonable dme. 

d) Sample preparation 

The sample to be analyzed normally should have 
some solubility in the mobile phase chosen and 
normally the sample is dissolved in the mobile 
phase. If this is not possible, a small amount of 
polar solvent such as dimethyl sulphoxide and 
dimethyl formamide (DMSO or DMF) can be 
used to dissolve the substance followed by 
dilution with mobile phase to required 
concentration before using. Insoluble and 
suspended particles must not be present and is 
to be removed by filteration. 

e) Separation characteristics 

The extent of separation that can be achieve 
depends on a number of operational parameters 
of the system including the nature of stationary 
phase, nature of mobile phase, temperature and 
flow rate. Good separation between components 
is measured not only by their distance between 
each other but also by the breadth of the peaks. 
Peaks must be sharp and symm.etrical and the 
operation parameters must be adjusted so as to 
get a good separation and sharp peaks. 

Typical analysis procedure (reverse phase) 

Reagents HPLC grade solvents double 

distilled water 

Apparatus HPLC chromatograph equipped with 

a reverse phase column. Typical 
parameters for water's make HPLC 
system are given below: 



1 . Column 


Stainless steel 125 mm length, 




4.9 mm i.d. Nucleosil C 18.5 [.im 




particle size 


2. Temperature 


25°C 


3. Flow rate 


1 ml/min 


4. Injection Vol 


5^1. 


5. Chart speed 


5mm/min 


(Detector) 




6. Attenuation 


1.0 


7. Wavelength 


254 nm 


(Detector) 





17.2.3.1 Procedure 

a) Preparation of sample solution 

Weigh accurately about 0.03 g of the sample and 
transfer to a 1 00 ml volumetric flask and dissolve 
the sample in mobile phase and make up the mark 
with the mobile phase, stopper and shake well. 

b) Preparation of standard solution 



Weigh accurately D.03 g of the pure sample 
(standard) and transfer to a 100 ml volumetric 
flask and prepare the solution by making up to 
mark with the mobile phase stopper and 
shake well. 

c) Determination of purity ofsuhstace 

Start the pump and allow the mobile phase to 
flow through the column and adjust the flow rate 
and detector parameters. When a steady base 
line is obtained inject 5.0 fil of each of standard 
solution and also inject 5.0 j.d of sample solution. 
Compute the area of each peak and calculate 
using the following equation: 

Percent, purity = 



Concentration 
of standard 



Area of peak 
of sample 



Purity of 
X standard 



Concentration 
of sample 



Area of peak 
of standard 



17.3 Thin Layer Chromatography 

17.3.1 Principle of the Method 

In chromatography techniques, physical phenomena 
of adsorptionand partition is employed; only practical 
techniques are different for its use in different forms as 
paper, column, high pressure liquid and gas 
chromatography. In Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) 
stationary phase consists of a thin layer of sorbent 
(silica gel, alumina, cellulose powder, etc) coated on an 
inert, rigid, backing material such as glass plate, 
aluminium or plastic so that separation process occurs 
on a flat essentially two dimensional surface. TLC is 
widely used for qualitative analysis; it does not provide 
quandtative information of high precision and accuracy. 
With the development of High Performance Thin Layer 
Chromatograph (HPTLC), separations and quantitative 
measurements has become possible. 

17.3.2 State of the Art of TLC 

TLC technique consists of preparation of plates, sample 
application, development of plates and location of spots. 

17.3.2.1 Preparation of plates 

In TLC, variety of coating materials are available, but 
silica gel is most frequently used. A slurry of adsorbent 
(silica gel, alumina, cellulose powder, etc) is spread 
uniformly by means of commercial spreader or manually. 
The recommended thickness of adsorbent layer is 1 50- 
250 mm. After air drying overnight or even drying at 
80-90 C for about 30 min, the plate is ready for use. The 
plates can be also prepared by dipping into slurry of 
adsorbent in voladle solvents (like chloroform) and air 
drying. 



19 



IS 5299 : 2001 



Precoated ready plates are also commercially available 
which can be cut to any size required. 

17.3.2.2 Sample application 

The accuracy and precision with which the sample 
spots are applied is very important when quantitative 
analysis is required. The origin line, to which the sample 
solution is applied is usually located 2-2.5 cm from the 
bottom of the plate. Small volumes of 1 , 2 or up to 5 (il 
are applied using calibrated syringe. Care must be taken 
to avoid disturbing the surface of the adsorbent as this 
causes distorted shapes of the spots on subsequently 
developed chromatogram. Use of low boiling solvent 
clearly aids drying and helps to ensure compact spots. 

17.3.2 J Development of plates 

TLC chromatograms are developed by ascending 
techniques in which plate is immersed in developing 
solvents to a depth of 0.5 cm. The developing chamber 
is preferably lined with sheet of filter paper which dip 
into the solvent in the base of the chamber, for ensuring 
the chambers saturation with solvent vapours. 
Development is allowed to proceed until the solvent 
front has travelled the required distance (80 percent of 
the plate length). The plate is then removed from the 
chamber and solvent front is marked with pointed 
object. 

Plate is allowed to dry in an oven or otherwise taking 
into consideration heat and light sensitivity of 
separated compound. 

17.3.2.4 Location of spots 

Positions of separated solutes can be located by various 
methods. Coloured substances can be directly viewed, 
while colourless solutes may usually be detected by 
spraying the plate with appropriate reagent which 
produces coloured areas in the regions which they 
occupy. Some compound fluorescent in U.V. ( Plate 
required will be HF-254) light may be located in this 
way. Visualization of colourless separated solutes is 
also achieved by placing the plate in an iodine vapour 
chamber for few seconds. Iodine forms reversible 
complexes with most of the organic substances, thus 
dark spots are developed in those areas containing 
sample material. 

17.3.2.5 Rf values 

Elution characteristics are reported by /?/ values. The 
/?/ value is a measure of the travel of substance on the 
plate during the chromatogram relative to the solvent 
front. The values are defined by length of migration of 
substance divided by the solvent front distance. 

17.3.2.6 Quantitative evaluation 

This is done by removing separated components by 
scraping relevant adsorbent portion, extracted in 



suitable solvent and after removal of solvent analyzed 
by appropriate technique (UV, GLC) more precisely by 
measuring photodensities of spots directly on TLC 
using densitometer. 

17.3.3 Conclusion 

TLC is used in number of applications. The speed of 
technique makes it quite useful for monitoring large 
scale chromatograms. Analysis of fractions can guide 
decisions on solvent elution sequence. By comparing 
the colours of unknown (developed by using specific 
spray reagents) against various concentration of 
calibrated samples, impurities and purities can be 
qualitatively predicted (for example, ONPT impurity in 
MNPT). 

17.3.4 High Performance Thin Layer 
Chromatography 

17.3.4.1 Principle of the method 

In recent years Quantitative Thin Layer 
Chromatography (QTLC) has gained importance. In 
modem analytical laboratories, TLC had become an 
instrumental technique for precise estimation of purities 
and impurities. After availability of TLC systems high 
resolution adsorbent materials, the innovative approach 
of TLC appeared in the form of HPTLC (High 
Performance Thin Layer Chromatography). HPTLC 
differs from conventional TLC in a number of ways but 
mainly in the size of the particles used in the 
manufacture of plates and precise instrumental 
technique to get the quantitative results. Unlike in 
GLC, 100 percent sample is accountable in TLC. 

On HPTLC layers, chromatography takes place inlhe 
fast capillary flow range of developing solvents. The 
advantages of HPTLC over conventional TLC are : (a) 
better separation efficiency, (b) better economy with 
very low running costs, (c) very simple sample 
preparation, (d) unknown samples chromatographed 
and quantitatively analyzed in very short time, and (e) 
applications in diverse fields with impurity profile and 
fingerprinting. 

For HPTLC the particle size is usually between 5 |J.m 
and 10 |xm with much tighter control over the size 
distribution. Layers are 0. 1 to 0.2 mm thick with rapid 
separation using development distance of 5-10 cm. 
The small particle size and more uniform nature of silica 
gel results in greater chromatographic efficiency than 
found in ordinary TLC. In TLC detection is based on 
spray reagent and use of plates impregnated with 
fluoroscent indicators but in HPTLC for quantitative 
estimations. TLC scanner is used, which operates in 
U.V. visible modes. This scanner can measure 
absorbance, fluorescence and capable of obtaining 
spectra of individual spots. With precise control in all 
stages of sample application to chromatography 



20 



IS 5299 : 2001 



through innovative instrumentation the importance of 
HPTLC, has potentially increased which also 
complements other chromatography methods. 

17.3,4.2 State of the art of HPTLC technique 

Sample application, development of chromatogram, 
densitometric chromatogram evaluation and TLC 
scanner are primary stages involved in getting 
quantitative results. 

17.3.4.2.1 Sample application 

Sample can be applied in band or spot made. Uniform 
sample applications on plate provides optimum 
conditions for densitometric measurements. Sample 
can be applied manually or by using automatic TLC 
samplers. Automatic samplers make the analysis more 
reliable. 0. 1 to 1 .0 jig sample for spot applications and 
0.5 to 5.0 |J:g for bond applications is recommended on 
HPTLC plates. Different concentrations of calibration 
standards against unknown are applied for QTLC. 

17.3.4.2.2 Chromatogram development 

Very small amount of mobile phase (20 ml for 20 cm x 
20 cm plate and4 ml for 10 cm x 10 cm plate) is sufficient 
for development of plates. Plate is developed in the 
solvent chamber with pre-equilibrium mobile phase 
vapours. Low cost reagent grade solvents can be used 
for chromatogram development only if solvent mixtures 
behave like a one component solvent. Gradient elutions 
can also be done by repeatedly developing the 
chromatogram with ascending order of solvent 
polarities. Automated multiple development system 
(AMD) can be used for reproducible gradient elutions. 
Gradient eiution provides separation of widely differing 
polar substances on chromatogram. New dimension in 
chromatographic resolution can be obtained by 
reversed phase gradient eiution. 

17.3.4.2.3 Densitometric chromatogram evaluation 
(DCE) 

Densitometric chromatogram evaluation consists of 
four steps : Scanning, integration, calibration and result 
computation. Methods and raw data created and stored 
can be retrieved for later use at any time. 

DCE is done in the reflectance mode. Diffiisely reflected 
light is measured by the photosensor and the difference 
between the optical signal from the sample free 
background and that from the sample zone is correlated 
with the amount of respective fraction of calibration 
standards chromatographed on the same place. 
Densitometer scans in a linear way by absorbance and 
fluorescence with a spectral range from 200 to 800 nm. 
Computing integrator consists of simple personal 
computer with software tailored for TLC evaluation. 



Absorption spectra as well as fluorescence excitation 
spectra are measured and recorded. Multiwavelength 
scanning also permits optical resolution of fractions 
insufficiently separated by chromatography which is 
applicable everywhere. 

Scanning is done in direction of chromatography. 
Scanner searches first in the Y direction (direction of 
chromatography) until a signal maximum is detected; 
then, at this Y position in the X direction until that 
maximum is found. Only then is the quantification run 
of that fraction performed. 

17.3.4.3 Conclusion 

Thus by doing various combination of instrumental 
techniques, valuable information is obtained through 
High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography. Almost 
all dyes and intermediates are analyzed using quick 
HPTLC method with affordable running cost to small 
laboratories. HPTLC is a powerful and valid method of 
quantitative analysis and simulataneously a most 
valuable partner in multidimensional separation 
technique. HPTLC systems comply with all modem 
GLP requirements. 

Follov.'ing general procedure is involved in development 
and validation of a new method: 

STEP 1 - Optimization of the chromatographic 

procedure, 
STEP 2 - Create statistical record on reliability 

and 
STEP 3 - Implement routine evaluation 

All these three steps are depicted in following block 
diagram: (see Fig. 12) 

17.4 Paper Chromat(^raphy 

17.4.1 Principle of the Method 

Paper chromatography is a form of partition 
chromatography in which stationary phase is a thin 
liquid film adsorbed on the surface of an essentially 
inert support. Mobile phase may be either a liquid 
(liquid - liquid partition chromatography) or a gas (gas- 
liquid partition chromatography or gas chromatography 
- GLC). Separation depends largely upon partition 
between the two phases. Paper chromatography is an 
important example of partiton chromatography in which 
fine quality filter papers serve as a support by the 
cellulose molecules for the immobile liquid phase. 

17.4.2 State of the Art of Paper Chromatography 

Paper chromatography consists of spotting samples 
on ready papers, developing in mobile phases by 
ascending or descending techniques and location of 
spots and calculating Rf \a\aes and evaluation against 
standards either qualitatively or quantitatively. 



21 



IS 5299 : 2001 



»- CHROMATOGRAM OF UNKNOWN SAMPLE 



aple\ 



OPTIMISE CHROMATO- 
GRAPHY CONDITIONS 



I EVALUATIONJ -«> j SPECTRUM f *" 4^DENTITY 



PURITY 



MULTIWAVELENGTH SCAN 



SCANING 

WAVELENGTH 

OPTIMISED 



NO- 



YES 



NO I METHOD Ok} - 



YES 



VALIDATE METHOD 



■NO 



]--«* H STATISTICS] 
^ SPECTRA y 



REPRODUCIBLE 
METHOD 




H purityHJ 



IDENTITY 



YES 



EXTERNAL 
STANDARD POSSIBLE 



NO- 



YES 



(routine (EXT STO) I [ ROUTINE (CALI) 



Fig. 12 Block Diagram hor HPTLC 



17.4.2.1 Selection of stationary phase 

Different grades of filter papers are used (for example, 
zero and 1 to 4 Number Whatman Papers). When speed 
of development is important in that case, Paper No. 3 is 
suitable. No. 1 is most suitable for general use. When 
heavy loading and good resolution is required, thick 
quality No. 20 is used. Modified cellulose papers such 
as silicone treated papers are useful for non-aqueous 
phases for reversed phase chromatography. Ion 
exchange cellulose papers are used for separation of 
ionic-organic and inorganic substances. 

17.4.2.2 Selection of mobile phase 

Generally, mixture of one or more organic solvents and 
water is used. Water immiscible organic solvents like 
phenol, acetic acid are used as one of the organic 
components to increase the proportion of water in 



mobile phase. From two-phase system, settled organic 
phase, saturated with water is used as mobile phase. 
The aqueous layer being used to saturate the 
atmosphere of the vessel in which chromatogram is 
subsequently developed. 

For getting good resolution in chromatography of 
amphoteric substances like amino acids, the spotted 
paper is dipped into aqueous buffer solution, air dried 
and this paper pre-equilibriated with buffer solution is 
then developed. 

17.4.2.3 Sample application 

Drops of solution of substances to be chromatographed 
are individually applied to the paper by means of a 
capillary tube. Spots are applied with accuracy and 
precision with calibrated syringes in quantitative 
analysis. Spotted paper is developed with mobile phase 



22 



IS 5299 : 2001 



(downward by gravity — descending technique or 
upward by capillarity — ascending technique), 

17.4.2.4 Development of chromatogram 

Chromatogram is developed in mobile phase either by 
descending or ascending technique. When solvent 
has travelled required distance, the paper is removed 
from container, solvent front position marked and 
paper is dried. If spots are not coloured, their location 
is determined by spraying with suitable chromogenic 
reagent. 

/?/ value is calculated as: 



/?/ = 



Disatnce moved by substance 
Distance moved by solvent front 



In ascending technique, paper is supported vertically 
in a closed jar. In descending technique, specially 
designed jar is used. The paper is supported at the 
top of the tank and which contains the mobile phase. 
Paper end is held by glass rod. Mobile phase flows 
regularly and evenly down the paper. Descending 
technique may be used with advantage when a two 
phase solvent system is to be employed. In such 
cases aqueous phase is placed in bottom of jar and 
allowed to saturate the atmosphere. Paper loaded with 
sample is equilibriated and then mobile phase is poured 
at top lid for development of paper. 

17.4.2.5 Quantitative evaluation 

This is done by removing separated components by 
cutting relevant adsorbent portion of paper extracted 
in suitable solvent and after removal of solvent, 
analyzed by appropriate technique (UV, GLC) more 
precisely by measuring photodensities of spots 
directly on paper using densitometer. 

17.4.3 Applications 

17.4.3.1 Separation of amino acid by descending 
technique 



Hydrochloride of amino acid solutions are made in water. 
Spotted papers are developed by solvent (Butanol: 
Glacial acetic acid : Water 4:1 :5). Paper is sprayed with 
ninhydrin (2 percent solution in butan-2-ol) and develop 
colour by heating paper in oven for 5-10 minutes at 
100 C. Amino acids are identified based on /J/values in 
comparison with standards. 



17.4.3.2 Separation 
descending technique 



of monosaccharides by 



Monosaccharide solutions are made in water. Spotted 
papers are developed by solvent (butan-1-ol, acetone, 
water 4:5: 1). Spray the paper with an ethanolic solutions 
of naphtho-resorcinol. Paper dried in oven at 100 C for 
5-10 minutes till spots become visible. Unknowns are 
identified knowing the/?/ values. 

17.4.4 Special Applications 

Complex mixtures having close Rf values may not be 
separated by above ascending or descending 
techniques. In such case two dimensional paper 
chromatography is used with advantage. Single spot 
of the mixture is applied near to one comer of paper and 
the chromatogram is developed in one direction as 
usual. The paper is dried and chromatogram is 
redeveloped in second solvent system so that the 
direction of flow is at right angles with respect to the 
first. In both solvent systems, components have wide 
range of Rf values achieving good separation. Such 
component is characterized by two /?/ values. 

17.4.5 Conclusion 

Paper chromatography is used for the separation of 
number of organic compounds-ionic, organic and 
inorganic compounds. As compared to TLC, this 
technique is time consuming; but the components 
having very close Rf values can be separated by two 
dimensional technique which is not possible in TLC. 
Quantitative estimations can be done using standard 
substances. 



23 



IS 5299 : 2001 



Organization 
Atul Limited, Valsad, Gujarat 



Ajanta Chemical Industries, New Delhi 
Coiour-Chem Ltd, Mutnbai 

Clariant India Ltd, Mumbai 



Development Commissionser Small Scale Industries, 
New Delhi 

Hindustan Ciba-Geigy India Ltd, Mumbai 

Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 

Indian Dyestuff Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, Calcutta 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 
Sudarshan Chemical Industries Ltd, Pune 

The Dyestuff Manufacturer's Association of India, Mumbai 

The Gujarat Small Scale Dyestuffs Manufacturer's 

Association. Ahmedabad 
BIS Directorate General 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Dyes Intermediate Sectional Committee, PCD 1 1 

Representative(s) 

Dr H. Kaiwar (Chairman) 

Shri H. B, Dhuvad (Alternate \) 
Dr J. G. Desai (Alternate \\} 
Shri A. R. Desai (Alternate \\\} 

Shri S. D. Bhardwai 

Shri Kapil Dev (Alternate) 

Dr S. Siddhan 

Shri A. K. Chatterjee (Alternate I) 
Shri K. K. Mehta (Alternate II) 

DrJ. N. Shah 

Shr] K. S. Rindani (Alternate) 

Shri S. R. Singh 

Dr J. S. Rekm (Alternate) 

Shri S. Rajacxjpalan 

Shri D. K. Murthy (Alternate) 

Shri R. B. Bhandare 

Dr S. S. Paul (Alternate) 

Dr S. R. Deshmukh 

Shri S. D. Pawar (Alternate) 

Shri G.C, Desai 

Dr K. "V. Srinivasan 

Shri R. SAxyANARAVAN 

Shri P. K. Parab (Alternate) 



Dr M. G. Narsian 

Dr S. C. Amin (Alternate) 

Shri R. S. Patel 

Shri R. R. Shah (Alternate) 
Shri Anian Kar, Director & Head (PCD) 
[Representing Director General ( Ex-qfficio Member)] 



Member-Secretary 

Dr (Shrimati) Vuay Mauk 

Director (PCD), BIS 



21 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc ; No. PCD 1 1 ( 916 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg J 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110 002 \323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi /337 84 99, 337 85 61 

KOLKATA 700054 \337 86 26, 337 91 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 r60 38 43 

60 20 25 



{; 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 r254 12 16, 254 14 42 

\254 25 19,254 13 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) J 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAi400 093 \832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches ; AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Piinled at ftabhat Offset Piess, New Delhi-2 



