**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 5237 (1969) : Code for transport of small and medium 
sized seed eating birds [FAD 5: Livestock Feeds, Equipment 
and Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS iSTZT- 1969 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR TRANSPORT OF 

SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZED 
SEED-EATING BIRDS 



UDG 656 1/2-074 [636-5^6] 




® Copyright 1969 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

V1ANAK. BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DlfLlll 1 



rym m§r « f 



December 1969 



IS: 5237-1969 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR TRANSPORT OF 

SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZED 

SEED-EATING BIRDS 

Live Animals Sectional Committee, AFDC 24 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Y. K. Subrahmanyam Ministry of Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing 

& Urban Development 

Members 

Shri Brahm Datt Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar 

Col R. G. Datta Directorate of Military Farms, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. K. Tripathi ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director Traffic Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

( Rates ) 
Deputy Inspector General op Inspector General of Forests ( Ministry of Food, 
Forests Agriculture, Community Development & Co- 

operation ) 
Deputy Nautical Adviser Directorate General of Shipping ( Ministry of Parlia- 

mentary Affairs, Shipping & Transport ), Bombay 
Director Delhi Zoological Park, New Delhi 

Shri S. R. Dutt Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri J. Fernandes Air India, Bombay 

Shri B. L. Parashara ( Alternate ) 
Brig J. D. Kapur Directorate of Remount and Veterinary Services, Army 

Headquarters, New Delhi 
Maj S. N. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. E. Kulkarni HafFkine Institute, Bombay 

Shri B. M. Mazumdar Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping & Trans- 

port ( Transport Wing ) 
Shri K. G. Narainsinghani Chief Controller of Imports & Exports, New Delhi 

Shri D. S. Morkrima ( Alternate ) 
Dr Dev Raj Narang All India Society for Prevention of Cruelty to 

Animals, Calcutta 
Shri Jishnu Lal ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Rai Vita Private Ltd, Delhi 

Shri S. K. Beri ( Alternate ) 
Dr C. Krishna Rao Animal Husbandry Commissioner to the Government 

of India ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Commu- 
nity Development & Co-operation ) 
Dr T. Ramachandra Rao Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 

Dr S. G. Srikantia ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



IS: 5237- 1969 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Repbesentative 

Shbi B. B. Roy 

Db Satya Pbakash 
Db S. D. Shabma 



Db Habi Bhagwan, 



Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 



Representing 

Committee of International Foreign Flag Carriers in 
India, New Delhi 

Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation ( Department 
of Aviation ) 

National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi 

Animal Welfare Board ( Ministry of Food, Agricul- 
ture, Community Development & Co-operation), 
Madras 

Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojficio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shbi N. K. Chawla 

Assistant Director (Agri & Food), ISI 

Transport of Livestock Subcommittee, AFDC 24 : 2 



Convener 
Joint Commissioneb 

STOCK PbODTJCTION ) 

Members 
Shbi H. M. Bhatia 



( Live- Joint Commissioner ( Livestock Production ), Govern- 
ment of India ( Ministry of Food, Agriculture, 
Community Development & Co-operation ) 



Shbi Bbahm Datt 
Bbig Chandan Singh 



Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Develop- 
ment & Co-operation (Department of Agricul- 
ture ) 
Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar 
Directorate of Military Farms, Army Headquarters, 
New Delhi 
Shbi R. K, Tbipathi ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Dieeotob Tbaffic Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

( Rates ) 
Shbi S. R. Dutt Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi 

Shbi J. Fernandes Air India, Bombay 

Shbi B. L. Pabashaba ( Alternate ) 
Bbig J. D. Kapxjb Directorate of Remount and Veterinary Services, 

Army Headquarters, New Delhi 
Maj S. N. Sbivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Ktjndan Lal All India Motor Unions Congress, New Delhi 

Official Secbetaby Central Council of Gosarnvardhana ( Ministry of 

Food, Agriculture, Community Development & 
Co-operation ) 
Capt M. S. Patel Directorate General of Shipping ( Ministry of Parlia- 

mentary Affairs, Shipping & Transport ) , Bombay 
Capt P. S. Vanchiswab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. K. Ptjdttmjee Royal Western India Turf Club Ltd, Poona 

Shbi S. R. Captain ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 7 ) 



IS: 5237 -1969 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR TRANSPORT OF 

SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZED 

SEED-EATING BIRDS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 26 August 1969, after the draft finalized by the Live Animals Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products 
Division Council. 

0.2 Small and medium sized seed-eating birds include gallinaceous birds 
like pheasant, partridges, quails and guinea fowls, and passerine and 
psittacine birds like munias, bulbuls, budgerigars, parrots, love birds and 
wearer birds. These birds are used for various purposes, such as pets, 
exhibits, game and food. In view of the increasing demand for these birds, 
they are frequently required to be transported. As transport requirements 
of small and medium sized birds are similar, a common code is being 
prescribed for their transport. 

0.3 In the preparation of this code, due consideration has been given to 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, However, it is subject to 
the restrictions imposed under this Act, wherever applicable. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code covers the essential requisites for the transport of small and 
medium sized seed-eating birds by rail, road and air. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

3 



IS: 5237 -1969 

2.1 Birds — Only medium and small sized seed-eating birds. 

2.1.1 Small Size Birds — Include passerine and psittacine birds like munias, 
bulbuls, budgerigars, parrots, love birds and wearer birds, etc. 

2.1.2 Medium Size Birds — Include gallinaceous birds like pheasant, 
partridges, quails and guinea and guinea fowls. 

2.2 Size — The length, height and width of the birds shall be as denned 
in 2.2.1, 2.2.2 and 2.2.3. 

2.2.1 Length — Tip of beak to tip of tail feathers. 

2.2.2 Height — Tip of crown to toe while standing. 

2.2.3 Width — Width across shoulders' feathers. 

3. GENERAL CONDITIONS 

3.1 Birds to be transported should be healthy and in good condition. They 
shall be examined and certified by a qualified person for freedom from 
contagious and infectious diseases and their fitness to undertake the journey. 

3.1.1 Birds transported in the same cage shall be of the same species and 
maintained in compatible groups. 

3.1.2 Birds shall be preferably transported in pairs. Many males of the 
same species shall not be transported in the same container. Only one pair 
of gallinaceous birds shall be transported in each cage or container. 

3.1.3 Suitable perching arrangements shall be made in the cage while 
transporting passerine and psittacine birds like parrots, budgerigars, bulbuls, 
mynahs and munias. 

3.1.4 Birds shall be properly fed and watered before they are packed in 
containers for transportation. Extra feed and water should be provided in 
suitable troughs in the cages. 

3.1.5 The containers shall be properly cleaned and sterilized before the 
birds are placed in them. The use of injurious cleaning agents should be 
avoided. 

3.1.6 Birds shall be placed in containers shortly before transportation to 
minimize the injury due to fluttering. 

3.1.7 Arrangements shall be made for the watering, feeding and cleaning 
the cages during the journey. 

4. ROAD TRAVEL 

4.1 This mode of transport may be adopted only when the birds are to be 
transported over short journeys requiring 4 to 6 hours. 



IS: 5237 -1969 

4.2 In road journey, in public vehicle, the birds shall be placed in a proper 
cage or container. The cage containing birds shall not be put on the roof 
of the vehicle but shall be put inside the vehicle easily approachable for 
inspection during transit. 

4.3 The vehicle in which the birds are to be transported should avoid jerks 
and sudden stops. The speed of vehicle shall not exceed 40 kilometres per 
hour. 

4.4 An attendant shall be present at all times during transit and shall 
ensure that proper transit conditions are observed. 

4*5 The birds should not be exposed to rain or extreme temperatures. 
During hot weather, watering should be ensured every six hours. 

5. RAIL TRAVEL 

5.1 In case the journey is for more than twelve hours, an attendant shall 
accompany the consignments. 

5.2 The birds should not be exposed to rain or the direct blast of air. 

5.3 During summer, watering facility should be provided every six hours. 

6. AIR TRAVEL 

6.1 The cages shall be properly cleaned and sterilized before the birds are 
placed in the cage or container. 

6.2 For international transport the containers carrying birds should be kept 
in pressurized compartment with regulated temperature and preferably 
kept near the door. 

7. CONTAINERS AND GAGES FOR TRANSPORTATION 

7.1 Cages, containers and crates used to transport birds shall be of such 
material as will not collapse or crumble. They shall be well ventilated 
and designed to protect the health of the birds by giving them adequate 
space and safety. 

7.2 The cages shall be as shown in Fig. 1 and 2. The cages may be 
of the size 600 X 300 X 150 mm. The maximum number of birds 
accommodated in these cages shall not exceed 40 medium or 65 small 
by air and 25 medium or 40 small by rail and road. When there is a 
significant change in the number of birds to be transported, the size of the 
cage may be reduced or increased correspondingly. 

7.3 Labelling of Containers — All containers shall be clearly labelled 
showing the name, address and telephone number of the consignor and the 
consignee and marked 'LIVE STOCK 5 in bold capital red letters and 
with such details as are necessary for the well-being of the birds. 



o> 




•45* 60 + 60 J 60*| 
- 1 ITT-K.A. 



? ff *" 



W= 300 - 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Cage for Small Size Birds 



en 



10 

2 



IS: 5237 -1969 



-55 + 70 j-70*j 



3 PERCHES/2 mm DtA* 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 2 Gage for Medium Size Birds 



8. CARE IN TRANSIT 

8.1 The consignor shall be informed about the train or transport or flight 
number and its time of arrival in advance. 

8.2 Animal consignment to be transported by rail shall be booked by mail, 
express or fast passenger train and should not be detained after accepting 
the consignment for booking. 



( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members 
Representative 

Shbi B. B. Roy 

Db G. L. Sharma 
Dr S. D. Sharma 



Representing 

Committee of International Foreign Flag Carriers in 
India, New Delhi 

Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation ( Department of 
Aviation ) 

Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 

Animal Welfare Board ( Ministry of Food, Agricul- 
ture, Community Development & Co-operation), 
Madras 



Transport of Poultry, and Small and Medium Sized 
Birds Panel, AFDG 24:2:1 



Convener 
Shri J. N. Panda 



Members 

Shri F. C. Badhwar 
Shri J. C. Daniel 
Shri J. H. Desai 
Shri N. S. Garewal 
Shri Gurdip Singh 



Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Develop- 
ment & Co-operation ( Department of Agricul- 
ture) 



Bombay Natural History Society, Bombay 
Bombay Natural History Society, Bombay 
Delhi Zoological Park, New Delhi 
Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar 
Hi-bred ( India ) Private Limited, Karnal 



INDIAN STANDARDS 
ON 
Live Animals 

IS: Rs 

3059-1965 Code for the transport of monkeys by air ... ... ... 2*50 

3699 ( Part I )-1966 Code for the transport of monkeys by land: Part I Transport 

from trapping area to the nearest rail-head ... ... ... 1*00 

3699 (Part II )-1967 Code for the transport of monkeys by land: Part II 

Transport from rail-head to the nearest airport ... ... 2*00 

3907 ( Part I )-1966 Code for the transport of laboratory animals: Part I Transport 

of mice, rats, rabbits, guinea pigs and cotton rats ... ... 1*00 

3907 (Part II )-1967 Code for the transport of laboratory animals: Part II 

Transport of snakes ... ... ... ... ... 2*50 

3907 ( Part III )-1967 Code for the transport of laboratory animals: Part III 

Transport of frogs ... ... • • • ... • • • 2*00 

4157 ( Part I )-1967 Transport of livestock: Part I Transport of equines ( horses, 

donkeys and mules ) ... ... ... ..* 2*50 

4157 ( Part II )-1968 Transport of livestock: Part II Transport of cattle by rail 

and road ... ... ... ... ... ••• 2*50 

4157 (Part III )-1968 Transport of livestock: Part III Transport of sheep and 

goats by rail and road ... ... ... ... ... 2*00 

4746-1968 Transport of dogs and cats by air, rail and road ... ... 2*50 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 5 000 Indian Standards, broadly classified under (tie following 
main heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food Elect/otechnical 

Chemical Mechamcal Engineering 

Civil Engineering Structural & Metals 

Consumer Products Textile 

Qi thege r the standards belonging to the Agricurture & Food Group 
fall under the following categories: 

Abattoir Fish and Fishery Products 

Alcuhofic Drinks Food Additives 

Animal Feeds and Housino Food Grain Handling and Storage 

Baking Aids Fruits and Vegetables 

Bee-Keeping Equipment Honey 

Beverages Infant Foods 

Biscuits and Confectionary Meat and Meat Products 

Cereals and Pulses Pest Control Equipment 

Cocoa Products Pesticidal Formulations 

Coffee Products Pesticides 

Dai ry E q u i p m e nt Propa g at io n M ate rial s 

Dairy Industry, Methods of Test Regulated Market Yards 

Dairy Laboratory Apparatus Spices and Condiments 

Dairy Products Sugar and By-Products 

Edible Starch and Starchy T&a 

Products Tobacco Products 

Farm Implements and Machinery Transport o1 Live Animals 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

Rs 

IS I Bulletin f Published Every Month ) 

Single Copy .-- .-- ... ... .** l- ,v ' 

Annual Subscription *„ iP+ , M ... 25"^ 

Annual Hcporta { from 194S<4& Onward } -- »- ... 3"™ to 3*oo each 

Handbook of 151 Publications, 1565 ( Pan*! yf + £«. Price Ffcs 1Q-EW } 

Incorporating annotations w all Indian Standards,, and also Hating 

ISO Racomrndnddtloii^ and Pu&l teal Ions a NEC 



Availahtw ftvm 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manah Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zarar Marg r Mrw DeJhi 1 
Ttlcphtntf 2 ■ 3fi f 1 -50 Tg^ftr+mi U* n«|i*i M i h » 

27 SO SI -40 

r * n c A Q fftv * s 
T ■ I ■ gr« m • H«n«ht ah* IN * 
Hi SAttfar V*llnbttlmnl Pbi«* Hoid Bombay 7 

5 ChGwrlntjhflfl Approach C* I cull a t3 

l-f-HI/I Chlran All Line Hyri>rrit»irH 

117(1*6 SirvudayA Hauar Kanput 5 

U Gv**nl Palter* Ra-irl M auVai 2 

Printed il a rce* Press. New Delhi, Endd 



Talaphon* 


35*9 « 


ii 


23-1123 


■■ 


3 23 35 


■■ 


82 72 


wit 


inn 



