***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 5069 (1982) : Glossary of terms relating to methods of 
mechanical testing of metals [MTD 3: Mechanical Testing of 
Metals] 



-^JJIi^^^3^^iaVfi/I^ta>^^^igg^T<>>^irFS 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:%^>^ift^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 

METHODS OF MECHANICAL 

TESTING OF METALS 

( First Revision ) 



UDG 569:620n-OOl-4 




® Copyright iyS2 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAR HHAVAN* 9 BAHAUt'k SHAH ZAFAK MARtr 

NEW DELHI IIIKWa 

G, 7 December 1962 



Is I 5069 - 1962 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 

METHODS OF MECHANICAL 

TESTING OF METALS 

( First Revision ) 

Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee, SMDG 3 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi p. K. Ghakbavarty The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 
Shbi Sujit Kumab Basu M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi J. N. Bhattaohaejee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi K. L. Barui ( Alternate ) 
Da A. Ghakbaborty Usha Martin Black ( Wire Ropes ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri H. Maheswaby (Alternate) 
Shbi K. K. Ghkrian Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi Pankajt De ( Alternate ) 
Shbi O. P. Chugh Associated Instrument Manufacturers' { India ) 

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Shbi V. N. Nanda ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. K. Das Gupta National Physical Laboratory ( GSIR ), New Delhi 

Deputy DiBECTOB ( MET )-2 Ministry of Railways 

Assistant Director ( MET ), 
( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. G. Gahg, Directorate of Technical Development and Pro- 

duction ( Air ), New Delhi 
Shri P. Raghothambao { Alternate ) 
Shbi S. A. Haque Tata Iron and Steel Go Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shbi A. S. Walia ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. B. Idnani Blue Star Ltdj Bombay 

Shbi A. L. Chad ha ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. V. Kulkabni Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 

Ichalkaranji 
Shbi J. V. Kulkabni ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. C, Kumabaswamy The Indian Tube Go Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shbi D. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. S, Lakshminabayan Avery India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi R. D. S harm a ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 506d - 1982 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri S. R, Mazumdab 
Shri M. p. Mittal 

Shki Kanwaljit Singh Aroba 
( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. a. Padmanabhan 

Shbi M. Pbasad 

Shri K. Bishnoi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Radhakbishnan 

Db V. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. Ramesam 

Shbi I. N. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Rao 



Representing 

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur 



Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

{ GSIR ) , Durgapur 
Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 



National Aeronautical 
Bangalore 



Laboratory ( GSIR ), 



Ministry^of Defence (R&D) 



(GSIR), 



National Metallurgical Laboratory 
Jamshedpur 
Dr D. J. Ghakbavabti ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. N. Saha Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shbi S. K. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. N. Sabkab Ministry of Defence ( DGOF) 

Shbi A. K. Chattebjeb ( Alternate) 
Shbi F. G. Sharma Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri H. K. Taneja Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri V. N. Pandy ( Alternate ) 

Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bokaro Steel Ltd, 
Bokaro 



Shbi S. G. Ttjdekabb 



Shbi J. C. Ebby ( Alternate ) 
Shbt G. R. Rama Rao, 
Director { Struc & Met ) 



Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 



Secretary 

Shri S. K. Gupta 
Assistant Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS: 5069-1982 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 

METHODS OF MECHANICAL 

TESTING OF METALS 

(First Revision) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 18 April 1982, after the draft finalized by the 
Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1969. In this revision, SI units 
have been adopted .and definitions of a number of new terms incor- 
porated. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard defines the various terms commonly used in the 
methods of mechanical testing of metals. 

1.1.1 The terms covered relate to tension, compression, shear, torsion, 
bend, hardness, impact, cupping, fatigue, creep and fracture toughness 
testing of metallic materials. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 Calibration — The process of determining the characteristic relation- 
ship between the values of the physical quantity applied to the instrument 
and the corresponding positions of the index. 

2.2 Ductility — The ability of a material to deform plastically before 
fracture. It is usually evaluated by (a) comparing values of the elongation 
and/or the reduction of area of the specimen in tensile tests; (b) the 
depth of cup in the cupping tests; or (c) the internal diameter and angle 
of bend in the bend tests. 



IS 1 5069 - 1982 

2.3 Elasticity — The property of the material by virtue of which it tends 
to recover its original size and shape on removal of applied stress, not 
exceeding its clastic limit. 

2.4 Elasticity ( Elastic ) Limits — The greatest stress which a material 

is capable of sustaining without any permanent strain remaining upon 
complete release of the stress. 

2.5 Flexural Strength — Flexural strength is the resistance of a material 

to bending. 

2.6 Flexural Test — A test performed on a test piece from a material by 
subjecting it to a transverse loading under a given condition in a testing 
machine and noting the deflection produced at any desired point on the 
test piece and the corresponding load. 

2.7 Flexure — The bending characteristic of a material subjected to 
transverse load is called flexure. 

2.8 Hookers Law — This law states that stress is proportional to strain. 
The law holds good up to the proportional limit. 

2.9 Malleability — The property of metals and alloys to plastically 
deform under compression ( pressing, hammering, rolling etc ) without 
rupture. 

2.10 Mechanical Properties — The properties of a material that reveal 
its elastic and inelastic behaviours when force is applied, thereby indi- 
eating its suitability for mechanical applications. For example, modulus 
of elasticity, tensile strength, hardness, fatigue limit etc. 

2.11 Mechanical Testing — The procedure followed for determining 
the mechanical properties. 

2.12 Nil Ductility Transition Temperature — The maximum tempe- 
rature where a standard drop weight specimen breaks into two pieces. 

2.13 Proportional Limit — The stress at which the strain just ceases to 
be proportional to the applied stress. 

2.14 R-ratio ( Plastic strain ratio ) — It is the ratio of the true strain 
that has occurred in a width direction * w ' perpendicular to the direction 
of applied stress and in the plane of the sheet, to the concomitant true 
strain in the thickness direction * t *, 

2.15 Resilience — The amount of energy per unit volume released upon 

unloading. 



ISi5069-l!»82 

2.16 Strain — A measure of change in size or shape of a body with 
reference to its original shape or size, as a result of the applied force. 
Strain is a non-dimensional quantity frequently expressed in centimetres 
per centimetre. 

Note 1 — Strain may be either linear ( tensile strain or compressive strain ) or 
angular ( shear strain ). 

Note 2 — Linear thermal expansion per unit length, sometimes called * thermal 
strain ' is not considered as strain in mechanical testing. 

2*16.1 Elastic Strain — The change per unit dimension due to stress 
within the elastic range, with recovery of the original dimensions upon 
release of load, given the time. 

2*16.2 Linear Strain — The change per unit length of a linear dimension 
due to the force applied. 

2.16.2.1 Axial strain — The linear strain parallel to the longitudinal 
axis of the specimen. 

2.16.2*2 Transverse strain — The linear strain in transverse ( per- 
pendicular ) to the axis of the specimen. 

2.16.3 Plastic Strain or Permanent Strain — The change per unit dimen- 
sion due to applied stress that does not disappear or will remain after 
removal of applied stress. 

2.16.4 Shear or Angular Strain — The tangent of the angle of rotation of 
lines originally drawn perpendicular to two parallel lines on the body, 
under the action of a force. 

For small strains, this angle in radian and its tangent may be taken 
as equal. 

The aforementioned definition is made clear from Fig, 1. 

Shear strain = tan = -7 

n 



where 



= shear angle, 

a =a linear displacement under shear force, and 

h = distance between the parallel lines drawn originally on thi 
body. 



IS 13059-1982 




*°*^ SHEAR FORCE — ^ 




'''■'■': . ■' 






7 


1 


T 


/ 
/ 

/ 

i 

1 

/ 


/ 

/ 
/ 
/ 

/ 
1 


\ 




1 
i 

1 

1 

1 


/ 

/ 
I 

1 
1 
1 






-* — SHEAR FORCE 





Fig. 1 Shear or Angular Strain 

2.16.5 Total True, Strain ( True, Natural or Logarithmic Strain ) — The 
natural logarithm of the ratio of length at the moment of observation to 
the original gauge length. 

2.16.6 True Strain — The ratio of increase in length to the instantaneous 
length at the beginning of the deformation, 

2.17 Stress — Expressed as force per unit area. 

2.17.1 Fracture Stress — The true normal stress on the minimum cross 
sectional area at the beginning of fracture. It usually appUes to the 
tension test of un-notched specimens. 

2.17.2 Nominal Stress — The stress computed by simple elasticity 
formula ignoring stress-raisers and disregarding plastic flow. 

2*17.3 Normal Stress — The stress or the component of stress acting 
perpendicular to a given plane. Normal stress may either be a tensile stress 
or a compressive stress depending on the direction of the force. 

2.17.4 Principal Stresses — The normal stresses on three mutually 
perpendicular planes on which there are no shear stresses, 

2.17.5 Residual Stress — The stress present in a body that is free from 
external force or thermal gradient. 

2.17.6 Shear Stress — The stress component tangential to the plane on 
which the forces act. 



18:5069*1982 



2.17,7 Torsional Stress — The shear stress of a transverse cross-section 
resulting from twisting. 

2rl7.8 True Stress — The axial stress in tension or compression calcula- 
ted on the basis of the instantaneous cross-sectional area instead of the 
original area. 

2.18 Stress-Strain Diagram — A diagram similar to the load-extension 
curve but plotted with corresponding value of stress, as ordinate and 
strain, as abscissa. 

2.19 Transverse Test — A test generally applied to brittle materials 
like cast iron, by subjecting a suitable test piece of the material to trans- 
verse loads when held between two horizontal supports ( mandrels ) in a 
testing machine. 

2.20 Verification — The process of testing an instrument for the purpose 
of assessing the errors of pointer indications. The assessment is to deter- 
mine whether an instrument conforms to the stipulations laid down. 

3. TENSION, COMPRESSION, SHEAR AND TORSION TESTING 

3.1 Breaking Load or Final Load — The load at which the specimen 
fractures ( see Fig. 2 ). 



FRACTURE 




Fig, 2 Load-Elongation Diagram 

3.2 Cohesive Strength — The hypothetical stress in an un-notched bar 
causing tensile fracture without plastic deformation 

3*3 Compression Strength — The maximum compressive stress that a 
material is capable of developing, based on original area of cross-section. 

Note — In the case of materials which fail in compression by a shattering 
fracture, the compressive strength has a definite value. In the case of materials 
which do not fail in compression by shattering fracture, the value obtained for com- 
pressive strength is an arbitrary one based on the degree of distortion that is 
regarded as indicating complete failure of the material. 



IS 1 5069. 1982 

3.4 Elastic Constants — Modulus of elasticity either in tension or com- 
pression {E) or in shear {G); bulk modulus (K); and Poisson's ratio {a]. 
These are related by: 

E 

a) 1 + ff = 2^ , and 

b) £ = 3A" ( 1 - 2(r ). 

3.5 Elongation — The increase in gauge length measured after fracture 
of the specimen within the gauge length. It is usually expressed as a 
percentage of the original gauge length. 

3.5.1 Percentage of Permanent Elongation — The permanent variation in 
the gauge length of a tensile test piece after removal of the prescribed 
stress expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length. 

3.5.2 Uniform Elongation — The elongation which occurs between the 
upper yield point and the tensile strength. 

3.5.3 Tield Point Elongation — Beyond the upper yield point, the appre- 
ciable elongation which occurs before the load again resumes a steady 
increase, 

3.6 Extensometer — A device for measuring the extension or linear 
strain. 

3.7 Extensometer Gauge Length — The length of the parallel portion 
of the test piece used for the measurement of extension using an extenso- 
meter. This gauge length may differ from the original gauge length of the 
specimen. 

3.8 Gauge Length — The prescribed part of the cylindrical or prismatic 
portion of the test piece on which elongation is measured at any moment 
during the test. Following distinction is made between original and final 
gauge lengths: 

a) Original gauge length is the gauge length before the test piece is 
strained. 

b) Final gauge length is the gauge length after the test piece has 
fractured and the fractured parts are carefully fitted together as 
nearly as a single piece. 

3.9 Maximum Load — The maximum load which the test piece has 

withstood during the test ( see Fig. 2 ). 

3.10 Modulus of Elasticity — The ratio of stress to corresponding strain 
below the proportional limit: 

a) Young's modulus (£) is the modulus in tension or compression. 

8 



IS: 3069-1982 

b) Rigidity modulus or modulus of transverse elasticity or shear 
modulus (G) is the modulus corresponding to shfear strain 
resulting from shear stress. 

c) Bulk modulus (K) is the modulus corresponding to the volumetric 
strain resulting from three mutually perpendicular and equal 
direct stresses. 

Note — The stress-strain relationship of many metals does not conform to 
Hooke's law throughout the elastic range and deviates from it even at stresses well 
below the elastic limit. For such metals the slope of either the tangent to 
the stress-strain curve at specified point, the secant drawn from the origin to any 
specified point on the stress-strain curve or the chord connecting any two specified 
points on the stress-strain curve is usually taken to be the modulus of elasticity. In 
these cases, the modulus is correspondingly designated as tangent, secant, or chord 
modulus with the indication of stress or stresses. 

3.11 Modulus of Rupture — The nominal stress at fracture in bend or 
torsion tests. 

3.11.1 Modulus of Rupture in Bending ( 5b ) — The bending moment at 
the fracture divided by the section modulus: 

. Mc 
'Jh = —J- 

whcre 

M 5= The maximum bending moment computed from maxi- 
mum load and original moment arm, 

c = the initial distance from the neutral axis to the extreme 
fibre where the failure occurs, and 

/ = the initial moment of inertia of cross-section about the 
neutral axis. 

3.11.2 Modulus of Rupture in Torsion {S^) — The torque at the fracture 
divided by the polar section modulus: 

where 

T = the maximum twisting moment, 

r «= the original outer radius, and 

J = the polar moment of inertia of the original cross-section. 

Note — When the proportional limit in tension or compression or shear 
is exceeded the modulus of rupture in bending or torsion is greater than the 
corresponding actual maximum tensile or compressive or shear stress in the extreme 
fibre, independent of the effect of stress concentration near the points of application 
of load or torque. 



IS: 5069 -1982 

3.12 N- Value ( Work Hardening Exponent/Strain Hardening Goem- 
cient ) — The n-value approximates to a measure of the stretch forming 

capability of material. 

3.13 Necking or Waisting — A form or shape of the localized reduction 
in cross-section occurring in a ductile metal under tension before fracture. 

3.14 Notch — A slot or groove of specified characteristics intentionally 
cut in a test piece to break it at the desired section. 

3.15 Notch Rupture Ductility ( Notch Ductility ) — Notch rupture 
ductility of a notched tensile test is the percentage reduction in area of 
the specimen in the plane of failure at the root of the notch. 

3.16 Notch Sensitiveness — A measure of reduction in strength of the 
metal caused by the presence of notch resulting in stress concentration. 
The strength may be tensile, impact or cyclic ( dynamic ) 

3.17 Notch Sharpness — A term used to describe the severity of the 
notch used on the tensile test specimen. It is expressed as the ratio of the 
diameter of the specimen at the notch to twice the notch root radius. 

3.18 Notch Strength Ratio — The ratio of nominal stress required to 
fracture a notched specimen, to that required to fracture an un-notched 
specimen. 

3.19 Notch Tensile ( or Creep ) Testing — A test for determining the 
influence of a surface notch upon the properties of a material. It may be 
conducted as a tensile or as creep test. 

3.20 Percentage Reduction of Area — The ratio of the maximum 
change in the area of cross-section during test to the original area of cross- 
section, expressed as a percentage. 

The smallest cross-section may be measured at or after fracture as 
specified. The term, percentage reduction of area, generally, refers 
to that after fracture. 

3.21 Pernianent Set — The plastic deformation which persists after the 
removal of the applied load ( see Fig. 3 ). 

10 



IS ! 5069 - 1982 



STRESS AT J2 
PERMANENT £ 
SET LIMIT Hj 




STRAIN 



PERMANENT SET 
FiQ. 3 Permanent Set Measurement 

3.22 Poisson's Ratio { cr ) — The absolute value of the ratio of the trans- 
verse strain to the corresponding axial strain in a body subjected to 
uniaxial stress, usually within the elastic range. 

3.23 Proof Stress ( Non-proportional Elongation ) ( /?p ) - The stress 
at which the non-proportional elongation amounts to a specified percent- 
age of original gauge length. The proof stress which refers to the stress for 
a non-proportional elongation or a permanent set is usually specified by 
O'l or 2 or 0*5 percent of ori^iinal gauge length. It is conventionally 
indicated by R^ O'l or /?p 0*2 or /?p 05. The proof stress in the case of 
non-proportional elongation is derived from the stress-strain diagram 
(5««Fig.4). 




PERMANENT ELONGATION 
Fig. 4 Proof Stress by Non-proportional Elongation 



11 



IS I 5069-1982 

3.24 Proof Stress ( Total Elongation ) or Proof Stress Underload 

( i?t ) — The stress corresponding to a specified percentage of the original 
gauge length which is a made-up of the combined elastic and inelastic 
elongations ( see Fig. 5 ). ( Usually indicated by the symbol R% with total 
elongation suffixed, for example, R% 0'5 ). 

The value obtained by total elongation method would only be 
equivalent to R^ if suitable allowance is made for the measurement of 
elastic extension. 

3»25 Shear Force — A type of force which causes or tends to cause two 
contiguous parts of the body to slide relative to each other in a direction 
parallel to their plane of contact. 

3.26 Shear Fracture — A mode of fracture in crystalline materials result- 
ing from the movement along cleavage planes which are preferentially 
oriented in the direction of the shear stress. 



\ 


1 


PROOF STRESS ( Rt ) 
STRESS 


/ \ STRAIN 


t 


^« J— TOTAL ELONGATION 



Fig. 5 Proof Stress by Total Elongation 

3.27 Shear Strength — The stress required to produce fracture in the 
plane of cross-section, acted on by the shear force. 

3.28 Tensile Strength — The stress corresponding to maximum load in 
a tension test ( see Fig. 2 ) . 

3.29 Torque — The product of force and the perpendicular distance 
from its line of application to the axis about which it acts. 

3.30 Torsional Movement — The algebraic sum of the couples or the 
moments of the external forces about the axis of twist or both. 



12 



IS I 5069 - 1982 

3.31 Yield Point — The first stress in a material, usually less than the 
maximum attainable stress, at which an increase in strain results without 
an increase in stress ( see Fig. 2 ). If there is a decrease in the stress after 
yielding a distinction is made between upper and lower yield points, 

3.31*1 Apparent Tield Stress — In tests where a stress-strain diagram is 
not obtained, the value of stress determined from the load at which a 
lag/hesitation or drop of the pointer is first observed. The load taken is 
the maximum, usually recorded by the slave pointer during yield 
extension. 

3.31.2 Lower Tield Stress ( R^L ) — In tests where a stress-strain diagram 
is obtained, the lowest value of stress measured during plastic deformation 
at yield, ignoring any initial transient effects occurring. 

3.31.3 Upper Tield Stress { RqH ) — In tests where a stress-strain 
diagram is obtained, the value of stress measured at the commencement 
of plastic deformation at yield, or the value of stress measured at the first 
peak obtained during yielding even when that peak is equal to or less 
than any subsequent peaks observed during plastic deformation at yield. 

4. HARDNESS TESTING 

4.1 Brinell Hardness Test — An indentation hardness test using cali- 
brated machines to force a hard steel ball, under specified conditions of 
load and time, into the surface of the material under test and to measure 
the diameter of the resulting impression after release of the load. 

4.1.1 Brinell Hardness Number ( HB ) — A number related to the area 
of the permanent impression made by ball indenter of the specified size 
pressed into the surface of the material under a specified load. The surface 
area of the impression is determined from the mean diameter of the rim 
of the impression and the ball diameter. Brinell hardness number is 
calculated from the formula: 

TT -2" ( ^ - V ^^ - fi^* ) 

where 

F =* test load in Newton, 

D = diameter of ball in millimetres, and 

d = mean diameter of the impression in millimetres. 

4.2 Hardness — The resistance of metal to plastic deformation, usually 
by indentation. However, the term may also refer to stiffness, or temper 
or to resistance to scratching, abrasion or cutting. Indentation hardness 
may be measured by various hardness tests, such as Brinell, Rockwell and 
Vickers. 

13 



IS : 5069 - 1982 

4.3 Indentation Hardness — A number related to the area or to the 
depth of the impression made by an indenter of fixed geometry under a 
known static load. 

The term * indentation hardness * has no quantitative meaning, 
except in terms of a particular test in which the area and shape of the 
indenter, the identing load and other conditions of test are specified. 

4.4 Knoop Hardness Test — An indentation hardness test using cali- 
brated machines to force into the surface of the material under test, a 
rhombic based diamond pyramid indenter of specified edge angles, under 
stipulated conditions and to measure the long diagonal after removal of 
the load. 

4.4.1 Knoop Hardness Number ( HK ) — A number related to the applied 
load and to the projected area of the permanent impression made by a 
rhombic based diamond pyramid indenter ( of included edge angles of 
172°30' and 130°0' ) derived from the formula: 

"^ ~ 0-070 28 d^ 

P = applied load in Newton, and 

d = long diagonal of the impression in millimetres. 

In reporting Knoop hardness numbers, the test load should always 
be stated. 

4.5 Micro Hardness Tests — These tests are usually conducted using 
metallurgical microscopes or special purpose instruments under loads less 
than 1 kg normally in the range of 15 to 500 g, indenter being the 
standard Vicker*s diamond pyramid or the Knoop indenter. Advantage 
of this method is that the hardness of individual constituents of a micro- 
structure may be measured. 

4.6 Poldi Hardness Tester — A portable hardness tester consisting of a 
holder, carrying a 10 mm diameter steel ball fitted to alide along a square 
steel bar of known hardness. The ball is placed on the surface of the 
component to be tested and the bracket carrying the bar and ball is given 
a smart hammer blow, which makes a simultaneous indentation of the 
ball on both the standard bar and the work-piece, by virture of the ball 
strapped between the two. A comparison of the diameters of the 
indentations as per the following relationship gives a measure of the 
hardness, HB, of the component: 



where 



HB ( component ) = HB ( standard bar ) x 

14 



D - \/D^ — 42 
D - \/D^~^^do^ 



tS : 5069 - I9d:2 

where 

D = diameter of ball indenter ( usually 10 mm ); 

^D «= diameter of the impression on standard bar used; and 

do = diameter of the impression on the component. 

4.7 Rockwell Hardness Test — An indentation hardness test using 
calibrated machines to force a diamond cone indenter or a hard steel ball 
under specified conditions into the surface of the material under test in 
two operations ( preliminary and total loads ) and to measure the 
difference in depth of the impression under the specified load condition. 

4.7.1 Rockwell Hardness Number { HR ) ~- A number derived from the 
net increase in the depth of impression as the load on an indenter 
is increased from fixed preliminary load to total load and then returned 
to the preliminary load. 

Indenters for the Rockwell test include steel balls of several specified 
diameters and a diamond cone indenter having an included angle of 120° 
with a spherical tip of a radius of 0*200 mm. Rockwell hardness numbers 
are always quoted for a scale symbol representing the indenter, the load 
and the dial used, 

4.8 Rockwell Superficial Hardness Test — This test is made on a 
machine similar to that used for Rockwell hardness tests but differs as to 
preliminary load and total load. One point of hardness of regular 
Rockwell corresponds to 2 microns, while in superficial, it corresponds to 
1 micron. 

4.8.1 Rockwell Superficial Hardness Number — A number derived from the 
net increase in the depth of impression as the load on an indenter 
is increased from the fixed preliminary load to a total load and then 
returned to the preliminary load. 

Identers of the Rockwell superficial test include steel balls of several 
specified diameters and the diamond cone indenter of an included angle 
of 120° with a spherical tip of 200 mm radius. Rockwell superficial 
hardness numbers are always quoted with a scale number representing the 
indenter^ the load and the dial used. 

4.9 Scleroscope Test — A hardness test, wherein the loss of kinetic 
energy of a falling *tup\ resulting from the indentation caused by the 
impact of the * tup ' on the metal sample, is indicated by the height of 
rebound, 

15 



IS : 5069 - 1982 

4,10 Vickers Hardness Test — An indentation hardness test using 
calibrated machines to force a square based diamond pyramid indenter 
having specified face angles into the surface of the specimen under a pre- 
determined load and to measure the diagonals of the resulting impression 
after release of the load. 

4.10.1 Vickers Hardness Number ( HV) — The Vickers Hardness Number 

is proportional to the quotient of the load in Newtons applied to a square 

based diamond pyramid indenter of included face angles of 136°, by the 

surface area of the impression in square millimetres calculated from the 

measured diagonals of the impression, Vickers hardness number is 

calculated from the formula: 

136° 
0-102 X 2FSin -^ 

HV = ^^ - c- 0- 1891 F/t/2 

where 

F = applied load in Newtons, and 

d = arithmetic mean of the diagonals of the impression in 
millimetres. 

5, BEND TESTING 

5.1 Angle of Bend — The angle through which the specimen is bent. 

5.2 Bend Test — A test performed to indicate the ductihty and soudness 
of metallic materials by bending a standard test piece over a specified 
angle, a round a pin or mandrel of a specified diameter in a testing 
machine and noting the behaviour of the material during and after 
bending process. 

The ductility is judged by non-cracking ( or otherwise ) of the 
material under the conditions of test. 

The following four general types of bend tests are the recognized 
methods used for bending: 

a) Free Bend — The Bend obtained by applying force at the ends of 
a specimen without any application of force at the point of 
maximum bending. 

b) Guided Bend — The bend obtained by using a plunger to force the 
specimen into a die in order to produce the desired contour of 
the outside and inside surfaces of the specimen. 

c) Semi-guided Bend — The bend obtained by applying a force 
directly to the specimen in the portion specified. In order to 

16 



IS 15069-1982 



obtain this, the specimen is either held at one end or forced 
around a pin or around an edge. When the specimen is suppor- 
ted at the ends, it is bent by a force applied in the middle. In 
certain cases, the bend may be started in this manner and 
finished in the manner of a free bend. 

d) Wrap-around Bend — The bend obtained when a specimen is 
wrapped around a cylindrical mandrel in a closed helix. 

5.3 Bending Moment — At any section of a member subjected to 
bending, is the algebraic sum of couples or moments of all external forces, 
or both, acting on one side. 

5*4 Mandrel or Pin -— The plunger or tool used in making guided, 
semi-guided or wrap-around bend tests by the application of bending 
force in the inner surface of the bend, 

5,5 Radius of Bend — The minimum radius of the inside surface ot the 
bend specimen. 

6. CREEP TESTING 

6,1 Creep — The time dependent part of strain of a metal or alloy when 
stressed below its yield point or proportional limit. Its effect is more 
marked at elevated temperatures, and therefore, is important in the case 
of metals and alloys for high temperature uses, 

6.1.1 Primary Creep — The exhaustion stage of creep at a diminishing 
rate ( see Fig. 6 ). 

6.1.2 Secondary Creep — The stable stage of creep at a constant rate. 

6.1.3 Tertiary Creep — The final stage of creep at an accelerating rate, 
preceding fracture ( see Fig. 6 ) . 



t 








FRACTURE. 
/ 




1 

it 

ST 
< 




^^ 


/- 


B^ 


0. 
Ui 

o 




/ 


y 


time: — ^ 








[~ 


^ . crr^ridtn A ou ^oc-r-ri _ 


^ A 




* 


/- 







■primary creep tertiary creep 
Fig. 6 Stage s op Creep 
17 



IS t 5069 . 1982 



6.2 Creep Ductility — Creep ductility is indicated by the elongation at 
rupture of a cxxep specimen. 

6.3 Creep Limit — The maximum stress which a metal or an alloy can 
withstand indefinitely without deforming faster than at a specified strain 
rate. 

6.4 Creep Recovery — The time dependent portion of the decrease in 
strain following unloading of a creep specimen. 

6.5 Creep Rupture or Stress Rupture Strength — The stress that shall 
cause fracture at a constant temperature in a given time. 

6.6 Creep Strength — The constant nominal stress that will bring about 
a specified quantity of creep in a given time or creep rate at constant 
temperature. 

6.7 Dynamic Creep — Creep that occur under conditions of fluctuating 
load or fluctuating temperature. 

6.8 Initial or Instantaneous Stress — In a relaxation test is the stress 
enduring at the instant the specimen reaches the desired strain level. 

6.9 Instantaneous Recovery - — The decrease in strain occurring imme- 
diately upon unloading a creep specimen, before any creep recovery takes 
place. 

6.10 Instantaneous Strain — The strain occurring immediately upon 
loading a creep specimen before the commencement of creep. 

6.11 Percentage of Total Plastic Strain — The total plastic extension 
of the gauge length inclusive of any plastic extension during loading, 
expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length ( see Fig. 7 ). 

INITIAL PLASTIC STRAIN -i 

ELASTIC ^ ,^ \ ^, 

— STRAIN ~^/*y 




CREEP STRAIN 
INCREASING WITH 
TIME AT CONSTANT 
STRESS 



STRAIN 



Fig. 7 Total Plastic Strain in Creep 
18 



IS 15069-1982 

6.12 Rate of Creep — The slope of the creep time curve at a given time. 

6.13 Rupture — The complete fracture of the test piece within the 
parallel length under constant load and constant temperature, 

6.14 Stress Relaxation — The time dependent decrease in stress in a 
member subjected to creep at a constant strain. 

6.15 Time to Rupture — The total time elapsed at the test temperature 
and test load, between the commencement of the test and the rupture of 
the test piece. 

7. FATIGUE TESTING 

7.1 Coaxing ( or Understressing ) — An improvement in the fatigue 
behaviour of a material as a result of initial cyclic stressing below the 
normal fatigue limit and then subjected gradually to the desired stress 
range. Apparently due to strain ageing effects, it may double the number 
of reversals to failure in the case of steels stressed above their normal 
fatigue limit. 

7.2 Corrosion Fatigue — The fatigue aggravated by corrosion. 

7.3 Cumulative Damage Law — In a fatigue test employing various 
stress ranges and frequencies, sometimes with rest periods between 
successive application of stress on a single specimen, failure occurs when 
the sum of damage ratios ( cycle ratios ) attains unityj that is 



1. 
where 



iw 



n ~ number of cycles at stress S actually performed, and 
jV = average number of cycles to failure at the stress S. 

It is also known as * linear damage law ' or * Miner's law *. 

7.4 Cycle Ratio — The ratio of the number of cycles ( r ) of stress 
applied to a specimen ( or structure ), to the number of cycles to failure 
( JV" ) at the same stress, that is, «/JV. 

7.5 Damage Ratio — An indication of the * used-up ' life of the material 
subjected to a number of stress reversals at stress ranges above the fatigue 
limit. It is, usually, reckoned by the ratio of the difference betweeen the 
fatigue life (JV) of the material at the particular stress stepped-off from 
the S-N curve and the number of reversals ( n ) actually endured, to the 

jV-n 
fatigue life (^), that is, — ^ . 

19 



IS : 5069 - 1982 

7.6 Damping Capacity — The ability of the material to absorb the 

energy of vibration or cyclic stressing by internal friction resulting in the 
conversion of mechanical energy into heat energy. 

7.7 Fatigue — A phenomenon leading to fracture under repeated or 
fluctuating or cyclic stresses below the tensile strength of the material. 
Fatigue fractures are progressive starting as minute cracks developing 
under the action of fluctuating stresses. 

7.8 Fatigue Life — The number of cycles of stress that can be sustained 
prior to failure of a specified nature for a stated stress condition, 

7*9 Fatigue or Endurance Limit — The maximum stress below which a 
material can presumably endure an infinite number of stress cycles. If the 
stress is not completely reversed, the value of the mean stress or the mini- 
mum stress, or the stress ratio, should be mentioned ( see Fig. 8 ) . 

7.10 Fatigue or Endurance Ratio -— The ratio of the fatigue limit to 
the tensile strength. For steels, it is of the order of 5 ( extreme values 
lying between 0-35 to 60 up to 1500 MPa. ) 

7.11 Fatigue Range or Range of Stress — The algebraic difference 
between maximum and minimum stress, that is, Smax — Smin 



ENDURANCE 
TlMlt 



INFINITE LIFE 



N - No. OF CYCLES (LOGARITHMIC) m^ 

Fig. 8 Endurance Limit from jS'-JV Curve 

7.12 Fatigue Strengtli — The limiting stress below which a material will 
withstand a specified number of cycles of stress without fracture. 

7.13 Fatigue Testing — The testing of material or component under 
cyclic stressing ( fluctuating or alternating ) with its maximum below the 
ultimate tensile strength of the material, 

7.14 Maximum Stress ( *9inax ) — The highest algebraic stress value in 
the stress cycle ( tensile stress considered positive and compressive stress 
negative ). 



20 



13:5669.1982 

7*15 Mean Stress or Steady Component of Stress { Sja) — The 
algebraic mean between the maximum and minimum stress in one cycle, 
that is: 

^m =" 2 

7.16 Mlninaum Stress ( omin ) — The stress having the lowest algebraic 
value in the cycle ( tensile stress considered positive and compressive stress 
negative ) . 

7.17 Overstressing — The damage to fatigue properties of a material 
by cycling for a time at a stress above the fatigue limit. 

7.18 Scatter of Fatigue Data — The variability of the fatigue life deter- 
mined at a constant stress amplitude influenced by such causes as surface 
condition, type of mounting, axiality of stress, the type of testing machine 
used, the hetrogeneity of the material and the like. It is the general 
observation that scatter is wider: 

a) on smoothly polished specimens rather than on notched speci- 
mens: 

b) on high-strength materials ( such as high tensile steel and age- 
hardened aluminium alloys and the like ) rather than on soft 
materials ( such as mild steel and copper )• and 

c) at lower stress amplitudes. 

7.19 Stress Amplitude ( or Variable Component of Stress ) ( ^^a ) — 

One-half of the fatigue range of stress, that is: 

c -mas — ~mln 



7.20 Stress Cycle — The mode of application of stress ( see Fig. 9A and 
9B ) in fatigue testing and may be of: 

a) stress alternating between positive and negative limits; 

b) stress completely reversed, alternating between equal tension and 
compression values, with zero as the mean stress; and 

c) stress pulsating or fluctuating, that is, regularly varying between 
zero and a maximum. 

7»21 S/N ( Wohler ) Curve ( Stress-Number of Cycles Curve ) — 

The most common, method of representing the fatigue test results by 
plotting the number of cycles to failure as abscissa and stress amplitude as 
ordinate, using the logarithmic scale for the number of cycles ( see Fig, 8 ) . 

21 



IS : 5069 • 1982 



lA 
UJ 




TIME 



Sa Stress amplitude 
Sj\fax maximum stress Sjifin minimum stress 

9A Stress-Time Curve to Indicate Various Stresses in Stress Cycles 




FLUCTUATING 

COMPRESSION 

Alternating stress: Stress varies from positive to negative through zero. 

Fluctuating stress: Stress varies from positive to zero or from negative to zero over a 
range. 

9B Types of Cyclic Stresses 
Fig. 9 Stresses 



22 



1% : 5069 - ld82 

7.22 Stress l^atio — The algebraic ratio of two specified stress values in 
a stress cycle. The two commonly used ratios are; (a) the ratio of 
the amplitude of the alternating stress to the mean stress^ and (b) the ratio 
of minimum to maximum stress. 

7.23 Thermal Fatigue — The fatigue failure as a result of repeated or 
fluctuating thermal stresses. 

8. IMPACT TESTING 

8.1 Brittleness — A tendency to fracture without appreciable defor- 
mation. It may be indicated in impact tests by low values or by very low 
percentage reduction of area in the tensile test. 

8.2 Gharpy Test — A pendulum type single blow impact test, in which 
the specimen ( usually notched ) is supported at both ends, as a simple 
beam, and broken by a falling pendulum on the face opposite to and 
immediately behind the notch. The energy absorbed, as determined by 
the subsequent rise of pendulum, is a measure of impact strength or notch 
toughness and is expressed in joules. 

8.3 Impact Test — The test to determine the behaviour of materials 
when subjected to high rates of { sudden ) loading, usually in bending, 
tension or torsion. It measures the energy absorbed in breaking the 
specimen by a single blow or impact. 

The results of impact tests have limited application, and only afford 
an indication of the behaviour of the material with a notch subjected to a 
sudden blow or impact. 

8.4 Impact Strength/Impact Energy — The amount of energy required 
to fracture a material usually measured by means of an Izod test or 
Gharpy test. 

8.5 Izod Impact Test — A pendulum type single blow impact test 
in which the specimen, usually notched, is fixed at one end and broken by 
a falling pendulum. The energy absorbed as measured by the subsequent 
rise of the pendulum in a measure of impact strength or notch toughness. 
The impact strength is expressed in joules. 

8.6 Notch — A slot or groove of specified characteristics intentionally cut 
in a test piece so as to concentrate the stresses ( see also 3.14 ). 

8.7 Notch Brittleness — The susceptibility of a material to a britde 
fracture at points of stress concentration. For example, in a notch tensile 
test if notch strength is less than the tensile strength, it is said to be * notch 
brittle *, otherwise * notch ductile *. 

23 



8.8 Notched Bar Test — Bend tests in which a bar, notched on to one 
side, is bent with the notch in tension. The rate of bending may be slow 
or rapid ( as from a blow ) and with many variants. The different tests 
are Gharpy, Izod, Pellini Drop-weight, etc, 

8.9 Notch Sensitivity — A notch measure of the reduction in strength of 
a metal caused by a notch or in effect, stress concentration. Such 
* strength ' may be in static tensile, bend or ( dynamic ) fatigue or impact 
( see also 3.19 ). 

8.10 Notch Toughness — The high resistance of material to fracture 
under suddenly applied loads at any stress raiser, such as notch. 

8.11 Toughness — The ability of a material to absorb energy and 
deform plastically before fracture. It is usually measured by the energy 
absorbed in a notched impact test like Izod and Gharpy tests. The area 
under the stress-strain curve in a tensile test is also a measure of the 
toughness and as such, is proportional to the combined effects of tensile 
strength and ductility. 

8.12 Transition Temperature — Temperature in a range in which the 
change from ductile to brittle fracture occurs in a notched bar impact test. 

9. CUPPING TEST 

9.1 Cupping Number — The depth of impression at fracture, in the 
cupping test, usually expressed in millimetres. 

9.2 Cupping Test — A mechanical test used to determine the ductility 
and drawing properties of sheet metal. It consists in measuring the 
maximum depth of bulge ( or cup ) which can be formed before fracture. 

9.3 Erichsen Test — A cupping test to measure the suitability of material 
for deep drawing. A 20-mm diameter ball is forced into a sheet of 
material through the centre of a pair of * annuli ' used to lightly clamp 
the sheet. The dome is forced into the sheet. Its height before cracking 
and the extent of surface roughening as a result of grain coarsening deter- 
mine the suitability or otherwise of the material for different forming 
operations. 

10. FRACTURE TOUGHNESS TEST 

10.1 Crystallographic Cleavage — The separation of a crystal along a 
plane of fixed orientation, relative to the three dimensional crystal 
structure, within which separation process causing the newly formed 
surfaces to move away from one another, in directions containing major 
components of motion perpendicular to the fixed plane. 

24 



IS 15069-1982 

iO»^ Piane-strain Fracture Tougkness { KIC ) — It is the material 
toughness property measured in terms of the stress intensity factor and is 
defined as the resistance to crack propagation in the presence of a notch. 

10.3 Stress Intensity Factor { Kl) — A measure of the stress field 
intensity near the tip of an ideal crack in a linear elastic medium when 
deformed so that the crack faces are displaced apart, normal to the crack 
plane. KI is directly proportional to applied load and depends on 
specimen geometry. 



25 



iNTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 



Base Units 










Quaniiiy 


Unit 


Symbol 






length 


metre 


m 






Mass 


Itiiogram 


kg 






Time 


second 


s 






Electric current 


ampere 


A 






Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 






temperature 










Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 






Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 






Supplementary Units 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 






Plane angle 


radian 


rad 






Solid angle 


ste radian 


sr 






Derived Units 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 




N -= 1 kg.m/s^ 


Energy 


joule 


J 




d = 1 N,m 


Power 


watt 


W 




W = 1J/S 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 




Wb = 1 V.s 


Flux density 


testa 


T 




T = 1 Wb/m2 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 




Hz = 1 c/s (s-i) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 




S == 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 




V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 




Pa = 1 N/m" 



PUBLICATIONS OF iNDrAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 10 00O Indian Standards covering various subJActs havd b««ri 
jss^ued sc fafx Of these, the standards belonging to the Slructurat «nd 
M^lais Group f^ll under ti>« following categorieas 



arnrlng allijys and epitfari 
CoppEfcf ind copper aii^ys^ 

CnrroslCHi ^r&l!>ectlDri 

Crai^ei and iiUivd appi Jancaa 
D«iiiari ccHdIeti 

Foundry raw materlaltand oqulpmeFit 
L*Rd, line, ting antimony ar>d lh*U 

allD^a 
tpQM m^U\$ and thfilr alloys 
M«l9lllc nnfciNfrS 

MfltailOQrqphy and hant t realm en t 
Non-ddilruct^ve teilini) 
Oral Brvd raw materials 
Pfcg Iron, cnsl iron and malPeiSbla 

cat I |rbr> 



PQwd^r metalljfgloul malar iali and 

prgduda 
Pfeciou& mttali 
Qua lily control 
RairacloFies 
S1o«^l ci^&tljiga 
StadI rof^ingi 

Sti^l prcdyctf, wfOUQht and aIIqst 
Stfifll tubsB, plps& anij ntttriQB 
Sltucturnl ahai»dfi 
Woldlnfl 
UxiclaAftlflti-d 
Engjn^eri' illclQ 
Handliook lor veldfri 
^Sl handbooks )or itritelural Bng^nvvra 
Staam tablet 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



iSr Bullellfi ( Publlsh^il ^^ury Monlh 

SInglo Copy 

Annual Siih^^rtptfon 
Standards : MoMhIy AddHfons 

Slngif^ Copy 
Annual SubscFlpllon 
A n n ua I Rep rl $ ( 1 rom E »4a-4S n war da } 



i-li 
■ ■4) 


■ ■P 
■ + i 


■PIT 


R* 4'aD 


■■■ + 


■ -■ 
P-" 


Rb 0*80 

RBl-OQtoT'U 
Rm 100 DO 



INDIAN STANDAItDS INSTITUTIOfI 

Mmuk Bhavan. E) Bahadjr Sha^ Z^lar Maia, MEW DELHI l1l}aD2 



T«laphonea ; » W 21. S7 01 31 

Western t Nm&iiy Cnambgra, (^rant Road 

Eastflrn : 5 duswrinelik^e Approaeh 

Soyth&rn : C, 1 T. Campus 

Morth^rn : B6a, Phas€ VII 

^Pu^hpak\ Nurmohamad Sheikh Marg, Khanpur 
■F' BLbcK, Unlt^ ^Icfgi N^raelmNarai^ Sqysr^ 
Gangorn Complea^a Bhadbhada Rnndi T. T. Ma gar 

!E3E Kalpa,n9i Area 

&-e-SBC L. Na 6uplJa Mjifg 

R,14 YiJdhlat^r M^rg, C Schom& 

117i'41B S Sarvodaya Na&ar 

PJItllputra Industriol E^tiita 

Hanleji BIdg ( End Floor h R'/ Sl^lion Road 



Tel«gfBfnt ; MpnEiKs^ngthai 

Telephone 

BOMBAY 41;) OC07 ^7 37 2fl 

C A LCU TT A 70&0 72 27 SO SO 

M ADR A S aO0 1 1 3 41 24 4Z 

5. Aa S. r^AGAR — 
(MOHALI } IfloaSI 

AHMAD A BAD 380001 2 03 91 

n A N G A LOR E 560402 ^2 4B OS 

BHO PA 1402003 §2716 

BHUBANESHWAR T^lOt* S 36 37 

JHYDER A BAD 500001 2210 83 

jAiPL.ift 30^005 fi BflSS 

KANPUR 2r/B005 4 72 92 

FAITNA eo<K3l3 B^aOfi 

TRIVANDRUM 6»5«1 52 27 



PflnleEtal NtwInrfEei Prinling preafl- Khurja, Intfli 



