**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6157 (1981): Valve inspection and test [MED 17: Chemical 
Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621 -S46-B : 620- 1 1 ( Second Reprjnt AUG UST 1993 ) IS ,' 61 57 - 1 S81 



. „ - , , (Reaffirmed 2003) 

Indian Standard 
VALVE INSPECTION AND TEST 

(First Revision ) 



03 

U 

Q 



u 
o 
O 



CD 

01 



CO 

O 



E 
£ 
o 
O 

*cc 

c 
o 

*■• 

u 

o 

to 



1. Scope — Covers inspection and pressure test requirements for valves such as gate, check, piug 
and ball type. This standard may be used for other types of valves when it is specified in the 
individual valve standards or subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser if 
not specified in individual valve standards. 

2. Inspection 

2.1 Inspection at Manufacturer's Plant— \t inspection by purchaser is specified in the purchase 
order, it shall be done at the manufacturer's plant. All reasonable facilities shall be given to the 
inspector for satisfying himself that the valves are manufactured in accordance with relevant 
standards and the purchase order. 

2.2 Inspection Outside Manufacturer's Plant — If inspection of shell components produced at other 
than the manufacturer's plant is specified in the purchase order, these components shall be 
inspected by the purchaser's inspector at that location or at the valve manufacturer's works subject 
to agreement between the purchaser and the valve manufacturer. 

2.3 Extent of Inspection — Normally inspection by the purchaser shall be limited to the followtng. 

2.3.1 Visual examination of any finished component in the assembled valve. Visual examination 
of castings to ensure conformity to IS:8092-1976 'Surface quality of steel castings for valves and 
fittings ( visual method ) '. 

2.3.2 Dimensional check of the finished valve. 

2.3.3 Dimensional checks of the valve components. These checks shall be carried out when 
a greed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

2.3.4 While witnessing of shell and seat pressure tests as specified in thia standard, the 
purchaser's inspector may waive any part of normal inspection. 

2.4 If specified in the purchase order, non-destructive testing, such as radiography and magnetic 
particle, on casting and forgings shall be carried out by the manufacturer to an agreed procedure 
or specification in the presence of purchaser's inspectors either at the valve manufacturer's plant 
or at the place of the supplier of the components. If copies of the relevant test certificates are to 
be given, this shall be so stated in the purchase order, including the number of copies required. 

2.5 Material used for various components of valves shall be as specified in various specifications, 
indicated in the relevant individual valve-type standards. Any requirements of certificates for 
physical tests and chemical composition of materials shall be stated in the purchase order. 

2-6 If inspection is specified, the valve manufacturer shall give^at least seven-days notice on the 
availability of valves for inspection and tests. 

2.7 Valves shall normally be tested before painting/primer coating. However, if phosphate coating 
is a norma! practice of the valve manufacturer before assembly, such coating need not be removed 
before testing. If pressure tests in the presence of the purchasers representative are specified in 
the purchase order, painted valves from stock may be retested without removal of paint. In case of 
valve with permanent lining such as PTFE, rubber, glass etc, the purchaser may specify pressure 
test on the shell prior to lining of the valve in addition to such tests on shell following lining. 



Adopted 8 July 1981 



© November 1981, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAKBHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 6157 -1981 

3. Pressure Tests — The pressure tests indicated in this standard shall be carried out on each 
valve. 

3.1 Shell Test — The hydrostatic test for the shell of the valves shall be carried out at a gauge 
pressure not less than 1'5 times the pressure rating at 38°C rounded off to the next higher 1 bar 
increment. During these tests discs or wedges, plugs shall remain in the open position and balls 
in the half open position. The packing gland in vaives with stuffing box shall be sufficiently tight 
to maintain the test pressure. Visually detectable leakage through pressure boundary walls is not 
acceptable. There shall be no harmful inelastic deformation during or after tests. Leakage from 
packing shall not be the cause for rejection, if it could be demonstrated that the packing will not leak 
at the rated working pressure of the valve. 

3-2 Back Seat Test — This hydrostatic test shall be made on gate-and globe-valves by applying 
pressure inside the assembled valve, with the valve ends closed, valve fully opened and either with 
stem packing removed or completely loose. Back seat test pressure shall be same as that of seat 
test pressure. 

3-3 Seat Test (Air) — Valves shall be subjected to an air seat test at any pressure between 5'5 
to 6*9 bar gauge. In case pressure rating is less than 55 bar air seat test pressure, if specified in 
purchase order, shall be equal to pressure rating. There shall be no leakage during the test. 

On valves intended for low differential pressure service or vacuum service, a low pressure air 
seat test shall be carried out by the manufacturer, if so specified in the purchase order. The test 
pressure, then shall be specified by the purchaser and witnessed by purchaser's representative, if 
so desired. The pressure shall be applied as given below: 

a) Globe-valves; under the disc 

b) Check-valves; This test is not required; and 

c) Gate, plug and ball-valves; successively to each side of the closed valves. For Valves 
designed for flow in one direction only and so marked on the valve the pressure shall be 
applied on the upstream side of the valve only. 

In all cases the valve shall be in the closed position with the side not under pressure 
open to atmosphere for detection of leakage. 

For valves in double block and bleed application and for valves with independent 
double seating, the pressure shall be applied inside the bonnet or body with the discs 
closed and both sides open for inspection. 

Plug and ball-valves shall be operated from fully closed to fully open position three 
ttmes to demonstrate satisfactory mechenical operation and continued tightness after 
operation. It is permitted to charge sealant before testing on valves relying on sealing 
compound to effect seal. 

3-4 Hydrostatic Seat Test 

3.4.1 The seat test shall be made with seat clean and free of oil. However, if necessary to 
prevent galling, the seats may be coated with a film of oil of viscosity not greater than that of 
kerosene. This requirement does not apply to a valve in which a lubricant provides the primary 
seal. The seat test shall be carried out by closing the valve in the normal manner. 

3.4.2 Valve shall be subjected to hydrostatic seat tests at a gauge pressure not less than 110 per- 
cent (the hydrostatic seat test pressure shall not exceed the body rating or seat rating whichever 
is lower) of the rated pressure at 38 D C rounded off to the next higher 1 bar increment. This sfcall 
be applied as specified in the seat test (air). There shall be no visible leakage during the test. 

3.4.3 For check valves the hydrostatic seat pressure shall be applied on the down stream side. 
In addition to this, check valves shall also b3 tested on the down stream side to 25 percent of the 
hydrostatic seat test pressure. 

No leakage is permissible during these tests. 



IS; 6157 -1981 

4. Test Duration — The specified test pressure shall be maintained for each type of test as given 
in Table 1. 



TABLE 1 TEST DURATION-SECONDS (MINIMUM ) 



Valve Size, (mm) 




Duratiotii Seconds 






Shell 


Backseat 


Seat 


Up to and including 50 


15 


15 


15 


65 Up to and including 150 


60 


15 


60 


200 Up to and including 300 


120 


15 


* 120 


350 and larger 


300 


15 


120 



5. Test Fluid 

a) Hydrostatic tests shall be carried out with water at ambient temperature containing water 
sohible oil or suitable rust inhibitor. The use of any other liquid is subject to agreement 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser, and the viscosity of the same shall in no 
case be greater than that of water. 

b) The fluid for pneumatic tests shall be either air or inert gas. Air when used shall be free 
from oil as much as possible. 

6. Test Certificates — If specified by the purchaser, test certificate confirming that the valves have 
been tested in accordance with this standard and stating the actual pressure and medilim used in 
the tests shall be furnished by the manufacturer. 

7. Special Tests 

7.1 Fire Safe Tests — When required and specified in the relevant Indian Standard, these tests shall 
be carried out to an agreed procedure and requirement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

7.2 Antistatic Device Testing — When required and specified in the relevant Indian Standard, these 
tests shall be carried out to an agreed procedure and requirement between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser. 

8. Test Gauges — The gauges used for pressure testing shall be calibrated at intervals not exceed- 
ing three months by an independent competent authority if the manufacturer does not have such 
facilities. The results shall be recorded and shall be liable to Inspection and verification by the 
purchaser's representative for acceptance as and when required. 

In all the pressure tests, test pressure shall be measured for the stated duration without 
continuous use of any input to pressure build up by mechanical or any other means. 

Notes to Purchaser — Purchaser shall inform the manufacturer at the inquiry stage and in the 
purchase order, of the following, as some of the clause of this standard permit alternatives: 

a) Whether normal inspection is required at the manufacturer's plant ( see 2.1 and 2.6). 

b) Whether inspection of shell components is required ( see 2.2 ). 

c) Whether any special material tests and any associated test certificates are required ( see 2,4 ). 

d) Whether any supplementary inspection and any associated test certificates are required 
(see 2.5). 

e) Whether a test fluid other than water is required at ambient temperature ( see 5 ). 

f) Whether valve test certificates are required (see 6). 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This is the first revision of IS : 6157-1971 ' General rules for inspection of valves and cocks 
for fluid control purposes '. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



