•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



IS 6847 (1995) : Code of practice for installation of 
agricultural wheeled tractor [FAD 11: Agricultural Tractors 
and Power Tillers 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



frx^ j i iw&9*±&z& iv^^rrrF^ 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 6847 : 1995 
( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



$fa qf^R hf&r $ ^rm eft ftfrr ^ffkfT 

( wwg^Fttm ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION 
OF AGRICULTURAL WHEELED TRACTOR 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 65.060.10 



©BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 1995 Price Group 3 



Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, FAD 32 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

Agricultural wheeled tractor is a sophisticated prime mover and involves heavy initial investment. It is, 
therefore, imperative that it is utilized for reasonably long working hours for several years and the cost 
of operation is minimized. Though basic design of the tractor and quality of the materials used for its 
different components are important, proper installation of the tractor is equally important in achieving 
these objectives. 

Installation of an agricultural wheeled tractor should include the following: 

a) Predelivery checks and service, 

b) Guidance for matching implements, 

c) Delivery, 

d) Running-in, 

e) Training and familiarization to the user in operation and setting of the tractor to suit the land and 
the cropping pattern, and 

f) Instructions regarding free servicing and periodical maintenance to be carried out. 

A properly installed tractor is most likely to give trouble-free service to the user and this would create 
goodwill between the supplier and the user and would also give popularity to the manufacturer. Hence, 
it is essential that at every step the supplier takes all the precautions in installing a tractor. This code 
provides guidelines for installation of the tractor which should be helpful to the supplier and the user. 

This standard was first published in 1972. The revision of this standard has been taken up to incorporate 
modification in various clauses based upon actual trade practice for the benefit of users. 



IS 6847 : 1995 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION 
OF AGRICULTURAL WHEELED TRACTOR 



( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard provides guidelines for installa- 
tion of agricultural wheeled tractor. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary ad- 
juncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

6840 : 1972 Code of practice for preventive 
maintenance of agricultural trac- 
tors 

9864 : 1981 Guidelines for stocking spare parts 
of agricultural tractors. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the follow- 
ing definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Agricultural Tractor 

A self-propelled vehicle having wheels or tracks, 
designed primarily to operate trailed or mounted 
agricultural implements and machines, including 
trailers, and to supply power to operate them with 
the vehicle itself in motion or remaining stationary. 

3.2 Agricultural Wheeled Tractor 

An agricultural tractor in which wheels are the 
driving members. 

3.3 Installation 

Operations performed to make the tractor field- 
worthy io give trouble-free service for maximum 
working hours. 

3.4 Manufacturer 

Any person or organization who actually manufac- 
tures tractor components fully or partialy and as- 
sembles the tractor. 

3.5 Supplier 

Any person or organization appointed or recog- 
nized by the manufacturer for sale of the tractor of 
his make. The manufacturer may or may not be a 
supplier. 



3.6 User 

Any person or organization who purchases and 
uses the tractor. 

3.7 Operator 

A person who actually operates the tractor. An 
operator may or may not be the user. 

4 PREDELIVERY CHECKS AND SERVICE 

4.1 Predelivery checks and service of the tractor 
should be done to the satisfaction of the user. 

4.2 The complete service of the tractor including 
lubrication should be made in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recomendations or as per 
guidelines for predelivery check list as given in 
Annex A 

4.3 The functioning of the tractor and its different 
components should be checked and shown to the 
user. 

5 MATCHING IMPLEMENTS 

5.1 As the tractor is only a prime mover, it can be 
handled efficaciously when right type of imple- 
ments are used with it. It is, therefore, essential that 
the supplier should recommend the matching im- 
plements and should give adequate information 
regarding type of the implements along with their 
specifications and the addresses of the manufac- 
turers and the suppliers. 

6. DELIVERY 

6.1 At the time of delivery the supplier should 
hand over all the documents and literature to the 
user. A list of the documents and literature recom- 
mended to be supplied is given in Annex B. 

6.2 The supplier should provide a set of adequate 
tools for routine maintenance of the tractor. A list 
of the tools is to be mentioned in the operator's 
manual. A list of standard and optional accessories 
should also be given in the operator's manual and 
this is to be explained to the customer. 

6.3 The manufacturer is to make a list of fast- 
wearing components of the tractor for the guidance 
of the user in the operator's manual. User may be 



IS 6847 : 1995 



advised to stock these items to maintain service- 
ability of the tractor. Guideli nes may be taken from 
IS 9864:1981. 

7 -RUNNING-IN 

7. 1 The new tractor needs to be run in to make all 
its parts to move freely and smoothly. During this 
period, the pistons, piston rings, cylinders, valves, 
valve seats, bearings, etc, get proper seat and set- 
tling downthrough lubrication. 

7.2 The supplier should instruct the user regarding 
proper method of running-in of the tractor engine 
and transmission. These instructions may also be 
included in operator's manual. A recommended 
procedure for running-in the tractor is given in 
Annex C, which may be followed if the manufac- 
turer has not given instructions in this regard in the 
operator's manual. 

8 TRAINING AND FAMILIARIZATION 

8.1 Generally the users are not conversant with the 
tractor in its driving and control. It is essential on 
the part of the supplier to impart training to the 
user in order to familiarize him in different aspects 
of running-in, maintenance, servicing and checking 
of the tractor. Also utilization of the tractor effec- 
tively alongwith recommended accessories to be 
explained and demonstrated. Training should 



cover all the operations/accessories for which the 
tractor is recommended. 

8.2 The manufacturer should provide instruction 
on precautions and safety procedure for the opera- 
tion of the tractor and safety of the operator for 
common agricultural operations. 

9 FREE SERVICE AND PERIODICAL MAIN- 
TENANCE 

9.1 The user should be informed regarding peri- 
odical maintenance (see 6 of IS 6840 : 1972) and free 
services. These are to be specified in the operator's 
manual. Where norms of maintenance and free 
service are not followed during warranty period, 
consequence of loss of warranty and damage to 
machine to be highlighted. 

9.2 The supplier should send the information to 
the user about the date and place for free service 
well in advance. 

9.3 The place for free service should be, as far as 
possible, the user's point or the nearest service 
station recognized by the supplier. 

9.4 The user should not attempt to service the 
tractor himself as defects can generally be observed 
only by the trained mechanic of the supplier. 

9.5 Operations recommended to be performed 
during free service are to be listed on the free 
service coupon. 



ANNEX. A 

(Clause 4.2) 
CHECKS AND OPERATIONS TO BE PERFORMED DURING PREDELIVERY 



A-0 Predelivery checks and service should be 


g) 


done for the following: 




a) Cooling system; 


n) 


b) Lubrication system; 


J) 


c) Air cleaner system; 




d) Fuel system; 


A-2 


e) Transmission and wheel system; 




f) Hydraulic system; and 


A-2.1 


g) Electrical system; 


a) 


A- 1 COOLING SYSTEM 




A-l.l Ensure that: 


t>) 


a) the radiator is clean and not leaking; 


c) 



b) the block and the head are clean; 

c) there is no leakage in the head gasket; 

d) the fan bearings are lubricated and there is 
no end play in the bearings; 

e) the tension of the belt is proper; 

f) there is no abnormal noise in the water 
pump assembly; 



the hoses, drain cocks and gaskets are in 
proper order; 

the thermostat is working properly; and 
the fins, wherever provided, are clean (in the 
case of air-cooled engines). 

LUBRICATION SYSTEM 

Ensure that: 

the crankcase is fillled up to the prescribed 
level with fresh lubricating oil of the grade 
recommended by the manufacturer; 
the breather cap, if provided, is cleaned; and 
the oil pressure in gauge is correct and oil 
pressure warning light, if provided, is 
functioning properly. 

A-3 AIR CLEANER SYSTEM 

A-3.1 Ensure that: 

a) the oil cup is clean; 

b) the paper element is clean; 



IS 6847 : 1995 



c) 



d) 
e) 

g) 
A-4 

A-4.1 

a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 



f) 
g) 



the paper element is free from punctures 
(Discard it, if it has even a pin-point punc- 
ture); 

the plastic sealing rings on the upper and the 
lower sides of the element are smooth; 
the air intake pipe is free from dirt; 
the cup has been filled with clean oil up to 
the level mark; and 
the hose and the clamps are clean. 

FUEL SYSTEM 

Ensure that: 

the sediment bowl is clean; 
the fuel tank, lines and fittings are clean; 
the fuel filter cap's vent-hole is clean; 
the injectors are developing proper pressure 
(In case there are signs of dribbling, the 
injector should be dismantled and the 
needle valve, seat, spring and nozzle check- 
ed and cleaned with the cleaning set. The 
injector should be reassembled and tested 
again for proper pressure.); 
the fuel is of proper grade and up to the 
desired level; 

the overflow pipe is clean; and 
the air cleaner, if installed in fuel tank filler 
cap, is clean. 



A-5 TRANSMISSION AND WHEEL SYSTEM 



A-5.1 

a) 
b) 



c) 



Ensure that: 

there is no oil in the clutch housing; 

the clutch has been adjusted properly to 

restore the free movement of the clutch 

pedal; 

the transmission housing has been filled 

with the proper grade of lubricant up to the 

desired level; 



d) the final drive and the rear axle bearing are 
properly lubricated; and 

e) the tyres are properly inflated and fitted in 
the correct position. 

A-6 HYDRAULIC SYSTEM 

A-6.1 Ensure that: 

a) the storage tank is filled with the proper 
grade of hydraulic fluid up to the desired 
level. (This is necessary only when the 
hydraulic system is separate with its own 
tank and is not dependent on any other 
system of the tractor such as transmission.); 

b) the system is free from dirt and dust; 

c) all fittings and connections are clean and 
there is no leakage; 

d) the control valve, relief valve and cylinder 
are functioning properly; and 

e) the system is capable of developing proper 
force required to activate the implement for 
attachment. 

A-7 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM 

A-7.1 Ensure that: 

a) there is no crack or swelling in the battery 
container; 

b) all cells of the battery are live; 

c) the electrolyte has the correct specific 
gravity; 

d) the electolyte is present up to the desired 
level; 

e) the battery connections are correct; 

f) all connections, fuses and switches are in- 
tact; 

g) the system is developing the correct voltage; 
h) the dynamo is functioning properly; and 

j) all bulbs light, and the horn is functioning 
properly. 



ANNEX B 

( Clause 6.1 ) 
LIST OF DOCUMENTS AND LITERATURE 



1. Sale letter 

2. Warranty certificate 

3. Free-service coupons 

4. Spare parts catalogue 

5. Temporary registration number 



6. List of tools and accessories supplied with 
the tractor 

7. List of spare parts supplied with the tractor 

8. List of fast-wearing components 

9. Lubrication chart and owner's maintenance 
manual 



IS 6847 : 1995 



ANNEX C 

{Clause 7.2) 

METHOD OF RUNNING-IN OF THE TRACTOR 



C-l GENERAL 

C-l.l Never put at once a new or repaired tractor 
into operation under full load as it leads to increase 
wear and sometime to failure. Prior to full loading, 
the tractor should be run-in. 

C-2 PREPARATION OF THE TRACTOR FOR 
RUNNING-IN 

C-2.1 Clean the .tractor of dust and dirt. Wash off 
the grease with diesel oil. 

C-2.2 Tighten all outer fastenings. 

C-2.3 Lubricate all points according to the 
lubrication chart. 

C-2.4 Check oil in crankcase, gear box and 
hydraulic pump and top up if necessary. 

C-2.5 Fill the fuel tank with the fuel and the cool- 
ing system with water. 

C-2.6 Check the air pressure in the tyres. (The 
tractor is dispatched from the works with tyre pres- 
sure above normal. When preparing the tractor for 
the running-in, excess of air should be bled and 
pressure lowered to normal.). 

C-2.7 Check the operation of the hydraulic lift 
mechanism as indicated in the owner's main- 
tenance manual. 

C-3 STAGES 

C-3.1 Unless otherwise stated in the owner's 
maintenance manual, the stages of running-in of 
the tractor shall be as follows: 

a) Running-in at idling for 15 to 20 minutes, 

b) Running-in under no-load condition for 10 
hours using different gears, and 

c) Running-in under varying loads for 45 hours 
using all controls. 

C-4 PROCEDURE 

C-4.1 Running-in at Idling 

C-4.1.1 Start the engine in accordance with the 
instructions given in the owner's maintenance 
manual. 

C-4. 1.2 Keep the radiator cap tightly closed during 
the running-in. 



C-4,1.3 Let the engine work for 10 minutes at 500 
to 600 rev/min. Listen carefully the sound of the 
engine for any noise and at the same time, observe 
the readings of the instruments on the panel and 
watch the joints for any leakage. 

C-4.1.4 Having run the engine for 2 to 3 minutes, 
operate the hydraulic lift. 

C-4.1.5 When the engine has run for 10 minutes at 
low speed, increase its speed to the rated rev/min 
and check its performance as in C-4.1.3. 

C-4.1.6 At the end of the running-in, check the 
engine for stable operations at various speed start- 
ing from the minimum rev/min. 

C-4.1.7 Check the accuracy of the clutch engage- 
ment and disengagement and the operation of the 
lighting system. 

C-4.1.8 Having eliminated the faults detected, 
proceed to run-in the tractor under no-load condi- 
tion. 

C-4.2 Running-in Under No-Load Condition 

C-4.2.1 Run the tractor for about 1 hour in each , 
gear in each of the forward and reverse directions, 
beginning from the first gear, to a maximum of 10 
hours. 

C-4.2.2 During the running-in, take sharp turns to 
both sides, with use of brakes in the first and second 
gear and smooth turning in the higher gears. 

C-4.2.3 Check the following during the running-in: 

a) Operation of the engine and reading of the 
instruments, 

b) Correct adjustment and proper release of 
the clutch, 

c) Easy shifting of the gears and operation of 
the interlocking mechanism, 

d) Controllability of the tractor and reliability 
of the brake operation, and 

e) Operation of the electrical equipment. 

C-4.2.4 Having eliminated the faults detected, 
proceed to run-in the tractor under load condition. 

C-4.3 Rumiing-In Under Load 

C-4.3.1 Distribution of working lime under vary- 
ing load and speeds while running-in the tractor 
should be as given below: 



IS 6847 : 1995 



Throttle 
Opening 



1/4 
1/2 
3/4 
Full 



r~ 



Running-in Time in Each Gear 

A 



Total Running-in 
Time, h 



Neutral 

1 

1 



First 
Gear 

3 

5 

5 

4 



Second Third Fourth 

Gear Gear Gear 

3 3 4 

5 4 — 

7 , — — 



C-4.3.2 Listen the sound o.f the engine for any 
noise and observe the working of the engine and of 
transmission system during the total running-in 
period. 

C-4.3.3 Eliminate the faults detected during the 
running-in. 

C-4.3.4 After completing the running-in, perform 

the following operations: 

a) Drain oil, when it is still hot, from the 
crankcase, main drive, final drive hydraulic 
lift, wheel hub, fuel injection pump and 
governer housing, flush with diesel oil or 
flushing oil, and refill with the proper grade 
of oil; 



14 

15 

12 

4 



b) Clean or replace the oil filter, and renew oil 
in air-cleaner oil pan; 

c) Check the oil level in the belt-pulley hous- 
ing, and top up if necessary; 

d) Grease the water pump, front wheel bear- 
ing, hydraulic lift joints and tie-rod ends; 

e) Drain water from cooling system, and flush 
and refill the system with clean water; 

f) Clean the magnet breaker contacts; 

g) Tighten the cylinder head fastening nuts, 
and check the tappet clearance; and 

h) Tighten all outer fastenings. 

C-4.3.5 After completing the running-in under 
load, put the tractor into normal operation. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under \l e Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), JBIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 32 ( 449 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahad ur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



Telephone 



{ 



3310131 
331 13 75 



{ 



37 84 99, 37 85 61 
37 86 26, 37 86 62 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 
\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 
\ 632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi-1 100 r5, India. 



