**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 686 (1985) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to daylight [TXD 5: Chemical Methods 
of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IStMI.IMS 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DAYLIGHT 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 677CHfr474 : 53568*17 




® CvppiiH IS96 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK I131AVA.V, 9 BAHADUR RllAlt ZAFAH MaKO 
NI-VV DELHI 1 1SH1 

* r 3 My IMS 






IS : 686 - 1985 



Indian Standard 



METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DAYLIGHT 

( First Revision ) 



Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 



Representing 

Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 
Bombay 



Chairman 
Dr ( Kttmari ) M. D. Bhavsar 

Members 
ShriJamshed D. Adrianvala Tata Mills Limited, Bombay 

Dr V. G. Agnihotri National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Bandopadhyay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Kttmari L. C. Patel ( Alternate ) 



Directorate General of Supplies & 
( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 

Ministry of Defence (R&D) 



Corporation Limited, 



Shri P. K. Basu 

Shri A. K.Saigal (Alternate) 
Shri M. L. Behrani 

Shri N. Kasturia ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Bhattaoharya 

Shri D. K. Chattofadhyay 
( Alternate ) 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Desikan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri Pattl Lincdoh ( Alternate ) 



Disposals 



Indian Petrochemicals 
Vadodara 



Director, Weavers' Service 

Centre, Bombay 
Shri M. D. Dixit 

Shri D. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. G. Khandeparkar 

Dr B. R. Manjtthatha 
Shri Sunii. S. Mehta 



for Handlooms, 



Development Commissioner 

New Delhi 
Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 

( ICAR ), Bombay 
Intexa India, Bombay 
Silk & Art Silk Mills* Association, Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of th< 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 686 - 1985 

( Continued from page I ] 



Members 
Dr A. K. Mukherjee 



Dr (Shrimati ) U. Nandtjrkar 
Dr S.N. Pandey 



Representing 

Indian Jute Industries* Research Association* 

Bombay 
Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 
(ICAR), Bombay 
Ktjmari I, G. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) G. R. Phaloumani Textiles Committee, Bombay 
Shri P. R. V. Ramanan Central Excise & Customs ( Ministry of 

Finance ), New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Khere ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Rathode National Textile Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri P. P. Checker (Alternate) _ 

Representative Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. R. Akanthakrishna Setty Binny Limited, Madras 
Dr M. G. Modak ( Alternate ) 

Bombay Miliowners* Association, Bombay 
Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad 
Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co 
Ltd, Ahmadabad 



Shri J.J. Shah 

Shri Jamnadas K. Shah 

Shri K. G. Shah 



Dr J. I. Setalwad (Alternate) 
Shri S. S. Trivedi 

Shri J. N. Vohra 



Shri P. T. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 



Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Associa- 
tion, Ahmadabad 

Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development 
Corporation Limited, Chandigarh 



Shri R. I. Midha, 
Director ( Tex ) 



Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member) 

Secretary 

Shri M. S. Verma 

Assistant Director (Tex), ISI 



Colour Fastness Subcommittee, TDG 5 : 3 



Convener 
Shri S. S. Trivedi 



Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research 
Association, Ahmadabad 



Atul Products Limited, Bombay 



Members 

Shri M. R. Bhatt 

Shri K. B. Shah ( Alternate ) 

Dr D. K= Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri K. S. Desikan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri Patjx Lingdoh ( Alternate ) 

Shbi V, R, Karmarear Indian Dyestuffs Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri I. M. Patjsl Arvind Mills Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Dr ( Shrimati) S. Patwardhan Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Dr ( Shrimati) G. R, Phaloumani Textiles Committee, Bombay 



( C$ntinued on page 12 ) 



IS : 686 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DAYLIGHT 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 15 November 1985, after the draft finalized by 
the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1957 and has been revised 
to include changes carried out in other similar colour fastness standards 
regarding sampling, specimen size, apparatus and procedures as well 
as to align it with ISO 105-B01-1981 Textiles — Tests for colour fastness 
to light: Daylight, issued by International Organization for Standardi- 
zation ( ISO ). 

0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials to daylight is of considerable 
importance to the consumer. Though a quicker method of determining 
colour fastness to light by xenon arc ( see IS : 2454-1985* ) exists, yet in 
cases of dispute, the methods prescribed in this standard should be 
preferred. Two methods of mounting and testing of specimens for colour 
fastness to daylight have been prescribed in this standard. Method 1 is 
considered preferable and should be used in cases of dispute but it 
requires one set of standard patterns for each test specimen and is, 
therefore, impracticable when a large number of test specimens have to 
be tested concurrently. Method 2 enables a number of test specimens of 
differing light fastness ratings to be rated against a single set of standard 
patterns. This method is used when a large number of test specimens 
have to be tested concurrently. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 



'Method for determination of colour fastness of textile materials to artificial 
light ( xenon lamp ) (first revision ). 



IS : 686 - 1985 

accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes two methods for determining colour fastness 
of textile materials of all kinds and in all forms to the action of daylight. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2*1 A specimen of the textile material is exposed to daylight under 
prescribed conditions, including protection from rain, alongwith eight 
blue dyed wool standard patterns. The fastness is assessed by 
comparing the change in colour of the specimen with that of the 
standard patterns. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Lot — The quantity of same kind and form of textile material dyed 
or printed essentially under similar conditions shall constitute a lot. 

3.2 Sample shall be drawn from the lot so as to be representative of the 
lot. Sample drawn in accordance with the material specification for the 
coloured textile material or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller 
shall be held to be representative of the lot. 

4* PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 

4.1 An area of the textile product not less than 1 cm X 6 cm should be 
used for Method 1 ( see 7.1.1 ) or 1 cm X 10 cm for Method 2 ( see 7.1.2 ) 
so that each exposed portion is not less than 1 cm x 2 cm. The specimen 
may be a strip of cloth, yarns wound close together on a card or laid 
parallel and fastened on a card, or a mat of fibres combed and 
compressed to give a uniform surface and fastened on a card. Draw 
one such specimen from each piece in the test sample. 

4.2 To facilitate handling, the specimen or specimens to be tested and 
the similar strips of the standard patterns may be mounted on a card in 
an arrangement as indicated in Fig. 1 or Fig. 2 ( see 7.1.1 or 7.1.2 ). 

4.3 The specimens to be tested and the blue strips of the standard 
patterns should be of equal size and shape in order to avoid errors in 
assessment due to over-rating the visual contrast between exposed and 
unexposed parts on the larger specimens as against the narrower standard 
patterns. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

4 



IS : 686 - 1985 





c 






1 

1 1 


X 



1 

I - 1j 


X 



TEST SPECIMEN 

SPLFR NO. 1 
SPLFR NO.2 
SPLFR N03 
SPLFR N0.4 
SPLFR N05 

SPLFR NO. 6 
SPLFR N0.7 
SPL F R N0.8 



B 

Fig. 1 Mounting of Test Specimen and Standard 
Patterns for Method 1 



IS: 686. 1985 



uJ_ 


Y _ E 


1 rf= 


lef. —-] 






! I-- 1 - 






, M 

1 -1 






1 fl- 




tL ' 




h- 






! Hi- 

1 1 1 

! i±- 

1 <- 










k -l-J 1 




dI _J 



TEST SPECIMEN 



5PLFR 


N0.1 


SPLFR 


MO 2 


SPLFR 


NO. 3 


SPLFR 


NCU 


SPLFR 


NOS 


SPLFR 


NO-6 


SPLFR 


NO.7 


SPLFR 


NO.8 



B 



Fig. 2 Mounting of Test Specimens and Standard 
Patterns for Method 2 



4.4 While testing carpets the standard patterns shall be arranged in such 
a way that they are in the same plane as the surface of the carpet 
specimens. This can be achieved by underlayed cardboard. 

5. STANDARD PATTERNS 

5.1 Standard patterns of blue wool cloth ranging in light fastness from 
rating No. 1 ( very low light fastness ) to rating No. 8 ( very high light 
fastness) and dyed with the dyes listed in Table 1 shall be used 
( see Note ) . 

Note — Sets of standard patterns of light fastness rating No. 1 to 8 may 
be obtained from Indian Standards Institution or British Standards Institution. 
They are specially dyed to match a master set of standard patterns in colour 
and in fading behaviour. It has been found that, when repeated dyeings for 
the dyed standard patterns are made, the amount of dye required to match a 
previous lot is often different from that originally used. The dyeing strengths 
would, therefore, be misleading and they are intentionally omitted from this list. 



IS : 686 - 1985 



C, I. 


Aeid b}ue 


104 


C. I. 


Acid blue 


109 


C I. 


Acid blue 


83 


G. I. 


Acid blue 


121 


G. I. 


Acid blue 


47 


C. I. 


Acid blue 


23 


C. h 


Solubilized vat blue 


5t 


C I. 


Solubilized vat blue 


8t 



TABLE 1 DYES FOR STANDARD PATTERNS 

( Clause 5.1 ) 

Fastness Dye — Coloub Index — Designation* 

Rating No. 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 

♦The Colour Index ( third edition) published by the Society of Dyers and 
Colourits, P.O. Box 244, Perkins House, 83 Gratton Road, Bradford BD1 2JB, West 
Yorks, United Kingdom. 

fThe patterns dyed with these dyes should be decatized after dyeing. 



6. APPARATUS 

6.1 Exposure Rack — Facing south in the Northern hemisphere, 
north in the Southern hemisphere and slopping at an angle from the 
horizontal approximately equal to the latitude of the place where the 
exposure is made. The rack shall be sited preferably in a non-residential, 
non-industrial area free from dust and automobile exhaust fumes. 

6.1.1 The rack shall be placed so that shadows of surrounding objects, 
including any framing, will not fall on the exposed specimen and 
constructed so that the latter are firmly held. There shall be adaquate 
ventilation behind the mounted specimens and the rack shall be covered 
with window glass to protect the specimens from rain and other elements 
of the weather. The transparency of the glass used shall be at 
least 90 percent between 380 and 700 nm, falling to percent between 
310 and 320 nm. 

6.1.2 The minimum permissible distance between the glass and the 
specimens is 5 cm. In order to minimize shadows due to the varying 
angle of the sun, the usable exposure area under the glass is limited to 
that of the glass cover reduced on each side by twice the distance from 
the glass cover to the specimen. 



IS : 686 - 1985 

6.2 Opaque Cardboard — or other thin opaque material, for example, 
thin sheet aluminium, or cardboard covered with aluminium foil, or in 
the case of pile fabrics, a cover that avoids surface compression. 

6.3 Grey Scale for Evaluating Change in Colour — {See IS : 768- 
1982*). 

7. PROCEDURE FOR MOUNTING, EXPOSURE AND 
PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF LIGHT FASTNESS 

7.1 Exposure of Specimens — Expose the specimen ( or group of 
specimens ) and the standard patterns simultaneously to daylight every 
day from sunrise to sunset under conditions described in 6.1, in such a 
manner and for such duration as is necessary to evaluate fully the light 
fastness of each specimen relative to that of the standard patterns, by 
successively covering the specimens and exposed standard patterns 
throughout the duration of the test. Two suggested methods of 
procedure follow. 

7.1.1 Method 1 

7.1.1.1 Arrange the specimen to be tested and the standard patterns 
as shown in Fig, 1 with an opaque cover AB across the middle third of 
the specimen and standard patterns. Expose to daylight under the 
conditions described in 6.1* Follow the effect of light by removing the 
cover AB and inspecting the specimen frequently. When a change in 
colour of the exposed portion of the specimen can just be perceived, equal 
to grey scale grade 4-5, note the number of the standard pattern show- 
ing a similar change. (This is preliminary assessment of light fastness of 
the specimens). 

7*1.1.2 Continue to expose the specimen and the standard patterns 
until the contrast betwen the exposed and the unexposed portions of the 
specimen or the standard pattern 7 is equal to grey scale grade 4. 

7.1.1.3 If the standard pattern 7 fades to a contrast equal to grey 
scale grade 4 before the specimen does, terminate the exposure at this 
stage. If the specimen fades to a contrast equal to grey scale grade 
4 before the standard pattern 7 does, replace the cover AB exactly in the 
previous position, cover the left hand one-third of the specimen and the 
standard patterns with another opaque cover (CD in Fig. 1) and continue 
to expose until the contrast between the fully exposed and unexposed 
portions of the specimen is equal to grey scale grade 3. At this stage, 
terminate the exposure. 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour (first revision) . 

8 



IS : 686 - 1985 

Note — When a specimen has a light fastness rating equal to or greater than 
7, it would require unduly long exposure to produce a contrast equal to grey scale 
grade 3; moreover, this contrast would be impossible to obtain when the light 
fastness rating is 8. Assessment in the region of 7 to 8 are made, therefore, when the 
contrast produced on Standard pattern 7 is equal to grey scale grade 4, the time 
required to produce this contrast being long enough to eliminate any error which 
might result from inadequate exposure. 

7,1.1*4 Assess the light fastness of the specimen as given in 8. 
7.1.2 Method 2 

7.1.2.1 Arrange the specimens to be tested and the standard patterns 
as shown in Fig. 2, with an opaque cover AB, covering one-quarter 
of the total length of each specimen and standard pattern. Expose 
to daylight under the conditions described in 6.1. Follow the effect of 
of light by lifting cover AB periodically and inspecting the standard 
patterns. When a change in colour of the exposed portion of the 
standard pattern 3 can just be perceived, equal to grey scale grade 4-5, 
inspect the specimens and rate their light fastness by comparing any 
change that has occurred with the changes that have occurred in standard 
patterns 1, 2 and 3. (This is a preliminary assessment of light fastness.) 

7.1.2.2 Replace the lifted cover AB in exactly the same position 
and continue to expose until a change in colour of the exposed portion of 
the Standard pattern 4 can just be perceived, equal to grey scale grade 
4-5; at this stage fix an additional cover CD in the position shown in 
Fig. 2, overlapping the cover AB. 

7.1.2.3 Continue to expose until a change in colour of the exposed 
portion of the Standard pattern 6 can just be perceived, equal to grey 
scale grade 4-5; then fix the final cover EF in the position shown in 
Fig. 2, the other three covers remaining in position. Expose until either 

a) a contrast is produced on Standard pattern 7 equal to the 
contrast illustrated by grey scale grade 4, or 

b) a contrast equal to grey scale grade 3 on the grey scale has been 
produced on the most resistant specimen, 

whichever occurs first. 

7.1.2.4 Compare the changes in the colour of the specimens and 
those of the standard patterns and assess the light fastness of each 
specimen as given in 8. 

7.2 Other Permissible Exposure — Where the test is to be used to 
check conformity with a performance specification, it is permissible to 
expose the specimens with two standard patterns only; that specified as 



IS s 686 - 1985 

minimum and the one below it. Continue exposure until grey scale 
grade 4 and grey scale grade 3 contrasts have been produced on separate 
areas of the minimum standard pattern. 

8. ASSESSMENT OF LIGHT FASTNESS 

8.1 The final assessment in numerical ratings is based on contrasts equal 
to grey scale grade 4 and/or grade 3 between exposed and unexposed 
portions of the specimen (s). 

8.2 Compare the change in colour of the specimen with that of the 
standard patterns under suitable illumination. The light fastness of the 
specimen is the number of the standard pattern which shows similar 
changes in colour (visual contrast between exposed and unexposed parts 
of the specimen). If the specimen shows changes in colour which are 
nearer to the imaginary standard pattern midway between any two 
consecutive standard patterns the intermediate rating, for example, 3-4, 
shall be given. 

Note 1 — In case of doubt in the colour fastness rating as assessed by an 
observer, the assessment may be made by three observers and the overall rating may 
be reported accordingly. 

Note 2 — The term change in colour includes not only true, fading, that 
is destruction of dyes but also changes in hue, depth, brightness, or any combination 
of these characteristics of colour. If the difference in colour is a change of hue or 
brightness, this may be indicated by adding abbreviations as follows to the numerical 
fastness, ratings: 

B\ = bluer, T — yellower, D — duller, and 
R = redder, G = greener, Br ~ Brighter 

If the change in hue is accompanied by change in depth, this may also be indicated as 
follows : 

W » weaker, and Str — Stronger 

Note 3 — In order to avoid a misrating of the light fastness of the specimen due 
to photochromism, the phototropic specimens shall be allowed to condition in the 
dark at room temperature for 24 h before the light fastness is assessed. 

8.3 If different assessments are obtained at the different degrees of 
contrast, the light fastness of the specimen is the arithmetic mean of these 
expressed to the nearest whole or half grade. When three areas are 
being rated, take the mean of the contrasts closest to grades 4 and 3. 
Assessments, however, shall be confined to whole or midway ratings only. 
When the arithmetic mean gives a quarter or three quarter rating, the 
assessment is defined as the next higher half or whole grade. 

10 



IS : 686 - 1985 

8.4 If the colour of the specimen is more fugitive than that of Standard 
pattern 1, the rating shall be 1. 

8.5 Comparison of the changes in the specimen with changes in the 
standard patterns may be facilitated by surrounding the specimen with 
a mask of neutral grey colour (approximately the shade of the lightest 
chip of the grey scale for assessing change in colour), and the standard 
patterns in turn with a similar mask of equal aperture. 

8.6 If the light fastness is equal to or higher than 4, any preliminary 
assessment based on the contrast equal to grey scale 4-5 (see 7.1.1.1 
and 7.1,2.1 ) becomes significant; if this preliminary assessment is 3, it 
shall be included in the rating in brackets. For example, rating of 6 (3) 
indicates that the specimen changes very slightly in the test when 
Standard pattern 3 just begins to fade, but that on continuing the 
exposure, the resistance to light is equal to that of Standard pattern 6. 

8.7 If specimens larger than the standard patterns were exposed because 
of certain other requirements, mask of a neutral grey colour midway 
between the grade 1 and grade 2 of the grey scale (approximately Munsell 
N 5) should be used in assessment which covers the surplus area of the 
specimens leaving an area equal to that of the standard patterns open for 
comparative evaluation. 

9. REPORT 

9.1 Report individually, the numerical light fastness rating of 
specimens. 

9.2 If the rating is equal to 4 or higher and the preliminary assessment 
is equal to 3 or lower, report the latter figure in brackets. 



11 



IS : 686 - 1985 



( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members 

Shbi C. N. Prabhu 
Shbi S. R. Rajagopalan 

Shbi R. V. Gupte ( Alternate ) 
Representative 
Representative 
Shri K. S. Rindani 

Shbi V. S. Angadi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. R. A. Setty 

Shbi A.J. Kadavan ( Alternate 
Shbi J. J. Shah 
Shbi S. A. Shah 

Shbi S. B. Iyeb ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Singh 

Shbi A. C. Pebti ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A, Somasundaram 
Shbi D. R. Tendulkar 
Shbi S. Vabadabajan 



Representing 

Swadeshi Polytex Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Colour-Chem Limited, Bombay 

Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Limited, Calcutta 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Sandoz ( India ) Limited, Bombay 



Binny Ltd, Madras 
I 

Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 
Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 
Bombay 

Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Arun Knitters, Tirupur 

Amar Dye-Chem Ltd, Bombay 

Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 



12 



INDIAN 

STANDARDS 
INSTITUTION 

Jfai(AfLj$riiftf 

Mantle Bhavl*, 1 Bihadiii Stiati TftfUT P«f* P HiW DELHI 11 QUI 

T*l*pho na*;. 9*1 nt 11 , 111 It 13 TlUflflMi: MiflthaaEiatlia 

C Common Eo Ml Oflkia I 

"A'a itDm S M tnflalHya, f U Ml DC. Utml a Allohlri (Eaitf , i 35 94 if 

BOMBAY JCW3 

lEAPlavn : 4/14 C.f.T- 5ch*mn VII M. Y.I.P. ftolt. ManlaHla. 31 14 » 

CALCUTTA 71MCW 

Narlham : SCP 445*46, -ScGlor B5-C, 
CHANUlGAfiU 1«0» 



5*ulharn : C.LT, tampi". MADRAS *0DI ! 3- 



J" 21B4J 
1 11*41 

f 41 24 4^ 
41 £5 39 

I 41 tD li 



r 2 £3 4i 

'PuHipm', WuBm*hiim*d Shalhti Wnag, Khtnpur,. AMMADAIAH 314001 | fi w ifi 

-F 1 Modi, \Mt§ Bldfl. Mraitmharaja ayw*, BANGALORE »DDflH ?3 4a u 5 

^■nnUlrl Cflmpki, ftlfc Floor. BfladH^iadB Rflld,, T, T- Haflan B DT Ifl 

B^&PAt4*&flOJ 

Pt*1 No f 2|ftl, Liwlt WQ.J.H . BHUBA HE SH W AH IiUip2 S S* 57 

fllfl, WflTEi No. fl4, R. S iarua Rold, 51 h B»«llin« r GUWAH ATI TB1M — 

S-i-&4C L, H. CfUpll IJlarg [Haft pill jf StUlon Road}, UVQERABAD S4WW1 *£ ID « 

Rl^VihLilirUtr^CSchDin*, JAIPUR -IQ7G^ { g ^ 3? 

117/41* B Sartfrdlr* NBflar, KAPtPLlR *MQDn { p I BS 

PiUlpuLra I n EM 1 1 if I E*a», PATH A fflWQ Si S3 H 

Hlillli Hill ff n d Flo**}. Rlf SHIifln FUh 4 TBI V A NO RUM HWB1 ^ 27 

JpappeCAui 00b tWrt Sain Prtrtf): 

In^tiSiitlBn ol E*lflln«ra (Lititiar BuilHlnn. IMS 3hlva|l Njcsflr. PUHf 4n«a ft 34 35 



a? 
M 



*S*1#E Oflk* in Bombay I* flt N*H lt| Cfcamhar*, 6r*fll R nan , H B5 f B 

Bombed *PDPU7 

tSUii Offlc* in EalouLU li u * ChDwrlnijiHft Approach, p. 0- II W M 

Pf irKiii 31rw*. C akiiHa I0M7B 

ftinlH II Afc*P P I Ul i PtiW "P**l, <nii« 



