**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



m»>!5sss^^ft^: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IStA9l9~ 1973 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 

WOOL FIBRE DIAMETER 

BY AIRFLOW METHOD 



UDC 67 7 '3 1:677*0 17 2243 





© Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAtt, 9 BAHADUR SI1AH ZAFAR MAflG 

NEW DELHI 11000 1 



Aususi 1973 



IS: 6919- 1973 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 

WOOL FIBRE DIAMETER 

BY AIRFLOW METHOD 



Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDG 1 



Chairman 
Db T. Radhakrishnan 

Vice- Chairman 

Db V. SlJNDARAM 



Members 

Dr B. L. Banerjee (Alternate to 

Dr T. Radhakrishnan } 
Db V. G. MtTNSHi ( Alternate to 
Dr V. Sundaram ) 
Agricultural Marketing 
Adviser to the Government 
of India 

Shbi S. Jayabaman ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. V. Ananthan 
Shbi T. S. Chandrasekhabiah 
Shri K. K. Chattebjee 
Shbi G. N. Chattebji 

Shbi J. N. Misra { Alternate ) 
Db D. B. Das 
Shri I, B. Dutt 

Shri P. N. Maitba { Alternate) 
Shri A. R. S. Gopalachab 
Dr B. V. Iyer 

Shbi B. R. Shblat ( Alternate } 
Shbi N. C. Jain 

Shbi P. B. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Db Jai Pbakash 
Shbimati A, Kaflash 



Representing 

Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 
Calcutta 

Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 
(ICAR), Bombay 



Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 
of Agriculture ), Faridabad 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 
Government of Mysore 
Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 
Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay- 
Central Silk Board, Bombay 

Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Associa- 
tion, Ahmedabad 

. Ministry of Defence { DGI ) 

Textiles Committee, Bombay 

The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 
Bombay 



( Continued on page 2 



© Copyright 1973 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS s 6919 - 1973 



( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 

Shri S. P. Mtjli-ick 
Shri I. L. Pa tel 



Representing 

National Test House, Calcutta 
Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 
( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shbi A. K. Pbamanick ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Ramakbishna Pilxay The South India Textile Research Association, 

Coimbatore 
Shbi H. Sahasbanaman The Millowners' Association. Bombay 

Shbi A. D. Sule Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shei G. R. Kvjlkarni ( Alternate ) 
Db S. I. Tabapohbwala The National Rayon Corporation Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. S. Nadkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. G. Thanawala M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay 

Shei S. M. Chakraborty, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 



Secretary 

Shri D. R. Kohli 
Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Physical Methods of Test for Wool Subcommittee, TDC 1 : 2 



Convener 
Db Jai Prakash 

Members 

Shri P. T. Banerjee 
Shhi G. D. Bhogale 

Shri R. Chatteejee 

Shri V. N. Jaidka 

Db A. D. Madhuba Nath 

Shri J. M. Patel 

Shri S. P. Kapook ( Alternate ) 
Shri Parmanand Issardas 

Phatnani 
Shri M. R. Rao 

Shri P. K. Minocha ( Alternate ] 
Shri A. Barman Roy 



Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Woolcombers of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 

of Agriculture ), Faridabad 
Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute 

( I CAR ), Malpura ( Rajasthan ) 
The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Bombay 
Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd, Baroda 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

The All India Wool Trade Federation, Bombay 

Ministry of Defence (R&D) 



Shri K. C. Kothawala ( Alternate ) 



International Wool Secretariat, Bombay 



Shbi B. P. Sengupta 

Shbi A. T. Basak ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. D. Sule 
Shri P. R. Yeri 



Directorate General of Supplies & 
( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 



Indian Woollen Mills Federation, Bombay 
Government of Maharashtra 



Disposals 



IS : 6919 - 1973 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 

WOOL FIBRE DIAMETER 

BY AIRFLOW METHOD 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 5 March 1973, after the draft finalized by the Physical Methods of 
Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council, 

0.2 There is a close correlation between the air permeability of a uni- 
formly arranged mass of textile fibres and the specific area ( area/volume ) . 
For fibres of circular or near circular cross section and constant density, 
such as unmedullated wool fibres, the surface area of a given mass of 
fibres is inversely proportional to the average fibre diameter. This relation- 
ship is, therefore, used for determining the wool fibre diameter using 
airflow instruments. Owing to the speed and simplicity of the method, it 
is particularly suitable for quality control in the mills. 
03 This standard is based on ISO Recommendation No. 1245 ' Air perme- 
ability method for measuring the mean diameter of wool fibres' issued by 
the International Organization for Standardization, 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance wiih this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for determining the mean diameter 
of wool fibres using airflow instruments. 

1.2 This method is applicable to clean unmedullated wool fibres dispersed 
in a uniform open state. It is particularly suitable for combed slivers. 
The method is also applicable to oil combed slivers without cleaning, if 
the oil content is constant and the apparatus suitably calibrated. It is not 
applicable to samples containing medullated fibres and fibres which are 
hetrogeneous in diameter. 

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 6919 - 1973 



2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specified mass of fibres to be tested is compressed to a constant 
volume in a cylindrical chamber with perforated ends to which a flow- 
meter and a manometer are connected. The fibres are packed in such a 
way that they lie predominantly at right angles to the axis of the chamber. 
A regulated current of air is then passed through the compressed fibres 
and the average fibre diameter read off from a scale on the manometer or 
the flowmeter. 

3. APPARATUS 

3.1 Airflow Apparatus — Any of the two alternative forms of apparatus, 
namely, ' Constant I low ' and ' Constant Pressure ' as described below may 
be used. Both forms of apparatus have the same arrangement of parts, 
as illustrated in Fig. I: 

a) Constant Flow Apparatus — utilizes a specimen mass of 1'5 g, the 
flowmeter is adjusted to a fixed value and the mean fibre dia- 
meter is read off from the manometer scale. The scale is not 
linear since the successive intervals, corresponding to one micro- 
metre ( micron ) decrease with the diameter. 

b) Constant Pressure Apparatus — utilizes a specimen mass of 2'5 g, 
the manometer is adjusted to a fixed pressure and the mean fibre 
diameter is read off from the flowmeter. In practice this 
apparatus has been found to be somewhat more useful for 
routine work. 

3.2 The apparatus consists of the following parts as shown in Fig. 1. 




Fig. 1 General Arrangement of Apparatus 



IS : 6919 - 1973 

3.2.1 Air Valve ( B ) — giving sufficiently fine control of the air supply, 
such that the level of the flowmeter or manometer may be quickly 
adjusted to the working value. 

3.2.2 Suction Pump — of a type providing a smooth output of at least 
30 1/min at 200 mm head of water with minimal fluctuation of the float of 
the flowmeter. A filter to trap any loose fibres may be inserted between 
the pump and the air valve ( B ) . 

3.2.3 Constant Volume Chamber (A) — of brass, hardened steel, or any 
other suitable metal, suggested dimensions of which are given in Fig. 2. 
This comprises three parts, namely, (a) the base into which the fibres are 
packed, (b) the plunger which compresses the fibres, and (c) the screw cap 
which clamps the plunger to the base. The finish shall be smooth so that 
the plunger slides easily into the base without trapping fibres. 

3.2.3.1 Non-rotating plunger — Rotation of the plunger is possible 
whilst the screw cap is being screwed on to the constant volume chamber 
and this can affect results. To prevent this, a thin plate of steel is fixed 
to the top of the plunger as shown in Fig. 3. This plate is held by the 
operator whilst the cap is screwed on, thus preventing rotation. 

3.2.4 Reservoir ( D ) — of fluid manometer as specified in Table 1 mounted 
at sufficient height to give a clear working distance <77 of 350 mm in the 
glass limb of the manometer. 

TABLE 1 MANOMETER AND FLOWMETER CHARACTERISTICS 

Characteristic Constant Constant 

Considered Flow Pressube 

Minimum diameter of reservoir 150 mm CO mm 

Type of manometer fluid n-propyl alcohol Distilled water 

Working range of flowmeter 10 to 20 1/min 5 to 25 1/min 

3.2.4.1 The manometer (C) is made of glass tube of internal dia- 
meter at least 5 mm to reduce surface tension effects. In both cases a 
small amount of dye may be added to the manometer fluid, and where 
this consists of distilled water, a small trace of chromic acid shall be added 
to give a clear meniscus. A millimetre scale is fixed behind the limb £H. 

3.2.5 Flowmeter (F) — having the characteristics indicated in Table 1. 

3.2.6 Rubber Tube — connecting the manometer reservoir (D) to the 
chamber (A), which shall be pressure tubing of small internal diameter 
to avoid constriction at the bends. 



IS : 6919 - 1973 



SCREW CAP 



-45<J>- 



— H 23 <£ j-- 



K 



a 



PLUNGER 



BASE 



i ^ i ■ ir i ■ *- 



V5 mm <£ 
HOLES — 






22-3 •£> 
25-20* 

25-25 + 



7i 



E uE 

C DC p 
. ■- n ^ 



Jl 



TT 



/T 




/^ /» ^ j 



zzz 



p' 



2 



-1-5 mme£ 
HOLES 



r 



ii 



6-8 10 



21 



-38<£- 
-60 - 



n 



SECTION (EXPLODED) 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Suggested Dimensions of Constant Volume Chamber 



tS: 6919 -1973 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 3 Non-rotating Plunger 



3.2.7 Rubber or a Plastic Tube — from the chamber {A), to the flowmeter 
( F)' s which shall be of internal diameter not less than 6 mm, shall be as 
short as possible and shall not be twisted or kinked between calibration 
of the apparatus and its subsequent use. 

3.2.8 Packing Rod — For packing the fibres in the constant volume 
chamber ( see Appendix D ). 

3-3 Balance ■ — capable of weighing the specimen to an accuracy of 
±2 mg for the constant flow method and of ±4 mg for the constant 
pressure method. 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 Samples of wool fibres shall be drawn from the lot in such a way as 
to be representative of the lot. Samples drawn in compliance with the 
material specification or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller 
shall be taken as representative of the lot. 

5. ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONING AND 
TESTING 

5.1 Prior to test, the fibres shall be conditioned to moisture equilibrium 
and tested in standard atmospheric conditions of 65 ± 2 percent relative 



t& : 6919 - 1975 

humidity and 27 ± 2°C temperature as laid down in IS : 6359-1971*. 

5.2 If tests are not carried out in the standard atmosphere for testing, 
condition the laboratory sample to moisture equilibrium near the 

r-> *-»i-**i»*^» ti)P nriiA M/-\t*» +Vi a r**l o + -i*t« hum l^itiT At +-V» *» n -t-mf\er\\-t /s+'rfa ^ + ill £* tim^ 

of test, then correct the final results by the factors given in Appendix B. 

5.3 The readings of flowmeters are influenced to a small extent by varia- 
tions in barometer pressure and temperature. Correction plugs (see A-3.4) 
may be used if the variations in barometric pressure and temperature are 
appreciable at the place of testing. 

6. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 

6.1 Cleaning — The laboratory sample shall be about 8 g and shall first 
be degreased by rinsing well in the baths each of about 200 ml of petro- 
leum ether before conditioning. If the laboratory sample is known to be 
dry-combed with fatty matter content below 1 percent, the test specimens 
may be taken from it without cleaning. If the laboratory sample is known 
to be oily with fatty matter content between 3 and 4 percent, the test 
specimens may be taken from it without cleaning provided the apparatus 
has been calibrated from oil-combed slivers. 

6.2 Number of Specimens — Unless otherwise specified, test a minimum 
of two specimens for fibre diameter below 30 microns and a minimum of 
three specimens for fibre diameter above 30 microns. 

6.3 Selection of Specimens — Take the specimens from different places 
in the laboratory sample. In the case of balls of silver, the laboratory 
sample should be made up of pieces of silver from both inside and outside 
of the ball. 

6.4 Specimen Mass — For the constant flow method the specimen mass 
should be 1*5 g i 2 mg. For the constant pressure method the specimen 
mass should be 2'5 g ± 4 mg. 

6.5 Preparation — For slivers with cut ends, cut off with scissors a length 
to give as nearly as possible the specimen mass, then make up to the exact 
mass by adding shorter cut lengths or portions. For slivers with pulled 
ends, remove and discard about five hand draws, then weigh out the 
specimens by taking several successive hand draws. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Ensure that the meniscus of the manometer is at the zero mark and, if 
required, carry out an orifice plate check as given in A-3.3. 

*Method of conditioning of textiles. 



IS : 6^19 - 1973 

7.2 Pull out the weighed test specimen into a long thin sliver and feed it 
evenly into the constant volume chamber (A), packing the fibres down 
with the packing rod from time to time. Insert the plunger and screw 
down the cap to the furthermost extent so that the lip of the plunger is in 
contact with the base. 

7.3 Depending on the method to be used, adjust the air valve as follows: 

a) For constant flow method adjust the air valve until the top of the 
float of the flowmeter coincides with the reference mark T and 
note the fluid level of the manometer to the nearest millimetre 
or - l micron ( see A-3.1 ). 

b) For constant pressure method adjust the air valve until the fluid 
level of the manometer coincides with the 18 cm reference mark H 
and note the position of the float of the flowmeter to the nearest 
millimetre or 0*1 micron ( see A-3.2 ). 

7.4 Remove the specimen from the constant volume chamber, tease out 
the fibres by hand, repack in the constant volume chamber without loss 
of fibres, insert the plunger and screw down the cap, and note the reading 
again as before. 

7.5 Repeat the operation 7.4 so that a total of three readings on each test 
specimen is obtained. 

7.6 Similarly test the other test specimens as given above. 

8. CALCULATIONS 

8.1 Calculate the average of the three readings for each specimen and 
then average of the readings for all test specimens and express the result 
to the nearest O'l micron. 

9. REPORT 

9.1 The report shall include the following information: 

a) Type of material, 

b) Name of the apparatus used, 

c) Number of test specimens tested, 

d) Whether the specimen was tested after cleaning or without 
cleaning, 

e) Average fibre diameter, and 

f ) Whether tested in standard atmosphere or correction applied for 
relative humidity. 



IS : 691$ - 1973 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 5.3, 7.1 and 7.3 ) 

CALIBRATION OF APPARATUS 

A-l. LEAKAGE TEST 

A-l.l After assembling the apparatus as in Fig. 1 remove the cap and 
plunger from the constant volume chamber ( A ) and insert a rubber 
stopper. By means of a Hoffman clip close the rubber tube between ( A ) 
and ( F ) after introducing a pressure difference causing the meniscus in 
the manometer to alter by about 15 cm. Note the position of the meniscus 
periodically for several minutes and if it changes, the apparatus should be 
examined for leaks. 

A-2. SAMPLES OF SLIVERS 

A-2.1 Obtain sufficient quantities of the reference slivers ( see Appendix C) 
for calibration. In requesting these state: 

a) the test specimen mass for the apparatus to be used ( 1'5 or 2'5 g ), 
and 

b) whether oil-combed or dry-combed samples are required. 
Each type of sliver normally supplied is sufficient for four specimens. 

A-3. GRADUATING THE SCALE 

A-3.1 Constant Flow Apparatus — Make a horizontal mark T ( see 
Fig. 1 ) near the top of the flowmeter scale, avoiding any position giving 
marked fluctuation of the float. Fix a scale graduated in millimetres 
behind the manometer and adjust the zero mark to coincide with the 
meniscus of the liquid. Then condition and weigh out according to the 
procedure described in 5 and 6, 1*5 g specimens of each sample of refer- 
ence sliver and test according to the procedure described in 7, noting the 
distance in millimetres below the zero to which the meniscus falls. Do not 
clean the sliver before test. Test three specimens from each of the eight 
reference slivers in this way and calculate the average of the nine readings 
for each reference sliver. 

A-3.1.1 Plot the average depression h in millimetres of the manometer 
meniscus against the known value of fibre diameter d in microns and after 
inspection to ensure that the points lie about a smooth curve, fit a relation 
by least squares as given below. From this relation a conversion table may 
be prepared in microns, or a scale may be graduated in microns and fixed 
behind the manometer. 

10 



IS: 6919 -1973 

A-3.1.2 Calculation of Results by the Least Squares Method — The relation 
between d and h is of the form>hd* = constant and it is thus necessary to 
take logarithms to obtain a linear relation. 

Let X = log d and T = log h. 

For each of the n lots of sliver used for standardization two values 
X t and T t are obtained. 

First calculate the following quantities: 

ix= x x + z 3 + ... + x n -, ■zr^r 1 + r, + ... + r n 
?xr = x,n + xjr t + ... + x n r n 

ly"- =2r 2 - (IT) 2 

n 
2xy = -2Xr~(2X2T)ln 
b = 2xj j 2jv 3 
The regression equation of X and T which applies to the apparatus is then 
^ = 2X/n+i(r-2r/n) ... (1) 

A-3.1.2. 1 Finally construct a table h to d by taking values of h at 
5 mm intervals, finding log h, substituting in equation ( 1 ) to obtain X and 
so tabulating d = antilog X for each value of A. 

A-3.2 Constant Pressure Apparatus — Make a horizontal mark at a 
distance corresponding to 180 mm water pressure from the zero mark Z 
of the manometer. Fix a scale graduated in millimetres behind the flow- 
meter ( F) so that the zero of this scale coincides with a file mark ( zero ) 
made near the bottom of the flowmeter. Condition and weigh out 2 - 5 g 
specimens of each sample of reference sliver according to the procedure 
described in 5 and 6 and test according to the procedure described in 7, 
noting the distance y in millimetres of the float of the flowmeter from 
zero. Do not clean the slivers before test. Test three specimens from 
each of eight ( n ) reference slivers in this way and calculate the average of 
the nine readings for each reference sliver. 

A-3.2. 1 Plot the average reading in millimetres, Ji, y 2 , etc, against the 
known values of fibre diameter d x . t d 2 , etc. Fit a second degree regression 
line of y on d. This is done by finding the coefficients a, b, c t in the 
equation 

y = a + bd + cd* ... ... ... ... (2) 

11 



IS : 6919 - 1973 

by solving the equations 

2y ~na + bid + cZd 2 
Idy = aid -f b%d 2 -f- eld 5 
2d 2 y = aSrf a + b%d* + cSrf 4 

The equation ( 2 ) is then used to graduate a scale in microns which may 
be fixed behind the flowmeter. 

A-3.3 Orifice Plate Checks — To make regular daily checks that the 
apparatus is in good order, the use of the two orifice plates is recom- 
mended. These consist of aluminium discs of the same diameter as the 
inside of the constant volume chamber, each with a central hole. The 
discs have a rim which in use rests on the annular top of the constant 
volume chamber. The diameter of the central hole in one disc is chosen 
to give a reading of about one-third of the available scale on the mano- 
meter (constant flow method) of flowmeter ( constant pressure method) 
when clamped and used in the apparatus under working conditions, with 
no fibres in the chamber. The diameter of the central hole in ihe second 
disc is chosen to give a reading of about two-thirds of the available scale, 
under the above described conditions. 

A-3.3.1 At least once a day orifice plates are clamped in the apparatus 
so that air enters through the central hole only and the readings are 
noted. Variations in the readings given by the scale should not exceed 
2 mm and 4 mm respectively for the two orifice plates. This provides a 
useful and quick check on the functioning of the apparatus, particularly 
as regards the presence of air bubbles in the manometer system. 

A-3.4 Correction Plugs — A combined correction for both temperature 
and barometric pressure may be made by the aid of a plug filled with 
non-hygroscopic fibre, for example, polyester. Details of the construction 
are given in Fig. 4. The plug is filled with the correct mass* of non- 
hygroscopic fibre and the top of the plug sealed permanently with a resin 
which sets at a sufficiently low temperature to avoid damaging the fibres, 
( for example, 100°C ). The plug is clamped in place of the metal plunger 
on the airflow apparatus and the instrument reading taken several times 

<X\- £* i VI Vf 11U11 L11V. UaiUUlV'LllV WlU}i]UlV Id millJM \J 1.J111 XA K v * inv. LHVOOm^ 

at calibration. Let the mean reading be C ( microns ). During any series 
of subsequent tests the plug is inserted and a reading taken. Let this be 
T ( microns ) . Then the results of any tests are multiplied by the factor 

CjT. 

*The correct mass of non-hygroscopic fibre in grammes is given by l*5p/l*31 for 
constant flow and 2 - 5p/l"31 for constant pressure where p = density of fibre and density 
of wool assumed to be 1*31. For polyester the correct mass will be 1'58 g for constant flow 
and 2 - 63 g for constant pressure. 

12 



IS : 69i9 - 1973 



V5 mm £ 
HOLES 




-25-2$-* 
CONSTANT FLOW 9-2 mm, 
CONSTANT PRESSURE t7-3mmJ 

SECTIONAL FRONT 




1-5 mm<£ 
HOLES 

BOTTOM' VIEW 



Note — A thin rubber or plastic sealing ring of internal diameter 25-2 mm is 
placed under the rim of the plug so there is no edge leakage when clamped in position 
on the constant volume chamber. 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 4 Dimensions of Correction Plug 

A-3.4.1 With long usage of the plug, dirt deposits and the reading of 
the plug changes. It is advised, therefore, that after it has been used 
about 400 times ( 18 months if used once per day) the non-hygroscopic 
fibre be replaced by clean fibre and a new standard reading for the plug 
be determined. Likewise the plug shall be kept in a protective container 
when not in use and should be discarded if it has been in contact with 
any liquid, powder, etc. 



APPENDIX 

( Clause 5.2 ) 



B 



CORRECTION FOR RELATIVE HUMIDITY 

B-l. If tests are carried out in non-standard atmosphere of known rela- 
tive humidity the results in microns may be corrected by the following 



13 



IS : 6919 - 1973 

factors, applicable to fibre diameters between 19 and 37 microns: 

Relative Humidity Multiplier to Convert 

Percent to 65 Percent Relative Humidity 

40 1-022 

45 1-019 

50 1-015 

55 1-010 

60 1 -005 

65 1-000 

70 995 

75 0-988 

80 0-980 

85 0-969 



APPEN DIX C 

( Clause A-2. 1 ) 

REFERENCE SLIVERS FOR CALIBRATION 

C-l. For calibration of the airflow apparatus as described in Appendix A, 
laboratory samples of eight reference slivers are available. 

The fibre diameter of each sliver has been measured by the projec- 
tion microscope in several laboratories and is known accurately. 

The slivers are available in two foims: 

a) Dry-combed, fatty matter content less than 1 percent; and 

b) Oil-combed, fatty matter content between 3 and 4 percent, 

A set of eight reference slivers can be obtained by appropriate 
laboratories on application to: 

Interwoollabs 
24, rue Montoyer 
1 040 Brussels 
Belgium 

All such applications should state whether oil-combed or dry-combed 
slivers arc required, and whether specimen masses of 1'5 g or 2'5 g are 
required. 

14 



IS : 6919 - 1973 

APPENDIX D 

( Clause 3.2.8 ) 

PACKING ROD 

D-l. It is possible for operators to exert an unduly large force during 
packing if a rod of small diameter is used to compress the fibres in the 
constant volume chamber. To avoid this, the packing rod illustrated in 
Fig. 5 should always be used. The operator holds the rod by the long end 
and uses the short end to press the fibres into the constant volume chamber. 
The cross piece prevents the red penetrating too far into the constant 
volume chamber. 

The rod should be made from a non-metallic substance, for example, 
polythene, to minimize wear on the constant volume chamber. 

|— CONSTANT- FLOW 40 mm 
CONSTANT 'PRESSURE 
33 mm 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 5 Packing Rod 



15 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

PHYSICAL METHODS OF TEST FOR TEXTILES 

IS: 

681-1964 Methods for determination of universal count of woollen and worsted yarn 

744-1966 Method for determination of wool fibre diameter — Projection microscope 

method {first revision ) 

832-1964 Method for determination of twist in yarn 

1348-1971 Method for determination of kemp content of raw wool {first revision ) 

1377-1971 Method for determination of mean fibre length of wool {first revision ) 

1670-1970 Method for determination of breaking load, elongation at break and tenacity 

of yarns {first revision ) 
1671-1960 Method for determination of skein breaking load (strength), tenacity and 

yarn strength index of cotton yarn ( by constant-rate-of-traverse machine ) 

( metric system ) 

1954-1969 Methods for determination of length and width of fabrics {first revision ) 

1963-1969 Methods for determination of threads per decimetre in woven fabrics {first 

revision ) 
1964-1970 Methods for determination of weight per square metre and weight per linear 

metre of fabrics {first revision ) 

1966-1961 Methods for determination of bursting strength of woven and knitted fabrics 

1969-1968 Method for determination of breaking load and elongation at break of woven 
textile fabrics {first revision ) 

2702-1965 Method for determination of thermal resistance of textile fabrics, guarded 

hot-plate method 

2899-1965 Method for determination of percentage of medullated fibres in wool 

4681-1968 Method for determination of wrinkle recovery of fabrics ( by measuring crease 
recovery angle ) 

4902-1968 Method for determination of correct invoice weight and moisture content of 
woollen and worsted yarns 

6124-1971 Method for determination of crimp in wool 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



JNDJAN STANDARDS 



Over 7 QOQ Indian Standards covering various subjects have been 
issued so far. Of these, the stundurds belonging to the Textile Group 
fall under the following categories: 



Aeronautical textiles 

Chcmlcai lest methods 

Colour fastness of U-jctitc material 3 

Cotton fabric^ — rianrijnnm, fehafti, 

ond mill-mad* 
G yes t lilts 

Grading of fibres and yarns 
Grading ol raw silk. 

Hosiery 

Jute — bags and fabrics 
Jute mill accessories 
Narrow fabrics 
National flag of rnflla 
Nylon fabrics 
**ac*ay iny code* 
Physical test methods 
Rayon fabrics 



Rayon fabrics, hand loom 
Ropes and cordages 

Sampling of (extMes, methods for 
Slth fabrics— h-infU^nm and hnsdi 
Si ilng and finishing mate rials 
Spinning machinery compenwle 

Tuniiim ,v 

Textile floor covering s 
Textile materials for fishing 
Textile mill accessories (other thnn 

|ulfi mills) 
Twines 

Wooing mpicnlnery components 
Wool fabrics — handloom, Khadl, 

and mill-mada 
Yarn and similar structures 
Unclassified 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



151 Bulletin ( Pull 1 1 Shod Ev&ry Month ) 
Single Copy 

Anrudi Subscription 
Standards: Monthly Additions 

SingJeCopy 

Annual Subscription 
Annua) Reports { from 194B-49 Onwards ) 
I SI Handbook, 1*72 



Hs 25- M 

.,. Re D-ap 

... Rs 3-00 

Rs 2-0.3 to 5 _ ve 

... Rs M'OQ 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
Marian Bnavan, y usnaour Sfian Zaix* Mara, NFW DELHI 11D0C1 
Tnl»phuiiH 1 tl ' M 41 { 2a liriBi ) T»l*ar*mi 1 Hanakiidn*lfta 

Branch Office*; 

■ Sfldhna', Nurrriohamed Shaikh Mary, Knanpur, AHriEDABAD 36WJ1 

F Block, Unity Bldfl, Narasimharaja Square, BAN5ALORE: 560002 

534 Sardar Vaiiabhhhai Patai Road. BOMBAY 4O0DO7 

6 Chowtlnghae Approach, CALCUTTA 700013 

5-B-2OT/2-A 1 Firsi Floor J, Chlfag AN Lanr-, HYDERABAD S0M&1 

H7/J18 E Sarvodaya Nana', KANPUft SOSQ3S 

54 Ganar&l Patters Road, MADRAS &CH3QC2 



lel&ohona 

2 76 41* 
35 69 44 

23-rjfl as 

3 44 35 
a 72 T& 



Prinini it Ntw IndiA Pifl(itprt S ***«. Kkueit, India 



