**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  6969  (1973) :  Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  handling 
and  sale  of  refrigerated  drinking  water  [FAD  15:  Food 
Hygiene,  Safety  Management  and  Other  Systems] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  df69  -  I9T1 

(Reaffirmed  2005) 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR  HYGIENIC  CONDITIONS  FOR 
HANDLING  AND  SALE  OF  REFRIGERATED 

DRINKING  WATER 


*• 


UDC     CC3Cjei3  6 


* 


®  Copjriiht  1973 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    S    BAHAPUR     SHAH     ZAFAK     MAftO 

NEW  DELHI   UQfJQi 

jr^an— Mj  JiI'mtmbif  1973 


X 


!S:696d-1973 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR  HYGIENIC  CONDITIONS  FOR 

HANDLING  AND  SALE  OF  REFRIGERATED 

DRINKING  WATER 


Food  Hygiene,  Sampling  and  Analysis  Sectional 
Committee,  AFDG  36 

Chairman  Representing 

Maj-Gen  M,  S,  Boparai  Directorate    General    of   Armed    Forces     Medica 

Services,  New  Delhi 

Members 

Agricultural  Marketing  Adviser  Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection,  Faridabad 
TO  THE  Government  of  India 
Dr  J.  S.  Pruthi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  N.  Amble  Institute  of  Agricultural  Research  Statistics  ( ICAR  ), 

New  Delhi 
Shri  K.  S.  Krishnan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  Balasubramanian  Public  Analyst,  Government  of  Tamil  Nadu,  Madras 

Shri  D.  S.  Ghadha  Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards,  New  Delhi 

Dr  G.  G.  Das  Corporation  of  Calcutta 

Dr  p.  K.  Datta  All  India  Institute  of  Hygiene  and  Public  Healti^ 

Calcutta 
Shri  Sukumar  De  National  Dairy  Research  Institute  (ICAR),  Karnal 

Dr  G.  a,  Mulay  (  Alternate) 
Director  Central  Food  Laboratory,  Calcutta 

Executive  Health  Officer  Bombay  Municipal  Corporation 

Municipal  Analyst  (  Alternate ) 
Health  Officer  Corporation  of  Madras 

Dr  (  Smt  )  S.  Khosla  Department    of      Health      &      Family     Planning, 

Government  of  Punjab,  Chandigarh 
Dr  p.  K.  Kymal  Food  and  Nutrition  Board  (  Ministry  of  Agriculture  ), 

New  Delhi 
Dr  R.  G.  Sinha  {Alternate) 
Shri  Y.N.  Lakshman  Defence    Food  Research    Laboratory   [Ministry   of 

Defence  (R&D)],  Mysore 
Dr  G.  M.  Verma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  F.  G.  T.  Menezes  Directorate  of  Sugar    &    Vanaspati    ( Ministry   of 

Agriculture),  New  Delhi 
Public    Analyst    (  Food    and    Government  of  West  Bengal,  Calcutta 


Water  ) 


(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1973 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  {KIV  of  1957)  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS:6d6d-l973 


(  Continuedfrom  page  1 ) 

Members 
Dr  T.  N.  Ramaghandra  Rao 


Representing 

Central    Food    Technological    Research     Institute 
(CSIR),  Mysore 
Shri  G.  T,  Dwarkanath  (  Alternate  ) 
Col  M,  G,  Sanyal  Qjuarter      Master      General's         Branch,        Army 

Headquarters 
Lt-Gol  O.  P,  Kapur  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  Ranjit  Sen  Serologist  to  the  Government  of  India,  Calcutta 

Senior    Commercial    Officer    Chief  Catering  Officer,  Northern  Railway,  New  Delhi 

(  Catering  ) 
Dr  B.  N.  Singh  Indian  Standards  Institution,  New  Delhi 

Dr  S.  B,  Singh  Public    Analyst,    Government   of    Uttar    Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Health  Department,  Municipal  Corporation  of  Delhi 


Lt-Gol  O.  N.  Tyagi 

Dr  a.  G.  Ajwani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  C.  Vin 
Dr  Hari  Bhagwan, 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 


The  Coca-Cola  Export  Corporation,  New  Delhi 
Director  General,  ISI  ( Ex-officio  Member ) 


Secretary 

Shri  S.  K.  Sud 

Assistant  Director  (Agri  &Food),  ISI 


Hygienic  Codes  Subcommitteej  AFDG  36  : 5 


Convener 
Maj-Gen  M.  S.  Boparai 

Members 

Director  (  Health  ) 

Deputy    Director     (  Family 
Planning  )  (  Alternate ) 
Health  Officer 
Health  Officer 
Prof  N.  Mazumdar 

Dr  D.  V.  Parulekar 
Dr  B.  Ranoanathan 
Dr  D.  V.  S.  K.  Rao 
Secretary 

Senior  Marketing  Officer  (  FP  ) 
Deputy     Senior     Marketing 
Officer  (  FP )  {  Alternate  ) 
Dr  R.  G.  Sinha 

Shri  P.  C.  Vm 


Directorate    General    of    Armed    Forces    Medical 
Services,  New  Delhi 


Ministry  of  Railways 


Corporation  of  Calcutta 

Corporation  of  Madras 

All  India  Institute  of  Hygiene  and  Public  Health, 

Calcutta 
Bombay  Municipal  Corporation 
National  Dairy  Research  Institute  ( IGAR  ),  Karnal 
Britannia  Biscuit  Go  Ltd,  Bombay 
Central  Committee  for  Food  Standards,  New  Delhi 
Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection,  Nagpur 


Food  and  Nutrition  Board  (  Ministry  of  Agriculture  ), 

New  Delhi 
The  Coca-Cola  Export  Corporation,  New  Delhi 


IS :  6969  *  1973 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR  HYGIENIC  CONDITIONS  FOR 

HANDLING  AND  SALE  OF  REFRIGERATED 

DRINKING  WATER 

0.    FOREWORD 

0,1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  23  April  1973,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Food  Hygiene,  Sampling 
and  Analysis  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0.2  Sale  of  refrigerated  drinking  water  in  trolleys  by  itinerant  vendors  has 
become  common  in  cities,  especially  during  summer  season.  Such  water 
is  generally  handled  and  sold  by  people  lacking  the  basic  knowledge  and 
awareness  of  hygiene.  Many  times,  the  water  is  cooled  by  means  of  ice 
directly  put  into  it.  The  water  is  often  offered  for  sale  in  tumblers  which 
are  not  cleaned  properly.  This  standard  is,  therefore,  intended  to  provide 
guidelines  on  requirements  of  hygiene  during  handling  and  sale  of 
refrigerated  drinking  water  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  consumers'  health. 

0.3  This  code  is  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Factories  Act,  1948,  and 
the  Prevention  of  Food  Adulteration  Act,  1954,  and  the  Rules  framed 
thereunder  as  amended  from  time  to  time. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  code  prescribes  the  hygienic  conditions  required  for  handling  and 
sale  of  refrigerated  drinking  water  and  for  water  refrigeration  plants  which 
supply  such  water  for  sale. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

2.1  Refrigerated  Drinking  Water  —  Water  of  potable  quality  obtained 
by  cooling  by  refrigeration  and  not  by  direct  insertion  of  ice. 

2.2  Health  Officer  —  The  municipal  health  officer  or  any  other  officer 
of  the  health  department,  authorized  by  the  health  officer  of  the  town, 
city,  district  or  state  on  his  behalf. 

3 


IS:  6969-1973 

3.  GENERAL 

3,1  Licence  for  sale  of  refrigerated  water  through  water  trolleys  shall  be 
issued  only  to  the  person  who  owns  a  refrigeration  plant  duly  licensed  by 
the  health  officer. 

4.  REFRIGERATION 

4.1  Refrigeration  Plant 
4.1.1  Site  and  Premises 

4.1.1.1  The  building  in  which  the  water  is  refrigerated  for  sale  for 
human  consumption  shall  be  located  in  clean  and  healthy  surroundings 
away  from  roadside  where  lot  of  dust  arises  due  to  vehicular  traffic, 
garbage  dumps,  cattle  stables,  open  sewage  drains  or  other  places  likely 
to  breed  flies.  Premises  should  not  have  objectionable  odour  or  smoke. 
There  shall  be  no  accumulation  of  trash,  garbage  or  similar  waste  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  plant.  There  shall  be  a  suitable  storage  shed  or  room  for 
water  trolleys. 

4.1.1.2  The  structure  of  the  building  shall  be  of  permanent  nature 
and  shall  be  suitable  in  size,  construction  and  design  to  facilitate  mainte- 
nance and  hygienic  operations.  It  should  provide  sufficient  space  for 
housing  of  equipment  necessary  for  hygienic  operations.  The  material  of 
construction  shall  be  brick,  plaster,  cement,  concrete,  tile  or  any  other 
equivalent  material  which  ensures  cleanliness. 

4.1.1.3  No  portion  of  the  building  shall  be  used  for  domestic  purposes 
unless  separated  by  suitable  partitions  or  locations  or  other  effective 
means. 

4.1.1.4  The  floors  of  the  rooms  should  be  constructed  of  concrete  or 
other  equally  impervious  and  easily  cleanable  material.  They  should  be 
smooth,  suitably  sloped  for  drainage  of  water  and  provided  with  tapped 
drains. 

4.1.1.5  Wails  and  ceilings  of  the  rooms  should  have  a  smooth,  non- 
absorbent  light  coloured  surface,  free  from  crevices  and  angles  to  facilitate 
their  efficient  cleaning.  These  shall  be  painted  or  lime-washed  arid 
cleaned  as  often  as  necessary. 

4.1.1.6  The  refrigeration  unit  shall  have  adequate  lighting  and 
ventilation  keeping  in  mind  the  number  of  workers,  their  hours  of  work 
and  nature  of  operation.  Ventilation  and  lighting  shall  also  be  in  accord- 
ance with  the  Factories  Act,  1948,  as  amended  from  time  to  time.  Proper 
ventilation  is  essential  to  prevent  condensation  and  drippage.  Exhaust 
fans  shaU  be  provided  where  necessary. 


15:6969-1973 

4.1.1.7  The  refrigeration  room  shall  be  raade  flyproof,  rodentproof 
and  birdproof  and  should  be  provided  with  self-closing  double  doors.  The 
doors  and  windows  should  be  covered  with  flyproof  wire  gauze,  and  they 
should  open  outwards. 

4.1.1.8  The  rooms  and  the  area  surrounding  the  plant  should  be  kept 
clean  and  dust-free. 

4.1.1.9  The  building  shall  be  maintained  in  proper  state  of  repair  and 

cleanliness. 

4.2  General  Plant  Hygiene 

4.2.1  Refuse  shall  be  collected  in  covered  receptacles  and  shall  not  be 
allowed  to  scatter  on  the  floor, 

4.2.2  Adequate  steps  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  infestation  of  cockroaches 
and  other  household  pests. 

4.2.3  When  pesticides  are  used,  care  shall  be  exercised  to  prevent 
contamination  of  equipment  and  other  materials.  Under  no  circums- 
tances shall  these  be  used  during  processing. 

4.2.4  Floors  and  drains  shall  be  kept  clean.  In  the  refrigeration  room, 
drains  shall  be  provided  with  detachable  covers. 

4.2.5  No  lavatory,  sink,  cesspool,  or  garbage  shall  be  so  situated  or 
maintained  that  odours  or  fumes  therefrom  pervade  any  room  where  the 
water  is  cooled  or  filled  in  trolleys. 

4.2.6  Proper  places  shall  be  provided  for  storage  of  brooms,  brushes, 
buckets  and  other  cleaning  gear. 

4.2.7  The  factory  effluents  shall  not  be  letoff  on  road  or  adjacent 
fields. 

4.2.8  Window  glass  and  light  fittings  shall  be  maintained  clean  and 
dust-free  at  all  times. 

4.2.9  There  shall  be  no  cobwebs  in  any  part  of  the  unit.  Birds  and 
domestic  animals  shall  not  be  allowed  in  any  part  of  the  unit. 

4.3  Equipment  and  Container  Cleanliness 

4.3.1  Installation  and  Construction  of  Equipment  —  The  equipment  should 
be  constructed  and  installed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  facilitate  efficient 
cleaning  and  sanitization  and  easy  dismantling  and  assembling  of  all  the 
parts  that  come  in  contact  with  water.  All  the  equipment,  containers, 
lids  and  pipes  shall  be  smooth,  impervious  and  corrosion  resistant.  Ail 
the  materials  used  for  construction  of  those  surfaces  which  come  into 


Is :  6969 -1973 

contact  with  the  water  shall  be  non-toxic,  preferably  of  stainless  steel  (  see 
grade  07  Crl9  Ni9  of  IS  :  1570-1961*  )  or  of:  alummium  alloy  ( see  IS  :  20- 
1959t). 

4.3.2  Cleaning  and  Sanititation — All  the  containers  and  lids  should  be 
cleaned  thoroughly  with  the  use  of  sodium  carbonate  or  sodium  bicarbo- 
nate or  any  other  suitable  detergent  solution  and  sanitized  with  at  least 
50  ppm  chlorine  solution  prior  to  their  use.  The  residual  chlorine  may 
be  removed  by  flushing  the  equipment  with  water  to  be  cooled. 

4.4  Water  Supply 

4.4.1  Maximum  care  shall  be  taken  with  regard  to  both  chemical  and 
microbiological  quality  of  water. 

4.4.2  For  quality  tolerances  for  water  used  for  cooling,  IS  :  3957-1966$ 
should  be  referred  to  as  guideline. 

4.4.2.1  There  shall  be  an  adequate  supply  of  safe  and  potable  water. 

4.4.3  The  water  prior  to  storage  should  be  prechlorinated  between  0*2 
to  0*5  ppm  of  residual  chlorine. 

4.4.4  The  storage  tanks  for  water  should,  unless  completely  sealed,  be 
kept  covered  with  tight-fitting  lids,  examined  daily  and  cleaned  properly 
and  sanitized  by  spraying  100  ppm  chlorine  solution  at  least  once  every 
month. 

4.4.5  Water  sample  shall  be  got  periodically  examined,  chemically  and 
bacteriologically,  as  desired  by  the  licensing  authority.  A  record  of  such 
examinations  shall  be  maintained. 

4.4.6  Running  water  under  pressure  shall  be  easily  accessible  to  all 
rooms  and  areas  in  which  water  is  cooled  and  equipment  are  washed. 

4.4.6.1  Hot   and  cold  water  in  ample  supply  shall  be  provided  for 
plant  clean-up  needs,  where  necessary. 

4.5  Employee  Hygiene 

4.5.1  Every  person  employed  in  the  factory  shall  be  medically  examined 
by  an  authorized  registered  medical  practitioner  and  the  examination 
shall  include  X-ray  of  the  chest  for  tuberculosis.  The  examination  shall 
also  include:  examination  of  stool  for  protozoal  and  helminthic  infestation 
for  those  parasites  which  are  transmitted  by  ingestion,  and  for  the  presence 
o{  Salmonella y  Shigella  species  and  Vibrio  cholerae;  urine;  and  blood  examina- 
tion for  venereal  diseases.     Subsequently,  the  employee  shall  be  medically 


♦Schedules  for  wrought  steels  for  general  engineering  purposes. 

tSpecification  for  cast  aluminium  and  aluminium  alloys  for  utensils  (  second  revision)^ 

JQluality  tolerances  fgr  water  for  ice  manufacture. 


t:§:  6969 -1973 

examined  once  a  year  or  more  frequently,  if  necessary,  to  ensure  that  he 
is  medically  fit  and  free  from  communicable  diseases. 

4,5.1»1  It  shall  be  impressed  on  all  employees  that  they  should  notify 
the  medical  officer  and  management  cases  of  fever,  vomitting,  diarrhoea, 
typhoid,  dysentery,  boils,  cuts  and  sores  and  ulcers  (however  small), 
discharging  ears  and  notifiable  diseases  occuring  in  their  own  homes  and 
families. 

4.5.1.2  No  worker  who  is  suspected  to  be  suffering  from  any  of  the 
disorders  listed  in  4.5.1.1  shall  be  permitted  to  work  inside  the  plant.  The 
supervisor  shall  check  the  personal  hygiene  of  the  workers  before  the  start 
of  work  and  whenever  they  enter  the  refrigeration  area  after  any  absence. 

4.5.2  Employees  shall  keep  their  finger  nails  short  and  clean  and  wash 
their  hands  with  soap  or  detergent  and  water  before  commencing  work 
and  after  each  absence,  specially  after  using  sanitary  conveniences. 
Towels  used  for  drying  hands  should  be  clean.  No  worker  should  allow 
his  hands  or  any  part  of  his  body  or  clothing  to  come  into  contact  with 
the  water  which  is  meant  for  cooling.  He  should  adopt  strict  hygienic 
practices  so  as  to  avoid  adding  any  microbial  contamination  to  the  water. 

4.5.3  All  employees  shall  be  inoculated  and  vaccinated  against  the 
enteric  groups  of  diseases  once  a  year  and  against  smallpox  once  in  two 
years.  In  case  of  an  epidemic  all  workers  shall  be  inoculated.  A  record 
shall  be  maintained. 

4.5.4  No  worker  shall  be  allowed  to  work  without  proper  clothing  and 
footwear. 

4.5.5  Employees  shall  be  provided  with  clean  uniforms  (  preferably 
white  )  or  aprons  or  both  and  clean  washable  caps,  where  necessary. 

4.5.5.1  Separate  room  or  place  for  changing  the  clothes  shall  be 
provided.     The  clothes  shall  not  be  hung  in  the  refrigeration  area. 

4.5.5.2  The  uniforms  shall  not  be  worn  outside  the  plant  but  put  on 
just  before  starting  the  work  and  changed  when  leaving. 

4.5.6  Eating,  spitting,  nose  cleaning  or  the  use  of  tobacco  in  any  form 
including  smoking  or  chewing  betel  leaves  shall  be  prohibited  within  the 
refrigeration  area  of  the  unit.  Notice  to  this  effect  shall  be  prominently 
displayed  and  enforced. 

4.5.7  Sufficient  and  suitable  sanitary  conveniences  shall  be  provided, 
maintained  and  kept  clean  in  every  factory.  The  conveniences  shall  be 
properly  lighted.  Separate  conveniences  shall  be  provided  for  each  sex. 
The  conveniences  should  have  self-closing  doors  which  shall  not  open 
directly  into  any  work  room  in  the  factory.  The  conveniences  shall 
always  be  maintained  clean  and  in  good  repairs. 


4.5.8  Sufficient  number  of  latrines  and  urinals  and  wash  basins  with 
adequate  provision  of  nail  brushes,  soap  and  towels,  in  the  preseribed 
manner  should  be  provided,  conveniently  situated  and  accessible  to 
v/orkers  at  all  times  while  they  are  at  the  factory  ( see  also  Table  3  of 
IS:  1172-1971*).  The  wash  basins  should  be  installed  in  or  alongside 
the  sanitary  conveniences. 

5.  SALE 

5.1  Water  Trolleys 

5.1.1  The  main  body  of  the  container  shall  be  made  of  stainless  steel 
conforming  to  any  grade  of  IS  :  5522-1 969t  or  aluminium  alloy  conform- 
ing to  IS  :  21-1959$. 

5.1.2  The  pump,  if  used,  for  taking  out  the  water  from  the  tank  shall 
be  made  of  stainless  steel  and  no  leather  parts  should  be  used  in  the 
pump, 

5.1.3  Insulation  between  outer  and  the  inner  tanks  should  be  of  the 
cork  or  fibre  glass  or  any  other  material  which  should  be  inert  and  does  not 
have  corrosive  action  with  metal.  O  uter  and  inner  tanks  shall  be 
hermetically  sealed, 

5*1.4  The  water  tank  of  the  trolley  shall  be  washed  with  bleaching 
powder  at  least  once  a  week.  The  inner  tank  in  direct  contact  with  the 
water  shall  be  rinsed  with  chlorinated  water  before  filling  it  up  with  fresh 
refrigerated  water. 

5.1.5  The  v/ater  trolleys  shall  be  locked  or  sealed  by  the  licensee  before 
the  start  from  the  cooling  plant.  The  seal  put  on  the  trolley  by  the 
licensee  shall  not  be  broken  by  the  vendor, 

5.1.6  The  water  trolleys  shall  be  maintained  in  good  repair,  clean  and 
hygienically  fit. 

5.2  Tumblers  —  The  tumblers  for  serving  the  water  to  the  customers 
should  preferably  be  made  of  paper  and  of  disposable  type.  In  case 
tumblers  of  glass,  metal,  plastics  or  other  suitable  material  which  are  used 
again  and  again  after  cleaning  are  used,  proper  arrangements  shall  be 
provided  for  washing  and  disinfection  of  tumblers.  The  tumblers  should 
be  washed  and  disinfected  with  chlorine  solution  ( 200  to  300  ppm  of 
available  chlorine  )  and  then  washed  with  potable  water. 


♦Code  of  basic  requirements  for  water   supply,    drainage    and    sanitation    {second 

revision ) . 

tSpecification  for  stainless  steel  sheets,  coils  and  circles  for  utensils  and  hospitalwarc, 
JSpecification  for  wrought  aluminium   and   aluminium    alloy    for    utensils   ( second 

revision ) . 

8 


18:6969-1973 

5.3  Vendor  Hygiene —  The  requirements  of  hygiene  of  vendors  for  sale 
of  water  shall  be  the  same  as  those  of  the  employee  hygiene  in  the 
refrigeration  plant  (  see  4.5  ). 

5.3.1  The  record  of  inoculations  and  vaccinations  of  the  vendor  shall  be 
kept  at  site. 

5.4  General 

5.4.1  Trolleys  shall  not  be  plied  from  place  to  place,  but  shall  be  parked 
on  the  allotted  site  in  such  a  manner  as  to  cause  no  obstruction  or 
hindrance  to  vehicular  or  pedestrian  traffic. 

5.4.2  Ice  shall  not  be  added  to  the  water  tank  of  the  trolley  under  any 
circumstances. 


INDIAN     STANDARDS 

ON 

FOOD  HYGIENE,  SAMPLING  AND  ANALYSIS 

IS: 

2491-1972     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  food  processing  units  {first  revision  ) 

5059-1969     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  large  scale  biscuit  manufacturing  units  and 
bakery  units 

5837-1970     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  soft  drinks  manufacturing  units 

5839-1970     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  manufacture,  storage  and  sale  of  ice-creams 

6540-1972     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  manufacture  and  handling  of  ice  for  human 

consumption 

6541-1972     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  establishment  and  maintenance  of  mid-day- 
school  meal  programme 

6542-1972     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  fruit  and  vegetable  canning  units 

6968-1973     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  PAN  (  betel )  stalls  and  vendors 

6969-1973     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  handling  and  sale  of  refrigerated  drinking 
water 

7003-1973     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  sago  (  SABOODANA  )  manufacturing  units 

7005-1973     Code  for  hygienic  conditions  for  production,  processing,  transportation  and 
distribution  of  milk 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

INDIAN   STANDARDS 


Over  7  000  Indian  GtundAird^  qov&ring  varioys  £ub|ecte  havs  been 
issued  so  far-  Of  these,  the  standards  be  ton  9  in  9  to  the  Agricultural  and 
Fcaq-d  Products  Group  fall  under  the  following  cstdgorieE: 


Al^mttuir 

Alcoholic  drinks 

Animat  twda 

Ariiimil  housing  atid  equiprne<nl 

Qiikeiv  and  conf  Bc;iLoii0ry 

Beo-Hti4^pinfl  tciu^pment 

Bf^veraqos 

CoDoa  products 
CQiffle  and  il5  products 

Dairy  equipmenl 

Dairy  induatry,  layC^lJt  Ipl^ari^ 
Dairy  idduiitry.  mo^thofte  of  rssi 
Dai>ry  laboratory  Pipparatus 
Dciry  products 
tdbbEe  stari^h  Jinri  istmchy  prodiicts 

Farm  innplementa  and  mflj&hmory 

Fish  pud  filsliftrv  proiltjqta 

Fish  mdu^try.  sanirsfv  conditior^a 


Feed  sr^in  liandlmg  and  ^to-raga 
Fruits  and  v^ga^abtee 
Honey  and  by-pioducii 
infant  f oods 
Laboratory  animala 
M-&at  and  m-aal  ptodycts 

Pe^l  CDntrol  wt|uipiTfciei1t 

P^stj^ldai  forrnulatfcans 

Ffls!icjd«.  technical  grsdi  and  ganerBl 

PropagaElon  materia  la 

Regulatij4  marker  yardft 
sensory  iev^luntlOfl 
Sptcas  arid  condlm-snt^ 
Starch  d^riv&d  prGductt 
Su^yf^  di^d  t>>^'tirmJucts 
T^a 

Tobacco  pTDdu^le: 
Tfiansport  of  livQ  animal^ 


OTHER  PUBLICmONS 


^1 


1:^1  iutEetin  (  PubEdshed  E^ery  Mnnih  ] 
Sing  la  Copy 

Slandardi  -  Monthly  Additiia^ni 

SlPiql^  Cupy 

Ann u tit  -SubAcription 

AnnyaJ  RiPQfta  { IrDm  194B-49  Onwards  ) 
iSI  HundboE^K,  1EI72 


Rl 

3*04 

R« 

K'M 

n«r 

I-3D 

Rl 

3*55 

Re  z-M  10  5*55 

Rs 

20-ad 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  JN5TITUT1DN 
Mansk  Bhaydn,  9  euhiidur  Sltdti  2df^r  Marg,  NEW  DELHI  110001 
Tatephone  i  27  01  31  {  2i  linn )  T*l»ar*i«ii  i  Maniitciat»ttha 

Branch  Offices:  Ti\aotit>r\9 

'  Sscthiiia  \  Ntirmohiameti  Shaikh  Mbtq,  Ktisnpur,  AHlVl£DABAO  SSOOOt  2  03  91 

F  Block,  Unitv  BIdg,  ^JdrasniUisraia  Square,  6ANCALDRE  5^0002  Z  7S  4$ 

&34  Safdar  Valtabhbhat  Pal^l  Road,  BOMBAY  400007  9a  99  44 

&  Chowni  I  u  ^iei»  A  pumach,  CA  LCUTT A  7DCI0 1 3  23-03  02 

5-9-201  /2'A  (  f Erst  FJoor ),  Chira^  Ali  Lane.  H  YDEHASAD  SOOOOI  3  44  :i5 

1 1 7/41 B  3  glBi vDday  q  N  eg  er,  ty^  N  PU  R  20800  5  82  72 

C4  G4nariil  ruttsra  RQ«d.  MADFLAS  300002  B  72  79 


'PMnKd  at  NcdbH^I  PtiDECH,  U-eib^  iiace^,  iadi« 


