*••••••••••*•••• 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6074 (1971) : Code of Practice for Functional 
Requirements of hotels, restaurants and other food service 
establishmentsDaylighting of Factory Buildings [CED 12: 
Functional Requirements in Buildings] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



gyia^/f/raa^^^:^^ 



S?St^ * I |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 



\\V^:5^< 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




ic 



A- 



A 




BLANK PAGE 



^<*i^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : i674 - I9TI 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER 

FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

( Sfccad Reprisl APRIL \MA ) 



UDC 6+U24:69'O0I 3 




© CcpyfiMhi [911 

INDIAN iTABiPARDSI INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAH 9^ DAHADLR SHAH /AfAR MARG 

NkW DELHI J 10003 



13:6074-1971 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER 

FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

J ii.i >iiiii ,,,_^,..,,,^_.i„ „ , III I — .^^^ w..^— —■ ■ ■■I I m il ■■ II 

Functional Requirements in Buildings Sectional Committee, BDG 12 

Chairman Representing 

Maj-Gen B. N. Das Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters and 

Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta 

Members 
Du N. K. D. Choudbury Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 

Roorkee 

Db K. R. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Mrs E, S. Ghi;man Indian Institute of Architects 

ShriJ. M, Banjamin (Alternate) 
Shri R. G. Gokhale National Building Organization, New Delhi 

Shki K. R. Jani ( Alternate) 
Dp. K. M. Von Heinz In personal capacity ( 32 Alipore Road, Delhi ) 

Shri N. Majumdak All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health 

( Directorate General of Health Services ) 

Shri A. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Prof G. M. Mandalia University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Prof Rattan Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Mankikek National Safety Council 

Shri S. Majumder Directorate General of Observatories ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ) 
Shri J. V. Merta Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri S. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Puri Voltas Limited, New Delhi 

Shri B.J. Ramrakhiani Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation 

Shri M. M. Rana Central Public Works Department 

Shui J, D. Shastri Directorate General of Health Services New Delhi 

Sliri Sayed S. Shafi Institute of Town Planners ( India), New Delhi 

Shri D. P. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. G. Srivastava National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shui R. L. Suri In personal capacity ( A-116 Vasant Vihar, New Delhi ) 

Shri L. G. Toye Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shri N. V. Shastri ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Ajitha Simha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director (Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri V. K. Goona 

Deputy Director (Architecture), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN 9, BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 6074- 1971 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Panel on Hotels and Restaurants, BDC 12 : P 2 

Convener Representing 

Shri M. M. Raka Central Public Works Department 

Members 

Shrj K. Ktjmab Directorate General of Tourism ( Ministry of Tour* 

ism and Civil Aviation ) 
Shri Ram Pekshad The Federation of Hotels and Restaurant Association 

of India 
Shbi L. C. Nabiti-a { AUernaU ) 

Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee, AFDG 36 

Chairman 

Maj-Gen M. S. Bopabai Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical Services, 

New Delhi 

Members 
AaiucuLTtrRAi. Marketino Ad- Directorate of Marketing & Inspection { Ministry of 
viSBK. TO xBE GovEBKMENT OS Food, ^riculture, Gommunity Development & 

India Co-operation ), Faridabad 

Senior Marketing OFriCEB 
( Frpit PBODiJCTa ) ( Alternate ) 
Shbt V. N. Amblk Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. S. Khishnan ( AltenuUe) 
Dk K. Bagchi Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & 
Urban uevelopment ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Balasubkamanian Public AnsV/st to the Government of Tamil Nadu, 

Madras 
Dr S. G. Ghakrabobty Public Analyst to the Government of West Bengal, 

Calcutta 
Dr G. C. Da3 Corporation of Calcutta 

Dk p. K. Datta All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Dr p. K. Kymal Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Develop- 

ment & Co-operation 
Dr R. C. SlNHA ( Alternate) 
Dr Y. N. Lakshman Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ) , Mysore 
Db N. a. N. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr H. Laxminauayana National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Shri Suktjmar Dk ( Alternate) 
Shri F. G. T. Mentezes Diret-torate of Sugar & Vanaspati ( Ministry of 

Food, Agriculture, Community Development & 
Co-operation ) 
ShpI D. Mitra Public Analyst to the Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 

( Continued i/n page '11 ) 



IS: 6074 -1971 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER 

FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 18 March 1971, after the draft finalized by the Functional Requirements 
in Buildings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engi- 
neering Division Council. 

0.2 Hotels, restaurants and other food service establishments are in exis- 
tence in abundance in the country. This standard has been prepared to 
guide the various municipalities and other organizations in promoting bye- 
laws for the hygienic upkeep of hotels, restaurants and other food service 
establishments by laying down functional requirements of hotels. 

0.3 This code covers requirements specific to the large food service 
establishments. However, the basic principles of hygiene underlying the 
technical advice in this code should be applied with appropriate modifica- 
tions to all food service establishments. 

0,4 This code is subject to the provisions in the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and the rules framed thereunder, amended up to 
date. 

0,5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in additiori to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country - 

0,6 Building Bye-laws Sectional Committee, ( BDC 25 ) has already pub- 
lished the following Indian Standards which cover minimum provisions 
and requirements for buildings: 

IS: 1256-1967 Code of building byelaws 

IS : 4873-1968 Byelaws for construction of cinema buildings 

0.6.1 The present recommendation does not deal with the structural 
aspects but lays down only the functional requirements particular to Food 
Service Establishments which may be made use of for drafting specific 
recommendations and byelaws, by various municipalities concerned. 



18:6074-1971 

0.7 This standard at its different stages of formulation was also considered 
by the Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee ( AFDG 
36 ) and the Hygienic Codes Subcommittee ( AFDC 36 : 5 ) and the 
comments received were fuUy kept in view while finalizing this standard. 

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with^ the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the functional requirements essential for 
proper upkeep of hotels, restaurants and other food service establishments. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Food Service Establishments — Hotels, restaurants, dining rooms, 
coffee shops/houses, cafeteria, snack bars, canteens, refreshment rooms, 
hospital kitchens, flight kitchens, railway dining cars, soda fountains, ice- 
cream parlours, hotel messes, DHABAS and any other premises where 
food is prepared and/or served, hereinafter called 'Establishments'. 

2.2 Employee — A person who handles food or drink and is employed in 
an establishment where the food or drink is prepared and/or served. 

2.3 Licensee — A person, firm, corporation or association, licensed to run 
the establishment. 

2.4 Authority Having Jurisdiction — The local body which for tlie 
purpose of administering these byeiavvs may authorize a committee or an 
official to act on its behalf, hereinafter called 'Authority/Competent 

Aiirhovjf"^'* 

3. GJlNKtAIr COr^DITIONS 

3.1 Obligations of Intending Licensee — The intending licensee shall 
make an application for the grant of a license under the local byelaws on 
the form prescribed by the authority. A suggested form of the application 
is given 'tn Appendix A. The application for the grant of a licence shall 
be accompanied by a layout plan showing details of location, approach 
and distance from public sewerage, lavatories, urinals located in the vicinity. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values { revised ). 



15:6074-1971 

3.1.1 The intending licensee shall make an application for the grant of 
licence under these byelaws on the form prescribed by the authority. The 
application for the grant of licence shall be accompanied by a layout plan 
showing details of the food preparation and services area, the hygitt&ic 
arrangements and the disposal of wastes, 

3.1.2 Notwithstanding anything contained in these byelaws hereafter 
the licence when granted shall not absolve the licensee from the obligations 
arising out of any other provisions of the local byelaws or the Act or other 
legislation in vogue and the licence shall be liable to suspension, revocation 
or cancellation, if so, decided by the authority. 

3.1.3 The licensee shall in no case exceed or violate or in any way 
infringe the limits of the particulars mentioned in Appendix A for wl^ich 
the licence is originally granted. 

3.1.4 The licensed premises will mean and include preparation and 
service rooms, godowns, sheds, structures, enclosures and open spaces, etc. 

3.1.5 The licence form shall be exhibited along with its letters of require- 
ments or conditions, if any, communicated to the licensee for compliance 
in connection with the licence from time to time either prior to or after 
the grant of the licence in an easily visible part of the licensed premises 
and shall be produced for inspection purposes whenever so required by 
the competent authority. 

3.1.6 The licensee shall inform the authority in writing at least a month 
in advance of the date of intended change or of the date of expiry of 
licence whichever is earlier of any intended change in the particulars 
mentioned in the licence. 

3.1.7 The authority may at all reasonable hours, normally between 
sunrise and sunset enter into or upon any building or premises for the 
purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of these byelaws are 
being complied with. 

3.1.8 The licence for carrying out a trade or business within the premises 
of a food service establishments shall not be granted if the trade or busi- 
ness is likely to interfere or deteriorate hygienic conditions of the food 
service establishment. 

3.1.9 The licensee shall not keep or allow to be kept any article in 
connection with or any way related to the licensed commodity, trade pro- 
cess or operation or carry on or allow to be carried on any operation or 
process connected with or any way related to the licensed commodity, 
trade or operation or processes outside the licensed premises or on public 
road or street. Subject to the conditions mentioned above, the provisions 
of this clause shall not apply to the outside catering done by the licensee. 



ISs6074.1971 

3.1.10 All exits of the licensed premises shall be kept clear of obstructions 
at all times. 

3.1.11 Any structural alterations or additions and/or the licensed 
premises shall not be carried out without the prior permission from the 
competent authority. 

4. UGENGE 

4.1 A licence may be temporarily suspended in case notice for removal of 
defects, given by the authority is not complied with within a reasonable 
period specified by the authority in each case. 

5. SITE 

5.1 The food service establishments shall be located at a place where flies 
and vermins are minimum and kitchen and dining areas not within 10 m 
from the site where public garbage bins, public latrines and public urinals 
are located. In case of non-compliance with the above conditions, the 
licence to open a new food service establishment shall not be granted. 

e. BUILDING 

6.0 In addition to the recommendations in the code the building in which 
food service establishment is located shall also conform to the local building 
byelaws in force. 

6.1 The building should be of a permanent nature and maintained in a 
proper state of repair and cleanliness. 

7. FLOORS 

7.1 The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or 
served and of all washing placed shall be of such construction as to be 
impervious, easily cleansed, smooth and in good repair, 

7.2 All floors shall be kept clean and free from litter. Dustless method of 
floor cleaning shall be used, all except emergency floor cleaning shall be 
done during the period when least amount of food and drink is exposed, 

8. WALLS 

8.1 The walls shall have a smooth, non-absorbent surface, free from cracks 
and crevices to facilitate their efficient cleaning. 

8.1.1 The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or 
utensils are washed shall have a smooth washable surface up to a minimum 
height of 2*0 m from the floor. 



IS: 6074-1971 

9. CEILING 

9.1 Ceiling shall be clean, leak-proof and have a smooth non-absorbent 
surface free from cracks and crevices to facilitate their efficient cleaning. 
These should be such that they do not harbour vermin. 

10. DOOR AND WINDOWS 

10.1 In the absence of air-conditioning ail openings to the outer air inclu- 
ding doors, windows, sky lights shall be effectively screened with tight 
fitting screens free from holes with wire gauge conforming to IS: 1368- 
1960*. The doors when not in use shall be kept in closed position. Self- 
closing screened doors to the outer air shall open outwards. Other methods 
approved by the authority shall be employed to ensure the absence of flies, 

11. LIGHTING 

11.1 Recommended values of illumination in various areas of the establish- 
ment shall be as given in Table 1 . 

TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED VALUES OF ILLUMINATION 

The lighting of some of these locations wiU be determined primarily by aesthetic 
considerations and the recommended illumination values as given in IS : 3646 ( Part II )- 
1966* may be taken as a guide only. 

Sii Abeas Illumination, 

No. Lux 

(I) (2) (3) 

i) Entrance halls 150 

ii) Reception and accounts 300 

iii) Dining rooms ( tables ) 100 

iv) Lounges 150 

v) Bedrooms: 

a) General 100 

b) Dressing tables, bed heads, etc 200 
vi) Writing rooms ( tables ) 300 

vii) Corridors 70 

viii) Stairs 100 

ix) Laundries 200 

X) Kitchens t200 

xi) Goods and passenger lifts 70 

xii) Clockrooms and toilets t200 

xiii) Dining rooms: 

a) Tables 100 

b) Cash desks 300 
xiv) Self service-counters 300 

♦Code of practice for interior illumination: Part II Schedule for values of 
illumination and glare index. 

fSupplementary local lighting should be provided over kitchen equipment and 



♦Specification for wire gauze for general purposes. 

7 



IS J 6074 -1971 

12. VENTILATION 

12«1 In case of ron-air-conditioned buildings the minimum standards of 
mechanical ventilation shall be maintained as given in Table 2. 

TABLE 2 VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS FOR 
NON-AmCONDITIONED BUILDINGS 

Sl Abe a Air Changes per Hour 

No,, 

(I) (2) (3) 

i) Living rooms 3 

ii) Dining and lounge 2-3 

iii) Big kitchen 12 

iv) Small kitchen 6 

v) Toilets 6 

13. WATER SUPPLY 

13.1 There shall be adequate supply of safe and potable water. Running 
water shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or 
utensils are washed. 

134,1 Requirements for water supply for hotels and restaurants shall be 
as given in Table 3. 





TABLE 3 WATER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS 




Si. 

jNo. 


DKSCRlFnON 


NoK-AinrONDTTlONEl) 

( LjTiiES PKR Day ) 


Air Conditioned 
( LiTRKS PER Day ) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 




(4) 


i) 


Hotels ( per bed ) 


180 




275 


ii) 


Restaurants ( per seat ) 


70 




97 


Note — In hotels where laundry is provided arrangement 
120 litres per bed should be made. 


for an extra quantity of 



13.2 Storage of Water — For the storage of water, proper receptacles 
made of galvanized iron or other suitable material shall be used. Such 
receptacles shall be kept covered with tight fitting lids and shall have 
screvv caps at the bottom for draining out residual water. The receptacles 
shall be placed on a stand or a platform easily accessible for the purpose 
of maintenance and cleaning. The receptacles shall be examined and 
cleaned regularly. 



15:6074-1971 

13.2.1 If at any time, the water from the tanks on analysis is found 
harmful, the licensee shall stop the use of stored water and make alternative 
arrangement till the water of the tanks is made safe and potable. 

14. DRAINAGE 

14.1 Adequate arrangements shall be made for satisfactory drainage of all 
sewage and waste water. Harmful waste water, such as water containing 
kitchen waste, shall be satisfactorily disposed of. The drainage shall be 
so designed as to cause no stagnation at the maximum discharge rate for 
whi«^h the different units are designed. 

14.1.1 The requirements for fitments for drainage and sanitation shall 
conform to the requirements given in Tables 4 and 5. 

14.2 Where no sewers exist, grease trap and soak pits shall be provided 
for liquid waste which will not be drained directly into the public surface 
drains. Catch pits shall be properly covered with suitable cover and 
should be cleaned daily or oftener. Septic tanks conforming to IS : 2470 
(Part I)- 1963* or IS: 2470 (Part II)-1964t shall be provided if required 
by I he authority. 

14.3 The gradient of the drains should be such that no water stagnates 
anywhere within the premises. Where no sewerage is provided for the 
final outfall, soak pits or cess pools to the satisfaction of the Authority 
should be provided. 

15. KITCHEN 

15.1 Kitchen shall be sufficiently spacious and should be of a size in pro- 
portion to the average number of diners catered for at one meal. The 
floor spiCe in the kitchen shall be calculated at the rate of 0'5 m® Min per 
diner. In case of snack bars, soda fountains, etc, the service-cum- 
dispensing area shall be treated as part of the kitchen. 

^ioTE — The requirements of 15.1, however, do not cover mobile catering 
eitablishnunts. 

15.2 Subject to the requirements laid down in 15.1 the minimum size of 
the kitchen should not be less than 10 m* and none of the sides less than 
2-4 m. 

15.3 Exhaust fans should have provisions of grease filters for collecting 

grease. 

*Code of practice for design and construction of septic tanks: Part I Small installations 
( first revision ) . 

tCode of practice for design and construction of ser'lc tanks; Part II Large 
installation. 



TABLE 4 REQUIREMENTS OF DRAINAGE AND SANITATION FITMENTS IN HOTELS 

{Clause 14.1.1) 



e 



t«k 
I 



Si. 
No. 



Fitments 



i) Water-closets 



li) Ablution taps 



iii) Urinals 



Fob Residemtiai. 
Public and Staff r 



Fob Public Rooms 



FoK Nok-Re8idbhtial Staff 



(3) 

1 per 8 persom 
omitting occu- 
pants of the 
room with 

attached 
water-closets; 
minimum of 2 
if both sexes 
are lodged 

1 in each water- 
closet 



For Males 
(4) 

1 per 100 persons 
up to 400 per- 
sons; and for 
over 400, add 
at the rate of 1 
per 250 persons 
or part thereof 



For Females 

(5) 

2 per 100 persons 
~ up to 200 per- 
sons; and for 
over 200, add 
at the rate of I 
per 100 persons 
or part thereof 



For Males 

(6) 



Fox Females 

(7) 



1 for 1-15 persons 1 for 1-12 persons 

2 for 16-35 persons 2 for 13-25 persons 

3 for 36-65 persons 3 for 26-40 persons 

4 for 66-100 per- 4 for 41-57 persons 
sons 5 for 58-77 persons 

6 for 78-100 per- 
sons 



1 in each water- 1 in each water- 1 in each water- 1 in each water- 
c)nset r Insert closet closet 



closet 



closet 



closet 



1 water tap with draining arrangements shall be provided for every 50 persons or part thereof 
in the vicinity of water-closets and urinals 



1 per 50 persons 
or part thereof 



Nil up to 6 per- 
sons 

1 for 7-20 persons 

2 for 21-45 persons 

3 for 46-70 persons 

4 for 71-100 per- 
sons 



iv) Wash basins 



1 per 10 persons 
omitting the 
wash basins 
installed in the 
room suite 



1 per water-closet 
and urinal pro- 
vided 



1 per water-closet 
provided 



1 for 1-15 persons 

2 for 16-35 persons 

3 for 36-65 persons 

4 for 66-100 per- 
sons 



1 for 1-12 persons 

2 for 13-25 persons 

3 for 26-40 persons 

4 for 41 -57 persons 

5 for 58-77 persons 

6 for 78-100 per- 
sons 



v) Baths 



vi) Slop sinks 



1 per 10 persons 
omitting occu- 
pants of the 
room with 

bath en suite 

1 per 30 bed- 
rooms, mini- 
mum 1 per floor 



^ vii) 



Kitchen sinks and -<- 
dish washers 



-1 in each kitchen- 



NoTE 1 — Some of the water closets may be of European style if desired. 

Note 2 — It may be assumed that two-thirds of the number are males and one-third females. 



ss 



•a 



TABLE 5 REQUIREMENTS OF DRAINAGE AND SANITATION FITMENTS IN RESTAURANTS 

{Game )4J.l) 

FoK Male Public Fok Fe:jale Fvrltc Ton Malje Staff For Vemai.s Staff 

(3) (4) (5) (6) 

f for 50 seats up to ] for 50 seat,? up to ] for 1-15 persons I for 1-12 persons 

200 seats; and for 200 seats; and for 2 for 16-35 persons 2 for 13-25 persons 

ovtr 200 scats, over 200 seats^ 3 for 36-65 persons 3 for 26-40 persons 

Mdd at the rate of add at the rate of 1 4 for 66-100 persons 4 for 41-57 persons 

t per 100 seats or per 100 seats or part 5 for 58-77 persons 

part thereof thereof 6 for 78-100 persons 

1 in each water-closet 1 in each water-closet 1 in each water-closet I in each water-closet 

! u atcr tap with draining arrangements shall be provided for every 50 persons or part thereof 
in the vicinity of water-closets and urinals. 



Sl 


Fjtmenxs 


No. 




(.1) 


(2) 


i) 


\Vaif;r-ctoseis 



si) Ablniion taps 



iit) Urinals 



iv) Wash basins 

v) Kilchrn sinks and 
dish washers 



1 per 50 seats — Nil up to 6 persons 

1 for 7-20 persons 

2 for 21-45 persons 

3 for 46-70 persons 

4 for 71-100 persons 

^ „- 1 for every water-closet provided- 

^ 1 in each kitchen — — 



W 



'nI 

•^ 






vi) Slop or Service sinks 



1 in the restaurant- 



NoTK 1 — Some of the water closets may be of European style, if desired. 

Note 2 — It may be assamod that two-thirds of the number are males and one- third females. 



18:6074-1971 

15.4 Every establishment shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities 
for its employees, conveniently located in the premises of the establishment; 
if possible, on the same floor to comply with the city plumbing code of 
laws. Toilets shared by other occupants of the building not employed by 
the licensee shall not be permitted. 

15.5 Where exhaust or other mechanical ventilation is not provided there 
shall be an intervening room or vestibule between a toilet room and a 
room in which food or drink is prepared, served or stored or in which 
utensils are handled or stored. Toilet room doors shall be provided with 
self-closing arrangement. Intervening room or vestibule shall be provided 
with tight fitting self-closing doors. 

15.6 The toilet rooms for the staff shall have permanent and legible signs 
posted conspicuously in each toilet room directing employees to wash their 
hands with soap and water before resuming their work. Places for utensil 
washing shall not be considered as washing facilities for the personnel. 

15.7 It is desirable to provide changing rooms for the workers with inde- 
pendent wash and toilet facilities. Required number of lockers may also 
be provided in the changing rooms for the workers to store their personal 
effects during the hours of work. 

16. DINING HALL 

16.1 The floor area of the dining hall excluding the area occupied by the 
service counter and any furniture and fixture except tables and chairs shall 
be not less than 1 m* per diner. The surfaces of every table or board on 
which refreshments are served shall be of a non-absorbent impervious 
material except where table linnen is used. 

16.2 Hand washing facilities such as running water and soap shall be 
provided by the licensee for the customers at a convenient place. Facili- 
ties for drying of hands in a hygienic manner shall also be provided by 
the licensee. 

17. DISHWASHING ARRANGEMENTS 

17.1 All eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleansed and 
effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each use, so 
that all such utensils ready for a service to customers are clean to sight 
and touch. 

17.2 Equipment, that is too large to immerse may be treated: (a) with steam 
from a hose, in the case of equipment in which it is possible to confine 
steam, (b) by boiling water rinse, (c) by spraying or swabbing with chlorine 
solution of approved strength, or (d) separate area should be provided for 
pot washing with proper sterilization arrangements as given at (a), (b) and 
(c) above. 

13 



15:6074-1971 

17.3 A schematic diagram for a proposed sink washing arrangement is 
given in Fig, 1 to 3. 

18. STORAGE AND HANDLING EQjUIPMENT 

18.1 All containers and utensils shall be stored at a height of not less than. 
430 mm above the floor in a clean, dry place protected from flies, splash, 
dust, overhead leakage, and other contamination. Wherever practicable, 
containers and utensils shall be covered or inverted on a clean surface. 

18.2 Drain boards, trays, and shelves shall have an impervious surface 
which is not readily corrodable. 



1 WASH-WATER WITH DETERGENT 43' rO 49* C 
It RINSE -WftRM WATER 
III STERILIZE WATER 77* C IFOR 2 MiNUTES) 




FULLY ENCLOSED 
GUSSET 



TUBULAR 
LEGS 



SINU BOWLS AND SPLASHBACK. 
ALL INTERNAL CORNERS 15 mm 
COVE! USE OF SOLDER OR 

FILLET MATERIAL TO OBTAIN 
THE OeSlREO INTERNAL 
RADIUS NOT ACCEPTABLE 



INTEGRAL ORAINBOARDS' 
PITCHED A MINIMUM OF 
I IN 100 TOWARDS SINKS 



NoTS I — This is a schematic diagram and does not indicate details. 
Note 2 — The dimensions given are minimum recommended. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Hand Dishwashing Arrangements 



14 



IS:6074-1971 




OVERFLOW 



Note 1 — This is a schematic diagram and does not indicate details. 
Note 2 — The dimensions given are the minimum recommended. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Section Through Sink 





DISH TAOlE 
Rim 

Note — These sinks should be pro- Note — Removable icrapping blocks 

vided on soiled dish tables. They should be provided on soiled dish tables 

are used for the disposal of left-over for disposal of waste solids. Garbage bins 

liquids and solids from soiled utensils. may be provided below. 

3A Dump Sink 3B Dish Table Rim 

Fig. 3 Details of Washing Sink 

15 



18:6074.1971 

18.3 While handling the containers and utensils used for storage and 
service of food or drink, care shall be taken that the inside surfaces coming 
in contact with food or drink are not touched by hand. This applies also 
to other items of table-ware and cutlery. 

18.4 Paper cups, plates, straws and other single service containers shall be 
purchased in sanitary cartons and stored therein in a clean, dry place until 
used, and after removal from the cartons these articles shall be handled 
in a hygienic manner. Laundered clothes and napkins shall be stored in 
a clean place until used. 

18.5 Drinking straws and toothpicks shall be either wrapped or kept in 
sanitary dispensers protected from handling during fillings, storage and 
dispensing and from other sources of contamination. 

19. STORAGE OF FOODSTUFF 

19.1 All perishable food shall be stored at the temperatures as given in 

Table 6. 

TABLE 6 STORAGE TEMPERATURES FOR FOODSTUFF 

Sl Names of Articles 

No. 

(1) (2) 

i) Meat, meat products, poultry 
ij) Fresh fish and sea food 
iii) Dairy products and eggs 
iv) Fresh fruit and vegetables 
v) Ice-creams 

Note I — Potatoes need no refrigeration, but should be stored away from light. 

Note 2 — Fish and sea foods shall be stored in separate compartments so as not to 
affect other materials. 

20. ACOUSTICS 

20.1 Food service establishments ( hotels, restaurants, etc ) shall adopt 
suitable noise control measures to provide adequate sound insulation 
against various noise sources which would cause disturbance to human 
comfort and efficiency. If required by the authority, proper acoustical 
treatment will be carried out to the areas where music or dance perfor- 
mances are to be carried out. 

21. LIFTS 

21.1 When lifts are provided, their installation, operation and maintenance 
shall conform to IS : 1860-1968*. 



Storage Temperatube 


000 


(3) 
to 


1-50 


-2-00 


>> " 


-0-50 


0-50 


>j 


2-50 


2-00 


>f 


4-50 


-14-50 


>) — 


12-00 



♦Code of practice for installation, operation and maintenance of electric passenger and 
goods lifts {Jirst revision). 

16 



18:6074-1971 

22. FIRE SAFETY REQ,UIREMENTS 

22.1 General — Fire safty of food service establishments shall be 
considered from the following two aspects of the fire hazard and pre- 
cautions shall accordingly be provided against the same: 

a) possibility of loss or damage to life, refer to as personal hazard; 
and 

b) possibility of fire occurring and spreading in the building itself; 
refer to as internal hazard. 

22.1.1 In order that the fire hazards namely personal hazards, internal 
hazards are minimized, building shall conform to general requirements 
given in 22.2 to 22.10. 

22.2 All buildings and particularly buildings having more than one 
storey shall be provided with liberally desigijc-d safe-fire-resistant exists 
or escapes. 

22.2.1 The exits shall be so placed that they are always immediately 
accessible and each is capable of taking all the persons on that floor as 
alternative escape routes may be rendered unsuitable and/or unsafe due to 
fire. 

22.3 Escape route shall be well-ventilated as persons using the escapes 
are likely to be overcome by smoke and/or fumes which may enter from 
floor. 

22.4 Where fire resisting doors are employed as 'cut-offs' or fire breaks, 
they shall be maintained in good working order, free from any obstruction 
so that, they may be readily opened to allow quick escape of any person or 
persons trapped in that section of the building, and also, when necessary 
prompt rescue work may be expeditiously carried out. 

22.5 Electrical and/or mechanical lifts, while reliable under normal 
conditions may not always be relied on for escape purposes in the event 
of fire. The electrical supply to the building itself may he cut off or 
otherwise interrupted, or those relying upon mechanical drive may have 
the driving power availalile. 

22.6 Lift shafts and stairways serve as flues or funnels thus increasing the 
fire by increased draught and their designs shall be such as to reduce or 
avoid the possibility and consequent spread of fire. 

22.7 Basements (Including Sub-Basements) — Where basements are 
necessary for a building and where such basements are used for storage, 
provisions shall be made for es( ape of any heat arising due to fire and for 
liberating any smoke whi< h may be caused. 

17 



IS: 6074- 1971 

22.8 It is essential that the fire resistance of the basement conforms to the 
highest order and all columns for separating the upper structure shall have 
grading not less than the standards laid down for Grade 3 {see Table 7). 





TABLE 7 CLASSIFICATION OF 


STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS 


Gkade 


Time in Hours 


, Minimum 


Fire Load and Class of Fire 


No. 


Rbsistakck . 


f\GAINST 


Which Structural 




STAN-UAnR 


FiRK 


Et.i:ment may Withstand 








Fire Load in 


Class of Fire 








kcal/cm- 




(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


1 


6 




1 100 000 and over 


Very high 


2 


4 




550 000 to 1 100 000 


Higli 


3 


2 




275000 to 550 000 


Medium 


4 


1 




less than 275 000 


Low 


5 


I 




~ 


\^ery low 



22-9 First-Aid Fire Fighting Arrangements — First-aid fire fighting 
appliances according to 18:2217-1963* shall be provided and periodically 
inspected by the appropriate authority. 

22.10 The fire fighting appliances shall be distributed over the building in 
such a manner so as to be readily available in case of fire in any part 
of the building and shall be maintained in proper working order as 
specified in IS :2190-1962t. Adequate technical staff trained in fire 
fighting shall be maintained by the licensee. 

23. GAS INSTALLATION 

23.1 In case the establishment is equipped with gas for cooking, heating, 
etc, the installation shall conform to the local byelaws applicable to the 
installation of gas connections equipment, 

24. STORAGE DISPLAY AND SERVING OF FOOD AND DRINK 

24.1 All food and drink shall be stored and displayed in a manner as to be 
protected from dust, flies, vermin, unnecessary handling, over-head 
leakage, sewage back flow, and other contamination. Presence of rodents, 
cockroaches, ants, or other vermins shall be considered as a violation of 
these byelaws. Food or drink shall not be stored or prepared beneath 
over-head sewer or drain pipes. 

24.2 All unwrapped food and drink on display sliall be protected by 
glass or otherwise from puVjlic handling or other contaminatioi.. Approved 

♦Recommendations for providing first-aid fire fighting arrangements in public 
buildings. 

tCode of practice for selection, installations and maintenance of portable first-aid fire 
appliances. 

18 



15:6074-1971 

openings for self service may be permitted on counter frontSj but the 
direct line from the customers' breath to the displayed food shall be 
intercepted by glass or other partitioning, except in case of self service 
counters. 

24.3 All food and drink shall be handled and served in such manner as to 
minimize the opportunities for contamination. Serving of sliced butter 
and cracked ice shall not be by direct contact with fingers or liands and 
manual contact with all food or drink shall be avoided as far as possible. 

25. GENERAL HYGIENE IN ESTABLISHMENT 

25.1 No animals or birds shall be kept or allowed in any room in which 
food or drink is prepared, stored or served. There shall be no cobwebs 
in any part of the establishment. 

25.1.1 All enclosed spaces which provide harbourage for rodents shall 
be eleminated- All intersections between double wails and floors shall be 
protected against gnawing by rats, by the installation of approved rat- 
proof materials and ail openings in fl,oors, walls, and ceilings through 
which pipes, cables or conduits pass, shall be properly sealed with snugly 
fitting collars or approved rat-proof material; and the propagation of rats 
and invasion/infestation of the premises by them shall be permanently 
prevented. 

When pesticides are used, care shall be exercised to prevent contami- 
nation of equipment, utensils and food. Under no circumstances, shall 
pesticides be used when the food is being prepared or served. 

Under no circumstances, sinks and troughs for washing food or 
utensils be used for washing of liands. 

26. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

26.1 Every person employed in the food service establishment shall be 
medically examined by an authorized registered medical practitioner and 
the examination shall include X-ray of the chest for tuberculosis. The 
examination shall also include : examination of stool for protozoal and 
helminthic infestation for those parasites which are transmitted by inges- 
tion, for the presence of Salmonella^ Shigella species and Vibrio cfiolerae; 
urine; and blood examination for venereal diseases. Subsequently, the 
employee shall be medically examined once a year or more frequently, if 
necessary, to ensure that he is medically fit and free from communicable 
diseases. 

26.1.1 It shall be impressed on all employees that they should notify 
the medical officer /management, cases of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, 
typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts and sores and ulcers (however small), and 
liotifiable diseases occurring in their own homes and families. 

19 



18:6074-1971 

26.1.2 No worker who is suspected to be suflferlng from any of the dis- 
orders listed in 26.1.1 shall be permitted to work inside the establishment. 

1*6.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash 
their hands with soap or detergent before commencing work and each 
absence, specially after using sanitary conveniences. Toweis used for 
drying hands should be clean. No worker shall allow his hands or any 
part of his body or clothing to come into contact with the food. He should 
adopt strict hygienic practices so as to avoid adding any microbial conta- 
mination to the food. 

26.3 All employees shall be inoculated and vaccinated against the enteric 
groups of diseases once a year and against smallpox once in two years. In 
ease of an epidemic all workers shall be inoculated and a record shall be 
kept. 

26.4 No worker shall be allowed io work without proper clothing. Em- 
ployees shall be provided with clean uniforms ( preferably white ) or aprons 
or both and clean washable caps, where necessary. 

26.4.1 The uniforms shall not be worn outside the establishment but put 
on just before starting the work and changed when leaving. 

26.5 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of tobacco in any form or 
chewing betel leaves shall be prohibited where food is prepared or stored. 
Notice to this effect shall be prominently displayed and enforced. 

26.6 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences shall be provided, main- 
tained and kept clean in every establishment. The convenience shall be 
properly lighted. Seperate conveniences shall be provided for each sex. 
No convenience shall open directly into any work-room in the establish- 
ment. The conveniences shall always be maintained clean and in good 
repairs. 

26.7 Sufficient wash basins with adequate provision of soap and towels, 
latrines and urinals in the prescribed manner should be provided {see 
14.1.1), conveniently situated and accessible to workers at all times while 
they are at the establishment. 

27. ABATTOIR 

27.1 Abattoirs when provided in the establishment shall conform to the 
requirements laid down in 18:4393-1967*. 

•Specification for basic requirements for an abattoir. 



20 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.1 ) 
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF LICENCE 

Ward 

Old Licence No 

Name of Licensee 

Prem ises Licensed _^ 



Sl No. 


Nature of Articles, Trade or 
Operation 


Dimension or 
Quantity 


Fees 


Rs 


P 


i) 










H) 










iii) 










iv) 










V) 










vl) 










vii) 










vi'i) 











ix) 








-^) 











Total. 



Security Deposit of Rs- 

Valid from 

Date of Issue 



-to. 



Licensing Authority 



The Licence is hereby renewed: 



Sl 
No. 


Fees Received Vide 
Receipt No. 


i^AlE 


Rs 


P 


Licence 
Valid Up to 


Signature/ 
Authority 


i) 










ii) 













iii; 










iv) 













21 



18:6074-1971 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. N. Mitra Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Db D. V. Parulekab Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. Ramachandra Rao Corporation of Madras 

Db a. N. Ramachandra Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Shri C. T. Dwabkanath ( Alternate ) 
CoL R. R. Rao Qtiartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Lt-Col O. p. Kapub ( Alternate ) 
Db Sham Sinoh Sekhon Department of Health & Family Planning, Govern- 

ment of Punjab 
Senior Commercial Officer Chief Catering Officer, Northern Railway 

( Catebino ) 
Db B. N, Singh Statistics Department, ISI, New Delhi 

Lt-Col Q. N. Tyagi Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 

Dr a. G/ Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Vin Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 

Db HariBhagwan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojpcio Member) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shui S. K. Sun 

Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 

Hygienic Codes Subcommittee, AFDC 36 : 5 

Convener 

Maj-Gen M. S. Boparai Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical Services, 

New Delhi 

Members 
Dr K. BagcHi Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & 
Urban Development ) 
Director (Health ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Health Officer Corporation of Calcutta 

Dr H. Laxminarayana National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Db N. MaJumdar All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Dr D. V. Parulekar Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

Dr a. Ramachandea Rao Corporation of Madras 

Db D. V. S. K. Rao Britannia Biscuit Company Ltd, Bombay 

Senior Marke.tijsG Officer Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 
(Fruit Prodlcts) Food, Agriculture, Community Development & 

Co-operation), Faridahad 
Deputy Seni^^r Marketing 

Officer ( Fruit Products ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. G, Sink a Food and Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Food, 

Agriculture, Community Development & Co- 
operation ) 
Shri P. C. Vin Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 

22 



tei^ AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1983 

TO 

15:6074-1971 CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

OF HOTELS. RESTAURANTS AND OTHER FOOD SERVICE 

ESTABLISHMENTS 

Alterat^lons^ 

(Page 19, clause 26,2, line 7) - Delete the 
following: 

*urine; and blood examination for venereal 
diseases.* 

[Page 20, clause 26,2) - Substitute the following 
for the existing clause: 

•26.3 All employees shall be inoculated against typhoid 
and paratyphoid A diseases on their first appointment 
and thereafter, once in every five years. In case of 
epidemic s» all workers shall be inoculated. A record 
shall be maintained. ' 



(AFDC 36) 



Printed at Offset Printing Centre, New Delhi, India 



(jSri AMENDMENT NO. 2 FEBRUARY 1986 

TO 

IS : 6074 -1971 CODE FOR FUNCTIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS OF HOTELS, RESTAURANTS 

AND OTHER FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

( Page 7, clause 10.1, lines 3 and 4 ) — Substitute ' wire cloth confor- 
ming to IS ; 1568-1970* 'for ' wire gauge conforming to IS : 1568-1960* '. 

( Page 1^ foot-note with ' * ' mark ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing foot-note: 

* ♦Sp;;cification for wire cloth for general purposes {first revision ) '. 

( Page 8, clause 12,1 ) — Add the following new clause after this 
clause: 

' 12.2 In case of air-conditioned buildings, the design, construction and 
installation of air-conditioning systems and equipment installed in the 
building for the purpose of providing and maintaining conditions of air 
temperature, humidity, purity and distribution shall be as per requirements 
laid down in SP : 7 ( Part VlII/Scc 3 )-1983*. ' 

( Page 8 ) — Add the following foot-note: 

' *National Building Code of India 19B3: Part VIII liuild[ii<T services. Section 3 Air 
conditioning and heating. V 

( Page 9, clause 14.2, lines 4 a7id 5 ) — Substitute ' IS : 2470 ( Part I )- 
1985* and IS : 2470 ( Part II ).1985t 'for ' IS : 2 )70 ( Part I )-I963* or 
IS: 2470 ( Part, II )-1964t '- 

( Page 9, fool-uofes with ' * ' and ' f ' tnark ) — Substitute the following 
Ibr lUv, existing iboL-notes: 

* *Code of practice for iastaUation of septic tanks: Part [ Design, criteria and 
construction ( second revision ). 

f Code of practice for installation of septic tanks: Part II Secondary treatmont/and 
disposal of septic tank elllu(;nts ( second revision ). * /-"^^ 

( Page 16, clause 21.1, line 2 ) - Substitute ' IS : 1860-1980* ' for 
aS: 1860-1968* '. 

( Page \6, foot-note with ' * ' mark ) — Su1:)3titutc the following for the 

existing foot-note: 

. ^'. < 

' *Code of practice for installation, operation and maintenance of eh-ctric passenger 

and goods lifts ( second revision ).' 

/ 1 



f ( Page 18, clause 22.9, line 2 ) — Substitute ' IS : 2190-1979* ' for 

*IS : 22174963* '. 

( Page 18, clause 22.10, line 4 ) — Substitute ' IS : 2190-1979* ' for 
*IS : 2190-1962t'. 

( Page 18,/oof-riof€i with * * ' anc/ * f ' '"^^^ ) " Substitute the follow- 
ing for the existing foot-notes: / 

* *Gode of practice for selection, installations and maintenance of portable first-aid 
fire appliances ( second revision ). ' , 

{Page 20/clause 27.1, line 2 ) — Substitute ' IS : 4393-1979* * for 
* IS : 4393-1967* \ 

( Page 20, fool-note with ' * ' mark ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing foot-p6te: X 

' *Specification for basic requirements for an abattoir ( (^rst revision ). * 



{ BDG 12 ) 



Printed at New India Piinting Press, Khurja. lndi» 



