**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7149 (1973) : Fibreboard boxes for canned sea foods for 
export [CHD 15: Paper and its products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



ISi 7M7- Wit 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



SM:< tFlCATrONFOR 
FJ&REBOARD BOXES I OH I .WED S£A FOODS 

FOR EXPORT 



UBC GUI'? I ,| j'"fi 




<i\ i -if iy?J 

STANDAKO^i INST1TU 1 IOW 
M ANA K 31] I AVAN, * I' * I ■ I i ZATAl • H AM 




>74 



IS : 7149 - 1973 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FIBREBOARD BOXES FOR CANNED SEA FOODS 

FOR EXPORT 

Paper and Flexible Packaging Sectional Committee, MCPD 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri K. Viswanathan Rolls Print Co Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 
Shri A. B. Ajmeba Card Board Box Mfg Company, Calcutta 

Shri C. C. Ajmera ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Bandopabhyay Development Commissioner, Small Scale Indus- 

tries, New Delhi 
Shhi P. L. Burman Joint Committee of the Paper Industry, Calcutta 

Shbi Raj K. Chauhan Indian Confectionery Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Deputy Dibectob Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shbi B. N. Ghosh Federation of Corrugated Box Manufacturers' 

Association, Bombay 
Shbi Harbhagwandas P. Arora ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Hariharakrishnan The Travancorc Rayons Limited, Rayonpuram 

( Kerala ) 
Shbi S. K. Keshava India Tobacco Company Limited, Calcutta 

ShbiR. C. Sarin (Alternate) 
Shbi R. L. Khanna Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi D. P. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. R. Krishnaswami Indian Explosives Limited, Calcutta 

Shbi A. E. Ladhabhoy ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Malhotra Indian Paper Makers Association, Calcutta 

Shbi Man Mohan Singh Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri N. B. Menesse Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Shbi P. K. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Db H. B. N. Mtjrthy Jardine Henderson Limited, Calcutta 

Dr A. N. Nayar Packaging & Wood Products, Consultancy Service, 

Kanpur 
Shri P. R. Parekh Solid Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. N. Chokshi (Alternate) 
Shri V. B. Pathak Indian Plastics Federation, Calcutta 



Shbi J. N. Singh (Alternate) 



[ Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyright 1974 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any.means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 7149 - 1973 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri M. K. Ramasami 
Shri A. N. Rao 

Dr D. V. S. K. Rao 

Shri G. V. Rao 

Shri D. A. Rees 

Shri P. R. Seshan ( Alternate 
Shri J. C. Shah 



Representing 

Jayant Packaging Private Limited, Madras 
Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Federation of Biscuit Manufacturers of India, 

Delhi 
Directorate of Standardization ( Ministry of 

Defence ) 
The Metal Box Company of India Ltd, Calcutta 



Shri Shumsher Singh 



Federation of Associations of Small Industries of 

India, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 
Shri P. V. Narayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sunder India Foils Limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. P. Ghatterjee (Alternate) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI (Ex-officio Member) 

Deputy Director ( MCPD ) 



Secretary 

Shri V. K. Bansae 
Assistant Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



Boxes, Drums and Containers Subcommittee, MCPD 14 : 2 



Convener 
Shri A. B. Ajmera 

Members 

Shri C. C. Ajmera ( Alternate to 
Shri A. B. Ajmera ) 
Shri H. N. Bhargava 

Shri P. L. Burman 
Deputy -Director 
Shri B. K. Dohim 

Shri P. 15. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. N. Ghosh 

Shri S. K. Keshava 

Shri K. R. Krishnas^amv 

Shri P. N. Laea 

Shri G. Sknoupta (Alternate) 
Shri N. B. Menesse 

Shri P. K. Bose (Alternate ) 
Dr H. B. N. Murthy 



Card Board Box Mig Company, Calcutta 



Directorate of Standardization ( Ministry of 

Defence ) 
Joint Committee of the Paper Industry, Calcutta 
Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
Swastik Paper Industries, Bombay 

Corrugating & Paper Processing Company Private 

Limited, Calcutta 
India Tobacco Company Limited, Calcutta 
Indian Explosives Limited, Calcutta 
Orient Paper Mills Limited, Brajrajnagar 

( Distt Sambalpur ) 

Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 

Jardine Henderson Limited, Calcutta 

( Continued on page 9 ) 



IS: 7149 -1973 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
FIBREBOARD BOXES FOR CANNED SEA FOODS 

FOR EXPORT 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 7 November 1973, after the draft finalized by the Paper and Flexible 
Packaging Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo 
Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 India exports a sizeable quantity of its production of canned sea foods. 
Packaging of canned sea foods in suitable ' outers ' becomes important so as 
to cause less damage to the cans which will be sold in retail in the markets 
of the importing countries. This standard has been formulated to help the 
Indian exporters to provide adequate and functional packaging and improving 
the quality of Indian exports. 

0.3 Implementation of this standard will ensure tighter pack; reduced risk of 
dents to cans and damage to labels; prevent bulging of outer boxes in ware- 
houses. 

0.4 In preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from 
the indigenous practices and due weightage is also given to the prevailing 
international practices. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding, whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value, should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements for nbreboard transport boxes 
for export of canned sea foods. Requirements for the closure of the container 
after filling are also specified. 



"Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised). 



IS : 7149 - 1973 

2: TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the terms given in IS : 4261-1967* and 
IS : 7185-19731 shall apply. 

3. BOX 

3.1 The outer box shall be made from corrugated fibreboard, or solid fibre- 
board the external surface of which has been treated with a suitable water 
repellent material ( for instance, bitumanized kraft paper, wax, water replent 
kraft paper, etc ) . 

Note — In the case of corrugated fibreboard 3 or 5 ply may be used. 

4. STYLE 

4.1 The fibreboard box shall conform to the style No. 0204 specified in 
IS;6481-1971t 

5. DIMENSIONS 

5.1 Length and Width — The inside length and width of the box shall be 
an exact multiple of the diameter measured over the chimb of the can. 

5.1.1 A tolerance of + 3 mm shall be allowed on the internal length and 
width of the box . 

^>,2 Height ■ — The internal height of the transport box shall not exceed an 
exact multiple of the height measured over the chimb of the can intended to 
be packed into the container. 

5.2.1 Whenever partitions and separators are used due tolerance shall be 
allowed on the internal dimensions of the box. 

5.3 Flaps — The flaps shall meet without binding or overlapping. 

6. SAMPLING, CONDITIONING AND TESTING 

6.1 Sampling — The boxes shall be sampled and tested within 20 days of 
their receipt by the purchaser from each consignment of 10000 boxes or part 
thereof; 20 boxes shall be selected for testing as follows: 

a) If the boxes are bundled, 20 bundles shall be selected at random 
and from each bundle so selected, one box shall be selected at 
random for testing. 

b) If the boxes are not bundled, 20 boxes shall be selected at random 
from the total consignment. 



'Glossary of terms relating to paper and pulp based packaging materials. 
tGlossary of terms relating to paper and flexible packaging. 
JGuide for principle uses and styles of fibreboard containers. 



IS: 7149 -1973 

6.2 Conditioning — The sample of 20 boxes selected as in 6,1 shall be 
deemed to represent the whole consignment of boxes and shall be conditioned 
for testing by the method prescribed in 5 of IS : 1060 (Part I )-1966*. 

6.3 Testing < — The types of test and the selection of boxes for testing shall 
be as indicated in Table 1 . 





TABLE 1 TESTING OF BOXES 








( Clauses 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 ) 




St 
No. 


Type or Test 




Number of 
Boxes to be 

Selected 
from Sample 
for Testing 


Number of 
Test Speci- 
mens Obtain- 
ed from Each 
Box 


Number of Tests 

on Each Test 

Specimen 


(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) 


Bursting strength 




3 


1 


6 

( 3 each side ) 


ii) 


Waterproofness 
( Cobb/30 rain ) 




3 


5 


1 

( on external surface 
only ) 


Mi) 


Substance: 










a) for corrugating medium 

b) for combined weight of 
liners 


3 


2 


1 


iv) 


Puncture resistance 
combined board 


of 


3 


5 


1 



6.3.1 The requirements for the material of construction of the box as 
well as the methods of test for evaluating these requirements shall be as 
given in Table 2. 

6.4 Criteria for Conformity — The consignment of boxes shall be deemed 
to comply with the test requirements of the specification if, after the specified 
number of boxes from the test sample as given in Table 1, has been tested 
as required in Table 2, 

a) all the boxes pass the test, or 

b) only one box fails to pass one or more of the tests and on retesting 
in accordance with 6.5, no further box fails to pass the test or tests, 

6.5 Retests ■ — If only one box from the test sample fails to meet all the 
test requirements of the specification, further boxes shall be selected .at 
random from the consignment of boxes for testing for the defective property 
or properties. The number of additional boxes to be tested shall be twice 
the number specified in Table 1 for the test or tests in which the box from 
the original test sample failed. 

* Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied products: Part I ( revised). 



IS : 7149 - 1973 



TABLE 2 



PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS OF SOLID AND CORRUGATED 
FIBREBOARD 

(Clauses 6.3.1 and 6.4) 



St, 

No 


Type of Test 


"~ Upt 


Requirements 


Method of 

Test. Ref to 

Cl No. 




o 20 kg 


Above 


: 20-30 kg 






SFB 


CFB 


SFB 


'■■- — — — > 
CFB 




(i) 


(2) 


(3) 


w 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


i) 


Bursting strength 
kg/cm 2 , Min 


12 


12 


15 


15 


12'5 of IS: 1060 
(Parti )-1966* 


«) 


Waterproofness 
(Cobb mm 30), 
Max 


120 


120 


120 


120 


6 of IS : 4006 
(Partl)-1966| 


iii) 


Substance g/m 2 , 
Min: 


1400 


— 


1600 


_ 


6 of IS : 1060 
(Parti )-1966* 




a) For corrugating 
medium 


— 


170 (3 ply) 
150 (5 ply) 


— 


170 (3 ply) 
150 (5 ply ) 






b) For combined 
weight of liners 


— 


400 ( 3 ply ) 
450 (5 ply) 


— 


450 (3 ply) 
500 ( 5 ply ) 




-iv) 


Type of flute 




A, B, C or 

any combi- 
nation of 
these 




A, B, C or 

any combi- 
nation of 
these 




v) 


Puncture resistance! 


§ 200 


175 


200 


200 


9 of IS : 4006 



(Part II )-1972{ 

*Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied product, Part I ( revised ) . 

tMethods of test for paper and pulp based packaging materials, Part I. 

JMethods of test for paper and pulp based packaging materials, Part II. 

§Not less than four puncture test shall be made on unscored areas, only one 
test may fall below the minimum prescribed, but not more than 10 percent below the 
prescribed minimum. One test shall be made in such a manner that the corrugations 
of the combined board run in the same plane as the puncture arm and one test with 
corrugations at right angles to the first test. Such tests shall be made from both sides 
of the board. 

7. MANUFACTURERS 5 JOINT 

7.1 The manufacturers' joint shall be stitched, glued, or taped as follows: 

a) Stitched Joint 

i) Stitching lap • — The stitching lap shall be not less than 30 mm 
wide, and may be inside or outside the box. 

ii) Spacing of stitches — The centre-to-centre spacing of stitches shall 
not exceed 60 mm. The clear distance from a cut edge of the 
fibreboard to any stitch shall be not less than 6 mm and not 
more than 25 mm. The stitches shall be made at an angle of 
45° to the cut edge. 



IS: 7149 -1973 

b) Glued Joint 

i) The glueing lap shall be not less than 30 mm wide. 

ii) The adhesive used for the joint shall be water-resistant type, 

iii) The adhesive applied shall be in a strip not less than 25 mm. 

iv) The adhesive shall be applied not nearer to a cut edge than 3 
mm, and not nearer to a crease at the ends of the lap than 
12 mm, 

c) Taped Joint 

i) The side and end to be joined shall meet within 5 mm but 
not nearer than 1'5 mm, 

ii) The tape used for the joint shall be gummed reinforced tape not 

less than 50 mm wide. 
iii) The tape shall be applied symmetrically about the joint. 

iv) The tape shall start and finish within 3 to 6 mm from the crease 
at each end of the joint. 

8. CLOSURE 

8.1 The box when filled shall be securely closed by glueing the outer flaps 
to the innernaps with a water-resistant type glue. 

8.2 The quality of the glue and the amount of glue used for the closure shall 
be such that all the flaps will remain glued together with all normal conditions 
of transport and storage. 

8.3 Gum Taping — Suitable gum tape, minimum 50 mm wide, shall be 
used on all seams. 

8.4 Strapping- — Two normietallic straps minimum 12 mm wide shall be 
used in suitable directions. , 

9. PRINTABILITY OF OUTER SURFACE 

9.1 The condition of the outer surface of the box shall be such as to allow 
the marking, stamping or stencilling of the box with the type of ink normally 
used for the purpose. 

10. PACKING AND MARKING 

10.1 Packing — The boxes shall be supplied in the form as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the vendor. 



fit 7149 -i?ft 

10.2 Marking — In addition to the marking of the buyer, each box shall 
have the following information legibly and indelibly marked on the outside 
of the bottom of the box unless marking in any other position is agreed to by 
the purchaser: 

a) Name or registered trade-mark of the box manufacturer, 

b) Words ' FOR EXPORT % 

c) Gross mass limit of the box, and 

d) Bursting strength of the nbreboard. 

10.2.1 The box may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which 
is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products 
are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further 
safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of ISI Certification 
Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the 
Indian Standards Institution. 



IS : 7149- 1973 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri Nitin J. Nanavaty Apurva Containers Private Limited, Ahmedabad 

Shki V. B. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. Parekh Soild Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. N. Chokshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri M K. Ram as ami Jayant Packaging Private Ltd, Madras 

Shri Y. K. Sharma Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri Shumsher Singh * Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Sum P. V. Narayanan ( Alternate) 
Shri P. Veerraju Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Shri E. R. Viccajee Warden & Company Private Limited, Thana 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

PAPER AND FLEXIBLE PACKAGING 

IS: 

2771-1965 Corrugated fibreboard boxes 

6481-1971 Guide for principal uses and styles of fibreboard containers 

6715-1972 Master cartons for export of frozen sea foods and frog legs 



