**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7655 (1975) : Code of practice for food advertising [FAD 
15: Food Hygiene^ Safety Management and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



tSi 7655. 1975 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
FOOD ADVERTISING 

( First Reprint OCTOBER 1990 ) 
UDC 6641659.1:659.154 



(C) Copyright 1975 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARQ 
NliW DliLHl 1 10002 

Gr 3 September 1975 



( CMtinuedfrmn ptigi 1 ) 

Mtmbm kepnstMing 

Maj V. A, Nabayanan Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence )| Mysore 
Dr G. M. Vbbma ( Altirnau ) 
PcmLio AiTALYST ( FooD AKD Government ofWcst Bengal, Calcutta 
Watkb ) 

PCJBLIC AWALYST, BaCTMHOLOOY 

(AUtmatt) 
Db T. N, Ramaobandba Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Srbi C, T. Dwarakaxatu ( AUernaU ) 
Col K. Seitaram QjLiartermastcr General's Branch, Army Head- 

quarters 
Lt*Coi. O, P, Kapur (Alternati) 
SsKiOR 'Mbdical O f f I c s r Northern Railway, New Delhi 

( Gatbrino ) 
Dft S. B. SxNQH Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Dr T. a. V. SuBiiAMANiAN Vallabhbliai Patcl Chest Institute, Delhi 

Dr M. C. Swamikathan Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry 

of Health & Family Planning ), Now Delhi 
Shri D. S. Chadba ( AUernaU ) 
Suri p. C. Vin The Coca Clola Export Corporation, New Delhi 

SsRi J. D. Contractor ( Alternate ) 
Dr Hari Bhaowak, Director Cineral, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ] 

Secretary 

Suri Sour ah 
Assistant Director (Agri & Food ), ISI 



Ad-hoc Panel on Food Labelling and Advertising, AFDC 36: PI 

Convener 

Maj Gen M. S* Boparai Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi 
Members 
Suri D. S. Cbadha Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry 

of Health & Family Planning), New Delhi 
Col S. L* Chadba Health Department, Municipal Corporation of 

Delhi 
Shri S. Jayaraman Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 

of Agriculturo & Irrigation), Faridabad 
Sbri G. K. Nooif Royal Fancy Sweetmeat Saloon, Bombay 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 1981 

TO 

15:7655-1975 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FOOD ADVERTISING 

Cprrl^enduin 

[Pag0 8, olau80 5,1, Sia^), informal tablg, aeoond 
oolxtm^ »ix-A tntry] - Substitute 'U50 ag' for 'U50 g*. 



(AFDC 36) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, ladla 



I8t7«S5.197S 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
FOOD ADVERTISING 

0* FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 April 1975, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, Sampling 
and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Pixxlucts Division Council. 

0.2 Advertising is vital for successful marketing of food products. It 
provides an essential service to the consumer, to the industry and commerce, 
to the government and the economy in general. This is true only when such 
advertising is truthful, responsible and legal. The present code has been 
evolved keeping in view the role which advertising plays in ensuring the 
consumer's right to knowledge about the fbod^ products he buys, and the 
industry's problems in meeting the demands oNnarket forces in the best 
way possible. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard due consideration has ])cen ^ivcn 
to the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules framed 
thereunder and the t>uit Products Order, 1955. Assistance has been derived 
from the following publications. 

International. C^ode of Advcrlising Pradice. The Jiitcrnaiional 
Chamber of Commerce, 1966. 

Labelling of Tow.! Regulations No. 400, of the United Kingdom, 1970. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code lays down beisic principles and rules of conduct for IckkI 
advertising and claims. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2«0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions sJuill apply. 

2.1 Claim — An assertion on the label of a fcK>d that a food has sjKcial 
qualiti(^s or pro|>c^rti<'s normally not found in a food of that kitul and 
calnilaiod to enhance its nutritive, diabetic, tlierapeulie or orj;:inok|)ti(* 



I8i7<SS«1975 

values to make the food more attraetive in any other way to the consumer. . 
It includes assertions of selettivity in choice of raw material and of special 
care in harvesting, handling or processing designed to produce a better 
quality of product (but not simply good hygiene practice). It does not 
include meaningless superlatives. 

2*2 Components — Any substance which forms part of an ingredient. 

2.3 COnfimier -^ Any person to whom an advertising message is 
addressed. 

2t4 Food — Any article used as food or drink for human consumption other 
than drugs and water and includes: 

a) any article which ordinarily enters into or is used in the composi- 
tion or preparation of human (bod, and 

b) any flavouring matter or condiment;. 

2*5 Food Advertising -— The words food advertisement are construed 
throughout this code in their broadest sense to embrace any form of 
advertising or publicity rclatinj? to food. Therefore, it should include 
all material whether written, pictorial, spoken or film, which features a 
mcsscigc promoting a food product, or a food practice. 

2»6 Food'Additlve — Any substance not normally consumed as food by 
itself and not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, whether or 
not it has nutritive value, the intentional addition of which to the food 
for a technoloi^iail (including organoleptic) purpose in the manufacture, 
processing, preparations, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or hold- 
ing of such food results or may be reasonably expected to result ( directly or 
indirectly ) in it or its by-products becoming a component of or otherwise 
affecting the characteristics of such foods. The term does not include 
contaminants or substances added to (bed for maintaining or improving 
nutritional qualities. 

2*7 Ingredient — Any substance including food additive, used in the 
manufacture or preparation of food and present in the final product. 

2*8 Serving — A reasonal)lc quantity of food suited for consumption, at 
one time, by an individual from a specified group of population. 

3. BASIC PRINCIPLES 

3.1 Food advertising should l>e an (^sscntial scr\'ice to the consumer as well 
as (o industry, comnicrrc and public economy. 

3*2 Fo(kI advertising should Ix; socially responsible towards the consumer 
and the community. 



ISi765S.1975 

33 Alt food atdvertmng, irrespective of the medium used> should be legal, 
truthful, ethical and decent. 

3*4 Food shall not be described or presented in any advertising in a manner 
that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an«erroneous or 
exaggerated impression regarding its character in any respect. 

4. RULES OF CONDUCT 

4»1 Il0M0ty 

4.1.1 Food advertisements should be so framed as not to abuse the 
confidence of the consumer or exploit his lack of experience or knowledge. 

4.L2 Food advertisements should not play on superstition nor should these 
take undue advantage of beliefs, feelings and weaknesses of the consumers. 

4.1.3 Food advertisement should not hurt religious sentiments o( the 
consumers. 

4a Trathftd PraMntatioii 

4«2«1 Food advertisements should not contain any statement or visual 
presentation which directly or by implication, adds or omits information or 
causes, ommission or ambiguity which is likely to mislead the consumers. 

4.2JS No claims piirporting to be statements of fact should be made if 
they are likely to mislead. 

NoTS -~ Rounded off figurei for calories, ingredients etc, coukl be |iven, provided 
rounded off figure doel not disturb the relevance of the result claimed. 

4.M Food shall not be described or presented in advertising by words, 
pictorial or other devices including wrapper design, colour and style of 
lettering which would refer to or arc suggestive cither directly or indirectly 
of any other branded food products with which such food might be confused, 
or in such a manner ^ to lead the purchaser or consumer to believe that 
the food is associatc4 or confused with the food of his choice by mere 
imitation of brand nai^es, v^rapper design or other device, 

4*2*4 A misleading food advertisement should not be exonerated on the 
grounds that the advertiser or someone acting on his behall' has subsequently 
provided the consumer with accurate information. 

4«2«4.1 Specifically, food advertisemetits should not mislead as to: 

a) the qualities of the product advertised, for instance, its composition, 
nutritive value, its utility or suitability, its commercial or geogra- 
phical origin; 

b) the price, quantity and terms, of purchase; 



c) the services accompanying purchase, including aettvery> exet^mgfs 
and return; 

d) the coiiitems and the value of the guarantee attached to the 
product; the words guarantee or warranty, or words having the 
same meaning should not be used unless the full terms of the 
guarantee as well as the remedial action open to the purchaser are 
clearly set out in the advertisement, or are available to the 
purchaser in writing at the point of sale or with the goods; 

e) the existence. of any patent protection or other industrial proprictery 
right granted to the product advertised, or of medals, jpriites, 
diplomas, etc, awarded; 

f ) the qualities, the price, the value or the terms of purchase of other 
products on the market place and the services accompanying the 
purchase of such products; and 

g) the trustworthiness of statements made by other advertisers. 

4*2«4.2 Scientific terms, statistics, quotations from technical literature 
and the like should be used with a proper sense of respohsibiltty to the 
consumer. Statistics with a limited validity should not be presented in 
such a way as to make it appear that these are imiversally true« 

4JIA3 Food adyertisemcnts purporting that the purchase of a product 
will support some charitable cause should not mislead as to the share 
of the proceeds which will go to the charity unless quantum is specified* 

4.3 T^itisiioiifals asMl Rdferences 

43.1 Testimonials should be genuine and not contain any statement or 
visual presentation likely to mislead nor should they be used in a manner 
having that effect. Testimonials which arc obsolete or otherwise no longer 
applicable should not be used. 

43*1 Food advertisements should not contain reference to any person, 
firm or institution without due permission. Nor should a picture of any 
identifiable person be used in food advertising without due permission. 

4*3.3 Food advertisements should not contain any reference to anb^ier 
firm or product which is likely to bring that firm or product into contempt 
or ridicule. 

4.4 Exploitadon of Trado Names and Symbols 

4.4.1 Food advertisements should not take unfair advantage of the good- 
will attached to the trade names and symbols of another firm or product, 
or of the goodwill acquired by an advertising campaign Unless agited upon 
by the concerned party. 



SitTiSS.tiTS 

4*S lultiiioii In Afllvwmntt||^ 

4«M Any imit^^tion of food advertising iUustrations, lay out, copy 
slogans^ or packaging and la^lxlling colour combination or style of lettering of 
prmucis in current use by an advertiser in any one company and likely 
either to create confusion on the market or to stop the anticipated use in 
that cpmpany or elsewhere of his advertising or publicity should be avoided. 
In tasea branded product forms an ingredient of another product, it may 
be displayed on the label or advertisement of any type by prior permission 
from Ac concern party. 

4.6 lckiitiflcftti0it of Food Adiverti«em€sitf 

4*M Food advertisements should be clearly distinguishable as such, 
whatever their form and whatever the medium used; when published in a 
medium also containing news and editorial opinion, and advertisements 
diould be so presented that the consumer can readily distinguish it from 
the editorial matter. 

4.7 Safety Precsmtioiis 

4.7.1 Food advertisements should not contain any visual presentation of 
a situation where normal Siifety precautions arc disregarded and which thus 
might encourage negligence. 

4«7.2 There ishould be i'ull justification in the ca<ic of advertisements 
depicting children. 

4.8 C^dren and Invalids 

4«8*t Food advertisements addressed to children or young people should 
not cointain any statement or visual presentation which ml,<»ht result in harm 
to them physica)tly, mentally or morally. Such food advertisements should 
not take adv^ultagc of the natural credulity of childirn or the lack of 
experience of yoimg people. 

4.8.2 Food aidvcrtiscMnents sho\iUl not l.iKr ;'(lvnn(;M;«* of tlir hopes of 
persons suffering from illness or of an impaiud ahilils on the piUt of such 
pei-sons to judg« criticnlly advertisrnienis holdini^ out hhc jnomise of a 
cure or a rccoveiy froiji illness or shonid not nllr to an^^^jxcilir illnesses. 

S. CLAIMS 

5.1 Niitrltioiua OaJms 

54*I No food advertiM'mcnl should conUiln/any ilniiw that may mislead 
the coirtsumrr us to the composition, rharattt r or action of a lood or as to 
its suitability for the nutritional pur|M><e lor which it is reconunended. 
Exagj^<*ratcd claims should not he niadi\ 



5.1*2 No food advertbement riiotM c^mu^pi ^ ckiiiii^ 

a) for any particular value deri^^ from food or its ingredient, unless 
that value can be wfa<^ contributed by, or derived from that food; 

b) as to the nature or effect of such food ba^ on its ability to provide 
enei^gy unless calorie ccmtem Is significant with regard to the 
normal recommei^ed consiiim|ttions of such food, and include a 
true statement of the cakMrie content in Kcal per 100 g or 100 ml of 
that food; and 

c) as to the nature or eflect of a $ttch food suggesting that it isa source 
of protein unless at least 12 percent of the calone content of such 
food is provided by protein, 

5A3 No food advertisement should include any words or description 
which constitutes: 

a) a general claim that ^timins or minerals are present in that food 
ui^ess that food contains one or more vitamins and minerab listed 
below in such quantity thaf^ a normal daily consumption of the 
ibod as a supplement provides one-third of the recommended daily 
allowance of vitamins and minerals for an adult man as shown 
below: 

VitamnjMininl RecomtMndid Daily 

Allowance 

Vitamin A ( retinol ) 600 meg 

Vitamin C 50 mg 

Thiamine 1*0 mg 

Rilx>flavin 1*1 vng 

Niacin 14 mg 

Calcium 450 g 

Iron 20 mg 

Vitamin D 5 meg 

Vitamin Bo TG mg 

I'olie acid 100 meg 

Vitamin Bi2 I'Omcg 

Biotin 0'3 mg 

Pantothenic acid 10 mg 

The claim should also indnde a statement of the vitamin and 

mineral content in 100 g or 100 ml of that food. 

b) any claim or suggestion that the particular substance specified is 
present in that food unless accompanied by true statement of the 
minimum quantity of every such sulwtancc contained in 100 g of 
the food. 

5.1.4 Unless adequately justified, no food advertisement should adversely 
comment on good natural foods like milk or sound nutritional practices like 
breast feeding either directly or indirectly or even by implications. 



lit7<9».197S 

S«2«l No food advertisement should include any words, device or 
desoiption calculated to indicate that the food is an aid to slimming or to 
weight control or to weight reducti6n» unless such food can make definite 
and positive contribution to weight control or weight reduction^ 

$3 IMatMlie COalma 

S«3«l No food advertisement should indicate: 

a) that the food has been specially prepared for diabetics unless the 
carix>hydrate content of that food calculated by mass is two*third 
of the carbohydrate content of similar foods not sold as diabetic 
foodi the carbohydrate and calorie content thereof expressed in g 
per 100 g and Kcal/lOO g respectively; and 

b) in the case of any food which contains any carbohydrate, whether 
added or present in an ingredient of the food, that such food is 
suitable, or has been specially prepared for diabetics and that it 
contains no sugar. 

5.4 Medicisua Clsdma 

S.4.1 No food advertisement shall indicate either directly or indirectly 
that the food has tonic, restorative, or medicinal properties or properties 
which make it beneficial for invalids or which will cure, alleviate or prevent 
disease, unless: 

a) the food iljbntains a substance or substances in such quantity as to 
confer suc^ properties, or in the case of an indic^^ion as to tonic 
properties^^unless the food contains substances, other than alcohol, 
carbohydrate, protein or caffeine or other purine! derivatives, in 
such quaiilities as to confer tonic properties, and"^ in every case 
unless accompanied by a true statement of mininiMm quantity of 
each sucl% substance present in the food calculate^ by mass and 
expressed |is a percentage of the mass of the food, #nd if a specific 
purpose isiixlaitped, of the amount of such food v^ich has to be 
consumed ito achieve that purpose; or 

b) the food is sufficiently deficient in a substance or ^bstances as to 
confer properties in the food which can be express^ as percentage 
of the minimum quantity of the substances that hive or have not 
been removed. 

5«42 No food advertisement should hold out a promise olcure or contain 
any statement likely to endanger the health of any persom sufTcrihg from 
illness. In particular, care should be taken in the case of Hlness requiring 
medical attention. No food advertisement should contain any matter which 
can be regarded as an oflTcr of a food product for the treatment of any 
tteriom illness which should rightly receive medical attention, 



ISif«9S«197S 

5«4«3 No food advortti^ment should, without juitifkbte ;«^eeMCM(i Induce 
fear in the consumer that they are sufTering, or may witliout treatment suffer/ 
or suffer more severely, from an ailment, illness of disease^ ' 

5AA No food advertisement should contain any reference to doctors^ or 
hospital tests, unless such reference can be substantiated by ti^ep^ent 
evidence, and can be properly used in the manner proposed. This also 
applies to the use of dress or surrounding in a manner likely to edhvey an 
impression of independent professional medical advice or recctanimendation. 

SAS No food advertisement should contain the terms college, dinic, 
institute, laboratory, or similar terms, unless the establishment referred to 
genuinely corresponds to the description used. 

6. SPECIAL GATEGORttS OF ADVERTISING 

6*1 Advwtisdsig for Sales Promotioii Schemes — Food advertisements 
which invite the consumer to take part in competitions in order to promote 
sales; food advertisements which offer premiums or gifts to the consumer; 
and food advertisements which set out other promotion schemes like trading 
stamps, combined offers, etc, should state clearly all the conditions relating 
to the scheme advertised. The consumer should not be led by such food 
advertisements to overestimate the value of the offer. 

6.2 Mail Order Food Advertleiag — Special care should be taken in 
framing mail order food advertisements, bearing in mind that the consumer 
usually has no opportunity to inspect the merchandise beforehand. 

6«2*1 In particular, such advertisements should contain: 

a) a clear and accurate description of the product offered (including 
all information required on the label, such as list of ingredients), 
the terms of delivery (including approximate date thereof), pay- 
ment and return; 

b) accurate information on the identity of the food advertiser, includ- 
ing all details necessary to enable tlie consumer to get in touch 
personally with the food advertiser or his representative without 
any unreasonable delay; food advertisements containing only an 
accommodation address or a post^oflfice box number should not be 
accepted; and 

c) accurate information of shelf life of perishable commodities should 
be mentioned in the advertisements. 

7. RULES FOR IMFLEMENTAHON 

74 RMfMmeiliiUty 

7#1.1 Responsibility for the observance of the rules of conduct should 
rest with: 

a) the advertiser and the advertising practitioner or 8|M^or!ng 
organization who has created or fSacctl the ad vert^^ attd 

10 



lSt76S5-t9t5 

b) the publisher, medium owner or contractor who publishes or 
distributes ihc advertisement. 

7.1«2 Any one taking part in the planning, creation or publishing of an 
advertisement should exercise his proper responsibility to ensure that the 
rules are observed. 

7«1«3 This responsibility embraces the advertisement in its entire content 
and form, including testimonials and statements or visual presentations 
originating from other sources. The fact that the content or form whoUy 
or in part originates from other sources should not be an excuse for non- 
observance of the rules. No advertiser, advertising practitioner or agent, 
publisher, medium owner or contractor shoulc;! publish any advertisement 
which has been found unacceptable by a >vell-defincd section of the 
population. 

7t2 Interpr^Catiosi 

7.2.1, The rules of the code should be applied in the spirit as well as in 
the letter. Owing to the different characteristics of the various kinds of 
media (press, television, radio, posters, Alms, etc), a presentation which 
may be acceptable for one medium may not necessarily be acceptable for 
another. 

7.2.2 Food ad\»crtiscmcnts should be judged by their presumed impact 
on the consumer, bearing in mind that the consumer is usually motivated 
by impressions gained from a brief scanning of the advertisement in its 
entirety. i 



II 



BURbiC^MiOF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Mana^^^^^l^hddur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1 10002 

T^\gt^^^^^m^Ol SI. 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksan&tha 

^ ( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices'. Telephone 

Central Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah ZaferMarg, (331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 7331 13 75 

♦Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M. V^J/P.flpad, 36 24 99 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054^ . , 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Seictor 35-C, ( 2 18 43 

CHANDIGARH 160036 I 3 16 41 

r41 24 42 
Southern : C. I T Campus. MADRAS 600113 \ 41 25 19 

141 29 16 
tWestern : Manakdidya, E9 MIDC, MaroL Andheri ( East), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branch Offices'. 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, ( 2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 } 2 63 49 

JPeenya Industrial f^rea 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road (38 49 55 

BANGALORE 660058 |38 49 56 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor. Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar. 6 67 16 

BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No 82 '83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 

53/6 Ward No 29, R G Barua Road, 6th Byelane, 3 31 77 

GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C L N Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 10 83 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R1 4 Yudhister Marg C Scheme. JAIPUR 302005 | 5 93 32 

117/418 B Sdrvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 jj] I2 92 

Pathputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 

T.C No. 14/1421, University P.O.. Palayam /6 21 04 

TRIVANDRUM 695035 \6 21 17 

Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 

Pushpanjalh Firot Floor. 205-A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1 332 Shivaji Nagar, 6 24 35 

PUNE 411005 

*Saies Office m Calcutta is at 5 Chownngh^o Approach, P. O Princep 27 68 00 
Street Calcutta 700072 

tSales Office in Bombay it at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 66 28 
Bombay 400007 

tSdles office m Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 
Bangalore 560002 

Repiography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



