**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7310-1 (1974) : Approval Tests for Welders Working to 
Approved Welding Procedures, Part I: Fusion Welding of 
Steel [MTD 11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15:7310 (Part I)- 1*7* 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

APPROVAL TESTS FOR 

WELDERS WORKING TO APPROVED 

WELDING PROCEDURES 

PART I FUSION WELDING OF STEEL 



UDC 62J-79i'65:658 38fi 




© Copyright 1974 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MaR<j 

NEW DELHI 110001 
Prkx Ry 1'^ October i ■ 



IS: 7310 (Part I). 1974 

Indian Standard 

APPROVAL TESTS FOR 

WELDERS WORKING TO APPROVED 

WELDING PROCEDURES 

PART I FUSION WELDING OF STEEL 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDG 14 



Chairman 
Shri R. Ghosh 

Members 

Shri J. K. Ahluwalia 

Shri M. M. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Bagchi 

Shri B. G. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Balasubrahmanyam 
Shri K. Balmanohar 
Shri R. N. Chakraeorty 
Shri B. N. Das 

Shri S. P. Dasgupta 



Representing 
Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta 

Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

National Test House, Calcutta 

Binny Ltd, Madras 

Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 



Public Works Department, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 



Shri B. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Director, Research and Design, 

B & RBranch, Chandigarh 
Executive Engineer ( Electri- 
cal), Electrical Division 
No. 1, New Delhi 
Executive Engineer ( Electri- 
cal), Central Electrical 
Division No. 1 , Calcutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. D. Govindaraj Philips India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr J. Vaid ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Hari Malik Electricals Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1974 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 7310 ( Part I )- 1974 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

DrJ. Jain Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Prof A. P. Jambulingam Indian Society for Technical Education, New Delhi 

Joint Director ( M & G ), RDSO, Ministry of Railways 
Lucknow 
Chemist and Metallurgist, 
Integral Coach Factory, 
Perambur ( Alternate I ) 
Production Engineer ( Shell ), 
Integral Coach Factory, 
Perambur ( Alternate II ) 
Shri M. V. D. Kamath Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta 

Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Kodikal Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri A. P. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni Advani-Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Viswanath {Alternate ) 
Shri A. C Mukherjee Power Cables Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar 

Shri G. D. Apte ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. L. Prabhakar Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. R. Prasher Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shri S. S. Raghavan Engineer-in-ChiePs Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri K. S. Hans ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. B. Rao Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. C. Roy Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shri V. V. Sathyanarayana Mining & Allied Machinery Corpn, Durgapur 

Shri S. K. Banerjia ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Sengupta Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri V. V. Kaviswar ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. K. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. C. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Srinivasalu Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 

Shri B. PAttabhiraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Srivastava Mukand Iron and Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. R. Subramanian Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta 

Shri J. C. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sundaresan Directorate General of Employment and Training, 

New Delhi 
Superintending Engineer, Cen- Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
tral Mechanical Circle, Nadu, Madras 

Madras 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 



Director ( Struc & Met ; 



Secretary 

Shri M. S. Nagaraj 

Deputy Director ( Struc & Met), ISI 

( Continued on page 18 ) 



IS: 7310 (Part I) -1974 

Indian Standard 

APPROVAL TESTS FOR 

WELDERS WORKING TO APPROVED 

WELDING PROCEDURES 

PART I FUSION WELDING OF STEEL 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 29 March 1974, after the draft finalized by the Welding 
General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on the approval 
testing of welders and welding procedures, the latter having a bearing on 
the former for certain applications. This link has been used as a means 
of arranging the series of standards into: 

a) approval testing of welding procedures, 

b) welder approval when welding procedure approval is required, 
and 

" c) welder approval when the welding procedure is not required to be 
approved ( for either technical or contract reasons ). 

0.3 For the purpose of this standard, a welder working to an approved 
procedure or a procedure being approved is considered to be sufficiently 
experienced in the appropriate welding process and hence already capable 
of passing training tests such as those contained in IS : 817-1966*. 

0.4 To indicate the philosophy behind this series of standards, it is 
considered useful to give details of the practices relating to welding 
procedure approval. Depending upon the emphasis placed on quality 
control in the production of welded components, so may the approval of 
welding procedures be administered in one of several ways which should be 
stipulated at the enquiry and /or order stage. The alternatives currently 
employed are the following: 

a) Each individual contractor ( or sub-contractor ) might have proved 

by actual test pieces, every weld form he wishes to use, in every 

thickness and material: or 



*Code of practice for training and testing of metal arc welders ( revised ). 



IS:73lO(Partl)-1974 

b) Each individual contractor ( or sub-contractor ) might have proved 
by actual test pieces, a set of welds representative on a group 
basis, of all the various thicknesses and materials to be used in 
production; or 

c) Each individual contractor ( or sub-contractor ) need not make 
procedure test pieces provided he can prove by appropriate 
authentic documentation of an independent nature that he has 
previously welded the type of joint and material in question 
satisfactorily. 

In respect of ( a ) and ( b ) it should be appreciated that once the 
welding procedure tests have been approved, they need never be repeated 
unless there is a change in certain variables. As an extension beyond ( c ), 
it may be possible in the future for fully documented welding procedures, 
developed independently of the particular contractor, to be employed 
without the need for further approval tests. 

0.5 In preparing this standard the practices being followed in the country 
in this field have been kept in view. Assistance has also been derived 
from draft British Standard Specification for approval testing of welders 
working to approved welding procedures, Part 1 : Fusion Welding of Steel, 
( Doc: 73/41348DC ) issued by the British Standards Institution. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part I ) specifies requirements for the approval testing 
of welders to be engaged on the manual, semi-automatic or automatic 
fusion welding of structural steel or austenitic stainless steel fabrications, 
except castings, for which an approved welding procedure is required. 

1.2 This standard is applicable to the following manual, semi-automatic 
and automatic fusion welding processes: 

a) Manual metal-arc, 

b) Inert-gas tungsten arc ( TIG ), 

c) Gas metal arc ( MIG or CO a ), 

d) Submerged-arc, 

e) Electro-slag, and 

f) Gas welding. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 



IS :7310( Parti)- 1974 

1.3 Where the approval of a welder and a welding procedure are to be 
covered in one test, the provisions contained in IS : 7307 ( Part I )-1974* 
shall apply. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Welding Proceduref — A specified course of action followed in 
welding including a list of materials and, where necessary, tools to be used. 

2.2 Welding Procedure Test — The making and testing of a welded 
joint representative of that to be used in production in order to prove the 
feasibility of a welding procedure. 

Note — This term is not usually applied to any tests that may have been made 
during the development of a welding procedure. 

2.3 Approved Welding Procedure — A documented welding procedure 
that has been approved by an inspecting authority either by means of a 
welding procedure test or as a result of authentic documented ex- 
perience gained with the welding of joints similar to that to which the 
welding procedure applies. 

2.4 Test Piecef — Components welded together in accordance with a 
specified welding procedure, or a portion of a welded joint detached from 
a structure, for test. 

2.5 Test Specimenf — A portion detached from a test piece and prepared 
as required for testing. 

3. INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN TO THE WELDER 

3.1 The welder shall be provided with full written details according to 3 of 
IS : 7307 ( Part I )-1974* of the approved welding procedure which he shall 
follow in making his test weld ( see also 7 ) . 

4. ITEMS TO BE RECORDED 

4.1 The items according to 3 of IS : 7307 ( Part I ) -19.74* shall be recorded 
for each welder approval test. 

5. EXTENT OF APPROVAL 

5.1 General — The extent of approval for a welder shall be the same as 
that for the approved welding procedure. When a change in the welding 

•Approval tests for welding procedures: Part I Fusion welding of steel. 

fThis definition has been extracted from IS : 812-1957 ' Glossary of terms relating to 
welding and cutting of metals '. 



IS: 7310 (Part I) -1974 

procedure according to 4 of IS : 7307 ( Part I ) -1974* requires a new welding 
procedure test, this shall entail re-approval of the welder except in the 
following cases: 

a) A change in parent metal within the following group of steels: 

Carbon steels and low alloy steels with less than 6 percent total 
alloy content. 

b) A change in deposited metal composition for welding any of the 
steels within the group given in ( a ) above. 

c) A change from a basic to a rutile covered electrode. 

d) A reduction in preheating temperature. 

e) A change in post-weld heat treatment. 

5.2 Position — The approval of a welder on a test joint welded in one of 
the fundamental welding positions shall give approval for welding in the 
following positions: 

a) A test in the fiat position gives approval only for that position; 

b) A test in the horizontal-vertical position includes approval for the 
horizontal-vertical and flat positions; 

c) A test in the overhead position includes approval for the overhead, 
horizontal-vertical and flat positions; 

d) A test in the vertical-up position includes approval for the vertical- 
up and flat positions; and 

e) A test in vertical-down position gives approval only for that position. 

In addition, the approval of a welder on a test joint inclined at 45° 
to the horizontal involving the overhead position, shall include approval 
for all welding positions. 

5.3 Thickness — For gas welding, the approval of a welder on material of 
thickness t shall include approval for thicknesses in the range 0*5 t to It. 

For processes other than gas welding, the approval of a welder on 
material of thickness t shall include approval for thicknesses in the range 
0*75 t to 1-5 L 

5.4 Pipe Outside Diameter or Dimension — The approval of a welder 
on pipet of outside diameter or dimension D shall include approval for 
diameters or dimensions in the range 0*5 D to 1*5 Z). For rectangular hollow 
sections D shall be the dimension of the smaller side. 



♦Approval tests for welding procedures: Part I Fusion welding of steel. 

|In this standard the word ' pipe ', alone or in combination, is used to mean i pipe ' or 
* tube ' or ' structural hollow section s ( circular or rectangular ), although these terms are 
often used for different categories of product by different industries. 



IS: 7310 (Part I) -1974 

6. TEST PIECES 

6.1 The welder shall make a test piece or pieces representative of each type 
of joint to which the welding procedure will relate in production preferably 
selected from the following: 

a) A butt joint ( plate or pipe) ( see Fig. 1 or 2 ); 

b) A fillet weld ( plate ) ( see Fig. 3 ) ; and 

c) A branch connection ( pipes* ) forming the minimum angle 
likely to be involved in production ( see Fig. 4 ). 

The test weld shall be stopped and restarted within the central 50 mm 
of the length of the test piece shown in Fig. 1 and at about 75 mm from 
one end of the test piece shown in Fig. 3. In the case of manual metal-arc 
welding the restart shall be made with a fresh electrode. Edge preparation 
and fit-up shall be as given in welding procedure ( see 5.1 ). 

6.2 If the production joint design or application is such that none of the 
above types of test piece could be regarded as representative, for example, 
surfacing or attachment welds to thin pipes, then the welder shall make a 
special test piece which simulates the production joint in all essential 
features, such as dimensions, restraint, access, heat sink effects and any 
special surface protection. 

6.3 Tack welds shall be made from the side to be welded and their location 
shall be identifiable after the test weld has been completed. Subsurface 
defects that break the surface or which are revealed as the result of any 
grinding specified in the welding procedure shall not be repaired and there 
shall be no other repair welding of a completed test piece. 

7. SUBMISSION OF TEST WELD 

7.1 If the welder realizes that for some reason the test weld he has made 
is likely to fail the subsequent examination and testing, he may withhold 
the submission of the test piece and make a second test weld. If the 
welder does choose to make a second test weld, it is the second test piece 
that shall be examined and tested, the first test piece being scrapped. 

8. EXAMINATION AND TESTING 

8.1 General — Test welds for welder approval shall be: 

a) examined by non-destructive testing and assessed in accordance 
with 8.2.2, supplemented by: 

1) macro- examination if necessary to assist in the interpretation 
of the results of non-destructive testing; and 

*In this standard the word 'pipe', alone or in combination, is used to mean 'pipe' or 
'tube' or Structural hollow section* ( circular or rectangular), although these terms are 
often used for different categories of product by different industries t 



IS: 7310 (Part I)- 1974 

2) when radiography is used, the bend tests given in Table 1 to 
detect any lack of side fusion that could occur when the dip 
transfer technique, TIG welding or gas welding has been 
used; or 

b) tested using the test specimens given in Table 1 when the test piece 
material is to the same specification as that to be used in 
production or when the use of non-destructive testing is not 
feasible. 

8.1.1 When both non-destructive and destructive testing are to be 
applied, the same test piece(s) for the welder approval test shall satisfy the 
requirements for both methods of testing. 

8.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, the first and last 25 mm of the length 
of a butt joint in plate shall be ignored in both non- destructive and 
destructive testing. 

8.1.3 If the test piece fails to satisfy any of the requirements for non- 
destructive testing given in 8.2.2, one further test piece shall be welded 
and subjected to the same examination. If this additional test piece does 
not meet the required standard, the cause of failure shall be established. 
If this failure is established as being the result of metallurgical or extra- 
neous causes and is not attributable to the welder's workmanship, then a 
further repeat test shall be undertaken. If the failure is established as 
being attributable to the welder's workmanship, then the welder shall not 
be regarded as capable of meeting the requirements of this standard 
without further training. 

8.1.4 If any test specimen fails to satisfy the relevant requirements given 
in 8.3.3, two further test specimens for each one that failed shall be 
obtained, either from the same test piece if there is sufficient material 
available or from a new test piece, and subjected to the same test. If 
either of these additional test specimens does not meet the required 
standard, the cause of failure shall be established. If this failure is 
established as being the result of metallurgical or extraneous causes and is 
not attributable to the welder's workmanship, then a further repeat test shall 
be undertaken. If the failure is established as being attributable to the 
welder's workmanship, then the welder shall not be regarded as capable of 
meeting the requirements of this standard without further training. 



8.2 Non-destructive Testing 

8.2.1 Examination — After any post-weld heat treatment and prior to the 
cutting of any test specimens, all test pieces shall be examined visually. 

8 



IS: 7310 (Part I) -1974 



225 

MIN 



-100 MIN- 



-100 MIN H 



X WELD TO BE STOPPED AND RESTARTED 
WITHIN CENTRAL 50mm 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Test Piece for Butt Weld in Plate 




-100 MIN - 



-100MIN- 




Fig. 2 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Test Piece and Location of Test Specimens 
for Butt Weld in Pipe 



IS:7310(PartI)-1974 



225 



100 



A FULL LENGTH OF WELD 
/ THIS SIDE 




ROOT RUN TO BE 
STOPPED AND 
RESTARTED ABOUT 
75mm FROM END 
(ONE MICRO -EXAMI- 
NATION POSITION) 



CUTTING LINES 

FOR SPECIMENS 
WHEN ONLY ONE 
SIDE WELDED 



100 



J 



DIRECTION OF FRACTURE 
FORCE 



-WELD THIS SIDE 



-100 «- 



-50 



* LENGTH OF WELD WHEN 

SECOND SIDE. WELDED 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 3 Test Piece for Fillet Weld in Plate 



10 



IS : 7310 ( Part I ) - 1974 




Fig. 4 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Test Piece for Branch Connection in Pipe 



When non-destructive testing is to be used, visual examination shall be 
followed by: 

a) magnetic particle (see IS : 5334-1969* ) or penetrant testing 
(see IS: 3658-1966f ); and/or 

b) ultrasonic (see IS : 4260-1969J ) and /or radiographic examination 
( see IS : 1 182-1 967§ and IS : 4853- 1968)1 ) 

depending upon joint geometry, material and the requirements for 
production work, using the appropriate application standard where it exists. 

8.2.2 Acceptance Levels — Defects that are detected by visual examination 
and the other relevant methods of non-destructive testing shall be assessed 
in accordance with the details specified in Table 2. The existence of any 

* Code of practice for magnetic particle flaw detection of welds. 

t Code of practice for liquid penetrant flaw detection. 

% Recommended practice for ultrasonic testing of welds in ferritic steel. 

§ Recommended practice for radiographic examination of fusion welded butt joints in 
steel plates {first revision ). 

|j Recommended practice for radiographic examination of fusion welded circumferential 
joints in steel pipes. 

li 



IS: 7310 (Part I). 1974 

defect greater than the maximum permitted by Table 2 shall be sufficient 
cause for rejection. 

Note 1 — Multiple type faults contained with the same weld, either superimposed 
or interposed, which are -individually acceptable as isolated imperfections may 
be considered acceptable provided that investigation shows that there is nothing 
fundamentally wrong with the welding procedure. 

Note 2 — It should be appreciated that the details given in Table 2 may be different 
from those specified for a particular application. 

TABLE 1 DESTRUCTIVE TESTS — NUMBER OF TEST SPECIMENS 

REQUIRED* 

{Clauses 8.1 and 8.3.1 ) 

Sl Test Specimen Butt Butt Joint in Pipe Fillet Branch Connec- 

No. Joint of Outside Dia Weld tion in Pipe of 

in or Dimension in Outside Dia or 

Plate t * * Plate Dimension 

Up to Over t * 

and In- 88*9 Up to 

eluding mm and In- 

88*9 mm eluding mm 
88-9 mm 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 

i) Macro-examination 1 2 2 2 4f 8f 

ii) Root bend ( for material less than 1 2 3 — — — 

10 mm thick and for all welds 

made from one side only ) 
iii) Face bend ( for material less 1 — 1 — — — 

than 10 mm thick ) 
iv) Side bend ( for material at least 2 11 — — — 

1 mm thick ) 
v) Fillet weld fracture ( only for — — — 3 — — 

single side weld ) 

*When more than one specimen of a particular type is required, the specimens shall be 
taken as far apart as possible, with one specimen for macro-examination taken from that part 
of the joint considered to have been welded in the most difficult welding position or from a stop/ 
start position. 

fFor purely structural applications the number of specimens may be reduced to 2 and 4 
respectively. 

8.3 Destructive Tests 

8*3.1 Test Specimens — The specimens to be obtained when certain 
destructive tests are required ( see 8.1 ) shall be as given in Table 1. 

When the size and thickness of a pipe butt joint are such that the 
specified test specimens cannot be obtained, then some other method of 
test agreed between the contracting parties shall be used, for example, a 
full size tensile test or a pressure test. 

12 



IS: 7310 (Part I). 1974 



TABLE 2 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING — ACCEPTANCE LEVELS 

( Clause 8.2.2 ) 



Defect Type 

I) Planar Defects 

a) Cracks and lamellar tears 

b) Lack of root fusion 

c) Lack of side fusion 

d) Lack of inter-run fusion 

e) Lack of root penetration 



Permitted Maximum 



Not permitted 
Not permitted 
Not permitted 
Not permitted 
Not permitted 



2) Cavities 



a) Isolated pores ( or individual pores > */4 and 
in a group ) 



b) Uniformly distributed or localised 

porosity 

c) Linear porosity 



d) Wormholes, isolated ( as seen in the 
radiograph ) 



e) Wormholes, aligned 

f ) Crater pipes 

3) Solid Inclusion ( Slag Inclusions ) 



1*5 mm for t up to and including 25 mm 

3*0 mm for t over 25 mm up to and 
including 50 mm 

4*5 mm for t over 50 mm up to and 
including 75 mm 

6*0 mm for t over 75 mm 

1 percent area ( as seen in a radiograph ) 

for t > 25 mm and pro rata for greater 
thicknesses 

Linear porosity parallel to the axis of the 
weld may indicate lack of fusion or 
lack of penetration and is therefore not 
permitted 

1 3> 6mm w }> 1*5 mm 

As linear porosity 

As wormholes isolated 



a) Individual and parallel to weld axis t J> 1'8 mm t > 18 J> 75 mm t >• 75 mm 

/ > t\l 6 mm / > "f/3 /> 25 mm 

W$> 1*5 mm K)J>l-5mm a? J> 1'5 mm 
( as seen in the radiograph ) 

b) Linear group* Aggregate length should not exceed 8 percent 

of length of group, which in turn should 
not exceed 12 t in length 

Maximum dimension in any direction 
6 mm 



c) 



Individual and randomly orientated 
( not parallel to weld axis ) 



( Continued) 



13 



IS: 7310 (Part I) -1974 



TABLE 2 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING — ACCEPTANCE LEVELS — Contd 
Defect Type Permitted Maximum 



4) Tungsten Inclusions 

a) Isolated 

b) Grouped 

5) Copper Inclusions 

6) Profile Defects 



a) 



Undercut (detected by visual 
mination or radiography) 



b) Shrinkage grooves and root concavity 

c) Excess penetration 

d) Reinforcement shape 



e) Overlap 

f ) Linear misalignment 



As isolated pores 

As uniformly distributed or localized 
porosity 

Not permitted 



Slight intermittent undercut permitted pro- 
vided it does not form a sharp notch; 
depth should not exceed 0*4 mm 

As for undercut, depth should not exceed 
1*2 mm i::.i 

h ^ 3 mm. Occasional local slight excess is 
allowable 

The reinforcement shall blend smoothly 
with the parent metal and dressing is 
not normally required provided the shape 
does not interfere with the specified NDT 
techniques 

Not permitted 

h > */ 10, 3 mm Max 



♦Individual inclusions within the group should not exceed the sizes in 3(a) above. A 
linear group is defined as a number of inclusions in line and parallel to the weld axis where 
the spacing between their adjacent ends does not exceed 6 times the length of the longest 
inclusion within the group. With parallel groups, all inclusions count towards the 
aggregate. 



Abbreviations used'. 



inner 



= parent metal thickness. In the case of dissimilar thicknesses t applies to the th 
component. 
w = width. 
/ » length. 
h s= height. 
s= diameter. 



8.3.2 Preparation and Testing — The preparation^ shape and dimensions of 
test specimens ( except for dimensions of bend test specimens from pipe ) and 
the methods of testing them shall be as specified in IS : 3600-1973*. 

If backing material forms part of a butt joint, it shall be removed 
prior to bend testing. Each bend test specimen from a butt joint in pipe 

•Code of procedure for testing of fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. 

14 



IS : 7310 ( Part I )- 1974 



t + ttt 3 for pipes up to and including 60' 3 mm outside diameter; 



shall be a parallel strip of width: 
10 



and 

t + — , with a maximum of 40 mm, for pipes over 60*3 mm outside 

diameter 
where t is the wall thickness and D is the outside diameter of pipe. 

Each bend test specimen shall be bent through at least 90° round a 
former of a diameter as specified below. 

For Group FEl steels ( see IS : 7307 3t 

(Partl)-1974* 
For Group FE2 steels ( see IS : 7307 4/ 

(Partl)-1974* 
For other steels Diameter equal to 1/ greater 

than that required to test 
the parent metal of the 
same thickness 

where t is the thickness of the specimen. 

8.3.3 Test Results 

a) Macro-examination and fillet weld fracture test — The etched face for 
macro-examination and the fracture surface from the fillet weld 
test shall be assessed in accordance with the requirements of 8.2.2. 

b) Bend tests — If the specimen bends through 90° without failure, 
slight opening-out ( 1*5 mm Max ) at the corners or on the tension 
surface shall not be cause for rejection. If the specimen fails 
across the surface in tension, it shall be broken open and assessed in 
accordance with the requirements of 8.2.2. 

9. STATEMENT OF RESULTS 

9.1 A statement of the results of assessing each test piece, including repeat 
tests, shall be made for each welder. The item required under 4 
shall be included together with details of any features that would be 
rejectable by the requirements of 8.2.2. If no resectable features are found, 
a statement, that the test piece made by the particular welder satisfied the 
requirements of this standard in respect of that type of test weld, shall be 
signed by the person conducting the test. 

9.2 The welder's employer should hold and regularly maintain adequate 
records of all approval tests for each welder, A typical record sheet is 
given in Appendix A for information. 

♦Approval tests for welding procedures: Part I Fusion welding steels. 

15 



IS:7310(PartI)-1974 

9.3 It is recommended that welder approval tests carried out in accordance 
with this standard and witnessed by an independent inspecting authority 
should be accepted by other inspecting authorities provided that all the 
provisions have been fulfilled. 

10. RE-APPROVAL OF WELDER 

10.1 A welder's approval to weld to a particular procedure shall remain 
valid provided that it can be shown, as certified at intervals of six months 
by a senior responsible person in the firm that employs the welder, that the 
welder has, subsequent to the test, been employed with reasonable continuity 
on that procedure and has continued to produce satisfactory welds as 
verified by non-destructive examination. Re-approval jshall be required 
if any of the following apply: 

a) A new welding procedure is to be approved, except for the cases 
given in 5. 

b) The welder changes his employer without the transfer of his test 
records. 

c) Six months or more have elapsed since the welder was engaged in 
welding to the approval procedure or a similar procedure. 
Subject to the agreement of the inspecting authority, a re-approval 
test may be waived provided the first production weld by the 
welder is non- destructively tested and complies with the require- 
ments of this standard. 

d) There is some specific reason to question the welder's ability. 



16 



IS: 7310 (Part I)- 1974 

APPENDIX A 

(Clause 9.2) 

TYPICAL WELDER APPROVAL TEST RECORD 

Note — One sheet should be completed for each test. 



Welder's Name 



Welder's Identity No. 



Approval test No. 



Date of test 



Shop or site 

test 



Welding procedure No. 


Welding process and polarity 


Parent material (s) : 

Type 

Thickness 

Pipe outside diameter or dimension 


Welding consumables: 
Electrode or filler material Specifica- 
tion 

Type of flux or electrode covering 
Shielding gas composition 


Welding position 


Pipe position 


Type of joint with sketch of 
weld preparation 


Weld dimensions required 
Additional information 



Approval test results 

( State : Satisfactory, unsatisfactory or not applicable and clearly indicate 
any results of re- tests ) 

Non-destructive tests 

Visual 

Magnetic particle 
Liquid penetrant 
Radiography /ultrasonics 

Destructive tests 

Macro- examination 

Root bend 

Face bend 

Side bend 

Fillet weld fracture 

Result of test with any remarks 

Inspecting authority 
Witnessed by 
Date 



Employer's signature 

Position 

Date 



Endorsements ( intervals of six months ) 

17 



IS: 7310 (Part I) -1974 

(Continued from page 2) 

Subcommittee for Training and Testing of Welders; Handbooks 
and Other Publications, SMDG 14:4 

Convener Representing 

Shri S. V. Sambamurti Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri J. K. Ahluwalia Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Gajender Singh Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 

Prof A. P. Jambulingam Indian Society for Technical Education, New Delhi 

Shri S. V. Nadkarni Advani-Oerlikon Private Ltd, Bombay 



18 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

TRAINING AND TESTING OF WELDERS 

IS: 

8J 2*135? t; loo.. , r -.- . ,f rr ■ nm rd.itin g (n weld ing and Cutting nf i nrtab 

L J-'JOi Schrnir :ii" .ymholi Tut urnMing 

8! 1-1966 Code of practice for training and testing of rnrr.il bit wdd«a [ wind) 

flHM96H C3odeofjn •--jrrafoy and health rtmiJrenicnts in electric and eajwridtTHF and 

qui ring cipcrbE fans { Jfert fjt *i jjm j J 

I 3*)^ 1 96 J < , iraofec for i raining and i«i ing nf nxy-acetyl me wdden 

30! Code ofpnctHX faff fire pflxaitlfottf in wcldinsj and cutting oprratiora 

S9Z2-l*lVO Qualifying i^ !s p^- ,, . •, |. h ftj^agpj j n ai^an adding 

- Part J VI 574 Approval la* for adding procedure: Part I Fu»Qn wdding ofitCcl 

9JQ ( Fart I H 974 Approval .rsw fonvcldcri mating «> approved adding precedim 
rare J t u , i.jj i wdd i ng of *um?1. 

71IB ( Pari I 1-1974 A Pj .* tl fo r we id Wi when welding procedure appml is not 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Minah Hhavan. <i Bahadur Shah Zal&i Mara. HEW DEUH1 110001 

Tai-^ fl n. : 21 01 31 ( Sfl lint. J Tekram, « nUnak.a^lna 

Sadhna , Nurmahdmod Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMED ABAD 380001 S03f1 

f Black, Unity Bldg, NftfasimMardfa Square, BANGALORE 560OQ2 r m*U 

534 Sardir Valla b hb ho J Pq le I Road . BO MB A Y 4Q0QO7 as m u 

S C how r l ng h*e A pproach* C A LCU TTA 70001 3 | 3 .0 B 02 

Katiii No. H, Sector 1EA. CHANDIGARH B63 2Q 

5-6-56'57 Nmiipally Station Road, MYUFRAR AD 500001 4 571l 

1 1 7/410" B Sarvodaya Najjar. K AN PUR 308005 » n 

54 Gaoa ral Patter a Re ad , M AORA S 50D002 s a7 at 

BCI Bldg. ( Third Floor (, Gandhi M«|dan E*a1, PATNA 800004 2S6H 



Pruned if T> r I. , huiln, D«JLi IJ, India 



