**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7799 (1975) : Code for preservation of vitamins in 
foodstuffs [FAD 15: Food Hygiene, Safety Management and 
Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS j 77W- 1975 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR PRESERVATION OF 
VITAMINS IN FOODSTUFFS 



UDC 6646/9:577 1604 




© Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
UANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2 AFAR MARG 
^. . j-i /-i^. t*W D£LH1 lift' 

^ ^ ^ wl O 

Fru*# Jfci 5*5? Dtcembtr 1975 



IS $7799-1975 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR PRESERVATION OF 
VITAMINS IN FOODSTUFFS 

Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee, 

AFDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Ranjit Sen Serologist to the Government of India ( Directorate 

General of Health Services ) , Calcutta 

Members 

Agricultural M aeketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 
Adviser to the Government of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

of India 

Shut T, V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Amble Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics 

(IGAR), New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Krishnan ( Alternate ) 
SflRi K. Balasubramanian Public Analyst, Government of Tamil Nadu, 

Madras 
Col S. L. Chadha Health Department, Municipal Corporation of 

Delhi 
Dr A. J. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. C. Das Health Officer, Corporation of Calcutta 

Dr P. K. Datta All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri K. C. De The Metal Box Go of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr V. V. Karnik ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sukumar De National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Dr C. A. Mtjlay ( Alternate) 
Director Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Executive Health Officer Bombay Municipal Corporation 

Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Health Officer Corporation of Madras 

Dr ( Smt ) S, Khosla Department of Health & Family Planning, Govern- 

ment of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Dr P. K. Kymal Food & Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture 

& Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Dr O. N. Agarwala ( Alternate ) 
Maj V. A. Narayanan Defence Pood Research Laboratory (Ministry of 

Defence ) , Mysore 
Dr G. M. Verma ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 } 



® Copyright 1975 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to bean infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 7799 -1975 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Public Analyst ( Food and Government of West Bengal. Calcutta 
Water ) 

Public Analyst 
( Bacteriology ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. N. Ramachandra Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath ( Alternate ) 
Col K. Seetabam Quartermaster General's Branch, Army 

Headquarters 
Lt-Col O. P. Kapur ( Alternate ) 
Senior Medical Officer Northern Railway, New Delhi 

( Catering ) 
Dr S. B. Singh Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Dr M. R. Subbaram Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati (Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation), New Delhi 
Dr I. A. Sjddiqi (Alternate) 
Dr T. A. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Dr M. C. Swaminathan Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry 

of Health & Family Planning), New Delhi 
Shri D. S. Chadha (Alternate) 
Shri P. C. Vin The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri J. D. Contractor ( Alternate) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI (Ex-qfficio Member) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Sohrab 

Deputy Director (Agri & Food ), ISI 

Vitamin and Amino-Acids Assay Subcommittee, AFDG 36 : 3 

Convener 
Dr T. A. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Members 
Dr ( Smt ) Bhavani Belavady National Institute of Nutrition ( ICMF ) , Hyderabad 
Dr P. K. Datta All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Dr V. S. Krishnamachar National Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR), Poona 

Dr V. K. Mohan Rao Central Drug Research Institute ( CSIR ), Lucknow 

Dr M. S. Naik Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
Dr D. B. Parihar Defence Food Research Laboratory. Mysore 

Shri S. S. Arya ( Alternate) 
Dr P. B. Rama Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Dr S. Venkat Rao (Alternate ) 
Dr R. V. Rao National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ) , Karnal 

Shri Rup Kishore Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Shri D. Venkatappaiah ( Alternate ) 
Dr S, B. Singh Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 



IS i 7799 -1975 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR PRESERVATION OF 
VITAMINS IN FOODSTUFFS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 September 1975, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, 
Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Vitamins are organic compounds present in small amounts in natural 
foodstuffs and are essential for health. They are broadly classified into 
two groups, namely, fat soluble and water soluble. Vitamins A, D, E 
and K are fat soluble while the vitamins B complex and C are water 
soluble. These vitamins are affected by the various processes to which 
foodstuffs are subjected from the time of harvesting until they are 
consumed. Loss of vitamins during handling, transport and processing is 
generally a result of their sensitivity to oxygen, light, heat and the/>H 
of the medium during processing. Any method of preparation that 
disturbs the natural cell organization, such as peeling, chopping, cutting, 
etc, tends to increase the losses. Presence of some of the trace elements 
like iron and copper may also catalyse the loss of vitamins. 

0.3 In this code an attempt has been made to suggest ways of preservation 
of vitamins during various processes to which foodstuffs are subjected. 
Adherence to the practices suggested in this code will help conserve a 
considerable amount of vitamins contained in foods which otherwise go 
waste. This will also help in educating the consumers and manu- 
facturers for better utilization of available nutrients contained in foods. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes conditions and practices of handling, 
transport, processing, packaging and storage of foodstuffs for preservation 
of vitamins contained or inherently present in them. 

2. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF VITAMINS 

2.1 Fat-Soluble Vitamins 

2.1*1 Carotene and Vitamin A (Retinol) — Stable under inert atmosphere, 
but loses activity when heated in the presence of oxygen; completely 
destroyed when oxidized, dehydrated or dehydrogenated; more sensitive 
to ultraviolet than other wavelengths of light. It is stable at neutral and 
alkaline pH, but unstable in acid medium. It is oxidized by fat pyroxi- 
dases and in presence of traces of copper. 



IS: 7799 -1975 

2.1.2 Vitamin D — Stable in neutral and acidic pH; unstable in alkaline 
jfeH, and sensitive to air, light and heat. Vitamin D crystals are stable 
when stored in amber glass bottles. No loss occurs through processing 
and storage. 

2.1.3 Vitamin E ( Tocopherol ) — Stable to vigorous boiling in acid in the 
absence of oxygen, and quite stable to visible light, but unstable at room 
temperature in the presence of oxygen, alkalis, ferric salts and ultraviolet 
light. Esters of tocopherols are more stable than the free forms. 

2.1.4 Vitamin K — Stable to heat and reducing agents but sensitive to 
alcoholic alkali, oxidizing agents, strong acids and light. 

2.2 Water-Soluble Vitamins 

2.2.1 Thiamine ( Vitamin B\) — Stable in acid medium, but unstable in 
air especially at alkaline pYL and high temperature; destroyed by addition 
of alkalis and food preservative like sulphites, and by autoclaving, 
baking and roasting ( 10 to 15 percent). 

2.2.2 Riboflavin ( Vitamin B%) — Sensitive to light, and rate of destruction 
increases with a rise in pH and increase in temperature. Stable to heat 
if in dry form, or in acid medium. 

2.2.3 Niacin (Nicotinic Acid) — Nicotinamide is partially hydroly zed by 
alkali but the resulting nicotinic acid has the same biological activity. 
Nicotinic acid is generally stable to air, light, heat, acids and alkalis. It 
is released by lengthening baking time, time of treatment, heat and 
pressure. 

2.2.4 Pantothenic Acid — Most stable between pH 5*5 and 7'0; is rapidly 
hydrolyzed under stronger acidic or alkaline conditions. It is sensitive 
to dry heat, hot acid and hot alkali but unaffected by light and air. 

2.2.5 Pyridoxins, Pyridoxal and Pyridoxamine ( Vitamin B&) — All the three 
forms are sensitive to ultraviolet light when in neutral or alkaline 
solution. These are not very stable to heat and are destroyed by exposure 
to heat, light and alkaline solution. 

2.2.6 Folic Acid — Stable during boiling at pH 8 for 30 minutes, yet 
large losses occur during autoclaving in acids and alkalis. This destruc- 
tion is accelerated by oxygen and light. 

2.2.7 Cobalamin ( Vitamin Bi?) — Stable in neutral />H, acid and alkali, 
as well as heat, but sensitive to air, oxygen and light. 

2.2.8 Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) — Fairly stable in acid solution, but 
decomposes in light. The decomposition is accelerated by the presence 
of alkalis, oxygen, copper and iron. Unstable to heat. It is a particu- 
larly sensitive vitamin and is easily destroyed. 



IS; 7799-1975 

3. PRESERVATION OF VITAMINS DURING PREPARATION 
FOR COOKING AND PROCESSING 

3.1 Selection, Handling and Preparation of Fresh Vegetables 

3.1.1 Green vegetables should be obtained as fresh as possible and 
should be used as early as possible. Leafy green vegetables, when refri- 
gerated, retain more than 90 percent of the vitamin G and vitamin A 
value for 24 hours. Levels of these nutrients drop to 75 percent after 
storage for several days. Fresh green vegetables lose much vitamin G 
even in a day or two when stored at room temperature. For example, 
spinach may lose three-quarters of its vitamin C in two days. 

3.1.2 Leafy green vegetables should be kept in a cool and damp place 
to reduce wilting, as dry heat results in serious losses of vitamin C in 
succulent vegetables. 

3.1.3 Precautions should be taken to avoid damage through crushing 
or bruising during handling, transport and storage. 

3.1.4 Vegetables should be washed before peeling and cutting and not 
after. Washing and soaking after peeling or cutting results in a loss of 
water-soluble vitamins. 

3.1.5 Peeling should be done thin rather than thick since removal of 
thick peelings results in a proportional loss of vitamins. 

3.1.6 Vegetables should be cut into large pieces rather than small so 
that less surface-area is exposed to the atmosphere for oxidation. Vege- 
tables should be cut and sliced immediately before cooking. Exposing 
cut vegetables to strong sunlight gradually destroys vitamins. 

3.1.7 Vegetables for salads should be shredded or finely chopped just 
before serving to conserve vitamin C. 

3.1.8 Green peas, beans and other immature seeds retain vitamin C to 
a greater extent when they are present in their pods rather than when 
shelled. Similarly cabbage in a solid head will retain its vitamins longer 
than a cabbage pre-shredded. 

3.1.9 The dark green outer leaves of cabbage, lettuce, etc, are very 
rich in vitamin A. So are the green tops of vegetables like the radish, 
beet root, carrot, knol khol, etc. In preparing such vegetables, these 
highly nutritious portions should not be thrown away. Cabbage shred- 
ded with a sharp knife will retain vitamin C longer than cabbage cut on 
shredder or with a dull knife. 

3.2 Selection, Handling and Preparation of Fruits 

3.2.1 Fruits should be washed before cutting; soaking or washing after 
peeling and cutting results in a loss of water-soluble vitamins. 



IS 1 7799- 1975 

3.2*2 Fruits should be cut into bigger pieces as with ^mall pieces a 
greater area is exposed to atmospheric oxidation. Exposure to sunlight 
destroys many vitamins. 

3*2*3 Fruits should be cut and peeled immediately before processing or 
serving. 

4* PRESERVATION OF VITAMINS DURING HOME-COOKING 
OF FOODS 

4.1 General Considerations 

4.1.1 Use a pan with a flat bottom, a tight-fitting lid, diameter suited 
to the size of the heat source and volume suited to the amount of the food 
being prepared. 

4.1.2 Certain methods of cooking also conserve vitamins. Roasting of 
food materials, such as coffee and fenugreek seeds increase both the free 
and total niacin in the product. Pressure cooking conserves the vitamins 
present in foodstuffs. 

4.1.3 A good home practice is to utilize and not throw away the fluid 
portions of the contents of canned foods, since these contain large 
percentages of the water-soluble vitamins. 

4.1.4 If frozen foods are to be cooked before serving, these should not 
be defrosted earlier but only just before the cooking to protect flavour, 
appearance and food value. Frozen fruits to be served without cooking 
should be defrosted as close to the time of serving as possible. 

4.1.5 Water-soluble vitamins are more stable in the presence of acid. 
Vinegar and tamarind water can, therefore, be added with advantage 
during cooking or preservation. Addition of alkali or sodium bicarbo- 
nate hastens destruction of these vitamins. 

4.1.6 Steeping of fresh vegetables in water for long time should be 
avoided. A minimum lapse of time between harvesting and cooking or 
processing and serving is essential to get the highest nutritive value out of 
vegetables. 

4.2 Green Vegetables — The following guidelines should be adhered to 
while cooking vegetables. 

4.2*1 The water-soluble vitamins diffuse out when vegetables are 
boiled; the more the water the more serious will this loss be. Leafy 
vegetables cooked in just enough water will lose only half as much 
vitamins B and G as when these are cooked in an excessive amount of 
water. Therefore, use the smallest possible amount of water for cooking. 
In fact green leafy vegetables should be cooked in their own water content. 
Keep the water boiling before adding vegetables. Add salt to water 
before adding vegetables. Water-soluble vitamins keep remarkably well 
in frozen foods. Sulphur dioxide is useful in protecting the vitamins 



IS:7799-1975 

4 S 2*2 Add vegetables a little at a time so as to keep water constantly- 
boiling. If vegetables are put into cold water, the destruction of vitamins 
is accelerated during the short interval before the water is brought to a 
boil. Cook vegetables no longer than is necessary to make them tender. 
The longer a vegetable is cooked the greater will be the destruction of 
vitamins. Seasonings like butter, sauce, etc, should usually be added at 
the end of the cooking period* 

4.2.3 Fry vegetables briskly in a small quantity of hot oil and a 
tea-spoonful of salt. Add a small quantity of boiling water and let it 
stand for a short period in a closed container. Keep the lid on so that 
no steam escapes. When the vegetables are cooked, only very little water 
should be left, most of it having been absorbed. 

4.2.4 If after cooking there is water left which is not needed for a 
particular preparation, use this water either for cooking the next batch or 
use it for preparation of soups or gravies, or use it for kneading dough for 
CHAP ATI. This helps to utilize valuable vitamins and minerals present 
in green vegetables* 

4.2.5 Plan cooking so that vegetables are served immediately after these 
are cooked. Do not allow cooked vegetables to stand on a hot plate or 
fire for long time. Keeping vegetables hot after these have been cooked 
greatly reduces the amount of vitamins these contain. In fact losses occur 
even when stored at room temperature or in refrigerator. The loss of 
vitamins in most of the cooked vegetables is considerable. 

4.3 Cooking of Rice 

4.3.1 Washing — As far as possible, washing of rice should be avoided. 
Washing removes thiamine, riboflavin and niacin. Alkaline water 
enhances the loss of vitamins. 

4.3.2 Parboiling — Parboiled rice contains 3 to 4 times as much vitamins 
as raw rice of the same variety milled and processed to the same degree. . 
Hence its use is nutritionally advantageous. Less of vitamins are lost 
during washing of parboild rice. 

4.3.3 Draining of Cooked Rice — Approximately 25 percent of the vitamins 
of rice is diffused out with cooking water. The combined effect of 
processing, washing and cooking of the polished rice leads to a nearly 
complete loss of vitamins, while parboiled rice, still retains most of these 
vitamins even when the cooking water is discarded. 

4.4 Sprouting — Germination of pulses in general enhances the vitamin 
content especially vitamins of B group, G and E. It is recommended that 
pulses should be consumed after sprouting. 



IS -.7799-1975 

4.5 Fermentation — Fermentation of foods for the preparation of IDLI, 
DOSA, DHOBELA> KHAMAN> etc, results in a substantial increase in 
vitamins of B group. 

4.6 Pickling — Pickling of fruits and vegetables also preserves consi- 
derable amount of vitamins. Pickled AMLA (Indian gooseberry) 
conserves vitamin G while carrots preserve vitamin A. 

4.7 Baking — Baking results in a loss of considerable amount of vitamins. 
Some protein is also rendered unavailable. 

4.8 Frying — Frying results in some loss of vitamins. 

5. COMMERCIAL PROCESSING 
5*1 Dehydration 

5.1.1 Moderate losses of vitamins occur during dehydration. Retention 
of vitamins, such as carotene and vitamin G is higher in spray-dried or 
freeze-dried fruits or vegetables than in sun-dried. 

5.1.2 Losses of vitamin G during dehydration are extensive especially 
in vegetables. Vitamin C is the most difficult of vitamins to preserve 
during dehydration and blanching of vegetables. 

5.2 Canning 

5.2.1 High-temperature short-time blanching is more conducive to 
retention of water-soluble vitamins than other procedures. 

5.2.2 In products like canned citrus fruits, pineapple and tomatoes^ 
and in the juices prepared from these fruits, vitamin C is retained in 
processing and storage. 

5.2.3 Canning itself is not detrimental to vitamin A and carotene but 
losses occur during storage. 

5.3 Milling — Considerable losses of vitamins occur during milling of 
cereals and pulses. Some vitamin-containing fractions are also lost in 
this operation. Whole-cereal flours ( ATT A ) are nutritionally superior 
as compared to milled flours {MAID A). Unpolished rice contains more 
vitamins than polished rice. 

6. STORAGE 

6.1 Storage at 0°C results in slow loss of vitamins. The losses of vitamins 
m most foods stored at 15°C are significantly higher than storage at 0°C. 
At 0°C temperature, frozen vegetables lose less than 25 percent of their 
vitamin G content during a period of 6 to 9 months. Vitamin A and 
carotene contents of frozen fruits and vegetables may drop as much as 
25 percent during storage at 0°C from one season to the next. 

8 



IS: 7799 -1975 

6.1.1 Most fresh vegetables and fresh ripe fruits keep well in a 
refrigerator. Leafy green vegetables retain more than 90 percent of their 
vitamin C and A value for 24 hours. Retention of these nutrients drops 
to 75 percent after storage for several days. Fresh green vegetables lose 
much of the vitamin G even in a day or two when stored at room 
temperature. Spinach loses three-quarters of its vitamin C in 2 days. 
New potatoes are considerably richer in vitamin C than old ones, because 
the vitamin is gradually lost during storage. 

6.1.2 Under-ripe fruits should be stored at room temperature to ripen,. 
Vitamin losses are smaller at room temperature during the time required 
for ripening. Fruits should be used or transferred to the refrigerator a& 
soon as ripened. This is important to keep them in good condition as cell 
damage causes considerable loss of vitamin C. 

6.1.3 Canned foods should be stored at low temperature in order to 
prevent losses in vitamins. 

6.2 Storage at Room Temperature — Storage of cereals and pulses 
at room temperature for long time results in loss of vitamins in grains. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

FOOD ANALYSIS 

IS: 

5398-1968 Methods for estimation of thiamine ( vitamin B, ) in foodstuffs 

5399-1969 Methods for estimation of riboflavin ( vitamin B 2 ) in foodstuffs 

5400-1969 Methods for estimation of nicotinic acid ( niacin ) in foodstuffs 

5401-1969 Methods for detection and estimation of coliform bacteria in foodstuffs 

5402-1969 Method for plate count of bacteria in foodstuffs 

5403-1969 Method for yeast and mould count in foodstuffs 

5835-1970 Method for estimation of vitamin D in foodstuffs 

5838-1970 Method for estimation of vitamin G in foodstuffs 

5886-1970 Methods for estimation of carotenes and vitamin A ( retinol ) in foodstuffs 

5887-1970 Method for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning and food- 
borne diseases 

7219-1973 Method for determination of protein in foods and feeds 

7234-1974 Method for estimation of folic acid in foodstuffs 

7235-1974 Method for estimation of tocopherol ( vitamin E ) in foodstuffs 

7529-1975 Method for estimation of vitamin B I8 in foodstuffs 

7815-1975 Method for estimation of amino acids in foods 



