**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7688-2 (1976) : Code of practice for labelling of 
pre-packaged foods, Part 2: Guidelines on claims [FAD 15: 
Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 7668 ( Part II >» 1976 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS 

PART II GUIDELINES ON CLAIMS 



UDC 66481-9 038:659154 





© Copyright 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK B MAYAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAP All MAftO 

NfiW DELHI 11U002 

-, ^ December 1976 



IS : 7686 ( fart II)- 1976 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS 

PART II GUIDELINES ON CLAIMS 

Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee, AFDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Ranjit Sen Serologist to the Government of India ( Directorate 

General of Health Services), Calcutta 

Members 
Agricultural Marketing Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 
Adviser to the Government Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

of India 
Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Amble Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Krishnan ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. C. Das Health Officer, Corporation of Calcutta 

Dr P. K. DattA All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri K. C. De The Metal Box Company of India Limited, Calcutta 

Shri V. K. Karnik ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sukumar De National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Dr C. A. Mulay ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

Director Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Director General. Directorate General Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 
Maj-Gen Daryao Singh ( Alternate ) 
Executive Health Officer Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Health Officer Corporation of Madras 

Col Kewal Krishna Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 

Dr A. D. Kumar ( Altsrnate ) 
Dr ( Smt ) S. Khosla Department of Health & Family Planning, Govern- 

ment of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Dr P. K. Kymal Food & Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture & 

Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Dr O. N. Agarwala ( Alternate ) 
Maj V. A. Narayanan Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ) , Mysore 
Dr G. M. Verma ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringemsnt of copyright under the said Act, 



IS:7688(PartII)-i976 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Public Analyst (Food and Government of West Bengal, Calcutta 
Water ) 
Public Analyst ( Bacteriology ) 
( Alternate ) 
Dr A. N. Rai Chawdhuri National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi 

Dr T. N. Ramachandra Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath ( Alternate ) 
Col K. Seetaram Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Lt-Col D. D. Vohra ( Alternate ) 
Senior Medical Officer Northern Railway, New Delhi 
( Health ) 

Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Public Analyst, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati, ( Ministry of 
Agriculture & Irrigation ) 



Dr S. B. Singh 

Shri N. Srinivasan 
Dr M. R. Subbaram 



Shri I. A. Siddiqi ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. A. V. Subramanian 
Dr M. C. Swaminathan 

Shri D. S. Ghadha ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Vin 



Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 
Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 
Health & Family Planning ), New Delhi 



The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 
Shri J. D. Contractor ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Sohrab 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Ad-hoc Panel on Food Labelling and Advertising, AFDG 36 : PI 



Convener 
Shri D. S. Chadha 

Members 
Dr K. T. Achaya 

Shri Rajat Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Smt T. Jacob 
Dr S. Jayaraman 

Col Kewal Krishna 

Dr A. D. Kumar ( Alternate ) 



Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 
Health & Family Planning ), New Delhi 



Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association 
of India, Bombay 

Lady Irwin College, New Delhi 

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation), Faridabad 
Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 



IS: 7688 (Part II) -1976 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS 

PART II GUIDELINES ON CLAIMS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 August 1976, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, 
Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Food labelling is an essential component in all food processing Industries. 
The purpose is to tell the consumer, in correct manner, about the contents of 
the food inside the package or container. The consumers want to know 
what a package contains to be sure that they are not paying for an 
unknown quality and quantity of the food in the package. This leads to the 
necessity of enumerating on the label the ingredients, net contents and other 
essential points about the food in the package. It is also equally important 
that the declarations and claims made on the label are true and reflect the 
product packed. 

0.3 This standard is being issued in three parts. This part covers guidelines 
on labelling claims of prepackaged foods. Parts I and III cover general 
guidelines and nutritional labelling respectively. 

0.4 This standard is subject to the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules framed thereunder. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part II) lays down guidelines for making claims of 
various kinds on the label of prepackaged foods. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2*1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions, in addition to 
those given in IS : 7688 ( Part I )-1975* and IS : 7655-1975t shall apply. 

2.2 Dietetic Claim — This relates to (a) higher or lower than normal con- 
tent or the absence of a particular substance and/or (b) physical, chemical, 

♦Code of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part I General guidelines. 
+Gode of practice for food advertising. 



IS : 7688 ( Part II)- 1976 

biological or other property of the food by reason of which the implication 
arises that the food is suitable to meet the special nutritional requirements 
of persons whose digestive process or metabolism are disturbed or who on 
account of age or other conditions are liable to obtain benefit from a 
controlled consumption of foodstuffs (see 5). 

2.3 Medical Claims — This relates to the suitability of a food for use in 
the prevention, alleviation, treatment or cure of a disease or symptoms of a 
disease, disorder or physiological condition (see 6). 

2.4 Nutritional Claims — This relates to the claim of the presence of 
particular substances by reason of which the food may be used in the selec- 
tion of a balanced diet. Statements of quantity only, as envisaged in nutri- 
tional labelling and, in particular, vitamin and mineral labelling, imply such 
claims [ see IS : 7688 ( Part III )-1976* ]. Mere declaration of a nutrient in 
the list of ingredients without quantity or for technological reasons only 
would not imply such claims ( see 4 ) . 

3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

3.1 A claim shall comply with the general principles given in IS : 7688 
(Part I)-1975f and IS : 7655-1975J in particular with respect to any 
possibility of misleading the consumer. 

3.2 A food shall not bear any label constituting a claim which cannot be 
substantiated or the special properties claimed for the food are of marginal 
additional benefit to the consumer, having regard to the products of like 
composition available in the market where the product is to be sold. 

3.3 When a claim is made, it shall be factual, truthful and capable of being 
objectively substantiated with specific technical data or by means of 
comparative figures, when the claim is made in the form of a comparison. 

3.4 The term 'natural 5 may be used on a label only in association with a 
product which is raw, unmixed, contains no additives and has not been 
subjected to any preservation process other than chilling or freezing. 

3.5 The term c home made' may be used on the label only in association 
with a product produced in a home kitchen. 

3.6 The term 'fresh 5 may be used to describe foods that have not begun 
significantly to deteriorate in overall quality. 

3.7 Religious or ritual preparation of a food may be claimed provided it 
does not hurt religious sentiments of the consumers. 

♦Code of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part III Nutritional labelling. 
fCode of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part I General guidelines, 
JCode of practice for food advertising. 



IS: 7688 (Part II)- 1976 

4. NUTRITIONAL CLAIMS 

4.1 No food label should contain any claim that may mislead the consumer 
as to the composition, character or action of a food or as to its suitability for 
the nutritional purpose for which it is recommended. Exaggerated claims 
should not be made. 

Note — Rounded off figures for joules ( J )* (or kcal ), ingredients, etc, may be given, 
provided rounded off figure does not disturb the relevance of the result claimed. 

4.2 No claims may be made that a food is a significant source of a 
nutrient unless the nutrient is present in the food at a level equal to one-third 
of the Recommended Daily Allowance ( RDA ) in a expected daily consump- 
tion. No claim may be made that a food is nutritionally superior to another 
food unless it contains substantially more of the RDA of the claimed nutrient 
per unit mass. 

4.3 No food label should contain a claim: 

a ) for any particular value derived from food or its ingredients unless 
that value can be wholly contributed by, or derived from that food; 

b ) as to the nature or effect of such food based on its ability to provide 
energy unless, joules ( or kcal ) content is significant, with regard 
to the normal recommended consumptions of such food and inclu- 
des a true statement of the joules ( or kcal ) in 100 g or 100 ml of 
that food; and 

c ) as to the nature or effect of such a food suggesting that it is a source 
of protein unless at least 12 percent of the joules ( or kcal ) of such 
food is provided by protein. 

4.4 No label shall include any words or description which constitutes: 

a ) a general claim that vitamins or minerals are present in that food 
unless that food contains one or more of the substances established 
to contain vitamins and minerals, and is accompanied by a true 
statement of the minimum quantity of each such substance per 
100 g or 100 ml as the case may be; and 

b ) any claim or suggestion that a particular substance specified is 
present in that food unless it is accompanied by a true statement of 
the minimum quantity of every such substance contained in 100 g 
of food. 

4.5 The term enriched shall be used on the label only to describe the addi- 
tion of vitamins, mineral nutrients or amino acids to a food which normally 
would contain the added nutrients. 

4.6 The term fortified shall be used on the label only to describe addition 
of vitamins, mineral nutrients or amino acid to food which normally may 
not contain these nutrients. 



* 1 kilocalorie ( kcal ) = 4186*8 joules (J ). 



IS: 7688 (Part II) -1976 

5. DIETETIC CLAIMS 

5.1 Slimming Claim — No label should include any words, device or 
description calculated to indicate that the food is an aid to slimming or to 
weight control or reduction unless such food is capable of making definite 
and positive contribution to weight reduction. 

5.2 Diabetic Claims — No label should indicate that the food has been 
specially prepared for diabetics, unless: 

a) the carbohydrate content of the food calculated by mass is substan- 
tially less than the carbohydrate content of similar foods not sold 
as diabetic food, the carbohydrate content and joules thereof 
expressed in g/100 g and joules or kcal/100 g respectively; and 

b) the carbohydrates in the food, either in the ingredients used to 
make the food or added as an extra component has been specially 
prepared or chosen to suit the needs of diabetics, and are free from 
sucrose. 

6. MEDICINAL CLAIMS 

6.1 No label shall indicate either directly or indirectly that the food has 
tonic, restorative, or medicinal properties or properties which make it 
beneficial for invalids or which will cure, alleviate or prevent disease, unless: 

a) the food contains a substance or substances in such quantity as to 
confer such properties, or in the case of an indication as to tonic 
properties, unless the food contains substances, other than alcohol, 
carbohydrate, protein or caffeine or other purine derivatives, in 
such quantities as to confer tonic properties, and, in every case, 
unless accompanied by a true statement of minimum quantity of 
each such substance present in the food ( calculated by mass and 
expressed as a percentage of the mass of the food ) and if a specific 
purpose is claimed, of the amount of such food which has to be 
consumed to achieve that purpose; or 

b) the food is sufficiently deficient in a substance or substances as to 
confer properties in the food which can be expressed as percentage 
of the minimum quantity of the substances that have or have not 
been removed. 

6.2 No label should hold out a promise of cure or contain any statement 
likely to endanger the health of any person suffering from illness. In parti- 
cular, care should be taken in the case of illness requiring medical attention. 
No food label should contain any matter which may be regarded as an 
offer of a food product for the treatment of any serious illness which should 
rightly receive medical attention. 



IS: 7688 (Part II). 1976 

6.3 No label should, without justifiable reason, induce fear on the part of 
the consumer that he is suffering, or may without treatment suffer, or suffer 
more severely, from an ailment, illness or disease. 

6.4 No label should contain any reference to doctors, or hospital tests, 
unless such reference may be substantiated by independent evidence, and 
may be properly used in the manner proposed. This also applies to the 
use of the dress or the surrounding in a manner likely to convey an impres- 
sion of independent professional medical advice or recommendation. 

6.5 No label should contain the terms college, institute, laboratory, or 
similar terms, unless the establishment referred to genuinely corresponds to 
the description used. 

7. PROHIBITED GLAIMS 

7.1 The following types of claims shall be prohibited: 

a) Misleading claims, 

b) Unsubstantiated claims, 

c) Medical claims with exceptions (see 6), 

d) Meaningless claims including meaningless comparatives and super- 
latives, 

e) Claims which give rise to doubts about the safety of similar foods, 

f) Claims which arouse or exploit fear in the consumers, and 

g) Claims as to an organic nature or origin of food. 



ttfDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

FOOD ADVERTISING AND LABELLING 

IS: 

7655-1975 Code of practice for food advertising 

7688 ( Part I )-1975 Code of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part 1 General 
guidelines 

7688 ( Part II )-1976 Code of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part II 
Guidelines on claims 

7688 (Part III )-I976 Code of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part III 
Nutritional labelling 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 8 500 Indian Standards covering various subjects have been 
issued so far; Of the**, the standards belonging to the Agricultural and 
Food Products Group fa I J under I he following categories? 



Abattoir 

Alcoholic drinks 

Animal fa«dt 

Animal housing and pqulpmem 

Botory and confectionery 

Bfifl-kfifipiriQi oqutpnififit 

Cerpals, pukH And the-lf products 

Cgcoq product 

Cofl&o and ill product! 

Dairy equipment 

Dairy industry. Jayouj plana 

Dairy Industry, mem ad a ol iesT 

Dairy laboratory apparatus 

Dairy products 

Edible starch and starchy products 

Form irnplHiimiitv bjicI luaclplii-vry 

Fish and fishery products 

Fl«ti lifcduslry, aanltary conditions 



Fgofl gddl(iv#s 

Food grain hand ling and storage 

Fruits and tfog&lablds 

Honey and by-praducis 

Infant toocia 

Labointnry animals 

Meat and meat product* 

Pest conirul GCpuipmsnt 

P^sliuda* luririulaliojis 

Pu^cides.. tachnicaf grada and ganarai 

Prop ag all on mare rials 

RagulQit&d m^oi yards 

Sfinaflfy evaluation 

Spices and condiments 

Stareti derived producls- 

Sugars, and by-products 

Tea 

Tobacco product 

Tirana port or live an I male 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



1SI BuH«ltn i PMhJI*h*d Every Month i 
Single Ccipy 
Annua] Subscription ... ... 

Standards ; Monthly Addittona 

single Copy 

Annual Subscription «*• ». 

Annual Raparit ( from 1848-49 Onwards k 

i si Han a Dock, mi 



4-00 
Ra 38-db 

Ri Z'Op to 6'M 

Rl SO'QO 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Waned Bhnvan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 11QQD2 
Telephone i 21 01 31 < 20 line*) Te1riQr,ims I Manakaangth* 



Western i Noutlty Cham ben, 6 rant Road 
Eastern i S Chowrlnghea Approach 
Southern ■ C.LT. Campus, Afiyar 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamad Shaikh Mnrg, Khan par 

'(■' Block, Unity Hlng, Naraslmharaja Square 

Ahlrnaa Bldg, SCO 82-B3, Sector 1TC 

6-8-56'57 NampaN^r Station Road 

1 17/41 B B Ssrvodaya Naaar 

B.C.I, Bldg {3rd floor ), Gandhi Mai dan Eaal 

Hanlai Bldg, {Ertd Floor), Rly Station Road 



Talephona 
BOMBAY 4GUC0T 3T ST SB 

CALCUTTA 7O0O7E S3 08 02 

MA UK AS 60OQSQ 41 34 4? 



AHM/DABAD 380001 I 03 91 

BANG A LUKE 5G0002 2 76 40 

CHANDIGARH 160017 2 03 20 

HYDERABAD SUUiJUl 4 57 11 

KANPUR SO&005 fl2 72 

PATNA BOO 304 5 30 90 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 



(tinted at Dafei Male**. Dalai, EndlU 



