•••*****•*•••••• 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 


Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
'The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live' 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


IS  7032-1  to  8  (1986) :  Physical  methods  of  test  for  uncut 
Indian  jute,  Mesta  and  Bimli  [TXD  1:  Physical  Methods  of 
Tests! 


<bVJJIi^j>^^^Vfl/ll^^^ag^Ts^^lITFS3egS 


[SS^  V I  l>5ft>!>5^>«SV: 


^^\\X^L 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


<a^EL 


!**> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  7032  (  Parts  1  to  8  )  -1988 

(Reaffirmed  2000) 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMll 

(First   Revision) 


UDC    677  13  +  677142:677  017 


C  Copyright  1987 
BUREAU     Ol'    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MA.NAK    BLIAVAN.    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAk    MAUG 

NEW  DELHI  UQflOl 

qt  #  September  1987 


IS  :  7032  (  Parts  1  to  8  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

(  First  Revision  J 


Physical  Methods  of  Test  Sectional  Committee,  TDC  1 

Chairman  Representing 

Dr  V.  Sxjndaram  Cotton       Technological      Research    Laboratory 

( ICAR  ),  Bombay 
Members 

Dr  V.  G.  Munshi  (  Alternate  to 
Dr  V.  Sundaram  ) 
Agricultural  Marketing  Directorate  of  Marketing  &    Inspection  (  Ministry 

Adviser  to  the  Government  of  of  Agriculture  ),  Faridabad 

India 
Shri  A.  T.  Basak  Directorate  General    of   Supplies    &    Disposals 

(  Inspection  Wing  ),  New  Delhi 
Shri  D.  K.  Nandy  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  B.  N.  Basu  Office  of  the  Jute  Commissioner,  Calcutta 

Shri  C.  Bhattacharya  Indian        Petrochemicals      Corporation       Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Shri  H.  C.  Bhatia  (  Alternate  ) 
General  Manager  (  Operations  )    The  National  Rayon  Corporation  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  D.  S.  Nadkarni  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Ghosh  Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

Shri  S.  S.  Bagga  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  V.  G.  Kamath  Nirlon     Synthetic      Fibres    &    Chemicals    Ltd, 

Bombay 
Dr  A.  R.  Mukherjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Shrimati  A.  Kaplesh  The  Silk  &  Art  Silk  Mills  Research  Association, 

Bombay 
Shri  M.  R.  Paranjape  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  K.  Mam  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Shri  P.  C.  Basu  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  B.  R.  Manjunatha  Intexa  India,  Bombay 

Dr  (  Shrimati  )  G.  R.  Phalgumani  Textiles  Committee,  Bombay 
Shri  M.  Radhakrishnan  The     Bombay     Textile     Research    Association, 

Bombay 
Shri  A.  V.  Ravindranathan  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1987 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  are  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  7032  (  Parts  1  to  8  )  -  1986 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shrimati  G.  P.  Rane  Wool  Research  Association,  Bombay 

Dr  S.  R.  Ranganathan  Indian    Jute    Industries'     Research    Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr  U.  Mukhopadhyay  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  S.  Rathore  National  Textile  Corporation  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Shri  K.  N.  Seshan  The  South  India   Textile  Research  Association, 

Coimbatore 
Dr  G.  S.  Singh  The  Raymond  Woollen  Mills  Limited,  Thane 

Shri  J.  K.  Banerjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  C.  Sivaraman  Textile  India  Research  Bureau,  Bombay 

Shri  T.  N.  Sonwalkar  Central  Silk  Board,  Bangalore 

Dr  T.  V.  K.  Srivastava  Office  of  the  Textile  Commissioner,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  Ravindran  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  A.  Subramanian  Ahmedabad  Textile  Industry's  Research  Associa- 

tion, Ahmadabad 
Shri  M.  G.  Thanawala  M.  Best  Cotton  Rope  Manufacturing  Co,  Bombay 

Shri  J.  N.  Vohra  Punjab  State  Hosiery  and  Knitwear  Development 

Corporation  Ltd,  Chandigarh 
Shri  P.  T.  Banerji  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  I.  Midha,  Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-ojficio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Tex  )  (  Secretary  ) 

Physical  Methods  of  Test  for  Jute  Subcommittee,  TDC  1  :  3 

Convener 

Dr  U.  Mukhopadhyay  Indian    Jute    Industries'  Research  Association, 

Calcutta 

Members 

Shri  S.  K.  ChAtterjee(  Alternate  to 
Dr  U.  Mukhopadhyay  ) 
Shri  G.  M.  Bhandari  Indian  Jute  Mills  Association,  Calcutta 

Shri  S.  K.  Kariwala  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  C.  Biswas  National    Jute     Manufactures  Corporation  Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri  A.  Ghosh  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Dr  K.  Chakravarty  Directorate  of  Jute   Development   (  Ministry   of 

Agriculture  ),  Calcutta 

Shri  N.  C.  Halder  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  K..  Dutta  Office  of  the  Jute  Commissioner,  Calcutta 

Shri  S.  N.  Ghosh  Jute      Technological       Research     Laboratories 

( ICAR  ),  Calcutta 

Shri  N.  K.  Sil  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Sekhar  Guha  Eskaps  (  India  )  Private  Limited,  Calcutta 

Shri  B.  Majumdar  Export  Inspection  Council  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Shri  P.  K.  Giri  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  N.  Sanyal  The  Jute  Corporation  of  India  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Dr  R.  K.  Sarkar  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Dr  Debanjan  Sur  Institute  of  Jute  Technology,  Calcutta 

Shri  S.  C.  Roy  (  Alternate  ) 


IS  :  7032  (  Parts  1  to  8  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 

TTM^TTT   TMHTAXT     TT  TTT7       J/POT^      A\TH     DTH/TTT 

(First   Revision) 


t>.  tUKtWUKU 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  (  Parts  1  to  8  )  (  First  Revision  )  was  adopted  by 
the  Indian  Standards  Institution  on  27  June  1986,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Physical  Methods  of  Test  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved 
by  the  Textile  Division  Council. 

0.2  This  standard  consisting  of  nine  parts  (  Parts  1  to  9  )  was  published 
between  1973  and  1976  and  covered  methods  of  test  for  various  charac- 
teristics of  jute  fibres.  After  the  publication  of  IS  :  271-1975  'Grading  of 
white,  TOSS  A  and  DAISEE  uncut  Indian  jute  (  second  revision  )',IS  :  9846- 
1981  'Grading  of  uncut  Indian  MESTA\  and  IS  :  11596-1986  'Grading 
of  uncut  Indian  BJMLV  have  been  published.  These  standards  have  taken 
into  consideration  the  characteristics  such  as  strength,  lustre,  colour, 
density,  fineness,  root  content  and  defects,  etc,  for  grading  of  fibres.  These 
grading  standards  prescribe  the  'Hand  and  eye  method'  for  grading  and 
allot  scores  for  different  characteristics.  This  standard  (  Parts  1  to  8  ) 
has  been  revised  to  make  it  applicable  to  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibres  also. 
The  method  for  determination  of  brightness  (  colour  )  (  Part  9  )  has  been 
withdrawn. 

0.3  This  standard  is  aimed  at  obtaining  instrumental  measures  for  charac- 
teristics of  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibres  for  the  purpose  of  grading.  To 
achieve  this  aim  only  those  methods,  which  are  simple  and  could  be 
adopted  by  the  graders  with  the  minimum  of  efforts  and  where  scoring 
could  be  possible,  have  been  selected  after  survey  of  the  work  done  by 
research  institutions,  the  published  literature  and  also  keeping  in  view  the 
type  of  instruments  available  with  the  industry. 

0.4  In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard, 
if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be 
done  in  accordance  with  IS  :  2-1960*. 


♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 

3 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  1  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

PART  1     GENERAL 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  1  )  prescribes  the  definitions  of  terms,  sampling 
procedure  and  atmospheric  conditions  for  testing  of  uncut  Indian  jute 
(  white,  TOSSA  and  DAISEE ),  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibres. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

2.1  Fibres 

2.1.1  BIMLI  —  It  is  a  substitute  for  jute  obtained  from  the  bark  of 
Hibiscus  sabdarifa.  It  is  generally  inferior  and  coarser  than  jute.  Chemi- 
cally the  fibre  is  different  from  jute  in  its  low  lignin  content. 

2.1 .2  Jute  —  A  multicellular  fibre  obtained  from  the  bast  of  various 
species  of  Corchorus,  of  which  the  round  pod  jute  (  Corchorus  capularis  or 
white  jute  )  and  the  long  pod  jute  (  Corchorus  clitorius  or  TOSSA  or 
DAISEE  jute  )  are  the  most  important.  The  fibre  strands  are  long  usually 
varying  from  1*5  to  3*5  metres. 

2.1.3  MESTA  —  It  is  a  substitute  for  jute  obtained  from  the  bark  of 
Hibiscus  cannabinus.  It  is  generally  inferior  and  coarser  than  jute.  Chemi- 
cally the  fibre  is  different  from  jute  in  its  low  lignin  content. 

2.2  General  Terms 

2.2.1  Colour  — ■  The  property  of  a  fibre  which  distinguishes  its  appearance 
as  creamy,  white,  grey,  etc. 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  1 )  -  1986 

Note  1  —  The  colour  description  of  white,  TOSS  A  and  DA1SEE  jute  in  relation 
to  the  terms  used  for  the  purpose  of  grading  in  IS  :  271-1975*  is  given  below  : 


Term 

Colour  Description 

White  Jute 

TOSSA  Jute 

DAISEE  Jute 

Very  good 

Light  creamy  to 
white 

Golden  to  reddish 
white 

Reddish 

Good 

Creamy  pink  to 
brownish  white 

Reddish  to  brow- 
nish white 

Reddish     to 
brownish 
with    some 
light  grey 

Fairly 
good 

Brownish  to  red- 
dish white  with 
some  light  grey 

Reddish  or  brow- 
nish with  some 
light  grey 

Brownish  or 
light     grey 
with    some 
grey 

Fair 
average 

Brownish  to  light 
grey 

Light     grey      to 
copper  colour 

Light  grey 

Average 

Grey    to     dark 
grey 

Grey  to  dark  grey 

Grey  to  dark 
grey 

Note  2  —  The  colour  description  of  MESTA  fibres  in  relation  to 
for  the  purpose  of  grading  in  IS  :  9846-1981f  is  given  below: 

the  terms  used 

Good 

Fair 

Average 

Creamy  to  whitish 
Light  grey 
Greyish  to  dark 

Note  3  —  The  colour  description  of  BIMLJ  fibres  in  relation  to  the  terms  used 
for  the  purpose  of  grading  in  IS  :  11596-1986$  is  given  below: 

Good  Creamy  to  whitish 

Average  Greyish  to  dark 

2.2.2  Density  —  Mass  per  unit  volume  of  the  fibre  including  its  air- 
spaces. The  higher  density  is  a  characteristic  of  better  quality  fibre.  In 
the  hand  and  eye  method  for  grading  of  raw  jute,  heaviness  or  body  of  the 
fibre  is  assessed.  This  is  more  or  less  equivalent  to  the  bulk  density  of  the 
fibre. 

2.2.3  Fineness  —  A  measure  of  diameter  (  width  )  or  mass  per  unit 
length,  or  both  of  the  fibre  filament.  (  The  finer  the  fibre,  the  better  is  its 
quality.  ) 

2.2.4  Foreign  Matter  —  These  are  dust  and  mud,  moss  and  stick  which 
are  mostly  lost  during  processing  and  are  thus  subject  to  claims. 


*Grading  of  white,  TOSSA  "and  DAISEE  uncut  Indian  jute  (  second  revision  ). 
tGrading  of  uncut  Indian  MESTA. 
t  Grading  of  uncut  Indian  BIMLI. 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  1  )  -  1986 

2.2.5  Lustre  —  The  display  of  different  intensities  of  light  reflected  both 
specularly  and  diffusely  from  different  parts  of  a  surface  exposed  to  the 
same  incident  light.  Due  to  this  reflection  of  light  the  surface  of  textiles 
(  fibre,  yarn  or  fabric  )  looks  glossy  or  shining. 

Note  —  In  case  of  jute  fibres,  higher  lustre  is  generally  a  characteristic  of  a 
better  quality  fibre. 

2.2.6  Natural  Dust  —  The  dust  which  might  get  associated  with  the  fibre 
during  the  process  of  its  production. 

2.2.7  Parcel  —  A  consignment  containing  certain  number  of  bales, 
bundles  or  drums. 

«  /%  o     t.         7  ti.  .    £.1 j. C 4-U„      :„J:.,:J..„1      :..*~        \4r,CrTA      ~~A 

L.ii.O   fieeti  —   1I1C  UWC  system    num  mc    niuinuuai    Julc,     juiiiji  /i     auu. 

BIML1  plants. 

2.2.8.1  Reed  length  —  The  length  of  the  reed   from  bottom  to   top 
(  excluding  the  underground  root  portion  in  case  of  BIML I  ). 

2.2.8.2  Effective  reed  length  —  The  length  of  the  reed   after  the  root 
and  hard  barky  croppy  ends  have  been  removed. 

2.2.9  Root  —  The  hard  barky  region  at  the  lower  end  of  the  reed  which 
requires  additional  softening  treatment,  normally  called,  'cuttings'.  This 
includes  the  underground  root  portion  in  case  of  BIMLI. 

2.2.10  Strength  —  The  ability  of  the  fibres  to  resist  strain  or  rupture 
induced  by  external  force. 

2.2.10.1  The  strength  aspect  of  the  fibres  is  classified  depending  upon 
their  tenacity. 

Note  1  —  Tenacity  is  the  breaking  load  of  a  material  under  test  divided  by  the 
linear  density  of  the  unstrained  material,  expressed  as  grams  per  tex. 

Note  2  —  Linear  density  is  the  mass  per  unit  length;  the  quotient  obtained  by 
dividing  the  mass  of  fibre  or  yarn  by  its  length.  When  the  mass  is  expressed  in 
grams  and  the  length  in  kilometres,  the  resulting  value,  that  is,  the  quotient,  is 
expressed  as  tex. 

Note  3 — IS  :  271-1975*  specifies  the  terms  'very  good',  'good',  'fairly  good', 
'fair  average',  'average'  and  'weak  mixed'  for  the  purpose  of  grading  jute  fibres. 

Note  4  —  IS  :  9846-1981  f  specifies  the  terms  'very  good',  'good',  'fairly  good', 
'average'  and  'weak  mixed'  for  the  purpose  of  grading  MESTA  fibre. 

Note  5  —  IS  :  11596-1 986J  specifies  the  terms 'good',  'fair',  'average'  and  'weak 
mixed'. 


•Grading  of  white,  TOSS  A  and  DAISEE  uncut  Indian  jute  (  second  revision ). 
■(■Grading  of  uncut  Indian  MESTA. 
{Grading  of  uncut  Indian  BIMLI. 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  1 )  -  1986 

2.3  Defects 

a)  Major  —  Entangled  croppy  end  fibre,  centre  root,  dazed  and  over- 
retted  fibres,  mossy  fibre,  runners,  knots,  entangled  sticks  and 
hunka. 

b)  Minor  — -  Croppy  fibre,  weak  croppy  fibre,  gummy  fibre,  loose 
sticks,  specks,  leaf  and  loose  leaf. 

2.3.1  Centre  Root  (  BUK  CHHAL  )  —  The  hard  barky  region  in  the 
middle  part  of  the  reed  which  requires  additional  softening  treatment. 

2.3.2  Croppy  Fibre  —  Fibre  with  top  ends  rough  and  hard  (  but  not 
barky  )  caused  by  careless  retting. 

2.3.2.1  Weak  croppy  fibre  —  Fibre  which  has  become  unusually   weak 
over  a  length  of  about  30  cm  at  the  top  end. 

2.3.2.2  Entangled  croppy  end  fibre  —  Fibre   with   unusually  entangled 
croppy  end. 

2.3.3  Dazed  Fibre  — ■  Fibre  which  is  weak  in  strength  and  dull  in  appear- 
ance, due  to  usually  being  stored  in  moist  condition. 

2.3.4  Gummy  Fibre  —  Fibres  held  together  by  undissolved  pectinous 
matter. 

2.3.5  Hunka  —  The  very  hard  barky  fibre  running  continuously  from  the 
lower  end  to  almost  the  tip  of  the  reed. 

2.3.6  Knots — Stiff  barky  spots  in  1  he  body  of  the  reed  which  break  the 
continuity  of  the  fibres  when  opened. 

2.3.7  Leaf  and  Loose  Leaf —  It  is  ihe  dark  grey  leafy  or  paper  like  sub- 
stance (  remnant  of  the  skin  of  the  plant )  appearing  on  the  strand.  Loose 
leaves  are  those  that  lie  loosely  on  the  fibre  and  are  easily  removable. 

2.3.8  Mossy  Fibre  —  A  type  of  vegetation  which  sometimes  gets  attach- 
ed to  the  plant.  Its  portions  may  remain  on  the  fibre  even  after  retting 
and  washing.  It  can  be  separated  by  hand. 

2.3.9  Over-Retted  Fibre  —  Fibre  which  has  lost  its  strength  and  bright- 
ness on  decomposition  due  to  prolonged  retting. 

2.3.10  Runners  —  Hard  barky  fibre  running  from  the  lower  end  to  the 
middle  region,  more  or  less  continuously. 

2.3.11  Specks  -—  Soft  barky  spots  in  the  body  where  fibres  can  be  separat- 
ed with  some  effort  without  breaking  their  continuity,  though  they  may 
remain  as  weak  spots. 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  1  )  -  1986 

2.3.12  Sticks,  Entangled  Sticks  and  Loose  Sticks  —  Sticks  are  remnants 
of  woody  part  of  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLI  plant  over  which  fibre  sheath  is 
formed.  Entangled  sticks  are  broken  sticks  which  are  linked  with  fibre 
mass  and  are  not  easily  removable.  Loose  sticks  are  broken  sticks  easily 
removable  by  shaking. 

3.  SAMPLING 

3.1  Lot  —  The  quantity  of  raw  jute,  MESTA  or  BIMLI  of  one  type  and 
quality  delivered  to  one  buyer  against  one  despatch  note  shall  constitute  a 
lot. 

3.2  The  samples  for  testing  shall  be  drawn  in  accordance  with  Table  1 . 


TABLE 

1     SAMPLING  OF  JUTE, 

MESTA  AND 

BIMLI 

no.  of  bales 
in  the  Lot 

No.  of  Bales  to 

be  Drawn  and 

Opened 

No.  oe  MORAHS 
to  be  Drawn 

No. 

TO 

OF 
BE 

Strands 
Drawn 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

Up  to  10 

1 

5 

30 

11   to  20 

2 

10 

30 

21    to  100 

3 

15 

30 

101  to  150 

4 

20 

40 

151  to  200 

5 

25 

50 

Above  200 

— 

— 

50* 

*The  number  of  bales  and  MORAHS  shall  be  sc 

i  drawn  as  to  get  50  strand; 

4.  ATMOSPHERIC  CONDITIONS  FOR  CONDITIONING  AND 
TESTING 

4.1  The  test  shall  be  carried  out  in  prevailing  atmospheric  conditions. 
However,  in  case  of  dispute,  the  conditioning  and  testing  shall  be  carried 
out  at  standard  atmospheric  conditions  of  65  ±  2  percent  relative  humidity 
and  27  ±  2°C  temperature  (  see  also  IS  :  6359-1971*). 


*Method  for  conditioning  of  textiles. 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  2  )  - 1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMH 

PART  2    REED  LENGTH 

(  First  Revision  ) 

1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  2  )  prescribes  a  method  for  the  determination  of 
reed  length  of  jute,  MESTA  and  B1MLI  fibre  strands. 

2.  EQUIPMENT 

2.1  The  following  equipment  are  required: 

a)  A  smooth  platform  or  floor, 

b)  Measuring  tape,  and 

c)  A  pair  of  scissors. 

3.  PROCEDURE 

3.1  Reed  Length  —  Lay  the  fibre  strand  on  a  smooth  horizontal  platform  or 
floor.  Remove  any  kinks  or  bends  with  minimum  tension  without  unduly 
stretching  the  fibre  strand.  Measure  the  length  of  the  strand  from  one  end 
to  the  other  with  the  help  of  a  tape  correct  to  0*5  cm  (  L  ). 

3.2  Effective  Reed  Length  —  Measure  the  length  of  the  root  (  Lx  )  and 
croppy  end  portion  (  L2 )  correct  to  0*5  cm.  Determine  the  effective  reed 
length  by  the  following  formula: 

Effective  reed  length  =  L  —  (  L\  +  Z,2 ) 

3.3  Repeat  the  test  with  the  remaining  test  specimens  and  determine  the 
average  of  all  the  values. 

4.  REPORT 

4.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  Average  reed  length, 

b)  Average  effective  reed  length,  and 

c)  Size  of  the  sample  (  strands  ). 

11 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  3  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

PART  3     ROOT  CONTENT 

(  First  Revision  } 

1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  3  )  prescribes  a  method  for  the  determination   of 
root  content  of  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibre  strands. 

2.  EQUIPMENT 

2.1  The  following  equipment  are  required: 

a)  Weighing  balance,  and 

b)  A  pair  of  scissors. 

3.  PROCEDURE 

3.1  Take  a  test  specimen  consisting  of  full  length   reeds.     Weigh   it   in   a 
balance  correct  to  1  g  (Wt). 

3.2  Cut  off  the  bottom  root  portion  from  each  individual  strand  so  that  the 
cut  fibres  do  not  contain  any  root.  Weigh  the  root  portion  correct  to   1   g 

3.3  Repeat  the  test  with  the  remaining  test  specimens. 

4.  CALCULATIONS 

4.1  Calculate  the  root  content  of  the  individual  test  specimens  as  follows: 

W 
Root  content  =  — ==^~    x   100 

4.2  Calculate  the  average  of  all  the  values  obtained  in  4.1. 

5.  REPORT 

5.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  Average  root  content,  percent;  and 

b)  Size  of  the  sample  (  strands  ). 

13 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  4  )  - 1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

PART  4     DEFECTS 

(First  Revision) 

1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  4  )  prescribes  a  method  for  the  determination  of 
defects  (  centre  root,  crop-end,  runners  and  hunka  )  in  the  jute,  MESTA 
and  BIMLI  fibre  strands. 

2.  EQUIPMENT 

2.1  The  following  equipment  are  required: 

a)  Weighing  balance,  and 

b)  A  pair  of  scissors. 

3.  PROCEDURES 

3.1  Take  a  test  specimen  consisting  of  full  length  reeds  and  determine  its 
mass  to  an  accuracy  of  1  g  (  W  ). 

3.2  Cut  the  centre-root  and  crop-end  portions  and  keep  them  separately. 
Determine  the  mass  of  the  centre-root  (  W\  )  and  crop-end  (  W% )  to  an 
accuracy  of  1  g. 

3.3  Separate  out  the  runners  from  the  cut  fibres,  if  any,  and  determine  its 
mass  to  an  accuracy  of  1  g  (  W3 ). 

3.4  Remove  the  hunka  from  the  cut  fibres  and  determine  its  mass  correct 
to  1  g  (  W, ). 

3.5  Repeat  the  test  with  the  remaining  test  specimens. 

4.  CALCULATIONS 

4.1  Calculate  the  percentage  of  centre-root,  crop-end,  runner  and  hunka 
of  the  individual  test  specimens  as  follows: 

a)  Centre-root,   Pt   =    -ji-L-   x   100 

w 

15 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  4  )  -  1986 

b)  Crop-end,  P2   =    -jp-  X  100 

c)  Runner,  P3        =  -j^~    X  10° 

W. 

d)  Hunka,  P4        =    ~f-    x  100 

4.2  Determine  the  percentage  of  total  defects  by  adding  Plf  P2,  -P3  and  Pt. 

4.3  Determine  the  average  of  all  the  values. 

5.  REPORT 

5.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information; 

a)  Average  percentage  of: 

1)  centre-root, 

2)  crop-end, 

3)  runner,  and 

4)  hunka; 

b)  Average  total  defects;  and 

c)  Size  of  the  sample  (  strands  ). 


16 


IS:  7032  (Part  5) -1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

PART  5  FOREIGN  MATTER 

(  First  Revision  ) 

i.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  5  )  prescribes  a  method  for  the  determination  of 
foreign  matter  (  dust,  mud,  moss  and  stick  )  of  the  jute,  MESTA  and 
BIMLI  fibre  strands. 

2.  EQUIPMENT 

2.1  Weighing  Balance 

3.  PROCEDURES 

3.1  Take  a  test  specimen  and  weigh  it  to  an  accuracy  of  1  g  {  Wx  )•  Beat 
the  fibre  strand  against  a  hard  surface  and  shake  to  remove  dust,  mud  and 
other  foreign  matter.  Continue  beating  until  the  mass  becomes  reasonably 
constant.  Separate  out  by  hand  the  moss  and  sticks,  if  any,  from  the 
strand.  Then  determine  the  final  mass  of  the  strand  to  an  accuracy  of  1  g 
(  w2). 

3.2  Repeat  the  test  with  the  remaining  test  specimens. 

4.  CALCULATIONS 

4.1  Calculate  the  percentage  of  foreign  matter  of  the  individual  test  speci- 
men as  follows: 

W    —  W» 

Foreign  matter,  percent  =  — i— x  100 

W\ 

4.2  Calculate  the  average  of  all  the  values. 

5.  REPORT 

5.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  Average  amount  of  foreign  matter,  percent;  and 

b)  Size  of  the  sample  (  strands  ). 

17 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  6  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  B1MLI 

PART  6     BULK  DENSITY 

f  First  Revision  ) 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  6  )  prescribes  a  method  for  determination  of  bulk 
density  of  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibres. 

2.  PREPARATION  OF  TEST  SPECIMEN 

2.1  Take  clean  portions  of  100  mm  length  at  random  from  the  middle 
region  of  the  reeds  ( that  is.  leaving  aside  rooty  bottom,  croppy-end  and 
defects  ).  Adjust  the  sample  'size'  so  that  the  mass  of  each  sample  is  40  g. 
Prepare  at  least  3  such  samples. 

3.  APPARATUS 

3.1  Metallic  Plates  —  of  100  x  25  mm  with  suitable  arrangements  for 
bringing  them  close  by  applying  pressure  in  the  form  of  dead  weight.  An 
outline  sketch  of  an  apparatus  suitable  for  this  purpose  is  given  in 
Appendix  A. 

3.2  Weighing  Balance 

4.  PROCEDURE 

4.1  Take  a  sample  as  laid  down  in  2.1  and  place  it  in  between  the  two 
metallic  plates  keeping  the  gadget  flat  on  the  table.  Suspend  the  instrument 
from  the  handle.  Apply  a  load  of  10  kg  and  note  down  the  volume  of  the 
fibres  from  the  scale  of  the  instrument. 

Note  —  The  samples  may  be  tested  in  the  prevailing  atmospheric  conditions. 
However,  in  case  of  dispute,  the  sample  shall  be  conditioned  and  tested  in  standard 
atmospheric  conditions. 

4.2  Similarly,  test  other  two  test  specimens. 

19 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  6  )  -  1986 

5.  CALCULATIONS 

5.1  Calculate  the  bulk  density  by  the  following  formula: 

D—ir 

where 

D  —  bulk  density, 

M  —  mass  of  fibres  compressed  in  g,  and 

V  —  volume  of  fibres  under  compression  in  ml. 

6.  REPORT 

6.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  Type  of  fibre, 

b)  Number  of  test  specimens  tested,  and 

c)  Bulk  density. 


20 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  6  )  -  1986 


APPENDIX    A 

(  Clause  3.1  ) 


TOP  PLATB  A- 


z 


BOTTOM 
PLATE  B- 


JL 


@   ® 


-  SCALE  CC  FOR 
READING  VOLUME 


All  dimensions  in  centimetres. 

Fig.  1    Bulk  Density  Measuring  Gadget 


21 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  7  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

PART  7     BUNDLE  STRENGTH 

(  First  Revision  J 

1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  7  )  prescribes  a  method  for  testing  bundle  strength 
of  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibres  by  tensile  testing  machines,  working  at 
constant  rate  of  loading  (  CRL  ),  constant  rate  of  elongation  (  CRE  )  and 
constant  rate  of  traverse  (  CRT  ). 

2.  PRINCIPLE 

2.1  A  bundle  of  fibres  of  15  to  3-0  kilotex  is  gripped  between  two  suitable 
damps  and  their  breaking  load  is  determined  on  tensile  testing  machines. 
Then  tenacity  is  calculated  by  dividing  the  breaking  load  by  the  mass  of 
the  fibres  held  between  the  clamps. 

3.  PREPARATION  OF  TEST  SPECIMEN 

3.1  Take  clean  portion  of  200  mm  in  length  at  random  from  the  middle 
region  of  the  reeds  ( leaving  aside  rooty  bottom,  croppy  end  and  defects  ). 
Cut  out  sufficient  length  from  each  portion  to  cover  fully  both  the  clamps. 
The  mass  of  each  portion  should  be  approximately  300  to  600  mg;  heavier 
ones  shall  be  thinned  out  from  the  side  and  to  the  lighter  ones  another  reed 
or  a  portion  of  a  reed  shall  be  added.  Make  this  adjustment  simply  by 
feel.  Take  5  portions  constituting  5  test  specimens  (  bundles  ). 

3.2  Similarly  prepare  at  least  2  more  sets  of  5  specimens  as  in  3.1. 

4.  APPARATUS 

4.1  Testing  Machine  —  Tensile  strength  testing  machine  with  a  capacity  of 
100  kgf  or  a  little  more  working  on  one  of  the  following  principles: 

a)  Constant  rate  of  traverse  (  CRT  ), 

b)  Constant  rate  of  load  (  CRL  ),  or 

c)  Constant  rate  of  extension  (  CRE  ). 

23 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  7  )  -  1986 

The  specimens  shall  break  within  20  ±  5  seconds.  In  case  of  constant 
rate  of  traverse  machine  the  time  of  break  shall  exceed  the  inertia!  period 
of  the  instrument.  The  load  range  of  the  machine  shall  be  such  that  the 
observed  values  would  be  between  10  and  90  percent  of  the  full  scale  load. 
The  permissible  error  in  the  machine  at  any  point  in  this  range  shall  not 
exceed  ±  1  percent  of  the  maximum  load.  The  machines  shall  be  provided 
with  the  following  arrangements: 

a)  Two  clamps  with  the  following  provisions  to  grip  the  specimens: 

1)  Each  clamp  shall  be  such  that  at  least  10  mm  of  fibre  length  is 
gripped.  There  should  be  no  slippage  of  fibres  during  test.  To 
prevent  slippage  the  inside  of  the  clamps  should  preferably  be 
lined  with  leather  or  rubber  padding. 

2)  The  clamps  shall  be  capable  of  being  adjusted  on  to  50  mm  test 
length. 

b)  A  scale  or  dial  for  recording  the  load  in  kilograms. 

5.  PROCEDURE 

5.1  Mounting  the  Test  Specimen  —  Place  the  two  clamps  50  mm  apart.  Put 
the  fibre  bundle  in  one  of  the  clamps  and  tighten  it.  Straighten  the  fibres, 
putting  a  small  tension  and  tighten  it  in  the  other  clamp.  If  the  clamps  are 
detachable,  these  can  be  taken  out  of  the  machine,  placed  on  a  platform, 
separated  50  mm  apart  and  the  fibre  bundle  fixed  as  above.  The  clamps 
can  then  be  inserted  into  the  clamp  holders  on  the  machine.  The  fibre 
bundle  should  be  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  machine. 

5.2  With  the  help  of  preliminary  specimen,  set  the  machine  so  that  the 
specimen  breaks  within  20  ±  5  seconds.  In  the  case  of  constant  rate  of 
traverse  type  machine  set  it  at  a  rate  of  traverse  so  that  the  time  of  break 
exceeds  the  inertial  period  of  the  instrument. 

5.3  Operate  the  machine  and  carry  the  test  to  rupture  and  record  the  break- 
ing load  of  the  specimen.  If  the  specimen  slips  in  the  jaws  the  test  shall  be 
discarded  but  noted,  and  another  test  taken  in  view  thereof. 

Note  —  Even  if  a  test  value  is  isolated  on  account  of  break  near  the  jaw,  the  value 
shall  be  noted  but  not  taken  into  account  in  calculations.  If  such  breaks  exceed  10 
percent  of  the  number  of  specimens  tested,  suitable  corrective  action  on  the  machine 
may  have  to  be  taken. 

5.4  With  a  knife  or  sharp  razor  blade  cut  the  fibres  flush  at  the  inner  edges 
of  the  two  clamps  and  collect  the  tufts  of  fibres  thus  obtained.  Test  the  other 
test  specimens  in  similar  manner. 

5.4.1  Weigh  the  broken  tufts  of  fibres  for  the  5  specimens  together. 

5.5  Test  at  least  3  groups  of  5  specimens  each  in  similar  manner. 

24 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  7  )  -  1986 

6.  ATMOSPHERIC    CONDITIONS     FOR     CONDITIONING      AND 
TESTING 

6.1  All  the  tests  shall  be  carried   out  as   laid   down  in   4.1   of  IS  :  7032 
(  Part  1  )-1986*. 

6.1.1  In  case  standard  atmospheric  conditions  are  not  available,  the 
samples  may  be  conditioned  and  tested  at  the  prevailing  atmospheric 
conditions  and  the  prevailing  relative  humidity  shall  be  noted  and  correc- 
tion applied  for  mass  and  breaking  load  as  given  below: 

a)  Correction  for  mass  —  Convert  the  mass  of  fibre  bundles  as  obtained 
in  5.4.1  to  equivalent  mass  at  65  percent  relative  humidity.  For 
this  purpose,  the  equilibrium  moisture  regain  for  jute  corresponding 
to  prevailing  RH,  will  require  to  be  determined  from  the  regain 
humidity  curve  for  jute  or  by  using  a  suitable  moisture  regain  meter. 
For  example,  if  the  moisture  regain  at  the  prevailing  RH  is  R  the 
corrected   mass  at   12  percent  moisture  regain  corresponding  to 

65  percent  RH  will  be  given  by  the  formula  M  X  \  D 

1UU  -j-  K 

(  12  is  the  approximate  moisture  regain  of  jute  at  65  percent 

relative  humidity ). 

b)  Correction  for  breaking  load — Convert  the  breaking  load  values 
obtained  in  5.3  for  the  difference  in  relative  humidity  to  breaking 
load  at  65  percent  relative  humidity  by  multiplying  with  the  appli- 
cable correction  factor  as  given  in  Appendix  A.  However,  if  the 
relative  humidity  is  between  35  to  75  precent,  the  correction  for 
breaking  load  value  is  small  and  may  be  ignored. 

The   corrected  values  of  mass  and  breaking  load  shall  be  used   in 
the  formula  given  in  7.1. 

7.  CALCULATION 

7.1  Calculate  the  tenacity  of  the  fibre  by  the  following  formula: 

Tenacity  (  in  gjtex  ),  S  =   —jj^r^- 

where 

T    =  sum  of  the  breaking  load  values  of  5  bundles  of  fibres  in 

kgf,  and 
M   =  total  mass  of  all  the  bundles  in  milligrams. 

7.2  Determine  the  average   value   of  tenacity   S  from  at   least   3  sets  of 
readings. 


♦Physical  methods  of  test  for  uncut  Indian  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLl  {first  revision ). 
Part  1  General. 

tThis  has  been  obtained  by  multiplying  length  by  10.  The  length  indicated  in 
4.1  [a  (  2  )  ]  is  5  cm. 

25 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  7  )  -  1986 

Note  —  When  the  difference  between  any  two  values  of  tenacity  (  S)  exceeds  1 5 
percent  of  the  mean,  another  value  for  S  should  be  obtained  and  the  average  of  four 
readings  shall  be  reported . 

8.  REPORTS 

8.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  Type  of  machine, 

b)  Number  of  test  specimens  tested,  and 

c)  Tenacity. 

APPENDIX  A 
[Clause  6.1.1  (b)  ] 

FACTORS  FOR  CORRECTING  BUNDLE  STRENGTH  OF  JUTE 

AT  DIFFERENT  RELATIVE  HUMIDITIES  (  OR  MOISTURE 

REGAINS  )  TO  STRENGTH  AT  65  PERCENT  RH  (  12  4 

PERCENT  MOISTURE  REGAIN  ) 


Equilibrium 

Moisture 

Correction 

Related  Humidity 

Regain 

Factor 

Percent 

Percent 

(  Multiply  by  ) 

10 

3-0 

1-35 

15 

3-9 

1-21 

20 

4-8 

1-13 

25 

57 

1-08 

30 

65 

1-05 

35    . 

70 

103 

40 

8'0 

1-01 

45 

8-7   ) 

50 

9-5    J 

55 

105    y 

1-0 

60 

11-5    | 

65 

12-4  J 

70 

13*5 

101 

72 

14-0 

1'02 

75 

150 

1-03 

80 

165 

106 

85 

18-8 

109 

90 

22-0 

1*15 

95 

268 

1*24 

Note  —  No  correction  is  necessary  when  the   relative  humidity  of  the  testing 
atmosphere  ranges  between  35  and  75  percent. 


26 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR 
UNCUT  INDIAN  JUTE,  MESTA  AND  BIMLI 

PART  8     FINENESS 

(  First  Revision  J 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (  Part  8  )  prescribes  a  method  for  determination  of  fine- 
ness of  jute,  MESTA  and  BIMLI  fibres  by  air  flow  method. 

2.  PRINCIPLE 

2.1  A  specified  mass  of  fibres  is  compressed  to  a  constant  volume  in  a 
cylindrical  chamber  with  open  ends  to  which  a  flowmeter  and  a  manometer 
are  connected.  A  regulated  current  of  air  is  then  passed  through  the  com- 
pressed fibres  and  the  average  fibre  fineness  read  from  the  scale. 

3.  APPARATUS 

3.1  Air  Flow  Apparatus  —  It  shall  consist  of  the  following  principal   parts: 

a)  Constant  Volume  Chamber  —  for  taking  a  known  mass  of  fibres 
and  compressing  it  to  a  fixed  known  volume.  It  generally  com- 
prises: 

1)  a  plug  cell  into  which  the  fibres  are  packed, 

2)  a  plunger  which  compresses  the  fibres,  and 

3)  a  screw  cap  which  clamps  the  plunger  to  the  base. 

b)  Means  for  Air  Regulation  —  for  regulating  and  controlling  the  flow 
of  air  through  or  air  pressure  difference  across  the  specimen.  It 
shall  give  sufficiently  fine  control  of  air  supply  so  that  the  level 
of  the  flowmeter  or  manometer  may  be  quickly  adjusted  to  the 
working  Valve. 

c)  Means  for  Producing  Air  Flow  —  Capable  of  producing  the  requir- 
ed air  pressure  applied  to  the  specimen  or  the  required  pressure 
difference  across  the  specimen. 

27 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

d)  Means  for  Measuring  the  Resistance  of  Specimen  to  Air  Flow  or  the 
Air  Pressure  Difference  Across  the  Specimen  —  The  combination  of 
manometer  for  maintaining  the  air  pressure  applied  to  the  specimen 
and  a  flowmeter  for  indicating  the  rate  of  air  flow  through  the 
specimen  may  be  used.  Flowmeter  or  manometer  shall  be  calibrated 
to  directly  read  the  fineness  in  tex  or  denier. 

Note  —  Two  suitable  instruments  developed  by:  (  a )  Ahmedabad  Textile  Indus- 
try's Research  Association,  Ahmadabad  (  modified  by  Indian  Jute  Industries' 
Research  Association,  Calcutta  ),  and  (  b  )  Jute  Technological  Research  Laboratories 
(  ICAR) ,  Calcutta,  are  described  in  Appendices  A  and  B. 

3.2  Balance  —  capable    of  weighing  the    specimen  to    an     accuracy  of 

±  5  mg. 

3.3  Device  for  Fibre  Cutting  —  fibre  cutter  or  a  pair  of  scissors. 

4.  PREPARATION  OF  TEST  SPECIMEN 

4.1  Take  a  suitable  portion  at  random  from  the  middle  regions  ( leaving 
aside  the  rooty  bottom  and  under-retted  crop  ends  )  of  several  reeds, 
covering  the  full  range  of  the  sample.  Clean  each  portion  so  as  to  free  it 
from  barky,  specky  and  knotty  spots,  hard  gummy  fibres  as  well  as  other 
extraneous  materials.  If  necessary  the  cut  fibre  reeds  shall  be  lightly  struck 
against  a  hard  surface  to  shake  off  the  adherent  dirt  and  dust.  Cut  the 
fibres  bundles  to  a  specified  length  and  take  the  mass  of  the  fibres  as 
required  by  the  instrument  used  (  see  Appendices  A  and  B  ). 

5.  PROCEDURE 

5.0  Make  the  necessary  preliminary  adjustments  appropriate  to  the  instru- 
ment used.  Ensure  that  the  meniscus  of  the  manometer  is  at  the  zero 
mark. 

5.1  Place  the  test  specimen  in  the  fibre  compression  cylinder,  taking  care 
that  all  the  fibres  are  placed  inside.  Adjust  the  machine  as  recommended 
by  the  instruction  manual  of  the  instrument  (  see  Appendices  A  and  B  ). 

5.2  Cause  the  air  to  flow  through  the  specimen  and  read  the  air  flow  or 
the  difference  in  pressures  on  the  scale  to  an  accuracy  of  half  a  division 
of  the  scale. 

5.3  Remove  the  test  specimen  from  the  fibre  compression  cylinder  and  take 
one  or  two  more  readings  on  the  same  specimen  as  recommended  by  the 
instruction  manual  of  the  instrument. 

5.4  Take  the  other  test  specimens  and  determine  the  test  values  in  the  man- 
ner set  out  in  5.1  to  5.3. 

28 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

6.  CALCULATIONS 

6.1  Calculate  the  average  of  all  the  values  taken  for  all  test  specimens. 

7.  REPORT 

7.1  The  report  shall  include  the  following  information: 

a)  The  instrument  used; 

b)  Number  of  test  specimens;  and 

c)  Fibre  fineness  in  tex,  or  denier 


APPENDIX    A 

(  Clauses  3.1,  4.1  and  5. 1  ) 

IJIRA  JUTE  FIBRE  FINENESS  TESTER* 

A-l.  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  INSTRUMENT 

A- 1.1  A  working  sketch  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  A  rubber  bulb  (  6  )  which  when 
squeezed,  pumps  air  into  a  tank  (  8  ),  equipped  with  a  loosely  fitting  float 
(  7  )  which  can  rise  to  the  top  of  the  tank.  As  the  float  descends,  it  forces 
air  through  the  outlet  of  the  apparatus  If  the  rate  of  flow  is  sufficiently 
small,  sensibly  constant  air  pressure  can  be  secured  for  a  sufficiently  long 
interval.  The  air  outlet  in  the  needle  valve  is  (  14  )  connected  in  series  with 
the  sample  chamber  (  11  ).  The  cylindrical  sample  chamber  is  filled  with  a 
weighed  amount  of  the  opened  sample  under  investigation,  and  closed  by  a 
perforated  piston  (  10  )  which  compresses  the  plug  to  the  same  dimensions 
each  time.  After  passing  through  the  plug,  the  air  escapes  into  the  atmos- 
phere. The  junction  of  the  needle  valve  and  the  sample  chamber  is  connect- 
ed to  the  reservoir  manometer  (  4  ).  The  measuring  limb  of  this  reservoir 
consists  of  three  parts,  namely,  a  first  vertical  section,  which  is  always  filled 
by  the  manometric  liquid  when  testing  any  sample  within  the  range  of  the 
instrument;  an  inclined  section  which  is  directly  calibrated  in  denier,  and 
a  third  vertical  section  which  serves  to  monitor  the  constancy  of  total 
pressure.  The  entire  assembly  is  mounted  on  a  board  provided  with  level- 
ling screws. 


"Modified  by  Indian  Jute  Industries'  Research  Association,  Calcutta  (  original 
model  for  cotton  developed  by  Ahmedabad  Textile  Industry's  Research  Association, 
Ahmadabad).  Mention  of  the  name  of  a  specific  (or  proprietary),  instrument  is  not 
intended  to  promote,  or  give  preference  to  the  use  of  this  instrument  over  others  not 
mentioned. 

29 


IS  :  7032  (Part  8  )-  1986 


1. 

Thermosetting  laminate  mounted  board 

11. 

Sample  chamber 

2. 

Levelling  screws 

12. 

cm  scale 

3. 

Reference  mark  for  liquid 

13. 

Denier  scale 

4. 

Reservoir  for  manometric  liquid 

14. 

Needle  valve 

5. 

Reservoir  plug 

15. 

Distributor 

6. 

Aspirator  bulb 

16. 

Name  plate 

7. 

Float 

17. 

Air  pressure  maintaining  tube 

8. 

Air  tank 

18. 

Check  nut 

9. 

Reference  hnark  for  total  pressure 

19. 

Perforated  disc 

10. 

Piston 

20. 

All  gradient  stand 

21. 

Air  filter 

Fig.  1  IJIRA  Fibre  Fineness  Tester 


30 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

A-l.1.1  The  calibrated  section  of  the  manometer  is  inclined  (  horizontal 
gradient  1  in  5  )  in  order  to  increase  the  sensitivity  and  spread  out  the 
scale. 

A-2.  OPERATING  PROCEDURE 

A-2.1  Level  the  instrument  with  the  help  of  the  levelling  screws  and  a  spirit 
level. 

A-2.2  Collect  about  40  g  of  raw  jute  after  proper  sampling.  Cut  the  fibre 
to  approximately  1  cm  pieces.  Mix  the  cut  fibres  thoroughly  and  tease  out 
by  hand. 

A-2.3  Divide  the  cut  sample  into  3  sub-samples.  Weigh  one  specimen  of 
8*65  g  from  each  sub-sample. 

A  _/^  A  Dfl:/»lr  fV*£k  lirrki  rvVfc**s^  C^a/>imani>  irttrt  i'liO  £"***•«  *Vf<a  r"»r\  <lfH  f\/*t*  O  rt  H  r*lf\c&  tnt* 
/n._^fl^       J.    UV1V      111V      TT  VIAHWU     OUVVUilVlik]      itiiy      VljV     JUHI  l/IV     VllUlUl/Wl      UUU         W1VUV  IUV 

chamber  by  piston  (  10  ). 

A-2.5  Squeeze  the  aspirator  bulb  (  6  )  a  number  of  times  as  that  the  float  in 
the  tank  (  8  )  rises  to  the  top.  Stop  squeezing  and  the  float  will  start  des- 
cending. Observe  the  position  of  manometer  liquid.  At  a  certain  point  the 
manometer  reading  will  remain  steady  for  a  while.  Note  the  denier  reading 
corresponding  to  this  position  of  the  manometer  liquid. 

A-2.6  Remove  the  specimen,  fluff  it  out  and  repeat  for  a  repeat  test. 
A-2.7  Repeat  as  in  A-2.6.  Altogether  take  3  readings  for  each  specimen. 
A-2. 8  Reneat  the.  test  for  the  other  two  snecimens  as  in  A-2.3  to  A-2.7. 
A-2.9  Find  the  average  of  the  9  readings. 

A-3.  CHECKING 

A-3.1  In  order  to  check  from  time  to  time  that  the  instrument  is  perform- 
in"  satisfa.ctorilv  readin°s  should  be  taken  on  the  calibration  samn!e 
provided. 


31 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

APPENDIX  B 

(  Clauses  3.1,  4.1  and  5.1 ) 

JTRL  JUTE  FIBRE  FINENESS  TESTER* 

B-l.  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  INSTRUMENT 

B-l.l  Air  Flow  Production  Arrangement  —  The  aspirator  (  7  in  Fig.  2  ) 
is  a  wide  fiat  tank  T1  of  400  cm8  area  with  a  narrow  outlet  Ox  of  6  mm 
diameter.  The  tank  is  raised  to  suitable  height  (  40  to  50  cm  )  by  a  stand 
the  outlet  at  02  being  extended  below  by  a  rubber  tube  E.  This  provides 


water. 


Vxinlifs-v     mat*ar      V\f*aA      utrithniit     JiairirKT     f-n      fianHli*      a    lartrf*  /"ma-ntiiv  /"if 

UlgUVX  TT  ULW1  1LVUU  ¥»  *  UJVM*  J.1M   »   l"^j  W  **%***%*  *«  »-%      ***■»■  £}'*''     *[**»M»l*j        v  * 


B-l.l.  1  To  maintain  a  constant  water  head,  the  top  level  drop  has  been 
neutralized  by  pulling  down  the  end  of  the  outlet  rubber  tube  to  some  ex- 
tent, such  that  the  difference  in  water  head  (  H )  between  the  water  level  in 
the  tank  and  the  tip  of  the  outlet  02  remains  constant.  This  has  been 
achieved  by  a  simple  device.  The  end  Oa  of  the  outlet  rubber  tube  is 
attached  to  the  top  opening  of  the  receiver  T2  hung  from  a  spring.  The 
spring  is  so  adjusted  that  the  weight  of  liquid  being  drained  into  the  recei- 
ver is  sufficient  to  extend  the  spring  by  an  amount  equal  to  the  drop  in  the 
liquid  level  in  the  Tv  The  constant  level  difference  thus  maintained  ensures 
constant  rate  of  flow. 

B-l. 1.2  For  refilling  the  tank  7\  the  receiver  T2  is  hung  upside  down 
from  a  hook  N  above  the  tank  T^  into  which  the  receiver  empties  itself 
through  the  same  rubber  tube  E.  The  tank  7^  has  two  openings,  h  and  72, 
at  the  top,  h  having  a  tap,  and  one  outlet  with  a  tap  at  the  bottom.  The 
inlet  tube  72  is  connected  to  the  regulating  valve  Y  and  the  other  parts  of 
the  instrument,  through  it  air  is  sucked  in  as  water  flows  out  of  the  tank. 
The  tap  7i  provides  an  opening  to  the  atmosphere  during  refilling.  In  the 
receiver  T2  also  the  side  opening  B  maintains  a  connection  between  the 
inside  and  the  outside  atmosphere.  The  specification  of  the  flow  system  are 
such  that  a  maximum  flow  rate  of  about  1 5  ml  per  second  can  be  mentioned 
for  25  seconds. 

B-l. 2  Flow  Gauge  —  The  flow  gauge  (  77  in  Fig.  2  )  is  essentially  a  mano- 
meter (  Flf  F2  ),  attached  to  the  two  ends  of  a  glass  wool  plug  or  an  equi- 
valent glass  or  brass  capillary  tube  Wm  a  glass  tube.  For  a  particular  flow 
rate  through  the  plug,  a  difference  of  pressure   develops   between   the  ends 


♦Mention  of  the  name  of  a  specific  (  or  proprietary )  instrument  is  not  intended  to 
promote,  or  give  preference  to  the  use  of  that  instrument  over  others  not  mentioned. 

32 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

of  the  plug  and  is  indicated  in  this  manometer.  This  manometer  is  calibrat- 
ed in  terms  of  flow  rate,  since  pressure  difference  is  proportional  to  the  flow 
rate.  The  packing  of  the  glass  wool  plug  may  be  altered  for  different  ranges 
of  flow  rate. 


« 


/ 

Aspirator 

h 

Tap 

// 

Flowmeter 

A 

Inlet  tube 

/// 

Plug  chamber 

J 

Stand 

IV 

Manometer 

N 

Hook 

B 

Side  opening 

ox 

Narrow  outlet 

C 

Chamber 

o* 

End  of  the  rubber  tube 

c, 

Plug  cell 

A,P* 

Pressure  gauge 

c\ 

Centre  open  screw  cap 

Tx 

Tank 

E 

Rubber  tube 

T* 

Receiver 

Fif* 

Manometer 

W 

Glass  wool  plug 

H 

Water  head 

Y 

Regulating  valve 

Fig.  2    Instrument  for  Fibre  Fineness  Determination 

B-l.2.1  To  increase  the  sensitivity  of  the  flow  gauge  manometer,  the  area 
of  limb  F2  is  made  much  larger  than  that  of  the  other,  such  that  the  depres- 
sion in  the  wider  limb  is  negligible  in  comparison  to  the  elevation  of  the 
liquid  in  the  narrow  limb,  and  further,  the  narrow  limb  is  kept  inclined  at 
60°  to  the  vertical.  A  sliding  scale  is  placed  beside  the  narrow  limb.  The 
zero  of  the  scale  is  made  to  coincide  with  the  liquid  meniscus  before  start- 
ing the  test.  If  the  meniscus  level  falls  below  a  mark,  some  liquid  may  be 


33 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

added  into  the  wider  limb.  The  glass  wool  plug  is  so  adjusted  that  the  flow 
gauge  manometer  reading  is  changed  from  0  to  26  cm  with  increase  in  flow 
rate  from  0  to  15  ml  per  second. 

B-1.3  Fibre  Plug  and  the  Chamber  — -  A  plug  is  formed  of  parallel  fibre 
bundles.  Such  a  plug  is  introduced  longitudinally  into  a  cylindrical  cell  C\ 
of  1-25  cm  diameter  and  5  cm  length  (  HI  in  Fig.  2).  At  one  end,  the  cell 
has  a  flange  which  can  be  pressed  air-tight  on  the  rubber  ring  over  the  rim 
of  a  wider  chamber  C  by  a  centre  open  screw  cap  2. 

B-l.3.1  The  chamber  is  thus  open  to  the  atmosphere  at  the  top,  and  a 
small  tube  at  the  bottom  connects  the  chamber  to  the  manometer  and  the 
other  parts  of  the  instrument. 

B-1.4  Pressure  Gauge  ~  The  pressure  gauge  Pi,  P2  ( IV  in  Fig.  2  )  is  a 
manometer  used  for  registering  the  difference  of  pressure  between  the  two 
ends  of  the  fibre  plug.  One  end  of  the  manometer  as  well  as  the  fibre  plug 
is  open  to  the  atmosphere.  The  design  of  the  gauge  is  exactly  similar  to 
that  of  the  manometer  used  for  the  flow  gauge.  The  zero  of  the  scale  is 
always  set  at  the  liquid  meniscus  before  the  experiment  is  started. 

B-2.  FIBRE  CUTTER 

B-2.1  For  a  5-cm  plug  cell,  the  fibre  bundle  has  to  be  cut  to  5  cm  length. 
Fibre  cutter  (  Fig.  3  )  consists  of  a  channel  of  rectangular  cross  section  with 
a  closely  fitting  plunger  both  cut  exactly  to  5  cm  length.  The  fibre  is  placed 
longitudinally  in  the  channel  with  ends  projecting  on  both  sides.  The  plun- 
ger is  then  pressed  by  a  crew,  from  the  top.  The  projecting  ends  of  the  fibres 
are  then  cut  flash  with  the  channel  ends  by  a  chisel  and  hammer.  The  rota- 
table  rectangular  frame  through  which  the  crew  works  can  be  turned  aside 
when  the  fibre  is  put  in  the  channel.  The  plunger  is  provided  with  a  pro- 
jection (  not  shown  in  Fig.  3  )  across  the  length  to  prevent  tilting. 

B-3.  OPERATION  OF  THE  INSTRUMENT 

B-3.1  A  group  of  raw  jute  fibre  samples  is  cut  to  5  cm  length  by  the  cutter 
and  exactly  3  g  are  weighed  out  of  it  to  form  the  test  bundle.  This  mass  is 
found  suitable  for  the  size  of  the  plug  cell  used  and  is  also  specific  for  a 
particular  calibration.  The  bundle  is  wrapped  tightly  in  a  paper  strip  and 
introduced  into  the  plug  cell  C,.  The  paper  is  then  taken  out  or  torn  off  by 
pushing  the  bundle  gently  either  way,  keeping  the  fibre  ends  flush  with  the 
cell  ends.  The  cell  is  then  fitted  air-tight  onto  the  chamber  C. 

B-3.1. 1  The  tank  T\  is  filled  with  water  and  the  top  tap/2  is  closed.  With 
the  receiver  on  the  spring  S,  the  outlet  tap  Ou  is  opened.  The  regulating 
valve  Y  is  then  manipulated  to  attain  a  fixed  difference  of  pressure  indicated 
on  the  pressure  gauge.  Immediately  the  flow  gauge  reading  is  taken. 

34 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 


FRAME 


PLUNGER 


RECTANGULAR 
CHANNEL 


Fig.  3     Fibre  Cutter 


B-4.  CALIBRATION  OF  THE  INSTRUMENT 

B-4.1  Calibration  of  the  Pressure  Gauge  Manometer 

B-4.1.1  The  fibre  plug  chamber  C  is  disconnected  and  the  instrument 
connected  to  a  vertically  mounted  U-tube  manometer  through  the  leg  of  a 
T-tube.  One  end  of  the  head  piece  of  the  T-tube  is  connected  to  the  U-tube 
manometer  and  the  other  end  closed  air-tight  by  means  of  a  screw  clip  on  a 
rubber  tubing. 

B-4. 1.2  The  water  aspiration  system  is  replaced  by  a  suction  pump  which 
is  connected  to  the  regulating  valve  y.  The  suction  pump  is  run  on  and  the 
regulating  valve  Y  opened  slowly  to  obtain  a  steady  pressure  difference  in 
the  U-tube  manometer.  The  two  liquid  columns  in  the  U-tube  may  be  made 
level  again  by  letting  in  air  through  the  screw  clip  on  the  T-tube. 


35 


IS  :  7032  (  Part  8  )  -  1986 

B-4.1.3  The  steady  pressure  difference  in  the  U-tube  manometer  is  9  cm 
with  a  manometric  liquid  (  kerosine  oil )  of  specific  gravity  082.  The  cor- 
responding pressure  gauge  reading  on  the  instrument  is  then  marked  on  a 
scale  placed  beside  it.  For  subsequent  readings  of  the  flow  gauge,  the  air 
suction  through  the  valve  Y  should  be  controlled  so  as  to  give  this 
particular  valve  of  steady  pressure  on  the  pressure  gauge  manometer  of  the 
instrument. 

B-4.2  Calibration  of  the  Flow  Gauge  Manometer 

B-4.2.1  Take  a  vertically  mounted  rotameter  ( a  flowmeter  having  a 
rotating  indicator  of  air-flow  )  and  connect  a  rubber  tubing  at  the  lower 
end.  Clamn  on  the  rubber  tubing  a  screw  clip  to  regulate  air  flow  through 
the  rotameter. 

B-4.2.2  Disconnect  the  U-tube  manometer  and  connect  the  upper  end 
of  the  rotameter  to  this  point.  Run  on  the  suction  pump.  Adjust  the  control 
valve  Y  and  the  screw  clip  of  the  rubber  tubing  attached  to  the  rotameter 
alternately  so  as  to  have  different  flow  rates  at  the  particular  steady  pressure 
indicated  by  the  pressure  gauge  manometer  of  the  instrument  (  correspond- 
ing to  a  pressure  head  of  9  cm  in  the  U-tube  manometer  referred  to  ). 

B-4.2.3  Note  down  the  rate  of  airflow  in  the  rotameter,  and  mark  this 
flow  on  the  scale  beside  the  flow  gauge  manometer  of  the  instrument.  A 
number  of  flow  rates  all  at  the  steady  pressure  difference,  are  thus  marked 
on  the  flow  gauge  scale.  A  calibration  curve  is  drawn  relating  flow  rates 
(  ml/s  )  and  scale  length  (  cm  )  of  the  flow  gauge.  This  calibration  curve  is 
used  to  find  out  the  different  'tex'  values  corresponding  to  the  different  flow 
rates  by  using  the  formula,  tex  =  0  283  x  flow  in  ml/s.  The  flow  gauge 
scale  is  then  calibrated  directly  in  terms  of  tex  values. 

B-5.  SENSITIVITY  OF  THE  INSTRUMENT 

B-5.1  Since  both  the  pressure  and  the  flow  gauges  are  sensitive  enough  to 
detect  a  change  of  1  mm  in  reading,  the  approximately  error  of  observation 
is  not  likely  to  exceed  2  percent,  when  the  pressure  gauge  stands  at  180  cm 
and  the  flow  gauge  between  6*0  and  26-0  cm.  Considering  the  variation 
within  a  sample,  this  order  of  sensitivity  seems  to  be  sufficient  for  textile 
fibres.  A  3-g  bundle  may  be  made  to  represent  as  many  regions  as  possi- 
ble, to  minimize  the  variation  between  readings. 


36 


