**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7250 (1995) : Method of test for evaluation of 
insectproof ness of woollen textiles [TXD 5: Chemical 
Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 7250:1995 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 



( ww^^mr ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR EVALUATION 
OF INSECTPROOFNESS OF WOOLLEN 

TEXTILES 

(First Revision) 



ICS 59.060.10 



©BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

December 1995 Price Group 2 



Cliomical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TX 05 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

Woollen fabrics and garments are frequently damaged by larvae of dermested beetle and moths and result 
in enormous economic loss. Among beetles, the woolly bear {AnthrenusflavipfsLec) and the carpet beetle 
(Attagenus fasciatus); and among moths {Tinea pellionella Linn and Tinea translucens) and the webbing 
clothes moth (Tineola bisselliella Hum) are mainly responsible for damage throughout India. 

The standard originally published in 1974 provided use of larvae oiAnthrenusflavipes and Tinea pellionella 
species. The standard has been revised to incorporate use of additional insect. Details for breeding of 
larvae of test species have also been included. 

The earlier version of the standard specified temperature of 30 ± 0.5°C and 75 ± 2 percent relative 
humidity. The revised standard adopts standard atmospheric conditions for textiles, namely, 27 ± 2'^C 
temperature and 65 ± 2 percent relative humidity. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been drawn from ISO 3998 : 1977 Textiles — 
Determination of resistance to certain insect pests'. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for 
rounding off numerical values {revised)\ 



IS 7250 : 1995 



Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR EVALUATION 
OF INSECTPROOFNESS OF WOOLLEN 

TEXTILES 



(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 



as 



This standard specifies a method for deterimnation 
of the resistance of woollen textiles to the larvae of: 
(a) Anthrenus flavipes, (h) Attagenus fasciatus, and 
(c) Tinea translucens. It is applicable to all textiles 
containing wool fibres in any proportion. 

2 PRINCIPLE 

Conditioned voracity control specimens and test 
specimens of known mass are placed in contact with 
selected larvae for 14 days. The loss in mass of all 
specimens, the extent of the attack on test 
specimens and the condition of test larvae are as- 
certained to assess the resistance of each lest 
specimen. 

3 APPARATUS 

3.1 Metal, glass or plastic containers of 45 mm 
diameter and 10 mm height with metal/plastic cover 
having 4 or 5 minute ventilating holes. This con- 
tainer shall be large enough to permit test larvae to 
remain in contact with, or move away from the lest 
specimen. 

3.2 Pointed forcep and a camel hair brush with 
pesticide free bristles. 

3.3 Weighing bottles with stopper. 

3.4 Balance capable of determining mass to an 
accuracy of 0,1 mg. 

3.5 Die of 40± 1.5 mm diameter for punching cir- 
cular test specimen. 

4 CONDITIONING, REARING AND TESTING 
ATMOSPHERE 

The atmospheric conditions for rearing and testing 
shall have 27 ± TC temperature and 65 ± 2 percent 
relative humidity. 

5 SPECIMENS 

5.1 Test Specimens 

Eight test specimens shall be selected at random 
from the sample of material to be tested. Use four 



of these as test specimens and remaining four 
moisturie regain controls. 

5.2 Voracity Control Specimens 

As it is essential to provide a control on larval 
voracity, eight test specimens shall be selected from 
undyed unproofed woollen material or yarn cor- 
responding to the sample to be tested. Use four of 
these eight specimens as larvae voracity control 
specimen and four as moisture regain controls. 

5.3 Form and Characteristics 

The specimen shall be of the form and size as given 
in Table 1. 

Table 1 Form and Size of Specimens 



Material 


Form and Size 


Woven or knitted 
fabrics, felts and 
furs 


Discs, 40 ± 1.5 mm in diameter 


Carpet 


Squares approximately 30 mm x 30 
mm with tuft and/or loops along the 
edges intact 


Carpet pile alone 


200 mg specimens 


Yarn 


200 mg specimens, wound into a loose 
hank in the container 


6 TEST INSECTS 





6.1 The larva of any of the following test insects 
shall be used. Choice of test species depends upon 
the species against which proofness is required. 
Anthrenus flg.vipes and Attagenus fasciatus are 
difficult to control and thus require high level of 
insectproofing agent than Tinea translucens: 

(i) Anthrenus flavipes 10- 1 1 weeks old 

(ii) Attagenus fasciatus 11-12 weeks old 
(iii) Tinea translucens 24-27 days old 

6.2 Details of breeding of the above larvae are 
given in Annex A. In case, there is any deviation in 
rearing medium or temperature and relative 



IS 7250: 1995 



humidity, it may call for some deviation in the age 
of the larvae used for tests. In that case the devia- 
tion shall be indicated in the test report. Differen- 
ces caused by variation in temperature and 
humidity are largely overcome by use of standard 
conditions given in 4. 

7 PROCEDURE 

7.1 Condition all the sixteen specimens in the at- 
mosphere specified in 4 for 24 hours. Then 
determine the mass of each specimen separately in 
a stoppered weighing bottle to an accuracy of 0.1 
mg. 

7.2 Place each of the test and voracity control 
specimens of known mass in a separate container. 
On to each of the four test specimens and the four 
voracity control specimens place fifteen larvae of 
the selected insect or pest. (These larvae should be 
subjected to fasting for 24 h before their release on 
specimens.) 

7.3 Keep the sixteen containers in the dark in the 
lest atmosphere for a period of 14 days. 

7.4 After test period, remove all larvae, cast skins 
(exuviae) excrements and loose fibrer. from the test 
specimens and voracity control specimens by means 
of pointed forceps and a camel hair brush. 

7.5 Count and record for each test specimen the 
number of surviving, dead or pupating larvae. 

7.f> Transfer the test specimen, the voracity control 
specimens and moisture regain control specimens 
to small tared weighing bottles. Determine the 
mass separately of the test, voracity control and 
moisture regain control specimens. 

7.7 Test is invalid if the mean loss in mass of the 
foirr voracity controls is less than 35 mg, or any 
single value is less than 25 mg or more than 25 
percent of the control larvae die or pupate. 

8 OBSERVATIONS AND CALCULATIONS 

8.1 Method of Calculation and Formula 

8. LI Determine the loss in mass {m) of each test 
specimen and voracity control specimen due to 
insect feeding as follows: 

mo X m^ 

m ~ m\ 

mi 

where 

mo = mass of the test specimen or voracity 

control specimen before exposure to 

larvae, 
mi - mass of the test specimen or voracity 

control specimen after exposure to 

larvae for 14 days, 



m2 
ni3 



mean initial mass of appropriate 
moisture regain a^ntrols, and 
mean final mass of appropriate mois- 
ture regain controls. 



8.2 Visual Assessment of Insectproofness 

8.2.1 Examine each test specimen and assess the 
visible damage using the symbols given in Tables 2 
and 3. 

Table 2 Estimation of Cropping 

Symbol Cropping : Visible Surface Damage 

1 No detectable damage 

2 Very slight cropping 

3 Moderate cropping 

4 Very heavy cropping 

Table 3 Estimation of Holes 



Symbol 



Estimation of Holes 



A No detectable damage 

B Yarn or fibres partially severed 

C A few small holes, yarn or fibres severed 

D Several large holes 

8.3 Visual Assessment of larval Condition 

Count and record for each test specimen the num- 
ber of larvae in each of the following conditions: 

a) Live, 

b) Dead, and 

c) Pupating. 

8.4 Assessment of Insectproofness 

8.41 A tested sample offabric, carpet or yarn shall 
be considered a borderline case of satisfactory in- 
sectproofness if any of the following applies: 

a) Visible surface damage and estimation of 
holes is assessed as attack level 2 B on two 
of the test specimens and the remaining test 
specimens are undamaged. 

b) Visible surface damage and estimation of 
hx)les is assessed as attack level 3 B on any 
one test specimen with the yarn or fibres 
partially severed at more than one point 
(indicative of uneven application) with the 
remaining test specimens are undamaged. 

c) No surface damage is visible to the naked 
eyes but the mean loss jn mass is greater 
than 15.0 mg or the loss in mass of any one 
test specimen is not greater than 20 mg. 

8.4.2 A tested sample of fabric, carpet or yarn shall 
be considered satisfactorily proofed if the attack 



IS 7250 : 1995 



level is assessed as less than that defined as border- 
line under 8.4.1. 

8.4.3 If a tested sample of fabric, carpet or yarn has 
level greater than that defined as borderline 
under 8.4.1 then it shall be considered inadequately 
proofed. If estimation of holes is assessed as C or 
D on any test specimen, the sample also falls in this 
category. 

9 TEST REPORT 

The test report shall include the following: 
a) Type of textile material under test; 



b) Test insect species used; 

c) Larval conditions at the end of the test; 

d) Mean loss in mass, in mg, of the four test 
specimens; 

e) Assessment of visible damage; 

f) Mean loss in mass, in mg, of the four voracity 
control specimens; 

g) Any deviation from the specified procedure; 
and 

h) Assessment of iqsectproofness: Proof/ 
Borderline/Not proof. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 6.2 ) 

BREEDING OF LARVAE OF TEST SPECIES 



A-I PRINCIPLE 

The insect pests are cultured on suitable media for 
specified times under controlled atmospheric con- 
ditions. The cultures are sieved and the larvae of 
specified size and age are collected for use in the 
test. 

A-2 INJECTS 

The method describes procedures for rearing and 
maintaining the following insect pests: 

i) Anthrenus flavipes (Le Conte) (beetle), 
ii) AtUigeniis fasciatus (Thunberg) (beetle), 
iii) Tinea translucens (Meyrick) (Moth). 
A-3 APPARATUS 

A-3.1 Rearing Containers — Glass jar of suitable 

shape and volume provided with fine mesh metal 
screen or cloth covers. 

A-3.2 Test Sieves— of 0.8 mm, LOO mm and 1.25 
mm aperture. 

A-3.3 Pigeon Feathers (for handling larvae, etc.) — 
rubber bands of various si/cs. 

A-3.4 Oviposition Jar (L5 cm X 9 cm diameter) — 
covered with round mosquito net piece. 

A-3.5 Aspirator — for removal of cast skins of lar- 
vae. 

A-3.6 Petri Dishes — with glass cover. 

A-4 MAINTENANCE OF CULTURES 

A-4. 1 Anthrenus ilavipes (woolly bear of furniture 
carpet beetle). 

a) Medium 

All wool, undyed, scoured, worsted white 
serge or barrack blanket piece is treated 



with a solution containing 10 percent 
glucose, 1 percent brewer*s yeast and 10 
percent dry albumen. Dry albumen can 
be obtained from fresh hen's egg. 

b) For starting a culture, about 100 adults are 
liberated on fabric pieces treated with 
medium in a container for a week. Adults 
after a Wfeck are removed from the container 
and liberated into a second such container 
for a week. This process is repeated at week- 
ly interval. Add fresh medium as and when 
required. Remove excreta and cast skins of 
larvae when needed. After 11 or 12 weeks 
remove excess fabric and sieve the culture. 
Larvae that are retained by LOG mm sieve 
will be used for the test. (This will produce 
larvae of 0.8 to 1.0 mg.). 

c) Selected lar\^ae shall be kept in filter paper 
lined petri dish for fasting for 24 h before 
their release on the specimens. 

A-4.2 Attagenus fasciatns (the banded carpet 
beetle) 



a) Media 






Medium 1 






Fishmeal 
Cornmeal 
Powdered Brewer's 
yeast 


70 g 
25 g 

H 




This formulation shall be ground to 
through a 0.8 mm sieve. 


pass 


Medium 2 






Dog's biscuit 
Powdered brewer's 
yeast 


95 g 

5g 





IS 7250 : 1995 



b) For starting culture release some adults on 
the Medium No.l or 2 in suitable container 
and fill three-fourths of it with medium. On 
the top of medium place a small piece of 
wool fabrics for shelter of adults. Sieve the 
culture in medium at interval of 11 lo 12 
weeks. Larvae that pass through 1.25 mm 
sieve but are retained by 1.00 mm sieve will 
be used for the test (TTiis should produce 
larvae of 6 to 7 mg). Add fresh medium as 
and when required. Remove dead larvae 
and cast skins at biweekly interval. 

c) After 12th week sieve the culture and 
release the larvae on fresh medium. 



A-4.3 Tinea translucens ( the tropical case making 
clothesmoth) 

a) Medium 

All wool undyed, scoured worsted white 
serge or barrack blanket piece, impreg- 



nated with a five percent dispersion of 
brewer's yeast in distilled water. 

b) For starting a culture, freshly emerged 
adults are caught by aspirator and intro- 
duced daily in a glass oviposition container 
having pieces of filter paper for harbourage 
ofmoths. These jars are covered with round 
mesh mosquito netting held in place with a 
rubber band. Every morning, eggs are 
removed by inverting the oviposition jar in 
a glass dish. Cultlires with known number 
of eggs (150 to 200) are started in a rearing 
container having above medium. Eggs 
hatch out within 5 to 6 days. Each culture 
thus contains about 150 to 200 larvae which 
will be used as test insects when 24 to 27 days 
old. Add fresh medium as and when re- 
quired to the rearing jars. Remove excreta 
at 15 days interval. 

c) Selected larvae shall be released in a petri 
dish for 24 h for fasting before their release 
on test and voracity specimens. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of cotnments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 



This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TX 05 (0256). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75, 371 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams ; Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 



{ 



331 66 17 
335 38 41 



{ 



37 84 99, 37 85 61 
37 86 26, 37 91 20 



{ 



6038 43 
60 20 25 



r 235 02 16, 235 04 42 
\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

r 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,83278 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printograph. New Delhi-5 (INDIA) 



