**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8168 (1976) : Method for determination of available 
lysine in foods [FAD 16: Foodgrains, Starches and Ready to 
Eat Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



(Reaffirmed 2005) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
AVAILABLE LYSINE IN FOODS 

{ Fii*t Reprint MAY-! 9^4 ) 



UDC 661* 15^3: 5^^7,^66,1*6 




Gr 2 



© Copyright 1976 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

.M\N\K BHA^AN. « DAH/VDUR SHAH 7.AFAK MaRG 

NEW DELHI IIOO'? 

November 1976 



18:8168-1976 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
AVAILABLE LYSINE IN FOODS 

Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee, 

AFDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

I)k RanJIT Sex Scro?ogisc fo fhe Gov^ernmcnt of India ( DGHS ), 

Calcutta 

Members 
AoUTCULTURAL MAnKKTiNG Dirfctoxaie of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 
ADVisan TO THE GovKJixMENT Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 

oy Ikima 
ShkI T, V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shui V. N. Amki^e Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Krishman ( Alternate ) 
Dn G. C. Das Health Officer, Corporation of Calcutta 

Dr p. K. Datta All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shhi K. C. Dk The Mrta! Box Company of India Limited, Calcutta 

Sam V, K. Karnik ( Alternate ) 
Sam SuKuMAR Dk National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

'Dk C. a, Mt;LAY ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Dbamija Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

DruKCTOH Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

DiuECTOu General Directorate General Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 
Maj*Gen Daryao Singh ( Alternate ) 
ExFxuTivE Health Officer Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

MtjNiciPAL. Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Health Officer Corporation of Madras 

Cor. Kkwal Krishna Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi 

Dr a. D. KiTAtAR ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Smt ) S. Khosla Department of Health & Family Planning, 

Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Dr P. K. Kymal Food &. Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture & 

Irrigation ), New Df'ihi 
Db O, N. Agarwala ( Alternate ) 
Maj V. A. Narayanan Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 
Dr G. M. VkrMA ( Alternate ) 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8168 -1976 

( Continued from pagt 1 ) 

Members Representing 

PiBLiC Analyst ( Food and Government of West Bengal 
Water ) 
Public Analyst ( Bacterio- 
logy ) ( Alternate ) 
Dk a. N, Rai Ghawdhubi National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi 

Dii T. N. Ramachandba Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Shbi G. T. Dwabkanath ( Alternate ) 
CoL K. Sbetaram Qiiartermastcr General's Branch, Army Head- 

quarters, New Delhi 
Lt-Col D. D. Vohra ( Alternate ) 
Senior Medical Officer Northern Railway, New Delhi 

( Health ) 
Db S. B. Sinoh Public Analyst, Govcrnmem of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Shri N. Srinfvasan Public Analyst, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Dr M, R. Svbbabam Directorate of Sugar &. Vaiiaspati ( Ministry of 

Agriculture &. Irrigation ) 
Shbi I- A. Siddiqi ( Alternate ) 
Db T. a. V. SubraManL\N Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Dr M. C. SwamiKathaN Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of 

Health &. Family Planning ), New Delia 
Shhi D. S, Chadha {Alternate) 
Shex p. C. Vin The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi 

Shbi J. D. Contractor ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanakdam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-cfficio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Sohrab 
Deputy Director ( Agri &. Food ), ISI 

Vitamin and Amino-Acids Assay Subcommittee, AFLG 36 : 3 

Convener 
Dr T, a. V. SubbamaniaN Vallabhbhai Patcl Chest Institute, Delhi 

Aiembers 
Dr (Smt) RhawaNI Belavaoy National Institute of Nutrition ( ICMR ), 

Hyderabad 
Dr p. K. Datta All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Dr V. S. Krishxamachar National Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Pune 

Dr V* K» Mohan Rao Central Drug Research Institute ( CSIR ), Lucknow 

Dr M. S. NaiK Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
J>n D, S- Parihab Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Mysore 
Shri S. S. Arya ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. B. Rama Rao Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Mysore 
Db S. Venkat Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. V. Rao National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal 

Shri Rup Kishore Directorate of Sugar &. Vanaspati ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi 
Shri D* Venkatappaiah ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. B. Sinoh Public Analyst, Government of Utur Pradesh, 

Lucknow 



IS: 8168* 1976 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
AVAILABLE LYSINE IN FOODS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 31 August 1976, after the draft finalized by tiie Food Hygiene, 
Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Agricultural and Food Products Division CounciL 

0.2 Available lysine content is considered as the most important chemical 
( non-biological ) indicator of nutritional quality of protein because low 
values reflect loss due to heat processing. Since lysine is a limiting 
amino acid, its fortification should be viewed in the light of the concept 
of suitable and reliable method of analysis which gives repeatable and 
reproducible results. There are mainly two methods, namely, chemical 
and microbiological, for analysis of lysine. Of these, chemical method 
is more precise and accurate. This standard, therefore, prescribes 
chemical method for analysis of available lysine* It is expected that 
this method will help in achieving uniformity in the analysis of lysine 
thereby facilitating uniform interpretation and comparison of results. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from a number of books and publications. However, the 
method included in this standard is predominantly that which has been 
tried in various laboratories in the country and is mainly based on 
practical experience gained within the country. 

0.4 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, ii the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes chemical method for determination of 
available lysine in foods- 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 8168 - 1976 

2.1 Available Lysine — That fraction of lysine which reacts with fiuo* 
rodinitrobenzene ( FDNB ) associated with biologically active fraction of 
lysine. 

3, PRINCIPLE 

3.1 The method is based on the conversion of lysine residues with the 
reactive epsilon amino groups in food proteins into yellow epsilon dini- 
trophenyl (DNP) lysine by treatment of the material with FDNB and 
colorimetric estimation of the DN? lysine obtained by a subsequent acid 
hydrolysis. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Autopipette cr Suitably Graduated Pipettes 

4.2 Burette — 25 ml capacity, graduated to 0'05 ml. 
4*3 Conical Flasks 

Note— It is not advisable to clran the flasks with chromic acid; but, if this is 
done, they should be soaked in dilute sodium hydroxide and rinsed with distilled water 
thoroughly. 

4.4 Photoelectric Colorimeter — absorbance at 435 nm. 

4.5 Round-Bottom Flasks — 100 or 150 ml capacity with 8 cm long 
necks and standard joint 24-29 for fitting to condensers. 

4.6 Stoppered Test Tubes — graduated at 10 ml. 

4.7 Water-Bath — for temperature of lOO^G. 

5. REAGENTS 

5.0 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled water ( see 

IS ; 1070-1960* j bliali be employed in tests. 

No'it: ~ ' Vvui rhcmicah ' shall mean cliemicals that do not contain imparities 

^vlikh afrcci 111'' Ifit results. 

5.1 Mono F-N-Dinitrophenyl Lysine Hydrochloride Monohydrate 

( "^"v'PL) - -Dis.'-.olyc 314 mg of lysine in 250 ml of 8-1 N hydrochloric 
acid. Dilute 10 ml standard DNPL solution with water to 100 ml. Use 
thi.s diluted solution as a standard for the routine tests. A 2-ml aliquot 
contains the equivalent of 0*1 mg of lysine when diluted to 10 ml has a 
net absorbance of about 0*4 at 435 nin in a I-cm cuvette. 

Note — Tliis compound dissolves slowly. It is, therefore, desirable to allow a day 
for the process. 



♦Specification for water, distilled quality ( revised), 

4 



lSiS16S'1976 

5.2 l-FIt>nrD-2,4-Dimtrobenxciiu {TDNE) — ir the FDNB is solid, 
place the bottle in warm water for a few minutes before dispensing it 
with an autopipette. Prepare FDNB solution in ethanol every day. 
Each sample will require 12 ml of ethanol solution containing 0*3 ml of 
FDNB, Actual measurement of FDNB may not be essential. 

JVoTE — It is a vesicant and, therefore, disposable gloves of polyethylene, not rubber, 
should be worn during its use. All operations involving the use of the vesicant inclu- 
ding its addition to the sample may be performed on a sheet of paper which may be 
disposed of later. 

5*3 Mcthoxycarbonyl Chloride { MCC ) — • 8 percent {mfv), 

5.4 Sodium Bicarbonate Solution — 80 g in one litre of distilled 

water. 

5*5 Bufifer Solution — 19 parts of 8 percent sodium bicarbonate and 
1 part of 8 percent sodium carbonate adjusted suitably to pH 8-5. 

5.6 Hydrochloric Acid — concentrated, 1 N and 8*1 N. 

5.7 Diethyl Ether — peroxide free, 

5.8 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — O'l g in 100 ml of 50 

to 60 percent ethanol. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.0 Carry out the procedure in duplicate and away from direct or 
strongly reflected sunlight. 

6.1 Take 50 g of the material finally ground to pass thiough 425-micron 
IS Sieve { IS : 460-1962* ), Take samples for the determination of 
nitrogen also in duplicate at this time* Then take two portions, each 
containing an estimated 30 to 50 mg of nitrogen into round-bottom 
flasks and to earh add 8 ml of 8 percent sodium bicarbonate. Shake 
gently to disperse the material and leave for 10 minutes. The sample 
should not be widely scattered. Add 0'3 ml FDNB, previously dissolved 
in 12 ml of ethanol to each flask, stopper the flask and shake gently on a 
mechanical shaker for 2 hours. Remove the stoppers and allow the 
flasks to stand in boiling water to remove the ethanol. Add immedia- 
tely 24 ml of8"l N hydrochloric acid to one flask. To the other flask 
add only 12 ml of 8' I N hydrochloric acid. Then add exactly 12 ml of a 
solution of DNPL in 8* IN hydrochloric acid, a quantity that contains the 
equivalent of 8 mg lysine which serves as an internal standard. Add 
DNP^^ after the FDNB reaction has been stopped by the acid; otherwise 
it will he converted to bis-DNPL which will be eliminated by extraction 
with ether. Reflux the contents of the flask gently for 16 hours. Dis- 
connect the flasks after the condensers have been washed with water. 
Cool the flasks in ice for 2 hours to keep for easy filtration. Filter the 
contents through a Whatman filter paper No. 41 or equivalent, with 
water washings into a 250-ml volumetric flask. Make the filtrate 

•Specification for test sieves ( revised). 



IS: 8168 -1976 

to the volume and mix. Dilute an aliquot of the filtrate so that 
2 ml of the dilute material contains an estimate of approximately 50 
/Ag of the available lysine, 

jSiQrpjj — ^ precipitate of dinitroplicnol may form. The precipitate should hr allowed 
to settle and avoided during the pipetting. It should not be transfcTicd during the 
next stage, but should be removed by ether. 

6.2 Pipette 2 ml from each diluted filtrate into each of the two glass- 
stoppered test tubes marked ^A' and *B', and a small conical flask marked 
'C. Extract the contents of the tubes thrice with 5*0 mi of ether. Discard 
as much of the ether as safely as could be by taking it off with a drop- 
ping pipette or autopipette. Hold the tubes in hot water (about 80^C ) 
until eflfervescence from the residual ether had ceased and cooled off. 
Make up tube *A' to 10 ml with I N hydrochloric acid and keep for the 
final readings, 

6.3 Dilute the contents of flask 'C with water and titrate with 2 N 
sodium hydroxide^ using a drop of phenoiphthalein indicator. Note the 
quantity of sodium hydroxide needed and then add the same volume 
to tube 'B\ followed by 2 ml of buffer solution. Further additions should 
be continued without pause as DNP-compounds are less stable at this 
/?H. Add methoxy carbonyl chloride (0*045 to 0*055 ml permissible) 
and shake the tube vigorously to disperse and dissolve the compound. 
After 5 to 10 minutes, add carefully 0'75 ml of concentrated hydrochlo- 
ric acid. Extract again the contents 4 times with 5 ml ether. Discard 
the ether washings. Evaporate the residual ether in the aqueous layer 
by standing the tube in hot water bath. Cool the tube and make up the 
contents to 10 ml with water. 

6.4 Read the absorbances of the contents of tubes *A' and 'B' at 435 nm 
against water. Reading *A' minus reading 'B* (the blank) is the net 
absorbance attributable to DNP-lysine. 

7. CALCULATIONS 

7*1 Available Lysine in g per 100 g of Material 

jA-C) ,^ X 40 

^{B-D)-{A^C)^ W ^ ^^*-^ ^ 1(J0 
where 

A ~ sample reading, 
B ~ sample and extra DNP-lysine, 
C* " blank for sample, 

D = blank for sample and extra DNP-lysine, 
W " sample mass equivalent in g of 2-ml aliquot, 
A ~~ C = correct sample reading, and 

B -~ D ^ reading for extra DNP-lysine ( A' gram ) in 2-ml 
aliquot. 
NoTK — ■ The mrtliod is not suitable for measuring added lysine oi frrc lysine in a 
hydrolysed product. This yields di-DNP-iysinc which is lost in the first cihcr wash. 



