**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8455 (1977) : Recommended procedure for welding of 
polythlene [MTD 12: Welding Applications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: £455-1917 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 
WELDING OF POLYETHYLENE 



UDC 621 -791-46: 678-7*2-2 




© Copyright 1977 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAfl ZAFAR BURG 

NEW DELHI I LOOM 




October 1977 



15:8455-1977 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 
WELDING OF POLYETHYLENE 

Welding General Sectional Committee, S MDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. V. Nadxarni Advani-Oerlikon Limited, Bombay 

M embers 
Shri P. S. Visvanath (Alternate to 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni ) 
Shri J . K. Ahluwalia Stewarts and Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri V. N. Desai ( A Iternate ) 
Shri Awtar Singh Beas -Project, Talwara Township 

Shri T. D. Accarwal ( A Iternate ) 
Shri S. Balasubrahmanyam Binny Limited, Madras 

Shri K. Balmanohar Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri S. Bhatia Philips India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr J. Vaid( Alternate) 
Shri B. C. Biswas National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Chakraborty Braithwaite and Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Director, Research and Design Public Works Department, Government of Haryana, 

(B & R Branch) Chandigarh 

Executive Engineer ( Electrical ), Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Electrical Division No. 1, 
New Delhi 
Executive Engineer 
(Electrical), CentrAL 
Electrical Division No. 1, 
Calcutta (Alternate ) 
General Manager Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

Shri A. P. Sanyal ( A Iternate) 
Shri S. K. Hari Malik Meters Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Sinha ( A Iternate ) 
DrJ.Jain Tata Engineering and Locomotive Go Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Prof A. P.J ambulingam Indian Society for Technical Education, New Delhi 

Joint Director (M&C ), RDSO, Ministry of Railways 

LUCKNOW 

Chemist and Metallurgist, 

Integral Coach Factory, 

Perambur (Alternate I ) 
Production Engineer (Shell), 

Integral Coach Factory, 

Perambur (Alternate II ) 

(Continued on page 2 ) 



©Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



15:8455-197? 

(Continued from page 1) 

M embers Representing 

Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspeo 

tion Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri S. N . Basu ( A Iternate ) 
Shri R. Krishnamurthv Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Tiruchchirappalli 

Shri N. K. Sethi ( Alternate) 
Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Public Works Department, Uovernment of Tamil 
Public Works E ngi neeri ng Nadu, Madras 

Corporation 
Shri N. Mukherjee Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta 

Shri R. Purkayastha ( Alternate ; 
Shri A. C. Mukherj ee Apar Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N . M u m Moorthy Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri M. K. Tadani ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. C. Panday Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shri M. M. Patel Association of Indian Engineering Industry, Calcutta 

Shri R. M. Kapadia (Alternate) 
Shri K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar 

Shri G. D. Apte (Alternate) 
Shri H. L. Prabhakar Larsen &Toubro Ltd, Bombay; and Chemical Plant 

and Machinery Association of India, Bombay 
Shri J . R. Prasher Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

DrV. Ramaswamy Research and Development Organisation ( HSL ), 

Ranch i 
DrK. V. Subba Rao (Alternate ) 
Shri P. B. Rao Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. Gangopadhyay (Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. G. Rao Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shri L. M. Tolani( Alternate) 
Representative Central Mechanical -Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR),Durgapur 
Representative National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

J amshedpur 
Representative Indian Institute of Welding, Calcutta 

Shri V. V. Sathyanarayana Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Limited, 

Durgapur 
Shri S, K. Banerjia (Alternate) 
Shri S. K.Sengupta Bhilai Ispat Limited, Bhilai 

Shri V. V. Kaviswar (Alternate t 
Shri H. K. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. C. Sharma (Alternate ) 
ShriS.Sundaresan Directorate General of Employment & Training, 

New Delhi 
Shri S.G.N. Swamy M ukand I ron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Sri vast ava (Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, lSl{Ex-officio Member) 

Director (Struc&Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri M.S. Nagaraj 

Deputy Director (Struc& Met ),ISI 

( Continued on page 15 ) 



IS : 8455 * 1977 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 
WELDING OF POLYETHYLENE 

0. FOREWORD 

O.l This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 29 April 1977, after the draft finalized by theWelding General Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division 
Council. 

0.2 In recent years considerable progress has been made in the application 
of welding in the plastic industry. This standard has been prepared as a 
guide to the industry in welding of polyethylene. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 
DIN 16932 ' Welding of PE (polyethylene ): Directions ', issued by DIN 
Deutsches I nstitut fur Normung. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard is intended to serve as a guide for welding of polyethylene. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 In view of the availability of a large variety of types of polyethylene 
( abbreviated as PE ) which differ in mechanical properties and particularly 
in their density and melting characteristics, the welding process and 
procedure differ from material to material. Therefore, welding should be 
resorted to only for joi ni ng parts of same type of PE. 

2.2 Polyethylene is welded in a plastic condition. The influencing factors 
are the welding temperature, direction and amount of heat impact and the 
welding pressure. The welding conditions are dependent on the behaviour 
of the PE type to be welded. In the absence of any data the welding 
procedure should be established in each case by conducting procedural 
tests. 

2.3 Polyethylene should not be welded at temperatures below the crystal- 
lite melting temperature and above the degradation temperature to avoid 
defects in the welded joint. The crystallite melting points for different 
densities are given in Fig. 1. 



IS : 8455 - 1977 



o 



uo 



§ 130 



UJU 



120 



no 






100 



0-90 0-91 0-92 0-93 0-94 0-95 0.96 -0-97 
DENSITY IN g/cm 3 

Fig. 1 Crystallite Melting Points for Polyethylene 



3 HOT GAS WELDING 

3.1 In this process the contact surfaces of parts to be welded and the filler 
material are heated to the desired temperature using hot gases and the parts 
welded under pressure. 

3.2 Welding Equipment — Manual welding torches are normally used 
in which gas free from oil and moisture and at a pressure of 0*05 MPa 
(0'5kgf/cm 2 ) is heated to the required temperature. Examples of welding 
torches normally used are given in Fig. 2 and 3. In practice air is chiefly 
used as the welding gas for PE. The temperature of the gas should be 
adjustable. The temperature is measured at 5 mm from the end of the 
nozzle of the welding torch. 




ELECTRIC HEATING 

ELEMENT (INTERCHANGEABLE) 



*. ' V VV V v V v 



-BLOWPIPE TIP 
(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



ELECTRICAL 
CONNECTION 



7 



WELDING AIR 
(ADJUSTABLE) 



Fig. 2 Electrically -Heated H ot Gas Welding Equipment 

4 



IS: 8455- 1977 



TUBE COIL- 




HEATING GAS 

JET( INTERCHANGEABLE) 

WELDING AIR 
(ADJUSTABLE) 



-BLOWPIPE TIP 
(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



INSULATING 
JACKET 




-HEATING GAS 
(ADJUSTABLE) 

-INSULATION AGAINST 

RADIATION OF HEAT 



Fig. 3 Gas- Heated HotGasWelding Equipment 



3.3 Filler Material — The filler material used for welding PE should be 
of the same type as PE being welded. It is, therefore, preferable to use 
the filler material cut from the base material being welded. The filler 
material may also be extruded from the basic raw material from which the 
parent material being welded is manufactured. 

3.3.1 Filler rods used are normally of 3 or 4 mm diameter and are 
finished to required profiles ( for example, triangular shape for welding 
V-welds ), although circular cross section is preferred. 

3.3.2 Where circular rods are employed, 3 mm diameter rods are used 
for root and sealing runs ( dimension d x in Fig. 4 to 10 ). For subsequent 
runs and finishing runs and where thickness does not exceed 5 mm, 3 mm 
filler rods shall be used. Where thickness to be welded exceeds 5 mm the 
filler material used for subsequent and finishing runs shall be of 4 mm 
diameter ( dimension d % in Fig. 4 to 10). 



6(^7^ 




0*5 T0 1 




Fi g. 4 Single V-Butt Weld Without Sealing Run 



3.4 Weld Forms — Types of joints made by hot gas welding are singleV- 
butt welds without and with sealing run ( see Fig. 4 and 5 ). In the case 
of joints with sealing run, the root side of the joint is gouged before deposit- 
ing the sealing run. Where filler rods of triangular shape are employed, 
no sealing run is required ( see Fig. 6 ). 



IS; 8455. 1977 




0-5 TO 1 



5A PREPARATION OF THE 
V-BUTT WELD 



-d, 



<*? 




w^ft 



^3 



» ^ 



« ^^^ 



di 



1. Welding V-Weld 

2. Make an angled root 

3. Make the root round 

4. Weld the sealing run 

5B WELDING THE 
V-BUTT WELD 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 5 Single V-Butt Weld with Sealing Run 



Fig, 6 Single V-Butt Weld Made with Triangular Rod 




0*5 TO 1 




h- d T 



m- 



3 7/. 



1. Weld one side of the double 

V-butt weld 

2. Make the root round 

3. Weld the other side of the 

V-butt weld 
7A PREPARATION OF THE 7B WELDING THE DOUBLE 

DOUBLE V-BUTT WELD V-BUTT WELD 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 7 Double V-Butt Weld 



T ^Pi TREATED WITH 
V/A A SCRAPER — 





8A PREPARATION OF THE 
FILLET WELD 

All dimensions in millimetres. 



88 WELDING THE FILLET 
WELD 



Fig. 8 T-J oint with Single Fillet Weld 



TREATED WITH 
A SCRAPER- 




d 2 - 



J- 



tm 




mmm& 



9A PREPARATION OF THE 
FILLET WELD 



98 WELDING THE 
FILLET WELD 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 9 T-J oint with Double Fillet Weld 




|0A PREPARATION OF THE 
BUTT WELD 




WITHOUT SEALING 
RUN 
-d 2 




WITH SEALING 
di RUN 



1. Without sealing run 

2. With sealing run 
I0B WELDING THE BUTT 

WELD 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 10 Corner J oint with Single V-Butt Weld 

7 



IS:*455.1977 

3.4.1 DoubleV- butt joints are shown in Fig. 7. Weld on one side of 
the joint is deposited. The root of the joint is gouged before depositing 
the weld on the other side. 

3.4.2 T-joints with fillet welds ( see Fig. 8 and 9 ) and corner joints with 
butt welds (see Fig. 10 ) should be avoided as far as possible by suitably 
designing the fabrication procedure. Where these are unavoidable they 
should be made using heated tool process. 

Instead of the corner joint shown in Fig. 10 it is preferable to adopt 
a joint shown in Fig. 11 using single or doubleV- butt welds. 




Fig. 11 Better Solution Than the Corner J oint 
Shown in Fig. 10 

3.5 Preparation of the Parts to be Welded -The surfaces of poly- 
ethylene parts stored for a long time may undergo changes due to the actions 
of ultra-violet radiation or due to dirt accumulation. The portion of the 
parts affected should be removed by scraping prior to welding unless the 
joint faces are to be prepared by machining, for example, by planing, 
rasping, milling or grinding. This provision appl ies to the filler rods also. 
The filler rods and the connecting surfaces of the parts should be free from 
shavings, traces of grease and other impurities. 

3.6 Welding Procedure — Wherever possible welds shall be made in the 
flat position. One end of the welding rod is pointed with a knife and fixed 
to the seam. With continuous and uniform heating of the base material 
and the filler material, the parts to be welded are raised to the welding 
temperature with a slight to-and-fro movement of the nozzle of the torch 
in the direction of welding. As soon as the filler rod becomes plastic, it is 
pressed into the joint without all owing it to buckle ( holding the filler rod 
as close as possible to the welding end ). 

3.6.1 In order that the material reaches the welding temperature the 
welding gas should have been heated to a temperature of 200 to 300°C 
measured 5 mm from the nozzle of the welding torch, depending upon the 
type of polyethylene being welded. The temperature of the welding gas 
influences the speed of welding and should, therefore, be assessed for each 
application. When using high speed welding equipment the temperature 
should be about 20" higher than the temperature mentioned earlier. 

8 



IS: 8455- 1977 

3.6.2 Heating should be such that neither the parent material nor the 
filler material should reach full plasticity. Once this stage is reached the 
welding pressure drastically reduces and further welding will not be 
possible The correct plasticity is indicated from the fact that the filler 
rod does not spring back when the welder temporarily releases his grip on 
it, and it pushes in front of it a shiny 'bow wave ' which does not contain 
any bubbles. 

3.7 Weld Finish — Normally the weld is not machined. If for any reason 
it has to be finished, machining marks shall be avoided. 

3.8 Quality of Weld — The following factors influence the quality of the 
welded joint: 

a) Welding conditions — temperature, speed and pressure; 

b) Selection of filler material to suit the parent material; 

c) Form of weld; 

d) Number of runs in the weld seam — a few thick runs are better 
than several thin ones; 

e) Freedom from kinks, etc; 

f) Cleanliness of the joining faces and the filler material; and 

g) Welder's skill. 

3.9 Strength of Weld — For purpose of design a joint strength equal to 
0*6 times the strength of the parent material may be assumed. 

4. HEATED TOOL WELDING 

4.1 Welding Process — In this process the surfaces to be welded are heated 
to the required temperature by suitably designed heating tools and welded 
under pressure, usually without the use of filler material. 

4.2 Welding Equipment-The heating tools for welding are heated 
electrically, with gas or other suitable means. They transmit their heat by 
conduction to the surfaces of the parts to be welded. The heating tool 
should be free from scales. Residues of YE should be prevented from 
adhering to the heating tool, and this can be achieved effectively by means 
of a polytetrafluoro ethylene ( PTFE ) covering. 

4.2.1 Heating tool may also be in the form of thin electric wires which 
may be incorporated in the final joint. 

4.3 Filler Material — Filler material is generally not used in heated tool 
welding process. 

4.4 Weld Form — Butt weld, lap joint with lap weld (welding of over- 
lapped surfaces ), fold welding and T-joint are some of the welds produced 
in this process. These are illustrated in Fig. 12 to 15. 



CO 
00 






<0 

3 



1 r^M 

r 1 



2 r^ 



HEATED 
TOOL I 



^ 



1. Heating 

2. Welding 

Fig. 12 Heated Tool Welding 



y/////////////^ 



-HEATED 
TOOL 



IP. 



& 




1. Heating 

2. Welding 

Fig. 13 Lap J oint with Lap Weld 



i 



^^ 




-HEATED 
TOOL 



1. Heating 
2. Welding 

Fig. 14 Fold Welding 



IS = 8455-1977 




1 CHEATED 
TOOLS 



t^M^i 




1. Heating one part 

2. At the same time 

heating other part 

3. Welding 

Fig, 15 T-Joint by Butt Welding 

4.5 Preparation of Parts to be Welded — Where necessary the connect- 
ing parts shall be prepared according to 3.5. The connecting surfaces and 
the heating tool shall be free from shavings, traces of grease and other 
impurities. 

4.6 Welding Procedure — The heating tool is brought into contact with 
the welding surfaces exercising a slight pressure P x not exceeding 4MPa. 
As soon as the parts reach the welding temperature the heating tool is 
withdrawn and the connecting surfaces are brought into contact together 
and welded subjecting them to the required pressure. 

4.6.1 The temperature of the heated tool should be between 180°C and 
200°C depending on the type of PE being welded. At this temperature 
the PE reaches the thermoplastic range at the points of contact. 

4.6.2 The pressure P a during welding should be such that all the over- 
heated or oxidized material is expelled from the weld zone leaving behind 
at the same time sufficient plastic material to form a well bonded joint. 
For best results pressure P a should not exceed 12 MPa(l t 2kgf/cm 2 ). 



11 



IS: 8455- 1977 

4.7 Weld-Finishing— The welds do not normally require finishing. If 
for any reason the weld is to he finished kinks should be avoided. 

4.8 Quality of Welds — The quality of the finished joint depends on the 
following factors: 

a) Selection of welding conditions -welding temperature, welding 
pressure and duration of its application, etc; 

b) Cleanliness of the connecting surfaces and the heating tool; and 

c) Skill of the welder. 

4.8.1 If carefully executed it is possible to achieve weld strength equal to 
that of the parent material. 

5. IMPULSE WELDING 

5.1 Welding Process — In this process the parts to be welded are kept 
one above the other and heated by heat impulses from heating tools in 
contact with them and welded under pressure. 

5.2 Welding Equipment — The impulse welding equipment consists of a 
power supply unit ( power source ), pressure device and impulse plate. 
The impulse pressure plate has electrical heating elements of extremely low 
heat capacity which are briefly heated electrically (for example, 0*25 second) 
after pressing against the weld line. The welding heat is then removed 
from the weld zone in the same operation maintaining the pressure until 
the weld zone has regained its dimensional stability. Residues of PE should 
be prevented from adhering to the heating surfaces of the equipment, an 
effective means of doing this being a PTFE coating. 

5.3 Filler Material — In this process filler material is not generally used. 

5.4 Weld Forms -Lap joints with welds on overlapped surfaces are 
possible in this process. 

5.5 Preparation of Parts to be Welded — The surfaces to be welded 
need no special preparations, but the surfaces and the heated tool should be 
free from traces of grease and other impurities. 

5.6 Welding Procedure -The connecting surfaces of the parts to be 
welded ( films ) are placed on a mounting plate covered with an elastic 
heat insulator so that they overlap. The impulse pressure plate ( plate 
with heating element and heat insulator ) is pressed on to the welding line 
by means of a suitable pressure device and heated electrically for a brief 
period. The pressure is maintained until the weld zone is cooled off. 
With films of thickness between 0*15 and about 0*25 mm, the mounting 
plate is also designed as an impulse pressure plate ( heat impulses on both 
sides of joint). With films of thickness greater than 0'25 mm, heated tool 
welding is preferable to impulse welding. 

12 



IS : 845$ -197? 

5.7 Weld Finish — The welds made by impulse process need no further 
finishing. 

5.8 Quality of Weld — The provisions contained in 4.8 shall apply. For 
design purpose a strength of 60 to 80 percent of the strength of parent metal 
may be assumed. 

6. FRICTION WELDING 

6.1 Welding Process — In this process the connecting surfaces of the 
parts to be welded, usually solids of rotation, are heated to the required 
welding temperature by frictional heat and welded under pressure without 
the use of filler material. 

6.2 Welding Equipment — The equipment consists of a turning machine 
such as lathe, which permits turning of the connecting surfaces ( of the 
parts to be welded ) sufficiently quickly under pressure against each other 
so that the surfaces are heated to welding temperature by frictional heat. 

6.3 Filler Material — Filler material is not needed in this process. 

6.4 Weld Form — Butt joints with welded contact surfaces are possible by 
friction welding. 

6.5 Preparation of Parts to be Welded — The connecting surfaces up to 
40 mm diameter are faced. When the diameter (d) exceeds 40 mm it is 
advisable to taper both the connecting surfaces by turning them to a cone 

of slope a/2 where tan — =— • 

The connecting surfaces should be free from shavings, traces of grease 
and other impurities. 

6.5.1 Hollow members may be centred by means of inserted plugs or 
external guides made of such material that cannot be welded to PE. 

6.6 Welding Procedure-The parts to be welded are clamped in the 
turning attachment -of the equipment and turned against each other under 
pressure. When the surfaces reach the welding temperature — which is 
apparent when the pasty material oozes out all round the circumference — 
the axial pressure is increased. The attachments are then clamped and 
movements of the two parts against each other is concluded. The welding 
pressure is maintained until the joint has cooled off ( see Fig. 16 ). 

Note — Depending upon thickness of parts and the type of PE being welded the 

pressure should be increased slowly. From the annular gap between the parts to be 
welded a fine powder should first emerge followed by short threads of material until 
finally the glassy welding bead results. 

If the pressure is increased too much the parts do not get welded. 
Care should be taken that the parts are not heated to melting temperature. 
Otherwise the welding pressure drastically reduces and no welding takes 
place. 

13 



IS 6455-1977 

6.7 Weld Finish — The provisions contained in 4.7 apply; 

6.8 Quality of Welded J oint — In friction welding butt joints of strength 
equal to that of the parent material are achieved. 



V CHUCK 



-WORK PIECE 



WELD SEAM 




CLAMP 
RING 



• PRESSURE 
PLATE 

•APPLIANCE 

CLAMPED 



w-wtm 



Fig. 16 Friction Welding 

7. HIGH FREQUENCY WELDING 

7.1 High frequency welding is not. a popular method of welding PE in view 
of special dielectric properties of PE. 



14 



IS: 8455-1977 



( Continued from page 2 ) 



Subcommittee for Welding and Cutting Processes and Procedures, 

SMDC 14:3 



Convener 
Shri H.L. Prabhakar 

M embers 

Assistant Director (Welding ) 
Shri Awtar Singh 
Shri S. P. Dasgupta 

Shri M. T.Kanse 

Shri S. N . Basu (Alternate) 
Shri R, Krishnamurthy 

ShriJ.C.Mago ( Alternate) 
Shri A. C. Mukherjee 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni 

Shri B. Malkani ( Alternate) 
Shri J .R. Prasher 



Representing 
Larsen&ToubroLtd, Bangalore 



Ministry of Railways 

Beas Project, Talwara Township 

Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR), Durgapur 
Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Tiruchchirappalli 



Apar Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Advani-Oerlikon Limited, 



Bombay 



Shri M. R. C. Nagar ajan ( Alternate \ 



Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 



Shri R. Purkayastha 

Shri s. K. Burman( Alternate) 
r epresentative 
Representative 
Representative 
Shri W. R. D. Saxton 

Shri J . N. Goswamy (-Alternate) 
Shri S. L. Venkata Raman 
Works Manager 

Shri A. P. Sanyal (Alternate) 



Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta 

Indian Institute of Welding, Calcutta 
Heavy Vehicles Limited, Avadi, Madras 
Central Boilers Board? New Delhi 
Lloyds Register of Shipping, Calcutta 

The K. C. P. Limited, Madras 

Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Visakhapatnam 



15 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (Si UNITS) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Conversion 


Force 


newton 


N 


N = 1 kg.1 m/s 8 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


W = 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


Wb - 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


T - 1 Wb/m* 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 1 


H z = 1 c/s ( s" 1 ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


S = 1 A/V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = 1 N/m* 



