**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8420 (2000): Grain Dryers - Glossary of Terms [FAD 20: 
Agriculture and Food Processing Equipments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 8420 : 2000 

r> (Reaffirmed 2006) 

3RM ^sTT^ $ -*& — "qTf^TTte *|«4|c|ofl 

Indian Standard 

GRAIN DRYERS — GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

(First Revision) 

ICS 01.020; 65.060. 01 



© BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 2000 Price Group 2 



Agricultural Produce Processing and Milling Machinery Sectional Committee, FAD 51 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Agricultural Produce Processing and Milling Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Divisional Council. 

Various terms are commonly used in relation to grain dryers and drying. With a view to accord authoritative and 
uniform definitions to these terms, this standard has been formulated. 

This standard was first published in 1977. This revision has been taken up to incorporate a number of new terms 
and to update existing terms in the light of comments received on the standard. 



IS 8420 : 2000 



Indian Standard 

GRAIN DRYERS — GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 



2.11 Convection 



This standard covers the definitions of various terms 
frequently used in relation to grain dryers and drying. 

2 DEFINITIONS 

2.1 Absolute Humidity — Absolute humidity is the 
ratio of mass of water and mass of air in a mixture of 
water vapour and air. 



2.2 Ambient Temperature — 

surrounding atmospheric air. 



The temperature of the 



2.3 Available Heat in Drying Air — The quantity 
of heat in drying air that can be utilized in evaporating 
the moisture from the grain. 

2.4 Batch — Quantity of grain put into a bin 
or container on repetitive basis that can be held for 
drying. 

2.5 Blending — The process of mixing two or more 
different products together, such as, grains and supple- 
ments, to obtain desired quality characteristics or of 
mixing different quantities of the same product with 
different moisture contents to obtain a final mass with 
a uniform moisture content. 

2.6 Bound Moisture — The amount of moisture 
tightly bound to the gram interior with properties 
different from those of free moisture. 

2.7 Bin Discharger — An equipment/outlet for dis- 
charging products from bulk storage bins. 

2.8 Casing — The outer enclosure surrounding the 
entire heat exchanger and confining the air being 

heated. 

2.9 Conduction — Transmission of heat through or 
by means of a conductor. 

2.10 Control — Any component of a dryer or heat 
source designed to effect or limit any normal or ab- 
normal conditions of the drying operation or control 
drying parameters in a desired way. 



Transmission of heat by moving masses of matter, as 
by current in gases and liquids, caused by difference 
in density due to different temperatures. 

2.12 Cooler A self contained unit for cooling of 

dried but hot grains. 

2.13 Cooling Stage The time required to move a 

cooling zone entirely through a grain mass. 

2.14 Cooling Zone — The portion or section of the 
grain mass front in storage where the temperature of 
the grain falls during aeration. 

2.15 Cycling Burning — Type of operation wherein 
application of maximum heat is periodic, such as: 

a) cycling between high fire and low fire; 

b) cycling between high fire and a constant 
pilot; and 

c) cycling from high tire to off, then restarting 
to high fire by constant or intermittent 
ignition. 

2.16 Dehydration — The reduction or lowering of 
moisture from grain/product usually to a very low 
level. 

2.17 Depth Factor — When drying with air, a depth 
which would contain enough product that, if all the 
theoretical heat available for drying could be used, it 
would all dry. to equilibrium in a period of time equal 
to time required for fully exposed grain to dry half- 
way to equilibrium. 

2.18 Dew Point — Temperature at which a vapour 
condenses' its first drop of liquid from vapour-air mix- 
ture. At this temperature the dry-bulb temperature 
equals the wet-bulb temperature. 

2.19 Dielectric — A non-conducting material hav- 
ing few electrons of fixed polarity or charge. 

2.20 Discharge Grain Temperature — The mean 
temperature indicated by a thermometer inserted in a. 
sample of grain being discharged from the dryer. 



IS 8420 : 2000 



2.21 Dry-bulb Temperature — The temperature of 
a vapour-air mixture ordinarily determined by using 
the thermometer. 

2.22 Dryer — A unit which provides the conditions 
for reducing moisture, generally by forced ventilation 
with or without addition of heat. 

2.22.1 Batch Dryer — A dryer wherein the product 
to be dried is placed in batches and drying is regulated 
by the length of time the whole batch is under treat- 
ment in the dryer. This can be portable or stationary. 

2.22.2 Circulating Dryer — - A batch dryer equipped 
to circulate or mix the product during drying or cool- 
ing period. 

2.22.3 Continuous Flow Dryer — A dryer in which 
the material is moved through in a substantially con- 
tinuous stream and its rate of progress regulated in 
order to adjust the capacity of the unit. 

2.22.4 Counter-Flow Dryer — A continuous-flow 
dryer wherein the grain being dried move in one 
direction and the drying air moves in the opposite 
direction. 

2.22.5 Cross-Flow Dryer — A continuous flow dryer 
wherein the flow of air is the transverse to the direc- 
tion of flow of the product being dried. 

2.22.6 Direct-Fired Dryer — - A dryer in which the 
product of combustion comes into direct contact with 
the product being dried. 

2.22.7 Indirect- Fired Dryer — A dryer in which the 
product of combustion does not come in contact with 
the product being dried and heat is transferred through 
heat exchanger. 

2.22.8 In-silo Dryer — A silo or large bin in which 
usually large quantity of grain is stored is used for 
drying of grains by providing air heating and circula- 
tion arrangement and controls. 

2.22.9 Parallel-Flow Dryer — A continuous flow 
dryer in which the drying air flows in the same direc- 
tion as that of the grain being dried, 

2.22.10 Self-Contained Dryer — The dryer unit con- 
sisting of the drying and/or cooling chamber, heat or 
radiation source, all fans and duct work alongwith the 
necessary controls and product handling equipment. 

2.22.11 Tunnel Dryer — A dryer in which the grain 
being dried is conveyed through a tunnel like cham- 
ber. It may be continuous flow or batch type. 



2.23 Drying — The reduction of moisture in a prod- 
uct usually to some predetermined moisture content. 

2.24 Drying Air — The air being passed through the 
grain for drying. 

2.25 Drying Air Temperature — The temperature 
of the air entering the grain being dried. 

2.26 Drying Conveyor — A mechanical linkage or 
assembly to carry the grain being dried through the 
drying chamber. 

2.27 Drying Front — The divisional layer between 
the dried and undried grains in drying systems with 
shallow drying zones. 

2.28 Drying Zone — The band or layer of grain in a 
dryer in which most of the drying occurs at any 
instant. 

2.29 Enthalpy — Enthalpy of air is defined as the 
heat content of a unit mass of dry air and its associate 
moisture. 

2.30 Equilibrium Moisture Content — The mois- 
ture content of the grain when it is in equilibrium with 
the surrounding atmosphere. 

2.31 Equilibrium Relative Humidity — The rela- 
tive humidity of the air surrounding the grain which 
is in equilibrium with grain of a given moisture 
content. The air and grain are at the same tem- 
perature. 

2.32 Evaporation — The total mass of moisture 
evaporated by the dryer per hour or per batch calcu- 
lated from the input and output moisture content of 
the grain and the output mass of the grain treated; 
except in case of the batch or in-silo dryers. 

NOTE — In batch or in-silo dryer there may be circumstances 
where the output moisture content is most accurately estimated 
by reference to the total loss of mass during drying. Also there 
may be loss of mass due to insect infestation if grain are stored 
for long duration. 

2.33 Flow Control Valve — A check valve which 
permits flow of fluid in either direction but which limits 
excessive flow in one direction. If the designated flow 
rate is exceeded, the valve automatically closes. 

2.34 Fail Safe Control — A control so designed, that 
a malfunction of any of its components shall automati- 
cally stop the operation of the device or equipment 
controlled by it. 

2.35 Fan — A device used to move air for drying, 
aeration etc. It includes blade assembly, mounting 



IS 8420 : 2000 



structure and casing, but may or may not include a 
power source. 

2.36 Free Moisture Content — Amount of moisture 
adhering to grain surface or mechanically entrapped 
in the void space of grain having nearly all properties 
similar to those of free water. 

2.37 Hot Air Unit — A basic heated air producing 
unit including fan, burner and electrical system or any 
other type of complete heating system. It is usually 
coupled to drying structure by means of a flexible duct. 

2.38 Heat Capacity — Heat capacity is known as the 
heat required to raise the temperature of a unit mass 
of a substance by a unit temperature. 

2.39 Heat Exchanger — A device used to transfer 
heat from one fluid stream to another without inter- 
mixing. 

2.39.1 Direct Type Heat Exchanger 

In this type of heat exchangers, the hot flue gas is di- 
luted with atmospheric air and the mixture is used for 
drying grains. 

2.39.2 Indirect-type Heat Exchanger 

Indirect-type heat exchangers are of two types. One is 
air to air heat exchanger, in which the air to be used 
for drying is heated by the flue gas in a shell-and-tube 
heat exchanger. The other is steam-to-air heat ex- 
changer, in which air to be used for drying is heated in 
shell and extended surface (fin) heat exchanger using 
steam. 

2.40 Hot Air Drying — Use of forced ventilation with 
the addition of heat for drying. 

2.41 Hot Air Temperature — Mean temperature of 
the air to be used for drying the grain, measured at a 
number of points as close as practicable to its entry o 
the grain. 

2.42 Holding Capacity — The amount, of grain a 
dryer or a bin can hold. It is not necessarily the dry- 
ing capacity or the throughput capacity of the dryer. 
For example, a continuous flow dryer may have a 6 
tonne holding capacity, a 12 tonne throughput ca- 
pacity and an average drying capacity of 2 tonnes 
per hour. 

2.43 Humid Volume — Humid volume of a vapour- 
air mixture is the volume in cubic metres of one 
kilogram of dry air and its accompanying vapour at 
the prevailing temperature and pressure. 



2.44 Manometer — U-tube filled with liquid to mea- 
sure pressure in air duct systems. 

2.45 Maximum Permissible Drying Time — The 

maximum elapsed time that may be used to complete 
drying any portion of the grain without undesirable 
change in grain quality. 

2.46 Modulate — Automatically governing the rate 
of fuelilow by a control which is temperature sensi- 
tive in order to maintain a constant temperature at the 
location of the sensing device. 

2.47 Moisture Content — Content of water in the 
grain expressed as percentage by mass on wet or dry 
basis, determined by using following formula: 

Moisture Content Weight of water in product 



(Wet Basis) = 100 x Weight of dry matter + Water 



Moisture Content 
(Dry Basis) = 100 x 



Weight of water in product 
Weight of dry matter 



2.48 Pitot lube — Special tube used in conjunction 
with a manometer to obtain air velocity in air duct. 

2.49 Plenum Chamber —An air chamber maintained 
under pressure (positive or negative) usually connected 
to one or more distributing ducts in a drying or aera- 
tion system. The term is also used to designate the air 
chamber under the perforated floor in a grain bin and 
the pressure chamber between grain columns in a batch 
dryer. 

2.50 Pressure Regulator — A device which reduces 
the fluid (liquid or gas) pressure to a relatively con- 
stant delivery pressure while inlet pressure and vol- 
ume of gas may vary. 

2.51 Pressure Relief Valve — A valve designated as 
a safety device to open and remain open, to discharge 
a fluid whenever the fluid pressure reaches the start- 
to-discharge setting of the valve. When the fluid pres- 
sure drops somewhat below this setting, the relief valve 
automatically closes. 

2.52 Pressure System — Method of air movement 
in which the air is forced through the product with the 
air duct or ducts at a pressure about atmospheric pres- 
sure. It is called a 'pushing' or 'forcing' system of air 
movement. 

2.53 Pre-ventilation — The cleaning of the plenum 
or duct of any volatile gases prior to ignition of the 
burner. It is usually accomplished by a device which 
ensures that the fan is operating for a certain period of 
time before ignition is permitted. 



IS 8420 : 2000 



2.54 Psychometric Chart — The various properties 
of air and air-water vapour mixture represented in a 
graphic form. 

2.55 Quick Acting Valve — A manually-operated 
valve specially designed to accomplish rapid shut-off 
of fuel flow to dryer. 

2.56 Radiation — ■ Transmission of heat without the 
help of intervening media. 

2.57 Relative Humidity — Relative humidity of a 
vapour-air mixture is a measure of its fractional satu- 
ration with moisture and is defined as the ratio of the 
partial pressure of the vapour to the saturated pressure 
at the same temperature. 

2.58 Specified Ambient Conditions — The ambient 
conditions of temperature, pressure and relative 
humidity to which the results of a dryer may be 
corrected. 

2.59 Specified Energy Consumption — The con- 
sumption of energy for evaporating one kilogram of 
water including the heat equivalent of all power used 
by the dryer corrected to specified ambient conditions. 

2.60 Specified Evaporation — The mass of water 
evaporated per unit of fuel, corrected to specified am- 
bient conditions. 

2.61 Static Pressure — The pressure exerted by a 
static fluid medium on the wall of the container. 



term also applies to equalization of moisture or tem- 
perature throughout kernel or grain. 

2.67 Throughput — The amount of grain which can 
flow through a continuous flow dryer per unit of time. 

2.68 Time of Drying — The elapsed time from the 
start of the drying process to the point of achieving 
desired moisture content of product. 

2.69 Time of One-Half Response — Time required 
to dry fully exposed grain half way to equilibrium. 

2.70 Traverse Time — The in-product travel time of 
air from entrance to any point. 

2.71 Turning — The process of moving grain through 
the air within a bin or storage structure or from one 
bin or structure to other. 

2.72 Unbound Moisture — Moisture in excess of 
equilibrium moisture content corresponding to satu- 
rated humidity. 

2.73 Vapourizer — A type of heat exchanger wherein 
heat is supplied to change the liquid fuel to vapour 
ready for combustion. The vapourizer may be inte- 
gral with the burner so that part of the heat of combus- 
tion is used for vapourization. 

2.74 Vapourizer Burner — An integral unit depen- 
dent upon the heat generated by the burner as the source 
of heat to vapourize the liquid fuel. 



2.62 Steady State — Condition when the operation 2.75 Velocity of Air Flow 

or process reaches equilibrium. 



2.63 Suction System — Method of air movement 
in which the air is moved through the product with 
the air duct or ducts at a pressure lower than 
atmospheric. It is also called exhaust system of air 
movement. 

2.64 Supplemental Heat — Any heat added to that 
already present in the atmosphere to obtain a limited 
temperature rise to accomplish drying within the maxi- 
mum permissible drying time to prevent spoilage. 

2.65 Temperature Rise — The difference between 
ambient temperature and the temperature of the dry- 
ing air resulting from the addition of heat by dryer 

burner. 

2.66 Tempering — Bringing a product to a desired 
moisture content or temperature for processing. The 



2.75.1 Apparent Velocity of Air Flow 

The rate of air flow determined by dividing the quan- 
tity of air flow by the cross-sectional area. 

2.75.2 Average Velocity of Air Flow 

The rate of air travel through product void space, it is 
determined by dividing the apparent velocity by the 
product void space. 

2.76 Void Space — The space between the particles 
in a bulk of stored grain usually expressed as percent 
of total volume. 

2.77 Wet-Bulb Temperature — This is the steady 
temperature reached by a small amount of liquid evapo- 
rating into a large amount of rapidly moving unsatur- 
ated vapour-air mixture. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 51 (937). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Aniheri (East) 
MUMBAI400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

J 323 76 17 
\323 38 41 

f337 84 99, 337 85 61 
\337 86 26, 337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



J 235 02 16,235 04 42 
\235 15 19,235 23 15 

f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1.832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORF 
FARIDABAD. Grf/^IABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



rrinted at : Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



