**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8477 (1985) : Methods for determination of bitumen 
content in laminated jute bags [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of 
Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 






Indian Standard 



IS :a477-19B5 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATJON OF BITUMEN CONTENT IN 

LAMINATED JUTE BAGS 

(first Revision ) 



UDC 62J 798151 - 419 : 67n3'027 65['32 : 543'a69 




© Copyright 19g6 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MAKAK BHAVAW. 9 n\rUD|J1l SHAH ZAPAR MARO 

JSEW DELIUIJOOOS 

Cr 2 ^^fiV 1935 



IS : 8477 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF BITUMEN CONTENT IN 

LAMINATED JUTE BAGS 



( First Revision ) 



Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 

Chairman Representing 

Dr ( KuMARi ) M. D. Bhavsar Silk and Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 

Members 

Shri Jamshed D. Adrianvala The Tata Mills Limited. Bombay 

Dr V. G, Agnihotri National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Bandopadhyay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Kumari L. C. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Basu Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Saigal ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Behrani Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri N. Kasturia ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Bhattacharya Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, 

Vadodara 

Shri D. K. Chattopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Desikan OflSce of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri Paul Lingdoh ( Alternate ) 
Director, Weavers' Service Development Commissioner for Handlooms. 

Centre, Bombay New Delhi 

Shri M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, 

Bombay 

Shri D. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. G. Khandeparkar Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 

(ICAR), Bombay 
Dr B. R. Manjunatha Intexa India, Bombay 

Shri Sunil S. Mehta Silk and Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

The publication is protected under the //7£//aw Ct?/?>^A'/^^r Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole ox in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:8477-1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

M embers Representing 

DrA, K. MuKHERJEE Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Dr ( Shrimati ) U. Nandurkar Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Dr S. N. Pandey Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 

( ICAR ), Bombay 
KuMARi I. G. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) G. R. Phalgumani Textiles Committee, Bombay 
Shri p. R. V. Ramanan Central Excise and Customs ( Ministry of 

Finance ), New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Khere ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Rathode National Textile Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri P. P. Checker (Alternate ) 
Representative Crescent Dyes and Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. R. Ananthakrishna Settv Binny Limited, Madras 

Dr M. G. Modak ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. J. Shah The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri Jamnadas K. Shah The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad 

Shri K. G, Shah Ahmedabad Manufacturing and Calico Printing 

Co Ltd, Ahmadabad 
Dr J. I. Setalwad ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmedabad Textile Industrys* Research 

Association, Ahmadabad 
Shri J. N. Vohra Punjab State Hosiery and Knitwear Develop- 

ment Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh 
Shri P. T. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. L Midha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. S. Verm a 

Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 

Chemical Test Methods Subcommittee, TDC 5 : 14 

Convener 
Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmedabad Textile Industries' Research 

Association, Ahmadabad 
Members 

Shri D. K. Jain ( Alternate to 
ShriS. S. Trivedi ) 
Dr V. G. Agnihotri National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Bandopadhya Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

KuMARi L. C. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Desikan OflSce of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri Paul Lxngdoh (Alternate ) 
Dr B. L.Ghosh Indian Jute Industries Research Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr K. p. Das ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) U. Nandurkar Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Shrimati G. P. Rane ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 8 ) 



IS : 8477 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 

DETERMINATION OF BITUMEN CONTENT IN 

LAMINATED JUTE BAGS 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 15 November 1985, after the draft finalized by 
the Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 Jute T)ags laminated with craft paper or polyethylene film using 
bitumen as the bonding material are extensively used these days for 
packing materials like pesticides, fertilizers, etc This method was 
evolved for determining the amount of bitumen used for bonding the 
liner and the jute fabric as its quantity is important for the performance 
of the laminated jute bag. The standard has been revised to include a 
more simplified method based on conditioning of the test specimens in a 
desiccator containing saturated solution of sodium nitrite. 

0.3 Method 1 based on conditioning of the test specimens in a standard 
atmosphere or in a conditioning chamber is time consuming and 
requires the use of conditioning chamber. Method 2 based on condi- 
tioning of the test specimens in a desiccator containing saturated solution 
of sodium nitrite is easier and cheaper and does not require a special 
instrument for conditioning of the test specimens. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this 
standard, if the final value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off", 
it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes two methods for determination of bitumen 
content in laminated jute bags. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 8477 - 1985 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of laminated fabric of known mass is taken and the 
liner is removed by dipping in a suitable solvent and then the fabric 
portion is extracted in Soxhlet apparatus. From the mass of the initial 
piece, liner and extracted fabric, the bitumen content is calculated. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Lot — The quantity of laminated jute bags purporting to be of one 
definite type and quality delivered to a buyer against one despatch note 
shall constitute a lot. 

3.2 The sample shall be so drawn as to be the representative of the lot. 
The sample drawn in accordance with the procedure laid down in the 
material specification or as agreed to between the buyer and the seller 
shall be taken as representative of the lot. 

4. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 

4.1 From the sample, cut four pieces of 100 mm X 100 mm taking one 
piece from the area near the mouth, the other from the area close to the 
bottom and two pieces from the middle portions of the bag. The pieces 
shall be taken in such a way that they contain spot application portion 
in case the bitumen is applied off-set. 

5. METHOD 1 

5.1 ConditJoniDg of Test Specimens 

5*1.1 Before testing, condition the specimens to m^oisture equilibrium 
in standard atmosphere at 27 d= 2''C temperature and 65 ± 2 percent 
relative humidity {see also IS : 6359-1971* ). 

5.1.1.1 When the test specimens have been left in such an atmos- 
phere for at least 24 hours in such a way as to expose, as far as 
possible, all portions of the specimens to the atmosphere, they shall be 
deemed to have reached moisture equilibrium. 

5.1.2 In case arrangements are not there for conditioning the test 
specimens in standard atmosphere, these may be conditioned in a 
conditioning chamber and mass determined immediately after the 
removal of the test specimens from the conditioning chamber. 



*Method for conditioning of textiles. 



18:8477-1985 

5.2 Apparatus and Reagents 

5.2.1 Soxhlet Apparatus 

5.2.2 Weighing Balance — with an accuracy up to 1 mg. 

5.2.3 Solvent — Light petroleum or any other suitable solvent such as 
trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene. 

5.3 Procedure 

5.3.1 Take the conditioned test specimens and determine their collective 
mass to the nearest milligram. 

5.3.2 Wash all the specimens with the solvent ( see 5.2.3 ) and care- 
fully separate the liner pieces. Wash the liner pieces with solvent to 
remove adhering traces of oil and bitumen. 

5.3.3 Dry the liner pieces in air and determine their collective mass to 
the nearest milligram ( see Note ). 

Note — If the liner pieces are made of craft paper, these shall be conditioned 
before determining their collective mass, 

5.3.4 Take the four fabric pieces obtained after the removal of liner 
pieces from the test specimens and place them in a thimble of the Soxhlet 
apparatus. Take about 400 ml of the solvent in the extraction flask. 
Extract the pieces for 1| to 2 hours at a rate of about 6 cycles per hour. 
Take out the fabric pieces and let the solvent evaporate. 

5.3.5 Condition the fabric pieces as given in 5.1.1 or 5.1.2 as the case 
may be, and determine their collective mass to the nearest milligram. 

5.3.6 Calculate the quantity of bitumen per square metre as given 
in 7.1 and 7.1.1. 

6. METHOD 2 

6.1 Apparatus and Reagents 

6.1.1 Soxhlet Apparatus 

6.1.2 Weighing Balance — With an accuracy up to 1 mg. 

6.1.3 De^/ccaror— Suitable size, charged with saturated solution of 
sodium nitrite at 27 ± 2°C. 

6.1.4 Solvent — Light petroleum or any other suitable solvent such as 
trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene. 



IS : 8477 - 1985 

6.2 Procedure 

6.2.1 Condition all the test specimens ( see 4.1 ) in the desiccator 
charged with saturated solution of sodium nitrite at 27 ± TC for at 
least 24 hours in such a way that the fabric side of each specimen is 
exposed to the air inside the desiccator. 

6.2.2 Remove all the specimens from the desiccator and immediately 
determine their collective mass to the nearest milligram. 

6.2.3 Wash all the specimens with the solvent ( see 6.1.4 ) and care- 
fully separate the liner pieces. Wash the liner pieces with solvent to 
remove adhering traces of oil and bitumen. 

6.2.4 Dry the liner pieces in air and determine their collective mass 
to the nearest milligram ( see Note under 5.3.3 ). 

6.2.5 Take the four fabric pieces obtained after the removal of the 
liner pieces from the test specimens and place them in the thimble of Ihe 
Soxhlet apparatus. Take about 400 ml of the solvent in the extraction 
flask. Extract the fabric pieces for U to 2 hours at a rate of about 
6 cycles per hour. Take out the fabric pieces and let the solvent 
evaporate. 

6.2.6 Place the fabric pieces in the desiccator charged with saturated 
solution of sodium nitrite at 27 ± l^'C for at least 24 hours exposing 
both sides of each fabric piece as far as possible to the air inside the 
desiccator. 

6.2.7 Remove the fabric pieces from the desiccator and immediately 
determine their collective mass to the nearest milligram. 

6.2.8 Calculate the quantity of bitumen per square metre as given 
in 7,1 and 7.1.1. 

7. CALCULATION 

7.1 Calculate the quantity of bitumen per square metre by the following 
formula : 

X ^25[a-ib + c + d)] g/m^ 
where 

X == mass of bitumen per square metre of the laminated 
fabrics; 

a == combined mass of the conditioned test specimens; 

b = combined mass of the liner pieces; 



IS : 8477 - 1985 

c = combined conditioned mass of the extracted fabric 
pieces; and 

d = correction factor for oil content of the fabric. 
7.1.1 Calculate the value of d by the following formula: 

"^ "" 100 

where 

c ^ combined conditioned mass of the extracted fabric 
pieces; and 

y ^ oil content percentage of the fabric as specified in the 
material specification, on conditioned mass basis ( see 
Note ). 

Note — Generally five percent oil content on conditioned mass basis is used 
for hessian and double-warp thread fabrics made of jute. For other fabrics use 
the value as given in the material specification based on conditioned mass. Five 
percent of oil content on conditioned mass corresponds to six percent of oil 
content on dry de-oiled material basis. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 The report shall include the following information: 

a) Type of material; 

b) Bitumen content per square metre; and 

c) Method of bitumen application, namely, continuous or off-set 
bonding. 



IS : 8477 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr ( Shrimat! ) G. K.. Pkalguman! Textiles Committee, Bombay 
Shri J. J. Shah The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri Jamnadas K. Shah Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Shri Ishwarbhai M. Patel ( Alternate ) 
ShriXanubhai M. Shah SLM-Maneklal Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. S. Singh Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Thane 

Shri J- K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Taraporewala Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri S. Varadaramn The Bombay Textile Research Association, 

Bombay 



