**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 818 (1968) : Code of Practice for Safety and Health 
Requirements in Electric and Gas Welding and Cutting 
Operations [MTD 11: Welding General] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 818 • 1888 
( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY AND 

HEALTH REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRIC 

AND GAS WELDING AND CUTTING 

OPERATIONS 



(First RB/ision ; 



Sevciitli Reprint SEPTEMBER 1998 



UDC 621-791 5/7 : 614'8 



O Copyright 1968 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

ftlANAK BHAVAN, » BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 9 May 1968 



IS: 818-1968 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY AND 

HEALTH REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRIC 

AND GAS WELDING AND CUTTING 

OPERATIONS 

(First Revision) 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

SeriR. Ghosh Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

SbriJ . K. AHI.UWALIA Stewart»& Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi M . M . Ghosh ( Alternate } 
Srki F. V. Badaui Directorate General of Technical Development 

Shbi N. C. Baqchi National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D . P . Chatterjee Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection W Ing ),New Delhi 
Shbi B. N. Das National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ),Jamshed- 

pur 
DxrxTTT DiRscTOR Reskaboh Ministry of Railways 
( Mkt )-I, R D so , ChittabanJak 
Chemist and Metali<itroist, 
Intbqrai. Coach Factory, 
PsitAXBtrB ( Alumale I ) 
Pbodttction Enginbeb 

(Shei.l), Inteorai. 

Coach Factory Peram- 
BUR ( Alternate II ) 
Dr N . D. Desai Power Cables Pvt Ltd, Bomhay; and Indian Engineer- 

ing Association, Calcutta 
Sari S. K. Hari ( Alternau ) Indian Engineering Aaaoclatlon, Calcutta 
SbriK. C. Jebath Englneer-ln-Chlef's Branch, Army Headquarters 

ShriJ . N. Malik ( Alters& ) 
Shri T. V. M ATBEW Bhilai Steel Plant, Bhilai 

Shri Jaomohan Singh Alternate j 
Shbi M . Mitra Asiatic Oxygen & Acetylene Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. V. Nadkarni J . B. Advanl-Oerllkon Electrodes ( Pvt ) Ltd, Bomhay 

Shri S. K. Pathak Bralthwalte & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Col S . G . Pendsb Directorate General of Employment & Training 

New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAUOF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI n0002 



*Ss 818-1968 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri K. G. K. Rao 

ShRI D. V. REDDI 

Shki M. K. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. r o y 
Sari S. C. Roy 
Shri S. Shanmuoasucdaram 

Shbi J. P. SiNOLA 

Executive Engineer 

(Electrical), Central 
Electrical Division 

No. 1 , Calcutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri v. r. Subramanian 

Shri J. C. Acharva ( Alternate) 
Shki t. N. Velu 
Dr A. K. Chatterjee, 
Director ( Struc& Met ) 



Representing 

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpnr 
lilinistry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Durgapur Steel Plant, Durgapur 

Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Public Works Department, Government of Madras 

Central Public Works Department 



Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. Visakhapatnam 
Director General, BIS ', Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 
SuRi M. S. NaoaRaj 

Assistant Director ( Struc& Met ), BIS 



IS: 818 -1968 



CONTENTS 



0. Foreword 

1. SCOPE 

2. Terminology 



3. Installation and Operation of gas Welding and Cutting 
Equipment 

3.1 General 

3.2 Stationary Automatic Acetylene Generator ■-. 

3.3 Stationary Non-Automatic Acetylene Generator 

3.4 Portable Automatic Acetylene Generator 

3.5 Calcium Carbide 

3.6 Service Piping Systems 

3.7 Storage, Handling and Use of Oxygen and Fuel-Gas 
Cylinders 

3.8 Manifolding of Cylinders 

3.9 Pressure-Reducing Regulators 

3.10 Hose ... 

3.11 Blow Pipes 

4. Installation and Operation of Arc- Welding and CirrriNG 

Equipment 

4.1 General 

4.2 Equipment 

4.3 Installation 

4.4 Operation and Maintenance 

5. Installation and Operation of Resistance Welding 
Equipment 

5.1 General 

5.2 Resistance Welding Machines 

5.3 Portable Welding Machines 

5.4 Flash-Welding Equipment 

5.5 Hazards and Precautions 

6. Fire Prevention and Protection 

6.1 Basic Precautions 

6.2 Soecial Precautions 



PAGE 
5 
6 
6 

6 
6 
7 

12 
12 
13 
15 

19 
25 
28 
28 
29 

29 
29 
30 

35 
36 

37 

37 
37 
37 
3i 

37 

38 
38 
38 



IS:818- 1968 



6.3 Welding or Cutting Containers 

6.4 Sprinkler Protection ... 

7. Protection of Personnel 

7.1 General ... 

7.2 Protective Equipment ... 

7.3 Protection of Fellow Workers from Arc- Welding 

7.4 Protective Clothing ... 

7.5 Work in Confined Spaces 

7.6 First Aid Provisions ... 

8. Ventilation and Health Protection 

8 . 1 General 

8.2 Lead, Cadmium and Mercury 

8.3 Fluoride-Bearing Fluxes and Zinc 

8.4 All Other Welding and Cutting ... 

8.5 Local Exhaust Hoods and Booths 

8.6 Work in Confined Spaces 

8.7 Medical Control 



Rays 



PAGE 

39 
. 40 

40 

40 
40 

42 

. 42 

43 

. 43 

43 

43 
46 
46 
46 

47 
47 
48 



IS: 818- 1968 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SAFETY AND 

HEALTH REQUIREMENTS IN ELECTRIC 

AND GAS WELDING AND CUTTING 

OPERATIONS 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by tine Indian 
Standards Institution on 23 February 1968, after the draft finalized by the 
Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural 
and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1957. In this revision certain 
modifications have been incorporated with regard to manual electrode hold- 
ers, ventilation and health protection and the values have been specified only 
in metric units. 

0.3 The aim of the Steel Economy Project of I SI is to achieve efficiency and 
economy in the use of steel. One of the main channels through which eco- 
nomy of steel could be achieved is by the propagation of the use of welding 
in all steel fabrications. The use of welding calls for certain safety and 
health requirements to be met. Accordingly, the Sectional Committee 
decided to formulate this code of practice with a view to propagating the 
more rapid development of the welding industry in India. 

0.4 This code requires reference to the following Acts, and Rules and Regu- 
lations laid down by the Government of India with their subsequent 
amendments, if any: 

The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (Act IX of 1910) 

The Carbide of Calcium Rules, 1937 

The Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 

The Petroleum and Carbide of Calcium Manual, 1950 

The Gas Cylinder Rules, 1940 

The Factories Act, 1948 

0.5 For the purpose-of-decMing whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in the standard. 



♦Rulwfor rounding off numerical values l^ ««'«(/). 



IS : 818 . 1968 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code lays down requirements for the protection of (a) persons from 
injury and illness, and (b) properties ( including equipment ) from damage 
by fire and other causes, arising from electric and gas welding and cutting 
equipment, its installation, operation and maintenance. 

1.1.1 The general provisions of this code of practice are applicable to 
welding and cutting of metals and other allied processes. 

1.1.2 This code does not cover particular hazards which may be inherent 
when welding and cutting equipment is used in special types of industries. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 812-1957* 
shall apply, besides the definition given under 2.1.1. 

2.1.1 CoTifined Space — A small or restricted space, such as a tank, boiler, 
pressure vessel or small compartment of a ship. 

J. INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF GAS WELDING AND 
CUTTING EQUIPMENT 

3.1 General 

3.1.1 A mixture of inflammable gases and air may be explosive over a 
wide range and shall be carefully guarded against. No device or attach- 
ment facilitating or permitting mixtures of air or oxygen with combustible 
gases prior to combustion, except the burner or in a standard torch, shall 
be allowed unless approved for the purpose. 

3.1.2 In no case shall acetylene be generated or utilized at a pressure in 
excess of 0'14kgf/cm^ ( gauge pressure ) . 

3.1.2.1 In case acetylene is to be generated or utilized at a pressure in 
excess of 0'14kgf/cin*, prior permission of the Chief Inspector of Explosives, 
Government of India, shall be obtained. 

3.1.2.2 The requirement under 3.1.2 shall not apply to the storage and 
use of acetylene when stored in cylinders containing a homogeneous porous 
substance with or without a solvent, if the conditions set forth in the 
G overnment of India (late Department of Labour) N otification N o. M . 
1268(1) dated 9 January 1939 are fulfilled. 

3.1.2.3 Use of liquid acetylene shall be prohibited. 

3.13 Apparatus-All apparatus, such as torches, regulators or pressure 
reducing valves, acetylene generators and manifolds shall be of satisfactory 
type and quality and manufactured according to sound engineering practice. 



'Glossary of terms relating to welding and cutting of metals. 

6 



IS: 818 -1968 

3.1.4 Cylinders — All portable cylinders used for storage and shipment of 
compressed gas shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the 
requirements specified in the Gas Cylinder Rules, 1940, issued by the 
Government of India. 

3.1.5 Instructions -Workmen in charge of the oxygen or fuel gas supply 
equipment, including generator and oxygen or fuel-gas distribution pipe 
system, shall be thoroughly conversant with the type of equipment, the pro- 
cess and safety requirements and shall have been judged competent by 
their employers before taking charge. They shall, at all times, possess the 
rules and instructions covering the operation and maintenance of oxygen or 
fuel-gas supply equipment including generators and oxygen or fud-gas 
distribution piping system. 

3.2 Stationary Automatic Acetylene Generator 

3.2.1 Approval and Marking — Generators shall beof approved construction 
and shall be clearly marked giving the information mentioned below: 

a) The maximum rate of acetylene (in cubic centimetres or cubic 
metres per hour) for which they are designed, 

b) The weight and size of carbide necessary for a single charge, 

c) The manufacturer's name and address, and 

d) The name or number of the type of generator. 

3.2.2 Rating -The total hourly output of a generator shall not exceed the 
rate for which it is approved and marked. When generators are coupled to 
deliver gas simultaneously, arrangements shall be made such that the rate 
of output of each does not exceed the rate fixed by the maker and the safety 
devices shall be adjusted to the increased output of gas. 

3.2.3 Location ef Generators -Generators shall preferably be placed outside 
the building in generator houses constructed and located in accordance with 
the requirements laid down under 3.2.4. Howwer, the installation of app- 
roved generators within buildings shall be permitted provided they comply 
with the requirements given under 3.2.5. 

3.2.4 Outside Generator Houses -No opening in any outside generator 
house shall be located within 1-50 m of any opening in another building. 

3.2.4.1 Sides and roofs of generator house shall be of non-combustible 
material. 

3.2.4.2 When a part of the generator house is to be used for the storage 
or manifolding of oxygen cylinders, the space to be so occupied shall be 
separated from the generator by partition walls running continuously from 
floor to roof or ceiling. The construction shall be of one of the types listed 
under 3.2.5.2. Such separation walls shall be without openings and shall 
tjfe joined to the floor, other walls and ceiling or roof in a manner so as to 
effect a permanent, air-tight joint. 



I8t818. 1968 

3.2.4.3 A portion of the exterior walls equal to not less than 1*0 cm* of 
vent area per 60 cm' of room volume shall be of light, non-combustible 
material, preferably of single-thickness and single-strength glass. Single- 
thickness and single-strength glass skylights may be accepted in part or 
entirely in lieu of the glass area or its equivalent, provided the required ratio 
of vent area is thus obtained. 

3.2.5 Inside Generator Rooms or Compartments 

3.2.5.1 The installation of acetylene generators within buildings shall 
be restricted to buildings not exceeding one storey in height. However, 
this need not be construed as prohibiting such installations on the roof or 
top floor of a building exceeding such height. 

Note — The word ' buildings * sliall mean buildings having occupancy other than that 
directly associated with the production of acetylene or the storage and manifolding of 
gases used in welding and cutting. 

3^.5/2 Where generators are installed inside buildings, they shall be 
enclosed in a separate room or compartment of ample size. The walls, par- 
titions,' floor and ceiling of such rooms or compartments shall be of one of 
the types of construction listed below, or of other construction equivalent in 
strength and fire resistance. Walls or partitions shall be continuous from 
floor to ceiling and shall be securely anchored. At least one wall of an 
inside generator room shall be an exterior wall. 

Types of Construction 

a) Gypsum or cement plaster at least 20 mm thick on metal laths on 
each side of a stud partition; 

b) Expanded metal laths enclosed in solid cement plaster not less than 
65 mm; 

c) Reinforced concrete; 

d) Brick; and 

e) Tile, gypsum or concrete block (cement plaster on each side to a 
thickness of 6 mm ). 

3.2.5.3 A portion of the exterior walls equal to not less than I'O cm* of 
vent area per 60 cm* of room volume shall be of light, non-combustible 
material, preferably single-thickness, single-strength glass. Single-thick- 
ness, single-strength glass skylights may be accepted in part or entirely in 
lieu of the glass area or its equivalent, provided the required ratio of vent 
area is thus obtained. 

3.2.6 Installation -The foundation for the generator shall be so arranged 
that the generator would be level and such that no excessive strain would 
be placed on the generator or its connection. Acetylene generators shall be 
grounded to water pipes. 



IS:818-19fiB 

3.2.7 Space Around Generator -There shall be ample space around the 
generator for free, unobstructed operation, maintenance, ready adjustment 
and charging. 

3.2.8 Ventilation, Heating and Ligliting o/Generator Houses or Rooms 

3.2.8.1 Tlie space around the generator shall be well-ventilated. This 
may be done by employing openings near the floor level and near the high- 
est practical point in the room. 

3.2.8.2 The heating of generator houses or rooms shall be by steam, 
hot water or other indirect heating system; the furnace shall be so located 
that no flame or fire is in or near the generator enclosure. Electric heaters 
shall not be employed. 

3.2.8.3 Generator house or room shall have natural light during day- 
light hours. Where artificial lighting is necessary, it shall be restricted to 
electric lamps set in air-tight frames in the exterior walls or roof of the gene- 
rator house or room without being enclosed by wired glass panels. Elect- 
rical installations, not of the flame-proof type, may be permitted in the 
generator room provided air under pressure is blown through the electrical 
conduits and fittings. 

Electric switches, telephones and all other electrical apparatus which 
may cause a spark shall be located outside the generator house or in a room 
or space separated from the generator room by an air-tight partition. 

3.2.8.4 No person shall smoke within 5 m of a generator house or room. 

3.2.9 Protection Against Freezing-Generators shall be placed where water 
would not freeze. The use of common salt (sodium chloride) or other 
corrosive chemicals for protection against freezing shall not be permitted. 
(For ' heating * systems, see 3.2.8.2 ). 

3.2.10 Water Supply Connections-Water shall not be supplied through a 
continuous connection to the generator, except when the generator is pro- 
vided with an adequate open overflow or automatic water shut-off which 
would effectively prevent overfilling of the generator. The supply pipe 
shall -terminate at a point not less than 5"0 cm above the regularly provided 
opening for filling so that it is possible to see the water as it enters the 
generator. 

3.2.11 Drain Connections — Unless otherwise specifically approved, the 
generator shall not be fitted with continuous drain connections leading to 
sewers. All the residue from the carbide shall be discharged through an 
open connection into an open tank provided in the open air. The residue 
shall remain for at least ten hours in not less than four times its bulk of 
water in such tank. 

Note -An open connection for the sludge draw-off at the generator U dairablc to 
enable the generator operator to observe leakage of generating water from tbe drain 
««lve or sludge cock. 



IS: 818 -1968 

3.2.11.1 Precautions shall be taken for preventing any lime sludge from 
being discharged into the drains. 

3.2.12 Generator Escape or Relief Pipe 

3.2.12.1 Each generator shall be provided with an escape or relief pipe 
of standard full-weight galvanized iron or steel, except that outside of build- 
ings vent pipes larger than 10"0 cm in diameter may be of galvanized tubing 
of sheet steel not less than 2*0 mm in thickness. 

3.2.12.2 The escape or relief pipe shall be installed without traps and in 
such a manner that condensation, if any, may drain back to the generator. 

3.2.12.3 The escape or relief pipe shall be carried full size to a suitable 
point outside the building and shall terminate in a hood or bend located at 
least 60 m above the ground, preferably above the roof and away from 
sources of ignition, such as flues or chimneys and tracks used by steam 
locomotives. Generating chamber relief pipes shall not be inter-connected 
but shall be led separately to the outside air. The hood <m- bend shall be 
so constructed that it would not be obstructed by rain, snow, ice, insects ot 
birds; the outlet shall be at least 90 cm from combustible construction. 

Note — Provisions under 3.2.12 apply only to generators in which the gas holder bell 
is incorporated. These are not applicable to generators which are provided with sepa- 
rate gas holders. Also, the relief pipe shall be provided when the gas holder is installed 
in a room. 

3.2.13 Maintenance and Operation 

3.2.13.1 Generator room shall be open to authorized persons only. A 
label or printed card giving fully detailed instructions as tp the use of the 
apparatus and a certificate by the licensee to the effect that the attendant 
who shall be mentioned by name has been properly instructed in tlie 
management of the apparatus shall be exhibited on or in close proximity to 
the apparatus. 

3.2.13.2 When recharging the genwator, the instructions of the manu- 
facturer shall be strictly followed with regard to the sequence of operations. 

3.2.13.3 The supply of calcium carbide and water to the generator 
shall be so regulated that the temperatures of the generating and cooling 
water do not rise above those indicated by the manufacturer, but in no case 
above 82°C. 

3.2.13.4 The calcium carbide shall De completely decomposed in the 
apparatus, so that the lime sludge discharged therefirom shall not be cap- 
able of generating more gas. 

The apparatus shall give no tarry or other heavy condensation products 
from the decomposition of the carbide. 

3.2.13.5 In the case of generators, when the charge of calcium carbide 
is exhausted and before additional calcium carbide is added, the generating 

10 



IS: 818 -1968 

chamber shall always be flushed out with water, renewing the water supply 
in accordance with the instruction card furnished by the manufacturer. 
Periodic cleaning and maintenance shall be performed in the manner speci- 
fied by the manufacturer. 

3.2.13.6 Charging of calcium carbide at other than daylight hours is 
allowed, if the generator room is lighted in accordance with 3.2.8.3. 

3.2.13.7 The carbide used each time for recharging the generator shall 
be just sufficient to refill the space provided for calcium carbide without 
ramming the charge. Only a wooden tool shall be used in distributing the 
charge. 

3.2.13.8 Partially decomposed charges of calcium carbide shall not be 
recharged into the generator. 

3.2.13.9 Generator water chambers shall at all times be kept filled to 
proper level, except while draining, during the recharging operation. 

3.2.13.10 Whenever repairs are to be made or the generator is to be 
charged or carbide is to be removed, the water chamber shall be completely 
filled to avoid the danger of explosion due to mixture of air and acetylene 
within the water space and also to prevent dropping of fresh calcium car- 
bide into insufficient water. Before making any repairs involving welding, 
soldering, brazing or any hot work or operation liable to produce a flame 
or spark, the calcium carbide charge and feed mechanism, shall be comj>- 
letely removed to avoid wetting the same, and all acetylene shall be expel- 
led by completely flooding the generator shell with water. The generator 
shall then be disconnected from the piping system and kept filled with 
water, as far as possible. It shall be maintained in a position so as to hold 
as much water as practicable. 

Hot repairs shall not be made in a room where there are other genera- 
tors unless all the generators and piping have been purged of acetylene. 
Hot repairs should preferably be made outdoors. 

3.2.13.11 Relief valves shall be regularly operated to ensure proper 
functioning. Relief valves for generating chambers shall be set to open at 
a pressure not in excess of 0'14kgf/cm'. 

3.2.13.12 All parts of the acetylene generator installation shall be 
maintained in good condition at all times. 

3.2.13.13 In dismantling any part of an acetylene installation, special 
care shall be taken to prevent the generation of sparks by friction or impact 
unless that part of the installation has been: 

a) thoroughly cleaned; 

b) carefully cleaned of calcium carbide, residue and sludge; 

c) thoroughly flushed; and 

d) completely filled with water, steam or an inert gas. 



IS:818.1968 

3.3 Stationary Non-Automatic Acetylene Generator — In addition to 

the requirements laid down under 3.2, non-automatic acetylene generators 
shall comply with the requirements laid down under 3.3.1 and 3.3.2. 

3.3.1 Limitations -Non-automatic generators shall not be used for gene- 
rating acetylene directly at pressures exceeding 0-07kgf/cm2 and all water 
overflows shall be visible. 

3.3.2 Gas Holders 

3.3.2.1 All gas holders shall be constructed on the gasometer principle, 
the bell being suitably guided. The gas bell shall move freely without 
tendency to bind and shall have a clearance of at least 5-0 cm from the shell. 

3.3.2.2 The gas holder may be located in the generator room, in a 
separate room or outdoors. When the gas holder is located indoors, the 
room shall be ventilated in accordance with 3.2.8.1. 

3.3.2.3 When the gas holder is not located within a heated building, 
gas holder seals shall be protected against freezing. 

3.3.2.4 Means shall be provided to stop the generator feeding mechan- 
ism before the gas holder reaches the upper limit of its travel. 

3.3.2.5 When the gas holder is connected to only one generator, the 
gas capacity of the holder shall be not less than one-third of the hourly 
rating of the generator. 

3.3.2.6 Where acetylene is used directly from the gas holder, a 
hydraulic back-pressure valve shall be used between the gas holder and shop 

line. 

3.4 Portable Automatic Acetylene Generator 

3.4.1 General 

3.4.1.1 All portable generators shall be of a type specifically approved 
for portable use and shall conform to the requirement specified'in the Car- 
bide of Calcium Rules, 1937, issued by the Government of India. 

3.4.1.2 Portable generators shall not be used within 3 metres of 
combustible material other than floor. 

3.4.1.3 Portable generators shall not be used in a room, the volume of 
which is less than 35 times the total gas generating capacity per charge of 
all the generators in the room. Generators shalfnot be used in rooms 
having a ceiling height of less than 3-00 m. 

3.4.1.4 Portable generators shall be protected against the freezing of 
water in the generator and in its appurtenances. The use of common salt 
(sodium chloride) or other corrosive chemicals for protection against freez- 
ing shall not be permitted. (For hearing system, see 3.2.8.2). 

12 



IS: 818 -1968 

3.4.1.5 The pressure in the generating apparatus shall not be increased 
above the designed pressure by placing weight on the generator or in any 
other manner. 

3.4.2 Operation and Maintenance 

3.4^.1 Portable generators shall be cleaned and recharged and the air 

mixture blown off outside buildings. In large, well-ventilated, one-storey 

buildings, special exceptions to this rule may be granted by the proper 
authorities. 

3.4.2.2 When charged with calcium carbide, portable generators shall 
not be moved by crane or derrick unless necessary precautions are taken to 
prevent tilting or dropping. 

3.4.2.3 When not in use, portable generators shall not be stored in any 
room in which open lights or fires are used unless such generators are free 
of carbide and thoroughly purged of gas. Storage rooms shall be ventilated 
to avoid the accumulation of acetylene. 

3.4.2.4 When portable acetylene generators are to be transported and 
operated on vehicles, they shall be securely anchored to the vehicles. If 
transported by truck, the motor shall be turned off during charging, clean- 
ing and generating periods. 

3.4.2.5 Cleaning and repair of acetylene generators shall, as far as 
possible, be undertaken in daylight. 

3.5 Calcium Carbide 

3.5.1 Storage -The storage of calcium carbide shall conform to the 
requirements laid down in the Carbide of Calcium Rules, 1937 issued by 
the Government of India. 

3.5.2 Containers and Packages-Calcium carbide shall be packed in metal 
containers of sufficient strength so as to permit handling without rupture 
and shall be provided with a screw top or its equivalent. The containers 
shall be constructed water and air-tight without the use of solder. How- 
ever, solder may be used at such points as may be necessary in order to 
close small crevices which it is not possible to seal otherwise. Solder shall 
not be in used joints in such a manner that fire would disrupt the package. 

Note- The metal from which the containers are made may contain not more 
than O'l percent of copper. 

3.5.3 Marking- Packages containing calcium carbide shall be conspi- 
cuously marked '' Calcium Carbide-Dangerous if not kept dry. The contents of 
this package are liable to give off a highly inflammable gas if brought into contact 
with moisture ', 

3.5.4 Opening Containers — Metal tools even so-called sparkless tools for 
opening calcium carbide containers, shall be used with caution to avoid 

13 



15:818-1968 

striking a spark; such a spark may cause ignition of an acetylene and au 
mixture. 

3.5.5 Handling — Drums shall be handled in such a manner that they are 
not punctured or ruptured. Full drums of calcium carbide shall be used in 
rotation as received from the supplier. 

3.5.5.1 All calcium carbide dust which is not usable shall he 
carefully removed from emptied containers and completely destroyed by 
immersion in not less than ten times its weight of water in a place in the 
open air at a sale distance from any flame. 

3.5.5.2 The waste calcium carbide dust shall not be allowed to enter 
public drains or water courses. 

3.5.6 Storage of Calcium Carbide Indoors 

3.5.6.1 General — Calcium carbide shall not be kept at any place con- 
taining impurities which will cause the evolution of any ignitable gas. 

3.5.6.2 Storage building-Every building for the storage of calcium 
carbide shall be constructed of non-inflammable material with non-inflam- 
mable roofs and with tiled, paved? cemented, iron or steel floors raised at 
least 30 cm above the ground level. The buildings shall be well-ventilated 
and water-proofed. 

3.5.6.3 Arrangements in storage buildings- Calcium carbide shall be 
stored only on racks or trestles standing at least 30 cm above the level of 
the floor of the building. No article of an inflammable or combustible 
nature shall be kept in the same building. 

3.5.6.4 Storage -Calcium carbide shall be stored: 

a) if in quantities aggregating not more than 225 kg -in a suitable 
un-inhabited building at least 6'0 m away from any other premises. 
However, quantities not exceeding 1 10 kg may be stored in a 
building connected with a shop at a distance not less than 3*0 mm 
from, any other premises; 

b) if in quantities aggregating more than 225 kg but not more than 

1 350 kg-in a suitable uninhabited building at least 12"0 m away 
from any other premises; and 

c) if in quantities aggregating more than J 350 kg — in an un-inhabit- 
ed building at least 18"0 m away from any other premises and at 
least 9"0 m away from any road. 

Notices reading as follows, shall be displayed on the outside of the 
ioors of the stores: 

' Calcium Carbide — .Vo naked light shall be brought near this store. ' 

NoTitl — The distances specified under 3.5.6.4 may be reduced suitably if warrant- 
ed, provided screen walls are erected or other special precautions arc taken. 

NoTjt 2 -Not more than 1000x10* kg of carbide of calcium sliall be stored in any 
one building, provided that not more than 250 x 10' kg of carbide of calcium is siorrU 
in any one room or other part of the building. 

14 



IS: 818 -1968 

3.5.6,5 Disposal of wet carbide — If any carbide becomes wet, it sliall be 
destroyed by being submerged in deep water. If deep water is not avail- 
able, the wet carbide shall be spread out in the open in an isolated place 
and all precautions shall be taken to pre^/ent any fire or artificial light or 
sources of ignition being brought near until the material has given off all 
its gas. 

3.6 Service Piping Systems 

3.6.1 M aterial 

3.6.1.1 General-Except as provided under 3.6.1.2 and 3.6.1.3, all pip- 
ing shall be of wrought iron, steel, brass, copper or other suitable material. 

3.6.1.2 Oxygen piping -Black steel, wrought iron, brass or copper shall 
be used for oxygen piping up to a maximum working pressure of 3'f>kgf/ 
cm". Black steel, brass or copper shall be up to a maximum working pres- 
sure of 2 1 -Okgr/crn*. Piping meant to work at a pressure between 2 1 -Okgf/ 
cm^ and 140.0 kgf/cm- should be heavy gauge copper or approved steel 
tubing. Systems intended for a working pressure in excess of 140'O.kgf/ 
cm* should be of extra heavy gauge copper or heavy gauge approved steel 
tubing. 

All fittings and lengths of pipe for service lines shall be examined 
before assembly and, if necessary, hammered to free them from scale or dirt. 
They shall be washed out with a suitable non-flammable solution which 
would effectively remove grease and dirt. Hot solutions of tri-chlorethy- 
lene, caustic soda and tri-sodium phosphate solutions have been found 
effective cleaning agents for this purpose. 

3.6.1.3 Acetylene Piping-Steels or wrought iron pipe shall be used for 
acetylene piping. Under no circumstances shall acetylene gas be brought 
in contact with metal containing more than 70 percent copper except in 
torches. 

3.6.2 Jointing 

3.6.2.1 Joints in steel or wrought iron pipe shall be welded, brazed ot 
soldered or made up with threaded or flanged fittings. Rolled, forged or 
cast steel or malleable iron fittings may be employed. 

3.6.2.2 Joints in brass or copper pipe may be welded, brazed or 
soldered or made up with threaded or flanged fittings; or if of the socket 
type, they may be brazed. 

3.6.23 Joints in seamless copper, brass or other non-ferrous gas tubing 
shall be made, by means of suitable fittings; or, if of the socket pipe they 
may be brazed. 

3.6.2.4 Threaded connections in oxygen piping shall be tinned or 
made up with litharge and glycerine (litharge and water are sometimes 

15 



18:818-1968 

used for service pressures over 2 1 •Okgf/cm*), applied to the male threads 
only. 

3.6.3 Installation 

3.6.3.1 All acetylene distribution installations shall be provided with 
suitably located shut-off valves for the isolation of the service-piping system 
or systems. 

3.6.3.2 Purifiers— Purifiers shall be so designed that their walls resist 
attack by the purifying substance and they do not unduly impede the pass- 
age of the acetylene. 

3.6.3.3 If acetylene is purified, the purifying substances shall not 
contain ingredients that form explosive substances with acetylene {see 
18:308-1962*). 

3.6.3.4 Sludge pits and drains for sludge from acetylene installation 
shall be open to the atmosphere and shall be adequately fenced. 

3.6.3.5 The working of the acetylene installation shall be properly 
controlled. Generators and the conditions in which they operate shall not 
be modified without the approval of the competent authority. 

3.6.3.6 Piping located inside or outside of buildings may be placed 
above or below ground. All piping shall be run as directly as practicable, 
carefully protected against injury, proper allowance being made for expan- 
sion and contraction, jarring and vibration. Pipe laid underground in 
earth shall be located below the frost line and protected against corrosion. 
After assembly, piping shall be thoroughly blown out with air or nitrogen to 
remove foreign materials. For oxygen piping oil-free oxygen, oil-free air or 
oil-free nitrogen shall be used. 

3.6.3.7 Oxygen piping may be placed in the same tunnel, trench or 
duct with fuel-gas pipe lines, provided there is good natural or forced 
ventilation, but under no circumstances shall an oxygen pipe line be placed 
in a tunnel, trench or duct where it may be exposed to contact with oil. 

3.6.3.8 Where, of necessity, low points occur in any piping carrying a 
moist gas, they shall be drained into drip pots constructed so as to permit 
pumping or draining out the condensate at necessary intervals, and provid- 
ed with drain valves having outlets normally closed with screw caps or 
plugs. No open-end valve or pet-cocks shall be used, except that in drips 
located outdoors, underground, and not readily accessible, valves may be 
used at such points if they are equipped with means to secure them in the 
closed position. Pipes leading to the surface of the ground shall be en- 
cased or jacketed where necessary to prevent loosening or breaking. 

3.6.3.9 When necessary, gas cocks or valves shall be provided for 
buildings at points where they would be readily accessible for shutting off 



^Specification for dissolved acetylene ( gas ) ( revised). 

16 



the gas supply to them in any emergency. Underground valve boxes or 
manholes shall be avoided wherever possible. When used, they shall be 
constructed so as to provide good natural ventilation. There shall also be 
provided a shut-off valve in the discharge line from the generator, gas 
holder, manifold or other source of supply. 

3.6.3.10 When combustible gas lines or other parts of equipment 
are being purged of air or gas, open lights or other sources of ignition shall 
not be permitted within 6"0 m of uncapped openings. 

3.6.3.11 No welding of additional hangers or supports to any oxygen 
or acetylene line shall be done until after the line has been thoroughly 
purged with air or nitrogen. Only oil-free oxygen, oil-free air, oil-free 
nitrogen or oil-free carbon dioxide shall be used to purge oxygen lines. 

3.6.4 Testing -All high pressure piping and valve in the case of a dis- 
solved acetylene factory shall be hydraulically tested to 49'Okgf/cin* and 
before gas is compressed in dissolved acetylene cylinders, the high pressure 
system shall be purged with air. 

3.6.4.1 Oxygen pipe lines shall be tested to 1'75 times the working 
pressure. But in case the working pressure is over 140'0kgf/cm* they 
shall be tested to 1"6 times the working pressure. Oxygen piping to be used 
at a working pressure in excess of 21*0kgf/cm* should be tested hydrauli- 
cally with water before being tested by gas. Any medium used for testing 
oxygen pipe lines shall be free from oil. Naked lights shall not be used to 
detect leaks. 

3.6.5 Painting and Signs 

3.6.5.1 All buried pipe and tubing and all outdoor ferrous pipe and 
tubing shall be covered or painted to protect against corrosion. 

3.6.5.2 All exposed oxygen pipe lines except copper pipes shall be 
identified by one colour of paint, and all exposed fuel-gas pipes by a differ- 
ent colour. Where more than one fuel-gas is employed, the pipe lines 
supplying the different fuel-gases shall be identified by distinctive means. 

3.6.5.3 Where colours are used -as means for identification, a colour 
chart indicating the colours employed for this purpose shall be prominently 
displayed or the piping shall otherwise be identified. 

3.6.5.4 All outlet stations shall be identified suitably. 

3.6.5.5 Signs clearly establishing the location and identity of section 
shut-off valves shall be provided. 

3.6.6 Hydraulic Back-Pressure Fa/wi- The terms' hydraulic back-pressure 
valves ', ' hydraulic valves ' and ' hydraulic seals ' are used interchangeably. 

3.6.6.1 In low-pressure fuel-gas systems including acetylene, liquefied 
petroleum gas, city gas, natural gas, etc,where the gas, i» piped at a pressure. 

17 



ISiS18.1968 

not in excess of O'OTkgf/cm* an approved hydraulic back-pressure valve 
shall be employed at every point where gzts is withdrawn from the piping 
system to supply a torch or machine. A shut-off valve shall be installed at 
the inlet of each hydraulic valve. 

3.6.6.2 In fuel-gas systems where the gas is piped at a pressure in 
excess of 0"07kgf/cm*, ah approved service regulator, check valve or hy- 
draulic back-pressure valve shall be employed at every point where gas ip 
withdrawn from the piping system to supply a torch or machine. A shut- 
off valve shall be installed at the inlet of each hydraulic back-pressure valve, 
regulator or check valve. 

3.6.6.3 The escape or relief pipe from hydraulic back-pressure valves 
shall be at least as large as the vent connection on the hydraulic back- 
pressure valve. The escape or relief pipe should be installed without lo v 
points where moisture may collect. If shop conditions make low points 
unavoidable, these points shall be provided with drip pots normally closed 
with screw caps or plugs. No petcocks shall be used. 

3.6.6.4 The escape or relief pipe shall be carried full size to a suitable 
point outside the building and shall terminate in a hood or bend located at 
least 6"0 m above the ground, preferably above the roof, and as far as 
practicable from windows or other openings into buildings and also from 
sources of ignition, such as flues or chimneys and tracks used by steam 
locomotives. The hood or bend shall be so constructed that it is not obs- 
tructed by rain, snow, ice, insects or birds; the outlet shall be at least 90 cm 
from combustible construction. No valves shall be installed between the 
vessel and the safety valve nor in the safety valve discharge line. 

3.6.63 Correct liquid levels in hydraulic back-pressure valves shall be 
maintained. Such liquid levels shall be checked at intervals frequexit 
enough to ensure correctness of the same. Permanent type anti-freeze may 

be used in hydraulic back-presssure valves for manifold branch line? and 
station outlet service, but not hydraulic back-pressure valves on acetylene 
generators. 

3.6.7 Portable Outlet Headers-The term 'Portable outlet header ' is used to 
mean any assembly of valves and connections used for service outlet pur- 
poses, which is connected to the service piping system by means of hose or 
other non-rigid conductors. Devices of this nature are commonly used at 
piers and drydocks in shipyards where it is not possible to locate the service 
piping close enough to the work to provide a direct supply. 

3.6.7.1 Use of portable outle. headers shall be restricted to locations 
outdoors, and to temporary service where the conditions preclude a direct 
supply from outlets located on the service piping system. 

3.6.7.2 Each outlet on the service piping from which oxygen or fuel-gas 
is withdrawn to supply a portable outlet header shall be equipped with a 

18 



IS: 818 -1968 

shut-off valve located in a readily accessible position. The installation of a 
hydraulic back-pressure valve or non-return valve on the supply outlet of 
the fuel-gas service piping is some times desirable. 

3.6.7.3 Hose used for connecting the portable outlet header to the ser- 
vice piping outlet shall comply with the requirements specified under 3.10.1 
to 3.10.3 for torch hose. 

3.6.7.4 Connection fittings for the supply hose shall comply with the 
requirements specified under 3.10.1.2 and 3.10.4. Connections for oxygen 
hose shall be of sufficiently different dimensions or patterns from that for 
fuel-gas to prevent intermixing in making a connection. 

3.6.7.5 Outlet headers for fuel-gas service shall be provided with hy- 
draulic back-pressure valves installed at the inlet ends preceding the service 
outlets unless an approved service regulator check valve or hydraulic back- 
pressure valve is employed at each outlet. Outlets provided on headers for 
oxygen service may be fitted for the use of pressure-reducing regulators or 
for direct hose connections. 

3.6.7.6 If conditions necessitate, each service outlet on the portaoie 
header unit shall be provided with a valve assembly that includes a detach- 
able outlet seal cap, chained or otherwise attached to the body of the valve. 

3.6.7.7 Materials and methods of fabrication employed in the construc- 
tion of portable outlet headers shall comply with the requirements specified 
under 3.6.1, 3.6.2, 3.6.4 3.6.5.2 and 3.6.5.4. 

3.6.7.8 Portable outlet headers shall be provided with frames which 
would support the equipment securely in its correct operating position, and 
protect it from injury during handling and operation. 

3.7 Storage, Handling and Use of Oxygen and Fuel-Gas Cylinders 

3.7.1 Storage 

3.7.1.1 Cylinders shall be kept away from radiators and other sources 
of heat. 

3.7.1.2 Inside buildings, cylinders shall, be stored in a well -protected, 
well -ventilated, dry location, well away from highly combustible maierials, 
such as oil or excelsior. Cylinders shall be stored in definitely assigned 
places away from elevators, stairs or gangways. Assigned storage spaces 
shall be located where cylinders would not be knocked over or damaged by 
passing or falling objects. Cylinders shall not be kept in unventilated 
enclosures, such as lockers and cup-boards. 

3.7.1.3 Cylinders containing oxygen and combustible gases, such as 
acetylene and hydrogen should not be stored in the same room. How- 
ever, if stored in the same room under unavoidable circumstances, they 
should be kept far apart. Acetylene cylinders shall always be stored 
upright. 

19 



I8i8l8-1968 

3>7.1,4 All cylinders shall be protected against excessive rise in 

temperature. Cylinders may be stored in tljie open, provided they arfe 
protected against inclemency of weather. During winter, cylinders stored 
in the open shall be protected against accumulation of ice or snow. 
Warm ( not boiling) water shall be used to thaw ice in cylinder valve 
outlets. Cylinders stored in the open shall be screened against the conti- 
nuous direct rays of the sun in localities where extreme temperatures 
prevail. Cylinders containing oxygen shall .be stored separate from cylin- 
ders fuel-gases. 

3.7.1.5 Full cylinders of oxygen and fuel-gas shall be used in rotation 
as received from the supplier. 

3.7.1.6 Empty cylinders shall have their valves closed. 

3.7.1.7 Valve protection caps, when provided for, shall always be 
in place, hand-tight, except when cylinders are in use or connected for use. 

3.7.2 Handling 

3.7.2.1 When transporting cylinders by a crane or derrick, a cradle, 
boat or suitable platform shall be used. Slings or electric magnets shall 
not be used for this purpose. Valve-protection caps, when provided for, 
shall always be in place. 

3.7.2.2 Cylinders may be moved by tilting and rolling them on their 
bottom edges; dragging and sliding shall be avoided. When cylinders 
are transported on a hand truck, they shall be secured in position. Cylin- 
ders shall not be dropped or struck, nor shall they be permitted to strike 
each other violently. 

3.7.2.3 Valve-protection caps shall not be used for lifting cylinders 
from one vertical position to another. Bars shall not be used under valves 
or valve-protection caps to pry cylinders loose when frozen to the ground 
or otherwise fixed; the use of warm (not boiling) water is recommended. 
Valve-protection caps are designed to protect cylinder valves from da- 
mage. &fore raising cylinders provided with valve-protection caps from 
a horizontal to a vertical position, the cap shall be turned clockwise to 
see that it is hand-tight, then the cylinder shall be raised by grasping 
the cap. 

3,7 J2A a suitable cylinder truck,, chain or steadying device should 
be used to keep cylinders from being knocked over while in use. 

3.7Jt.5 Unless cylinders are secured on a special truck, regulators 
shall be removed and valve-protection caps, when provided for, shall be 
put in place before cylinders are moved. 

3.7.2.6 Cylinder valves shall be closed before moving cylinders. 

3.7.2.7 Cylinder valves shall be closed when work is finished. 

20 



ISi818-1968 

3.7^J Valves of empty cylinders shall be cicsed. 

3.7.2.9 Cylinders shall be kept sufficiently far away from the actual 
welding or cutting operations so that sparks, hot slag, or flames might 
not reach them. Also acetylene cylinders shall always be kept with the 
outlet facing upwards. 

3.7.2.10 Cylinders shall not be placed where they might become part 
of an electric circuit. Contacts with third rails, trolley wires, etc, shall be 
avoided. Cylinders shall be kept away from radiators, piping systems, 
layout tables, etc, that may be used for grounding electric circuits, such 
as for arc-welding machines. Tapping of an electrode against a cylinder 
to strike an arc shall be prohibited. 

3.7.2.11 Cylinders shall never be used as rollers or supports, whether 
full or empty. 

3.7.2.12 The numbers and markings stamped on cylinders shall not 
be tempered with. 

3.7.2.13 Empty cylinders shall be marked ' empty 'or ' MT' segregated 
from full cylinders and promptly returned to the supplier witJh valve- 
protection caps in place. All valves shall be closed. 

3.7.2.14 No person other than the gas supplier shall attempt to mix 
gases in a cylinder. No one except the owner of the cylinder or person 
authorized for him shall refill a cylinder. No one shall use a cylinder's 
contents for purposes other than those intended by the supplier. 

3.7.2.15 No one shall temper with the safety devices provided in 
cylinders or valves. 

3.7.2.16 If an acetylene cylinder is heated accidentally or becomes 
hot due to excessive or severe back fire from use of faulty equipment, 
it shall be dealt with promptly as follows: 

a) The valve shall be shut. 

b) Regulator or other fittings shall be detached. 

c) The cylinder shall be taken outdoors. 

d) It shall be immersed in water or water shall be applied copiously. 

e) The valve shall be opened and the cylinder kept cool in water 

until empty. 

NoTB— As these operations may take several hours, the suppliers should be contacted 
for further advice. 

3.73 Fuel-Gas Cylinders 

3.7.3.1 Fuel-gases shall be called by their full names and not by 
the word 'gas' 

21 



IS: 818 -1968 

3.7.3.2 Storage 

a) Inside a building, cylinders except those in actual use or attached 
ready for use shall be limited to a gas capacity of 56 m* or 112 kg 
of liquefied petroleum gas. In large under-ventilated one-storey 
buildings, special exceptions to this rule may be granted by proper 
authorities. 

b) For storage in excess of 56-00 m', total gas capacity of cylinders 
or 112 kg, of liquefied petroleum gas, a separate room or 
compartment conforming to the requirements specified under 
3.2.5.2 and 3.2.5.3 shall be provided, or cylinders shall be kept 
outside or in a special building. The rooms or compartments 
of the special building for storage of gas cylinders shall have 
no open flame for heatmg or lighting and shall be well -ventilated. 
Signs reading, 'Danger — .Ho Smoking, Matches or Open Lights' (or 
other equivalent wording) shall be conspicuously pasted. 

c) Fuel-gas cylinders shall be placed with valve-end up whenever 
they are in use. Acetylene cylinders shall be stored valve-end up. 

3.7.3.3 The following special precautions shall be taken while storing 
liquefied petroleum gas: 

a) No cylinders shall be stored below ground level or on the upper 

floors. 

b) Between the storage shed and any building, public place, public 
road or any adjoining property which may be built upon, the 
following minimum distances shall always be maintained as a 
sefety zone, namely: 

Q uantity of Liquefied Petroleum M inimum Distances to lie 

Gas in Cylinders, kg Kept Clear in Metres 

to 100 — 

131 „ 1000 3 

1001,, 4000 5 

4001 „ 8000 7 

8001 „ 12000 9 

12 001 „ 30000 12 

Over 30000 15 

provided that the distances specified above may be reduced by 
the proper authorities ( 1 ) where screen walls are provided or other 
special precautions taken; or (2) where there are special circum- 
stances which in their opinion would justify such reduction. 

c) Liquefied petroleum gas exceeding 100 kg but not exceeding 300 kg 
may be kept in a storage shed forming part of, or attached 
to a building provided that it is separated therefrom by a substan- 
tial partition and the only means of access to it is from the 

22 



I$i818.196B 

outside air. Such storage shed shall not be situated under any 
staircase, or near other entrances to, or exits from the rest of the 
building or other buildings. 

d) No addition or alteration shall be carried out in the storage shed 
without the previous sanction in writing by the proper authority. 

e) Sufficient number of fire extinguishers and adequate supply of 
sand shall be kept at the storage shed. 

f) Empty cylinders which were being used for storing liquefied petro- 
leum gas shall be kept in the approved storage shed, unless they 
have been thoroughly cleaned and freed from the inflammable gas. 

g) The cylinders, if stored vertically, shall not be stored more than 
three high. If stored horizontally they shall not be stocked more 
than five high in the case of full cylinders and seven high in the 
case of empty cylinders. 

3.73.4 Use 

a) Fuel-gas cylinders shall be handled carefully. (Rough handling, 
knocks, or falls are liable to damage the cylinder, valve or safety 
devices and cause leakage.) Cylinders in use shall be held in 
position by straps, collars or chains to prevent them from falling 
over. The devices for holding the cylinders shall be such that 
it is possible to remove the cylinders rapidly in case of fire. Suitable 
designed equipment shall be used for transporting gas cylinders. 

Before connecting a regulator to a cylinder valve, the valve shall 
be opened slightly and closed immediately. (This action is generally 
termed cracking. ) This action is intended to clear the valve of dust 
or dirt that otherwise might enter the regulator. The valve shall be 
opened while standing to one side of the outlet, never in front of it. 

A fuel-gas cylinder valve shall never be cracked near other 
welding work or near sparks, flame or other possible sources of ignition. 

b) Before a regulator is removed from a cylinder valve, the cylinder 
valve shall always be closed and the gas released fix>m the regulator. 

c) Nothing shall be placed on top of an acetylene cylinder when in use 
which may damage the safety device or interfere with the quick 
closing of the valve. 

d) If on opening the valve on a fuel-gas cylinder there is found to be 
a leak around the valve stem, the valve shall be closed and the 
gland nut tightened. If this does not stop the leak, the use of the 
cylinder shall be discontinued, and the same removed outdoors, 
properly tagged and the supplier advised. In case the fuel-gas 
leaks from the cylinder valve, and it is not possible to shut it off 
with the valve stem, the cylinder shall be removed outdoors, pro- 
perly tagged and the supplier advised. A regulator may be attach" 

23 



IS 1 818. 1968 

ed to a cylinder valve to stop temporarily a leak through the valve 
seat. 

e) If a leak should develop at a fuse plug or other safety device, the 
cylinder shall be removed outdoors, well away from any source of 
ignition; the cylinder valve shall be opened slightly and the fuel-gas 
allowed to escape slowly. 

f) A warning shall be placed near the cylinders having leaking fuse 
plugs or other leaking safety devices not to approach them with a 
lighted cigarette or other source of ignition. Such cylinders shall 
plainly tagged, the supplier promptly notified and his instructions 
followed as to their return. 

g) Safety devices shall not be tempered with. 

h) Fuel-gas shall never be used fi-om cylinders through torches or 
other devices equipped with shut-off valves without reducing the 
pressure through a' suitable regulator attached to the cylinder valve 
or manifold. 

j) The cylinder valve shall always be opened slowly. 

k) An acetylene cylinder valve shall not be opened more than 1^ 
turns of the spindle. 

m) Where a special wrench is required, it shall be left in position on 
the stem of the valve while the cylinder is in use so that the fuel- 
gas flow may be quickly turned off in case of emergency. In the 
case of manifolded or coupled cylinders at least one such wrench 
shall always be available for immediate use. 

3.7.4 Oxygen Cylinders 

3<7.4,1 The following important precautions shall be observed: 

a) Oxygen shall always be referred to by its name * Oxygen ' and not 
by the word air. Oxygen does not bum, but supports and acce- 
lerates combustion and, therefore, causes oil and other similar 
materials to bum with great intensity. Oil or grease in the pre- 
sence of oxygen under pressure may ignite violently. 

Warning -A serious accident may easily result if oxygen is used 
as a substitute for compressed air. Oxygen shall not be used in 
pneumatic tools, in oil pre-heating burners, to start internal- 
combustion engines, to blow out pipe lines, to dust clothing or work, 
to create pressure or for ventilation. 

b) Cylinders, cylinder valves, couplings, regulators, hose and appara- 

tus shall be kept free from oily or greasy substances. Oxygen 
cylinders or apparatus shall not be handled with oily hands or 
gloves. Oxygen cylinders shall not be handled on the same plat- 
form with oil or placed in position where oil or grease firom over- 
head cranes or belts is likely to fall upon them. A jet of oxygen 

24 



IS: 818. 1968 

shall notstrikt an oily suffice, greasy clothes, or enter a fuel oil or 
other storage tank. 

3.7.4.2 Storage -Oxygen cylinders shall not be stored near (a) highly 
combustible material, especially oil and grease; (b) reserve stocks of cal- 
cium carbide, and acetylene or other fuel-gas cylinders; (c) any other sub- 
stance likely to cause or accelerate fire; and (d) in an acetylene generator 

compartment. 

3.7.4.3 Use 

a) Oxygen cylinders shall not be dropped or otherwise roughly 
handled. 

b) Unless connected to a manifold, oxygen from a cylinder shaii not 
be used without first attaching an oxygen regulator to the cylinder 
valve. Before connecting the regulator to the cylinder valve, the 
valve shall be opened slightly for an instant and then dosed. This 
action is intended to clear the valve of dust or dirt that otherwise 
might enter the regulator. The cylinder valve shall be opened 
while standing to one side of the outlet. 

c) A hammer or wrench shal I not be used to open oxygen cyl i nder 
valves. If it is not possible to open the valves by hand, the supp- 
lier shall be notified. 

d) Oxygen cylinder valves shall not be tempered with nor shall any 
attempt to repair them be made. If trouble is experienced, the 
supplier shall be sent a report promptly indicating the character of 
the trouble and the cylinder's serial number. The supplier's 
instructions as to its return shall be followed. 

e) After a regulator is attached, an oxygen cylinder valve shall be 
opened slightly at first so that the regulator cylinder-pressure- 
gauge hand moves up slowly; then the valve shall be opened all 
the way. If the high pressure is suddenly released, it is liable to 
damage the regulator and pressure gauges. The cylinder valve 
shall be opened whilestanding to one side of the regulator and 
not in front of the glass covered gauge faces. 

f) When the oxygen cylinder is in use, the valve shall be opened fully 
(In the case of diaphragm-type valve) in order to prevent leakage 
around the valve stem Complete removal of stem from a dia- 
phragm-type cylinder valve shall be avoided. 

3.8 Manifolding of Cylinders 

3^.1 General 

3.8.1.1 Cylinders are manifolded for the purpose of centralizing the 
gas supply, to provide a continuous supply of gas and to provide gas at a 
rate in excess of that which may be obtained ftom a single cylinder. Such 
manifolds shall be of substantial construction and of a design and materials. 

25 



18:818-1968 

suitable for the particular gas and service for which they are to be used. 
The wide range of pressures involved in the gases used, which range fit>m 
the relatively, low pressures of some of the fuel-gases to the high pi-essures 
needed for oxygen, makes it necessary that care be employed in the const- 
ruction, installation and maintenance of manifolds, it is advisable to 
obtain manifolds from, and have them installed under the supervision of 
those familiar with the proper practices with reference to their construction 
and use. 

3.8.1.2 All component parts used in the methods of manifolding des- 
cribed under 3.8.2 shall be approved with regard to materials, design and 
construction either separately or as an assembled unit. 

3.8.1.3 All manifolds and parts used in methods of manifolding shall 
be used only for the gas or gases for which they are approved. 

3.8.1.4 When acetylene cylinders are coupled, approved flash arres- 
ters shall be installed immediately after the pressure-reducing device 
which shall be fitted to the outlet valve of the couplers. 

3.8.1.5 Each fuel-gas cylinder lead should be provided with a back- 
flow check valve if more than three fuel cylinders are coupled together. 

3.8.1.6 The aggregate capacity of fuel-gas cylinders connected to a 
portable manifold inside a building shall not exceed 56*00 m> of gas. 

3.8.1.7 Acetylene and liquefied fuel-gas cylinders shall be manifolded 
in a vertical position. 

3^.2 Manifolding of Cylinders for Direct Supply to Consuming Devices 

3.83.1 In one type of manifolding, the gas passes from the cylinders 
through individual cylinders leads to a single common coupler block 
and from there through a single common pressure-reducing regulator to the 
consuming device. 

3.8.2.2 In a second type of manifolding, the cylinders are con&ted 
together in sequence. The individual cylinders are provided with coupler 
tees attached to the cylinder valve. The gas content of each cylinder 
passes through the coupler tee and joins the main gas stream flowing 
through a common line composed of leads joining coupler tee to successive 
coupler tee. A properly supported regulator serves the entire group of 
connected cylinders. 

Note — The units described under 3.8.2.2 and 3.6.2.3 arc generally calM portable 
manifolds. 

3.8.2.3 The aggregate capacity of fuel-gas cylinders connected as 
a unit inside a building as described in 3.8.2.1 or 3.8.2.2 shall not exceed 
56-00 m* of gas or 112 kg in the case of liquefied petroleum gas {See 
Note under 3.8.2.2 ). 

26 



IS 1 818- 1968 
3JtJ3 Manifolding of Cylinders for Shop Pipe Line Supply Systems 

3.8.3.1 Cylinders are manifolded for shop pipe line supply systems 
by means of substantially supported stationary pipe-type headers to which 
a number of cylinders are connected by means of leads. One or more 
permanently mounted regulator serve to reduce and regulate the pressure 
of the gas flowing from the cylinders to the point or points of consumption. 
Such stationary manifolds shall comply with 3^.3^ and 3.8.4. 

3.8.3.2 Fuel-gas manifolds (acetylene, liquefied fuel-gases and non- 
. liquefied fuel-gases other than acetylene) shall comply with the following 
requirements: 

a) Only cylinders containing fuel-gas at approximately equal pressure 
shall be manifolded. 

b) Fuel-gas cylinders may be manifolded inside a building provided 
the following conditions are satisfied: 

1) Adequate ventilation is provided in the part where they are 
manifolded; 

2) No flame is brought near its vicinity; and 

3) The portion of the building, where such manifolding is done, is 
separated from the rest of the building by means of a suitable 
flame-proof partition wall. 

3.8.3.3 Special buildings or rooms, if provided, shall have no other 
occupancy except that they may be used for the storage of cylinders 
containing fuel-gaps and drums of calcium carbide. Such buildings or 
rooms shall have no open flames for heatmg or lighting and shall be 
well-ventilated. 

3.8.4 Oxygen Manifolds 

3.8.4.1 Oxygen manifolds shall not be located in an acetylene gene- 
rator room, nor in close proximity to cylinders of combustible gases. 
Unless well separated, there shall be a fire-resistive partition of one of 
the types of construction listed under 3.2.5.2 between the oxygen manifold 
and the combustible gas cylinders. Oxygen manifolds shall be located 
away from highly inflammable material oil, grease or any substance 
likely to cause or accelerate fire. 

3.8.4.2 Oxygen manifolds to which cylinders having an aggregate 
capacity of more than 170*00m* of oxygen are connected shall preferably 
be located outside or in a special building. If located inside a building 
having other occupancy, such manifolds shall be located in a separate 
room of fire-resistive construction or in an area of fire-resistive construction 
with no combustible material within 6*0 m of the manifold. 

27 



ISt818-1968 

3Jt,5 Liquid Oxygen — Where liquid oxygen m a quantity exceeding 
4501 kq is to be used for welding and cutting, the container or containers 
should preferably be located outside or in a special building having no 
other occupancy except that related to the handling and gasification of 
the oxygen. 

3.9 Prcssnre-Rediiciiig Regulators 

3.9.1 Regulators or automatic reducing valves shall be used only for 
the gas and at pressures for which they are intended. 

3.9.2 Pressure-adjusting screws on regulators shall always be fully releas- 
ed before the regulator is attached to a cylinder and the cylinder valve 
opened. 

3.9.3 W hen repairs to regulators or parts of regulators, such as gauges, 
are necessary, such repairs shall be performed only by skilled mechanics. 
Working of low-pressure gauges attached to regulators shall be periodically 
tested to ensure their accuracy. Oxygen gauges shall not be tested 
with oil. In general it is best to return regulators to the supplier for 
repairs, calibrations or adjustments. 

3.9.4 Union nuts and connections on regulators shall be inspected before 
use to detect faulty seats which may cause leakage of gas when the regu- 
lators are attached to the cylinder valves. W hen damaged nuts or connec- 
tions are found, they shall be removed from service. 

3.10 Hose 

3.10.1 H ose for welding and cutting operations shall conform to I S : 447- 
1964* or IS : 3572-19661. 

3.10.1.1 Red is the generally recognized colour for acetylene and 
other fiiel-gas hose and green or black for oxygen hose. 

3.10.1.2 Screwed coupling on these hoses shall have different thread:» 
and shall be plainly marked to avoid interchanging the hose. 

3.10.2 A single hose having more than one gas passage, a wall &ilure 
of which would permit the flow of one gas into the other gas passage, 
shall not be permitted. However, hoses joined by a web so as to form 
integral lengths of double hose may be accepted provided that the hoses 
are easily distinguished from each other by labelling ( not readily removable, 
and at mtecvals not greater than 2*0 m on at least one of the divisions or 
sides of the dual hose with the name of the gas for which the division 
or side is intended, such as oxygen or acetylene, and provided further 
that there is supplementary identification by (a) different colours for the 



A Sp&fication for welding and cutting hose of rubber with woven reinforcement ( nvisiJ) 
(Second revision in 1968) . 

tSpecification for brmided welding and cutting hoK <rf' rubber. ( Since reviled ). 

28 



IS>SI8-19«8 

exterior or interior of the divisions or sides, or ( b )feel or touch ( that 
is, smoother versus ribbed or rough exterior wall suriace). 

When parallel lengths of oxygen and acetylene hose are taped together 
for convenience and to prevent tangling, not more than 10"0 cm out of 
every 20'0 cm shall be covered with tape. 

3.10.3 Hose connections shall be made through substantial fittings, and 
clamped or otherwise securely fastened to these connections in such a 
manner as to withstand without leakage a pressure twice as great as the 
maximum delivery pressure of the pressure regulators provided on the 
system. 

3.10.4 Hose shall not be crimped or kinked. Hose shall not be bent 
or otherwise deformed to control the pressure. Only torch, regulator or 
cylinder valves shall be used to control the flow of gas. 

3.10.5 After connecting welding or cutting apparatus to oxygen and 
fuel-gas cylinders, or when starting to re-use the apparatus after an inter- 
val of one-half hour or more, each gas shall be allowed to flow through 
its respective hose separately for a few seconds so as to purge the hose 
of any mixture of gases. This operation shall not be performed in a 
confined space. 

3.11 Blow Pipes 

3.11.1 A blow pipe of the injector type intended for use with low pres- 
sure shall not be used in connection with high pressure acetylene unless 
a suitable control valve is fitted. A blow pipe of the non-injector type 
intended for use with high pressure shall not be used with low pressure 
acetylene. 

3.11.2 All blow pipes and other apparatus shall be dismantled and 
cleaned internally at regular periods, preferably by the makers. The 
apparatus shall be maintained in proper working order. 

3.11.3 Accumulation of slag on the blow-pipe-tip shall be frequently 
removed. No attempt should be made to alter or clean the blow-pipe-tip 
by a hard metal reamer; only hard wood sticks or soft brass wire shall 
be used for this purpose. 

3.11.4 Cylinders shall not be used to support the work, nor shall the 
blow-pipe game be allowed to come in contact with the cylinders. The 
blow-pipe when alight shall not be hung on the cylinder or on the regu- 
lator. 

4. INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF ARC-WELDING AND 
CUTTING EQUIPMENT 

4.1 General 

4.1.1 Workmen designated to operate arc-welding equipment shall have 

29 



IS>8I8-1968 

a thorough knowledge of requirements with regard to safety and shall have 
been judged competent by their employers before taking charge. 

CI. 2 Before starting operations, all connections to the machine shall be 
checked to make certain that they are properly made. The work lead shall 
be attached firmly to the work. Laying work connections loosely on the 
work should be avoided. Work leads should be as short as possible. The 
welding machine frame shall be grounded. 

4.13 Electric Shock -The following precautions sliail be taken to prevent 
electric shock: 

a) Welders shall be instructed the method of avoiding electric shock. 
Voltages required for arc-welding are low and normally would not 
cause injury or severe shock. Hence, parts having these voltages 
are liable to be handled carelessly. These voltages are, neverthe- 
less, sufficiently high that under certain circumstances they may be 
dangerous to life. This danger is particularly marked in very hot 
weather, when the welder is sweaty or when he is wet. The welder 
shall develop the habit oralvvays keeping his body insulated from 
both the work and the metal electrode and holder. He shall 
always wear shoes and gloves. Particularly, he shall never permit 
the metal part of an electrode, the electrode coverings, or any 
metal part of the electrode holder to touch either his bare skin or 
any wet coverings on his body. Consistent use of electrode holders 
with well-insulated jaws, well-insulated cables, dry protective 
coverings on the hands and body and insulations from ground 
would be helf^ul in avoiding contact. It shall never be assumed 
that because contact with the electrode at one time is not harmful, 
similar contacts at other times would also be harmless. 

b) Electrodes shall be removed from holders when not in use to 
eliminate danger of electrical contact with persons or conducting 
objects. Electrode holders when not in use shall be so placed that 
possibilities of electrical contact between them and persons or 
conducting objects are eliminated. 

c) Welders and welding supervisors shall check their equipment 
regularly to see that electrical connections and insulation on the 
holders and cable are in good order. Anything that appears unsafe 
shall be promptly reported to the proper authority, and use of such 
equipment shall be discontinued until its safety has been assured. 
Repairs shall be made only by qualified personnel 

4.2 Eqnipment 

4.2.1 General 

4.2>1-1 The arc-welding machines covered in this code are the principal 
types used for manual, semi-automatic and automatic arc-welding. They 

30 



18:818-1968 

include dc, single-<^)erator, variable-voltage welding generators; dc, 
multiple-operator, constant-voltage machine; and ac, single- or multiple- 
operator, welding transformers. 

4^.1.2 Arc-welding apparatus shall be of suitable quality. 

4.2.1.3 Standard machines shall be designed and constructed to carry 
their rated load under rated temperature rises, when and where the tempe- 
rature of the cooling medium does not exceed 40°C and where the altitude 
does not exceed 1 000-0 m. 

Conditions surrounding arc-welding usually involve damaging features 
that shall be specially considered in the construction of welding apparatus. 
A machine conforming to these standards shall, therefore, be suitable for 
operation when the following conditions prevail: 

a) Exposure to gases and dust produced by arc, and 

b) Exposure to salt or moist air as on board a ship or on sea coast. 

4^.1.4 Unusual service conditions may exist, and under such circum- 
stances machine shall be specially designed to safely meet the requirements 
of the safety service Chief among these conditions are 

a) exposure to unusually corrosive fumes, 

b) exposure to steam or excessive humidRy, 

c) exposure to excessive oil vapour, 

d) exposure to inflammable gases, 

e) exposure to abnormal vibration or shock, 

f) exposure to excessive dust, and 

g) exposure to weather. 

4.2.1.5 Open-circuit voltage ( no-load voltage ) of arc-welding machines 
should be as low as possible consistent with good welding and the types of 
electrode used, and should not exceed the following limits: 

Type of Machine Voltage 

Max 

a) Single-operator, dc welding loo 
machines 

b) Constant-voltage multiple-operator, 75 
dc welding machines 

c) ac welding machines 100 

It is possible to provide reliable control equipment to automatically reduce 
the no-load voltage on transformer-type welding machines. This equip 
ment is available for use where welders are working on wet steel or in con- 
fined quarters or under other severe conditions where there may be greater 

31 



18:818-1968 

probability of the welder getting across the open-circuit voltage. Such 
controls shall be used when the voltages specified above are exceeded. 

4.2.1.6 Special-service, voltage-reducing resistors, such as may be used 
for working from trolley voltage of 250 to 560 volts direct current, shall 
have protective means provided for automatically disconnecting them from 
the source of power during off-arc periods. 

4.2.1.7 Single wound transformers (auto transformers) shall not be 
used to draw welding current directly from any ac power circuit having a 
voltage exceeding 100 volts. 

4.2.2 dc Arc-Welding Generators and Motor Generator Sets 

4.2.2.1 dc arc-welding generator sets shall conform to IS : 2641-1964*. 

4.2.2.2 A suitable motor starter of the hand or magnetic type, having 
an ampere rating equal to the ampere rating of the motor, shall be used. It 
shall be mounted integrally with the motor generator and connected to 
operate the motor and shall be capable of interrupting stalled rotor current 
of the motor. The starter shall have over load and low voltage protection 
incorporated. 

4.2.2.3 A suitable means of control for varying the welding current 
over the specified welding range shall be provided. A suitable current 
indicating device which shows the welding current corresponding to the 
setting of the generator control shall be provided. 

4.2.2.4 All parts of the motor and generator equipment shall be suit- 
ably enclosed and protected to meet the usual service conditions defined 
under 4.2.1.3. 

4.2.2.5 Neither terminal of the welding generator shall be bonded to 
the frame of the welding machine. 

4.2.2.6 The following minimum information, as applicable, shall be 
given on the name plates of dc, variable-voltage generator and motot-gene- 
rator arc-welding machines: 

a) Manufacturer's name; 

b) Type, designation and serial number of the machine; 

c) Output volts at rated amperes output; 

d) Rated amperes output; 

e) Rated duty cycle; 

f) Temperature rise in "C; 

g) Speed in rev/min at rated load; 
h) Frequency of power supply; 

* Specification for electrical welding accenoriet. 

32 



IS:818<1968 

j) Number of phases of power supply; 
k) Voltages of power supply; and 
m) Input amperes ( rating of motor and starter ) at generator rated load. 

4,2.3 ac Arc-Welding Machines 

4.2.3.1 An ac arc-welding machine shall be a completely assembled, 
compactly mounted unit of the oil-cooled or air-cooled type comprising the 
equipment necessary for furnishing alternating current electrical energy to 
the welding circuit. 

4.2.3.2 Transformers shall conform to IS : 1851-1966*. The secondary 
circuit shall be thoroughly insulated from the primary. Cooling may be 
accompanied by natural or forced draught. 

4.2.3.3 Control apparatus shall meet the following requirements: 

a) All control apparatus shall be enclosed except for the ojjerating 
wheels, levers or handles; 

b) Any arrangements for changing primary taps shall be enclosed with 
a cover which could.be opened only with tools; and 

c) Control handles and wheels shall be large enough to be easily grasped 

by a gloved hand. 

4.2.3.4 Any panels or mountings for current-carrying parts shall be of 
suitable insulating material. 

4.2.3.5 Input terminals shall be completely enclosed and accessible 
only by means of tools. The primary side of the weldirtg machine shall be 
provided with suitable wire terminals inside the machine case for the 
connection of conductors of at least the minimum size required, correspond- 
ing to the rating of the welding machine. 

4.2.3.6 Welding (secondary) terminals shall be so arranged that no 
current-carrying parts are exposed to accidental contact. 

4.2.3.7 All parts involved in the construction of the unit shall be en- 
closed in a substantial metal housing, mounted on a base, feet or wheels. 

4.2.3.8. The rating of transformer-type, arc- welding machines shall be 
based on tap connections giving the rated open-circuit voltage and rated 
current. Where taps are provided giving higher primary input at rated 
secondary current, reduced capacity ratings shall be specified for these 
taps. 

4.2.3.9 A disconnecting switch shall be provided at or near each weld- 
ing machine which is not equipped with a disconnecting switch mounted as 
an integral part of the welding machine. The disconnecting switch shall 



*Specification for single operator type arc welding transformers {first revision ) 

3? 



ISs818-1968 

be a motor-circuit switch or a circuit brealcer. The ampere rating shall be 
not less than the rated primary current of the welding machine. The 
horsepower rating of a switch used as a controller shall be not less than the 
numerical value obtained by multiplying the rated primary current of the 
welding machine by 01, 0-2 or 0-25, respectively, for 220-,440-and 550-voli 
machines. These factors apply to P-pole switches. 

4^^.10 All terminal connections, tap connections and control shall be 
plainly and permanently marked to designate their purpose and correct 
usage. The following minimum information shall be given on the name 
plates of transformer-type arc-welding machines: 

a) Manufacturer's name; 

b) Type, designation and serial number of the machine; 

c) Frequency; 

d) Primary volts; 

e) Maximum input ( primary) amperes ( at rated output amperes ); 

f) Output volts at rated amperes output; 

g) Rated amperes output; 

h) Rated duty cycle or time rating; 
j) Temperature rise in °C; and 
k) Open-circuit voltage. 

4.2.4 Manual Electrode Holders 

4.2.4.1 Manual electrode holders shall conform to IS :264I-1964*. 

4.2.4.2 Any current-carrying parts passing through the portion of the 
holder which the welder grips in his hand shall be fully insulated against 
the maximum voltage encountered to ground. Insulation of all metallic or 
current-carrying parts, including the jaws which grip the electrodes, is 
recommended wherever service conditions permit. 

4.2.4.3 The dipping in water of hot electrode holders whether con- 
nected or not shall not be permitted as the retained moisture may cause an 
electric shock. 

4.2.5 Welding Service Cable and Connectors 

4.2.5.1 All welding cables shall conform to the requirements of 
IS: 434 ( Part I )-1964t and shall be of the completely insulated, flexible 
type, capable of liandling the maximum current requirements of the work 
in progress, taking into account the duty cycle under which the welder is 
working. Minimum cable sizes which may be used to carry the current 
specified shall conform to the requirements specified in IS : 434 (Part I )- 
1964t. 



^'Specification for eiectricai welding accessories. 

^Specification for rubber-Insulated cables: Part I W ith copper conductors ( rtoistd). 

34 



15:818-1968 

4.2.5.2 The cable shall be free from repair or splices up to a minimi m 
distance of 3'0 m from the electrode holder. 

4.2.5.3 When it becomes necessary to connect or splice lengths of the 
cable to another, substantial insulated connectors of a capacity at least 
equivalent to that of the cable, shall be used. If connections are effected 
by means of cable lugs, then these shall be securely fastened together by 
more than one bolt to give good electrical contact. The exposed metal 
parts of the lugs shall be completely insulated. 

4.3 Installation 

4.3.1 General — Installation, including power supply, shall conform to 
the requirements laid down in the Indian Electricity Act, 1910. 

43.2 Earthing of Welding Machine Case —The frame or case of the welding 
machine shall be efficiently earthed in accordance with the Indian Electri- 
city Rules, 1956. 

4.33 Rating of Supply Conductors — For individual welding machines, the 
rated current-carrying capacity of the supply conductors shall be not less 
than the maximum primary current of the welding machines. 

4.3.4 Earth Returns 

4^.4.1 Welding current should preferably be returned to the welding 
machine by a single cable from the work to the welding machine. Con- 
nection of a cable from the welding machine to a common conductor or 
structure on which the work rests, or to which the work is connected may 
be permitted. 

4.3.4.2 Pipe lines containing gases or inflammable liquids or conduits 
carrying electrical conductors shall not be used for a ground return cir- 
cuit. Chain or wire rope shall not be used to carry welding current. 

4.3.4.3 When a building structure or pipe line is used as a ground re- 
turn circuit, it shall be checked to ascertain whether proper electrical con- 
tact exists at all joints. Sparking or heating at any point shall cause the 
rejection of the structure or the pipe line as a ground circuit, particularly 
if inflammable vapours or gases are present. 

4.3.4.4 Where a structure or pipe line is continuously employed as a 
ground return circuit, all joints shall be bonded and appropriate periodic 
inspection shall be conducted to ascertain that no condition of electrolysis 
or fire hazard exists by virtue of such use. 

4.3.4.5 All earth connections shall be checked to determine that they 
are mechanically strong and electrically adequate for the required current. 
The earthing clamps shall conform to IS : 2641 -1964*, 



•Specification for electrical welding acccssoiies. 

35 



153 818.1968 

4.4 Operation and Maintenance 

4.4.1 General 

4.4.1.1 All arc-wdding «:|uipmait shall be maintained in safe working 
order at all times. Periodic inspection shall be conducted. 

4.4.1^ Printed rules and instructions covering operation and mainte- 
nance of equipment supplied by the manufacturers shall be strictly followed. 

4.4.1.3 When the welder has occasion to leave his work or stop work 
for any appreciable time, or when the machine is to be moved, the power 
supply switch la the equipment shall be open. The equipment shall be 
disconnected from the source of power when not in use. 

4.4.1.4 Welding equipment shall be maintained in good mechanical 
and electrical condition to avoid unnecessary hazards. Commutators 
shall be kept clean to prevent excessive flashing. Gasoline and other in- 
flammable liquids shall not be used for cleaning commutators. Fine sand 
paper, such as No. 00 or commutator polish shall be used. 

4.4.1.5 Welding equipment used in the open shall be protected from 
inclement weather conditions. Protective coverings shall not obstruct the 
ventilation necessary to prevent overheating of the machine. When not in 
use, the equipment shall be stored in a clean dry place. Machines which 
have become wet shall be thoroughly dried before being used. 

4.4.1.6 It is good practice to blow out the entire generator type weld- 
ing machine occasionally with clean, dry compressed air. 

4.4.1.7 Electrical holders shall be provided with discs or shields to 
protect the hands of the operator from the heat of the arcs. 

4.4.2 Cable 

4.4.2.1 When, in the course of work, a cable ( either work lead ore lec- 
trode lead) becomes worn, exposing bare conductors, the portion thus ex- 
posed shall be adequately insulated. 

4.4.2.2 Welding cables shall be kept dry where practicable, and free 
from grease and oil to prevent premature breakdown of the insulation. 

4.4.2.3 When it becomes necessary to carry cables some distance from 
the machines, they shall be substantially supported overhead, if practicable. 
If this is not possible, and cables are laid on the floor or ground, they 
should be protected in such a manner that they would not be damaged, 
entangled or interfere with safe movement of people. Special care shall be 
taken to see that welding supply cables are not in proximity to power sup 
ply cables or other high-tension wires. 

36 



ISi818-1968 

5. INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF RESISTANCE 
WELDING EQ.UIPMENT 

5.1 General 

5.1.1 All equipment shall 'be installed by a qualified electrician, in 
accordance with the Indian Electricity Act, 1910. There shall be safety- 
type disconnecting switch or such other equivalent device (such as a circuit 
interrupter ), opening all the power circuit breaker or circuit to the machine. 
The device shall be conveniently located at or near the machine so that 
the power may be shut-off when the machine or its controls are to be 
serviced. 

5.1.2 Workmen designated to operate such resistance welding equipment 
shall be properly instructed and judged competent, before they are allowed 
to operate such equipment, 

5.2 Resistance Welding {Machines 

5.2.1 All external weld initiating control circuits shall operate on voltage 
not over 120 volts. 

5.2.2 In the case of stored energy or condenser discharge type of resistance 
welding equipment, control panels involving voltages over 550 volts shall 
be suitably insulated and protected by complete enclosures. The doors of 
these shall be provided with suitable locks or interlocks so as to make the 
equipment safe from any residual charge in the condensers. A manually 
operated switch shall also be installed so as to provide an additional safety 
measure, thus assuring discharge of all the condensers. 

5.2.3 The back doors of machines and panels shall be kept locked or inter- 
locked to prevent tempering by unauthorized persons. 

5.3 Portable Welding Machine* -W herever possible welding guns shall 
have suitable, counter-balanced devices for supporting the gun, including 
secondary leads. 

5.4 Flask-lVelding Equipment 

5.4.1 Flash-welding machines shall be equipped with a hood to control 
the flying gash. In cases of high production, including handling of oily 
parts, adequate ventilating system shall be installed to carry of the metallic 
dust and oil fumes. 

5.42 Controls of all automatic or air and hydraulic clamps should be so 
arranged as to prevent the operator from closing the clamps with his hands 
on the work or on the clamps during closing operations. 

55 Hazards and PrecandonB — A careful job-analysis of the operations 
to be performed on each welding machine, shall be made and the safeguards 
and personal protective equipments which have to be used for each job, 
shall be determined. 

37 



18:818.1968 

6. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION* 
6.1 Basic Precautions 

6.1.1 Where practicable, the object to be welded shall be moved to a safe 
location designated for welding. 

6.1.2 If the object is such that it is not possible to move it readily, all 
movable fire hazards in the vicinity shall be taken to a safe place. 

6.1.3 If it is neither possible to move the object nor is it possible to move 
all the fire hazards to a safe place, then guards shall be used to confine the 
heat, sparks and slag, and to protect the immovable fire hazards. 

6.1.4 If it is not possible to follow the requirements stated under 6.1.1, 
6,1.2 and 6.1.3, no welding or cutting shall be performed. 

6.3 Special Precaations 

6^,1 When the nature of work to be performed falls under the conditions 
given under 6.13, certain additional precautions shall be taken. 

6.2.2 After combustible floors have been swept clean, they shall be pro- 
tected by thoroughly wetting with water, covering with damp sand, sheet 
metal, asbestos, etc, or such other equivalent material. Provisions shall be 
made to protect welders from the hazard of shock when floors are wet. 

6.2.3 Suitable, incombustible tables, jigs or work-places shall be provided 
for support of small or moderate size work during welding and cutting 
operations. Such operations should not be undertaken on work resting 
directly on concrete floors. 

6.2.4 Wherever there are floor openings or cracks which are not possible 
to close, it is advisable to make certain that there are no highly combustible 
materials on the floor below to ensure that there is no fire hazard due to 
spark which might drip through to the floor. This precaution shall also be 
observed with regard to cracks or holes in walls, open door-ways and.open 
or broken windows. 

6.2.5 Suitable fire-extinguishing equipment, such as pails of water, 
buckets of sand, hose lines or portable extinguishers shall be kept in readi- 
ness for instantaneous use. Care shall be taken to maintain them in good 
working condition at all times. 

6.2.6 Additional personnel may be stationed as fire watchers, if required, 
not only while the actual welding or cutting operations are being performed 
but also for a sufficient period of time after completion of the work to 
ensure that no fire exists. This period may vary from 30 minutes to several 
hours, depending on the site conditions. 



*For more details regarding fire precautions reference may be made to IS :3016-1965 
■ Code of practice for fire precautions in welding and cutting operations '. 

38 



15:818-1968 

6.2.7 Where unusual fire hazard conditions prevail, the site shall be 
inspected by a qualified person and welding and cutting coming within 
the scope of6.1.2 and 6.1.3 authorized before any work is started. 

6.3 Welding or Cutting Containers 

6.3.1 Welding or cutting operations on containers filled with explosive or 
inflammable substances shall be prohibited except in certain particular 
cases where all appropriate safety precautions have been taken and subject 
to any conditions imposed by the competent authority in particular for: 

a) the repair by the electric welding process of water-sealed gas- 

holders where such gas-holders contain town gas, coal gas, furnance 
gas or similar inflammable gases other than acetylene at more 
than the atmospheric pressure; 

b) urgent repairs in the open air of gas mains, where such gas mains 
contain town gas, coal gas, furnace gas or similar inflammable 
gases, other than acetylene at more than atmospheric pressure; and 

c) such repair of pipes in oil refinery as is essential for safety. 

6.3.2 If parts of installations subjected to great stresses, such as steam 
boilers and other pressure vessels, are to be repaired by welding, then such 
repairs shall be carried out by welders authorized for such work by a 
competent authority; and only such methods, equipment and filler metal 
as have been declared permissible for such purposes by the competent 
authority shall be used. 

6.3.3 If an inert gas is used for purging, after the vessal has been filled, 
the gas should be allowed to flow slowly into it throughout the welding or 
cutting operation. 

6.3.4 All hollow spaces, cavities or containers shall be vented to permit 
the escape of air or gases before preheating, cutting or welding. Purging 
with inert gas is recommended. 

6.3.5 Welding of oil drums, motor car petrol tanks or any other contain, 
ers which might at any time have contained a liquid giving off and in- 
flammable gas shall not normally be permitted. However, in case welding 
of such containers is absolutely necessary, the following precautions shall 
be taken before welding them: 

a) They shall be thoroughly degreased using an alkaline or any other 

type of degreasi ng soiution; 

b) They shall then be thoroughly rinsed with hot water and allowed 
to dry for a few days; 

cj After drying and before welding, they shall be purged thoroughly 
for a period of at least five minutes with an inert gas; and 

d) The inert gas shall be allowed to flow through the container under 
A positive pressure while welding is taking place. 

39 



I$t818-1968 

6.4 Sprinkler Protection -Where sprinkler protection exists, it shall be 
maintained without interruption while welding or cutting work is being 
performed. If welding or cutting is to be done quite close to automatic 
sprinkler heads, sheet asbestos or damp cloth guards shall be used to shield 
the individual heads temporarily. 

7. PROTECTION OF PERSONNEL 

7.1 General 

7.1.1 In every factory all floors, steps, stairs, passages and gangways shall 
be of sound construction and properly maintained. These shall be provid- 
ed with suitable hand-rails wherever necessary. 

7.1.2 Safe means of access shall be provided to every place at which any 
person is at any time required to work as far as practicable. 

7.1.3 A welder or helper working on platforms, scaffolds or runways 
shall be protected against falling. This may be accomplished by the use 
of railings, safety belts, life lines, or such other equally effective safeguards. 
Life belts and similar devices shall beof a type that will permit quick escape 
of the workman. 

7.1.4 Automatic and semi-automatic resistance welding machines shall, 
where practicable, be equipped with gate guards or two-handed tipping 
devices so designed as to prevent the hands of the operator from reaching 
the danger zone after the pressure control has been actuated. 

7.1.5 All portable welding equipment, such as gas cylinders, hoses, 
electric cables, etc, shall be so installed at the working place as to prevent 
all risks of the equipment, falling or tipping and of persons stumbling or 
tipping. 

7.1.6 It shall be strictly prohibited to use any compressed gas or compres- 
sed airto clean dust, dirt, etc, of worker's clothes when these are being worn. 

7.2 Protective Equipment* 

7.2.1 The object of protective equipment is to protect the eyes and face 
from beat and the injurious effects of the rays ( infra red, visible light and 
ultra voilet ) given off from the electric arc. They should, therefore, be 
constructed of heat-resisting, non-ignitable material which is also imper- 
vious to the harmful rays. They shall be light for convenience in use, and 
strong to withstand rough service. The minimum amount of metal shall be 
used in their construction, particularly on the outside of the shield, for 
example, there should be no metal frame for the glass either on the outside 
or on the inside; metal rivets should not be used unless one end is covered 
by an insulating material, as these may be the means of causing electric 
shock. 



*For more details regarding protective equipment, reference may be made to 
IS : 1 179-1967 'Equipment fer eye and face protection during welding ( First revision) . 

40 



ISi81t-lM8 

7.25 Head shields shall befitted with an adjustable band to fit the 

wearer's head. This device shall be made as fiir as practicable from an 
insulating material. Any metal work forming part of it shall be thoroughly 
insulated from the wearer's head and the insulation shall be non- 
absorbent. The sides of the shield shall be sufficiently large so as to give 
protection to the neck and side of the head. This is especially important 
where welders work near each other. 

7.2.2.1 The handles of head shields shall be of a material which is a 
bad conductor of both electricity and heat. It shall be fixed either inside 
the shield to protect the head from the heat and rays of the arc, or fixed 
outside and provided with a good guard. 

7.2.2.2 The window through which the operator views the arc shall be 
of the required grade The frame shall be such as to take protective glass 
with a piece of plain glass fixed in front fadng the arc so that spatter from 
the arc is intercepted by the plain glass which may be renewed from time 
to time. The protecting glass shall be fixed such that the arc is not visible 
through cracks and chinks round the edges. Helmets shall be preferred to 
head shields. 

7.2.3 Goggles 

7.2.3.1 Goggles shall be used: 

a) to protect the eyes of persons, other than the welder, from the rays 

of and electric arc; and, 

b) to protect the eyes of persons from small flying pieces of slag while 

chipping it from the weld. 

7.2.3.2 Goggles to protect the eyes from the injurious rays shall always 
be fitted with opaque side shields. The glasses of the goggles shall be of 
a suitable grade. Alternately, the goggles shall befitted with Crookes 
spe';tade glass. However, goggles fitted with this glass are suitable only 
for protection when the arc is not in the immediate neighbourhood. Glas- 
ses of greenish neutral colour are considered to afford the maximum pro- 
tection for the eyes. 

7.2.3.3 Goggles to protect the eyes from small flying pieces or slag 
shall befitted with clean non-splinterable glass if there is no need to pro- 
tect the wearer from rays from the arc. Side screens should, however, be 
fitted but they may be transparent if preferred. If goggles to protect the 
eyes from slag are also required to give protection from arc rays, they shall 
comply with the requirements specified under 7.2.2.1 and the optical glass 
should be protected from mechanical damage by a superimposed and easily 
replaceably piece of dear glass. 

soTE- It should be noted that goggles do not provide adequate protection for a 
welder, as It Is necessary for his face to be protected in addition to his eyes and he should, 
therefore, use a helmet or head shield. 

41 



IS>818-1968 

1.2A Screens— All electric welding operations shall be screened to prevent 
the rays of tiie arc from affecting otlier persons working in tlie neighbour- 
hood. Where the worl< is done at fixed benches or in welding shops, 
permanent screens shall be erected, as far as practicable. Wherethisis 
not possible, temporary screens shall be used to limit the radiation. All 
screens shall be opaque, of sturdy construction to withstand rough usage, 
and of material which shall not readily catch fire by sparks or hot metal. 
They shall not, however, be so heavy or cumbersome as to discourage tlieir 
use. 

7.3 Protection of Fellow Workers from Arc-Welding Rays 

7.3.1 Where arc welding is regularly carried on in a building, the walls 
of the welding bay shall be painted with a non-reflecting colour to prevent 
flickering reflections. 

7.3.2 Where the work permits, the welder shall be enclosed in an indivi- 
dual bootfi painted with a non-reflecting paint, such as zinc oxide or lamp 
black. Alternately, an enclosure of non-combustible screens similarly 
painted shall be provided. Booths and screens shall permit circulation of 
air at floor level. Workers or other persons adjacent to the welding areas 
shall be protected from the rays by non-combustible or flame-proof screens 
or shields or shall be required to wear appropriate goggles. 

7.4 Protective Clothing-Protective clothing required for any welding 
operations varies with the size, nature and location of the work to be per- 
formed. However, they should not be of such type or weight as to restrict 
the comfort of the operator unduly, thus discouraging its use. 

7.4.1 The following protective means may be employed: 

a) Leather or asbestos gloves, except when engaged in light work; 

b) Flame-proof aprons made of leather, asbestos, or other suitable 
material for protection against radiated heat and sparks; and 

c) Woollen clothing in preference to cotton clothing, the clothing 
being reasonably free from oil or grease. 

7.4.2 Sleeves and collars shall be kept buttoned and pockets eliminated 
from the front of overalls and aprons. Trousers or overalls shall not be 
turned up on the outside. 

7.4.3 For very heavy work, fire-resistant leggings, high boots or other 
equivalent means shall be used. 

7.4.4 Lower-cut shoes with unprotected tops shall not be used. 

7.4.5 In production work a sheet metal screen in front of the worker's 
legs may Reemployed to provide further protection against sparks and 
molten metal in cutting operations. 

42 



18:818.1968 

7.4.6 Caps or shoulder covers made of leather or other suitable material 
shall be worn during overhead welding or cutting operations. Leather 
skull caps may be worn under helmets to prevent head burns. 

7.4.7 For overhead welding, or welding in extremely confined spaces, 
ear protection is also desirable. This may be accomplished by placing 
wool or rubber plugs in the ears or by covering them with wire screen pro- 
tectors. 

7.4.8 W here there is exposure to sharp or neavy falling objects, hard 
hats or head protectors should be used. 

7.5 Work in Confined Spaces 

7.5.1 Adequate ventilation shall be provided in confined spaces in accor- 
dance with the requirements laid down under 8. 

7.5.2 W hen welding or cutting is being performed in any confined space, 
the gas cylinders and welding machines shall be left on the outside. Before 
operations are started, heavy portable equipment mounted on wheels shall 
be securely blocked to prevent accidental movement. 

7.5.3 W here a welder has to enter a confined space through a manhole 
or other small opening, means shall be provided for quickly removing him 
in case of emergency. W hen safety belts and life lines are used for this pur- 
pose they shall be so attached to the welder's body that he is not jammed 
in a small exit opening. 

7.5.4 W hen arc-welding is to be suspended for any substantial period of 
time, such as during lunch hours or overnight, all electrodes shall be re- 
moved from the holders and the holders carefully located so that there is no 
possibility of accidental contact. The machine shall also be disconnected 
from the power source. The welders should usefully insulated electrode 
holders. 

7.5.5 W hen gas welding or cutting, the torch valves shall be closed and 
the gas supply to the torch positively shut-off at some point outside the con- 
fined area whenever the torch is not to be used for a substantial period of 
time, such as during lunch time or overnight. W here practicable, the torch 
and hose shall also be removed from the confined space. 

7.5.6 After welding operations are completed, the welder shall mark the 
hot metal or provide some other means of warning other workers. 

7.6 First-Aid Provisions — All injuries shall be reported as soon as possi- 
ble for medical attention. Provision shall be made for rendering first-aid 
in accordance with the requirements specified under the Factories Act, 1948. 

8. VEiyrTILATION AND HEALTH PROTECTION 

8.1 General 

8.1.1 The requirements for ventilation and health protection have been 
established on the basis of the following three factors in gas- and arc-welding 

43 



isttis-uci 

which govern theamajnt of contamination to which welders may be ex- 
posed: 

a) Dimensions of space in which welding is to be done (with special 
regard to height of ceiling): 

b) Number of welders employed on the. work; and 

c) Possible evolution of hazardous fumes, gases or dusts depending 
upon the metal being welded. 

8.1.2 In individual instances, additional factors than those specified 
under 8.1.1 may also be involved, in which case ventilation or respiratory 
protective devices shall be provided to meet individual requirements. Such 
factors would include: 

a) atmospheric conditions, 

b) heat generated, and 

c) presence of volatile solvents. 

8.1.3 In addition to the hazards from burns, electricity and radiation, 
means for the control of which have already been standardized, under cer- 
tain conditions there may be health hazards due to gases, fumes or dusts 
containing lead, zinc, cadmium, fluorine, mercury or compounds thereofor 
to the possible for mat ion of oxides of nitrogen or due to extreme heat. 
These potential hazards are not serious except in spaces not properly venti- 
lated. Health hazards from welding operations may be controlled by 
local exhaust or general ventilation, depending upon the nature of the 
hazard. When such a hazard is present, sufficient ventilation or individual 
respiratoryprc'tection shall be provided in accordance with the require- 
ments of this section. 

8.1.4 When it becomes necessary to perform welding in a space entirely 
screened on all sides, the screens shall be so arranged that no serious rest- 
riction of ventilation exists. It is desirable to have the screens so mounted 
that they are about 60 cm above the floor unless the work is performed at 
so low a level that the screen should be extended nearer to the floor to pro- 
tect nearby workers from the glare of welding. 

8.1.5 Local or general ventilating systems shall be provided and arranged 
sufficient to keep the amount of toxic fumes or dust below the maximum 
allowable concentration as specified in Table 1. Where, because of the in- 
termittent nature of the work or for other good reasons, it is impracticable 
to control gases, fumes or dusts by such means, welders shall be required 
to use respiratory protective equipment. 

44 



IS 1 818 -1901 



TABLE 1 MAXtMUMOUOWABLE CONCENTRAXIO N OF TOXIC 

DUSTS AND GA3ESFOR EXPOSURE NOT EXCEEDING 
EIGHT HOURS DAILY 



D usT OR Gas 



(1) 



Xylene 

Lead and certain of its inorganic 
compounds, tine carbonate, sul- 
phate, oxides, nitrate and chloride 

Toluene ( toluolc ) 

Oxides of nitrogen ( calculated as 
NO.) 

Styrene monomer 

Methanol ( methyl alcohol ) 

Formaldehyde 

Methyl chloride 

Trichloroethylene 

Metallic arsenic and arsenic trioxide 

Mercury 

Chromium (as chromate, dichro- 
mate dust or as chromic acid 
mist ) 

Manganese dust and fumes 

Carbon monoxide 



( Clause 8.1.5 ) 

VOLUME PekIOOOOOO 

Parts of Air AT 

25°Cand760 mm 

Pressubb 

(2) 

Parts 

200 



200 

5 



Weioht Per Litiw at 

25°C AND 760 mm 

Pressure 



(3) 
mg 
0-868 
0000 015 



Hydrogen sulphide 
Benzene ( benzol ) 
Cadmium or its compounds 
Carbon disulphide 



0-752 



20O 




1-7 


200 




0-26 


5 




(H)n 


100 




0-2 


200 




— 


— 




0^)00 5 


— 




0-0001 


— 




00001 


^— 




0006 


loo 
(with atmospheric 
oxygen not below 
19 percent by vol), 
and 

409 
( for exposures not 
exceeding a total of 
one hour daily ) 


Oil 
0-46 


20 




0-028 


35 




0-32 


— 




00001 


20 




0062 



8.1.6 In confined spaces or other locations where the amount of toxic 
substances is likely to exceed the maximum allowable concentrations, sup- 
plied-air respirators, such as air-line respirators or hose masks with or 



45 



IS:8i8-i968 

without blowers shall be provided. This applies not only to the welder 
but also to helpers and other personnel working ia the immediate vicinity. 
Air supply for such equipment shall be clean and of equable temperature. 
Since welding operations are liable to alter the compositions of the atmos- 
phere, blowing in fresh air may help to remove the polluted atmosphere in 
tanks and enclosed spaces. 

8.1.7 Where welding operations are incidental to general operation, local 
exhaust ventilation shall be provided to prevent contamination of the gene- 
ral work. 

8.1.8 Individual respiratory equipment shall be well maintained. It 
shall not be transferred from one employee to another without being steri- 
lized. 

8.1.9 Manufacturers' instructions pertaining to fluxes and electrode cove- 
rings shall be carefully observed. 

8.1.10 No welding or cutting shall take place in the room where a va- 
pour degreasing plant is also situated. 

8.2 Lead Cadmium and Mercury — All welders eriagaged in welding 
or cutting metal containing (or coated with ) lead, cadmium, or mercury- 
bearing substances, shall be provided with an approved type air-line respi- 
rator or hose mask except where local exhaust ventilation, sufficient to con- 
trol the fumes generated as specified under 8.5 is provided and used. Ex- 
haust ventilation shall not be substituted for respiratory protection required 
in welding or cutting operations inside confined spaces. 

8.3 Fluoride-Bearing Fluxes and Zinc — Welding or cutting metals 
coated with zinc or zinc-containing substances and welding involving 
^he use of fluoride-bearing flux shall be done indoors only when local 
exhaust ventilation as prescribed under 8.5, is provided. Where the work 
is to be done in a confined space, air-supplied respirators shall be provided. 

8.4 AU Other Welding and Cutting- When welding or" cutting is done 
on metals under conditions not covered under 8.2 and 8.3, mechanical ven- 
tilation shall be resorted to only under one or more of the following con- 
ditions: 

a) The working space is less than 280 m* per welder; 

b) The room in which welding has to be done has a ceiling height of 
less than 5"00 m; and 

c) The available space is confined or contains partitions, balconies or 
other structural barriers to the extent that they significantly obs- 
truct cross ventilation. 

8.4.1.1 The mechanical ventilation shall be at the minimum rate of 
56 ms'per minute per welder or four air changes per hour, whichever is 
greater, except where local exhaust hoods and booths have been provided 

46 



IS: 818 -1968 

asspecified in 8.5 or air-line respirators are provided. Natural ventilation 
is considered sufficient for welding or cutting operations where the restric- 
tions listed under 8.4 are not present. 

8.9 Local Exhaust Hoods and Booths -Mechanical local exhaust ven- 
tilation shall be provided by the following methods: 

a) By means of freely movable hoods intended to be placed by the 
welder as near as practicable to the work being welded and 
provided with a rate of air flow suijicient to maintain a velocity in 
the direction of the hood of 30-0 linear metres per minute at the 
point of welding when the hood is at its most remote distance from 
the point of welding. The rates of ventilation required to accomp- 
lish this control velocity using a 7-cm wide flanged suction opening 
are given in Table 2; and 

b) By means of a fixed enclosure with a top and not less than two 
sides which surround the welding or cutting operations and with 
a rate of air flow sufficient to maintain a velocity away from the 
welder of not less than 15 linear metres per minute. 



TABLE 


2 RATE 


OF 


VENTILATION 


REQUIRED 




Wsi/iMNO ZoMB From 
Axe OB TOBCH 




Minimum Ant Flow 

PBB MlNUTB 




DuciDiA* 


(>) 






(2) 




(3) 


cm 






m» 




cm 


10 to 15 
15 to20 

20 to 25 
25 to 30 






4-5 

80 

120 

170 




7 

9 

11 

13 



NoTB 1 — Whenever poauble, all exhaust from operation shall be discharged to the 
outdoors. 

Note 2 -For hoods not provided with flanges, minimum air flow shall be increased 
by 60 m' per minute. 

♦Nearest 1 cm duct dia based on 1200 m per minute velocity in pipe. 

8.6 Work in Confined Spaces -The following additional requirements 
shall be met where welding is done in confined spaces: 

a) All welding and cutting operations carried on in confined spaces 
shall be adequately ventilated to prevent the accumulation of 
toxic gases or possible oxygen deficiency. 

b) All air, replacing that withdrawn shall be clean and respirable. 
In such circumstances where it is impossible to provide such 
ventilation, air-supplied respirators or hose masks shall be used. 

47 



15:818-1968 

c) Where welding operations are carried on in confined spaces and 
welders and helpers are provided with approved air-supplied 
respirators or hose masks, a workman shall be stationed on the out- 
side of such confined space to service the power and ventilation 
lines to ensure the safety of those working within. 

d) Oxygen from a cylinder or torch shall never be used for ventilation. 
8.7 Medical Control 

8.7.1 All welders and workmen engaged in welding operations shall be 
thoroughJy examined periodically. 

8.7.2 Employment of persons under 18 years of age shall be prohibited 
in gas-or arc-welding and oxygen cutting tanks or in confined spaces, on 
scaffoldings or in pre-heated assemblies. 



48 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375,323 9402 

Fax : 91 11 3234062, 91 1 1 3239399, 91 1 1 3239362 

Telegrams ; Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Offices) 

Central Laboratory: Telephone 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 6-77 0032 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 32376 1 7 

'Eastern :1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 337 66 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 60 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 23523 15 

fWestern: Manakalaya, E9, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), a32 92 95 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 360001 550 1348 

t Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, a39 49 55 
BANGALORE 560056 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, TT Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 55 40 21 

Plot No. 62-63. Unit VI. Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 40 36 27 

Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 21 01 41 

Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 a-28 8801 

Savitri Complex, 116 G.T Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 8-71 19 96 

5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 761003 541 1 37 

5-8-560, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 20 10 a3 

E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 37 29 25 

117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 206065 21 66.76 

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 23 69 23 
LUCKNOW 226001 

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 52 51 71 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 8000T3 26 23 05 

Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 32 36 35 

T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 621 17 



'Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, PO. Princep Street, 27 10 65 

CALCUTTA 700072 

tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 309 65 28 

:t Sales Office is at 'F Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, 222 39 71 

BANGALORE 560092 



Printed at Simco Printing Press. Delhi 



