**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 817-2 (1996) : Training of Welders - Code of Practice, 
Part 2: Oxyfuel welding [MTD 11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS817(Part2):1996 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

cTe^ c^ fel^ -^^;^ - fffrr ^hUcTT 

Indian Standard 
TRAINING OF WELDERS - CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 2 OXYFUEL WELDING 

(Second Revision ) 

ICS 25.160-10. 03.100.30 



© BIS 1996 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 11000? 

June 1996 Price Group 6 



Welding General Sectional Committee, MTD 11 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council. 

As a part of steel economy programme, it was recommended that welding should be used as a mode of 
fabrication in preference to riveting. This standard was first prepared in 1957 to lay down a scheme for 
training and testing in welding to a trainee in order to enable him to undertake normal welding jobs. It 
was subsequently revised in 1966 simplifying the course and making it directly related to the actual requirement 
of the job. 

In view of the experience gained and to cater the needs of the welding industry more effectively, the 
committee has decided to further revise this standard. 

In this revision the committee decided to publish this standard in parts. This part covers the practices to 
be followed for the training of welders for oxyfuel welding Additional parts of this standard, as proposed, 
are given under: 

Part 1 Manual metal arc welding 

Part 3 TIG welding 

Part 4 MIG/MAG welding 

Part 5 Mechanized welding 

Part 1 'Manual metal arc welding' has been published. 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 

Indian Standard 
TRAINING OF WELDERS - CODE OF PRACTICE 

PART 2 OXYFUEL WELDING 

(Second Revision) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This code recommends minimum requirements for 
a course of instruction in gas welding and prescribes 
certain standard tests, comprising the initial 
qualification tests at the training establishment and 
subsequent annual and periodic tests for the practising 
welder 

hi TiiQ principal objectives for the course of instruction 
covered by this code are: 

a) to enable the trainees to acquire basic 
knowledge in theory as well as enough skill 
in practical welding to pass the qualification 
tests prescribed in this code. 

b) to coach the trainees in the fimdamental 
techniques and safe practices in the use of 
different gas mixtures such as ox>'-'acet>'lene, 
oxy-propane, etc. 

1.2.1 The course of instruction is not expected to 
produce an experienced welder, but rather a welder 
with enough skill and knowledge so tb^t he will have 
immediate value to industry as a welder on less difficult 
work and will be able, by gaining experience in 
industry, to progress rapidly to woik of greater difficulty 
and responsibility. 

1.3 The standard tests prescribed in this code consist 
of the following: 

a) Initial qualification test — It is the test 
which the trainee shall be required to pass 
before completing his course of training. The 
passing of this test indicates that the welder 
has enough basic skill and knowledge to be 
of value to industry as a welder. 

b) Annual and periodic tests — The check 
tests designed to be applied at regular 
intervals for ensuring that a welder actually 
engaged on work has continued to maintain 
a standard of proficiency, as require4 by the 
initial qualification test. 



SECTION 1 GENERAL 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts 
to this standard: 



IS No. Title 

812 : 1957 Glossary of terms relating to 

welding and cutting of metals 

813 : 1986 Scheme of symbols for welding (//r5/ 

revision ) 

818 : 1968 Code ofpractice for safety and health 

requirements in electric and gas 
welding and cutting operations (Jirst 
revision ) 

1 278 : 1 972 Filler rods and wires for gas welding 
( second revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this code, all terms relating to gas 
welding, unless otherwise defined in this code, shall 
have the meaning assigned to them in IS 812 : 1957. 

4 SYMBOLS 

For the purpose of this code and unless otherwise 
defined in this code, the symbols used shall have the 
meaning assigned to theni in IS 813 : 1986. 

5 MATERIALS 

5.1 Test Plates for Welding 

Test plates shall consist of carbon and low alloy steel; 
cast iron; aluminium, copper, nickel, magnesium and 
their alloys. 

5.2 Consumables for Welding 

Filler rods shall conform, to IS 1278 : 1972 and 
corresponding fluxes. 

5.3 Gas Mixtures 

Oxygen and accetylene are the principal gases used in 
gas welding. These are supplied generally in different 
coloured cylinders though in large workshops, piped 
oxygen and acetylene supplies are often used. Oxygen 
supports combustion of the fixel gases. 

Acetylene supplies both the heat intensity and the 
atmosphere needed for welding. Hydrogen, natural gas, 
liquid petroleum gas, propane gas are used only to a 
limited extent in gas welding. 



IS 817 (Part 2) : 1996 



5.4 Accessories 

Aprons, gloves, hose protectors, hose chps, hoses, hose 
connectors and nuts, wire brush, goggles, spark lighter, 
cylinder trolley and other tools such as spanners and 
spindle keys. 

6 SELECTION OF TRAINEES 

Trainees selected to receive the instruction 
recommended in this code shall have the following 
qualifications: 

a) have minimum educational qualification 
equivalent to 10th standard; 

b) ability to understand the language of 
instruction; 

c) no physical or mental disability that precludes 
safe operation of welding equipment or 
interferes with full performances of duties of 
industry; and 

d) the mi nimum age requirements prescribed in 
the State and Central Labour laws applicable 
in the state in which the instruction is 
conducted. 

7 LENGTH OF COURSE AND HOURS OF 
INSTRUCTION 

It is recommended that theoretical instructions are 
given tp the trainees for a minimum period of 40 h 
and practical training for preparation of test plates for 
welding, use of gas cylinders, and torches, cutting of 
plates, etc. for 3 h daily minimum for at least 15 
working days. 

SECTION 2 EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES 
FOR THE TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT 

8 EQUIPMENTS ACCESSORIES AND 
CONSUMABLES 

8.1 Welding Booths 

Each welding booth shall have an area with sufficient 
clear floor space to allow adequate freedom of 
movements for the trainee and the instructor. Internally 
each booth shall be so constructed, lighted and 
ventilated, as to provide complete protection to the 
trainee. Suitable positioning jigs shall be provided to 
facilitate the positional welding. 

8.2 Oxy- Acetylene Welding Outfits 

One set of oxy-acetylene welding outfits of standard 
quality shall be provided to each group of trainees 
consisting of not more than four trainees in each group. 

8.3 Adequate quantity of gas mixture, filler rods and 
fluxes besides parent plates shall be made available to 
the trainees. 

8.4 Testing Apparatus 

The training establishment shall possess apparatus 
suitable for preparing and testing the test specimens 



or shall have facilities for having these test specimen 
prepared and tested elsewhere. 

8.5 In addition to the foregoing, the training 
establishment shall provide all other apparatus and 
equipment necessary for the safe and proper execution 
of the welding course prescribed herein. A list of 
accessories and equipment recommended for a training 
establishment is given in Annex A. 

9 SUPERVISION 

9.1 Number of Trainees Per Instructor 

Each shop class should be restricted to not more than 
12 trainees in attendance per instructor. 

9.2 Record of Trainees Progress 

A record shall be kept of each trainee's progress, 
showing the number of hours of individual practice 
and the results of all tests prescribed in Section 3. A 
recommended form of trainee progress chart is given 
in Annex B. 

10 REFERENCE MATERIALS 

10.1 Outline of Course 

At the start of the course a prepared outline indicating 
the syllabus of the course, the tests required, and the 
subjects to be covered in the related instruction shall 
be made available to the trainees. A specimen syllabus 
for the course is given in Annex C. 

10.2 Welding Publications 

The training establishment shall make available for 
trainees use suitable reference material consisting of 
books, manuals, periodicals, codes, standards, etc. 

11 QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES OF 
INSTRUCTOR 

11.1 General 

The instructions prescribed in this code may be given 
by one or more instructors, provided each instructor 
in welding practice possesses the qualifications 
prescribed under 11.2.1 and each instructor in 
welding theory possess the qualification prescribed 
under 11.2.2. In addition, each instructor shall have 
the ability to present effective demonstrations and 
explanation of those portions of the course which he 
is to teach. 

11.2 Qualification of Instructor 

11, 2.1 Each instructor giving any portion of the 
instruction in welding practice ( see 13 ) shall possess 
the following qualifications: 

a) A minimum of three years experience and 
in welding technology with basic educational 
qualification; 

b) A practical knowledge of the physical 
properties of the metals and the welding 
process; 



c) Familiarity with the instructions in welding 
practices covered in Section 3; and 

d) Familiarity with the instructions and 
specifications used in welding and capability 
to read simple drawings relating to welding 
of structures. 

11.2.2 Each instructor giving any portion of the 
instruction in welding theory shall have a thorough 
knowledge of the subject on which he gives 

instructions. 

11.3 Duties of Instructors 

The instructional staff shall be charged with the 
responsibility of giving instruction in welding practice 
and welding theory, as prescribed in Section 3. The 
duties shall include the following: 

a) Planning instruction in accordance with the 
course outlined in this code keeping in view 
the following four basic steps of instruction: 

i) Preparing the trainee for new 
instruction; 

ii) Using appropriate methods for 
presenting the new instruction 
(demonstration, illustration, 

explanation, discussion, etc); 

iii) Providing proper supervision and 
criticism as the trainee applies his new 
knowledge and skill; and 

iv) Supervising the check tests assigned to 
trainees. 

b) Instructing the trainee to work safely 
emphasizing the training establishment's 
safety regulations. 

c) Observing acceptable shop management 
practices, such as, care, control and 
conservation of materials and equipment, 
shop cleanliness and orderliness. 

SECTION 3 COURSE OF INSTRUCTIONS 

12 GENERAL COURSE OF INSTRUCTION 

12.1 The insruction shall consist of welding practice 
and lectures in theory. The practical and theoretical 
training should be suitably interspersed and related 
to one another. The training shall start with instructions 
in safety precautions protection of person, protection 
and care of the equipment. This instruction coming 
at the very commencement of the course will reduce 
the risk of disablement of the trainees from such causes 
as back fire, blindness, etc, and help in preventing 
explosion to the cylinders which might be caused by 
ignorance of its proper use. 

12,1.1 The instruction in safety shall be given before 
the trainees are permitted to use by regular welding 



IS817(Part2): 1996 

equipment. A list of recommended safety rules is given 
in Annex D and should be used in this instruction. 

12.1.2 For detailed instructions for safety and health 
requirements in gas welding and cutting operations 
reference should be made to IS 818 : 1968. 

13 INSTRUCTION IN WELDING PRACTICE 

13.1 Instruction in welding practice shall be given by 
means of a series of exercises which shall conform at 
least to the requirements prescribed in this section. 
The exercises shall be performed on steel plates of 
various thickness as appropriate for each individual 
exercise. The plate shall be reasonably free from scales 
rust, paint and other defects which adversely affect 
welding. 

13.1.1 In this list of suggested welding exercise, no 
specific recommendations are made with respect to 
the number of times each exercise should be repeated. 
The trainee should be required to perform each exercise 
to the satisfaction of the instructor before being allowed 
to advance to the next exercise. 

13. 1.2 It is recommended that the trainee should test 
as many of his welds as possible as soon as they have 
been cooled in still air. Further, the instructor should 
inspect tested welds and point out to the trainee any 
defects that may be in evidence and the reason for 
such defects or failure of the joint. The techniques of 
testing shall be as prescribed for the assessment tests 
( see 15 ). 

13.1.3 It is recommended that the size of specimens 
indicated in the various illustrations be maintained 
wherever possible. 

13.1.4 It is recommended that the pieces be set up 
and tack welded before welding. 

13.2 Exercises 

13.2.1 Lighting the Torch and Flame Adjustment 

These exercises shall be designed to instruct the trainee 
to: 

a) readily open and close the different gas 
cylinders; 

b) light the torch; and 

c) adjust the flame-oxidizing, reducing and 
neutral flame. 

13.2.2 Running Beads 

These exercises shall include practice of running beads 
using both right ward, that is, back hand and left ward, 
that is, forehand techniques of gas welding. Gradually 
the trainee shall learn to weld in different position. 
Initially filler rods shall not be used. When the trainees 
shall be confident in running beads, they shall use 
filler rods using proper flux. The art of which shall 
also be imparted during the practice of welding. 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 



13.2.3 Welding of Butt and Fillet Welds in Sheet 
Metal 

These exercises shall be designed to instruct the trainees 
in the technique of preparation of assemblies and also 
making the butt and fillet welds in various positions 
with or without the use of filler rods and fluxes. The 
trainees shall also learn the techniques for welding 
the short flanged edges butt joint ( melt through 
weld ) without 8ie use of filler rods. The trainees shall 
be instructed to use different jigs used for welding to 
help maintain flatness and minimize distortion. 

13.2.4 Welding of Butt and Fillet Welds in Thick 
Plates 

These exercise shall be designed to instruct the trainees 
in the techniques of edge preparations and prepare 
test asemblies and also making fillet and butt welds in 
different positions using filler rods and fluxes. Use of 
different jigs and proper tacking to maintain flatness 
and minimize distortion shall also be taught to the 
trainees. 

13.2.5 Resurfacing for Repair Welds 

These exercises shall be designed to instruct the trainees 
in the technique of depositing of weld beads using repair 
welds. The trainees shall be instructed to clean the 
interpass welds property before depositing successive 
welds beads. 

13.2.6 Welding of Pipes and Tubes (in Vertical Up 
and Flat Position) 

Exercises should be designed to instruct the trainees 
for butt welding of pipes and tubes in vertical up and 
flat positions. The trainees shall be instructed to weld 
with proper speed and manipulation so as to achieve 
complete root penetration. 

13.3 Check Tests 

13.3.1 Each trainee shall be required to make 
specimens on each exercise for check tests as 
stipulated in 13.2. Each specimen shall be inspected 
visually for appearance, size contour and defects, etc, 
till the trainee attains perfection in that exercise. 

13.3.2 Check tests in jobs shall be made after 
sectioning the weld deposited plates, polishing the 
section and macro etching using 5 to 10 percent nitric 
acid in alcohol. Weld defects such as slag inclusions 
porosity, etc, should not be present in the weld beads. 

14 PREPARATION OF TEST PIECESL 

14.1 Test welds shall be made on steel plates which 
shall be reasonably free from rust, oil, paint and other 
defects which may adversely affect welding. 

14.2 Butt Weld Test Pieces 

The test piece shall conform to the requirements of 
Fig. 1 A for filler rod sizes of 2.5 mm and above and 
Fig. IB for filler rod sizes L6 and 2.0 mm. The edges 
to be welded shall be prepared preferably by machining 



or by smooth flame cutting. The plates shall be properly 
tack welded at regular intervals along the line of the 
weld with tacks about 25 mm. On thicker plates, the 
method usually adopted is to arrange the two plates so 
that they diverjge from the point where welding 
commenced. This space may be maintained by the use 
of clamps and is particularly applicable to the 
longitudinal seams. 

14.2.1 The plates shall be slightiy pressed so that 
they are reasonably flat after welding. All beads shall 
be deposited with 4 mm filler rods including the sealing 
run. The weld shall be back chipped to a semicircular 
groove to a depth of 3 mm. After back-chipping, the 
sealing run shall be deposited. 

14.3 Fillet Weld Test Pieces 

The test pieces shall conform to the requirements of 
Fig. 2A for filler rod sizes of 2.5 nun and above and 
Fig. 2B for filler rod sizes 1.6 and 2.0 mm. The test 
pieces shall be properly tack welded at regular intervals 
along the line of the weld with tacks about 25 mm to 
minimize distortion. The test weld shall be deposited 
using 4 mm filler rods to deposit a weld of 6 mm leg 
length. 

14.4 Each completed test plate shall be indelibly 
marked in such a manner as to identify each specimen 
that will be removed therefrom. The marking shall 
identify the following: 

a) The trainee, 

b) The position of welding, and 

c) The material. 
15 ASSESSMENT 

15.1 By Visual Examination 

The test pieces shall be visually examined for the 
following: 

a) Dimension of weld deposit — The dimensions 
of the weld shall be checked. The finished 
weld shall be slightly over rather than under 
the specified size. 

b) Shape of profile - In butt welds, the surface 
shall be slightly convex. In fillet welds, the 
contour may vary from concave to convex 
according to the welding position and 
technique followed. 

c) Uniformity of surface ~ The height and 
spacing of ripples shall be uniform. 

d) Degree of under cut - The welded joint shall 
be free from under cuts, but slight intermittent 
occurrences may be disregarded provided that 
such undercut is not in the form of a sharp 
notch. 

e) Freedom from other defects — The surface of 
the weld shall be free from porosities, cavities 
and slag inclusions. 



IS 817 (Part 2) : 1996 



50 



40 



300 



T 

40 



50 



Li 



FACE 
SPECIMEN 



RESERVE 

REPEAT 

IF 



ROOT 
SPKIMEN 



DISCARD 



DISCARD 



BEND 



FOR 

TEST 

REQUIRED 



BEND 



10 



L 

J 



< 



45 



^ 



16-0 f a- 



10 






100 



Positiofi 


a 


F 


60°- 65" 


H-V 


60°- 65" 


V(Up) 


70°. 75" 


V(Down) 


70° -75" 


O 


80° - 85" 



100 



Weld to be stopped and restricted with a fresh 
electrode within central 50 mm. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 



1A For Filler Rods of Sizes 2.5 mm 
and Above 



1B For Filler Rods of Sizes 1.6 mm and 2.0 mm 
Fig. 1 Method of Making Butt Weld Test Specimen for Initial Quaufication Test and Annual Test 



15.2 By Testing 

15.2.1 Butt Welds 

After visual assessment of the butt welded tests pieces, 
two bend specimens each 4Q mm wide shall be cut 
from the test assembly. The upper and lower surfaces 
of the weld shall be made flush with the parent plates. 
Tool marks should be avoided as they lead to 
localization of stress and may cause premature failure. 
The shaip comers of the test specimens shall be rounded 



to a radius not exceeding 1 mm. The specimens then 
shall be bent to an angle of 180° over a former having 
a diameter equal to four times the thickness of the 
specimen as shown in Fig 3. One test specimen shall 
be tested with the face of the weld in tension and the 
other with the root in tension. A good weld shall show 
no crack or defect of a dimension greater than 3 mm 
measured along the weld and 1.6 mm measured across 
the weld. Premature failure at the corner of test 
specimens shall not be regarded as cause for rejection. 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) ; 1996 

T 




a. » g M 

-I fc u 

ui 2; =~ 

O >^ ui «»- 



UJ £ 
m - 






-^ 


— 


— 10 






WELD^ 


50 

1 








1 25 
50 

.^ : — mm^ 




-10 



METHOD OF 

BREAKING 

SPEClkEH 







i 

s 




1 

8 


100 













All dimensions in millimetres. 

2A For Filler Rods 
of Size 2.5 mm and Above 



2B For Filler Rods 
of Size 1.6 mm and 2.0 mm 



Fig, 2 Method of Making Fillet Weld Test Specimen for Initl\l Quaufication, Annual and Periodic 

Control Test 



Prior to bending the edges of the test specimen shall 
be etched to reveal the weld, if this is not sufficiently 
discernible to ensure that the bending takes place at 
the centre line of the weld. 

15.2.2 Fillet Weld 

A iter the visual assessment, the test assembly shall be 
r it into 3 equal portions and break open along the 
V eld and the weld fraaure examined. The weld fracture 
sliall be examined, keeping in view of the following 

factors: 

a) Degree of fusion - Fusion shall be completed 
over the whole area of the joint surfaces. The 
fracture shall be inspected for lack of fusion. 



b) Degree of root penetration - Defects are most 
likely to occur at the root of the weld. In 
normal fillet welds with good root penetration, 
the weld metal shall reach the comer 

The fracture shall have a clean uniform appearance 
and the weld metal shall be free from cavities and 
slag inclusions. 

15.2,3 The butt welded pipes/tubes shall be sectioned 
and etched with suitable etching after grinding the 
welded areas. There should be reasonable penetration 
and absence of weld defects like under cut, porosity, 
etc. 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 




D = AT 



/1|A r^Of WELD _|_; 
H^k-D*2.2T Ji 




ROLLER 



Fig. 3 Method of Carrying Out Bend Test 



ANNEX A 
{Clause S.5) 



ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED FOR TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT FOR 

WELDERS 



A-1 SHOP MACHINES AND ACCESSORY 
EQUIPMENT 

The training establishment shall be provided with the 
following shop and accessory equipment: 

a) Heavy work bench with machinist's or 
blacksmith's vice weighing 30 kg or more; 

b) Gas cutting torch (manual or machine type) 
or plate shear for preparing plates for welding 
and for cutting test specimen; 

c) Two-ended pedestal grmdcr with 25 cm X 3 
cm ( or larger ) coarse wheels and wheel 
dresser; 

d) Heavy power hacksaw ( preferably 25 mm 
width capacity ) or horizontal metal band saw; 

e) Portable or flexible shaft grinder; 

f) Equipment for machining test specimens; 

g) Guided-bend test device with hydraulic jack 
of 8 tonnes or larger capacity; 

h) Break or rupture device with hydraulic jack 
of 8 tonnes or larger capacity, 

j) Fire extinguishers, chemical type; 

k) Fire buckets with water; 

m) Sand bags of fire protection; 

n) Scrap box 90 cm X 60 cm X 30 cm; 

p) Chartboard for progress chart, instructional 
charts and notices; 



q) Small platform scales for weighing 
electrodes, etc; 

r) First aid kit; 

s) Provisions for sterilizing welding helmets; 

t) Anvil 45 kg or heavier; 

u) Display board for sample specimens of 
welding exercises; and 

v) Hot metal quenching tank. 

NOTE - Facilities for showing motion pictures, film strips 
and slides have been found to be of assistance. 

A-2 SMALL TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES 

While welding, each trainee shall be supplied with 
the following equipment: 

a) Sledge hammer for rupturing check test 
specimens; 

b) Ball peen hammer; 

c) C-clamps; 

d) Cold chisels; 

e) Centre punches; 

f) Scrioers; 

g) Metal rules; 

h) Try squares; 

j) Sets of metal marking steel stamps ( letters 
and figures of 5 mm height ); 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 

k) Small steel wedges; 

m) Medium coarse files for rounding edges of 
test specimen; and 

n) Soapstone marking crayon. 

A-3 REQUIREMENTS FOR EACH TRAINEE 
WHILE WELDING 

While weldmg, each trainee shall be supplied with 
the following equipment; 

a) Helmet or hand shield with suitable coloured 
filter lens and clear cover glass; 

b) Welding and cutting torches; 

c) Ground clamps ( where necessary leather 
gloves, or gauntlets ); 



d) Safety goggles for use while chipping and 
cleaning welds and for flash protection; 

e) Wire scratch brush; 

f) Slag-chipping hammer; and 

g) Pair of short pick-up tongs or heavy gas pipe 
pliers. 

A-4 EQUIPMENT FOR TRAINEE OBSERVERS 
AND INSTRUCTORS WHILE OBSERVING 

While welding each instructor and trainee shall be 
supplied with the following equipment: 

a) Helmet or hand shield with suitable coloured 
filter glass and clear cover glass, and 

b) Weld gauges ( see ISl Handbook of Manual 
Metal Arc Welding for Welders ). 



SI No. 



ANNEX B 

( Clause 9 2 ) 

RECOMMENDED FORM OF TRAINEE PROGRESS CHART 



Name 

Address 

Local Address 

Employer's Name and Address. 



Course required: 

1. Butt welds in flat position and fillet welds in flat and horizontal-vertical position, 

2. Butt and fillet welds in vertical position and butt welds in horizontal-vertical position, and 

3. Butt welds and fillet welds in overhead position. 

Special remarks, if any 

Terms of payment - Cash/Credit/Free 

Date in Date out Total period (weeks) 



Lesson 1 
Lighting the Torch and Flame Adjustment 



Date 



Day 



Opening/closing of gas cylinders 
Lighting the torch 
Adjusting the flame 
Status of progress 



IS817(Part2): 1996 
Lesson! 
Running Beads 

Date Day 

Right ward/back hand ( flat position, without filler rod ) 
Left ward/forhand ( flat position, without filler rod ) 
Running of bead with filler rod ( flat position ) 
Running of bead ( in different positions with filler rods ) 
Status of progress 

Lesson 3 
Butt and Fillet Weld in Sheet Metal 

Date Day 

Fillet weld in different positions, without filler rod 
Butt weld in different positions, with filler rod 
Fillet weld in different positions, with filler rod 
Butt weld in different positions, with filler rod 
Short flanged edged butt joint 
Making check test specimen No. 1 
Making check test specimen No. 2 
Status of progress 

Lesson 4 
Butt and Fillet Welds in Thick Plate 

Date Day 

Butt and fillet welds in thick plate 
Edge preparation 

Fillet weld in different position using filler rods 
Butt weld in different position using filler rods 
Making check test specimen 
Status of progress 

Lesson 5 
Repair of Welding /Joining 

Date Day 

Depositing of weld beads in minimum of two beads of worn-out surfaces 
Status of progress 

Lesson 6 
Pipes and Ibbes 

Date Day 

Butt welding of pipes/tubes in flat and vertical up position 
Status of progress 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 

ANNEX C 

{Clause 10.1 ) 

RECOMMENDED SYLLABUS FOR THE TRAINING COURSE 

Period Details of Course Position Hours of 

Instruction 

First Theory 7 

Week 

a) Safety in Welding 

The instruction course shall be so designed as to make the trainee 
aware of the necessity for observing safety precautions under the 
following three general headings: 

i) Protection of person, that is, proper shoes, clothing, hand 
shield, helmet or goggles with the right shade of filter, 
adequate ventilation. 

ii) Protection of property, that is, safeguarding combustible 
material, protection from hot slag, flying sparks and flame, 
availability of fire protection equipment etc. 

iii) Protection and care of equipment, that is, storage and 
handling of oxygen and acetylene cylinders ( or acetylene 
generators where low pressure system is used ), operation 
of pressure regulators, handling of blowpipe, care of hose 
and equipment, etc. 

iv) Safety rules recommended in IS 818 : 1957. 

b) Welding Process 

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to acquaint the trainee 
with the principal welding process in common use, with particular 
emphasis on gas welding. 

Practice 30 

a) Lighting the torch and flame adjustment. 

b) Running beads 

Film shows, discussions, etc. 

Second Theory 7 

Week 

a) Gases 

The elementary knowledge about the various gases used in gas 
welding. 

b) Welding and Gas Cutting Equipment 

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an 
idea of the characteristics of gas welding equipments. Fittings and 
dismantling of manual gas cutting equipment, flame adjustment and 
care of equipment should also be covered. 

Practice 30 

a) Butt and fillet welds in sheet metal 

b) Fillet welds in sheet metal 
Film shows, discussions, etc. 

Third Theory 7 

Week 

a) Elementary Welding Metallurgy 

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an 

10 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 

Period Details of Course Position Hours of 

Instruction 

elementary knowledge of the thermal and metallurgical factors 
involved in the welding of steel. The welding characteristics of 
high tensile and alloy steels, cast iron and non-ferrous metals 
should also be explained in a simple manner. 

b) Elementary Blue Print Reading 

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to give the trainees 
an elementary knowledge of factors involved in reading simple 
blue prints in order to assist him in comprehending common 
welding terms and symbols used. 

Practice 30 

Butt and fillet welds in thick plates. 
Film shows, discussions, etc. 

Fourth Theory 7 

Week 

Welding Procedures, Terms and Symbols 

Instruction in this subject shall include plate edge preparation, types 
of joints, use of jigs, fixtures and manipulators, tacking and other 
aids to assembly, sequence of welding, residual stresses, control of 
distortion, pre-heating and post-heating. The more important terms 
relating to gas welding and the standard symbols used for detailing 
weld sizes and showing welds on drawings shall be explained. 

Practice 30 

Resurfacing 

Film shows, discussions, etc. 

Fifth Theory 7 

Week 

a) Quality of Welds 

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to familiarize the 
trainees with the characteristics of good welds and causes of 
defective welds. The topic for discussion shall include (i) 
soundness, (ii) fusion, (iii) penetration, and (iv) weld contours 
and dimensions. 

b) Inspection and Testing of Welds 

Under this heading should be covered the more common methods 
of weld inspection and testing ( shop as well as field methods ). 
Instruction in this subject is better given in the form of a discussion 
of the trainees welds before and after testing. The following points 
in particular should be covered: 

i) Visual inspection and use of weld gauges; 

ii) Bend, tensile impact and pressure tests; and 

iii) Non-destructive methods such as radiographic and 
magnetic particle inspection. 

Practice 30 

Welding of pipes and tubes 
Film shows, discussions, etc. 

Sixth Theory 7 

Week 

Same as fifth week — Further lectures 

11 



IS 817 ( Part 2 ) : 1996 

Period 



Seventh 
Week 



Details of Course 



Position 



Practice 

Same as fifth week. 

Film shows, discussions, etc. 

Theory 

a) Characteristics of Filler Rods 

instruction in this shall be designed to familiarize the trainee with 
the different types of electrodes used in gas welding. 

b) Estimating and Costing 

Factors afifecting welding cost and the method of estimating materials 
requirements shall be explained in a simple manner 

Practice 

Revision 

Film shows, discussions, etc. 



Hours of 
Instruction 

30 



30 



DO 



ANNEX D 
(Clause 12.1.1 ) 
RECOMMENDED SAFETY RULES 
DON'T 



1. Wear leather gloves, adequate clothing and heavy 
shoes, tightly laced. 

2. Wear a helmet or use a shield when in the vicinity 
of welding or flash arc. 

3. Remove combustible materials from the vicinity of 
welding or gas cutting operations. 

4. Get prompt first aid if burned or if your eyes have 
been injured by a flash or flying scale. 

5. Wear safety goggles when chipping, grinding, 
peening or removing slag. 

6. Keep booth and floor clean and clear of electrode 
studs, scraps of metal and carelessly disposed tools. 

7. Know how to use the fire extinguishers and 
memorize their location. 

8. See that hose connections are tight and that cables 
do not become hot. 

9. Make proper provision for venting exhaust gases 
when operating the tip of the torch in confined 
spaces. 



1. Look at a welding flash with the naked eye. 

2. Use cracked or defective helmets or shields. 

3. Hang a torch with its hose on regulators or cylinder 
valves. 

4. Pick up hot objects. 

5. Use electrode holders with defective jaws. 

6. Leave the electrode holder on the table or in contact 
with a grounded metallic surface. Replace it on 
the support provided for that purpose. 

7 . Weld on closed containers or on containers that have 
held combustible materials. Secure permission from 
the instructor before welding on any container 

8. Weld in the vicinity of flammable or combustible 
materials. 



12 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed: if the review- indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. MTD 11 (3712). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 




Date of Issue 


Text Affected 








« 


^ >, 







BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shaji Zafar Marg; >Tew Delhi 1 1()()()2 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 83 75 \ 

■■•■J . ' *^ 

• 
Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M. V. 1. P. Road. Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336. Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAl'400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

C'OIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

( Common to 

all offices ) 


^ 


Telephone 




'323 76 17 
.323 3841 


' 337 84 99, 
337 86 26. 


337 85 61 

337 86 62 


■ 


r 60 38 43 
, 60 20 25 


■ 235 02 16 
' ,235 15 19 


.235 04 42 
.235 23 L5 


• 832 92 95 
832 78 91 


.832 78 58 
.832 78 0? 



Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurja, Indi; 



