**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8004 (1976) : Recommended procedure for welding of rigid 
PVC [MTD 12: Welding Applications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

WELDING OF RIGID PVC 

(RIGID POLYVINYL CHLORIDE) 



UDC e2i'79r53 : 678'743'22*077 




© Copyright Wh 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAJN, S BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

HEW DEJi^Ki iionna 




May 1976 



IS 18004 .1976 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

WELDING OF RIGID PVC 

(RIGID POLYVINYL CHLORIDE) 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDG 14 



Chairman 
Shbi S. V. Nadkarni 

Members 

Shbi P. S. Visvakath ( Alternate 
Shri S. V, Nadkarni ) 
Shbi J. K. Ahltjwalia 

Shbi V, N. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Balastjbbahmanyam 
Shbi K* Balmanohas 
ShbiB, C, Biswas 
Shbi R. N. Ghakbabobty 
DibbctobjResbakch, and Design 

( B & R Bbanoh ) 
Executive Engineee ( Electbi- 
caIi), Electrical Division 
No. 1, New Delhi 

Executive Engineer 

( Electrical ) , Central 

Electrical Division No. 1, 

Calcutta ( Alternate ) 

Shri H. D. Govindaraj 

Db J. Vaid ( Alternate ) 

Db G. J. GUEUBAJA 

Shbi S. K. Hart 

Shbi M. K. Sinha {Alternate ) 
DbJ. Jain 



Representing 
Advani Qerlikon Limitedj Bombay 



to 

Stewarts and Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Binny Ltd, Madras 

Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. Visakhapatnam 

National Test House, Calcutta 

Braithwaite and Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Public Works Department, Government 

Haryana, Chandigarh 
Central Public WorksTOepartmentj New Delhi 



of 



Prof A. P, Jambulingam 



Philips India Ltd, Bombay 

Central Mechanical Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Malik Electricals Private Ltd, Bombay 

Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Indian _Society for Technical Education, 

New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1976 ,J» 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1^5Z).«a»id. 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8004 -1976 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Joint Dibeotob (M & C ), RDSOj Ministry of Railways 
Ltjoknow 
Chemist and Mbtallubgist, 
Integbai^ Coach Faotoby, 
Pbbambttb ( Alternate I ) 
Production Engineeb 
(Shell), Integkal Coach 
Factoby, Pebambub ( Alternate II ) 
Shei M, T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 
Shbi S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. S. Kopikal Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Visakha- 

patnam 
Shbi A. P. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Db K, V. Kbishnamubthy Research and Development Organization ( HSL ), 

Ranch! 
Db K. V. Subba Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Mttkhebjee Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi R. Pubkayastha ( Alternate) 
Shbi A, C. Mukhebjee Apar Private Ltd, Bombay 

Lt-Col p. R. Nabasimhan Engineer-in-Chiefs* Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shbi K. S. Hans (Alternate ) 
Shbi M, M. Patel Association of Indian Engineering Industry, 

Calcutta 
Shbi R. M. Kapadia ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar 

Shbi G. D. Apte ( Alternate ) 
ShbiH. L. Pbabhakab Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay; and Chemical 

Plant and Machinery Association of India, 
Bombay 
Shbi P. B. Rao Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi S. Gangopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. S. G. Rao Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shbi L. M. Tolani ( Alternate) 
Rbpbesentative National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi S. C. Roy Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shbi V. V. Sathyanaeayana Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, 

Durgapur 
Shbi S. K. Banerjia ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Sbngupta Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shbi V. V. Kaviswab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. K. Sethi Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shbi H. K. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi K. G, Shabma ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Sbinivasultt Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 

ShriB. Pattabhieaman ( ^/^^r«fl^« ) 
Shbi S. SuNDABESAN Directorate Geney^l of Employment & Training, 

New Delhi 

« 
( Continued^cfftpltge''H ) 



IS: 8004-1976 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

WELDING OF RIGID PVC 

(RIGID POLYVINYL CHLORIDE) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 

on 19 February 1976, after the draft finalized by the Welding General 

Sectional Committee has been approved by the Structural and Metals 

Division CounciL 

0.2 In recent years considerable progress has been made in the application 

of welding in the plastic industry. This standard has been prepared as a 

guide to the industry in welding rigid PVC, 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 

DIN 16930 ' Welding of Rigid PVC ( Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride ) -Directions ' 

issued by Deutscher Normenausschuss, Berlin. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 

standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 

the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 

IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 

off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard recommends provisions for welding rigid PVC ( rigid 
polyvinyl chloride ). 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 5687-1970t 
shall apply. 

3. GENERAL 

3.1 Rigid PVC is welded in a paste-like condition. The factors influencing 
the weldabiiity of rigid PVC are the welding temperature, duration of the 
heat apphcation and the welding pressure. J* 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised), 

•[Glossary of terms relating to welding of plastics. * >w ^ •% - 



IS ; 8004 . 1976 

3.2 With the various welding processes specified in this standard the welding 
temperature of rigid PVG lies between 180 and 210"G. Temperatures 
above 210°G should be avoided because of possible decomposition of the 
rigid PVG. Welding temperatures below 180°C result in defective welds. 

4. HOT GAS WELDING 

4.1 In this process the connecting parts to be welded and the filler material 
are heated by suitable hot gases ( referred to as welding gas hereafter ) to 
the necessary welding temperature and welded under pressure. Oxygen 
and combustible gases should not be normally used for safety reasons. 
Gaution is also advisable even with non-combustible gases like nitrogen and 
carbon dioxide, 

4.2 Welding Apparatus — Manual welding torches are normally used in 
which gas free from oil and moisture and supplied at a pressure of 0*05 MPa 
( 0*5 kgf/cm" ) is heated to the required temperature. Examples of welding 
apparatus normally used are given in Fig. 1 and 2. In practice air is 
chiefly used as welding gas for rigid PVG. The temperature of the welding 
gas should be adjustable. It is measured at 5 mm from the end of the filler 
rods* 



-ELECTRIC HEATING 
.ELEMENT (INTERCHANGE ABLE) 




ELECTRICAL 
CONNECTION 



-BLOWPIPE TIP 
(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



WELDING AIR 
(ADJUSTABLE) 



Fig. 1 Electrically-Heated Hot Air Welding Equipment 



HEATING GAS 
TUBE COIL^ yET(INTERCHANGEABLE) 

WELDING AIR 
(ADJUSTABLE) 



r-WI 

\ \ \ ^^^^ 

^BLOWPIPE TIP ^"^MAJING \w,m<;iii atihm j 



-BLOWPIPE TIP 
(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



JACKET 



ATING GAS 
(ADJUSTABLE) 

INSULATION AGAINST 
RADIATION OF HEAT 



Fig, 2 Gas-Heated Hot Air Welding Eq,uipment; 

4 



1^:8004-19^6 

4.3 Filler Material — The filler materials normally used are rigid PVG 
rods or PVG rods containing plasticizers. Sizes of rods normally used are 
2, 3 or 4 mm. 2 mm rods are used for root and sealing runs {di in Fig. 3 to 
8 ) . For depositing the middle portion and finishing iTins of the weld 3 mm 
rods are used when the thickness to be welded is up to and equal to 4 mm 
( ^a in Fig. 3 to 8 ). 4 mm rods are used when the thickness to be welded 
exceeds 4 mm. 

4.3.1 In special cases ( for example, when lining surfaces with rigid PVG 
films ) strips ( filler strips ) of rigid PVG are also used with thickness 0'8 tc 
1 mm and width up to 15 mm. 



60 -7d* 



-H h--cl2 



^^ ^^m^n 



-0'5TO 1 -Hf*- di 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 3 Single-Butt Weld Without Sealing Run 





2 

3 



^^ 



^^^^ 




di 



1. Welding V-weld 

2. Make an angled root 

3. Make the root round 

4. Weld the sealing run 

4A PREPARATION OF THE V-BUTT WELD 4B WELDING THE V-BUTT WELD 

All dimensions in millimetre. 
Fig, 4 V-Butt Weld With Sealing Run ♦ 

5 



IS:S004-1976 





0-5 TO 1 



5A PREPARATION OF THE DOUBLE 
V-BUTT WELD 



1. Weld one side of the double V-butt 
weld 

2* Make the root round 

3. Weld the other side of the V-butt 
weld 

SB WELDING THE DOUBLE V-BUTT 
WELD 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 5 Double V-Butt Weld 



^ TREATED WITH 
^"^^ A SCRAPER- 





1^^^^^^^^ 



6A PREPARATION OF THE FILLET WELD 6B WELDING THE FILLET WELD 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig, 6 T- Joint With Single Fillet Weld 



TREATED WITH 
A SCRAPER- 





7A PREPARATION OF THE FILLET WELD 7B WELDING THE FILLET WELD 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 7 T- Joint With Double Fillet Weld ♦ 



IS : 8004 . 1976 






WITHOUT SEALING 
RUN 

0~d2 



m3 



\ WITH SEALING 



RUN 



1. Without sealing run 

2. With sealing run 

8A PREPARATION OF THE BUTT WELD 8B WELDING THE BUTT WELD 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 8 Corner Joint With Single V-Butt Weld 

4.4 Forms of weld > — Butt welds are normally made as single-V without 
sealing runs {see Fig. 3), single-V with a sealing run (see Fig. 4 ) or as 
double- V butt welds ( see Fig. 5 ). T-joints and corner joints ( see Fig, 6, 7 
and 8 ) should be avoided wherever possible. In place of T-joints it is 
preferable to use joint shown in Fig. 9 with single- or double-V butt weld. 

4.5 Preparation of the Parts to be Welded — The surfaces of the parts 
to be welded ( see Fig. 3 to 8 ) are prepared by planing, scraping, filing, 
rasping, milling or grinding, or if they are not chamfered as shown in 
Fig. 6A and 7A treated with a scraper, 

4.5.1 The surfaces to be welded and the filler rod should be free from 
shavings, traces of grease and other impurities. Cleaning agents which have 
a softening or swelling effect on rigid PVC should not be used. 




Fig. 9 Better Solution Than the Corner Joint Shown un^ Fig. 8 

7 



tS:g064-19'76 

4.6 Welding Procedure — Wherever possible welding should be carried 
out in flat position. The filler rod is sharpened to an angle of 30°, fastened 
to the weld line and continuously introduced to the weld joint by hand 
under constant uniform heating of the weld with the torch and with even 
and almost vertical pressure {see Table 1 for the recommended pressure). 
At the same time a slight pendulum movement should be made with the 
nozzle of the welding torch between the base material and filler rod at an 
interval of 5 mm from the weld ( see Fig. 10). 



TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED PRESSURE ON FILLER ROD 

Filler Rod Recommended Pbessube 
Size 

mm kN ( kg ) 

2 10 (1000) 

3 20 (2 000) 

4 30 (3 000) 




DIRECTION 


OF WELDING 






Fig, 10 Right: The Filler Rod is Held Almost Vertical 



4.6.1 The filler rod should not be held at an oblique angle because this 
can cause tension in the weld seam which impairs its quality and results in 
cracks ( see Fig. 11). 

4.6.2 In order to obtain a welding temperature of 180-2 lO'^C the welding 
gas should have a temperature of at least 300°G {see 3.2) measured at a 
point 5 mm from the nozzle of the welding torch. 

4*6.3 If welding is satisfactory a bow-wave is,IJ3rmed at the filler rod in 
front of the weld. Over-heating and decomposition of the base material, 
filler rod and weld seam are apparent in their black colour. Decomposed 
portions of this kind should be removed and re-welded. ^ ^ •% « 

8 



IS : 8004 - 1976 

DIRECTION OF WELDING 




Fig. 1 1 Wrong: If the Filler Rod is Held Obliquely, This Subjects 
THE Welds to Tension and Causes Stress 

4»6.4 The spatter ( flash ) resulting during welding between the filler rod 
and base material, and between the filler rod and the weld joint already 
made shall be removed before depositing further weld material since the 
spatter material get overheated and decompose during subsequent welding. 

4.6.5 Excessive reinforcements proud of the normal weld surface should 
be avoided as they increase the notch effect and result in failure of the 
welded joint if they are subjected to continuous stress. 

4.7 Finishing the Weld Joint ■ — Normally completed welds are not 
machined. When the welds are to be machined machining marks should be 
avoided as they result in cracks when the joint is subjected to continuous 
stress. 

4.8 Quality of the Welds — The following factors influence the quality of 
the welded joint: 

a) Choice of correct welding conditions ( temperature, speed and 
pressure ) ; 

b) Form of weld; 

c) Number of runs in the welded joint < — a few thick runs give better 
results than a number of thin ones; 

d) Appearance of machining marks; 

e) Cleanliness of filler material and the surfaces to be welded; and 

f) Skin of the welder. 

4.8.1 In general a welded joint can be considered to be a good joint if 
its strength is at least equal to 0*6 times the strength of the base material. 

5. HEATED TOOL WELDING 

5.1 Welding Process — In this process the surfaces of the parts to be 
welded are heated to the required temperature by suitably designed beating 
tools and welded under pressure usually withovt filler pi^terjal, ♦ ^ 



18:8004-1976 



5.2 Welding Apparatus — The heating tools used for welding are heated 
electrically, with gas or by other means. They transmit their heat by 
conduction to the connecting surfaces of the parts to be welded. Care 
should be taken that scale is not formed on heated tools. Residues of PVC 
should be prevented from adhering. This can be achieved effectively by 
means of a polytetrafluore ethylene covering. 

5.3 Filler material is not generally used. 

5.4 Weld Forms — Pressure butt weld ( see Fig. 12 ) or lap joints Vvith lap 
weld are the normally used weld forms in heated tool welding process. 

HEATED 
TOOL 

r-tr^ P. 

HEATING 




-WELDING 



Fig. 12 Heated Tool Welding 



5*5 Preparation of the Parts to be Welded — Where necessary the 
connecting surfaces to be welded are faced. The surfaces and the heated 
tool should be free from shavings, traces of grease and other impurities. 
Gleaning agents which have a softening or swelling effect on rigid PVC 
should not be used. 

5.6 Welding Procedure — The surfaces to be welded are pressed against 
the heating tool in a suitable device. As soon as the welding temperature is 
reached the heating tool is removed and the connecting surfaces are welded 
together under pressure in the device ( see Fig. 12 ). 

5.7 Weld spatter ( flash ) shall be removed as far as possible from the weld. 
6, IMPULSE WELDING 

6.1 Welding Process — In this process the surfaces of the parts to be 
welded are brought in contact with each other, heated by heat impulses 
from suitable heating tools and welded under pressure. 

6.2 Welding Apparatus ^ — The impulse welding apparatus consists of a 
power source, pressure device and impulse pressure plate. The impulse 
pressure plate has electrical resistance elements of ^^xtremely low heat capacity 
which are electrically heated briefly ( for examjSle, 0'25 second), 

6.3 Filler Material — Filler material is not generally used, * ^ ^ -% « 



10 



18:8004-1976 

6.4 Weld Forms — Lap joints with lap welds are normally used in impulse 
welding process. 

6.5 Preparation of Parts to be Welded — The joining surfaces of the 
parts to be welded require no special preparation. The surface and the 
heating apparatus should , however, be free from traces of grease and other 
impurities. Gleaning agents which have a softening or swelling effect on 
rigid PVG should not be used. 

6.6 Welding Procedure ' — The connecting surfaces are placed on a moun- 
ting plate covered with an elastic heat insulator so that they overlap. The 
impulse pressure plate ( plate with heating element and heat insulator ) is 
pressed on to the welding line by means of a suitable pressure device and 
heated electrically for a brief period. The pressure is maintained until the 
welding zone has cooled off. In the case of thicknesses 0*06 to 0'2 mm the 
mounting plate is also designed as an impulse pressure plate. The weld 
seams need no finishing. 

6.7 Q,uality of Weld — The provisions contained in 4.8 shall apply. 

7. FRICTION WELDING 

7^1 Welding Process — In friction welding the joining surface of the parts 
to be welded < — usually solids of revolution — are heated to the required 
temperature by frictional heat and welded under pressure without filler 
material. 

7.2 Welding Apparatus — The friction welding apparatus consists of 
devices ( for example, a turning machine ) which permit the connecting 
surfaces of the parts to be welded to turn sufficiently under pressure against 
each other so that the surfaces are heated to the welding temperature by 
friction. 

7.3 Filler Material — Filler material is not generally used. 

7.4 Weld Forms ' — Butt joints with welded contact surfaces are produced 
by friction welding. 

7*5 Preparation of Parts to be Welded — In the case of parts up to 
40 mm diameter the welding surfaces shall be faced. When the diameter 
of the parts exceeds 40 mm, one or both of the connecting surfaces shall be 
perpared so that they taper to a cone with a slope of a/2 satisfying the 
condition 

a D 
tan "2" "^2~ '^' 
where D is the diameter of the part to be tapered. ^ 

11 



IS: 8004 -1976 

7.5.1 The joining surfaces shall be free from shavings, traces of grease 
and other impurities. Gleaning agents having a softening or swelling effect 
on rigid PVG should not be used. 

7.6 Welding Procedure — The parts to be welded are clamped in the 
turning device and turned against each other ( see Fig. 13 ) under pressure. 
After the surfaces reach the welding temperature — which is apparent when 
pasty material oozes allround the circumference ■ — axial pressure is 
gradually increased. The attachment is then undamped and the movement 
of both parts against each other is concluded. The welding pressure is 
maintained until the weld joint is cooled off. 



-CHUCK 



-WORK PIECE 



WELD SEAM 




CLAMP 
RING 



-PRESSURE 
PLATE 
APPLIANCE 
CLAMPED 

Fig. 13 Friction Welding 



APPLIANCE 
RELEASED 



7,6.1 The joint shall be finished according to 4,7. 

7.7 Qiiality of Welded Joint — The strength of the welded joint 
approaches that of the base material. 

8. HIGH-FREQ^UENCY WELDING 

8.1 Welding Process — The joining surfaces of the part to be welded are 
heated to the required welding temperature in a condenser field of a high- 
frequency current source and welded under pressure usually without filler 
material. 

8.2 Welding Apparatus — High frequency welding equipment consists of 
a high frequency generator, welding press and electrode ( welding tool ) 
adapted to the weld form, 

8-3 Filler Material < — In the case of high freqilency welding filler material 
is not generally used. 

8.4 Weld Form — Lap joints with lap welds are obtained in H^vft^ing. 



12 



IS: 8004-1976 

8.5 Preparation of Welding Faces — The joining faces of the parts 
( usually films ) to be welded do not normally require any special prepara- 
tion. The surfaces should, however, be free from impurities. Gleaning 
agents having a softening or swelling effect on rigid PVG shall not be used. 

8.6 Welding Procedure < — The parts to be welded are placed on the 
mounting plate so that they overlap. They are heated and welded by HF 
energy after applying pressure on the work piece. The HF energy supply is 
regulated according to the thickness of the film or sheet. After switching 
off the HF energy supply, the pressure is maintained until the weld zone is 
cooled off and has regained its dimensional stability. 

8.7 Finishing the Welded Joint — The provision contained in 4-7 shall 
apply. 



13 



18:8004-1976 

( Cmtinued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Superintending EiTQIKEER, Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

Central Mechanical Circle, Nadu, Madras 

Madbas 
Shbi S. G. N. Swamy Mukand Iron & ^Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Sbivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shbi M. S. Nagaraj 
Deputy Director ( Struc & Met ), ISI 



Subcommittee for Welding and Cutting Processes and Procedures. 

SMDG 14 : 3 

Convener 
Shri H. L, Pbabhakab Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Members 
Assistant Dibector ( Welding ), Ministry of Railways 

RDSO, LtrcKNOW 
Shbi Awtar Singh Bears Project, Talwara Township, Dist Hoshjarpur 

( Punjab ) 
Shri S. P, Dasgupta Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR),Durgapur 
Shbi V. G. Jagannath Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 

Shbi R. Visvanathan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 
Shri S. N. Bastj ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Kodikal Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Visakha- 

patnam 
Shri A. P. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. C. Magog Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shbi A. C. Mtjkhbrjee Apar Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. V. Nadkabni Advani Oerlikon Limited, Bombay 

ShriB. Malkani {Alternate) 
Shbi J. R. Pbasher Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. R. G. Nagabajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Pubkayastha Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi S. K. Bubman ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. L. Venkataraman The K. C. P. Ltd, Madras 

Shri J. R. D. Saxton Lloyds Register of Shipping, Calcutta 

Shri J. N. Goswamy {Alternate) 



14 



