**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8002 (1976) : Recommended procedure for welding of 
flexible PVC [MTD 12: Welding Applications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS t 8002 -I »76 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

WELDING OF FLEXIBLE PVC 
( FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL CHLORIDE ) 



U DC 62 1 • 7 9 1 '58 : 6 78' 743*22 07? 




© Capyrighl 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAH. MARC 

NEW DELHI 110002 



r7*?Gr4 Jim* 1976 



IS 1 8002 -1976 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

WELDING OF FLEXIBLE PVC 
( FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL CHLORIDE ) 



Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 



Chairman 
S hbi S. V. Nadkabni 

Members 

Shbi P. S. Visvanath ( Alternate 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni ) 
ShbiJ. K. Ahluwalia 

Shbi V. N. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Balasubbahmanyam 
Shbi K. Balmanohar 
Shbi B. C. Biswas 
Shbi R. N. Chakbabobty 
Director, Research and Design 

(B&R Branch) 
Executive Engineer ( Electri- 
cal ), Electrical Division 
No. 1, New Delhi 

Executive Engineer 

( Electbical ) , Central 

Electrical Division No. 1, 

Calcutta ( Alternate ) 

Shbi H. D. Govindaraj 

Dr J. Vaid ( Alternate ) 
Db G. J. G crura j a 

Shri S. K. Habi 

Shbi M. K. Sinha (Alternate ) 
DbJ.Jain 



Representing 
Advani Oerlikon Limited, Bombay 



to 

Stewarts and Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Binny Ltd, Madras 

Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 

National Test House, Calcutta 

Braithwaite and Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Public Works Department, Government 

Haryana, Chandigarh 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 



of 



Prof A. P. Jambulingam 



Philips India Ltd, Bombay 

Central Mechanical Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Malik Electricals Private Ltd, Bombay 

Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Indian Society for Technical Education, 

New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyright 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1^57 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission ol the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8002 -1976 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Joiist Director ( M & C ), RDSO, Ministry of Railways 
Lucknow 
Chemist and Metallurgist, 
Integral Coach Factory, 
Perambur ( Alternate I ) 
Production Engineer 
(Shell), Integral Coach 
Factory, Perambur ( Alternate II ) 
Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 
Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Kodikal Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Visakha- 

patnam 
Shri A. P. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. V. Krishnamurthy Research and Development Organization ( HSL ), 

Ranchi 
Dr K. V. Subba Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Mukherjea Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. Purkayastha ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Mukhebjee Apar Private Ltd, Bombay 

Lt-Col P. R. Narasimhan Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri K. S. Hans ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Patel Association of Indian Engineering Industry, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. M. Kapadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Pole Walchandnagar Industries, Walchandnagar 

Shri G. D. Apte ( Alternate ) 
ShriH. L. Prabhakar Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay; and Chemical 

Plant and Machinery Association of India, 
Bombay 
Shri P. B. Rao Ministry of Defence { DGI ) 

Shri S. Gangopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. G. Rao Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay 

Shri L. M. Tolani ( Alternate ) 
Representative National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shri S. C. Roy Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shri V. V* Sathyanarayana Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, 

Durgapur 
Shri S. K. Banerjia ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Sengupta Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri V. V. Kaviswar ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Sethi Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd* Hardwar 

Shri H. K. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. G. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Srinivasulu Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 

Shri B. Pattabhiraman ( Alienate ) 
Shri S. Sund ares an : ^Directorate General of Employment & Training, 

^ New Delhi /* 

** ( Continued on page 16 ) 



IS: 8002 -1976 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR 

WELDING OF FLEXIBLE PVC 
( FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL CHLORIDE ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 19 February 1976, after the draft finalized by the Welding General 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals 
Division Council. 

0.2 In recent years considerable progress has been made in the application 
of welding in the plastic industry. This standard has been prepared as a 
guide to the industry in welding flexible PVC. 

0.3 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 
DIN 16931 ' Welding of flexible PVC (flexible polyvinyl chloride) — 
Directions ' issued by Deutscher Normenausschuss, Berlin. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers recommendations for welding flexible polyvinyl 
chloride (flexible PVC). 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS :5687-1970t 
shall apply. 

3. GENERAL 

3.1 Flexible PVC is obtained by incorporating plasticizer in PVC powder 
before melting. The setting temperatures of this material lie below room 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) , "* 
•(•Glossary of terms relating to welding of plastics. 



IS: 8002 -1976 



temperature and decrease with a rise in plasticizer content. The flexible 
PVC is welded in a dough like condition. Welding temperature, welding 
speed, applications of pressure at the point of welding are, therefore, 
important considerations. It is recommended that flexible PVG is welded 
at a temperature between 250 and 300°C. At temperatures below 250°G 
the bond produced in the weld seam will be inadequate, and at temperatures 
above 300°G the flexible PVG starts decomposing. 

4. WELDING PROCESSES 

4.1 Flexible PVC may be welded using any of the following processes: 

a) Hot gas welding with filler material, 

b) Hot gas welding without filler material, 

c) Heated tool welding, 

d) Friction welding, 

e) Impulse welding, and 

f ) High frequency welding. 

5. HOT GAS WELDING WITH FILLER MATERIAL 

5.1 Welding Process — The contact surfaces of the parts to be welded 
and the filler material are heated to the desired temperature by means of 
hot air and the joint is formed using a pressure roller. This process is not 
suitable for thickness below 1 mm. 

5.2 Equipment 

5.2.1 The equipment consists of a blowpipe in which air free from 
moisture and oil is blown at a rate of 1 000 to 1 500 1/h and at a pressure 
of about 0*05 MPa (0*5 kgf/cm 2 ). Examples of electrically-heated and 
gas-heated equipment are shown in Fig. 1 and 2. The air is heated to the 
desired temperature on flowing past the electric heating element ( see Fig. I ) 
or gas-heated tube coil ( see Fig. 2 ) . The temperature of the welding air 
is measured at a point 5 mm from the tip of the blowpipe. 



■ELECTRIC HEATING 
^ELEMENT (INTERCHANGEABLE) 




ELECTRICAL 
CONNECTION 



•BLOWPIPE TIP 
(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



WELDING AIR 
(ADJUSTABLE) 



Fig. 1 Electrically-Heated Hot Air Welding Equipment 



lS:fc00i-i9?d 



Tube coil- 





HEATING GAS 
JET(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



** 'X W W W V* ' U 



a^A-^A' 



^ 




-BLOWPIPE TIP 
(INTERCHANGEABLE) 



INSULATING 
JACKET 




WELDING AIR 
(ADJUSTABLE) 



HEATING GAS 
(ADJUSTABLE) 

INSULATION AGAINST 
RADIATION OF HEAT 



Fig. 2 Gas-Heated Hot Air Welding Equipment 

5.2*2 To produce the pressure on the filler material required for welding, 
a pressure roller is used which also guides the filler rod ( see Fig. 3 ). The 
surface of the roller may have a groove of 0*5 mm radius when using with 
filler wires of small diameter ( see Fig. 3 ). 





3A PRESSURE ROLLER AND 
FILLER ROD 



3B FILLER ROD PRESSED INTO SINGLE-V 
BUTT WELD WITH PRESSURE ROLLER 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 3 Pressure Roller 

5.3 Filler Material — The filler material used shall be rods of flexible 
PVG usually with a circular cross section of diameter 3 mm and over. For 
welding films and foils, strips of required width can also be cut from the 
parent material and used as filler material. 
5*4 Edge Preparation for Welding 

5.4.1 The normally used welded joints are single-V butt, double- V butt 
and fillet welds. The edge preparations for the single- V joint and the 
welded joint with and without reinforcement strip are shown in Fig. 4 and 5. 

5.4.2 The fusion faces to be welded shall be prepared by cutting, planing, 
melting, scraping or grinding, or by heating,^ 'Particles of dirt shall be 
removed mechanically, or with a scraper, spoke or emery paper. 



-tti8tai-i0ft 




-1 TO 2mm 

4A WELD PREPARATION FOR 4B AFTER WELDING 

V BUTT WELD 

Fig. 4 Single-V Butt Weld Without Reinforcement 




Fig. 5 Single-V Butt Weld with Reinforcement Strip 

5.5 Welding Technique — Welding is normally done from left to right. 
The filler material is pressed into the weld groove with the pressure roller at 
the same time guiding it to the right with the left hand. With the welding 
equipment in the right hand moving to the right the parent material and 
filler material at the weld joint are heated to the required temperature. For 
achieving good result work can be carried out at a temperature range of 
250-300°C at welding speeds of 60 to 110 mm/min. Temperatures lower 
than 250°C result in low and uneconomic speeds. The force to be exer- 
cised with the pressure roller depends upon the cross section of the filler rod 
and varies between 1 to 3 kg. Over-heating and the resulting decomposition 
of the base material, filler material and the welded joint are apparent in the 
change in colour to black with the procedure mentioned above using pressure 
roller, the decomposed material will be squeezed to the edge of the weld 
bead and can, therefore, be easily removed. 

5.5.1 The weld may be finished smooth by removing the extra bead using 
a suitable sharp tool. 

5.6 Quality of the Welded Joint • — The quality of the welded joint 
depends upon the following important factors: 

a) Shape of the weld, 

b) Number of filler rod layers in the weld seam. A few thick layers 
are better than several thin ones, and 

c) The skill of welders and the welding procedure. 

5.6 t l The quality of the weld is normally evaluated by the strength of the 
welded joint in comparison with the strength of the basic material. The 
density of weld deposit is also of great importance where the joint has to 
be leakproof. ^ "* ** B 



18:8002-1976 

6. HOT GAS WELDING WITHOUT FILLER MATERIAL 

6.1 Welding Process — In this process the contact surfaces of the parts to 
be welded are heated to the welding temperature ( see 5.1 ) by hot air and 
united under pressure. 

6.2 Welding Equipment — The welding equipment described in 5.2 shall 
be suitable. In addition a suitable pressure tool is required to apply 
welding pressure after the contact forces are suitably heated. 

6.3 Shape of Welded Joints — The most common form of weld made 
from this process is lap joint. One or both of the parts to be joined may 
be chamfered prior to welding. Chamfered edges prevent any air pockets 
and improve the appearance of the weld. The lower part may be 
chamfered to 25° for best results {see Fig. 6). The overlapping portion 
shall be three times the material thickness. 

3s^ 



P. VWt 



\K\K\\W^2///////X 



T ^ 25 ' 

Fig. 6 Lap Weld, Lowermost Part Chamfered 

6.4 Preparation of Contact Faces — The contact faces shall be prepared 
in a manner described in 5.4.2. 

6.5 Welding Technique — The contact surfaces are heated to the required 
temperature in a manner described in 5.5 guiding the heating equipment in 
a pendulum movement in the welding direction. The surfaces are then 
pressed together with a pressure tool. Material decomposed due to over- 
heating should be removed as indicated in 5.5. 

6.6 The lap weld does not normally require any finishing. 

6.7 Regarding the quality of weld the provisions given in 5.6 shall apply. 

7. HEATED TOOL WELDING 

7«I Welding Process — The contact surfaces of the parts to be welded are 
heated to the desired temperature ( see 5.1 ) with suitable heating elements 
by radiation or contact and united under pressure. Heated tool welding is 
generally carried out without filler material. When the filler material is 
used it shall also be heated to the desired temperature using similar heating 
elements. 

7.2 Welding Equipment — The electrically heated heating element should 
preferably have the wedge shaped design adopted for welded joints. The 
heating element shall be of a metal of good thermal conductivity having a 
smooth corrosion resisting surface, for example, "topper with aluminized or 
permanently nickel plated surface. The working temperature of the heating 



IS 1 8002 -1976 



elements should be 250-300°C. It is preferable to use a heating equipment 
in which it will be possible to measure the current, voltage, temperature and 
the humidity of the atmosphere. 

Note — The range of temperature 250-300°G can be established by pressing a 
piece of flexible PVG against the heating element. Material left on the heating 
element should not darken in colour for about 3 seconds. 

7.3 The parts to be welded shall be free from any impurities {see 5.4.2), 

7.4 Types of Weld and Welding Technique 

7.4.1 The required temperature of the heating element can be best deter- 
mined and set by having a few trial welds. If products of decomposition 
are deposited on the heating element they should be removed. Otherwise 
there will be hinderance to transfer of heat and the products of decomposi- 
tion gaining access will impair the strength of the weld. 

7.4.2 Butt Weld Without Filler Material — The parts to be welded are held 
such that their contact faces are under moderate pressure against the sides 
of the wedge-shaped heating element. After reaching the welding tempera- 
ture the parts are drawn slowly still maintaining the pressure over the blade 
of the heating element so that they meet and are welded together by forming 
a bead all round ( see Fig. 7 ). 



THE PARTS ARE 
DRAWN 



PRESSURE 



PRESSURE PRESSURE 



tit 



3 £ 



^ 



HEATING 
ELEMENT 



PRESSURE 

« 



-WELDED 
JOINT 



Fig. 7 Heated Tool Welding of a Butt Joint Without 
Filler Material 

7.5 Butt Welds with Filler Material , 

7.5.1 Regarding filler material and weld preparation the provisions 
contained in 5.3 and 5.4 respectively shall apply. * ^ ^# * . 



8 



IS: 8002. 1976 

7.5.2 Welding Procedure < — The edges to be welded are heated to the 
desired temperature with a heating element of the cross section same as of 
the weld profile. At the same time the welding rod is pressed with a 
grooved roller on to the top of the heating element, heated in this manner 
to the welding temperature and welded to the basic material by the 
combined movement of the heating element and pressure with the roller. 

7.6 Lap Weld - — The heating element ( heated wedge ) is moved 
continuously or by stages in the direction of the weld seam between the two 
surfaces to be welded, the surfaces heated to welding temperature being 
united under pressure. The pressure required can be applied by pressure 
rollers or with a finger ( see Fig. 8 ). 

PRESSURE 

ROLLER 




-HEATED WEDGE 
PRESSURE/^ "T" y (ELECTRICALLY 

ROLLER— ' n J HEATED) 

FILM 

Fig. 8 Heated Tool Welding of a Lap Joint 
with a Heated Wedge 

7.7 Finishing the Weld ■ — The extra weld metal shall be removed with a 
suitable sharp instrument. 

7.8 In heated tool welding the quality of weld depends upon the welding 
temperature, pressure exercised and the welding speed. 

8, FRICTION WELDING 

8 # 1 Welding Process — The contact surfaces of the parts to be welded 
(mostly solids of rotation ) are brought to the necessary welding temperature 
by frictional heat and welded by pressure without filler material. 

8*2 Welding Equipment — The welding equipment consists of devices or 
machines ( for example, a lathe ) which enable rotation of contact surfaces 
of the parts to be welded against each other under pressure and at sufficient 
speed for the surfaces to be warmed to the welding temperature by frictional 
heat (see Fig. 9 ). 

8.3 Filler Material — Filler material is not required. 

8.4 Weld Shapes — Butt joints with welding of contact surfaces are used. 



18:8002-1976 



-CHUCK A-WORK PIECE 



WELD SEAM 




CLAMP 
RING 



'PRESSURE 
PLATE 
-APPLIANCE 
CLAMPED 

Fig. 9 Friction Welding 



APPLIANCE 
RELEASED 



8.5 Preparation for Welding — For diameters of parts not exceeding 
40 mm both the contact surfaces are faced. For diameters exceeding 40mm 
one or both of the contact surfaces are coned with a slope of a/2 satisfying 

the condition tan a/2 = o~ where D is the diameter of the part to be 

coned. It would be advantageous to have a hole made in one of the two 
parts to enable the hot gas escape when the material becomes heated. 

8.6 Welding Techniques — The parts to be welded are clamped in the 
turning device. Between the centres and the fixed tool a pressure plate 
is inserted to distribute the pressure over a large area. The parts are then 
turned against each other under pressure. After the contact surfaces reach 
the welding temperature which is recognized by the formation of a welding 
bead the pressure is gradually increased. The clamp is then released and 
the movement of both parts against each other is concluded. The welding 
pressure is maintained until the weld joint is cooled off. 

8.6.1 The weld may be finished smooth by removing the extra bead 
using a suitable sharp tool. 

8.7 Quality of the Welded Joint — In friction welding the strength of the 
welded joint approaches that of the basic material. 

9. IMPULSE WELDING 

9»1 In impulse welding process the heat necessary for welding is applied to 
the junction of the overlapping parts ( usually films or foils ) by means of 
impulses from superimposed heating elements tfrfder pressure and is subse- 
quently withdrawn under continuous pressure. 

♦ 

10 



IS: 8002 -1976 

9.2 Welding Equipment — The impulse welding equipment consists of a 
power source, a pressure application unit and heat impulse dies. The heat 
impulse die has electrical resistance heating elements of extremely low 
thermal capacity which on being pressed on to the weld seam are electrically 
heated for a brief period (for example, 0*25 second), and in the same 
operation withdraw the welding heat from the welding zone under pressure 
until the weld zone has regained its dimensional stability. 

9.3 Weld Form — Lap joints with lap welds are made by impulse welding. 

9.4 Preparation of Contact Faces — In impulse welding the contact 
surfaces do not require any special preparation. 

9.5 Welding Technique — The parts to be welded ( films, foils ) are placed 
on the pressing table covered with an elastic heat insulator. The heat 
impulse die is pressed on to the PVC films to be welded by means of suitable 
appliances and heated electrically for a brief period ( single sided heat 
impulse, see Fig. 10 ). The pressure is maintained until the weld zone has 
cooled off. 



FILM- 




-HEAT IMPULSE 
STAMP 



HEAT INSULATOR 
HEATING ELEMENT 



PRESSING 



TABLE 



-ELASTIC HEAT 
INSULATOR 



Fig. 10 Impulse Welding with Single Sided Heat Impulse Stamp 

9.5.1 In case of PVG films and foils with thickness between O'l mm and 
0*2 mm, the pressing table is also designed as a heat impulse die ( double 
sided heat impulse, see Fig. 11 ). 

9.5.2 With films of thickness over 0*2 mm the quality of weld declines 
rapidly as the thickness increases. Depending on the size of heating element 
a weld of length 100-1 500 mm is produced in one/operation the requirement 
of electrical power being 20 W/cm 2 of weld. In Fig. 12 are given for 
information the operation data on the application limits of impulsje welding 
process. 



11 



IS 1 8002 -1976 



HEATING 
ELEMENT 



FILM 



^^ 



"7E5 




•-HEAT 
IMPULSE 
STAMP 



HEAT 
INSULATOR 



■—HEAT 
IMPULSE 
DiE 



Fig, 1 1 Impulse Welding with Double Sided 
Heat Impulse Stamp 



* 


0-7 


1 


0-6 


<n 




o 


Ob 


2 




O 

u 


0-4 


UJ 

if) 


0-3 


z 


0-2 


+* 




UJ 


0-1 


i 











= SIDED^ 


/ 






^SlNGLf 
HEAT 








IMPULSE / 






















, 








—DOUBLE SIDED 
HEAT IMPUI SP 













0*4 



3% 



0-1 0-2 0-3 

THICKNESS s IN mm — ~ 
t — duration of impulse 
$ = total thickness of superimposed films (combined thickness) 

Fig. 12 Application Limits of Impulse Welding 
for Flexible PVG 

9.6 The welds made by impulse welding need no finishing. 

9.7 Quality of the Welded Joint — The quality of weld is dependent 
upon the build up of the thermal field over the .heated area of the heating 
element ( see Fig. 13). In other words the^performance of the heating 
element has an influence over the quality of weld. It is possible to achieve 
joint strength up to 80 percent of the strength of the basic material. 



12 



IS: 8002 -1976 



/THERMAL FIELD ABOVE 
/ THE HEATING ELEMENT 



WELDING TEMPERATURE 



FILM 




ADHESION 
TEMPERATURE 



HEATING 
ELEMENT 



Fig. 13 Trapezoidal Structure of the Thermal Field 
Above the Heated Area of the Impulse Stamp 

9.7.1 The lines of stress run along the edge of the weld. The direction 
and value of stress should, therefore, be anticipated before selecting the 
position of the welds ( see Fig. 14 ). 



LOW LOAD 




HEAVY LOAD 



Fig. 14 Reciprocal Position of Loading Direction 

and Welding Edge 

10. HIGH FREQUENCY WELDING 

10.1 Welding Process — The joining surfaces of the parts to be welded are 
heated to the required welding temperature in a condenser field of a high- 
frequency current source and welded under pressure usually without filler 
material. 

10.2 Welding Equipment — High frequency welding equipment consists 
of a high frequency generator, welding press and electrodes ( welding tool ) 
shaped to the required weld form. The weldirig tool may be fitted to a 
cutting blade ( see Fig. 15 ). 

13 



IS: 8002- 1976 



UPPER PART 
OF TOOL 



WELD FORMING 
ELECTRODE 



CUTTING 
BLADE 



LOWER PART 
OF TOOL 




-WASTE 



WELD-FORMING 
ELECTRODE 



Fig. 15 Symmetrical HF Welding Tool with Cutting Blade 

10.3 Weld-Forms •— Lap welds and in some cases butt welds are possible 
in high frequency welding. 

10.4 Preparation of Parts for Welding — In high frequency welding 
the contact surfaces do not require any special preparation. 

10.5 Welding Technique — The parts to be welded ( films or foils ) are 
placed on the pressing table of the equipment so that they overlap. When 
the upper part of the equipment exerts pressure the parts get heated by the 
high frequency energy and welded due to pressure. The HF energy supply 
is regulated according to the thickness of the material to be welded. After 
switching off the HF energy supply the pressure is maintained until the weld 
zone is cooled off and has regained its dimensional stability. 

10.6 Finishing the Weld — The weld needs no finishing. When a blade 
is used in the equipment the waste material is removed ( see Fig. 15 ), 

10.7 Quality of Welded Joint — The following factors are of importance 
in achieving good quality in the weld: 

a) Accurate measure of the volume of molten material during welding 
process and its position with respect to the non-molten material. 

b) Application of correct pressure during welding. The foils should 
not be compressed to more than half their original thickness. 

c) Freedom from porosity in the weld zone. 

In Fig. 16 are illustrated poor and good^elded joints made by HF 
welding. 



14 



IS: 8002 -1976 




POOR 



PRESSURE INADEQUATE, 
TIME TOO LONG, 
FORMATION OF BLISTERS 
BETWEEN FILMS 



POOR 
PRESSURE GOOD, 



GOOD 

PRESSURE AND 
TIME TOO LONG* TIME CORRECT, 

SEAM SUBSEQUENTLY SEAM FREE FROM 
OVERHEATED, BLISTERS 

BLISTERS IN THE 
BEADS 



Fig. 16 Quality of Weld Seams Given Different Treatment 

10*7*1 It is recommended that trial welds are made to determine the 
pressure, HF energy, time and width of electrode in order to achieve good 
quality welds. The following formulae can be used to arrive at a favour- 
able ratio between the various welding parameters and strength of joint: 

b = 2 S subject to a minimum of 0*8 mm. 
r = 0*125 b. 

where 

b = width of weld, 

S = total thickness of combined films or foils, and 

r = curvature of the electrode. 

If b is chosen to be equal to S, the required density of energy No 
will be: 

JV Jw 10 W per cm of weld length and the force P required will be: 

P & 10 000 N per cm of weld length. 

The pressure required will, therefore, be: 
P = 1 000 N/W 

With HF welding machines with mechanically operated electrodes it 
is possible to produce long welds continuously. The rate of welding depends 
on the thickness of the film or foil and on the anticipated efficiency of 
the joint. 



15 



( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

$P~ferintending Enqineeb, Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
Central Mechanical Circle, Nadu, Madras 

Madras 
Shbi S. G. N. Swamy Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. S. Nagaraj 
Deputy Director ( Struc & Met ), ISI 



Subcommittee for Welding and Cutting Processes and Procedures, 

SMDC 14 : 3 

Convener 

Shri H. L. Prabhakar Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Assistant Director (Welding), Ministry of Railways 

RDSO, Lttcknow 
Shri Awtar Singh Beas Project, Talwara Township, Dist Hoshiarpur 

(Punjab) 
Shri S. P. Dasgupta Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR), Durgapur 
Shri V. G. Jagannath Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 

Shri R. Visvanathan ( Alternate ) ^ 
Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ) 

Shri S. N. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Kodikal Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Visakha- 

patnam 

Shbi A. P. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. C. Magoo Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shbi A. G. Mukhebjee Apar Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. V. Nadkabni Advani Oerlikon Limited, Bombay 

Shbi B. Malkani ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. R. Pbasheb Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi M. R. G. Nagaraj an ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. Pubkayastha Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Bubman ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. L. Venkatabaman The K. C. P. Ltd, Madras 

Shbi J. R. D. Saxton Lloyds Register of Shipping, Calcutta 

Shri J. N. Goswamy {Alternate) 



S* 



16 



