**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 8085-2 (1999): Methods of Test for Footwear, Part 2: 
Footwear Performance Test, Stiffness Test for Shanks, 
Lastometer Test for Cracking of Uppers; and Performance 
Test for Upper Fabrics, Coated Fabrics, Sock Lining and 
Other Lining Materials [CHD 19: Footwear] 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 8085 (Part 2): 1999 

- ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

#f^ ^ felTI eTR^'fre? XTfr«FT; sft? vJMedT ^ ^R^. ^f^ WJ^. AcfT^ ^ 



Indian Standard 
METHODS OF TEST FOR FOOTWEAR 

PART 2 FOOTWEAR PERFORMANCE TEST, STIFFNESS TEST FOR SHANKS, 

LASTOMETER TEST FOR CRACKING OF UPPERS; AND PERFORMANCE 

TEST FOR UPPER FABRICS, COATED FABRICS, SOCK LINING AND 

OTHER LINING MATERIALS 



c 



ICS 61.060; 19.020 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1999 Price Group 4 



Footwear Sectional Committee, CHD 019 



FOREWORD 

This standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Footwear 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

This standard prescribes the methods of test for ascertaining the performance of footwear, stiffness of shanks, 
the extent of influence of foot-pressure and flexing under conditions of normal-wear on the performance of 
uppers, particularly, the cracking of upper at or near the vamp ( the lastometer test ) and performance test for 
coated fabrics, sock lining and other lining materials. 

From the users* point of view, comfort in wear and performance in actual use are the two basic requirements of 
footwear. For this purpose, it is necessary that the finished footwear is suitably tested before it goes to the 
i;ustomer. 

Some of the tests for footwear prescribed in this standard can be done only at the manufacturer's end, while 
others can be done both at the manufacturer's end and at the user's end. This aspect has been specifically 
mentioned for all the test methods prescribed in this standard. 

Composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revisedy. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS8085{Part2):1999 



Indian Standard 



METHODS OF TEST FOR FOOTWEAR 

PART 2 FOOTWEAR PERFORMANCE TEST, SnFFNESS TEST FOR SHANKS, 

LASTOMETER TEST FOR CRACKING OF UPPERS; AND PERFORMANCE 

TEST FOR UPPER FABRICS, COATED FABRICS, SOCK LINING AND 

OTHER LINING MATERIALS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard ( Part 2 ) prescribes the methods of test 
for footwear performance test, stiffness of shanks, 
lastometer test for cracking of uppers at or near the 
vamp and performance test for upper fabrics, coated 
fabrics, sock lining and other lining materials. 

2 REFERENCE 

The Indian Standard listed below contains provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitutes 
provisions of this Indian Standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this Indian Standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the Indian Standard 
indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

IS2050:1991 Glossary of terms relating to 
footwear {first revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 2050 shall apply. 

4 PERFORMANCE TEST FOR FOOTWEAR 
UPPER AND BOTTOM 

4.1 General 

4. L 1 Applicahiliiy of the Method 

This test is applicable to all types of footwear with 
cemented, welted, moulded or injection moulded ( DMS/ 
DVP/DIP ) soles. This is a destructive test and can 
be performed both at the manufacturer's end and at 
the user's end. 

4.L2 The objective of this test is to measure: 

a) the cracking of the outsole at the forepart, 
between the forepart and the waist and in front 
of the heel breast; 



b) the separation of the outsole from the upper 
or from the platform or separati'^n of the platform 
from the upper at the waist or at the forepart; 

c) the cracking of the platform at the waist or at 
the forepart; 

d) the cracking or delamination of the back part 
of insole; 

e) the breakage of the shank; 

f) the separation of the insole from the upper; and 

g) the cracking of upper accross the joint. 

4.2 Conditioning 

Condition the samples at 27 ± 2''C temperature and 
65 ± 5 percent relative humidity for at least 24 hours 
before carrying out the test. 

4.3 Apparatus 

4.3.1 Shoe Flexing Machine 

The machine shown in Fig. 1 or its equivalent machine 
shall be used for testing. 

4.3.1,1 The forepart of the footwear is held down to 
a fixed platform and the heel of the footwear is held 
down to a flexing frame. The frame moves up and down 
by means of a motor, crank fly wheel and a shaft system 
at a constant ( adjusted ) angle. 

4.4 Procedure 

4.4,1 Adjust the angle of flexing at the required angle 
( see Table 1 ) by varying the position of tlie connecting 
rod in the crank fly wheel, as shown in Fig. 2. The 
footwear does not normally flex more than 45° under 
conditions of normal-wear. Mark on the insole of the 
shoe the average position of the ball joint of the foot. 
The machine foot end and the leg end can slide forward 
or backward relative to the clamp. Adjust the position 
of the machine foot and leg in the footwear such that 
the rear edge of the foot aligns with the ball joint mark 
and the flexing line of the footwear aligns with the 
fulcrum of the flexing frame as judged by the eye. Clamp 
the other odd of the pair also in the machine in the 



1 



IS8085(Part2):1999 




ANGLE 
INDICATOR 



FOOT 



Pig. 1 Shoe Flexing Machine 




CRANK WHEEL 
CONNECTING ROD 



5 



Fig. 2 Adjustment of Angle of Flexing 
2 



IS8085(Part2):1999 



Tabic 1 Suggested Flexing Angles for Different 
Stvles of Footwear 





{Clause AAA) 




SI 


Footwear Style 


Suggested 


No. 




Flexing Angle 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Ladies (Platform Styles) 






a) Clogs 


10^'' 




b) Sandals, boots 


15^^ 




c) Courts 


20" 




d) Lace-up casuals 


25^-30^^ 


H) 


Ladies (Non-platform Styles) 






a) Sandals 


35^ 




b) Courts 


35" 




c) Casuals 


35" 


HI) 


Men and Boys (Platform Styles) 






a) Slip-on casuals 


25" 




b) I,ace-up shoes and boots 


30" 



IV) Men and Boys (Non-platform Styles) 

a) Slip-on shoes and boots 45" 

b) Lace-up shoes and boots 45" 

same way. Angular scale of the pointer is set to zero 
by rotating the pointer knob. Check that the footwear 
flexes in the correct manner and to the desired angle 
by turning the flexing machine through a complete 
flexing cycle manually. 

4.4.2 Set the time switch off the machine at 60 hours 
and start the machine. Allow the footwear to flex for 
at least 50 000 times. After the completion of the 
required number of flexing cycles, remove the footwear 
from the machine and examine for the following: 

a) The cracking of the outsole at the forepart, 
between the forepart, and the waist and in front 
of the heel breast; 

b) Separation of the outsole from the upper or from 
the platform or separation of the platform from 
the upper at the waist or at the forepart; 

c) Cracking of the platform at the waist or at the 
forepart; 

d) Cracking or delamination of the back part of 

insole; 

e) Breakage of the shank; 

Separation of the insole from the upper; and 
g) Cracking of upper accross the joint. 
5 STIFFNESS TEST OF SHANKS 



5.1 General 

5.1.1 Applicability of the Method 

This test is applicable to all types of footwears and 
of all constructions having shank. This test can be 
performed both at the manufacturer's end and at the 
user's end. 

5.1.2 The objective of performing this test is to 
measure the flexural rigidity of shank, a characteristic 
which is a measure of stiffness. 

5.2 Apparatus 

5.2.1 Shank Stiffness Tester 

Steel shank stiffness tester ( see Fig. 3 or its 
equivalent apparatus ) shall be used for testing. This 
apparatus consists of an adjustable clamp (A), a 
loading clamp (B) and the deflection is measured. 

5.3 Procedure 

5.3.1 Remove the shank from the insole and measure 
its dimensions. Fix the heel end of the shank to the 
adjustable clamp (/I) in level with the back of the clamp, 
and fix it firmly. This ensures that minimum 32 mm 
of the shank is clamped. Fix the loading clamp {B) 
firmly to the other end of the shank so that the end of 
the shank is in level with the forward edge of the 
clamp. Adjust the angle of the adjustable clamp (A) 
so that the shank is horizontal between the two clamps. 
Adjust the dial gauge such that its end just touches 
the end of the loading clamp (B). 

5.3.2 Apply 0.2 kg weight to the hook of the loading 
clamp (B). Wait for one minute and take the dial 
reading (ai). Remove 0.2 kg weight and wait for one 
minute. Add 0.4 kg weight and again wait for one 
minute. Take the dial reading (as). Similarly, note the 
dial readings after applications of 0.6 kg weight (0(3) 
and 0,8 kg weight (a4) for one minute each. 

5.4 Calculation 



The flexural rigidity (S ) of the shank in 


kg/cm^ 


is 


calculated as: 






Flexural rigidity (5), IVL ^ ^ 






in kg/cm^ 3 Q 






where 






W - inerementent weight (200 g); 






L, - length ofthe shank (L) from the edge 


of 



rear clamp to the rear edge of the loading 
clamp + 1/2 the depth of the loading clamp 
( that is, 6 mm ), in cm; 

L + 0.6 cm; and 

1/10 ( 3^4 + ^3 - ^2 " ^^1 )> ^" ^"^* 



IS8085(Part2):1999 




Fig. 3 Sted Shank Stiffness Tester 



6 LASTOMETER TEST FOR UPPERS 

6.1 General 

6.1.1 Applicability of the Method 

This test is applicable to the footwear uppers of both 
leather and synthetic materials. This is a destructive 
test and can be carried out both at the manufacturer's 
end and at the user's end. 

6.1.2 The objective of this test is to ascertain whether 
the upper used in the footwear is weak or has variable 
stretch properties. In both these cases, the upper may 
cmck under the effect of foot pressure and flexing under 
conditioins of normal wear. 

6.2 Outline of the Method 

Test sample disc of upper material is clamped round 
its edge and mounted on the sample holding disk of 
the lastometer, {see Fig. 4 ). The wheel is then rotated 
to thrust a metal bulb of 6.25 mm diameter on to the 
centre of sample disc at right angles to its plane. The 
moment the test sample starts cracking, the load and 
distension are recorded. 



6.3 Test Sample 

Cut out the samples from the vamp portion of the shoe. 
Remove the lining attached to it and clean the surface. 
The test sample is a disc of upper material of 44.5 nun 
diameter and has two semi-circular cut-outs of 3 mm 
diameter ( see Fig. 4 ). 

6.4 Conditioning 

Condition the test samples at 27 ± 2°C and 65 ± 5 percent 
relative humidity for at least 24 hours before testing. 

6.5 Apparatus 

6.5.1 Lastometer 

Lastometer {see Fig. 4) or its equivalent apparatus to 
measure load and distension at the grain crack for upper 
leather and load and distension at rupture of synthetic 
upper materials. 

6.6 Procedure 

6.6.1 Remove the cup nut and the clamping ring, and 
turn the wTieel until the distension gauge reads zero. 



IS8085(Part2):1999 



SAMPLE 
HOLDING 
CLAMPING 




WHEEL 



LOAD 
INDICATOR 




SAMPLE 



Fig. 4 Lastometer 



Place the lest piece grain side up ( for leather ) on the 
clamping head with the two pegs located in the semi- 
circular cut-outs. Place the clamping ring on the top 
of the test piece and screw down tight, first by hand 
and then by clamp. The reading on pointer of the load 
gauge is set to zero The hand wheel is turned at the 
rate of one revolution per second. 

6.6.2 When the grain begins to crack, stop rotating 
hand wheel and record the load and distension. In the 
case of synthetic upper material note the load and 
distension when it ruptures. 

7 PERFORMANCE TEST FOR COATED FABRICS, 
SOCK LINING AND OTHER LINING MATERIAL 

7.1 General 

7,1.1 Applicability of the Method 

This method is applicable to all upper fabrics, plastic 
coated fabrics, sock lining and other lining materials 
and can be carried out both at the manufacturer's end 
and at the user's end, 

7.2 Test Samples 

Cut four circular test pieces of 45 mm diameter each; 
two each for dry and wet abrasion tests. 

7.2.1 Also cut four square pieces 127 mm x 127 mm 
of standard wool fabric to act as mild abrasives for 
rubbing the test pieces in Lissajous pattern. 

7.3 Conditioning 

Condition the test pieces at 27 ± 2°C temperature 
and 65 ± 2 percent relative humidity for 24 hours. 



7.4 Apparatus 

Martindale abrasion tester or its equivalent apparatus 
shall be used to measure the degree of abrasion 
( see Fig. 5 ). The machine shall have a horizontal base 
plate of 127 mm diameter, a circular clamp to hold the 
worsted fabric abrasive, specimen holders — four in 
number and a load to keep the specimen over the 
abrasive material. 

7.5 Procedure 

7.5.1 Dry lest 

7.5. 1. 1 Remove the four specimen holders. Take each 
of the four specimen holder in turn, unscrew the 
knurled ring, insert the test specimen and reassemble 
the holders by exerting the pressure downwards to 
keep the test specimen flat. 

7.5.1.2 Lift off the top frame of the tester. Unscrew 
the wing nuts of the abrasive holder, lay new felt, 
replace the circular frames and nuts and screw down 
tightly. Replace the top frame of the tester with the 
studs engaging the slots. The total load on the test 
piece shall be 0.68 kg. 

7.5.1.3 Replace the specimen holders with the test 
specimen. Set the counter to zero and switch on the 
tester. Run the tester and inspect the test pieces 
after 100, 200, 400, 800, 1 600 and 3 200 cycles. The 
damage to all the upper materials is assessed as slight, 
moderate and severe. 

MOTE — In the case of combine fabric, assess each 
component individually. 



IS8085(Part2):1999 



WEIGHT 



TOP FRAME 



SAMPLE 
HOLDER 




COUNTER 



ABRASIVE 

HOLDER 

(FRAME) 



Fig. 5 Maktindale Abrasion Tester 



7.5, 1.4 Use a square piece of 180 A emery paper for 
testing the plastic coated materials. Use the test piece 
holder which gives an abraded area of 6.5 cm^ and 
apply a load of 595 g. Stop the tester after every 200 
revolutions, assess the damage and clean the abrasive 
material. Stop the machine after 700 revolutions and 
examine the plastic surface by naked eye for break- 
down of coating, colour change and loss of gloss, 

7.5.2 Wet Test 



The effect of perspiration of foot on the abrasion 
resistance of all the lining materials and the inner/side 
of the upper material of the unlined footwear is 
assessed by the wet test. Soak the felt under the pad 
and the worsted abrasive cloth before the test and 
squeeze lightly to remove excess water. Mount the 
soaked test specimen on the abrasion tester and 
follow the same procedure as described in 7.5.1. 
Assess the damage caused to all the materials as sUght, 
moderate and severe. 



IS8085(Part2):1999 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Footwear Sectional Committee, CHD 019 



Chairman 

Air Vice Marshal V. B. Batra 
Directorate General Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Government of India, New Delhi. 



Members 

Shri Anil Aggarwal 

Shri B. B. Das {Alternate) 

Shri A. P. Aggarwal 

Shri M. P. Bajpai 

Shri K. K. Hajela (Alternate) 

Shri S. Banerjee 

Shri K. S. Rama Rao (i4//e/7ia/e) 

Shri J. Basak 

Shri J. Charaborti 

Shri Shib Kumar {Alternate) 

Shri Karan Chand 

Shri H. H. Siddiqui {Alternate) 

Shri Krishanu Chatterjee 

Shri D. Banerjee {Alternate) 

Shri B. N. Das 

Shri G. Md. Sadiq {Alternate) 

Shri D. Das 

Shri Adrash Gupta 

Shri Galttam Gupta 

Shri G. C. Kanaujiya {Alternate) 

Shri G. Mitra 

Shri B. N. Mondal 

Dr R. Panda 

Shri G. S. Lakhotia {Alternate) 

Shri V B. Parvatikar 

Dr Alok Tyagi {Alternate) 

Shri U. S. Paul 

Shrimati S. D. Paul {Alternate) 

Shri A Sehgal 

Shri K. Chaturvedi {Alternate) 

Shri D. K. Seth 

Shri N. N. Debnath {Alternate) 

Shri Y K. Sharma 

Shri B. Bhattacharya {Alternate) 

Dr R. S. Rajagopalan, 
Director (Chem) 



Representing 
Ministry of Etefence (R&D), Kanpur 

Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 

Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, Kanpur 

Madura Coats Limited, Madurai 

Bihar Rubber Company, Ranchi 

Standing Committee for Safety in Steel Industry, Durgapur 

Export Inspection Council of India, Chennai 

Bata India Limited, Calcutta 

Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 

Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta 

Liberty Footwear Co, Karnal 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 

Lakhani India Ltd, Faridabad 

Indian Leather Technologists Association, Calcutta 

National Engineering Industries Ltd, Calcutta 

Footwear Etesign and Development Institute, Noida 

Footform, Calcutta 

Tata Export Ltd, Dewas 

Office of the Development Commissioner (SSI), New Delhi 

Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Director General, BIS {Ex-officio Member) 



Member-Secretary 

Shri P. Mukhopadhyay 

Additional Director (Chem), BIS 



( Continued on page 8 ) 



IS 8085 (Part 2): 1999 

( Continued from page 7 ) 

Methods of Sampling of Test for Foot^vear Subcommittee, CHD 19 : 1 



Convener 

ShriB.N. Das 

Members 

Shri D. Banerjee 

Shri S. C. ^oy {Alternate) 

Shri S. Bhattacharya 

Shri M. Sarvanan {Alternate) 

Shri B. Dutta 

Shri Gautam Gupta 

Shri G. C. Kanauiiya {Alternate) 

Shri Sunder Lal 

Shri M. A. Khan {Alternate) 

Shri V. B. Parvatikar 

Dr Alok Tyagi {Alternate) 

Shri A. Paul 

Representative 

Representative 



Representing 
Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 

Bata India Limited, Calcutta 

Bharat Leather Corporation Ltd, Agra 

Indian Rubber Institute, Calcutta 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 

Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi 

Footwear Design and Development Institute, Noida 

Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta 
Escaps India Ltd, Calcutta 
National Test House, Calcutta 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director <!Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CHD 1 9 ( 1 20 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 J 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 15 19,235 2315 

. Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 1 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuija, India 



