**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8077 (1976) : Procedure for checking technique of quick 
frozen food [FAD 16: Foodgrains^ Starches and Ready to Eat 
Foods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



rSta077.l97A 

(Reaffirmed 2005) 

Indian Standard 

PROCEDURE FOR 

CHECKING TEMPERATURE OF 

QUICK-FROZEN FOODS 



UDC 664 8/S037-5 : 536 5 





© Copyright 197d 

|?^DIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. S BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAA IrlAaO 
jl Qr 3 ^^^ D£UiI 110002 

%m AugiiSt 1976 



IS: 8077-1976 

Indian Standard 

PROCEDURE FOR 

CHECKING TEMPERATURE OF 

QUICK-FROZEN FOODS 

Fish and Fisheries Products Sectional Committeej AFDG 27 

Chairman Representing 

Shri p. G. George Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ( Department of 

Agriculture ) 

Members 

Shri N. J. Chacko Kerala Food Packers, Alleppey 

Shri N. J* Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri D, S. Ghadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health & Family Planning ), New Delhi 
Smt Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Chidambaram Marine Products Export Development Authority, 

Cochin 
Shri A. I. George ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Gol R. Daniel Directorate of Remount Veterinary Services, 

Quartermaster Generars Branch, Army Head- 
quarters, New Delhi 
Maj A, G. Bhasker Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri O, P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Dr K. p. Shrivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, Ambrose Fernando Fish Exporters Chamber, Tuticorin 

Shri John P. George Island Seafoods Private Limited, Cochin 

Shri P. G. George ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Gupta State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri B. S. Kansra ( Alternate I) 
Shri N. Vaidyanathan ( Alternate II) 
Shri G. R. Kassamali Messrs G. R, Kassamali, Bombay 

Shri Z. G. Nathani ( Alternate ) 
Shri F, C. Kohu Marine Exporters Association ( Western Region ), 

Bombay 
Dr M. N. Moorjani Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(CSIR), Mysore 
Shri N. V. Sripathi ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. V. Navathe Commissioner of Fisheries, Government of Gujarat, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri R. Madhavan Nayar Cochin Company Private Limited, Ernakulam 

Shri N. K. Sadanandan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1976 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTi/>N 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission qf the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Acf/ 



18:8077-1976 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri Fredrick Felix Pais The Mysore Seafood Canners' and Exporters' Associa- 

tion ( Regd ), Mangalore 
Dr C. C. Pandurangarao Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (ICAR), 

Ernakulam 
Shri M. R. Nair [Alternate ) 
Shri D. Ramananda Rao Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Bombay 

Shri S. Ramaswamy Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Brig D. S. Rao Technical Standardization Committees (Foodstuffs), 

Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation 
Shri P. K. Dhingra ( Alternate ) 
Col K. Seetaram Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Lt-Col D. D. Vohra ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Srinivasan Directorate of Fisheries, Government of Tamil Nadu, 

Madras 
Smt Freda Chandrashekharan ( Alternate) 
Shri O. G. Thomas The Seafood Exporters* Association of India, Cochin 

Shri G. J. Panikkachery ( Alternate ) 
Shri Narayan Uchil South Kanara District Co-operative Fish Marketing 

Federation Ltd, Mangalore 
Shri D. V. Naik ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Mukundan Unni Directorate of Fisheries, Government of Kerala, 

Tri van drum 
Smt Sarojini Devi ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Uppal Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 

Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad 
Shri S. Jayaraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. M. Waknis Directorate of Fisheries, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
Shri M. M. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, IS I (Ex-ojfficio Member) 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri Manohar T. SAN-nvANi 

Deputy Director (Agri & Food), ISI 

Frozen Fish Products Subcommittee, AFDG 27 : 2 

Convener 
♦Shri John P. George Island Seafoods Private Limited, Cochin 

Members 
Shri C. Cherian Messrs Chemmeens ( Regd ), Cochin 

Shri K. Chidambaram Marine Products Export Development Authority, 

Cochin 
Shri A. I. George ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 12 ) 

„ ^> 



♦Shri John P. George was Convener of the Subcommittee at the time of the meeting in 
which this standard was considered for finalization. 

2 



IS : 8077 • 1976 

Indian Standard 

PROCEDURE FOR 

CHECKING TEMPERATURE OF 

QUICK-FROZEN FOODS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 31 May 1976, after the draft finalized by the Fish and Fisheries Products 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food 
Products Division Council. 

0.2 Temperature of quick-frozen foods is often required to be checked for 
proper processing and storage. This standard has been drawn up to 
prescribe internationally recognized procedure of checking temperature for 
uniform presentation and interpretation of data. 

0.3 This standard is mainly based on the draft codex standard on the subject 
prepared by the Codex AHmentarius Group of Experts on the Standar- 
dization of Quick-Frozen Foods. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is comphed with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard outlines procedure for measuring temperature of quick- 
frozen foods. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 

2.1 Temperature- — The temperature measured at the point of place- 
ment of the sensitive part of the sensing element. 

3. TEMPERATURE INDICATING AND RECORDING 
INSTRUMENTS 

3.1 Instruments that meet the following requiremejiis should be used for 
control purposes. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rtvised). * ^ .* ^ - 

3 



IS : 8077 . 1976 

3.1.1 The half-value period should not exceed 0*5 minute. 

3.1.2 The instrument should be accurate to within ±0-5°G over the 
range -30° to +30^*0. 

3.1.3 It should be sensitive to changes of 0'5°G. 

3.1.4 The accuracy of the measurement should not be affected by the 
temperature of the surroundings. 

3.1.5 Markings on the scale should be in divisions of 1*^0. 

3.1.6 For measuring instruments other than glass-stem thermometers, a 
setting device to allow adjustment of the indicating needle during recali- 
bration should be provided. 

3.1.7 The sensitive part of the measuring device should be so constructed 
as to ensure good contact with the quick-frozen food products. 

3.1.8 Electrical instrument should be protected from undesirable 
influences resulting from condensation of moisture. 

4. METHOD I — MEASURING TEMPERATURE IN THE 
PRODUCT (REFERENCE METHOD) 

4.1 Reliable information on the temperature of the food products should be 
obtained only by measuring the temperature in the product. The product 
temperature should be measured at any point in the product which is 25 mm 
below the surface. In the case of packages with one dimension less than 
50 mm, the measurement point should be half-vvay through this dimension. 
It is preferable to reach this point by inserting the sensing element so that 
as much of it as practicable is in the product. 

4*2 Instruments for Measuring Temperature 

4.2.1 Glass-Stem Thermometer — The glass-stem thermometer should have 
the following characteristics: 

a) An overall length of about 250 mm, 

b) A sharp-pointed round stem, 

c) A pocket carrying case to protect the thermometer, and 

d) Alcohol filling is preferred to mercury. 

Note — Glass-stem thermometers should be used with great care in proximity of food. 

4.2.2 Metal-Dial Thermometer — The metal-dial thermometer should have 
the following characteristics: 

a) An overall length of about 150 mm, -^ ' 

b) A sharp-pointed stainless steel stem, 



IS : 8077 . 1976 

c) A pocket carrying case to protect the thermometer, and 

d) A dial hermetically sealed with plastic and not with glass. 

Note — Instrument may be based on the principle of liquid expansion, vapour 
pressure change, spring deformation or metal expansion. 

4.2.3 Electrical Thermometer ( Electrical Resistance or Thermocouple as the Sens- 
ing Element ) — The sensing element of the electrical thermometer should 
have the following characteristics: 

a) An overall length of about 150 mm; 

b) A sharp-pointed stainless steel sensitive part; and 

c) Leads of known resistance, preferably leads with built-in compen- 
sation resistance. 

4.2.4 Electrical Temperature Recording Instruments — These instruments are in 
principle built on to the equipment described in 4.2*3. These instruments 
should be able to record temperatures on suitable charts over a determined 
period of time. 

4.2.5 Instruments for Making Holes in the Product — A sharp-pointed metal 
instrument, such as an ice-pick or hand drill which may easily be cleaned, 
should be used. The hole in the packet and product should be only 
marginally larger in diameter than the sensitive part of the sensing element 
to be used. 

4.3 Procedure 

4»3.1 Making a Hole — Sensing elements are generally not strong enough 
to penetrate into blocks of frozen foods. A hole should be made in the 
packages concerned using a probe or hand drill as specified in 4.2.5. The 
hole should be 50 mm deep. 

4.3.2 Pre-cooling 

4.3.2.1 A package should be selected at random from the load for use 
in pre-cooling the probe or hand drill and the sensing element. This will be 
referred to hereafter as the pre-cool package. A warm probe, hand drill or 
sensing element should not be placed in the test package. 

4.3.2.2 The sensing element should be inserted into the centre of the 
pre-cool package and it should be left there for at least 2 minutes. It should 
not be removed from the pre-cool package until it can be inserted in the 
test package. 

4.3.2.3 Pre-cooling may also be carried out between packages or just 
by allowing the equipment to stand in cold air of about the same 
temperature. 

4.3.3 Temperature Reading — The sensing element^sliould be removed from 
the pre-cool package and immediately inserted into the test package at a 



IS : 8077 - 1976 

depth as indicated in 4,1. The temperature should be read when this has 
reached a steady value or should be recorded continuously according to the 
instrument used, 

4.3,4 The method of m.easuring product temperature is illustrated in 
Fig. 1. 




ROZEN 

PRODUCT 



fl = 25 mm or longer 
b = 25 mm 



Fig. 1 Method of Measuring Product Temperature 



5. METHOD II — MEASURING SURFACE TEMPERATURE OF 
THE PRODUCT ( PRACTICAL METHOD ) 

5.1 A reasonable approximation as to the temperature of the product may 
be obtained by measuring the temperature at the surface of the product. 
The surface temperature of the product may be obtained in a non-destructive 
way and is sufficiently accurate for routine temperature checks, provided 
good contact is achieved by the sensing element between the packages or 
cases. By applying adequate pressure, the readings should, generally, be 
within ±VC of the product temperature. The sensitive part of the sensing 
element should be inserted at least 50 mm between the packages or cases. 

5.2 Instruments for Measuring Surface Temperature of the Product 

5.2.1 Glass-Stem Thermometer — The glass-stem thermometer should have 
an elliptical diameter not more than 5 mm thick such as to ensure as little 
air leakage between the packages as possible, in addition to those given 
in 4.2.1. 

5.2.2 Adetal'Dial Thermometer — The metal-dial thermometer should have 
a flat stainless steel stem not more than 5 mm thick instead of the sharp- 
pointed round stem as given in 4.2.2. 

5.2.3 Electrical Thermometer [Electrical Resistance or Thermocouple as the 
Sensing Element ) — The sensing element of the electrical thermometer should 
have the same characteristics as given in 4.2.3. *^^'* - 



IS 8 8077 -1976 

5*2.4 Electrical Temperature Recording Instruments — These instruments are 
in principle built on to the equipment described in 4.2.3. These instruments 
should be able to record temperature on suitable charts over a determined 
period of time. 

5.3 Procedure — This method is especially applicable to measuring 
temperature in full loads and master packages and is, therefore, applicable 
only in cold stores during loading and unloading and during transportation. 

5.3.1 Selection of Cases — ■ Seven packages or cases of frozen foods should 
be selected from the lot in question. Any 3 of the 7 packages should be 
stacked on the floor area of the natural cold environment for the lot being 
sampled. A side wall of top case ( number of stack ) should be cut at 
either end with a sharp knife as shown in Fig. 2. 

POINTS OF INSERTION 
OF SENSING ELEMENT 









-V" 








"^r* 











Fig. 2 Method of Measuring Surface 
Temperature of a Product 

5.3.2 Temperature Reading — The cut tab should be bent outward. The 
sensing element should be inserted at about the centre of the first stack of 
packages and between the first and second layers of packages so that all of 
the sensing element is in firm contact with package walls. The other 4 cases 
should be stacked on top of the case containing the sensing element. The 
temperature should be read when this has reached a steady value or should 
be recorded continuously according to the instrument used. The cut side 
wall area of the case should be closed and taped after use. 

5.3.3 The method of measuring surface temperature of the product is 
illustrated in Fig. 2. 



6. METHOD III— MEASURING TEMPERATURE OF THE AIR 
SURROUNDING THE PRODUCT 

6,1 A rough approximation of the temperature oT the product may be 
obtained by measuring the temperature of the surrounding air.^ The 



IS : 8077 - 1976 

temperature of the air surrounding a product may be measured under 
practical conditions during storage, transport and distribution ( including 
retail cabinet ) . The temperature of the air surrounding a quick-frozen 
product does not necessarily represent the temperature of the product. 
Depending on conditions, the temperature of the surrounding air may be 
higher or lower than that of the product. Under certain conditions, 
air temperature may provide a good approximation as to the product 
temperature. These conditions are as follows: 

a) A stabilized temperature in the loading space, 

b) No air currents, 

c) A relatively slow response rate of the instrument, and 

d) Measurements made over at least 30 minutes show no noticeable 
fluctuation. 

Such conditions generally prevail only in a storage room and between 
the frozen products covered with a master pack. 

6*2 Instruments for Measuring Temperature of the Air Surround- 
ing the Product 

6.2.1 The instruments described in 4.2. 1 to 4»2.4 may be used subject to 
the conditions set out under 6.1. 

6.2.2 Mechanical temperature recording instruments may also be used. 
These instruments consist of a self-contained unit, the sensitive element is 
generally directly connected to the recording part and adequately protected 
during handling. Instruments of this sort may be placed in cases of the 
product, replacing some of the packs in the case and to give readings of the 
air temperature. These instruments should be pre-cooled before insertion 
into the case. They provide a relatively uncomplicated method of measur- 
ing temperature surrounding the product at a certain spot over a period 
of time. 

6.3 Procedure 

6.3.1 Positioning the Sensitive Element — The sensitive element should be 
surrounded by the quick-frozen product and protected from direct colder 
or warmer air currents. 

6.3.2 Recording Instruments — appropriate to this sort of measurement 
may be placed in cases of the product replacing some of the packs. 

6.3.3 Temperature Reading — The temperatirfef fluctuations should be 
read over a period of 10 to 30 minutes, depending on the degree of 
fluctitation. ♦ ^ 



18:8077-1976 

7. CALIBRATION OF THERMOMETERS 

7.1 Thermometers should be checked at regular intervals depending on how 
consistent they are for accuracy. Instruments handled from one load to 
another should be checked weekly. Instruments used during transport 
should be checked before a new load is to be carried, 

7.2 The test may be made by immersing the thermometer sensing element 
in an ice water-bath. A one-litre container ( vacuum flask ) should be filled 
with chipped ice and then filled entirely with cold water. It should be 
stirred for at least 2 minutes before the sensing element is inserted into the 
centre of the mixture. The sensing element should be allowed to touch 
the container. The temperature indicated by the thermometer should be 
observed after passing for at least 2 minutes to allow stabilization to take 
place. The immersed thermometer should read within ±0'5°G of 0**G. 
The 0**G point on the scale should emerge just above the top of the flask. 
All other elements should be entirely in the ice. 

7.3 For checking the thermometer at temperatures in the range of — 18^ 
to — 21°G, a brine mixture consisting of 1 part by mass of sodium chloride 
and 3 parts by mass of chipped ice should be used. The reading of the 
thermometer under test should be compared with a reference thermometer. 

7.4 Both temperature sensors should be inserted into the brine mixture 
with the stems next to each other, taking care that they should not touch 
the container. The temperatures indicated by the thermometers should be 
observed after at least 2 minutes to allow stabilization to take place. 
Thermometers may also be checked by comparing the reading from the 
thermometer under test with the reference thermometer when both are held 
along-side each other in the same ambient. If no reference thermometer is 
available, an eutectic mixture of analytical grade sodium chloride and ice, 
intimately mixed, gives a temperature of — 21'4*G. 

7.5 If an error is indicated greater than O'S'^G, then the indication of the 
thermometer should be corrected by means of its standard adjustment 
mechanism. After adjustment, the indication of the thermometer should be 
re-checked. 

8. FULL SAMPLING 

8.1 Selection of Test Packages — The selection of location from which to 
take test packages for temperature measurement is difficult to specify pre- 
cisely and should be a matter of judgement, taking account of any previous 
history of the load or lot being examined and also the results obtained as 
the sampling proceeds. The correct interpretation of. the results depends, to 
a very large extent, on informed sampling. The^lSst packages should be 
selected in such a way that their temperatures should be representative, but 



■^ H* •% » 



18:8077-1976 



for commercial reasons, the minimum number of checks should be made to 
give temperatures representative of the stock being examined. 

8.2 Sampling in Various Locations 

8.2.1 Cold Stores — If cases are stacked closely together, that is, on a 
pallet, then temperature readings should be taken from a package on an outer 
face of an outer case, and from a package from a case in the centre of the 
lot. These temperatures are known as * outer temperatures ' and ^ centre tem- 
peratures '. If individual cases are being examined, then a pack should be 
selected from at least one layer in the middle and other from the outside of 
the case. A significant difference between the two readings will indicate a 
temperature gradient in the pallet load and may lead to talang more tempe- 
ratures if the previous history of the pallet load suggests that elevated tempe- 
ratures recorded have been sustained for a sufficient period of time to cause 
significant quality loss. 

8.2.2 Vehicles or Transport Container Unit — When unloading packages 
should be selected for temperature measurement from the locations shown 
in Fig. 3. These packages normally will give product temperatures represen- 
tative of the load. Any additional locations judged to be useful may be 
tested taking into account the sensitivity of the product to thermal shock, 
knowledge of the duration of the journey, etc. 



REAR 




FRONT 

1 . Top front, centre 

2, Bottom front, centre 

3. Top middle, centre 

4, Half-way up middle, centre 

Fig, 3r Suggested Locations in a Car or Truck from Which 
Test Packages Should be Selected 



5. Bottom middle, centre 

6. Bottom middle, side ( next to door 
if there is a side door ) 

7. Top rear, centre 

8. Bottom rear, centre 



10 



IS: 8077 -1976 



8.2.3 Retail Display Cabinets 



8.2.3.1 Bin cabinets — A product in the top layer of the cabinet should 
be selected and its temperature measured. The cabinet should be checked 
that it is not on defrost or recovering from a defrost cycle and it should be 
noted if the indicated product temperature is within the permissible range. 
If the indicated temperature is outside the permissible range, then the 
temperature at the centre and base of the cabinet should be taken before 
acting on the first result. 

8.2.3 .2 Vertical cabinets — In addition, the temperature of products on 
the front of shelves at the right- and left-hand sides of the cabinet should be 
taken. The indicated readings should be within the permissible limits. 



-->f 



11 



IS: 8077 -1976 



( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members 

Shri K. C, De' 

Dr V. V. Karnik ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. G. Dhapre 

Dr S. V. GOKHALE 

Shri G. R. Kassamali 

Shri M. Devidas Menon 
Dr M. N. Moorjani 

Shri M. R. Nair 

Shri Cyriac Mathen ( Alternate 
Shri K. V. Navathe 

Shri R. Madhavan Nayar 
Shri S. N. Rao 
Shri Narayan Ugkil 

Shri D. V. Naik ( Alternate ) 



Representing 
Metal Box Company of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Directorate of Fisheries, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
Konkan Fisheries Private Ltd, Mormugao Harbour, 

Goa 
Messrs G. R. Kassamali, Bombay 
Integrated Fisheries Project, Cochin 
Central Food Technological Research Institute 

( GSIR ), Mysore 
Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (ICAR), 

Ernakulam 

Commissioner of Fisheries, Government of Gujarat, 

Ahmadabad 
Cochin Company Private Limited, Ernakulam 
Kerala Fisheries Corporation Ltd , Ernakulam 
South Kanara District Go-operative Fish Marketing 

Federation Ltd, Mangalore 



■^^* 



12 



