**************** 


*■  fe^K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  8357  (1977) :  Method  for  assessment  of  fabric  drape  [TXD 
1:  Physical  Methods  of  Tests] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


?TR  TJ^  ^TT  teMHI  |  ^t  ^Wt  ^m\  ^f  ^TT  ^T^?TT  \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  B3S7  -  1977 

(Reaffirmed  2004) 

Indian  Standard 

METHOD  FOR 
ASSESSMENT  OF  FABRIC  DRAPE 


UDC  677064:67701 667 12 


Prk 


©  Copyright  1977 

INDIAN   STANDARDS   INSTITUTION 

MANAK   HHAVAN,    9  BAHADUR    SHAH   ZAFAfc  MARC 

NEW  DELHI  noon 


IS  :  8357  - 1977 

Indian   Standard 

METHOD  FOR 
ASSESSMENT  OF  FABRIC  DRAPE 

Physical  Methods  of  Test  Sectional  Committee,  TDC  1 


Chairman  Representing 

Shri  T.  V.  Ananthan  The  Bombay  Textile  Research  Association,  Bombay 

Vice- Chairman 

Dr  V.  Sundaram  Cotton  Technological  Research  Laboratory  (ICAR), 

Bombay 

Members 

Shri  M.  Radhakrishnan  (  Alternate  to 

Shri  T.  V.  Ananthan  ) 
Dr  V.  G.  Munshi  (  Alternate  to 
Dr  V.  Sundaram  ) 
Agricultural  Marketin  g    Directorate  of  Marketing  &  Inspection  (  Ministry  of 
Adviser  to  the  Government  Agriculture  ),  Faridabad 

of  India 
Shri  S.  Jayaraman  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  B.  L.  Banerjee  Indian     Jute    Industries    Research     Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr  U.  Mukhopadhay  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  N  Chatterjee  Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

Shri  J.  N.  Misra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  K.  Chatterjee  Office  of  the  Jute  Commissioner,  Calcutta 

Dr  D.  B.  Das  Indian  Jute  Mills  Association,  Calcutta 

Shri  Dharam  Dev  Office  of  the  Textile  Commissioner,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  P.  Ghosal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  R.  S.  Gopalachar  Central  Silk  Board,  Bombay 

Dr  B,  V.  Iyer  Ahmedabad  Textile  Industry's  Research  Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri  A.  Rajagopalan  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  V.  Jigjinni  The  National  Rayon  Corporation  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  D.  S.  Nadkarni  (  Alternate  ) 
Shrimati  A.  Kaplash  The  JSilk  &  Art  Silk  Mills'  Research  Association, 

Bombay 
Dr  B.  R.  Manjunatha  Textiles  Committee,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  Venugopal  (  Alternate  ) 

( Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©     Copyright  1977 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of 
the  publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act, 


IS:  8357 -1977 


(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 


Members  Representing 

Shri  R.  K.  Mehra  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Shri  N.  K.  Nagpaul  (  Alternate  ) 


Dr  M.  G.  Narsian 

Shri  K.  P.  Ramakrishna  Pillay 


Representative 

Shri  R.  R.  Shanbagh 
Shri  M.  G.  Thanawala 
Shri  S.  M.  Chakraborty, 
Director  (  Tex  ) 


The  Raymond  Woollen  Mills  Ltd,  Bombay 

The    South    India    Textile    Research    Association, 

Coimbatore 
Directorate    General    of    Supplies    &    Disposals 

(Inspection  Wing),  New  Delhi 
Wool  Research  Association,  Bombay 
M.  Best  Cotton  Rope  Manufacturing  Co,  Bombay 
Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-ojficio  Member  ) 


Secretary 

Shri  D.  R.  Kohli 

Deputy  Director  (  Tex  ),  ISI 


IS  :  8357  - 1977 

Indian   Standard 

METHOD  FOR 
ASSESSMENT  OF  FABRIC  DRAPE 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  14  February  1977,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Physical  Methods  of 
Test  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Textile  Division 
Council. 

0.2  Drape  is  one  of  the  subjective  performance  characteristics  of  fabric  that 
contributes  to  aesthetic  appeal;  it  is  a  complex  property  involving  bending 
and  shearing  deformations.  The  present  standard  provides  a  simple  method 
for  the  objective  estimation  of  the  extent  to  which  a  fabric  drapes;  draping 
quality  is  expressed  as  drape  coefficient  which  theoretically  varies  between 
0  and  100. 

0.3  Drape  measurements  can  be  employed  for  study  of  the  effects  of  fabric 
geometry,  chemical  processing  treatments  and  finishes  for  woven  and 
knitted  fabrics,  certain  qualities  of  non-wovens  like  leather  for  apparel. 
Drape  coefficient  can  also  be  used  as  an  index  for  control  of  batches  in 
production. 

0.4  In  reporting  the  results  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with 
this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off, 
it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS: 2-1960*. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  a  method  of  test  for  the  assessment  of  drape 
of  fabrics  and  is  applicable  to  all  fabrics  intended  for  end  uses  in  which 
drape  is  important. 

2.  PRINCIPLE 

2.1  A  circular  fabric  specimen  is  sandwiched  between  two  horizontal  discs 
of  smaller  diameter,  and  the  unsupported  annular  ring  of  fabric  is  allowed 
to  hang  down  under  the  action  of  gravity.  A  planar  projection  of  the 
contour  of  the  draped  specimen  is  recorded  on  a  light-sensitive  paper.  The 
drape  pattern  obtained  is  cut  along  the  outline  and  its  area  determined 
gravimetrically.  The  drape  coefficient  is  calculated  as  the  ratio  of  the 
projected  area  of  the  drape  specimen  to  its  theoretical  maximum. 


*Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 

3 


IS  :  8357  - 1977 

3.  TERMINOLOGY 

3.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

3.1  Fabric  Drape  —  The  extent  to  which  a  fabric  will  deform  when  it  is 
allowed  to  hang  under  its  own  weight. 

3.2  Drape  Co-efficient  —  The  area  covered  by  the  shadow  of  the  draped 
specimen  expressed  as  a  percentage  of  the  area  of  the  annular  ring 
of  fabric. 

4.  APPARATUS 

4.1  Drape  Tester  —  Consisting  of: 

a)  a  pair  of  horizontal  discs  of  12*3  cm  diameter  between  which  the 
specimen  is  held;  the  lower  disc  has  a  central  pin  for  positioning 
on  a  holder. 

b)  an  actinic  source  of  light  placed  directly  above  the  centre  of  the 
discs  with  suitable  attachment  to  give  a  parallel  beam  of  light. 

c)  arrangement  to  place  a  sheet  of  ammonia  process  paper  horizon- 
tally below  the  draped  specimen  (  see  also  4.3  ). 

d)  timer  and  other  devices  to  aid  exposure  for  prescribed  time. 

e)  an  enclosed  box  for  developing  the  drape  pattern  in  ammonia 
vapour. 

Note  —  An  outline  of  a  suitable  apparatus  developed  by  Bombay  Textile  Research 
Association,  Bombay  working  on  the  above  principles  is  given  in  Appendix  A*. 

4.2  Circular  Template  —  A  metal  template  of  250  mm  diameter  and  with  a 
central  hole  for  marking  and  cutting  specimens  for  drape  test. 

4.3  Ammonia  Process  Paper 

Note  1  —  In  case  ammonia  process  paper  is  not  available,  a  good  quality  drawing 
paper  may  be  used,  and  the  outline  of  the  drape  pattern  may  be  carefully  traced 
by  hand. 

Note  2  —  For  better  results  photographic  grade  of  ammonia  paper  may  be  used. 

4.4  Balance  —  Capable  of  determining  mass  to  the  accuracy  of  001  g. 

5.  ATMOSPHERIC     CONDITIONS      FOR     CONDITIONING     AND 
TESTING 

5.1  The  test  specimens  shall  be  conditioned  to  moisture  equilibrium  in 
standard  atmosphere  of  65 ±2  percent  RH  and  27±2°C  before  testing 
{see  IS:6359-1971| )  and  the  tests  shall  be  carried  out  in  the  standard 
atmosphere. 

♦Mention  of  the  name  of  a  specific  (  or  proprietory  )  instrument  is  not  intended  to 
promote  or  give  preference  to  the  use  of  that  instrument  over  those  not  mentioned. 
tMethod  for  conditioning  of  textiles. 


IS  :  8357  - 1977 

6.  PREPARATION  OF  TEST  SPECIMENS 

6.1  Marking  and  Cutting  —  Place  the  fabric  free  from  creases  and  wrinkles 
on  a  flat  horizontal  surface  and  by  means  of  the  template  ( 4.2 )  trace  the 
outline,  mark  the  centre  of  each,  and  cut  the  specimens.  Ensure  that  the 
specimens  represent  adequately  the  fabric  under  test  and  exclude  the  areas 
within  5  cm  of  the  selvedges  and  those  with  wrinkles  or  sharp  folds. 

7.  PROCEDURE 

7.1  Place  the  drape  tester  firmly  on  a  level  table.  Switch  on  the  light. 
(  The  mercury  vapour  lamp  when  lighted  attains  full  brightness  after  a  few 
minutes.  ) 

7.2  Remove  the  specimen  holder  from  the  bayonet  socket  and  place  a  cut 
fabric  specimen  between  the  plates.  Hold  the  stub  of  the  specimen  holder 
assembly  and  briskly  move  the  holder  with  the  specimen  up  and  down  ten 
times,  each  time  resting  on  the  table  for  a  moment.  ( This  is  to  allow 
the  fabric  to  orient  itself  freely  and  drape  into  natural  folds. ) 

7.3  Place  a  square  of  ammonia  process  paper  on  the  base  of  the  instrument 
and  lay  it  flat. 

7.4  Insert  the  stub  of  the  specimen  holder  ( with  the  specimen )  in  the 
socket  on  the  threaded  bolt.  Press  upwards  and  turn  counter  clock-wise  to 
lock  the  holder  in  position. 

7.5  Looking  along  the  level  of  the  base-board,  adjust  the  height  of  the 
drooping  edge  of  the  drape  specimen,  so  that  the  lowermost  edge  is  just 
above  the  paper  without  touching  it. 

7.6  Adjust  the  setting  knob  of  the  timer  for  the  required  time  of  exposure. 

Note  —  The  optimum  exposure  time  depends  on  the  quality  of  the  paper  used, 
and  will  have  to  be  determined  experimentally. 

7.7  At  the  end  of  the  exposure  time,  remove  the  ammonia  process  paper 
and  place  the  same  in  the  developing  box  containing  a  few  millilitres  of 
strong  ammonia  solution.     Remove  the  paper  when  the  latent  is  developed. 

7.8  Condition  the  paper  to  moisture  equilibrium  in  standard  atmosphere. 
Cut  out  the  drape  pattern  with  a  pair  of  scissors  and  determine  its  mass  in 
gram  correct  to  two  decimal  places. 

7.9  Determine  the  mass  per  unit  area  of  the  paper  used  by  cutting  a  known 
area  of  the  original  paper  and  weighing. 

7.10  Reverse  the  specimen  and  obtain  the  drape  pattern  with  the  other 
surface  upwards. 

7.11  Number  of  Tests  ■—  Test  at  least  four  specimens  making  a  total  of 
eight  measurements. 


IS  :  8357  -  1977 

8.  CALCULATIONS 

8.1  Calculate  the  drape  co-efficient  for  each  test  as  under: 

w 

Drape  co-efficient  (F%)=  -7—  x  10° 
'      A  —  a 

where 

W  =  mass  per  unit  area  of  the  paper, 
w   =  mass  of  the  drape  pattern, 

a    =  area  of  circle  of  12*5  cm  diameter=  122*8  cm2,  and 
A  =  Area  of  circle  of  25  cm  diameter  =  491*1  cm2. 
OR 
By  substituting  the  values  of  *a'  and  *A': 

^-122-8 

Drape  co-efficient  = —    Q   — X  100 

8.2  Calculate  the  arithmetic  mean  of  all  the  individual  test  values  and 
round  it  of!  to  two  significant  figures. 

9.  REPORT 

9.0  The  report  shall  comprise  the  following  information: 

a)  Type  of  fabric; 

b)  Name  of  the  instrument  used; 

c)  Number  of  specimens  tested;  and 

d)  Mean  drape  co-efficient. 


IS  :  8357  -  1977 


APPENDIX    A 
[Clause  4.1  (Note)] 


LAMP 
ASSEMBLY 


HEIGHT 

ADJUSTMENT 

KNOB 


UPPER   DISC 

FABRIC   SPECIMEN 
LIGHT 
SENSITIVE 
PAPER 


Fig.  1    Essential  Features  of  Drape  Tester* 


*A  suitable  instrument  is  available  with  the  Bombay  Textile  Research  Association 
Lai  Bahadur  Shastri  Marg,  Ghatkopar  (  West ),  Bombay  400086.  ' 


INDIAN     STANDARDS 

ON 

PHYSICAL  METHODS  OF  TEST 

IS: 

232-1967    Glossary  of  textile  terms  —  natural  fibres  (  first  revision  ) 

234-1973    Methods  for  determination  of  linear  density  of  textile  fibres  (gravimetric 

method  )  (  first  revision  ) 
570-1964     Methods  for  determination  of  universal  count  of  jute  yarn  (  revised  ) 
1670-1970     Method  for   determination  of  breaking  load,  elongation  at  break  and 

tenacity  of  yarns  (  first  revision  ) 
1671-1960    Method  for  determination  of  skein  breaking  load  (  strength  ),  tenacity  and 
yarn  strength  index  of  cotton  yarn  (  by  constant-rate-of-traverse  machine  ) 
(  metric  system  ) 
1954-1969     Methods  for  determination  of  length  and  width  of  fabrics  (  first  revision  ) 

1963-1969     Methods  for  determination   of  threads  per  decimetre  in  woven  fabrics 
(  first  revision  ) 

1964-1970     Methods  for  determination  of  weight  per  square  metre  and  weight  per 

linear  metre  of  fabrics  (  first  revision  ) 
1966-1975    Methods  for  determination  of  bursting  strength  and  bursting  distension  of 

fabrics:  diaphragm  method  (  first  revision  ) 

1969-1968     Methods  for  determination  of  breaking  load  and  elongation  at  break  of 
woven  textile  fabrics  (  first  revision  ) 

2364-1963     Glossary  of  textile  terms  —  fabrics  made  from  natural  fibres 

2387-1969    Methods  for  determination  of  weight  of  jute  fabrics  (  first  revision  ) 

2702-1965     Method  for  determination  of  thermal  resistance  of  textile  fabrics,  guarded 

hot-plate  method 

4125-1967    Glossary  of  terms  pertaining  to  defects  in  fabrics 

4681-1968    Methods  for  determination  of  wrinkle  recovery  of  fabrics  (  by  measuring 
crease  recovery  angle  ) 

6359-1971     Method  for  conditioning  of  textiles 

6489-1971     Methods  for  determination  of  tear  strength  of  woven  textile  fabrics  by 
Elmendorf  tester 

6490-1971     Method  for  determination  of  stiffness  of  fabrics  —  cantilever  test 

6668-1972    Method  for  preparing  test  specimens  from  fabric  samples  for  physical  tests 

7702-1975    Thickness  of  woven  and  knitted  fabrics 


