**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9099-2 (1980) : Performance testing of powered industrial 
trucks working in hazardous areas, Part 2 Electric battery 
powered industrial trucks [TED 22: Transport Tractors and 
Trailers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 9099 (Part II ) - 1980 

r J * ff . J i ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

PERFORMANCE TESTING OF 
POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS WOP KING 

in Hazardous areas 

PART II ELECTRIC BATTERY POWERED 
INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS 



UDC 621-868-835 : 61.0 I G 




© Cofyright 1961 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK SI I A VAN. 9 BAHADUR &HAH ZAFAk It* A KG 

NEW DELHI IIDQQ2 




Qr3 



Au^utt 196 1 



IS : 9099 ( Part II ) - 198© 

Indian Standard 

PERFORMANCE TESTING OF 

POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS WORKING 

IN HAZARDOUS AREAS 

PART II ELECTRIC BATTERY POWERED 
INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS 

Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee, MCPD 22 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi K. G. Unnithan Macneill & Magor Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shbi S. Roy Chowdhury ( Alternate to 
Shri K. G. Unnithan ) 
Shbi N. K. Appayya Ministry of Defence ( VRDE ), Ahrnednagar 

Shbi J. S. Malhotba ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Chaudhry Escorts Ltd, Faridabad 

Shbi L. R. Ghoudhaky ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. S. Ekbote Indian Air Lines, New Delhi 

Shbi Yashvib Kumak ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Maj V. R. Banahatti ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. Gopaktjmar Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ), Calcutta 

Shbi R. G. Govinoabajak Bombay Port Trust, Bombay 

Shbi Q,. H. Taufiq ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. D. John Madras Port Trust, Madras 

Shbi M. Chandbasekaran ( Alternate ) 
Joiut Dibeotob, Traffjc Ministry of Railways ( Railway Board ) 

Commercial 
Brig T. C. Joseph Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt-Col R. Shivdasani ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M, T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shbi S. S. Khosla Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 

Shbi D, P. Gtjpta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Konar Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Shbi P.J. Makhuani Directorate General, Factory Advice Service & 

Labour Institute, Bombay 

Shbi K. C. Saksena ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 9099 (Part II) -1980 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri J. S. Marwaha Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ),Lucknow 

Shri D. S. Arya ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. D. Modi Gujarat Industrial Trucks Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. G. Modi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Nagasttndaram Ministry of Defence ( Air Wing ) 

Shri D. K. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. N. Pestonji Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Go Pvt Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri H. F. Ragina ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. A. Phayade Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. F. Govadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Prasad Jost's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri E J. Tarapore ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. F. Sethna Voltas Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. Kausik ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. R. Singh Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri S. Chittaranjan ( Alternate ) 
Gapt N. A. Tamhane Chairman, MCPD 5 

Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary ) 



Forklift Trucks Subcommittee, MCPD 22 : 1 

Convener 
Shri P. F. Sethna Voltas Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri V. Kausik ( Alternate to 
Shri P. F. Sethna ) 
Shri V. P. Dewan Ministry of Defence 

Lt-Col V. P. Dhall ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. T. Kanse Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shri J. S. Marwaha Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow 

Shri D. S. Arya ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. N. Pestonji Godrej & Boyce Mfg Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. A. Phayade Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. F. Govadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Prasad Jost's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay 

ShriT. T. Gala ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Sinha Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd 

Calcutta ' 

Shri A. K. Joardar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. C. Unnithan Macneill & Magor Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy Chowdhury ( Alternate ) 



IS : 9099 ( Part IX )- 1480 

Indian Standard 

PERFORMANCE TESTING OF 

POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS WORKING 

IN HAZARDOUS AREAS 

PART II ELECTRIC BATTERY POWERED 
INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS 

0. FOREWORD 

C.l This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 28 November 1980, after the draft finalized by 
the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Safety in industrial operations is of extreme importance in order to 
avoid loss of human life or equipment and as incentive to the workman 
involved in these operations. As more and more industrial trucks are 
utilized for load movement in potentially hazardous atmosphere in most 
of the growth industries, there is absolutely a need for unequivocal 
guidelines on the economization of the risks involved, not only in the 
design and manufacture, and conversion of trucks, but equally important 
in the way they are operated, maintained and tested. It may be difficult 
to make all areas absolutely free of hazardous atmosphere but it may be 
more economical to devise means to ensure a safe operation for the 
industrial trucks in hazardous atmospheres. 

0.3 The performance of_such special design features as are provided to 
ensure the above requirements, is as important as taking care to 
maintain these special features. Thus, testing plays an important role 
before the truck is put in operation. This standard on performance 
testing has been drawn up to fulfil that need. 

0.4 Industrial trucks may be powered with electric battery or internal 
combustion engine. As such this standard is issued in the following 
two parts: 

a) Part I Internal Combustion Engine — Powered; and 

b) Part II Electric Battery Powered Industrial Trucks. 



IS : 9099 ( Part II ) - 1980 

0.4.1 The general requirements of these trucks are covered in IS : 8790 
( Part I )-1978* and IS : 8790 ( Part II )-1978f. 

0.5 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 
ANSI B56. 3-1972 Standard for safety-electric-battery-powered industrial 
trucks, issued by the American National Standards Institute ( ANSI ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II ) covers the tests to check the performance 
of electric battery powered industrial trucks ( except the Type EX, see 
IS : 8790 ( Part II )-1978f ) designed to operate in hazardous areas. 

2. PERFORMANCE TESTING 

2.1 Type E [see IS: 8790 (Part II )-1978t ] Industrial Electric 
Trucks 

2.1.1 Abnormal- Ope ration Test 

2.1.1.1 As a test of the ability of the truck to withstand abuse, the 
truck shall be loaded to 110 percent of its maximum rated load capacity. 
The centre of the load for a forklift truck may be so located as to yield 
rated load movement about the load axle. The truck shall be quickly 
and rapidly operated through 25 reversals of direction of travel, reversals 
of full height lifting, and other operations that may be performed by 
the truck, such as flashing of lamps, blowing of horn, and other normal 
operating sequences. There shall be no indication of damage to any 
part of the vehicles as a result of this test. 

2.1.1.2 The test course for fork and platform lift trucks shall be 12 m 
long. At the end of this course, the load shall be raised to full height 
and lowered to the hauling position. The truck with the load is then 
to return by reversal of direction of travel to the starting point. The 
truck shall be brought to a halt by service brakes only. 

2.1.1.3 A thermostat or an overcurrent protective device that 
causes interruption of power to the traction or pump motor shall not 
operate during the first five cycles of the test described in 2.1.1.1. If 
such interruption does occur during the remainder of the test, a 
thermostat is to be permitted to reclose and an overcurrent protective 
device is to be replaced or reclosed. The test is to be then continued 
until all of the prescribed operations have been concluded. 

♦General requirements of powered industrial trucks working in hazardous areas: 
Part I Internal combustion engine powered trucks. 

tGrneral requirements of powered industrial trucks working in hazardous areas: 
Part II Electric battery powered industrial trucks. 



IS : 9099 ( Part II ) - 1980 

2*1.2 Temperature Test 

2.1.2.1 General 

a) The materials employed in the construction of an industrial 
electric truck, when tested as specified for the type of trucks shall 
be such as not to produce any failure of electrical components or 
insulation that constitutes a fire hazard when the components are subjected 
to the temperatures attained during operation under the conditions of 
rated load. 

b) A thermostat or an overcurrent protective device that causes 
interruption of the power to the traction or pump motor shall not trip 
during the tests described in 2.1.2.2(a) and 2.1.2.3(a) to 2.1.2.4(b). 

c) Prior to each temperature test, the truck shall be equipped with 
a fully charged storage battery of the maximum voltage and ampere- 
hour capacity intended to be used with that specific truck. The tests 
outlined as above, shall be conducted at such a rate of power consumption 
that the battery is discharged in eight hours. A greater rate of power 
consumption may be used, if necessary, to enable normal operation of 
the truck. The rate of power consumption is to be determined by an 
amper-hourmeter. The rate of power consumption for the test described 
in 2.1.2.4(b) is not to be controlled. 

d) The 175°C temperature limit indicated in 2.1.2.2(a) and 
2.1.2.2(c) to 2.1.2.4(b) does not apply to the surface of the resistor 
element employed in these devices. In these clauses, the 175°G temper- 
ature limit is based on a 25°G ambient temperature. 

e) If a blower motor operates during the tests described in 
2.1.2.2(a) to 2.1.2.4(b) the tests are to be repeated with the blower motor 
disconnected. During the repeated tests, a thermostat or over-current 
protective device may terminate the test by interruption of power to the 
traction or pump motor. However, the temperature limits given in 
2.1.2.2(a) and 2.1.2.3(a) to 2.1.2.4(b) are also applicable. 

f) In performing the tests outlined in 2.1.2.2(a), 2.1.2.3(a) and 
2.1.2.4(a), constant temperatures usually are reached after approximately 
three hours of operation in the manner outlined. 

2.1.2.2 Fork-lift and platform-lift trucks 

a) The test course shall be 60 m long, including a grade as specified 
by the manufacturer over a distance of 10 m for a particular truck, with 
a total rise not less than 1 m. The truck shall be operated over the 
course hauling a rated load. At the end of the course, the truck is to 
negotiate a right angle turn after which the load is to be raised to 
full height and then lowered to hauling position. The truck with 
the load is then to return to the starting point;, where the load is 



IS : 9099 ( Part II ) - 1980 

again to be raised and lowered and deposited at right-angle to the test 
course. The truck is then to be operated with no load over the same 
course, and, at the end of the course, the fork or platform is to be raised 
to full height and lowered. The truck shall then be returned to the 
starting position, where the load is to be picked up and these runs 
repeated with alternate loaded and unloaded trips. The test shall be 
co ntinued until constant temperatures have been reached. During this 
test, the enclosure surface temperatures of each component shall not 
exceed 175°C. 

b) If a lift truck has multiple load ratings and corresponding 
maximum-lift heights, the test in 2.1.2.2(a) shall be conducted for the 
rated load condition which shall produce maximum temperatures. 

2.1.2.3 Load-carrying ( jixed-platform ) trucks 

a) The test course shall be any convenient length over 60 m. If 
the length exceeds 90 m s the truck shall be stopped and started at 
intervals of approximately 60 m. The course shall contain a grade not 
less than 53 percent, with a total rise of not less than 1 m. The course 
shall be negotiated not less than six times per hour. The truck shall be 
operated over the course hauling a rated load. The test shall be con- 
ducted so the truck is in motion approximately 80 percent of the time. 
The test shall be continued until constant temperatures have been 
reached. During this test, the enclosure surface temperatures of each 
component shall not exceed 175°C. 

2.1.2.4 Tractors 

a) The test course shall be any convenient length over 60 m. If the 
length exceeds 90 m, the truck shall be stopped and started at intervals 
of approximately 60 m. The course shall contain a grade of not less than 
5 percent with a total rise of not less than 1 m. The course shall be 
negotiated not less than six times per hour. Two loads shall be provi- 
ded for the truck, consisting of two trains of trailers of trailing vehicles. 
One of the trains is to be loaded to such capacity as to require a draw- 
bar pull on the level equal to the rated drawbar pull of the tractor. The 
other train shall consist of empty trailers equal in number to the loaded 
train. The tractor shall be operated over the course pulling the loaded 
train of trailers and returning to the starting point at which point the 
loaded train shall be uncoupled. The empty train shall then be coupled 
to the tractor and pulled over the same course. This cycle shall be 
repeated, alternating between loaded and unloaded trailers, allowing 
time at the starting point for normal coupling and uncoupling operations. 
The test shall be continued until constant temperatures have been 
reached. During this test, the enclosure surface temperatures of each 
component shall not exceed 175°C. 



IS : 9099 ( Part II ) - 1980 

b) Immediately after taking the final temperature readings, the 
tractor shall be operated an additional one-minute period against a 
bumping post or other obstruction. This action is to cause the wheels 
to slip and the tractor to exert maximum drawbar pull in effect. During 
this additional one-minute period, the enclosure surface temperature of 
each component shall not exceed 175°C. 

2.1.3 Brake Test 

2*1*3.1 Immediately following the temperature test, the truck, while 
hauling its rated load, shall be operated over the test course. The truck 
shall be brought to a complete stop every 15 m by application of the 
brakes. The test shall be continued until constant temperatures are 
reached on the external surfaces of the brakes. 

2.1.3.2 During the test, the temperatures on the external surfaces of 
the brakes shall be not higher than 175°G, based on a 25°C ambient 
temperature. The brakes shall not ignite or emit flame or hot particles. 

2.1.4 Arc-Rupturing Tests 

2.1.4.1 Motor controllers and switches in motor circuits 

a) All switches or current-rupturing devices connected in the motor 
circuit ( such as contractors and speed controllers) shall show no welding, 
complete disintegration of the contact material or failure to make the 
load circuit. There shall be no arcing to the frame or enclosure, other 
manifestation of fire hazard ( such as burning or melting of the load 
insulation ) or failure of the device to function either mechanically or 
electrically, when subjected to 100 cycles of making and breaking the 
stalled rotor current of the motor which they control. 

b) In conducting the test described in 2.1.4.1(a), a fully charged 
battery of the nominal voltage and maximum ampere-hour capacity is to 
be used as the supply source. If two or more current-rupturing devices 
are connected in series and operate in a sequence so that normally one 
device is intended to make and break the circuit, all but that one are to 
be shunted out of the circuit in order that, in turn, all switches in that 
circuit may be tested under stalled-rotor conditions. 

c) If the frame of the truck is not normally connected to the 
current-carrying parts, the frame is to be connected through a 30-ampere 
cartridge fuse to the positive pole of the battery for the first 50 cycles of 
operation and to the negative pole for the remaining 50 cycles. The rate 
of operation is to be one complete make-and-break operation every 
ten seconds, with the device remaining energized for approximately 
one second per cycle. 



IS : 9099 ( Part II ) - 1980 

d) If the frame of the truck is normally connected to the current- 
carrying parts, the following test is to be conducted. The rate of opera- 
tion and the duration of the 'on* period are to be as indicated in 
2.1.4.1(c). If the battery is protected by a fuse having a current rating 
not more than 125 percent of the current drawn by the motor under 
locked-rotor conditions, the performance is not acceptable if the fuse is 
blown. 

e) The test may be interrupted at not less than 25 operations to 
permit cooling of the motor. 

f ) In the case of speed controllers, the test is to be conducted with 
the speed control handle moved from the 'off' position through all 
running positions to the full-speed and then back to the 'off' position. 
This is to be counted as one cycle of operation. 

2*1.4.2 Switches controlling other than motor circuits 

a) Switches connected in other than motor circuits shall show no 
welding, complete disintegration of the contact material, or failure to 
make the load circuit. There shall be no arcing to the frame or 
enclosure, or other manifestation of fire hazard, such as the burning or 
melting of lead insulation or failure of the device to function, either 
mechanically or electrically, when subjected to 100 cycles of making and 
breaking the circuit in which they are connected. 

b) In conducting the test described in 2.1.4.2(a), a fully charged 
battery of the nominal voltage and maximum ampere-hour capacity shall 
be used as the supply source. 

c) If the frame of the truck is not normally connected to the 
current-carrying parts, the frame is to be connected through a 30-ampere 
cartridge fuse to the positive pole of the battery for the first 50 cycles or 
operation and to the negative pole for the remaining 50 cycles. The rate 
of operation is to be one complete make-and-break operation every 
ten seconds, with the device remaining energized for approximately 
one second per cycle. 

d) If the frame of the truck is normally connected to the current 
carrying parts, the following test is to be conducted. The rate of 
operation and the duration of the 'on' period are to be as indicated in 
2.1.4.1(c). 

If the battery is protected by a fuse having a current rating note 
more than 125 percent of the maximum current carried by the switch, 
the performance is not acceptable, if the fuse is blown. 

» e) The test may be interrupted at not less than 25 operations to 
permit cooling of the load. 



IS ; 9099 ( Part II ) - 1980 

2*1.5 Burnout Test 

2*1.5.1 There shall be no emission of flame or molten metal from 
the truck enclosure or other manifestation of a fire hazard as evidenced 
by the ignition of the cotton or paper placed in accordance with 2*1.5.2 
and the enclosure surfaces of each component of the truck ( excluding 
the surface of the resistor elements) shall not exceed 175°C — based on a 
ambient temperature of 25°G — when a stalled truck motor is energized 
for a five minute period with its controller in each position. Melting of 
solder employed in electrical components or at electrical connections is 
acceptable if this performance does not result in a fire hazard as above 
or the dropping of molten solder into the operator's compartment. 

2.1.5.2 For each section of this test, a fully charged battery of 
nominal voltage and maximum ampere-hour capacity is to be employed. 
All covers provided are to be in their intended positions. All necessary 
control switches and interlocks are to be defeated, so that energy can be 
continuously supplied to the circuit under test. Only one circuit is to be 
tested at a given time. If more than one motor and resistor circuit is 
employed, each circuit is to be tested individually. Cotton or other 
readily combustible material is to be placed around and about all 
openings. Clean paper is to be placed under the truck, and cotton is to 
be supported at the bottom and sides of the driving and other motors, 
and on any exposed part in any portion of the truck involving contact 
with or collection *>f combustible materials. 

2.1.5.3 Arranged in this manner, it is advisable to test control posi- 
tions first where resistors are energized, allowing them to cool between 
test, and subsequently testing the motor alone. If more than one section 
of a resistor or step in operating speed is provided on the control, the truck 
is to be tested in each position with control switches blocked so that the 
circuit under test can be quickly placed across the battery. The controls 
are to be thrown to the desired position and maintained in that position 
for a 5-minute period. Between each portion of the test, the trucks are to 
cool to room temperature. The test is to be considered acceptably 
completed at the end of 5 minutes of operation, if the results are in accor- 
dance with 2.1.5.1, even though the truck may be inoperative after the 
test. The emission of dense smoke, but not flame, is acceptable. 

2.1.5.4 It is anticipated that provision may be made in the design of 
the truck to include fuses, circuit breakers, or other overcurrent devices 
in the power circuit to open the circuit before the truck manifests a 
hazard when subjected to the test described in 2.1.5.1. To determine the 
reliability of such devices, the test in 2.1.5.1 is to be conducted three times, 
each time allowing temperatures to return to ambient temperature. Such 
devices are to perform satisfactorily when connected directly across the 
fully charged battery. There is to be no ignition of cotton placed around 
the overcurrent device or enclosure, if enclosed, during this test. 



IS : 9099 ( Part B) - 1980 

2*1.5.5 For Type E trucks only, the burnout test is to be waived if a 
disconnect switch or battery connector is provided that is positive in 
action and operable by the driver of the vehicle without leaving his 
normal driving position. 

2*1.5.6 There shall be no emission of flame or molten material when 
a motor of the control, blower or signal-circuit type: (a) has a locked- 
rotor current of 15 amperes or !ess 5 and (b) is protected by an over-current 
protective device, having a maximum rating or setting of 15 amperes is 
subjected to the following test. The motor is to be energized continuously 
under locked-rotor conditions until thermal equilibrium is attained, and 
the circuit is permanently opened by winding burnout or by the protec- 
tive device. The temperature on any exposed surface of the motor shall 
be not higher than 175°C based on an ambient temperature of 25°C. 

2.1.6 Dielectlic-Withstand Test 

2.1.6.1 A truck shall withstand for one minute without breakdown 
the application of a 50 Hz essentially sinusoidal potential of 1 000 V plus 
twice rated* voltage, if the truck is rated at more than 60 V, or 500 V, 
otherwise. The test potential is to be applied immediately after the 
temperature test and arc-rupturing test between the current-carrying 
parts and the frame with the battery disconnected, and with all current 
carrying parts normally connected to the frame disconnected. 

2.1.6.2 Where an opposite polarity potential normally occurs on a 
switching device or on a terminal board, those parts which are at opposite 
polarity shall withstand without breakdown the application of 50 Hz 
essentially sinusoidal potential of the value specified in 2.1.5.1 for 
one minute. 

2.1.6.3 With reference to 2.1.6.1 and 2.1.6.2, it is not intended that 
the test potential be applied across energy-converting components. Tests 
are to be conducted with switches in open as well as closed positions if 
necessary, to provide the required test conditions for the various positions 
of the controls. 

2.2 Type EE Industrial Electric Truck 

2.2.1 A type EE industrial electric truck shall comply with the 
performance requirements for Type E industrial trucks, except, that the 
use of device to disconnect the battery circuit shall not be caused for 
waiving the burnout test. 



10 



