**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9066 (1979): lubricated cotton gland packings [MED 30: 
Gaskets and Packing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 9066- 1979 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
LUBRICATED COTTON GLAND PACKINGS 



UDC 621-76204 




© Cap ng/ii HI79 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

\\K liiiAVAN. 9 1IAHADUU SHAH ZA7AB &h\RG 
NEW DELHI XIOUL'2 




June 197& 



Alternates to 



IS: 9066- 1979 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LUBRICATED COTTON GLAND PACKINGS 

Gaskets and Packings Sectional Committee, EDC 58 

Chairman Representing 

Shri A. Somasundakam Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchchirappalli 

Members 

Shri Raghavendra Rao\ 

^Shri P. N. Bhargava J 
Shri A. Somasundaram 
Shri D. M. Charles Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri Arun Chowdhury Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. Ramaswamy ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director ( Rubber ) Ministry of Railways ( Research, Designs and 

Standards Organization ) 

Assistant Director ( STD/ 
MP-VII ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Deshpande Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Shri G. Y. Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Gidwani Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shri R. C. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Jain Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Jitubhai R. Patel Gaskets & Radiators Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri K. R. Shukla ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kewal Singh Bagar National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Thane 

Shri R. D. Kolhe Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd, Kirkee, Pune 

Shri R. Lakshminarayanan Fenner ( India ) Ltd, Madurai 

Shri U. R. Mazumdar Victor Gaskets India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. K. Buoh ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. N. Nagdir Ministry of Defence ( Engineer-in-Chief s Branch ) 

Shri A. K. Kale ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Nazare Kirloskar Brothers Ltd, Pune 

Shri S. P. Patkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. -V. Rao Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, Thane 

Shri R. C. Shenoy ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. F. Smith Eastern Asbestos Plaiters* Association, Calcutta 

Shri G. L. Saraf ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9066 -■ 1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri W. N. Talwar Payen Talbros Private Ltd, Faridabad 

Shri S. G. Chopra { Alternate ) 
Shri S. Chandrasekharan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri Gurcharan Singh 
Assistant Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 



Packings and Gaskets for General Engineering Purposes 
Subcommittee, EDC 58 : 1 

Convener 
Shri V. Ghowdhury Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay 

Members 
Shri S. Ramaswamy ( Alternate to 
Shri V. Ghowdhury ) 
Shri S. C. Chopra Payen Talbros Private Ltd, Faridabad 

Deputy Director ( Diesel ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization 

( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 
Assistant Director 
( Diesel ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Ganesan Industrial and General Products, Madras 

Shri A. V. Parthasarthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Gidwani Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. C. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Mullick National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri K. N. Nadgir Ministry of Defence 

Shri R. S. Kanwove ( Alternate ) 
Shri M."V. Rao Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd^ Bombay 

Shri G. L. ParanJAPE ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. L. Sarae D. Saraf & Sons, Calcutta 

Shri M. L. Sarae ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sivasubramanyam Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri M. Ragha vender Rao ( Alternate I ) 
Shri S. K. Mehta ( Alternate II ) 
Shri V. Yajnik Reinz-Talbros Pvt Ltd, Ghaziabad 



IS : 9066 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
LUBRICATED COTTON GLAND PACKINGS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 15 January 1979, after the draft finalized by the Gaskets 
and Packings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Gland packings are used to contain fluid gases and slurries under 
extreme pressure and temperatures, abrasives and other difficult 
conditions. This standard relates to lubricated cotton gland packings. 
The requirements of other types of packings, namely, asbestos gland 
packing, proofed cotton duck gland packing, and jute and hemp or flax 
packing are covered in IS : 4687-1968*, IS : 4688-i968f and IS : 5414- 
1969$ respectively. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, ex- 
pressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2-1960§. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard deals with the requirements and methods of tests for 
cotton gland packings with a mineral hydro-carbon lubricant. These 
types of packings are suitable for use in high or low speed centrifugal 
pumps, sludge pumps and water pumps with a temperature limit of 65°C. 

1.2 Gland packings covered by this standard are not applicable for use in 
food industry. 



♦Specification for gland packing asbestos. 
tSpecification for proofed cotton duck gland packing. 
^Specification for gland packing, jute and hemp. 
§Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )• 



IS : 9066 - 1979 

2. MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 Yarn — The yarn shall be spun from a cotton having minimum 
staple length of 20 mm. The count of the single yarn shall not be 
coarser than 10s. More than one ply shall be twisted prior to use of 
machine. The packing shall be plaited throughout from yarns reasonably 
uniform in appearance and thickness. The cotton yarn content of the 
finished packing shall not be less than 40 percent by mass. 

2.2 Lubricants — The lubricant shall be either petroleum jelly, a 
mixture of petroleum oil and petroleum jelly or a lime base grease and 
shall be suitable for use up to 65°G. Mineral filler or any bulky material 
shall not be added with it. The lubricant content determined as per 
Appendix A shall be between 40 to 50 percent by mass. 

2.3 Graphite or Mica — The graphite shall be of more than 90 percent 
carbon contents and not coarser than 75 micron. Mica shall not be 
coarser than 150 micron. The graphite or mica content when determined 
as per Appendix A shall be between 5 to 15 percent by mass. 

3. CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 The packings shall be plaited on square plait principle to the size 
specified by the purchaser. Straight ends in the centre and the corner 
shall not exceed 25 percent of the total mass of the packing. In case 
of round section inner core of plain ends shall not exceed 10 percent of 
the total mass of the packing. The yarn shall be impregnated with 
lubricant and graphite or mica, prior to or during plaiting in order to 
ensure uniform dispersion. 

4. SIZE 

4.1 The cotton gland packing shall be manufactured in coils. The 
section and length of cotton gland packing shall be as agreed upon 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

4.2 The size of the packing shall not vary in thickness in any direction by 
more than the following: 

Size Tolerance 

mm mm 

Up to and including 10 ±0*5 

Over 10 and up to 35 ±1*0 

5. WORKMANSHIP 

5.1 The packing shall show no evidence of poor workmanship. The 
surface of the packings shall not have torn out threads. 



IS : 9066 - 1979 

6. SAMPLING 

6.1 Lot — The quantity of coils of packings of the same size, designation 
and of one definite quality, delivered to one buyer against one despatch 
note shall constitute a lot. 

6-2 The conformity of a lot to the requirement of this standard shall be 
determined on the basis of tests carried out on the sample selected from 
the lot. 

6.3 Unless otherwise agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser, 
the number of coils to be selected at random from a lot shall be in accord- 
ance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1. 



TABLE 1 


SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 




( Clauses 6.3, 6.4, 


6.5, 


7.1 and 7.2 ) 






No. OF Goil 
in the Lot 

(I) 


Sample: Size 

(2) 




Permissible Number of Defects 


Visual and 
Dimensional 

(3) 




Flexibility 


Up to 100 


8 









3 


101 „ 300 


13 




1 




4 


301 „ 500 


20 




1 




5 


501 „ 1 000 


32 




2 




6 


1 001 and abov 


e 50 




3 




7 



6.4 The coils selected according to 6.3 shall be inspected for construction, 
workmanship and dimensions. If the number of coils found not in con- 
formity with the specified requirements is less than or equal to the 
corresponding number given in col 3 of Table 1, the lot shall be declared 
conforming to the requirements of visual and dimensional characteristics. 

6.5 In case of those lots which have been found satisfactory according 
to 6.4, a number of coils equal to the sample size given in col 4 of Table 1 
shall be selected from those coils tested according to 6.4. The specimen 
cut from these coils shall be subjected to tests given in 7.2. The lot shall 
be declared conforming to the requirements of this specification if all the 
coils satisfy the relevant requirements. 

7. TESTS 

7.1 Visual and Dimensional Inspection — Each coil of packing 
selected in accordance with col 2 of Table 1 shall be inspected for the 
construction, workmanship and dimensions. The dimensions shall be 
measured carefully without applying pressure to an accuracy of 0*1 mm 
with a slide gauge, at least, at six different positions along the length. The 
mean of the six measurements thus made shall be within the variations 
specified in 4.2. 

5 



IS : 9066 - 1979 

7.2 Flexibility — A suitable length of packing when bent through 180° 
around the rod, the diameter of which is four times the thickness of the 
packing shall not separate into layer. 

8. MARKING 

8.1 Each coil of the packing shall be marked with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Dimension of packing, and 

c) Month and year of manufacture. 

8.1*1 Packing coils may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as afurther safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

9. PACKING 

9.1 Packings shall be packed in sealed parcels of suitable size and shall 
be adequately protected against damage and ingress of dust in transit. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 2.2 and 2.3 ) 

METHODS OF TESTS FOR LUBRICATED COTTON 
GLAND PACKINGS 

A-l. DETERMINATION OF LUBRICANT CONTENT 

A-l.l Procedure 

A-l. 1.1 Take a Soxhlet thimble and a Whatma'ns filter paper of 10 cm 
diameter, previously extracted with carbon tetrachloride, and place them 
in a weighing bottle. 

A-l. 1.2 Place the weighing bottle (with the thimble and filter paper) 
with the lid offset, in an oven maintained between 105°C and 110°C for 



IS : 9066 - 1979 

one hour. Replace the lid and cool in a desiccator to room temperature 
and weigh. 

A-l.1.3 Unplait a representative section of the packing not less than 5 g 
in mass, over the open filter paper so that all materials which are dislodged 
fall on the filter paper. 

A-l.1.4 Wrap the sample in the filter paper and insert into the thimble. 
The thimble with the filter paper and sample should be replaced in the 
weighing bottle which should once again be dried in the oven for 
one hour as before and cooled in a desiccator to room temperatures and 
weighed. 

A-1.L5 Place thimble with the sample wrapped in the filter paper in a 
Soxhlet extraction apparatus fitted with a water cooled Liebeg condenser. 

A-l.1.6 Extract for one hour ( or more till the extraction is colourless ) 
with carbon tetrachloride. The volume of the solvent to be used should 
be at least three times the capacity of the Soxhlet extractor. 

A-l.1.7 Dry an evaporating basin in an oven at 105°C for one hour, 
cool to room temperature in a desiccator and weigh. 

A-l.1.8 Transfer the solution from the extraction flask to the basin. 
Rinse the flask with a small quantity of fresh carbon tetrachloride and 
transfer to the basin. 

A-l.1.9 Place the basin and its contents in an oven for half an hour at 
105°C, cool in a desiccator to room temperature and weigh. 

A-1.2 Calculation 

Grease, oil content, percent = -r— — — ,,— X 100 
r KK a — W\ 

where 

W\ = mass of weighing bottle, thimble and filter paper 

( see A-l.1.2 ); 
W% = mass of weighing bottle, thimble and filter paper with 

sample ( set A-l.1.4 ); 

W% = mass of dry evaporating basin; and 
PF 4 = mass of evaporating basin with extract. 

A-2. DETERMINATION OF GRAPHITE OR MICA CONTENT 
A-2.1 Procedure 

A-2. 1,1 Dry the Soxhlet thimble and its contents after extraction carried 

7 



IS : 9066 - 1979 

out as given under A~1*L6, in an oven maintained between 105°C to 
1 lrO°C for one hour and cool in a desiccator to room temperature. 

A-2.1.2 Take filter paper and contents, open the filter paper and care- 
fully dislodge the graphite or mica on to the filter paper by gently 
untwisting the yarn. 

A-2.1.3 Discard the yarn. 

A-2.1.4 Weigh the weighing bottle with filter paper and graphite or 
mica. 

A-2.2 Calculation 



Graphite or mica content, percent = __ w x *CK) 



where 



Ws = mass of weighing bottle, thimble and filter paper with 
graphite or mica. 



