**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9415 (1980) : Method for determination of hardenability 
and grain size of tool steels by penetration fracture test 
[MTD 22: Metallography and Heat Treatment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 9415-TI80 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
HARDENABIUTY AND GRAIN SIZE OF 
TOOL STEELS BY PENETRATION 
I RACTURE TEST 



UDC 669' 14*M 825 ; G20179-3 + 62IMB6-82 




© Copyright 19*0 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 

NRW DELHI lltxm 

IV*, S, 5 00 GrZ J) f ««fcr 1980 



IS : 9415-1980 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
HARDENABILITY AND GRAIN SIZE OF 
TOOL STEELS BY PENETRATION 
FRACTURE TEST 

Metallography and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee, SMDC 27 

Chairman Representing 

Or S. K. Chatterjee Giust, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah 

Members 

Shri S. K. Bastj ( Alternate to 
Db S. K. Chatterjee ) 
Shri 1. N. Bhatia Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri M. O. Sahit ( Alternate I ) 
Shri N. B. Kamble ( Alternate II ) 
Shri A. M. Biswas Nacional Test_Hous^, Calcutta 

Shri K. C Bariti ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Bhatnagar National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Dr D. J. Chakravarty ( Alternate ) 
Shri Dasartha The Visvesvaraya Iron and Steel Ltd, Bhadravati 

Shri B. Haridasackar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Datar Ahmedabad Advance'jMills Ltd, Navsari 

Shri M. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. M. Davar Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. T. Borate ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director (MET)-2, Ministry of Railways 
RDSO, Lucknow 
Chemist & Metallurgist, 
Northern Railway, 
Lucknow ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. B. Dutt Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri a! K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Dey Hindustan Motors Ltd, Uttarpara 

Shri A* K Guha Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New 

Delhi 

Shri K. M. Takeja ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Katyal Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Dr D. M. Lakhiaki Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Buropur 

Shri D. R. Dasgupta ( Alternate ) 

{Continued on page 2 



@ Copyright 198t> 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 9415-1980 

(Continued from page 1) 

Members Representing 

Shri J. S. Lotay Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar 

Shbi Laxamax Mishra Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri V. D. Shabma ( Alternate ) 
Db G. Mttkherjee Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Alloy Steels Plant ), 

Durgapur 

Shri D. K. Bagchi ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. Muehebjee Tata Iron & Steel Co, Jamshedpur 

Shri A. N. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri 3. Mubanjan Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. D, Hazare ( Alternate ) 

Shri J. Nagesh Bhatt Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri D. Likshmanna ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. Parathasarthy Ashok Leyland Ltd, Madras 

Db P. S. Pattihal Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri J. C. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. Parghi Kamani Metals & Alloys Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V, Ramaswamy Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri B. N. Ray ( Alternate ) 
Db V. Ramaswamy Steel Authority of India Ltd ( R & D ), Ranchi 

Dr G. Rai ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. R. Ranadive Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Khandke ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Rastogi Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri P. G. Mulye ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. J. Shipstone Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant )» 

Bhilai 

Shri D. K. Bagchi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Sivaramakbishnan Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 
Shri D. K. De ( Alternate ) 

Dr K. V. Subha Rao Mukand Iron & Steel Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. R. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 

Shbi H. K. Taneja Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri V. N. Pandey ( Alternate ) 

Shbi K, L. Tondoh Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, Calcutta 

Shri Stjrenoba Verma All India Metal Forging Association, New Delhi 

Shri Sudhir Kumar ( Alternate ) 

Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretaries 
Shri S. L. Bali 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 

Shri B. Mukherji 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS : 9415-1980 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF 
HARDENABILITY AND GRAIN SIZE OF 
TOOL STEELS BY PENETRATION 
FRACTURE TEST 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 22 January 1980, after the draft finalized by the Metallography 
and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 The penetration fracture test, more commonly known as the PF 
test, is used for determining the quality of tool steels and classifying the 
heats into definite types with regard to melting practice, hardening sen- 
sitivity and physical properties of the tool after heat treatment. This 
standard has been prepared to provide a guide for procedure to be adop- 
ted for rapid determination of the quality of steels. The method descri- 
bed in this standard is in vogue as a useful process control technique. 

0.3 For determination of fracture grain size, the hardened and fractured 
specimen has to be compared with a set of fracture grain size standard, 
and the user of the standard has to obtain such a set. A set of fracture 
grain size standard consists of ten specimens, the number one constitu- 
ting the coarsest and the number 10 the finest grain size. There are two 
sets of fracture grain size standards available, that is, Shepherd's and 
J. K. ( Jernkontoret ) fracture grain size standard. For all practical 
purposes these two standards are identical and their co-relation with ASTM 
grain size number is almost linear. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard describes the method for determining the hardenabi- 
lity and grain size of tool steels by penetration fracture test for process, 
control purposes. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 9415-1980 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS: 1956 
( Part I)-l 976 * shall apply. 

3. PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST 

3.1 This test consists of subjecting two samples of the steel, under test, 
to a brine quench from recommended hardening temperature related to 
the steel grains; each specimen is then notched and broken, and from a 
comparison of the fractures with a set of standard fractures, the fracture 
grain size is determined. The depth of hardening, produced by quen- 
ching, is then determined by macro-etching the other half of the broken 
specimen. 

4. TEST PIECES 

4.1 The test pieces shall consist of round bar, machined accurately to 
20 ±0*5 mm dia, and should be approximately 75 mm in length. 

4.2 For purposes of identification, each test piece should be stamped 
on both ends with a number corresponding to the temperature from 
which it is quenched. 

4.3 The machined test pieces should be subjected to a preliminary heat 
treatment for making the structural conditions of the steel uniform. This 
should be carried out by heating the specimens at 870 Q C and holding at 
this temperature for at least 40 minutes. The specimens are then quen- 
ched in oil 

5. TEST PROCEDURE 

5.1 Hardening Treatment — Generally the oil quenched specimens should 
be uniformly heated to recommended temperatures and held at the harde- 
ning temperature for 30 minutes. The temperature-time cycle should be 
strictly adhered to, as otherwise the properties of the steel under test 
might be affected. 

5.1.1 The specimen should then be quenched by vertical immersion in 
1 percent aqueous brine solution. 

5.1.2 The time lag between removal of the test pieces from the furnace 
and the commencement of quenching should not exceed 5 seconds. 

5.2 Determination of Grain Size 

5.2.1 After the quenched specimens are sufficiently cooled to be hand- 
led, they should be notched mid-way between the ends with a thin 
cutting wheel to a depth not greater than 1*5 mm. The notched specimen 
should then be fractured by a hammer. 

5.2.2 The grain size of the fractured surface should be determined 
by comparing the hardened case fractures with the fracture grain size 
standards 



♦Glossary of terms relating to iron and steel: Part 1 Genera) metallurgy, heat 
treatment and testing ( first revision ). 

4 



IS : 94J5-1980 

5.3 Determination of Hardenability 

5.3.1 The second half of the fractured specimen should be cut at least 
25 mm from the original end and the cross-section should be prepared for 
macro-etching by final griading on *0' or '00* emery paper. The specimen 
should be etched in a 50 percent aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid 
for 3 minutes at a temperature of 80°C. The depth, to which the speci- 
men is hardened, should then be measured by means of a scale and 
recorded in units of 0*5 mm. 

5.3.2 The hardness penetration should be expressed in terms of the 
depth of the hardened case in units of 0*5 mm, that is, a depth of 2 mm 
should be expressed as 4 units. 

6. PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 

6.1 The penetration fracture characteristics of the tool steel should be 
recorded as number; for example, 4,5,6,8. The first two numbers repre- 
sent a depth of hardness in units of 0*5 mm for each of the two specimens 
respectively. The last two numbers give the fracture grain size numbers for 
the two specimens respectively as determined by gradual comparison with 
the standards. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

METALLOGRAPHY AND HEAT TREATMENT 

IS: 

2756-1965 Method for estimating the average grain size of wroul^t^coppfrand 

copper base alloys 
2853-1964 Method for determining austenitic grain size of steel 
4075-1967 Method of macrostreak flaw test for steel 

4163-1967 Method for determination of inclusion content in steel by microscopic 

^ method 
4748-19<& Methods for estimating average-grain size of metals^ 
6396-1971 Method of measuring decarburized depth of steel 
6416-1971 Methods of measuring case depth of ^steek 
7739 Code of practice for preparation of metaUagraphis spe$im$n$:, 

(Partl)-I975 General features 

( Part'HH975 Electrolytic polishm^ 

( Part III Vl975 Aluftiniuni aif Its alfoys aasi th<*r examination 

(PartIV)-1975 Co#erandits alf6ys*arid their examination 

( Part V )-1976 Iron and steel and their examination 

( Part VI )-1975 Lead and its alloys and their examination 

( Part VII )-1975 Magnesium and its alloys and their examination 

( Part VIII )- 1975 Nickel and its alloys and their examination 

( Part IX )-1976 Gold, silver, platinum, palladium and their alloys 

( Part X )-1976 Tin and its alloys and their examination 

( Part XI )-1976 Zinc and its alloys and their examination 
7754-1975 Method for designation of microstructure of graphite in cast iron 



