**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mr^sssss^^w: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 9603 (Part 3}- 19S6 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
PERTAINING TO TEXTILE PROCESSING 

PART 3 



UDC O01-4: €77-02 




© Copyright 19B7 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
UANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAM 

NEW DELHI 110003 

Gr4 March IS87 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
PERTAINING TO TEXTILE PROCESSING 

PART 3 



Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 



Chairman 
Dr { Km ) M. D. Bhavsar 



Representing 
Art Silk Mills 



Research Association, 



The Tata Mills Limited, Bombay 
National Peroxide Ltd, Bombay 
Binny Limited, Madras 



The Silk & 
Bombay 

Members 

ShriJamshed D. Adbunwala 
Dr V. G. Agnihotbi 

SHRI S. R. ANANTriAKRlSBNA 

Sett> 

Shri A. J. Kadavan { Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Basu Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ins- 

pection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri A. K. Saigal ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Behkani Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri K. Kastukia ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Bhattacharya Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri D. K. ChatTopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Chatter jee {Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Desikan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri Paul Linodoh ( Alternate ) 
Director, Weavers' Service Development Commissioner for Handlooms, New 

Delhi 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 



Centre, Bombay 
Shri M. D. Dixit 

Shri D. K. SiNha ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. G. Khandeparkar 
Shri P. K. Khere 



Dr B. R. Manjusatha 
Shri Sunil S. Mehta 
Dr A. K. Mukherjee 
Shri H. B Nagoria 

Shki S. R. Desai ( Alternate 
Dr ( Smt ) U. Nandurkar 
Dr S. N. Pandey 

Km I. G. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 



Cotton Technological Research Laboratory, Bombay 
Central Excise & Customs ( Ministry of Finance ), 

New Delhi 
Intexa India, Bombay 
Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay 
Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, Calcutta 
Man Made Textile Research Association, Surat 



Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Cotton Technological Research 
( ICAR ), Bombay 



Laboratory 



Continued on page 2 ) 



© Capyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr ( Smt ) G. R. Phalgumani Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Rathode National Textile Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri P. P. Checker ( Alternate ) 
Representative Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr R. K. Saxena Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri D. K. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. J. Shah The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri Jams ad as K. Shah The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad 

Shri I. M. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri K.. G. Shah Ahmadabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co 

Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Dr J. I. Setai/wai> ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri J. N. Vohra Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development 

Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh 

Shri P. T. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. I. Midha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 



Director ( Tex ) 



Secretary 

Shtu M. S. Verma 
Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Glossary of Terms Pertainin 0, to Textile Processin 0, Subcommittee 

Convenrr 

Shri K. S. Desikan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Members 

Shri Paul Linodoh ( Alternate to 
Shri K. S. Desikan ) 
Chief Chemist, Central Ministry of Finance ( Central Revenue ), Central 

Revenue Laboratory, New Delhi 

Deputy Chief Chemist, Central 
Revenue ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. D. Dig-he The Raja Bahadur Motilal Poona Mills Ltd, Pune 

Shri M. D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Dr B. Mahapatro Bombay Dyeing & Mfg Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. B. Mahasabde Empire Industrial Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. D. MohiLe Ministry of Finance, Directorate of Inspection & 

Audit ( CCE ), New Delhi 
Shri C. K. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Representative Binny Limited, Madras 

Representative Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. J- Shah The Bombay Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmadabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
PERTAINING TO TEXTILE PROCESSING 

PART 3 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards * 
Institution on 15 October 1986, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 Some of the important terms pertaining to textile processing have 
already been covered in Parts 1 and 2 of this standard. This standard 
covers a large number of other terms commonly used in textile trade 
and industry. These are expected to assist in proper interpretation and 
avoid confusion arising from various interpretations of definitions of 
these terms. 

0.3 While purporting to give the generally accepted meaning of a term, 
a definition should not be regarded as in any case taking the place of a 
specification. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes definitions of terms pertaining to textile 
processing and processed textiles. 

2. DEFINITIONS 



2.1 After-Chrome Process — A method of dyeing in which the fibre 
is first dyed with the dye and then worked in a separate bath containing 
the chromium mordant or in the same bath by adding the mordant after 
exhausting the dye. 

2.2 After Glow — Persistence of glow in a material under specified 
test conditions, after the removal of an external ignition source or after 
the cessation ( natural or induced ) of flaming of the material. 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.3 After Treating — Usually a process to fix/remove/improve the 
colour/resin on previously treated material. 

2.4 Ammonia Process — A process used for cotton for increased dye 
uptake, lustre and strength in which the cotton material is treated in 
liquid ammonia at — 33°C. 

2.5 Aniline Black — A fast black colour produced by oxidation of 
aniline on a textile material. 

2.6 Aniline Salt — Chemically known as aniline hydrochloride. 

2.7 Antidiazotate — A stabilized diazonium compound which is 
obtained by stabilization of diazonium salt in a strong solution of sodium 
hydroxide ( l06°Tw ). 

B 

2.8 Bagging ( Finishing ) — Tacking together of two selvedges of a 
fabric to form a tube in order to prevent the selvedges from curling 
during wet processing. 

2.9 Beetling — A finishing process used on linen and cotton fabrics to 
close up the spaces between threads and improve the appearance and 
handle by subjecting the previously dampened cloth to a hammering 
by a series of wooden mallets or 'fallers' which flattens the threads, 
improve the lustre and eliminates any 'thready' open appearance. 

2.10 Blanket Mark — A crimped, wavy, or pebbled mark embossed on 
a fabric by the blanket that covers the heated cylinder used in certain 
finishing processes. 

2.11 Block Printing — The printing of fabrics by hand with carved/ 
designed wooden blocks. 

2.12 Brilliance — That attribute of a colour which measures its 
luminosity or the degree of its lightness or darkness. 

2.13 Bronzing ( Defect ) — A bronze-like appearance on dyed textile 
materials caused by precipitation/agglomeration of the dye during the 
dyeing process. 



2.14 Carrotting — The modification of the tips of fur fibre by chemical 
treatment to improve their felting capacity. 

2.15 Caustic Soda Crepe — A puckered or crepe effect made by 
shrinking action of caustic soda on selected portions of cotton fabrics. 



IS: 9603 (Part 3)- 1986 

2.16 Cellulose Imago Print — A cellulosic fabric printed with a 
dispersion of pigment in a cellulose solution to produce a white on white, 
or an opaque effect on white or pastal background. 

2.17 Chafe Mark — A streak or mark cau>ed by friction in dyeing or 
finishing of piece goods. 

2.18 Char Length — The distance ftom edge of the specimen exposed 
to the flame under specified test conditions, to the upper edge of the 
charred section of the specimen, expressed in metric units. 

2.19 Chasing — A cloth finishing operation usually for cotton and 
linens done on a calender having five or more rolls. Two layers ( in 
some cases, more ) of the cloth are run through the machine at the same 
time and face to face which gives a characteristic threadiness with a 
subdued lustre and the threads are not flattened. 

2.20 Chromatic Colours — Those colours which possess hue, such as 
red, yellow, blue, etc, as distinguished from the achromatic colours such 
as white, grey, slate, black. 

2.21 Chromosol Process — A method of dyeing similar to 
metachrome process except that here mordant used is a double oxalate 
of chromium and sodium or potassium known as chromosol mordant. 

2.22 Cloudiness 

a) In a dyed fabric, a defect consisting of random faintly defined 
uneven dyeing. 

b) In a bleached fabric, a defect consisting of opaque patches, 
usually visible only in transmitted light, due to residues remain- 
ing after bleaching. 

2.23 Coloured Lake — An insoluble compound produced with suitable 
dyestuffs and metallic salts or bases by means of a precipitating agent. 

2.24 Colour Discharge Printing — The production of coloured 
design on dyed textile fabrics by printing with a composition containing 
the discharging agent and other dye resistant to discharging action of 
the discharging agent. 

2.25 Coloured Resist Printing — The production of multi-coloured 
design on textile fabric by dyeing, printing with a resisting agent and 
another dye resistant to effect of resisting agent and then developing so 
as to obtain coloured effect on a coloured background. 

2.26 Copper Number — The mass in mg of copper reduced from the 
cupric to cuprous state by 100 g of cotton under specified conditions. 
This is used as a measure to assess the reducing power of cotton. 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.27 Coupling — To combine a suitable organic component, usually a 
phenol, with a diazonium salt in such a way as to form an azo 
compound. 

2.28 Crimping/Texturizing — Processes usually applied to continuous 
filament yarns made from or containing thermoplastic fibres to impart 
high stretch character. 

2.29 Crocking — A synonym for 'rubbing' in the sense of fastness to 
rubbing of dyes. 

2.30 Crofting — The oldest process of bleaching linen by soaking in 
an alkaline solution and drying in presence of sun on grass until it 
becomes white. 

2.31 Crow's Feet ( Defect ) — Cloth breaks or wrinkles of varying 
degrees of intensity and size, resembling bird's foot prints in shape and 
occurring during the wet processing of fabrics. 



2.32 Desizing — A process for removing size from grey goods in 
preparation for bleaching, dyeing, etc, by means of an acid or enzyme or 
by any other means. 

2.33 Diazotization — A chemical reaction to convert an aromatic 
amine into a diazonium compound. 

2.34 Doctor Streak — A warp-way streak on a coated or printed fabric 
caused by the irregularity between the edge of the doctor blade and the 
fabric surface. 

2.35 Duplex Printing — A method for printing the same design on 
face and back of cloth, done in two distinct operations. 

2.36 Duration of After Glow ( After Glow Time ) — The time for 
which a material continues to glow, under specified test conditions, after 
cessation of flaming, or after removal of ignition source. 

2.37 Duration of Flame ( After Flame Time ) — The length of time 
for which a material continues to flame, under specified test conditions, 
after the ignition source has been removed. 

2.38 Dyeing — The process of colouring textile or other materials in 
such a way that the colour appears to be a property of the dyed 
material and does not give superficial effect such as that produced by 
painting. 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 



2.39 Emulsion — A finely divided suspension of an oil in water or 
water in oil. 

2.40 Enamelled Cloth — ■ A heavy cotton cloth, such as drill or warp 
satin, treated with oil, pyroxylin, etc, and given a glazed finish to 
resemble patent leather. 

2.41 Etching — A process for producing design on metallic roller used 
in a printing machine by chemical dissolution of the metallic surface. 

2.42 Extent of After Glow — The area of specimen in which the 
after glow spreads beyond the area damaged by flaming. 

F 

2.43 Fast Base — An aromatic amine which on diazotization will 
combine with naphthol to form an azoic pigment. 

2.44 Fast Colour Salt — A stabilized diazo compound, active or 
passive, stabilized as sulphate or chloride or aromatic sulphonate or as 
complex salt of diazo compound used as a component of the rapid fast 
or rapidazol or rapidogen dye and applied by dissolving in cold water 
and subsequently coupled with the azoic coupling component 
( naphthol ). 

2.45 First Printed Resist — A process where the resisting agent is 
printed on the fabric which is then dried and padded with the dye 
solution followed by drying and developing. 

t dR fii-vinvt A cro tit — Anv rhpm'^ra^ nsprl in Hvpincr. nrintincr nr finisViintr 
«.. , v ^ .— . — 9 --» / — — / OJI o _ - o 

which combines with a soluble compound to form an insoluble compound 
upon the fibre. 

2.47 Flame — As related to textile flammability, a hot, luminous zone 
of gas or matter in gaseous suspension, or both, that is undergoing 
combustion, which is relatively constant in size and shape and which 
produces a relatively low heat flux. 

2.48 Flame-Proof Fabric — A fabric which does not propagate flame, 
that is any flame goes out quickly when the igniting flame is 
withdrawn. 

2.49 Flame Resistance — The property of a material whereby 
flaming combustion is prevented, terminated or inhibited following 
application of a flaming or non-flaming source of ignition, with or 
without subsequent removal of the ignition source. The degree of flame 
resistance exhibited by a specific material during testing may vary with 
different test conditions. 



1 S : 9603 (Part 3 ) -1986 

2.50 Flame-Resistant — The material having flame resistance. 

Note — ' Flame resistant ' is a mandatory description for. a product that meets 
established conformance standard when the product is tested by a specific method. 
Where no conformance standard exists, it is a relative term and is used to compare 
one material with another. 

2.51 Flame-Retardant — A chemical used to impart flame resistance. 

2.52 Flame-Retardant Finish — A process for incorporating or 
adding flame retardant(s) to a material or product. 

2.53 Flammability — The characteristics of a material which pertain 
to its relative ease of" ignition and relativeability to sustain comburtion. 



2.54 Greasy Milling ( Wool ) — The process of milling the cloth 
before it is scoured. 

2.55 Gypsum — Hydrous sulphate of calcium which is used for weight- 
ing and dressing of cotton goods. 

H 

2.56 Hard Finish — A finish usually for woollen and worsted fabrics 
without a nap of any kind. 

2.57 Holland Finish — A glazed or unglazed finish applied to certain 
cotton fabrics by applying an oil and filling material followed by a 
thorough calendering to make them more or less opaque. 

2.58 Hydro-Extraction — An operation for squeezing out excess 
liquid, generally water, from a textile material. It neither brings about 
any change in the basic character of the textile material nor involves any 
chemical treatment. 



2.59 Ice Colours — A term applied to azoic dyes because the diazotized 
base solution has to be kept at low temperature by adding ice to prevent 
its premature decomposition. 

2.60 Indigo Dye — A dye capable of giving rich permanent blue colour 
after oxidation in air of the yellow juice applied on textile material and 
obtained from indigoferae plant leaves. 

2.61 Indigosol Dye — See 2.105. 

2.62 Ingrain Colours — Dyes which are developed in situ on the fibre. 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 



2.63 KD Finish — Treatments given to woollen fabrics to improve 
handle, appearance and shrinkage resistance by passing through heated 
perforated cylinders. 

2.64 Knit-Deknit Finish — A finish used for thermoplastic fibres for 
introducing a very high degree of curliness or crimp which gives 
extremely high stretch and bulk and hence adds greatly to the appeal 
of fabric, by first knitting the filament yarns into a tubular fabric and 
then setting permanently by steaming at 25 psi pressure. 



2.65 Lacquer Finish — An extremely smooth, highly glazed finish 
forming a thin film on the surface of the fabric produced by means of 
nitrate cellulose derivatives, synthetic resins, etc. 

2.66 Lacquer Printing — See 2.86. 

2.67 Levelling Acid Dyes — Acid dyes having good levelling 
properties. * 

2.68 London Finish — A finishing process applied to fabrics in which 
the fabric is thoroughly moistened and then allowed to dry naturally in 
the absence of tension, steamed and pressed. 

M 

2.69 Madder Bleach — A very thorough bleach given to cotton goods 
by several long alkali boils and bleaching with bleaching powder to give 
full white and is generally used for goods to be printed. 

2.70 Mangling — The process of extracting liquid by passing the wet 
textile material in rope form or open width form through one or more 
nips of the mangle. 

2.71 Market Bleach — The bleach given to cotton fabrics that are sold 
in this state and not later dyed or printed. 

2.72 Metachrome or Chromate Process — A method of dyeing in 
which the dye and the mordant ( in the form of chromate which does 
not form lake with the dye and which is gradually converted into 
dichromate ) are applied to the fibre from the same bath when present 
simultaneously. 

2.73 Metal Complex Dye — A water soluble pre-metallized dye in 
which one metal atom ( either chromium or cobalt ) is complexed with 
dyestuff molecule(s) which is applied from neutral or acidic dye bath 
and has very good all round properties. 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.74 Mineral Dyes — A class of dyes consisting of mineral pigments 
precipitated more or less mechanically in the fibre. 

2.75 Mineral Khaki — A mixture of hydrated ferric hydroxide and 
chromium hydroxide giving khaki colour by padding the cotton fabric 
in solution containing ferrous sulphate and chrome alum and then 
treating with alkali to form metal hydroxides. 

2.76 Moire Effect — A defect in dyeing arising from non-uniform 
dyeing and difference in reflection of different parts of the fabric which 
gives it a rippled appearance. 

2.77 Moire Finish — A finish to produce wavy effect by passing 
two superimposed layers of cloth through a calender under heat and 
heavy pressure. 



2.78 Oligomer — A simple polymer having small number of 
monomeric units combined, the number of monomeric units of which 
it is composed, may be known. 

2.79 Organdie Finishing — A finishing treatment given to cotton 
fabrics comprising a short contact of fabric with sulphuric acid of high 
concentration, to produce a stiff and transparent effect. 

2.80 Overprinted Resist — The treatment in which the fabric is 
impregnated with the dye solution, dried and printed with the resisting 
agent followed by development. 

2.81 Oxidation Colour — Colour obtained by oxidation of aromatic 
amines ( used as their salts with inorganic acids like hydrochloric acid 
to make them soluble in water ) in the fibre substance in an acidic 
medium, for example, aniline black, diphenyl black, solaniline black, 
paramine brown and fuscamine brown, etc. 



2.82 Palmering — A finishing process done on Palmer Calender to 
impart a soft mellow handle to fabrics. 

2.83 Paper Finish — Treatment given to woollen/worsted fabrics by 
pressing between layers of papers under pressure to improve handle, 
appearance and lustre of the fabrics. 

2.84 Persian Print — A low grade, plain woven cotton fabric printed 
in large patterns and brilliant colours. 

10 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.85 Photoengraving — A method used for preparing designs for 
textile printing by photographic techniques. 

2.86 Pigment Printing — Printing of textile fabric with ah emulsion 
of pigment along with a binder and curing the binder to fix the pigment. 

2.87 Pilling — Small accumulations of fibres on the surface of a fabric 
and held to the surface by an entanglement with the surface fibres and 
composed of the same fibres as those from which the fabric is made. 

2.88 Preservative — A compound used to inhibit the growth of mould, 
mildew, bacteria, etc. 

2.89 Pressure Mark — An impression or an area of greater lustre in 
fabric, caused by irregularities of pressure during the finishing process. 

2.90 Printing — The process of localized dyeing, producing designs of 
one or more colours on a fabric by means of roller, block, screen, etc, 
using any of the printing styles such as direct, discharge, resist, transfer 
and spray. 



2.91 Raised Fabric — A fabric with raised, brushed or napped surface 
or with cut or uncut pile. 

2.92 Rapid Fast Dye — A suitable mixture of selected stabilized 
antidiazotate and selected azoic coupling component ( naph.th.oi ). 

2.93 Rapidazole Dye — A suitable mixture of inactive stabilized diazo 
compound such as diazosulphonate or diazosulphonic acid or diazosul- 
phite, and a suitable azoic coupling component ( naphthol ) applied by 
dissolving in an aqueous solution. 

2.94 Rapidogen Dye — A suitable mixture of stabilized diazoamino or 
diazojmino compound ( fast salt ) and a selected azoic coupling com- 
ponent ( naphthol ) applied by dissolving in an aqueous solution. 

2.95 Reduced Vat Process or Leuco Vat Process — A method of 
dyeing in which the vat dye is first converted into soluble and substantive 
leuco form by reduction and then applied to textile material. 

2.96 Reduction Clearing — See 'clearing' in Part 2 of IS : 9603. 

2.97 Residual Shrinkage — The potential shrinkage remaining in a 
fibre, yarn, or fabric after treatment. 

2.98 Resist Yarn — Yarn which has been treated to resist the action 
of dyestuffs. 

11 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.99 Retting ( Flax ) — The subjection of crop or deseeded straw to 
chemical or biological treatment to make the fibre bundles more easily 
separable from the woody part of the stem. Flax is described as water- 
retted, dewretted or chemically retted, etc, according to the process 
employed. 



2.100 Saturation/Purity/Intensity/Chroma of a Colour — That 

attribute of chromatic colours which determines its degree of difference 
from a grey of the same brilliance. 

2.101 Scotch Finish — A closely shorn nep finish on heavy woollen 
fabrics. 

2.102 Scrooping — A finishing process usually associated with silk but 
also given to cellulosic fibres, yarns or fabrics to give high coefficient of 
static friction relative to dynamic coefficient which results in a high- 
pitched sound when the material is compressed normally due to the 
presence of a long chain fatty component and a crystalline organic acid, 
for example, soap and tartaric acid. 

2.103 Seam Mark — A particular form of pressure mark in the cloth, 
produced by the thickness of a seam during bleaching, dyeing, printing 
or finishing process. 

2.104 Setting — The process of conferring stability on fibres, yarns 
or fabrics of all textiles, generally by means of moist or dry heat. 

2.105 Solubilized Vat Dye — A water soluble dye obtained by treating 
vat dye with suitable chemicals to make it in soluble and substantive 
form and is generally a sodium salt of sulphuric ester of leuco vat dye 
which is applied on textile material in the presence of sulphuric acid 
and sodium nitrite or potassium dichromate. 

2.106 Speckle Printing — Printing of an encapsulated dye where the 
capsule breaks during the process of development. 

2.107 Sponging — The process of steaming piece goods on ajperforated 
steel steam box to obtain shrinkage. 

2.108 Spotting — A process of removing by special solvents or agents, 
the spots or stains on a textile material. 

2.109 Standing Bath — A bath that is preserved for further use and 
freshened up by the addition of necessary amount of dyestuff and/or 
chemicals. 

12 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.110 Stock Solution — A relatively concentrated solution of a dye 
or a chemical which is diluted with water considerably when used. 

2.111 Substantive Dyes — Same as direct dyes. 

2.112 Sulphur Black Tendering — It denotes the degradation of 
sulphur black dyed cotton materials during storage due to the formation 
of sulphuric acid. 

T 

2.113 Thermosol Dyeing ( Thermosoling ) — A continuous dyeing 
process used for thermoplastic fibres by which the dye is first deposited 
on the fibre surface by padding in aqueous dispersion of dye and then 
diffused and dissolved in the fibre by the application of dry heat for . 
30 to 60 seconds at 180 to 230°C depending upon the particle size of 
the dye, volatility of the dye and solubility of the dye in the fibre and 
the thermal properties of the fibre. 

2.114 Thickener — A substance of a gelatinous or gummy nature that 
is used to increase the viscosity of printing, dyeing, finishing pastes or 
liquors. 

2.115 Tie and Dye Method ( Tie Dyeing ) — A handcraft method 
of producing patterns on a fabric by gathering small portions of the 
cloth and dyeing them with thread into compact knots by virtue of which 
the tied areas resist the penetration of the dye on subsequent dyeing 
and thus remain undyed, forming a pattern of small dots on a dyed 
ground. These dots may be white or coloured depending upon the 
original fabric used. 

2.116 Tinting 

a) A process of colouring fibres with a fugitive dye. 

b) The colouring of yarns, fabrics, etc, to a very light shade. 

2.117 Top Dyed — Fibres dyed in top form. 

U 

2.118 Unraised Fabric or a Fabric of Plain Surface — A fabric 
having a surface significantly free from raised fibres, nap or pile. 

V 

2.119 Vat Acid Process — A method of dyeing in which the vat dye 
is first converted in a very fine state of division by reducing the vat dye 
and neutralizing the alkali used in reduction by acetic acid in the pre- 
sence of acid stable dispersing agent and subsequently this non-substan- 
tive dispersed dye is deposited on the fibre material and then the fibre 
material is developed in a bath containing sodium hydroxide and 
sodium hydrosulphite. 

13 



IS : 9603 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 

2.120 Vatting — A process of conversion of insoluble vat dye into 
soluble substantive form under alkaline reducing conditions. 

2.121 Vegetable Dyes — A dye obtained from various forms of 
vegetable matter such as, wood, bark, roots, barriers, etc, for example, 
logwood, cutch, indigo, madder, quericitron. 

W 

2.122 White Discharge Printing — The production of coloured 
design on textile fabrics by dyeing and then printing with discharging 
agents which destroy the dye by reduction or oxidation at the printed 
portions. 

2.123 White Resist Printing — The production of coloured design 
on textile fabrics by dyeing it with dyes ( which are fixed in two 
steps, that is, dyeing and developing ) and then printing with resisting 
agent which prevents the development at the printed portions during 
developing and thus gives a white effect on coloured background. 

2.124 Wigan Finish — A firm, starched, plain calendered finish 
without lustre, applied to light weight sheetings and printed clothes. 



14 



