**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 942 (1982) : Functional Requirements for 275 1/Min 
Portable Pump Set for Fire Fighting [CED 22: Fire Fighting] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 941 ' IN2 
( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

NCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS FUR 
5 1,'MIN PORTABLE PUMP SET 
FOR FIRE FIGHTING 



./ Revision ) 



LJpr (61:621 



\m 



H*2 

INDIAN STAMMKDS ISSTI T 1 ' 
M*N*K HHA.Y4H. * H*HI \[>LIR &ISM! /%PAft MAHCt 

.-, omM lira: 

Gr I S*y 



IS : 942 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 

275 1/MIN PORTABLE PUMP SET 

FOR FIRE FIGHTING 

( Second Revision J 



Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, BDC 22 

Chairman Representing 

Shri G. B. Menon Ministry of Home Affairs 

Members 

Shri Mahesh C. Agarwal Brijbasi Udyog, Mathura 

Shri P. S. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Bansal Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), 

Bokaro 
Shri A. Chatterjee Tariff Advisory Committee, Bombay 

Shri F. B. Sanjana ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Inspector General Ministry of Railways 
( RPSE ) 
Assistant Security Officer 
( Fire ) ( Northern Rail- 
way ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. P. Dew an Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt Col V. R. Banahati ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Devasahayam Home Department (Fire Service), Government of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri V. Jayaperumal ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. R. Dhobley Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay 

Director, Fire Services Home (Police) Department, Government of Andhra 

Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Deputy Director ( Fire 
Services ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Gidwani Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. N. Pandit ( Alternate ) 
Shri Gopal Krishan Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 942 - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

ShriK. K. Das Gupta West Bengal Fire Service, Calcutta 

Shri J. S Jamshedji Steelage Industries Ltd ( Minimax Division), 

Bombay 

Shri C. Ghanaraj ( Alternate ) 
Junior Manager ( Fire ) Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri S. N. Kundu Fire Safety Appliances Co, Calcutta 

Shri S. Paul ( Alternate ) 
Managing Director Avon Services ( P & A ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Technical Executive ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. D. Mehervanjee Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

( Bombay Fire Brigade ), Bombay 

Shri V. B. Nikam ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. R. Mehta Institution of Fire Engineers ( India ), New Delhi 

Shri A. N. Ahluwalia ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Mukherji Steel Authority of India ( Rourkela Steel Plant ), 

Rourkela 

Shri C. D. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. N. Panchal Central Industrial Security Force ( Ministry of 

Home Affairs ) 
Col V. V. K. Rao Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri Mohendra Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Sawhney Air Foam Industries Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri R. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Sebastin Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 

Shri V. V. Kimmatkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. H. Sethna Kooverji Devshi & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. T. Panjwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri Chandrakant M. Shah Zenith Fire Services, Bombay 

Shri M. H. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. V. Shah Newage Industries, Surendranagar ( Gujarat ) 

Shri B. J. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. L. Sharma Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( Delhi Fire 

Services ), Delhi 
Shri D- K. Sirkar Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd, Bareilly 

Shri Tarit Sur Sur Enamel & Stamping Works Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Sur ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sushil Kumar Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri S, Venkaswamy Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri B. V. Wagle Urban Development and Public Health Department, 

Government of Maharashtra, Bombay 

Shri V. H. Madkaikar ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. M. Mathur 

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



( Continued on page 7 ) 



IS : 942 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 

275 1/MIN PORTABLE PUMP SET 

FOR FIRE FIGHTING 



( Second Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 15 April 1982, after the draft finalized by the Fire 
Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

0.2 The portable pump set is one of the essential equipment for fire 
fighting. However, the capacity of this pump being limited, it cannot be 
relied upon for fighting large fires, but it has advantages of being light- 
weight and portable, which enables it to be carried almost anywhere. This 
type of pump is very suitable for small factories, railway/dock yards, areas 
where there are narrow lanes, rural areas and towns where water is scarce. 

0.2.1 This standard was first published in 1958 and revised in 1968. 
The second revision has been prepared to provide for use for diesel type of 
engines also. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the requirements regarding material and design 
of 275 1/min portable pump set for fire fighting. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 942 - 1982 

2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 The unit shall consist of the pump having an output of not less than 
275 1/min at a pressure of 4 kgf/cm 2 , fitted on a tubular steel frame and 
with anti-vibration coils/pads. The complete unit shall be of lightweight 
construction, so that it can be easily carried by two men. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The pump comprising volute, body ( casing ) impeller and one delivery 
outlet shall be manufactured from light aluminium alloy conforming to 
IS: 617-1975*. 

3.1.1 The mild steel tubes used for the fabrication of tubular frame shall 
conform to IS :3601-1966t- 

3.1.2 The spindle of the delivery valve shall be made of stainless steel 
conforming to 07CR18Ni9 Grade of IS : 6603-1972J. 

3.2 All parts which form waterways, or come into contact with water, shall 
be of corrosion resisting material or treated in a suitable manner. All 
metal parts exposed to atmosphere shall be either corrosion resisting or 
treated in a suitable manner. 

4. DESIGN 

4.1 The components of the unit shall comply with the following 
requirements. 

4.1.1 Engine 

4.1.1.1 The engine shall be a single cylinder two-stroke or four-stroke 
petrol or diesel driven. 

4.1.1.2 The engine shall be air-cooled. 

4.1.1.3 A well designed hand starting device shall be provided to 
ensure reliable and quick starting engine. 

4.1.2 Pump 

4.1.2.1 The pump shall be of single stage centrifugal type, directly 
mounted on the extension of the crankshaft of the engine. 

4.1.2.2 The pump casing shall be so designed as to afford easy access 
to the impeller and facilitate erection and inspection. The outer face of the 
pump casing shall carry the suction and delivery connections and their 
fittings and priming device. 

♦Specification for aluminium and aluminium alloy ingots and castings for general 
engineering purposes ( second revision ). 
tSpecification for steel tubes of mechanical and general engineering purposes. 
^Specification for stainless steel bars and fiats. 



IS : 942 - 1982 

4*1.2,3 The pump shall be fitted with mechanical gland of self 
adjusting type. 

4.1.2.4 The pump shall be tested for the performance of its duties 
(see 4.1.2.5) at 27° ± 2°C and at pressure of 760 mm of mercury. The 
following allowances ( deductions ) shall be made : 

a) Output — i) One percent of every 2'5°C rise in water temperature; 

ii) 4 percent for every 300 mm elevation above mean 
sea level; and 

iii) No allowance shall be made for humidity up to 
75 percent. However, deductions at the rate of 
1 percent of every 5 percent change in humidity 
shall be made when the humidity ranges from 
75 to 95 percent. 

b) Lift — i) 30 cm every 300 m elevation above mean sea level, 

and 

ii) One percent for every 2*5°C rise in water temperature. 

4.1.2.5 The pump shall be tested with suction stainer fitted continuously 
for 4 hours shall be with a lift of 3 m for the following duties: 

Output Pressure 

1/min kgf/cm- 

545 2*5 

365 3-5 

275 4'0 

4.1.2.6 The pump suction shall be fitted with 75 mm male round 
threads and female blank cap. The round threads shall confirm to Table 3 
of IS: 902-1974*. 

4.1.2.7 The delivery valve shall be of screw down type and fitted with 
63 mm female instantaneous coupling and blank cap. The delivery valve 
shall confirm to IS : 4928-l9681\ 

4.1.3 Primer — The primer shall be capable of lifting water at least 
through 7 m in not more than 45 seconds and shall be preferably fully 
automatic. 

4.1.4 Framework — It shall be of a cradle design made of tubular steel 
and provided with anti-vibration coils/pads. 

♦Specification for suction hose couplings for fire fighting purposes ( second revision ). 
fSpecification for quick closing clack-valve for centrifugal pump outlet. 



IS : 942 - 1982 

4.1.4.1 The cradle shall be fitted with 4 folding handles of spring 
loaded type. The handles shall be capable of being used for tying the ropes 
for slingling the pump down in the well. 

4.1.5 Suction Hose — The lengths of 15 mm suction hose shall be 4 of 
2*5 m or 2 of 4'5 m conforming to IS : 2410-1963*. The suction hose shall 
be fitted with 75 mm suction hose coupling conforming to IS: 902-1974f. 

4.1.6 Fuel Tank — The fuel tank shall have a capacity for 2 hours 
continuous running. 

4.1.7 The control panel shall include: 

a) Hand trottle, 

b) Pressure gauge calibrated from to 10 kgf/cm 2 , and 

c) Compound gauge with pressure calibrated from to 6 kgf/cm 2 in 
black and vacuum to 75 cms of mercury in red. 

4.2 Tools and Instruction Book — A tool kit comprising all essential tools 
required for normal maintenance, shall be provided with each pump along 
with a fully illustrated booklet and itemwise spare parts list. 

4.3 Weight — The total weight of the unit with fuel shall not exceed 
110 kgs. 

5. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 All parts of the unit shall be of good workmanship. 

5.2 The cradle shall be painted in Fire Red ( see Shade No. 536 of 
IS : 5-1978$ ). The paint shall conform to IS :2932-1974§* 

6. MARKINGS 

6.1 Each pump set shall be clearly and permanently marked with the 
following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark; 

b) Type of engine and pump; 

c) The output of the pump in 1/min; 

d) Weight of the pump set; 

e) Year of manufacture; and 

f) Instructions for operation of the pump. 

♦Specification for suction hose of rubber for fire services. 
fSpecification for suction hose couplings for fire fighting ( second revision ). 
^Specification for colours for ready mixed paints and enamels ( third revision ). 
§Specification for enamel, synthetic, exterior (a undercoating, (b) finishing 
( first revision ). 



IS : 942 - 1982 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Fire Fighting Units Subcommittee, BDC 22 : 3 

Convener Representing 

ShriP. N. Ghosh Institution of Fire Engineers ( India), New Delhi 

Members 

Shri S. A. Chattopadhyay ( Alternate to 
Shri P. N. Ghosh ) 
Shri K. K. Das Gupta West Bengal Fire Services, Calcutta 

Shri V. P. Dewan Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Lt Col V. R. Banahati ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Gidwani Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. N. Pandit ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. S. D. Mehervanjee Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 

( Bombay Fire Brigade ), Bombay 
Shri V. B. Nikam ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. B. Menon Ministry ,of Home Affairs 

Col S. A. Mohile Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri A. K. Suri ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. H. Sethna Kooverji Devshi & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. T. Panjwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. L. Sharma Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( Delhi Fire 

Services ), Delhi 
Shri D. K. Sirkar Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd, Bareilly 

Shri S. Venkaswamy Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri B. V. Wagle Urban Development Public Health and Housing 

Department, Government of Maharashtra, 
Bombay 
Shri V. H. Madkaikar ( Alternate ) 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base Units 



Quantity 


Unit 


Length 


metre 


Mass 


kilogram 


Time 


second 


Electric current 


ampere 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


temperature 




Luminous intensity 


candela 


Amount of substance 


mole 


Supplementary Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Plane angle 


radian 


Solid angle 


steradian 


Derived Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Force 


newton 


Energy 


joule 


Power 


watt 


Flux 


weber 


Flux density 


tesla 


Frequency 


hertz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


Electromotive force 


volt 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 



Symbol 




m 




kg 




s 




A 




K 




cd 




mol 




Symbol 




rad 




sr 




Symbol 


Definition 


N 


1 N=lkg. m/s* 


J 


1 J-l N.m 


W 


1 W=U/s 


Wb 


1 Wb-lV.s 


T 


1 T=lWb/m* 


Hz 


1 Hz=l c/s (s-M 


S 


1 S-1A/V 


V 


1 V=1VV/A 


Pa 


1 Pa=lN/m* 



