**************** 






w^z 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 





**************** 



BLANK PAGE 




**n±rr 




u*> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 9604: 1994 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



t^T^q^r — fcrf^rfe 

( WrITzpftm ) 

Indian Standard 

TUNGSTEN-INERT GAS (TIG) WELDING 
EQUIPMENT — SPECIFICATION 

( First Revision ) 

UDC 621791754'2903 



©BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Ju[ y 1994 Price Group 2 



Electric Welding Equipment Sectional Committee, ETD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by Electric Welding Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the. Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1980. In this revision the scope has been enlarged to cover pulsing 
units, gas regulators, flowmeters and gas mixers used for TIG welding-The Committee felt that the need 
for inclusion of 'high frequency insulation resistance test for torch for safety of the operator' will be 
included later on when details of the test are available. 

Tungsten-inert gas (TIG) welding is that in which an arc plasma from a non-consumable tungsten 
electrode radiates heat on to the work surface, to create a weld puddle in the protective atmosphere 
provided by a flow of inert shielding gas; heat must then travel by conducting from this puddle to melt the 
desired depth of weld. 

As the arc voltages experienced in TIG welding are lower than those of manual arc welding, the 
corresponding load voltages would be lower for TIG power sources. This necessitated changes in the 
requirements stipulated in the standards for welding power sources, in order to make them applicable for 
TIG process.The modifications, therefore, which are necessary as far as the requirements of power sources 
are concerned, are brought out in 6. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from Doc : ISO/TC 44.SC4 
(Secretariat -20 1975 'Draft proposal for revision of ISO R 700 — Rating of power sources for manual 
metal arc welding with covered electrodes and for TIG process' issued by the International Organisation 
for Standardization. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 9604 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

TUNGSTEN-INERT GAS (TIG) WELDING 
EQUIPMENT — SPECIFICATION 



(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard lays down the general and safety . 
requirements and test methods for TIG welding 
equipment. 

1.2 Requirements for ancillary equipment (see 2.2 
to 2.11) for TIG welding process are generally 
covered in this standard. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 In addition to the definitions given in the 
relevant standards on welding power sources, the 

. following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Welding Torch 

A current carrying device which can accommodate 
non-consumable tungsten electrode (s) around 
which an inert shielding gas flows from a nozzle at 
the exit and of the device. 

2.2 Arc Initiation Unit 

High voltage high frequency injection in the weld- 
ing circuit to enable an arc to be struck between the 
tungsten electrode and the workpiece without ac- 
tual physical contact. For AC welding, this unit may 
be required to be continuously switched on for 
maintenance of the arc, whereas for DC welding, it 
may be switched off once the arc is established. In 
some modern designs, use of HF units (either 
separate or integral with power sources) is totally 
dispensed with by use of special electronic circuitry 
which reduce the current flowing through the 
tungsten electrode to a trickle, when touched to the 
workpiece, irrespective of current setting. The arc 
is initiated as soon as the torch is lifted and the set 
current is available. These are known as 'touch- 
start' and 'lift-arc' techniques. 

2.3 HF Filter 

The arc initiation unit as described in 2.2 is of high 
voltage, high frequency type, and HF filter circuit 
should be fitted to prevent damage to the power 

source. 

2.4 DC Suppression 

To block or reduce the dc component generated in 
the welding current while welding metals having 



refracTory oxides, like Al, Mg, etc, and their alloys, 
with conventional ac power source. In ac power 
sources, where wave balancing facilities are avail- 
able, no separate dc suppression unit is required. 

2.5 Pre- and Post-Gas 

To initiate the shielding gas flow before the welding 
operation and to prolong it after the arc is 

extinguished. 



2.6 Slope-up 

It implies a gradual increase in the current while 
starting. 

2.7 Slope-down 

It implies gradual decay in current at the end of a 
weld. 

2.8 Pulsing 

If the power source is fully thyristorized or transis- 
torized, it is often possible to pulse the current to 
achieve thermal pulsing of the arc. This function is 
either built-in the power source or is provided by a 
separate pulsing unit. 

2.9 Gas Regulator 

A gas regulator is a mechanical device for reducing 
pressure automatically to a safe working level and 
controlling the volumetric flow of the compressed 
gas. 

2.10 Flowmeter 

This is used to control and monitor the flow of 
shielding gases. 

2.11 Gas Mixer 

When a mixture of two or more gases is used, the 
mixture is made in a mixing chamber metering the 
separate gases. 

2.12 Type Tests 

Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
specification. These are intended to prove the 
general qualities and design of a given type of weld- 
ing equipment. 



IS 9604 : 1994 



2.13 Routine Tests 

Tests carried out on each welding equipment to 
check requirements which are likely to vary during 
production. 

3 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 Welding Torch 

3.1.1 Torch shall be air, water or gas cooled. 

NOTE — In case of water cooled torches, in the event of 
water failure, there protection should be provided to prevent 
damage to the TIG torch. 

3.1.2 Torch shall be so designed that welding can 
be carried out with a minimum of effort by the 
operator and the tungsten electrode is housed 
concentrically with the gas nozzle. 

3.1.3 The handle shall be so positioned as to 
prevent any inconvenience to the operator's hand. 

3.1.4 Handles shall be constructed of or encased in 
insulating materials or they shall be insulated from 
the live parts. 

3.1.5 The construction of handles shall be such 
that dirt which is likely to cause danger of electric 
shock cannot lodge in joints, holes or other 
crevices, and that the live ends of pins or screws 
cannot become exposed in use. 

3.1.6 All exposed metal shall be insulated from 
current carrying parts. 

3.1.7 The terminals for electrical connections shall 
be of adequate size so as to allow connections of 
cables of appropriate rating without getting over- 
heated under normal conditions of use. 

3.1.8 The risk of damage due to continuous flexing 
of cables and hoses at the point of entry to the gun 
shall be kept to a minimum. 

3.1.9 Parts shall be adequately rated to prevent 
excessive temperature rise. 

NOTE — Because of the wide variation in equipment and 
processes, it is not at present practicable to specify tempera- 
ture rise tests. 

3.1.10 Torch shall be able to direct an adequate 
flow of shielding under all conditions of welding for 
which the torch is designed. 

3.1.11 The shielding gas and/or coolant flow to the 
torch shall be controlled by suitable means. 

3.1.12 Gas nozzles shall be readily replaceable. 

3.1.13 All parts affected by change of electrode size 
shall be easily replaceable and shall be permanently 
identifiable for the electrode size. 

3.1.14 The voltage to earth of torch mounted 
controls shall not exceed 110 V. 



3.2 Cables and Hoses 

3.2.0 The design and construction of cables and 
hoses shall satisfy the following requirements. 

3.2.1 Cables and hoses attached to the torch shall 
be of adequate capacity to carry : 

a) the welding current, 

b) the shielding gas, 

c) the cooling liquid or gas (if used), and 

d) the voltage and high-frequency. 

3.2.2 Cables, hoses and/or complete assemblies 
shall be readily replaceable. 

3.3 Arc Initiation Unit 

3.3.0 The unit is basically a spark gap type oscil- 
lator comprising a low-powered iron-cored trans- 
former with HV secondary winding, a spark gap, a 
high voltage capacitor and an air-core/open core 
(ferrite) output transformer. 

This unit may be remote controlled either through 
a separate foot-switch or a switch mounted on the 
torch itself. 

3.3.1 The unit should be capable of delivering the 
following output requirements: 

a) RF frequency range (1/3 to say 3 Mega 
cycles) 

b) Rated welding current 

c) HF injection. 

3.3.2 The unit should be housed in such an 
enclosure so that the following requirements are 
achieved: 

a) Easy access to the components for main- 
tenance. 

b) A transparent window to observe spark. 

c) Clearly marked terminals for power supply, 
torch work. 

3.4 DC Suppressor Unit 

3.4.0 For conventional ac power sources, this is 
basically a bank of capacitor housed in a sheet steel 
Construction. It is used in series with arc initiation 
unit & HF filter for disposal of superficial refractory 
films during TIG welding of aluminium, mag- 
nesium and their alloys with ac power source (also 
refer 2.4). 

3.4.1 The sheet metal housing/enclosure should 
have robust positive gripped terminals to enable it 
to be connected in series with arc initiation unit. 

3.4.2 The capacitor value and characteristic should 
be adequate to achieve the function mentioned 
in 3.4.0. 



IS 9604 : 1994 



3.5 Pulsing Unit 

3.5.0 The design of separate pulsing unit of pulsa- 
tion system unit in the power sources should have 
the following considerations: 

a) the arc current should alternate between 
two levels (normally designated as back- 
ground current and peak current). These 
levels should be independently adjustable. 

b) the duration of these currents should also be 
adjustable independently. 

3.6 Gas Regulator 

3.6.0 The four principal elements of a pressure 
reducing regulator are: 

a) A valve element consisting of a nozzle and a 
mating seat member. 

b) An adjusting screw which controls the 
thrust of the bonnet spring. 

c) A bonnet spring which transmits the thrust 
created by the adjusting screw to a 
diaphragm. 

d) A diaphragm connected with the matting 
seat member. 

3.6.1 There are two basic types of pressure reduc- 
ing regulators: 

a) The stem type (inverse or negative type) 

b) The nozzle type (direct acting or, positive 
type) 

3.6.2 Either of these two types or a combination 
may be used in two stage regulators. 

3.7 Flowmeter 

3.7.1 A flowmeter should consist of : 

a) A manual throttle valve for gas flow adjust- 
ment. 

b) A tube calibrated for the specific gas being 
used so that the operator can set the rate of 
flow. 

3.7.2 A regulator-flow meter combination can be 
used to step down high pressure in the cylinder to 
a lower working pressure and measure the outflow. 

3.8 Gas Mixers 

3.8.0 Here in the mixing chamber the gases are 
combined and the mixture discharges through a 
single port. 

4 MARKING 

4.1 Each piece of tungsten-inert gas welding 
equipment shall be legibly and indelibly marked 
with the following: 

a) Indication of source of manufacture, 

b) Manufacture type — designation and serial 
No., 



c) Rated voltage, 

d) Rated welding current, 

e) Cooling medium, and 

f) Insulation class. 

4.1.1 BIS Certification Marking — The product 
may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

4.1.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules made thereunder. The details 
of conditions under which the licence for the use of 
Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from -the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 

5 TESTS 

5.0 Classification of Tests 
5.0.1 Type Tests 

The following shall constitute type tests: 

a) Insulation resistance test (see 5.1) 

b) High voltage test {see 5.2), and 

c) Performance test {see 5.3). 

5.0.2 Criteria for Approval 

One sample shall be submitted for testing. The 
sample shall comply with the requirement of tests 
given in 5.0.1. 

5.0.3 In case of failure in one or more type tests, 
the testing authority shall call for fresh samples not 
exceeding two samples and subject them to the 
test(s) in which failure occurred. If, in the repeat 
test(s) no failure occurs, the tests may be con- 
sidered to have been satisfied. 

5.0.4 Routine Tests 

The tests given in 5.0.1 (a) and (b) shall be carried 
out as routine tests. 

5.1 Insulation Resistance Test 

The insulation resistance shall be measured with dc 
voltage of 500 Volte applied for a sufficient time for 
the reading of the indicator to become practically 
steady, such voltage being taken from an inde- 
pendent source generated in the measuring instru- 
ment. The insulation resistance shall be not less 
than 2 megaohms. When carrying out this test for 
torch, the surface of the handle shall be wrapped 
securely in metal foil to within 12 mm of the ends 
of handle, the voltage applied between the 
electrode housing and the foil. 

5.2 High Voltage Test 

The test shall be carried out after the insulation 
resistance test {see 5.1). The torch shall be capable 
of withstanding voltage of 2 000 V rms at 50 Hz. 



IS 9604 : 1994 



NOTES 

1 Control or protective devices, if any, shall be disconnected 
during the test. 

2 At the time of repeating the high voltage test, 75 percent 
of the full voltage shall be applied. 

5.3 Performance Test 

The criteria for assessing performance is under 
consideration. However, for the time being the 
evaluation of performance requirements shall be a 
matter of agreement between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser. 

6 POWER SOURCE 

6.1 The following Indian Standards on metal arc 
welding power sources are available: 

IS 1851 : 1975 Specification for single operator 
type arc welding transformers 
(second revision) 

IS 2635 : 1975 Specification for dc electric weld- 
ing generators (second revision) 

IS4559 : 1968 Specification for single operator 
rectifier type dc arc welding power 
source 

IS 6008 : 1971 Specification for single operator 
ac/dc arc welding power source 



These power sources are suitable for the TIG weld- 
ing process excepting the following changes in the 
requirements: 

a) Minimum hand welding current shall not 
exceed 30 percent of the rated current. 

b) Maximum hand welding current as given in 
3.4.2 of IS 1851 : 1975 shall not be applicable 
for TIG welding equipment. 

c) The formula for welding current welding 
load voltage shall be: 

V- 10 + 0.04 1 (up to 34V at 600 A & above) 

where V= 14 + 0.02 1 (Min 16V) 

Vvs, the load voltage, and 
/ is the load current. 

d) Starting Voltage — In power sources having 
starting voltage circuit, the starting voltage 
shall be generated at the time of switching 
on to ease the starting of arc and shall not 
exceed 110 V. 

6.2 Calibration 

A separate calibration or calibrated chart shall be 
provided with power sources when normal MMA 
power source not fully drooping or vertical volt- 
amp characteristic is used for TIG welding. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
•certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such a review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ETD 21 ( 3672 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 33i 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, VJ.P. Road, Maniktola f 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 j. 37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 J 53 38 43, 53 16 40 

53 23 84 



{ 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 J 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

235 15 19, 235 23 15 



{ 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 430093 1632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



