**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 11858 (1986): Handle grip for power tiller [FAD 11: 
Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS;lia58sl9BS 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
HANDLE GRIP FOR POWER TILLER 



UDC 631-312-3076:S2l-229-212 



® Cepyriglit 1987 

RIIREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
«An"k D..AYAN%BA..A..UR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

Gr 1 



IS : 11858 - 1986 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
HANDLE GRIP FOR POWER TILLER 

Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, AFDC 52 

Chairman Representing 

Prof M. M. Mehta Escorts Limited, Faridabad; and Indian Society 

of Agricultural Engineers, New Delhi 
Members 

Dr Ripdaman Singh C Alter- Escorts Limited, Faridabad 

nate I to Prof M. M. Mehta ) 
Da K. N. Singh ( Alternate II Indian Society of Agricultural Engineers, 
to Prof M. M. Mehta ) New Delhi 

DrA. Alam Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New 

Delhi 
Shri a. V. Alexander Escorts Tractors Limited, Faridabad 

Shri a. JiNDAL ( Alternate ) 
Shri Bhupendra National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing 

Federation of India Limited, New Delhi 
Shri A. K. Chakravarty National Bank for Agricultural and Rural 

Development, Bombay 
Shri Chandra Mohan Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar 

Shri G. S. Rihal (Alternate I ) 
Shri S. S.Gkewal( Alternate II) 
Shri N. C. Gupta Auto Tractors Ltd, Pratapgarh 

Shri S. K. Lamba Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

Industries ) ( Ministry of Industry and 
Cornpany Affairs ), New Delhi 
Shri G. N. Mehta Gujarat Tractors Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri G. C. Patel {Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mishra Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing 

Institute f. Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development ) ( Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation ), Budni 
Shri R. S. Dass (Alternate ) 

Dr V. K. Mittal Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

DrR. B. Ram (Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Mudhar HMT Limited (Tractor Division ), Pinjore 



Shri G. B. Lal (Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



(g> Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in Dart by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11858 -1986 

( Continued from pnge 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri H. M. Mutta Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. V. Venkateswaran { Alternate \ ) 
Shri A. R. Sonalkar ( Alternate II ) 
Shri A. T. Nahender * VST Tillers Tractors Limited, Bangalore 

Shri V. Prashant Rao ( Alternate I ) 
Shri K. ChandrasekhaR Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Shri R. Nigam Central Mechanical Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shri K. N. Gaur (Alternate ) 
DrT.P. Ojha Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering 

(ICAR ), Bhopal 
Shri J . P rasad^ (^ Alten^ate ) 
ShriS. B. Pandya National Farmers Organization, New Delhi 

Shri R. N. Patil Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

( Department of Agriculture and Co- 
operation ), New Delhi 
Shri V. V. Patil Bharat Krishak Samaj, New Delhi 

Shri Hudson Peter Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation Limited, 

Ernakulam 
Shri John Mathm { Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Prabhakar Bharat Earthmovers Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri C. G angadharai AH (Alternate ) 
Shri M. Ramaswamy Tractors and Farm Equipment Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Ranganathan ( Ater«a?e / ) 
Shri G. Venkataraman (Alternate II ) 
DrS. Satyamurty Eicher Goodearth Limited, New Delhi 

Shri Sunil Kumar ( Alternate } 
ShriUdayan Sen Directorate General of Technical Development 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Shri V. P. Srivastava Department of Agriculture, Government of 

Bihar 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, BIS ( Ex-offkio Member ) 



Director ( Agci & Food 



Secretary 

SriRi R. N. Sharma 
J oint Director ( Agri & Food ), BIS 



Power Tillers and their Accessories Subcommittee, AFDC 52 : 1 

Convener 

Shri R. N. Patil Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

(Department of Agriculture and Co- 
operation ), New Delhi 
Members 
Shri Annapurna Prasad National Engineering Co ( Madras ) Pvt Ltd, 

Madras 
Shri K. Ramachandran ( Alternate I) 
Shri K. S. Raghavan (Alternate II) 



( Continued on page 8 ) 



IS : 11858 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
HANDLE GRIP FOR POWER TILLER 

0. FOREWORD 

. 1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 30 October 1986, after the draft finalized by the Agricultural 
Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Handle grip of the power tiller is a component which comes in 
contact with the operator's grip. To facilitate interchangeability of the 
grip in various makes of the power tiller, this standard has been 
formulated. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies material, dimensions and other requirements 
of handle grip for power tiller. 

2. MATERIAL 

2.1 The grip shall be made of synthetic rubber or a combination of 
synthetic and natural rubber, compounded and vulcanized. It shall not 
contain any reclaimed or vulcanized waste. 

3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The dimensions of the grip shall be as given in Fig. 1. 

4.PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 The rubber used for grip shall conform to the requirements given in 
Table I. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



15:11858-1986 



Es^S^SSS^^^SSS^Ss 



S5SSSSSSS 




^i 




I 2 8 m i n 



r" 

32 :o 5 
1_ 



•— 35min 



€ 



n 



3- 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Handle Grip 



4.2 Tubing cut from the grip when subjected to the test prescribed 
under 6.4 shall net show any sign of cracking or other evidence of 
failure of the stretched part. 

5. OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 The colour and design on the surface of the grip shall be as agreed 
to betw een the purchaser and the supplier. 

5.2 Minimum 3 longitudinal projections shall be provided for proper 
gripping. 

5.3 Circular grooves, 4 in number, shall be provided at a minimum pitch 
of 19 mm ( see A in Fig. 1 ) for proper finger grip. 

5.4 The grip shall be homogeneous in composition, shall be adequately 
vulcanized, evenly and smoothly finished on inner tubing. The com- 
position shall be free from irritants and have no known injurious effect 
on person with whom it may come in contact. 



IS : 11858 - 1986 





TABLE 1 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS OF RUBBER 
HANDLE GRIP 


USED FOR 




( Clause 4.1 ) 




SL 
No. 


Characteristic 


VALUE 
Before 
Ageing 


Maximum Change 

FROM THE Original 

Value After 

ACCFI FRATED AGEINQ 

AT 70±1°CFOR 

168 Hours in 

Air Oven 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


i) 


Tensile strength, MN/m^.Afj/i 


100 


^25 percent 


ii) 


Elongation at break, percent, M i n 


400 


-25 Percent 


iii) 


Percent elongation under a tensile 
stress of 2 800 kN/ni* of original 


Between 
100 and 250 


— 



area of cross section of test 
piece 

iv) Tension set ( at 200 percent elonga- 
tion ), percent. Max 

v) pH of water extract 

vi) Extractable colour 



10 

7 ±0-5 

No colour or 
precipitate 
shall be 

formed but 
faint turbi- 
dity (to 
the extent 
of slight 
tr an s lu - 
c e n c e ) 
may be 
permitted 



5.5 The grip shall be free from pin-holes, pits, cracks, crevices, grooves 
and other defects. 



6. TEST METHODS 

6.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, 
all tests shall be carried out within 3 months of the date of receipt of 
the material by the purchaser. 

6.2 Test Pieces — It is not possible to carry out conveniently some of 
the tests on the grip itself. In such cases, tests shall be carried out on 
press cured slabs made from the same mix and vulcanized as closely as 
possible to the same degree as the grip. The number of slabs to be 
provided with the lot shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier. 

5 



IS : 11858 - 1986 

6.3 Physical Properties 

6.3.1 Tensile Strength and Elongation at Break — Carry out the test 
on dumb-bell test pieces cut out of press cured slabs in accordance with 
the method prescribed in IS : 3400 ( Pzrt 1 )-1977*. 

6.3.2 Accelerated Ageing — Subject dumb-bell test pieces to ageing 
at 70 ± I'C for 168 hours in an air-oven or a cell oven in accordance 
with the method prescribed in IS : 3400 ( Part 4 )- 19781 and test it 
according to 6.3.1. 

6.3.3 Elongation Under a Fixed Tensile Stress — This test shall be 
carried out as indicated in 6.3.1 on the grip tubing itself and the 
percentage elongation is measured when a tensile stress of 2 800 kN/m^ 
of the original area of cross-section of test piece has been applied. 

6.3.4 Tension Set — This test shall be carried out on the grip tubing 
in accordance with IS : 3400 ( Part 13 )-]983t 

6.3.5 pH of Water Extract — This test shall be carried out in 
accordance with Appendix A. 

6.3.6 Extractable Colour — Carry out this test in accordance with 
Appendix B. 

6.4 Resistance to Ageing Under Tension — The cut end of a piece of 
tubing of the grip shall be fitted over a glass tube of external diameter 
40 to 50 percent greater than the internal diameter of the rubber tubing 
and the hole subjected to accelerated ageing for 168 hours at 70 ± 1°C 
as prescribed in 6.3.2. 

7. MARKING AND PACKING 

7.1 Marking —Each grip shall be legibly marked with the manufac- 
turer's name and/or recognized trade-mark, batch or code number. 

7.1.1 The grip may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made there- 
under. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of 
that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. 
Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a 
licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



*Methods of test for vulcanized rubbers: Part I Tensile stress-strain properties 
( first revision ). 

tMethods of test for vulcanized rubbers: Part 4 Accelerated ageing (first 
revision ). 

^Methods of test for vulcanized rubbers: Part 13 Tension set (first revision ). 



IS : 11858 - 1986 

7.2 Packing — The grip shall be packed as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

8. SAMPLING FOR LOT ACCEPTANCE 

8.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, 
the sampling of the grip for lot acceptance shall be done in accordance 
with 3 of IS : 7201-1974*. 



APPENDIX A 
( Clause 6.3.5 ) 

DETERMINATION OF pH OF WATER EXTRACT 

A-l. PROCEDURE 

A-I.l Cut 5 grips into 2 mm pieces. Autoclave the pieces for 5 minutes 
at a pressure of 40 to 50 kN/m* with 200 ml of water. Discard the first 
extract and repeat the process with another 50} ml of water for 
40 minutes. Decant the extract, cool and determine the pH. with a 
meter. 



APPENDIX B 
( Clause 6.3.6) 

TEST FOR EXTRACTABLE COLOUR 

B-l, PROCEDURE 

B-I.l Cut 5 grips into 10 mm pieces and mix them. Weigh about 20 g 
of these pieces. Autoclave them with 100 ml of water under a steam 
pressure of 100 to 135 kN/m^ at a temperature of 120 to 125°C for 
33 minutes. Cool and examine the extracted solution. 



*Method of sampling of agricultural machinery and tractors. 

7 



IS : 11858- 1986 

( Continued from page 2) 

Members Representing 

Shri Balram Singh Bihar State Agro Industries Development 

Corporation Ltd, Patna 
Shri A. P. Verma ( Alternate) 
Shri Chandra Mohan . Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar 

Shri G. S. Ribai.( Alternate I) 
Shri S. S. Grewal ( Alternate U ) 
Shri R. L. Dass Directorate of Agriculture, Government of 

Assam, Guwahati 
Executive Engineer Directorate of Agriculture, Government of 

West Bengal, Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Lamba Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

Industries) ( Ministry of Industry and 
Company Affairs ), New Delhi 
Shri S. K. Mishra Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing 

Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development ) ( Department of 
Agriculture and Co-oneration j, Budni 
Shri R. S. Dass ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. T. Nahender VST Tillers Tractors Limited, Bangalore 

Shri V. Prashant Rao ( Alternate I ) 
Shri K. Chandrasekhar Rao (Alternate n) 
Dr T. p. Ojha Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering 

(ICAR), Bhopal 
Shri A. C. Varshney ( Alternate ) 
SHRIJ. Pa0HI Directorate of Agriculture, Government of 

Orissa. Bhubaneshwar 
Shri V. A. Patil Tractor Training Centre, Hissar 

Shri R. Tiwari( Alternate ) 
Shri Hudson Peter Kerala A^ro Machinery Corporation Limited,. 

Ernakulam 
Shri John Mathai ( Alternate ) 
Shri Udayan Sen Directorate General of Tec hnical Development 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Dr L. N. Shukla Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 



