••***•*********• 



* i^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 11538 (1986) : Code of practice for design and 
installation of farm drainage pumping plant [FAD 
Irrigation and Drainage Systems] 



gAIJif i::^J^^X^I f JH^aKN^j^gg^TSS^a^TTrS^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen'' 




a?a£im>KS^!5?f'>s^^^ 




BLANK PAGE 




.-^iiSS 




^'ISSJJ 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 11B3fl- 1986 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF 

FARM DRAINAGE PUMPING PLANTS 



UDC 631'621'005 J 006-76 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVA>J, P BAHVlJi/K. SHAH /AIjAR MaRO 

NEW Oi^tHI 110002 

Ct 4 >"' 1986 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF 

FARM DRAINAGE PUMPING PLANTS 

Composition of the Farm Drainage Sectional Committee, AFDG 47 

Chairman Representing 

Db a. M. Michael Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 

Members 

Dr a. K. Bhattaoharya ( Alternate to 
Dr A. M. Michael ) 
Dr M, G. Agarwal Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 

Db Bhupal Sinoh Tocklai Experimental Station, Jorhat 

Db H. S. Ghauhan G. B. Pant University of Agricultural and 

Technology, Pantnagar 

Db Sew a Ram ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer PWD Irrigation (North), Government of Karnataka, 

Belgaum 

Superintending Engineer 
( Designs ) ( Alternate ) 
Director Irrigation Research and Development, Pune 

Executive Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( FGM ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Shri V. S. Heqde Hulgul Group Cooperative Society, Sirsi 

Shbi N. G, Joshi Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. D. Khepar Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

Dr Sita Ram Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Pattabhi Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri A. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Dr H. Purnapuagnaohar University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore 

Dr R. K. Rat Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna 

Dr T. K. Sarkab Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta 

Shri G. K. Srinivasan Wavin India Limited, Madras 

Shhi K. R. Rang ar a JAN ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Vasudevan Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri B. P. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. PurnanaNdam, Director General, I SI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri R. N. Shabma 
Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



© Co0rigkt 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publicaticn is protected under the Indian C&pyrigkt Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF 

FARM DRAINAGE PUMPING PLANTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Farm 
Drainage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended to provide principles and practices useful 
to engineers in the planning and design of pumping plants for drainage 
of farm land. 

0,3 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been taken from 
ASAE EP 369-1974 'Design of agricultural drainage pumping plants,* 
issued by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, USA. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated 
expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the guidelines for design and installation of 
pumping plants for farm drainage purposes. 

Note — This standard does not cover the pumping plant for deep well drainage. 

2. CLASSIFICATION OF WATER STORAGE SYSTEM 

2.1 Water storage system for pumping plants shall be classified as follows: 

a) Open Storage Tank — For collecting and temporarily storing both 
surface and ground water. 

b) Sumps — For storing ground water only. 
♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

2 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

Note — Under the monsoonic rainfall situation, surface drainage component 
would be much more than the subsurface one. On the other hand, during post mon- 
soon period, pumping requirement would essentially consist of subsurface component 
and capacity of pumps would be much lower. A drainage pumping plant under such 
situtation would require design of two pumping plants; larger one to meet monsoon 
requirement and smaller one for post monsoon period. 

3. PLANNING OF AREA TO BE PUMP DRAINED 

3.1 The drainage system of the area served by the pumping plants should 
be planned to meet both drainage needs of the area as well as efficient 
operation of the pumps. 

3.1.1 Runoff from high ground, when removable by gravity flow to a 
suitable outlet, should be excluded from the pumped area by diversion 
around the area or by channelling through the area. 

3.1.2 Protection of pumped area against overflow or back water from 
the outlet should be provided by perimeter dikes designed against over- 
topping, wave action, erosion and instability of high water stages. Direct 
disposal of stored water by gravity in the storage reservoir could be made 
by the pipe outlets through the embankment. These outlets should be 
protected by gates to prevent backflow during the high exterior water 
stages and permit outflow during low water stages. This would reduce 
load on pumping system. 

3.1.3 The drainage system of the pumped area should provide the 
following: 

a) An optimum storage tank/sump water stage commensurate with 
the designed depth of water table. 

b) In case of surface drainage system, use of undeveloped swamp or 
low land near or adjoining the pumping plant to supplement 
tank/sump water storage for reduction of the pumping rate. 

c) Drainage channels discharging water to the water tank/sump 
should be suitably designed to avoid channel scour. 

3.1.4 Pumping plant location should be at or near the point of lowest 
elevation of the pumped area and accessible to an adjacent outlet. Site 
adjustments should be made as necessary to provide foundations without 
excessive use of piling, freedom from flooding of operating equipment, 
ready access to fuel or power supply and protection from vandalism. 

3.2 The outlet channel from the pumped area shall be adequate for 
handling the discharge. If it is to discharge in an irrigation canal system, 
the apphcable statutory requirements should be followed. 

4. PUMPING PLANT CAPACITY 

4.1 The pumping rate and frequency should be determined from the 
drainage requirement and temporary storage. 

3 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

4.1.1 The drainage requirement wouJd vary with climate ^ topography, 
soils, land use, types of crops and cost effectiveness of the system. Such 
requirements may be expressed as a coefficient or quantity of water to be 
removed per unit of area per unit of time. Drainage coefficient should 
be computed on the basis of local data ( see also 4 of IS : 10907-1984* ). 

4.1.2 Pumping plant capacity for surface and/or subsurface drainage 
should be based on surface and/or subsurface drainage designed 
coefficients respectively. 

5, PUMP SELECTION AND INSTALLATION 

5.1 The selection of the drainage pump would usually be based on 
designed discharge and total head as well as type of power available. 

5.2 Pump performance varies with head, speed, discharge and power re- 
lationships. The effect of these factors on efficiency of the pumping 
operation may be obtained from pump manufacturer's performance 
curves or pump characteristics for each kind and size of pump made. 

5.2.1 Cavitation is caused as a result of absolute pressure dropping 
below the vapour pressure of the liquid which passes through suction and 
impeller inlet. It results in pump vibration and noise, reduces pump 
discharge and efficiency and causes pump deterioration. Performance 
curves are useful for guidance in making proper selection and to ensure 
proper operation without cavitation. These curves would help to avoid 
the following at the time of pump selection: 

a) Heads much higher than those at optimum efficiency. 

b) Capacities much lower than capacity at peak efficiency, 

c) Suction lifts abnormally higher, or net positive suction heads 
( NPSH ) lower than the rated for the pump. 

d) Speeds higher than those recommended for the pump. 

5.3 Total head ( //t ) is sum of static head ( H ), velocity head ( Hv ) and 
friction head ( Ht ) and is total energy that a pump should impart at 
designed discharge. 

5.3.1 Static head or lift, is the vertical distance between the free water 
surface at the suction side of the pump and the free water surface at the 
discharge pipe side of the pump when discharge pipe is submerged, or at 
the centre of the discharge pipe when discharge pipe is not submerged. 
For the purpose of designing, H is to be considered from the lowest level 
on the suction side to the highest water level on the discharge pipe side. 



'Code for design of farm drainage tile or pipe system. 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

5.3.2 Velocity head ( i/y ) in m, for various pump sizes and capacities 
can be calculated as follows: 

where 

V = column velocity at discharge end, m/s; 
Q^ = pump capacity, m^/s; 

D = diameter, m; and 
g = acceleration due to gravity. 

5.3.3 When water or any other liquid moves through a pipe line, the 
latter offers some resistance to the flow. This resistance depends on the 
diameter, length, type and condition of the pipe and its fittings and 
velocity of flow. The values of head loss due to friction in pipes may be 
obtained on the basis of IS : 2951 ( Part 1 )-1965*. Head loss due to 
friction for PVG pipes may be obtained from the supplier. 

5.3*3.1 When calculating pipe losses allowances should be included 
for tees, bends, valves, and other fittings and obstructions in a particular 
pipe line. The values can be obtained from IS : 2951 ( Part 2 )-1965t 
and added to the value obtained for straight pipes ( see 5.3.3 ). 

5.4 Size of pump ( diameter of the discharge pipe at the pump outlet ) 
can be calculated on the basis of the following formula: 

D= 1-13 10^ 

where 

D ~ size of the pump, m; 

Q, = pump capacity, m^/s; and 

V = column velocity, m/s. 

5.4.1 The column velocity of a pump may range between 2*0 to 3 7 m/s, 
however 3 m/s may be used as an initial estimate in developing the 
pumping plant design. 

5.5 The discharge pipe should be of adequate capacity and water tight. 



♦Recommendation for estimation of flow of liquids in closed conduits: Part 1 Head 
loss in straight pipes due to frictional resistance. 

tRecommendation for estimation of flow of liquids in closed conduits: Part 2 Head 
loss in valves and fittings. 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

5.5.1 The discharge pipe may be gradually enlarged away from 
the pump by several pipe sizes to decrease velocity head and thereby 
decrease the power cost. 

Note — The friction losses in the discharge pipe can be reduced greatly by use of 
larger diameter pipe, usually 5 to 15 cm larger than the pump discharge flange. 
The transition can be made through a short expanding section of pipe at the pump 
flange, usually over a length of 60 cm ( see Fig 1 ). 



■\ P 



d| 






Fig. 1 Diagram Indicating Use of Larger Pipe to 
Reduce Frictfon Loss 

5.5.2 Submerged discharges are recommended to keep heads as low as 
possible. A non-return or flap valve should be used at the pipe end to 
prevent backflow through the pump. Erosion protection from discharg- 
ing water should be considered when outletting into a earthen channel. 

5.5.3 A siphon may be used whenever drainage water is pumped over 
a dike for both reduction in total head and reduction in power cost. 

5.5.3.1 Priming head shall be greater than operating head. The 
pump should be able to deliver a full cross section of water over the 
crest at a velocity over i'5 m/s. However, a limit on maximum lift of 
the siphon and maximum velocity of flow at the crest should be main- 
tained to prevent reducing inside pressure at the crest to avoid cavitation. 
Discharge pipe should be sufficiently submerged to prevent air entrain- 
ment. The pipe section at the crest should have sufficient strength to 
resist external atmospheric pressure. 

5.5.3.2 A siphon breaker shall be installed at the highest point in 
pipeline to prevent reverse flow during a power interruption ( see 
Fig. 2 ). The siphon breaker would be actuated when power stops or 
flow reverses. The non-return flap valve at the end of the discharge 
pipe may serve in lieu of a siphon breaker for small pumping plants. 

5.5.3.3 An air release valve is required to insure smooth priming of 
the siphon. This is preferably installed at the top of the bend outlet of 
the discharge pipe and near the water surface. 



IS ; 11538 - 1965 

5«6 Typical drainage pump installations and head relationships that 
should be considered in their design is shown in Fig. 2. In installation, 
guidance may be taken from IS : 9694 ( Part 2 )-1980*. 



LENGTH OF 
DIS CHARGE ^ p, 




HIGH WATER LEVEL 
PUMPING VMTER LEVEL 

LOW WATER LEVEL 



Fig. 2 Typical Drainage Pump Installation — Contd 



*Code of practice for selection, installation, operation and maintenances of 
horizontal centrifugal pumps for agricultural purposes: Part 2 Installation. 



00 



VACUUM BREAKER 



AIR ESCAPE VALyE 



A OUTSIDE DiA OF 
DISCHARGE PIPE 



S AVEPAGE SIPHON HEAD 







CO 



Fjg. 2 Typical Drainage Pump iNSTAtLATioNs 



[S : 11538 - 1986 

6. STORAGE 

6.1 The volume of drainage runoff to be stored in the tank/sump and 
auxiliary areas will vary from a maximum expected total runoff of the 
designed storm to a minimum set by the pumping rate that would prevent 
excessive numbers of pump starts and stops by the power source. 

6.2 For manual operation of the pumps, pump starts may be limited to 
two per day for convenience of the operator. The volume of storage 
for two starts per day should be calculated on the basis of following 
formula: 

5= 11 235 d 

where 

S = volume of storage, m^, and 

Q, = pump capacity, m^/s. 

6.3 For automatic operation of pumps, cycles of operation should be 
limited to about 10 per hour. This occurs when inflow is equal to one- 
half of the pump capacity. Minimum storage may be calculated as 
follows: 

5 = 90 a 

where 

S — volume of storage, m^, and 

Q, " pump capacity, m^/s. 

7. TANK/SUMP DESIGN 

7.1 The shape, size, and position of the storage tank/sump with respect 
to the pump affect the efficiency of the pumping operation. 

7»2 Efficient pump operation requires special sump dimensions and 
pump clearance for smooth free flow of water in the suction intake pipe. 
Essential clearances are shown in Fig. 3. Sump water ieve] should be 
maintained above a minimum submergance of the pump suction intake 
and is determined by the greater of the following independent conditions: 

a) Water cover over the propeller should be sufficient to keep the 
pump self-priming. 

b) Net positive suction head ( NPSH ) should be as determined by 
the pump manufacturer to overcome cavitation. 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

c) Submergence, as usually recommended in manufacturers' 
literature for vortex suppression, determined approximately from 
the following formula, is maintained: 

^^ 1^ 

where 

K = Minimum submergence, m; 

Q, = Pump capacity, m^/s; and 

d = Pump suction bell diameter, m. 

d) Water storage capacity should be sufficient to prevent too frequent 
pump starts and stops. 

7.2.1 Sump dimensions for automatic operation can be varied to fit 
field condition and be in line with economical installation. Generally the 
sump should not be deep but large and shallow. For efficient automatic 
operation, storage depth of sump of 0'7 to I'O m below the bottom of the 
pump is recommended. Greater sump storage depth usually add to both 
installation and operation costs of the pumping plant. In some soils, 
wide and frequent fluctuations in water depth cause serious bank slough- 
ing and channel erosion. 

7.2.2 In case of large circular sump, rotational effect can be minimized 
by placing the pump near the wall. 

7.2.3 Floor of the approach channel and sump should be level for a 
distance of 5 times of diameters of the suction bell measured from the 
centreline of the pump. Approach velocity to the pump should be kept 
to 0*3 m/s unless the sump configuration has been checked for eddy 
currents by the manufacturer. Trash rack openings below minimum 
static water level should permit water passage at designed velocity. 

7.2.4 Side wall clearance of pumps should not be less than 24 times 
the diameter of the suction bell. 

7.2.5 Minimum clearance between adjacent pump centrelines should 
be the sum of the diameters of the suction bells. 

7.2.6 Back wall clearance of pumps may be reduced to that necessary 
for maintaining the pumps. 

7.2.7 Where ditch storage is provided, size of culvert inlet passing 
water to the sump should be sufficient to handle the maximum pump 
discharge at a velocity not exceeding 0'6 m/s. 

7.2.8 Drain tile outlets discharging into a sump should be located as 
far from the pump as possible so as to minimize effect of turbulence and 
air entrainment. 

10 



IS : 11538 - 1986 




■- ' ■ ■ 



Fig. 3 Recommended Sump Clearances 
8. POWER SOURCE 

8.1 Driving units for pump may be electric motors, diesel, petrol or gas 
fueled engines. Electric motors provide an economical installation when 
an adequate and reliable source of electric power is available close to the 
site at reasonable cost. Internal combustion engines should be used when 



11 



IS : 11538 - 1986 

the source of electric power is not reliable or is too costly. Use of 
alternate sources of energy like wind mills and solar energy should be 
considered wherever feasible. 

8.2 Electric power is convenient for pump drainage operation and easily 
adapted to automatic operation. Motors and controls should conform to 
requirements of the relevant Indian Standards. 

8.3 Diesel and petrol engines may be adapted for variation in speed 
over a broad range and are limited only by the range of critical speeds 
which produce dangerous torsional vibrations. 

9. DRIVE HEADS 

9.1 Drive heads are required to connect the power source to the pump. 
Loss of efficiency through these units range from none in direct connec- 
tions to about 5 percent in gear connections, and up to 10 percent in 
multiple belt connections. Proper direction of pump rotation should be 
maintained in all drive applications. 

9.1.1 Direct connected hollow shaft electric motors are used in a 
vertical position. 

9.1.2 A right angle gear drive is required to connect internal 
combustion engines to vertical pumps. 

9.1.3 Multiple V-belt heads and flat pulley heads are suited to small 
pump installations. 

10. AUTOMATIC OPERATION 

10.1 Automatic operation is used primarily with electrical power sources. 
Points to bie considered in applying such equipment are given below: 

a) Evaluation of added installation and maintenance costs against 
advantages sought. 

b) Possible lack of interest on the part of owner or operator if 
operation is too much automated. 

c) Controls compatible with state electricity rules. 

d) Possibility of moisture getting into or submergence of controls. 

e) Hazards of winter operation in cold climates, 

f) Greater requirement of operator vigilance and maintenance 
including lubrication and trash rack cleaning. 

10.2 Automatic controls are available for internal combustion engines 
such as an electric starting system for air cooled engines. Such systems 
are not readily adaptable to most pump installations. 

10.3 Protective controls shall be supplied for all installations. 

12 



IS: 11538 -1986 

10.3«1 Automatic or electric units should have safety shut-ofT against 
overload, lov^r voltage, and excessive heating. 

10.3.2 Internal combustion engines should have controls which protect 
against overheating, low oil pressure and excessive speed, 

10.3.3 Auxiliary warning devices, such as signal lights and siren on the 
pump house should be provided for attention of the owner or operator. 

11. HOUSING 

11.1 Type of housing for pumping plants depends upon importance and 
size of the plant, type of power used and plant location. 

11.1.1 Factors influencing need for housing are air temperature, wind, 
humidity, precipitation and flooding fuel storage, safety, vendalism and 
plant appearance, 

11.1.2 Materials used for housing should be fire resistant, waterproof, 
durable and easily maintained. 

11.1.3 Size of housing should be suflftcient for the containment and 
servicing of the equipment. Provision should be made for removing the 
pumps when required. 

12. TRASH RACKS 

12.1 Trash racks should be provided to prevent entry of floating debrish/ 
trash into sumps where damage to pumps might otherwiseoc cur. 

12*1.1 Trash racks should be set not less than 2 J times the suction bell 
diameter in front of the centerline of the pumps. 

12.1.2 Velocity of flow through the trash rack should not exceed 
06 m/s. 

12.1*3 Recommended trash rack bar spacing is as follows: 

Pump Diameter^ mm Bar Spacing, mm 

Up to 400 20 

450-600 25 to 38 

760-1 060 50 

1 060 and above 65 to 75 

12*1.4 Trash racks should be sloped so that cleaning by hand is easily 
done or they should be equipped with mechanical cleaner. 

12.1.5 Where trash racks are not feasible, galvanized basket strainers 
may be used on small pumps to prevent entry of small gravel and debris. 

13 



IN D i A N S T A N D A R D S 

ON 

FARM DRAINAGE 

IS: 

8967 ( Part 1 )-1978 Farm drainage clay tiles: Part 1 Tiles with open joints 

8967 ( Part 2 )-1983 Part 2 Perforated tiles with collar joints 

8968-1973 Farm drainage concrete tiles 

9271*1979 Farm drainage plastic pipes 

9633-1980 Farm drainage asbestos cement pipes 

9696-1980 Code of practice for installation for farm drainage tile or pipe system 

9979-1981 Code for design and laying of mineral filter for tile drain system 

10907-1984 Code for design of farm drainage tile or pipe drain system 



