**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11521 (1985): Cargo Handling Nets [TXD 9: Cordage] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 111521 - 19B5 

(Reaffirmed 2001) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
CARGO HANDLING NETS 



UDC 656(1 073 2 : 677 07fi'732:'736 : 677 404 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 11O0O2 

G,j Afay 1986 



IS : 11521 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CARGO HANDLING NETS 

Cordage Sectional Committee, TDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri R. M. Telang Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri K. N. Ramachandratst ( Alternate to 
Shri R. M. Telang ) 
Shri A. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
GoL A. K. Brattagharya Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
DEpaTY CfftEP Mechanical Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Engineer ( Marine ), North 
Eastern Rail\7ay, Patna 
Shri D. K. Dutta Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 

Shbi G. D. Ganjkhane Neomar Limited, Vadodara 

Shri T. N. Ghabru Ministry of Defence ( DPIN ) 

STO/JSO ( Chemical ) of 
GINS ( B ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri Sekhar Guha Eskaps ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta 

Shri N. B. Sengupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri Taher S. M. Khandan M. M. Tayebally, Calicut 

Shri Shabbir S. M. Khandan ( Alternate ) 
Capt S. B. Kundbbgi Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. Majumder Export Inspection Agency, Calcutta 

Shri G. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. G. Mathur Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri S. C. Gtjfta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Mehra Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri S. P. Chakraborty ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. N. Misra Gujarat Filaments Ltd, Vadodara 

Shbi G. N. Prabhu Coir Board, Ernakulam 

Shri V. Abdul Majeed ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. K, Rama Rao Rail India Technical and Economic Services Ltd, 

New Delhi 

Shri P. R. Mallick ( Alternate ) 

( Ctntinued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction i& whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11321 - 1985 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Gapt B. R. Rao The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay 

Representative The Ganges Rope Co Ltd, Howrah 

REPRESENTATIVE Indian Jute Industries* Research Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri NtRMAii IC SoMANi Indian Rope Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta 

Shri T. Bhattaoharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. G. Taneja Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ), 

New Delhi 
Shri R. VishvaNath ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kantilal G. Thanawala M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay 

Shri Madhukant G. Thanawala ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi R. I. MiDHA, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. R. Banerjee 
Joint Director ( Tex ), ISI 



IS: 11521 -1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CARGO HANDLING NETS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Cordage 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0.2 The safe use of cargo handling nets is of utmost importance from the 
user's point of view. The cargo handling nets are manufactured from 
only polyamide and polypropylene ropes as these ropes possess good 
shock absorption properties and are hence safe for cargo lifting purposes, 
whereas other synthetic fibre ropes, such as high density polyethylene 
ropes and natural fibre ropes are not suitable for manufacturing cargo 
handling nets due to the absence of desired shock absorption 
properties. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of cargo handling nets 
made from polyamide and polypropylene ropes and designed to lift 
material from and into ships, etc. Recommendations on the care of nets 
have been given in Appendix B of this standard. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

♦Rules for rounding oflf numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 11521 - 1985 

2.1 Mesh Cord — Cord or rope from which the mesh of the net is 
constructed. 

2.2 Border Cord — The cord or rope surrounding the net and determi- 
ning the overall dimensions of the net. 

2.3 Hands — The ropes attached to the border cord at the corners of 
the net by which the net is lifted. 

2.4 Mesh Side — The distance between two sequential knots or joints 
measured from centre to centre when the cord between these joints is 
fully extended, 

2.5 Nominal Size — The overall dimensions of the net when laid evenly 
on a fiat surface in a relaxed condition and without any tension on the 
border cords, 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The cargo lifting nets shall be made from man-made fibre ropes, 
either polyamide as per IS : 45712 ( Part 2 )-1983* or polypropylene rope 
as per special Grade of IS : 5175-19821* The choice of the material 
shall be determined by the circumstances in which the nets are to be 
used, the purpose and the prevailing conditions, etc. 

4. CONSTRUCTION 

4,1 Safe working loads are chosen in accordance with the following basic 
principles: 

a) The basic safety factor for polyamide ropes is 9 and the basic 
safety factor for polypropylene ropes is 6. 

b) The safe working load of a net has been calculated from the 
formula, as follows: 

_, „ , . T 1 specified breaking load of 

of neT ""^ = 0-67 ( 7 + H) X mesh rope 

4 X basic safety factor of the rope 
where 

V = number of vertical mesh cords, and 
H =■ number of horizontal mesh cords. 

This formula for safe working load of a net is applicable when a number 
of small parcels have to be lifted. 



•Specification for polyamide multifilament ropw : Part 2 Haw»er-laid ropei for 
specific applications ( second r$vision ). 

fSpecification for polypropylene ropei ( S-atrand hawser laid and 8-itrand plaited ) 
{first rtcision ). 



4 



IS : 11521 - 1985 

4.2 Design 

4.2.1 The net shall have nominally square construction, in which the 
length of its vertical mesh cord should be equal to the length of its 
horizontal mesh cord. 

4.2.2 Nets shall be made with a square mesh and the length of the 
mesh side shall not be greater than 30 cm. 

4.2.3 Nets may be constructed as per the following three methods: 

a) Woven — As shown in Fig. 1 

b) Tucked — As shown in Fig. 2 

c) Knotted — As shown in Fig. 3 




Fig. 1 Woven 




Fio. 2 Tucked 

5 



IS : 11521 * 1985 




Fig. 3 Knotted 

However, the safe working load for nets manufactured as per the 
construction method (b) and (c) shall have a safe working load of 50 
percent of that calculated by the formula mentioned in item 4.1(b). 

4.2.4 Border cords and the hands shall have a diameter of at least 33 
percent greater than the mesh cords. 

4.2*5 Each net shall be manufactured using rope of only one type of 
material, that is, either polyamide or polypropylene. Further, each net 
shall be manufactured in such a way that the mesh cords, border cords 
and hand rope come from one lot and one rope manufacturer only 
respectively. Thus the load elongation characteristics of all mesh cords, 
border cords and hand rope shall be same and the stress concentration 
on the cords shall be matched. 

5. REQUIREMENTS 

5,1 The requirements of cargo nets shall be as specified in Table 1. Nets 
of other designs can be arrived at, at the convenience of the buyer and 
the seller. However, such net designs and constructions shall be as per 4.1 



IS I 11521 - 1985 

and 4.2 when tested as per Appendix A and tolerances on nominal mesh 
size and 'nominal length of hands' shall be ± 10 percent. The nets shall 
also meet the proof load requirement when tested as per A-3. 

6. PACKING 

6.1 All nets shall be neatly folded and suitably packed to prevent damage 
during transportation. IS : 3256-1980* may be followed as regards the 
packing and stitching materials. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 Each net shall have securely attached two labels on the border cords 
carrying the following information: 

a) Nominal size of the net, 

b) Nominal mesh size, 

c) Diameter of mesh cord, border cord and hand rope, 

d) Safe working load of the net written boldly in capitals, and 

e) Manufacturer's name and trade-mark* 

7.1.1 The net may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
mav be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. SAMPLING 
8,1 Lot 

8.1,1 The quantity of nets of the same nominal size, nominal mesh 
size, length of hands, type and size of rope manufactured under similar 
conditions and delivered to a buyer against a despatch note shall 
constitute a lot. 



*Code for inland packaging of ropes and cordages {first revision ). 

7 



CO 



Sl 
No. 



TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS OF CARGO HANDUNG NETS 



( Clause 5A) 

NoMiNAi. Nominal Nominal No. or Mesh Cords 

Size Sizk Length * * — » 

of Net of Mesh of Hands Vertical Horizontal 



Size of Rope Safe Working 
( IN Diameter ) Load of Net 

K ^ Woven T^spE 

kN 



Mesh Border Cord 
Cords and Hand 
Rope 



(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 




m 


mm 


m 






mm 


mm 




i) 


3x3 


125 X 125 


1-50 


23 


23 


12 


16 


25-48 


ii) 


3-6 X 3-6 


125 X 125 


1-80 


27 


27 


12 


16 


29-40 


iii) 


3x3 


225 X 225 


1-50 


12 


12 


20 


28 


35-28 


iv) 


3-6 X 3-6 


225 X 225 


1-80 


15 


15 


20 


28 


4410 


V) 


3-6 X 3-6 


200 X 200 


1-80 


17 


17 


20 


28 


49-98 


Toler- 


±10 


±10 


± 10 





_ 











ance 


percent 


percent 


percent 












Method 
of 
Teit 


Appendix A 


Appendix A 










Appendix A 
( See Note 1 ) 



Note 1 — The cargo net shall be proof loaded to 125 percent of its specified safe working load as per Appendix A, 
that is, the proof load on a cargo net with safe working load of 25-48 kN is 31*85 kN. 

Note 2 — A cargo net of any design and safe working load shall be acceptable as long as it is manufactured as per 
this specification, its safe working load calculated as per the formula given in 4.1 and tested as per Appendix A as 
declared by the manufacturer. 

Note 3 — 1 kN = 102 kgf approximately. 



W 



§ 



00 

en 



!S : 11521 ^ 19S5 

8.2 Sample Size 

B»2-i Sampling shall be as representative as possible of the lot subjected 
to the measurements and tests. The sample shall be drawn at random 
at the rate shown by the following formula: 

S - 0-4V ^~ 

where S is the number of nets to be drawn for sampling and JVis the 
number of size of the lot expressed in num^ber of nets. When S is 
calculated and is not a whole number, it is rounded off and the value 
obtained is given a whole number in accordance with the requirement 
of IS : 2-1960*. In case where S is less than 1 draw one sample net for 
testing. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 5.1 and Table I ) 

METHOD OF TESTING 

A-1, DIMENSIONS 

A-1.1 The specimen cargo nets shall be unfolded and spread on the 
floor. Initial tension shall be applied by pulling on the hands and then 
the net shall be allowed to relax on the floor for 3 minutes. 

A-1.2 The length and width of the net shall be measured from centre to 
centre of the border cords. The length of the hands shall be measured 
from one end of its eye to the other end ( as shown in Fig. 4 ). 

A-1.3 Three nieshes shall be measured per net, of which at least one 
shall be near the centre of the net and at least one shall be at the edge of 
the net. The distance between two sequential knots or joints in the 
vertical and in the horizontal side measured from centre to centre shall 
give the two dimensions of the mesh. 

A-2. BREAKING STRENGTH OF ROPE 

A-2.1 Polyamide Rope — of the same size as the border cords and 
mesh cords, declared by the manufacturer to be coming from the same 
lots used for fabricating the nets shall be tested as per the requirements 
laid down in IS : 4572 ( Part 1 )-l982t and IS : 4572 ( Part 2 )-1983t. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revistd ). 

tSpecification for polyamide multifilament ropes ; Part 1 G«n«ral r«quir«ments for 
hawser-laid and plaited ropes ( acond revisien ). 

tSpecification for polyamide multifilament ropes : Part 2 Hawwr-laid ropes for 
specific applications ( sicond revision ). 



IS i 11521 - 1985 



ROPE HAND 

NOMINAL LENGTH OF NETSIOE 




"Tw^N CM. LENGTH 
^^>- OF 

MESH SIDE 




NOMINAL WIDTH 
OF 

NET sioe 



HORIZONTAL 
MESH ROPE /CORD 



DETAIL AT A 




DETAIL AT B 



Fig. 4 Cargo Handling Net 

A-2.2 Polypropylene Rope — Polypropylene rope of the same size as 
the border cords and mesh cords, declared by the manufacturer to be 
coming from the same lots used for fabricating the nets shall be tested as 
per the requirements laid down in IS : 5175-1982*. 

A-2.3 It is imperative that each net shall be made out of the same type 
of rope and from the same lot ( see 4.2.5 ). In case of any doubt the 
rope manufacturer should be asked to certify the same. 

♦Specification for polypropylene ropes ( 3-strand hawser-laid and 8-strand plaited ) 
( Jirst revision ) . 



10 



IS : 11521 - 1985 

A-3. PROOF LOAD 

A-3.1 The specimen of cargo net is spread out on the floor. Gunny 
sacks containing sand and each weighing between 30 and 50 kg are 
spread uniformly over the mesh cords until a total mass which is 25 per- 
cent in excess of the safe working load is reached. The specimen net is 
then Hfted by means of its hands ofl:'the floor up to a distance of at least 
500 mm. 

A-3, 2 The net remains suspended for five minutes and is then lowered 
on the floor and the load removed. This net is then visually examined 
to check whether any fractures or splice slippages have taken place in 
the mesh cords, border cords and hands. 

A-3.3 A specimen net which has been proof loaded as above and has, 
after this test, no fractures or splice slippages is deemed to have a safe 
working load as specified. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 1.1 ) 

CARE OF CARGO HANDLING NETS 

B-1. GENERAL 

B-Ll Cargo nets made from any material are liable to wear and to 
mechanical damage, and can be weakened to some extent by various 
agencies such as chemicals, heat and light. Regular inspection by a 
competent person is necessary to ensure that the nets are still service- 
able. 

B-1.2 It should also be emphasized that no matter what agency has 
weakened the net, the effect will be more serious on smaller size cordage 
than on the larger size cordage. Consideration should, therefore, be 
given to the relationship of the surface area of the cordge and cross 
section, 

B-1. 3 Inspection should be done by examination of the net in small 
sections, the cordage being turned to reveal all sides before continuing. 
At the same time the cordage should where practicable, be opened up to 
allow for internal examination, 

B-1.4 To define a standard of acceptance or rejection is much more 
difficult than to describe the method of inspection. There can be no 
well defined boundary between nets that are safe and those that are not, 
because this depends on the stresses placed on the net in an emergency. 

11 



IS : 11521 > 1985 

The decision whether to continue to use a net or to take it out of service 
should be based on an assessment of the general condition of the net. 
This is necessary because many of the conditions that will guide the 
competent person cannot be exactly described but only stated in general 
terms. If, after examination, there should be any doubt about its safety, 
it should be withdrawn from service. It should again be emphasized 
that the effects of wear and mechanical damage are relatively great on 
thinner cordage, which therefore requires more stringent standard of 
acceptance. 

B-2. CAUSES OF DAMAGE 

B-2«l External wear due to dragging over rough surfaces causes 
filamentation. However, some type of filamentation is in a way effective, 
as this filamentation protects rope from further abrasion and damage. 

B-2.2 Physical cuts on the ropes of cargo nets can take place if the net 
is handling sharp edged items or comes in contact with other sharp 
edges. A net which has even one strand of any of its cords completely 
cut should be discarded immediately. 

B-3. SPECIFIC CAUSES OF DAMAGE 

B-3.1 Abrasion — Man-made fibre nets have very good abrasion 
resistance. 

B-3.2 Overloading — The resistance of man-made fibre cordage to 
damage due to repeated overloading is excellent. 

B-3.3 Chemical Attack — The chemical resistance of man-made fibre 
is in general very good and a brief description of the resistance to 
chemical attacks of the different man-made fibres is given below. 

B'3.3,1 Resistance of polyamides to alkalies is good but the resistance 
to acids is poor. The resistance of the polyolefin ( for example, polypro- 
pylene ) to both acids and alkalies is good. 

B-3«3.2 Resistance of man-made fibres to hydrocarbon oils and 
common organic solvent is good, although certain man-made fibres may 
swell in some chlorinated solvent. Attack by concentrated phenols on 
polyamide fibres is severe and contact should be avoided. 

B-3*3.3 As a general rule, if acids or alkalis of any concentration are 
brought into contact with a man-made fabric net, they should not be 
allowed to dry off and thus concentrate the chemical, but the net should 
be washed out well and taken out of service. Advice should be taken 
on the most suitable material if a net is to be used in an environment 
where chemical contamination is likely. 

B-3.3.4 Net should not be subjected to execssive heat, fire or steam 
and they should not be used where they could be damaged by falling 
sparks or molten metal from welding equipment. 

12 



