*••••••••••*•••• 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11783 (1986) : Ferro-silicon for explosive and 
pyrotechnic industry [CHD 26: Explosives and Pyrotechnics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



gyiaf/f/raa^^^:^^ 



S?St^ * I |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 



\\V^:5^< 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




ic 



j^- 



A 




BLANK PAGE 



^<*i^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS '. i 1781 • 1986 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
FERROSILICON FOR EXPLOSIVE AND 

PYROTECHNIC INDUSTRY 



VDC 669J5'-7S2-[98:662 l/'4 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDAltDS 
MANAK BHAVANs 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAa MARG 

NEW DUl-Hl 1IQ002 

Gr 3 ^"y '^S7 



18:11783-1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

FERROSILICON FOR EXPLOSIVE AND 

PYROTECHNIC INDUSTRY 

Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee, CDC 51 

Chairman Representing 

Dr H. Mukherjee Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Memberx 

Shri a. S. Ghosal ( Alternate to 
Dr H. Mukherjee ) 
Shri Avtar Singh National Fertilizers Ltd, New Delhi 

Shr[ p. K. Banerjee National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Shri S. O. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. M. Bhandarkar Directorate General oi' Ordnance Factories, Calcutta 

Shri M. L. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Bhattacharya Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad 

Shri C. N, Chandrasekharan Tamilnadu Industrial Explosives Ltd, Vellore 

Shri R. Govindarajan ( Alternate ) 
Director ( Mines Safety Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Equipment ) 
Joint Director of Mines 
Safety ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Grahadurai National Fireworks Factory, Sivakasi 

Shri S. Ramesh Babu ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Jain Narendra Explosives Ltd, Dehra Dun 

Shri J. W. Kawathekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. S. Mathur Ordnance Factory, Bhandara 

Shri B. M. Lal ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Mini Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri A. A. Niazi IBP Company Limited, New Delhi 

Dr p. R. Nambiar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. U. B. Rao Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Dr S. B. Ray Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 



Shri D. P. Basu ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the pubhsher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11783 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri p. R. Roy Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited, 

Ranchi 
Shri S. S. Salodkar Coal India Limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. N. Nandy ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Satyanarayana Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 

Dr S. K. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. N. Srihari IEL Limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. Seshan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Viswanathan Noble Explochem Limited, Nagpur 

Shri M. R. Rodham age ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. R. Yoganarasimhan IDL Chemicals Limited, Hyderabad 

Dr G. D. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri Satish Chancer, Director General, BIS ( Ex-ojficio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Dr R. K. Bajaj 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), BIS 



Raw Materials Subcommittee, CDC 51:4 

Convener 
Shri A. P. Manjrekar IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Members 

Shri R. Srinivasan ( Alternate to 
Shri A. P. Manjrekar ) 
Dr N. S. Bankar Explosives Research and Development Laboratory, 

Pune 

Shri K. M. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Das Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri A. Bhaumik ( Alternate ) 
Shri Arvind Machhar Anil Chemicals Pvt Ltd, Aurangabad 

Dr p. R. Nambiar IBP Co Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri B. B. Vohra ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Grahadurai National Fireworks Factory^ Sivakasi 

Shri S. Ramesh Babu ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. S., MArnuR Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, Calcutta 

Dr S. R. Chakraborty ( Alternate ) 
Dr Anil Pandit Deepak Nitrite Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri J. T. Vohra ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Samanta IEL Limited, Calcutta 

Shri B. S. Roy ( Alternate ) 



18:11783-1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

FERROSILICON FOR EXPLOSIVE AND 

PYROTECHNIC INDUSTRY 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 15 September 1986, after the draft finalized by the Explosives and 
Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 There is already an Indian Standard available on ferrosilicon 
(18:1110-1981*) which covers the requirement of ferrosilicon for use in 
iron and steel industry. However, Ferro Alloys Sectional Committee, 
SM DC 8, while considering the suggestion of Explosive and Pyrotechnics 
Sectional Committee, CDC 51, and the Ministry of Defence to consider 
requirements of pyrotechnic industry felt that it would be desirable to 
formulate a separate standard for pyrotechnic use, as it would be outside 
the scope of that Committee to cover such requirements. Therefore, this 
Indian Standard has been formulated with a view to cover the requirements 
for ferrosilicon for explosive and pyrotechnic industry. 

0.3 Ferrosilicon is generally used as a fuel in the pyrotechnic industry. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS:2'1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 



1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of sampling 
and tests for ferrosilicon for use in explosive and pyrotechnic industry. 



*Specification for ferrosilicon ( third revision ). 
•j-Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



18:11783-1986 

2. GRADES 

2.1 The material shall be of following two grades based on the total silicon 
content: 

Grade I — having total silicon content not less than 85 percent, 
and 

Grade II — having total silicon content not less than 70 percent. 

3. TYPES 

3.1 The material shall be of types A, B and C based on its sieve size as 
specified in Table 1. 



TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR FERROSILIGON FOR USE IN 
EXPLOSIVE AND PYROTECHNIC INDUSTRY 



( Clauses 3.1 andA.2) 



Sl 
No. 


Characteristic 


Requirement 


Method of Test 
( Ref to Cl No. ) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 




(4) 


') 


Moisture, percent by mass, Max 


0-05 




A-2 


ii) 


Matter soluble in water, percent by mass, 
Max 


0-25 




A.3 


iii) 


pH ( of aqueous extract ) 


7-5-90 




A-4 


iv) 


Total silicon, percent by mass, Min 






A-5 



a) Grade I 85 

b) Grade II 70 
V) Fineness; 

a) For Type A ( lumps ) 

— retained on 2 000 micron IS Sieve, 97 
percent by mass, Min 

b) For Type B 

— retained on 106 micron IS Sieve, Nil 
percent by mass, Max 

— retained on 63 micron IS Sieve, 20 
percent by mass, Max 

c) For Type C 

— retained on 90 micron IS sieve. Nil 
percent by mass, Max 

— retained on 63 micron IS sieve, 10 
percent by mass, Max 



A-6 



18:11783-1986 

4. REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 The material shall be of good quality, in the form of powder or lumps 
and shall be free from visible impurities or foreign matter. 

4.2 The material shall comply with the requirements laid down in Table 1 
when tested according to the methods prescribed in Appendix A. Reference 
to the relevant clauses of Appendix A is given in col 4 of Table 1. 

5. PACKING 

5.1 The material shall be supplied in securely closed, clean and dry 
galvanized mild steel drums ( see IS : 2552- 1979* ) or in such containers as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each container shall be legibly and indelibly marked with the following 
information: 

a) Name of material, and its grade and type; 

b) Gross and net mass of material; 

c) Name of the manufacturer and/or his trade-mark, if any; and 

d) Batch No., in code or otherwise, to enable the batch to be traced 
from records. 

6.2 The container may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

Note — The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the 
assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of 
that standard under a well deiined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard 
marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers 
may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

7. SAMPLING 

7.1 The method of sampling and the criteria for conformity of the material 
to the requirements of this standard shall be as prescribed in Appendix B. 



♦Specification for steel drums ( galvanized and ungalvanizcd ) ( second revision ). 

5 



18:11783-1986 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.2 ) 
A-l. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

A-1.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and distilled water 
( see 18:1070-1977* ) shall be employed in the test. 

Note — 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the resuUs of analysis. 

A-2. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE 

A-2.1 Procedure — Weigh about 10 g of the material in a weighed petri 
dish. Keep in an oven adjusted to a temperature of 105 ± 2^C for 
2 hours. Remove the dish to a desiccator for about half an hour to cool, 
and reweigh it. Repeat the process till constant mass is obtained. 

A-2. 2 Calculation 

Moisture, percent by mass ^ -r-r* ~rr- X 100 

A/, — A/ 

where 

M ^ mass in g of the empty dish, 

Ml = mass in g of the material and the dish before heating, and 
M<2, = mass in g of the material and the dish after heating. 
A-3. DETERMINATION OF MATTER SOLUBLE IN WATER 

A-3.1 Procedure — Treat 15 g of the material with 300 ml of freshly boiled 
water. Boil gently in a covered vessel for 15 minutes. Cool to room 
temperature and filter. Wash the filter paper twice with 1 5 ml of water. 
Make up the volume to 500 ml in a volumetric flask. Take 100 ml of the 
filterate and evaporate to dryness in a tared porcelain dish on a water 
bath. Dry for one hour at 103 to lOS'^C. Cool in a desiccator and weigh. 

A-3.2 Calculation 

Water soluble matter, percent by mass ^ {M.> — M ^) x -r^ 

where 

yV/ = mass in g of the material present in the aliquot ( taken for 
test ), 

Mj ^ mass in g of the empty dish, and 

A/g ^ mass in g of the dish and residue. 



* Specification for water for general laboratory use ( secor^d revision ). 

6 



IS : 11783 - 1986 

A-4. DETERMINATION OF pH 

A-4.1 Procedure ~ Weigh about 10 g of the material and transfer it to a 
250-ml beaker. Add 100 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water. Allow to 
stand for 30 minutes with occasional stirring. Filter, reject the first 50 ml 
of the filtrate and collect the remaining filtrate in a beaker. Determine the 
pH of the solution by means of a suitable pH meter using glass electrode. 

A-5. DETERMINATION OF SILICON 
A-5.1 Reagents 

A-5.1.1 Sodium Hydroxide — soHd. 

A-5.1. 2 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid— 1 : 1 and 1 :20 ( v/v ). 

A-S.1.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid—?^^ gr M6 {see IS: 265-1976*). 

A-5.1.4 Dilute Sulphuric Acid— 1:1 ( v/v )■ 

A-5.1.5 Hydrofluoric Acid — 40 percent. 

A-5.2 Procedure 

A-5.2.1 Place 8 to 10 g of sodium hydroxide in the nickel crucible and 
transfer 0*25 to 0-5 g of the dried and powdered material to pass through a 
150 micron IS Sieve, to the crucible depending upon the silicon content of 
the sample. Cover the crucible with the lid and heat, at first gently and 
then at the maximum heat for half an hour. Carefully fuse over a low 
flame, slowly revolving it round the outer edge of the flame till the contents 
have melted down without spattering. Rotate the crucible carefufly to stir 
any unattacked particles in the bottom and sides, maintaining it at a low 
red heat. Just before completion of the fusion which requires 3 to 4 
minutes, increase the temperature of the crucible to bright redness for one 
minute. Spread the melt uniformally on the sides and bottom of the 
crucible by slowly rotating it and allow to cool to room temperature. 

A-5.2.2 Extract the melt with minimum quantity of hot water in a 
porcelain dish, washing the crucible and lid with a jet of hot water. 
Acidify carefully with dilute hydrochloric acid (1:1) and add about 50 ml 
excess. Evaporate to dryness and bake for one hour at 100 to llOX. 
Redissolve the mass in 40 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid by warm- 
ing, and dilute with 150 ml of hot water. Raise to boil, allow to settle 
slightly and filter through Whatman filter paper No. 40. Wash 10 to 12 
times alternately with hot dilute hydrochloric acid (1:20) and hot water. 
Finally rinse with hot water till the washings are free from chlorides. 
Preserve the paper and the residue. 



♦Specification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ). 

7 



IS; 11783 -1986 

A-5.2.3 Evaporate the filtrate and washings to dryness and repeat the 
procedure of baking, washing, etc, as given under A-5.2.2. 

A-5.2.4 Place the papers and residue from A-5.2.2 and A-5.2.3 in the 
platinum crucible and dry completely on a hot-plate. Heat the crucible in 
a muffle furnace at 1 000°C for about 30 minutes, cool in a desiccator and 
weigh. Ignite again for 10 minutes at the above temperature as a check 
for constant weight. 

A-5.2.5 Add sufficient dilute sulphuric acid to moisten the residue, then 
add carefully about 10 ml of hydrofluoric acid and cautiously evaporate to 
dryness. Ignite over a free flame to constant weight. Record the loss in 
weight which represents the weight of silica. 

Note — A blank: determination should be carried out when the silica content of 
the ferro-alloy is below 10 percent. 

A-5.3 Calculation 

^.,. , A X 46-72 
Silicon, percent = ^^ 

where 

A = mass in g of silica obtained, and 
B = mass in g of the sample taken. 

A-6. DETERMINATION OF FINENESS 

A-6.1 Procedure — Place 10 g of the material on the respective IS sieve 
and brush it gently with a 25 mm varnish brush for 15 minutes or until no 
further material passes through the sieve, whichever is the lesser period. 
Remove the sieve and weigh the portion of the sample retained on it. 
Express it as percentage of the material taken for the test. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 7.1 ) 

B-1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING 

B-1.1 For general requiremetits of sampling, the methods given in IS : 8883 
( Part 1 V1978* shall be followed. 

♦Methods of sampling chemicals and chemical products: Part I General requirements 
and precautions. 



18:11783-1986 

B-2. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2.1 Lot — All the drums in a single consignment of the material of the 
same grade drawn from a single batch of processing shall constitute a lot. 
If a consignment is declared or known to consist of different batches of 
processing, the batches shall be marked separately and the groups of drums 
in each batch shall constitute separate lots. 

B-2,2 The number of drums to be selected shall depend upon the size of 
the lot and shall be in accordance with Table 2. 



TABLE 2 NUMBER OF CONTAINERS TO BE SELECTED 


Lot Size 


Number of Containers 
TO BE Selected 


(1) 


(2) 


Up to 50 


3 


51 to 100 


4 


101 to 150 


5 


151 to 300 


7 


301 and above 


10 



B-2,3 The drums shall be selected from the lot at random and in order to 
ensure randomness of selection, the method given in 18:4905-1968* may be 
followed. 

B-3. NUMBER OF TESTS 

B-3.1 Tests for determination of ferrosilicon, percent by mass shall be 
determined on individual drums and for the remaining characteristics tests 
shall be conducted on composite sample. 

B-4. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-4.1 For all those characteristics for which individual tests have been 
conducted average {X) and range ( R ) shall be calculated, range being 
the difference between the maximum and minimum of the test results and 

_ Suna of the test results 
verage — Number of tests 

The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements of 
ferrosilicon, percent by mass; if: 

X — 0-6 7J > the minimum value specified in Table 1. 



♦Methods for random sampling. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 
Base Units 



Quantity 


Unit 


Length 


metre 


Mass 


kilogram 


Time 


second 


Electric current 


ampere 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


temperature 




Luminous intensity 


candela 


Amount of substance 


mole 


Supplemetitary Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Plane angle 


radian 


Solid angle 


steradian 


Derived Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Force 


newton 


Energy 


joule 


Power 


watt 


Flux 


weber 


Flux density 


tesla 


Frequency 


hertz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


Electromotive force 


volt 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 



Symbol 






m 






kg 






s 






A 






K 






cd 






raol 






Symbol 






rad 






sr 






Symbol 




Definition 


N 




N ^ 1 kg. m/s^ 


J 




J -1 N.m 


W 




W= 1 J/s 


Wb 




Wb = 1 V.s 


T 




T= 1 Wb/m" 


Hz 




Hz= 1 c/s(s->) 


S 




S = 1 A/V 


V 




V == 1 W/A 


Pa 




Pa = 1 N/m'^ 



