**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11358 (1987) : Glossary of terms and symbols relating to 
rock mechanics [CED 48: Rock Mechanics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18:11358-1987 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND SYMBOLS 
RELATING TO ROCK MECHANICS 



UDC 001-4: 624-121 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 8 November 1988 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



Indian Standard 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND SYMBOLS 
RELATING TO ROCK MECHANICS 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 31 August 1987, 
after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 A series of Indian Standards covering various 
aspects of rock mechanics are being formulated 
which will cover a large number of terms relating 
to this field. The extensive use of these terms has 
necessitated the preparation of this glossary so 
that all the terms could be brought out in one 
standard and reference to this Indian Standard 
could be given in the other standards being formu- 



lated in this field, covering the method of test, 
code of practice and other related subjects. 
Prior to preparation of this Indian Standard, 
some of the terms relating to rock mechanics 
were covered in IS : 2809 - 1972* which is also 
under revision and during its revision the terms 
relating to rock mechanics will be deleted. 
However, some of the common terms which 
are in common use in both the fields appear in 
both of these standards. 



♦Glossary of terms and symbols relating to soil engi- 
neering {first revision ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the definitions of terms 
and symbols relating to field of rock mechanics. 

2. DEFINITIONS 



2.0 For this 
shall apply. 



standard, the following definitions 



2.1 A Line ( Minimum Excavation Line ) — A 

dimensional line in a tunnel inside of which rock 
projections are not permitted, 

or 

It is the line within which no unexcavated 
material of any kind and no supports other than 
permanent structural steel supports shall be per- 
mitted to remain. 

2.2 Acoustic Emission — See microseismic noise. 

2.3 Active Fault — A fault along which there is 
recurrent movement, that is usually indicated by 
small, periodic displacement or seismic activity. 

2.4 Adit — A nearly horizontal passage leading 
from the surface to an underground chamber or 
passage connecting two such chambers, 

or 

Tunnel into an abutment for exploratory or 
test purpose, 

or 

Opening in the face of a dam for access to 
galleries or operating chambers, 

or 

Access tunnel to a tunnel for construction or 
maintenance purposes. 



2.5 Air Lock — A compartment in which air 
pressure can be equalized to the compressed air 
inside a shield-driven tunnel as well as the outside 
air to permit passage of men and materials. 

2.6 Allowable Brearing Pressure ( ^a ) — It is the 

allowable pressure transmitted by a foundation 
to the rock mass such that no damage occurs 
either in the structure or in the rock mass. It is 
based upon safe bearing pressure (satisfying cri- 
teria of shear, total and differential settlement and 
tilt), correction factors, and past experience and 
judgement of experts. 

2.7 Angle of Draw Subsidence — It is defined as 
the angle between the vertical and the line con- 
necting the limit of excavation with the point of 
zero subsidence. This is also called the limiting 
angle of influence. 

2.8 Angle of Friction of Fractures — It is the slid- 
ing angle ( tangential ) of friction at normal pres- 
sure of 10 kg/cm^ across joints. It is classified as 
^1, A^, As, A^, A5 for angle of friction of fractures 
of >45, 35-45, 25;35, 15-25 and <15^ respectively. 
This notation is used in basic geotechnical 
description (BGD), 

The sliding angle of friction of joints is fur- 
ther measured in two parts as follows: 

a) Peak Sliding Angle of Friction — It is the 
sliding angle of friction for the maximum 
or peak shear strength observed in a shear 
test across a joint 

b) Residual Sliding Angle of Friction — It 
is the sliding angle of friction for the state 
of residual strength of a joint which may 



IS : -11358 - 1987 



be obtained by subjecting the joint to ex- 
cessive slip such that no further reduction 
in shear strength takes place. 

2.9 Angle of Internal Friction, Peak ( ^p ) — Angle 
of internal friction ( that is, slope of strength 
envelope ) coresponding to maximum shear stress 
in shear stress/displacement plot. 

2.10 Angle of Internal Friction, Residual ( ^r ) — 

Angle of internal friction corresponding to shear 
stress at large displacement ( that is, correspond- 
ing to residual shear strength ). 

2.11 Anisotropy — A condition of a material hav- 
ing different properties in different directions. For 
example, the state of geologic strata of transmit- 
ting sound waves with different velocities in verti- 
cal and horizontal directions. Situation of a 
material having different moduli of deformation 
in different directions, 

2.11.1 Transverse Anisotropy ~ The anisotropy 
of sedimentary deposits of rock mass is of very 
special nature and is called transverse anisotropy. 
( Only five elastic constants are sufficient to define 
the anisotropy of the rock mass ). 

2.12 Anticline — An arch-like fold ( up-fold ) in 
rocks, with the beds dipping in opposite direction 
from the crest. 

2.13 Apron — A floor with lining of concrete, 
timber or other resistant material at the toe of a 
dam, bottom of a spillway or chute to prevent 
erosion from falling water of turbulent flow. 

2.14 Arch — The configuration of the upper part 
of a tunnel section above the spring line or the 
crown or the curved roof of an underground 
opening ( tunnel ). 

2.15 Arching — The transfer of load by shear 
from the yielding part of a rock mass to the ad- 
joining less yielding or restrained part of mass. 

2.16 Artesian Condition — Ground water that is 
under sufficient pressure to rise above the level at 
which it is encountered by a well, but which does 
not necessarily rise to or above the surface of the 
ground. 

2.17 Asparities — These are small undulations 
along a discontinuity. There are two types of as- 
parities called primary and secondary asparities. 
Primary asparities are major asparities while 
secondary asparities are micro-undulations of 
the primary asparities. 

2.18 Attenuation — The amplitude of waves de- 
crease as they travel through rock mass. This 
reduction in amplitude is known as attenuation. 
Attenuation is energy loss with distance per cycle. 

2.19 Axial Young's Modulus ( E )— It is the ratio 
of the axial stress change to the axial strain pro- 
duced by the stress change for a cylindrical speci- 
men tested in uniaxial compression. 



It may be calculated using any of the follow- 
ing methods: 

a) Tangential Young's Modulus, £% — This is 
the tangential Young's modulus at a stress 
level which is some fixed percentage of 
the ultimate strength and is generally 50 
percent of the ultimate uniaxial compres- 
sive strength. 

b) Average Young's Modulus, E^t — The aver- 
age Young's modulus is defined a^ the 
average slope of more or less straight 
portion of the axial stress-strain curve. 

c) Secant Young's Modulus, Eb — The secant 
Young's modulus is usually measured 
from zero stress to some fixed percentage 
of the ultimate strength, generally 50 per- 
cent. 

B 

2.20 B Line (Fay Line ) — A dimensional line in 
a tunnel outside of which excavation is not paid 
for, 

or 

The B-line is that line for which payment ia 
made to the contractor for the underground ex- 
cavation done in rock using conventional method 
of drilling and blasting. 

2.21 Back Packing — Any material ( usually gra- 
nular ) which is used to fill the empty space bet- 
ween the \a.ggmg and the rock surface m a tunnel. 

2.22 Basic Geotechmcal Description ( BGD ) — 

The basic geotechnical description of rock ma$s 
is based on five parameters, namely, rock name 
( geological description ), layer thickness, fracture 
intercept, uniaxial compressive strength and angle 
of friction of fractures. For example, a zone of 
rock mass may be described as Quartz — I2, F4, 
S'a /la, where L, F, S and A represent the last four 
parameters defined in the text. 

2.23 Basic Sliding Angle of Friction of Joints 

( (^b ) — It is the angle of sliding friction between 
flat non-dilatant rock surfaces in dry or wet 
conditions. It is obtained from residual tests on 
flat unweathered rock surfaces. 

2.24 Bearing Pressure ( Safe ) (qs) ~ The load 
per unit area which can be safely supported by 
the ground ( rock and/or soil ). 

2.25 Bed Rock — Any layer of rock underlying 
soil, 

or 

Geologically, the term denotes materral under- 
lying drift deposits, 

or 

It is the solid, undisturbed rock in place 
either at the ground surface or beneath superficial 



IS: 11358- 1987 



deposits of gravel, sand, or clay, 

2.26 Bedding Plane — A plane dividing sedimen- 
tary rocks of same or different lithology. The 
division planes which separate the individual 
layers, beds, or strata marking the boundary bet- 
ween a bed and the bed above and/or below it. 

2.27 Bench — The unexcavated rock having a 
nearly horizontal surface which remains after a 
top heading has been excavated in a tunnel. 

2.28 Bench Blasiting — A method of blasting in 
quarries and open pits. The excavation proceeds 
in steps or in benches and rows of blast holes are 
drilled parallel to the free face. 

2.29 Bending Strength — An alternative term for 
flexural strength ( see tensile strength ). 

2.30 Blanket or Area Grouting — The process of 
grouting to a specified depth for the purpose of 
consolidation and/or reducing permeability. 

2.31 Blastability — Index value of the resistance 
of a rock formation to blasting. 

2.32 Blasting Cap or Detonator — A small tube 
containing a flashing mixture for firing explo- 
sives. 

2.33 Blocking — Wood on blocks placed between 
the excavated surface of a tunnel or a shaft and 
the main bracing system. 

2.34 Blow-Ottt — A sudden loss of a large amount 
of compressed air at the top of a shield. 

2.35 Bond Strength — The stress required to rup- 
ture the bond in a material, or between two kinds 
of material cemented one to another ( for example, 
a concrete block cemented on rock ). 

2.36 Bore Log — The detailed record of the rocks 
passed through in drilling, where accurate logs 
constitute a valuable source of sub-surface in- 
formation. 

2.37 Borehole — A hole drilled into the ground 
for purpose of extracting soil samples and/or rock 
cores for examination and testing. 



( of Extensometer ) — 

of a borehole in in-situ 



2.38 Borehole Extension 

Elongation in the axis 
rock, due to extension. 

2.39 Bottom Charge — Concentrated explosive 
charge at the bottom of a blasthole. 

2.40 Boulder -— A more or less rounded block of 
fragment of rock and of average dimension 300 
mm or greater. Usually boulders are rounded by 
being carried or rolled along by water or ice, 
sometimes also by weathering in place, in which 
case they are known as boulders of weathering, 
disintegration or exfoliation. 

2.41 Breast Board — Timber planks to support 
the face of tunnel excavation in soft ground. 



2.42 Breccia — A coarse-grained elastic rock com- 
posed of large, angular and broken rock frag- 
ments that are cemented together in a finer-grain- 
ed matrix, and that can be of any composition, 
origin or mode of accumulation. 

2.43 Brittle — A material is said to be in a brittle 
state or brittle under conditions in which its stabi- 
lity to resist load decreases suddenly with increas- 
ing deformation. 

2.44 Broken Zone ( Around Tunnel ) — The broken 
zone is defined as the area bounded by the locus 
of points around the tunnel opening where the 
induced tangential stress exceeds the in-situ 
strength of rock mass. The rock mass is in elas- 
tic state beyond the broken zone. 

2.45 Buckling — The twisting or forcing out of 
shape of a structural member or rock layer 
under compression by an excessive or eccentric 
load. 

2.46 Bulk Volume ( Kb, U ) ~ The volume con- 
tained within the gross external dimensions of a 
rock specimen, denoting the volume occupied by 
the grains, voids and intergranular infillings. 

2.47 Bump ( Coal Mines ) — Bump is defined as 
a strong seismic shock resulting from a failure or 
a sudden displacement at some point in the rock 
surrounding an underground opening. 

2.48 Burden — Distance between charge and free 
surface in direction of throw. 

2.49 Burst — To break suddenly into pieces from 
impact or from pressure within. 



2.50 Cable Anchor — Cable arc used to prestress 
the rock mass around large openings or anchor 
the civil engineering structures into the rock 
foundation. These anchors are known as cable 
anchors. 

2.51 Camouflet — The underground cavity creat- 
ed by a fully contained explosive. 

2.52 Cancellation Pressure — This is the hydrau- 
lic pressure in the flat jack at which the displace- 
ments created by cutting the slot are cancelled. 

2.53 Catastrophic Failure — A failure of large 
rock mass giving almost no warning. A sudden 
failure. 

2.54 Cavern ( Sinkhole ) — A subterranian hollow; 
an underground cavity ( most frequent in lime- 
stones and dolomites ). 

2.55 Cavities — Sinkholes and other sorts of open 
cavities are most commonly formed in limestone^ 
gypsum, and salt. 

2.56 Charge — The amount of explosive used in 
a blasthole. 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.57 Circular Wedge Failure — When the mate- 
rial is very weak, as in a soil slope, or when the 
rock mass is very heavily jointed or broken, as in 
a waste rock dump, the failure will be defined by 
a single discontinuity surface and will tend to 
follow a circular failure path, 

2.58 Clastic Rock — A consolidated sedimentary 
rock composed principally of detritus transported 
into its place of deposition ( for example, sands- 
tones and shales as distinct from limestones and 
anhydrites ). 

2.59 Clay — Soil consisting of inorganic material, 
the particle size of which have diameters smaller 
than 0-002 mm. 

2.60 Coefficient of Volumetric Expansion — This 
is the ratio between the increase in volume of 
rock mass and its initial volume. 

2.61 Cohesion ( c ) — The property of rock parti- 
cles to bind together, given by the vertical inter- 
cept or strength envelope, that is, of shear strength 
versus normal stress plot. 

2.62 Compacting Zone ( Around Tunnel ) — zone 
within rock mass having tendency to undergo 
compaction near supports in squeezing ground. 

2.63 Condition of Joints — This parameter in- 
cludes roughness of joint surfaces, their continuity 
their opening or separation ( distance between the 
surface ), the infilling ( gouge ) material, and 
weathering of the wall rock. 

2.64 Conformity — The relationship of adjacent 
beds not separated by a sedimentary disconti- 
nuity. 

2.65 Consolidation Grouting — See grouting. 

2.66 Continuum — A continuum is a mathemati- 
cal abstraction applied to a large collection of 
material particles. 

2.67 Controlled Blasting — Blasting designed to 
preserve the integrity of the remaining rocks, for 
example, smooth blasting or presplitting. 

2-68 Core — Any single solid piece or rock in 
cylindrical shape obtained by drilling process. 

2.69 Core Loss — Percentage of loss of core from 
a drillhole with respect to the total drill run. 

2.70 Core Recovery — Percentage of core recove- 
red from a drillhole with respect to the total core 
run. 

2.71 Crack— Rocks have small cracks which are 
formed either between the boundaries of the mine- 
ral grains or develop as transgranular fractures. 

2.72 Crater — A pit formed on the ground sur- 
face due to an underground explosion. 

2.73 Creep — Time-dependent deformation or 
strain. Deformation that occurs over a period of 
time when a material is subjected to constant 



stress at constant temperature. Slow deforma- 
tion that results from long application of stress. 
An inperceptibly slow, more or less continuous, 
downward and outward movement of slope-form- 
ing rock or soil. 

2.74 Creep Strength — Maximum stress required 
to bring about a specified amount of creep in a 
specified time. 

2.75 Critical Stress — Maximum and minimum 
compressive stress on the boundary of an open- 
ing. 

2.76 Cross Joints — These are the joints which 
generally occur in a direction normal to bedding 
planes. These are invariably discontinuous 
joints. 

2.77 Crown ~ The highest point of the cross-sec- 
tion. In tunnel linings, the term is used to desig- 
nate either the arched roof above spring lines, or 
all of the lining except the floor or invert. 

2.78 Crust — The outermost layer or shell of the 
earth lying above the Mohorovicic discontinuity. 

2.79 Curtain Grouting — The process of grouting 
in which one or more lines of holes are grouted to 
specified depths in order to create a barrier 
against seepage. 

2.80 Cut-Off — A wall or diaphragm of concrete, 
steel, grout wall, or a slurry trench or trench fill- 
ed with duly compact impervious material for the 
purpose of reduction of seepage under a dam and 
rock foundation material, and to reduce uplift 
pressure on the base of a dam and other structural 
foundation. 

2.81 Cycle Time — Cycle time is defined as the 
lime required for various processes of excavation 
starting from drilling and blasting to mucking and 
support installation. 

2.82 Cyclical Stress — Repeated stressing and de- 
stressing of material. 

D 

2.83 Damping — Reduction in the amplitude of 
vibration of a body or system due to dissipation 
of energy internally or by radiation, 

2.84 Decomposition — The breaking down of 
minerals by themselves or in rocks through chemi- 
cal processes, usually related to weathering. 

2.85 Decoupling — The ratio of the radius of the 
blastholes to the radius of the charge. In general, 
a reducing of the strain wave amplitude by increas- 
ing the spacing between charge and blastholes. 

2.86 Deformation Modulus ( Ec ) — In repeated 
loading-unloading tests, the ratio of stress, a to 
the total strain ( total strain = tei + eir ) is 
called the modulus of deformation t>r compression 
modulus: 



IS4 11358 -1987 



€tOtftl 



€el + «ir 



This modulus is thus based on the total mea- 
sured strains, that is, elastic plus inelastic ( irre- 
versible or plastic ) strains, €t\ and €ir, respec- 
tively. 

2.87 Degree of Squeezing — The ratio of uniaxial 
compressive strength (qc) of rock mass to the 
tangential stress ( ae =^ 2p ) defines the degree of 
squeezing which may be mild, moderate or high 
depending upon the value of qel2p. 

2.88 Delay — Time interval ( fraction of a 
second ) between detonation of explosive charges. 

2.89 Density ( p ) — Density of a rock is defined 
as its mass ( m ) per unit volume ( F ). 

In the civil engineering usage; however, the 
term density is tacitly assumed to mean the unit 
weight of a material. 

2.90 Dental Treatment — It is the treatment in 
the foundation or abutment of rock mass for safe- 
ty of a masonry concrete dam. ISormally, shear 
keys are provided between the foundation and the 
dam to improve resistance to sliding. If there is 
a fault or a shear zone or a zone of weak rock in 
the foundation, the soft rock is excavated to re- 
quired depth below the dam base and backfilled 
with concrete. 

2.91 Detonation — An extremely rapid and violent 
chemical reaction causing the production of a 
large volume of gas. 

2.92 Detritus — A deposit of material produced 
by the weathering and disintegration of rocks that 
has been moved from its place of origin. 

2.93 Dilatancy — Refers to a relative increase in 
volume for particular stress state, for example, 
packed sand expands when sheared. 

2.94 Dip — The vertical angle that a stratum ( or 
fault plane, or bending plane or joint plane or 
any planar feature ), makes with the horizontal 
measured perpendicular to the strike of the struc- 
tural surface, 

or 

The dip at right angles to the strike, 

or 

The slope of bed rock relative to the hori- 
zontal, 

or 

A pronounced depression in the land surface. 

2.95 Discontinuity — The general term for any 
mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass having 
zero tensile strength. It is a collective term for 
most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak 
schistocity planes, weakness zones and faults. The 



ten parameters selected to describe discontinuities 
and rock masses are defined below: 

a) Orientation — Attitude of a discontinuity 
in space. Described by the dip direction 
( azimuth ) and dip of the line of steepest 
inclination in the plane of the disconti- 
nuity. Termination in solid rock or 
against other discontinuity reduces the 
persistence. 

b) Spacing — Perpendicular distance bet- 
ween adjacent discontinuities. Normally 
refers to the mean or moda J spacing of a 
set of joints. 

x) Persistence — Discontinuity trace length 
as observed in an exposure may give a 
crude measure of the areal extent or pene- 
tration length of a discontinuity. Termina- 
tion in solid rock or against other discon- 
tinuities reduces the persistence. 

d) Roughness — Inherent surface roughness 
and waviness relative to the mean plane 
of a discontinuity. Both roughness and 
waviness contribute to the shear strength; 
large scale waviness may also alter the dip 
locally. 

c) Wall Strength — Equivalent compression 
strength of the adjacent rock walls of a 
discontinuity, may be lower than rock 
block strength due to weathering or altera- 
tion of the walls. An important compo- 
nent of shear strength if rock walls are in 
contract. 

f) Aperture — Perpendicular distance bet- 
ween adjacent rock walls of a disconti- 
nuity, in which the intervening space is 
air or water filled. 

g) Filling — Material that separates the ad- 
jacent rock walls of a discontinuity and 
which is usually weaker than the parent 
rock. Typical filling materials are sand, 
silt, clay, breccia, gouge and mylonite. 
Also includes thin mineral coatings and 
healed discontinuities, for example, quartz 
and calcite veins. 

h) Seepage — Water flow and free moisture 
visible in individual discontinuities or in 
the rock mass as a whole. 

j ) Number of Sets — The number of joint 
sets comprising the intersecting joint 
system. The rock mass may be further 
divided by individual discontinuities. 

k) Block Size — Rock block dimensions re- 
sulting from the mutual orientation of 
intersecting joint sets, and resulting from 
the spacing of the individual discontinui- 
ties may further influence the block size 
and shape. 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.96 Disking ( During Drilling ) — When drilling 
into highly stressed hard rock, it is common for 
the core to emerge in regular discs, which are 
quite unrelated to the structure of the rock. The 
disking occurs when tensile stress developed due 
to stress relief exceeds the tensile strength of core. 
The thickness of the disc diminishes with increas- 
ing primitive stresses. 

2.97 Dome — Hemispherically shaped roof of a 
cylindrical underground excavation. 

2.98 Drainage Well — A vertical shaft construct- 
ed in masonry dams to intercept seepage before 
it appears at the down-stream face of the dam. 

2.99 Drift — A horizontal underground passage, 

or 

Rock material of any sort deposited in one 
place after having been moved from another. 

2.100 Drillability — Drillability is the measure of 
drilling speed at which a drill may penetrate diflFe- 
rent rocks, 

2.101 Drilling Conditions — Rock drillability may 
be classified in five categories; fast, fast average, 
average, slow average and slow. The driUing con- 
ditions depend upon hardness, texture and frac- 
ture formation of a rock mass. A quantitative 
classification for drilling condition is available. 

2.102 Drilling Pattern — The number, position, 
depth and angle of the blast-holes forming the 
complete round in the face of a tunnel or sinking 
pit. 

2.103 Dry Density ( pa ) — The mass of a rock 
sample or specimen after drying to constant mass 
at \5{PC per unit gross volume of the sample or 
specimen. 

2.104 Ductility — For a known or particular 
stress state ( existing or imposed ) to which a 
material can sustain plastic deformation without 
breaking or rupture. Elongation and reduction 
of area are common indices of ductility. 

2.105 Dyke — A sheet like body of igneous rock 
which is discordant, that is, cuts across the bed- 
ding or structural planes of the host rock. 

2.106 Dynamic Elastic Modulus i^E^yn) — It is 
the modulus of elasticity of rock mass under dyna- 
mic loads. During propagation of seismic waves 
through a rock mass, it is the dynamic modulus 
which determines the velocity of waves. The 
static modulus is less than the dynamic modulus. 
The ratio of static to dynamic modulus is called 
the reduction factor which can be estimated from 
the rock quality designation. 

E 

2.107 Effective Stress — Pore water pressure in 
rock is a factor aflFecting rock strength. The 



effective normal stress is generally taken equal to 
the difference between normal stress and the pore 
water pressure. This is strictly valid only where 
pores, cracks and fractures are interconnected. 

2.108 End Effect — In a uniaxial compression test 
in the laboratory or in the field, there is always 
some friction between the specimen and the lead- 
ing surfaces. This friction restricts the lateral 
expansion of the ends of the specimen. This effect 
of lateral restraint is called end effect which often 
gives rise to conical fragments based on each 
platen. 

2.109 Erosion — Process whereby soil or rock 
mass is loosened or dissolved and removed from 
any part of the earth's surface. It includes wea- 
thering, solution and transportation. 

2.110 Escarpments or Scarps — A steep cliff or 
ridge that is formed by sudden earth movements, 
usually vertical but sometimes also horizontal 
along fauh lines, 

or 

Any line of cliffs, or abrupt slope breaking 
the continuity of a land surface, 

or 

A fault line scarp is the one formed along 
the line of a fault. 

2.111 Expanding Zone — Zone within broken 
zone expanding in volume or undergoing dilata- 
tion after failure. 

2.112 Explosives — A substance which undergoes 
a rapid chemical change, with production of a 
large volume of gas. 



2.113 Face — The solid surface of the unbroken 
part of the rock at the advancing end of the work- 
ing place in a tunnel or adit. 

2.114 Factor of Safety ( of Slope ) — The ratio of 
the total force available to resist sliding to total 
force tending to induce sliding, 

2.115 Failure — Failing to perform an expected 
action. In a general sense, failure includes both 
frax;ture and flow. 

2.116 Fatigue — Permanent structural change that 
occurs in a material subjected to fluctuating stress 
and strain. In general, fatigue failure occurs at 
a stress level below the elastic limit. 

2.117 Fault — A fracture or a fracture zone along 
which there has b^en recognizable displacement, 
from a few centimetres to a few kilometres in 
scale. The walls are often striated and polished 
( slicken sided ) resulting from the shear displace- 
ment. Frequently, rock on both sides of a fault 
is shattered and altered or weathered, resulting in 
fillings such as breccia and gouge. Fault widths 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



may vary from millimetres to hundreds of metres. 

2.118 Fault Slip — A relative displacement of 
points on opposite sides of a fault measured on 
the surface of the fault, a minor fault, or slide. 

2.119 Fault Trace — The line of intersection of a 
fault plane with the surface. 

2.120 Fault Zone — A wide shattered belt rather 
than a fault plane. 

2.121 Fill — Deposits of soil, rock or other mate- 
rial placed by man. 

2.122 Finite Element — One of the regular geome- 
trical shapes into which a body is subdivided for 
the purpose of numerical analysis. 

2.123 Fissure — An extensive crack, break, or 
fracture in the rock. 

2.124 Fold — Folds are wavy undulations which 
are developed in the country-rocks whenever the 
region is subjected to severe pressure or stress. 

2.125 Foliation — The parallel disposition of the 
platy or flaky mineral is known as foliation. 

This property is developed in metamorphic 
rocks only. 

2.126 Formation — A group of rocks with re- 
cognizable and traceable boundaries, sufficiently 
alike lithologically to be mapped as a unit: 

a) Massive — A soild or dense rock mass 
with practically no seams, 

b) Sheets — A rock mass having layers or 
beds 1 to 3 m thick with thin horizontal 
seams, 

c) Laminated — A rock mass having thin 
layers of 30 to 100 cm thickness with hori- 
zontal seams with little or no gouge, 

d) Seamy — A rock mass with many open 
seams in horizontal and vertical positions, 
and 

e) Blocky — A rock mass, with wide open 
seams in all directions and filled with 
gouge, or which is shattered or fissured. 

2.127 Foot Wall — The mass of rock beneath a 
discontinuity surface ( zone ). 

2.128 Forepoling — Driving forepoles ( pointed 
boards or steel rods ) ahead of the excavation, 
usually over the last steel set erected, to furnish 
temporary overhead protection while installing 
the next set. 

2.129 Fracture — A general term for any break 
in a rock, whether or not it causes any displace- 
ment due to the mechanical failure by stress. 
Fracture includes cracks, joints, faults, etc, 

2.130 Fracture Intercept — It is the mean distance 
between successive fractures measured along an 



intersecting straight line. All fractures irrespec- 
tive of sets are to be counted. The least intercept 
is to be considered in any critical direction. It is 
classified as Fj, F2, F3, F4 and F$ for fracture 
intercepts of > 200, 60-200, 20-60, 6-20, and 
< 6 cm respectively. This notation is used is 
basic geotechnical description ( BGD ). 

2.131 Full-Column-Anchored Bolts — It is a 

rock bolt which has been grouted throughout its 
length. 

G 

2.132 Gauge — Finely graded material occurring 
between the walls ( of a fault, joint, etc ) as a re- 
sult of grinding movement. Filling material such 
as silt, clay, rock flour and other kinds of geologi- 
cal debris in joints, cracks, fissures, faults and 
other discontinuities in rock. 

2.133 Gauge Length — Gauge length is the dis- 
tance between two gauge points, taken on either 
side of the slot of flat jack that lies in the plane 
norma] to it. 

2.134 Gauge Points — These are arbitrary points 
marked on both sides of the slots and are used as 
observation points. 

2.135 Grain Density ( ps ) — The mass of the 
grains pulverized from rock specimens or sample, 
after drying to constant mass at 105°C, per unit 
volume of the grains, that is, the density of the 
pore free rock fabric. The ratio of grain mass 
( Mg ) to grain volume ( Kg ). 

2.136 Grain Mass ( Af g ) — The mass of the grains 
from a rock specimen or sample after drying to 
constant mass at 105'C. 

2.137 Grain Volume (Kg) — The volume of the 
grains pulverized from rock specimens or a sam- 
ple, that is, the bulk volume minus the pore volume. 

2.138 Ground Arch — The rock located immedia- 
tely above a tunnel which transfers the over- 
burden load on to the rock located on the sides of 
the tunnel. 

2.139 Ground Reaction Curve — Shows the rela- 
tionship between support pressure and radial dis- 
placements of a tunnel wall. It shows that rock 
pressure depends upon the tunnel wall displace- 
ment and is not a unique property. 

2.140 Grouting — Grouting is a process of inject- 
ing under pressure a slurry of fluid grout, or 
other suitable materials into the mass of a defec- 
tive rock formation through a borehole to fissures 
and cracks in the hope that all fissures, joints and 
cavities will be sealed off against water in rock. 

a) Consolidation Grouting — Fractured rock 
mass is grouied to increase its strength 
and modulus of elasticity. As a loose 
rock mass is consolidated by grouting, 
this is called consolidation grouting. 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



b) Curtain Grouting — ( see 2.79 ). 

c) Contact Grouting — The gap between a 
dam and its foundation or between a 
tunnel lining and the surrounding rock 
mass is grouted under pressure to develop 
strong contact and bond between the 
structure and the rock mass. 

d) Stage Grouting — A method of grouting 
in which a hole is drilled and grouted in a 
descending or ascending sequence of 
stages. 

2.141 Gunite — A fluid mixture of fine sand, 
cement and water which is spray pumped through 
a nozzle and is used in sealing or protection work. 

H 

2.142 Hanging Wall — The mass of rock above a 

discontinuity surface. 

2-143 Hardness — The resistance of minerals to 
scratching; it is a property by which minerals may 
be described relative to a standard scale often 
minerals known as Mohs' scale. 

or 

As used for rock in drilling and bit setting. 

2.144 Heterogeneous ( Non-Homogeneous ) — A 

characteristic of a medium or a field of force that 
signifies that the medium has the properties that 
vary with the position 

2.145 Homogeneous Material or Medium — Hav- 
ing the same properties at all points. 

2.146 Horizontal Rock Pressure — The rock pres- 
sure acting in horizontal direction on tunnel sup- 
port is termed as horizontal rook pressure. 

2.147 Hydraulic Conductivity of Fractures ( Ku 

L/r) — Hydraulic conductivity of fracture is 
defined as the ratio between the flow velocity in 
the conducting fracture and the hydraulic gradi- 
ent or potential gradient across it. 

2.148 Hydraulic Conductivity of Rock Mass 

( ^ ) — Permeability with respect to water, 

2.149 Hydraulic Fracturing — Creation of a frac- 
ture in rock by applying hydrauhc pressure inside 
a borehole. 

2.150 Hydraulic Gradient — Change of pressure 
head per unit of distance at a given point and in a 
given direction. 

2.151 Hydraulic Monitoring — Monitoring of 
pore-water pressure and discharge of ground 
water in rock engineering structures. Hydraulic 
monitoring can give advance warning of impend- 
ing failure much sooner than monitoring of 
deformation. 

2.152 Hydrostatic Pressure ~ A state of stress in 
which all the principal stresses are equal ( and 
there is no shear stress ). 



2.153 Hysteresis — A physical phenomenon met 
within the elastic and other behaviour of mate- 
rials. When a body undergoes stress, the strain 
which results is a function of the stress. On re- 
leasing the stress, the strain lags behind; so the 
strain for any particular stress is greater while the 
stress is decreasing than when it is increasing. 
When the stress is removed altoEether, a residual 
strain remains, This lagging behind is termed 
hysteresis, giving rise to an elastic hysteresis loop 
( a measure of internal friction ). 



2.154 Igneous Rock^ — These are the primary 
rocks which have been molten at sometime in 
their history ( for example, granite, basalt, gabbro 
etc). 

2.155 Incompetent Rock — Rock incapable of 
standing in underground opening or steep slopes 
at the surface without support. 

2.156 Inelastic Deformation — The portion of de- 
formation under stress that remains permanently 
even after removal of stress. 

2.157 Intact Rock — A material which can be 
sampled and tested in the laboratory and which 
is free of large scale structural features, such as 
joints, bedding planes, shear zones, and other 
kinds of rock defects, 

2.158 Intrusive Rock — Rock formed due to the 
emplacement and consolidation of magma beneath 
the surface of the earth in pre-existing rock. 

2.159 Isotropic Medium — Having the same physi- 
cal properties in all directions ( said of a medium 
with respect to elasticity, conduction of heat or 
electricity or radiation of heat or light ). 



2.160 Joint — A break of geological origin in the 
continuity of a body of rock along which there 
has been no visible displacement. A group of 
parallel joints is called a set and joint sets inter- 
sect to form a joint system. Joints can be open, 
filled or healed. Joints frequently form parallel 
to bedding planes, foliation and cleavages, and 
may be termed bedding joints, foliation joints and 
cleavage joints, accordingly. 

2.161 Joint Alteration Number ( Ja ) — The joint 
alteration number represents the degree of altera- 
tion of the joint surface used in classification of a 
rock mass by Q-system. 

2.162 Joint Frequency — Number of joints per 
metre for a given set of joints. 

2.163 Joint Opening — Mean opening of surfaces 
of joints of the same set. 

2.164 Joint Orientation — The orientation of 
joints is measured by the dip and strike of joints. 



8 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.165 Joint Roughness Coefficient ( JRC ) -~ The 

joint roughness coeificient is a joint parameter 
which accounts for roughness of a joint profile. 
Its value is higher for rougher joints. The value 
of the joint roughness coefficient can be obtained 
by comparing joint surfaces with typical rough- 
ness profiles. Its value may also be obtained from 
a tilt test on rock joints surface. 

2.166 Joint Roughness Number ( /r ) — The joint 
roughness number represents the roughness of a 
joint profile used in classification of rock mass by 
Q-system. 

2.167 Joint Set Number (Jn) — is defined as the 
number of joint sets present in the rock mass. 
The joint set number is used in the classification 
of a rock mass by the Q-system. 

2.168 Joint Spacing — Spacing between two ad- 
jacent joints of the same set. 

2.169 Joint Stiffness — There are two types of 
joint stiffnesses as follows: 

a) Normal Stiffness of Joint ( ifn, kg/cm^ ) — 
It is defined as the normal pressure corres- 
ponding to unit closure of the joint The 
ratio between the Young's modulus 
of the rock material and the normal 
stiffness of a clean unweathered joint is 
generally a constant which varies as 60, 
25, 5 cm for continuous, discontinuous 
joints and cleavage planes respectively. 

b) Shear Stiffness of Joints ( K^, kg/cm^ ) — 
It is defined as the shear stress correspon- 
ding to unit slip across the joint. It is 
generally taken as the ratio of shear 
strength of joint and the peak slip which 
is normally taken equal to 1/100 of the 
length of joint surface along the slip direc- 
tion. It should be noted that shear stiff- 
ness of a joint is very small compared to 
its normal stiffness. 

2.170 Joint System — A group of two or more 

intersecting sets of joints. 

2.171 Joint Wall Compressive Strength ( JCS, 
kg/cm^ ) — It is a parameter of a joint wall which 
gives the compressive strength of the asparities of 
the joint surface in clean unweathered joints. The 
joint wall compressive strength may be taken as 
the minimum value of uniaxial compressive 
strength of rock cores, otherwise it may be obtain- 
ed from the correlation between the Schmidt 
hammer number and the uniaxial compressive 
strength. 

2.172 Joint Water Reduction Factor ( /w ) — The 

parameter /w is a measure of water pressure 
which has an adverse effect on shear strength of 
joints due to reduction in normal stress. Water 
may, in addition, cause softening and possible 
outwash in the case of clay filled joints. 



K 

2,173 Karst — A geologic setting where cavities 
are developed in massive limestone beds by solu- 
tion or by flowing water. Caves and even under- 
ground river channels are produced into which 
surface run-off drains, and often results in the 
land above being dry and relatively barren. 



2.174 Laminar Flow— The flow of a liquid in 
which the movement at any fixed point is conti- 
nuous, steady and constant. 

2.175 Landslides — The relatively perceptible 
downward and outward movement of slope-form- 
ing materials, such as rock, soil, artificial fill, or a 
combination of these materials with respect to the 
original mass. Also, earth and rock that become 
loosened from a hill side by the water of snow or 
an earthquake and which slides or falls down the 
slope. 

2.176 Layer Thickness — It is the mean thickness 
of a layered zone of a rock mass. It is classified 
as Li, L2, jLj, L4, I5 for layer thicknesses of > 
200, 60-200, 20-60, 6-20 and < 6 cm respectively. 
This notation is used in basic geotechnical descrip- 
tion ( BGD ). 

2.177 Lineation — Lineation is any one-dimen- 
sional feature in a rock shown on a rock surface. 
It may arise in any of the following ways: 

a) By a linear-parallel arrangement of 
minerals, either by growth or mechanical 
orientation; 

b) By the intersection of a planar structure 
with the rock surface; 

c) By the intersection of two planar struc- 
tures such as bedding and cleavages; 

d) By the development of a series of small 
parallel packers in a planar structure such 
asmicrofolds, and 

e) By the deposition of elongated particles in 
a preferred orientation during sedimenta- 
tion. 

2.178 Liquefaction — The change in phase of a 
substance ( say^ a mass of a saturated sand ) to 
the fluid state ( say. sand as a loose, moving pour- 
ing body ). A saturated non-cohesive soil mass 
can be in a fluid state if no intergranular pressure 
exists within it. Such a fluid state is commonly 
called liquefaction. 

2.179 Liquid Limit {W\) — The minimum mois- 
ture content at the point between the liquid and 
the plastic states of clay, 

or 

The water content expressed as a percentage 
of weight of oven-dry soil, at the boundry 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



between liquid and plastic states of consistency of 
soil. 

Note — For the purpose of determination of liquid 
limit, it is denned as the water content at which a part 
of soil, cut by a groove of standard dinfensions, will 
flow together for a distance of 12 mm under the impact 
of 25 blows in a standard liquid limit apparatus, or as 
the water content of a soil paste, prepared in a speci- 
fied mould, into which a cone of specified dimensions 
and weight penetrates by 25 mm which dropped on to 
the paste in a specified manner. 

2.180 Lithoiogy — The physical character oi" a 
rock. 

2.181 Long-Term Rock Pressure — This is the 
ultimate rock pressure on the supports in under- 
ground openings. 

2.182 Loosening Pressure — Rock pressure exert- 
ed at supports by dead weight of loosened rock 
mass above a cavity. 

2.183 Lugeon — A water intake of 1 1/m/min at an 
injection pressure of 10 bars, that is, 1 035 kN/m^. 

M 

2.184 Machine Stiffness — The stifihess of a com- 
pression testing machine is defined as the ratio of 
force across the loading platens to the closure of 
platens after reducing the force to zero. To obtain 
complete stress-stain curves of rock, it is essen- 
tial that machine stiffness is more than post-peak 
stiffness of the test specimen, otherwise failure of 
the specimen will occur in violent manner. 

2.185 Macrofractures—- These are cracks in rock 
wider than 0*1 mm. They may be up to several 
metres or more in length. 

2.186 Mathematical Model — The representation 
of a physical system, by mathematical expressions 
from which the behaviour of the system can be 
deduced with known accuracy. 

2.187 Mass Movement — Unit movement of a 
portion of land surface as in creep, landslide or 
slip. 

2.188 Mass-Wasting — The slow down slope 
movement of rock debris. A general term for a 
variety of processes by which large masses of 
earth materials are moved by gravity either slow- 
ly or quickly from one place to another. 

2.189 Massive Rock — The rock mass is massive 
if the strength of the bond across partings or 
joints is comparable to the rock strength. 

2.190 Micrograph — A micrograph is obtained 
by an electron microscope and shows the structure 
of particles of soil or rock. 

2.191 Microseismic Noise — When rock material 
is overstressed and starts fracturing, specially in 
underground openings and rock slopes, micro- 
cracks develop giving rise to propagation of micro- 
seismic pulses which may be detected and 



recorded through geophones as 'microseismic 
noise' or acoustic em.ission. Rock burst is an ex- 
ample of microseismic noise or acoustic emission, 

2.192 Modulus of Deformation — See deforma- 
tion modulus. 

2.193 Modulus of Elasticity ( £) — See axial 
Young's modulus. 

2.194 Modulus Ratio — This is used to classify 
rock material and is defined as the ratio between 
the Young's modulus and the uniaxial compressive 
strength. The higher the value of the modulus 
ratio, the more brittle is the rock. The rock 
material is classified as high, medium and low 
modulus ratio for modulus ratios of > 500, 
500-200 and < 200 respectively. 

2.195 Modulus Reduction Factor ( MRF ) — The 

modulus reduction factor is defined as the ratio 
between static elastic modulus of rock mass ( E or 
estatic ) obtained from in-situ tests and the 
elastic modulus of rock matter {Er) obtained 
from, laboratory test. 

2.196 Modulus of Subgrade Reaction — It is de- 
fined as the ratio of normial pressure on the 
foundation and the corresponding settlement. 

2.197 Mohr Circle of Stresses/Strain — A graphi- 
cal representation of the components of stress/ 
strain acting across the various planes at a given 
point, drawn with reference to axes of normal 
stress/strain and shear stress/strain. 

2.198 Mohr Envelope — The envelope of a sequ- 
ence of Mohr circles representing stress condi- 
tions at failure for a given material. 

2.199 Mohs Hardness Scale — A scale of relative 
hardness of minerals arbitrarily reading from I to 
10. 

2.200 Mud Springs — When a joint strikes the 
ground water table below very soft or liquid 
( sloppy ) ground^ a spring will be formed. If 
mud comes out of the spring, it is called a mud 
spring. 

2.201 Mylonite — A compact, chert like rock 
without cleavage but with a streaky or banded 
structure produced by the extreme granulation 
and shearing of rocks which have been pulverized 
and rolled during overthrusting or by the action 
of intense dynamic metamorphism^ in general. 
Mylonite may also be described as a microbreccia 
with flow texture. 

N 

2.202 Neutral Pressure ( w, FjL^ ) — Pressure of 
water in the pores ( voids ) of a saturated medium 
of soil and rock. Also known as pore water 
pressure. 

2.203 Normal Stress — The stress in a rock nor- 
mal ( perpendicular ) to the shear stress. 



10 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



O 

2.204 Outbursts of Gas — In an opening, a rock 
mass may separate suddenly from the face and is 
crushed. This process may be accompanied by 
release of significant quantities of gas. The gases 
released by outbursts are most commonly methane 
carbon dioxide and nitrogen. Gas outbursts com- 
monly take place in coal mines and can also take 
place in shales, etc. 

2.205 Outcrop — That part of a stratum which 
appears at the surface. 

or 

Actual exposure of bed rock. 

2.206 Over-Coring — A process of drilling around 
a previously installed gauge within a borehole to 
relieve the stresses around the gauge. 

2.207 Over-Toppling — In some slopes, failure 
takes place not by sliding of rocks but by over- 
toppling of blocks of rocks. This type of failure 
occurs generally in steep slopes in thinly bedded 
rocks. 



2.208 Particle Velocity — As a seismic wave pro- 
pagates, it causes a particle of rock or soil to 
oscillate around its original position. The local 
velocity of motion of the particle is known as 
particle velocity. The ratio of particle velocity to 
the wave velocity gives the value of dynamic 
strain. 

2.209 Pay Line — See B line. 

2.210 Peak Shear Strength — Maximum shear 
strength along a failure surface. 

2.211 Percolation — The movement of gravita- 
tional water through soil. 

2.212 Perma-frost — Permanently, or perenially 
frozen ground, 

2.213 Permeability ( fc, LfT) — Permeability is de- 
fined as that property of a porous material that 
permits the passage or seepage of fluids such as 
water or oil or gas ( air ) through its intercon- 
necting voids. The overall permeability of a rock 
mass is denoted by K^ and is called the permeabi- 
lity of equivalent continuum. 

2.214 pH Value — The negative logarithm of the 
hydrogen ion activity. For example p¥L 7 indicates 
a hydrogen ion concentration (activity) of IQ-' 
mole/litre. 

2.215 Piezometer — An open or closed tube or 
other device installed downward from the ground 
surface and used to measure the level to which 
the water from a given aquifer will rise under its 
full head. 

2.216 Piezometric Surface — The surface at which 
water will stand in a series of piezometers. 



2.217 Pilot Tunnel — A small tunnel excavated 
over the entire length or over part of a tunnel to 
explore ground conditions and assist in final 
excavation. 

2.218 Pit — An excavation in the surface of the 
earth from which ore is obtained as in the large 
open pit mining or an excavation made for test 
purposes. 

2.219 Plane of Weakness — Planes in rocks that 
ajffect its structural properties. The planes may 
be the result of joints, fractures, faults, bedding 
or partings. 

2.220 Plane Wedge Failure ~ It is defined as the 
failure which occurs when a geological disconti- 
nuity such as a bedding plane, strikes parallel to 
the slope face and dips into the excavation at an 
angle greater than the angle of friction. 

2.221 Plastic Deformation — Deformation that 
remains after the load causing it is removed. It is 
the permanent part of the deformation beyond 
the elastic limit of a material resulting in plastic 
strain, plastic flow and irrecoverable deformation. 

2.222 Plastic Limit (W^)~ The water content 
at the lower limit of the plastic state of a clay. 
It is the minimum water content at which a soil 
can be rolled into a thread 3 mm in diameter 
without crumbling. 

2.223 Plastic Zone — See broken zone. 

2.224 Point Load Lump Strength Index ( lu F/L^) — 
It is the point load strength of a rock lump tested 
in point load tester. 

2.225 Point Load Strength Index ( A, F/L^ ) — It 
is the point load strength of a rock core tested in 
point load tester. It is defined as the ratio of 
peak load at failure to the square of diameter of 
core. The standard size of the core is Nx. size that 
is, about 50 mm. 

2.226 Poisson Ratio ( Y ) — The negative of ratio 
of the slope of axial stress strain curve to the 
slope of the axial stress-diametrical strain curve 
for a cylindrical specimen subjected to uniaxial 
compression. 

2.227 Pore Volume ( Fp, L^ ) — The volume of 
all pores contained within the gross external 
dimensions of a rock specimen or sample. 

2.228 Pore Water Pressure — See natural pres- 
sure. 

2.229 Porosity ( « ) — The volume of voids in a 
rock specimen expressed as a percentage of the 
gross volume ( Fb ) of the specimen. 

2.230 Portal — The entry or exit point of a tunnel 
if it meets the ground surface. 

2.231 Pre-splitting — See smooth blasting. 



11 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.232 Pressure Bulb — The zone of stresses below 
a foundation, outside of which stresses are less 
than a limiting value. A 10 percent pressue bulb 
is defined as a pressure bulb or zone of stresses in 
which maximum stress is more than 10 percent 
of the foundation pressure. 

2.233 Primary Lining — The lining initially placed 
inside a tunnel or shaft, usually to support the 
excavation. The primary lining may be of wood 
or steel sets with steel or wood lagging or rock 
bolts and shotcrete. 

2.234 Primitive Stress — The ground is in a state 
of equilibrium before excavation of a tunnel or 
any underground opening. At this stage, the 
stresses at any point within the ground are term- 
ed as ^primitive', 'primary' or *pre-excavation' 
stresses. 



2.235 Quarry — An excavation in the surface of 
the earth from which stone is obtained for crush- 
ed rock or building stone, 

2.236 Quasi-Elastic — * Quasi as if, as though it 
were, seemingly almost elastic, that is, considered 
as elastic for practical purposes. 



2.237 Radius of Influence ( ^, L) — The 'radius 
of influence' is an empirical concept used in a 
bore hole permeability test. It is the distance 
from the borehole at which the influence of the 
test on the piezo metric head is no longer percep- 
tible. Generally, one may consider that the radi- 
us of influence is between 100 and I 000 times the 
radius of the test bore hole. (The radius of in- 
fluence is greater in more permeable ground ). 

2.238 Raft Foundation — A raft is a continuous 
slab of RCC connecting all columns and walls, 

2.239 Redox Potential — The stability of an ele- 
ment in a state of oxidation depends on the 
energy involved either in adding or subtracting 
electrons, and a quantitative measure for this is 
given by the redox potential. 

A redox reaction is an oxidation-reduction 
one, If, in a cell, oxidation is produced at the 
anode and reduction at the cathode, the potential 
necessary is the redox potential. It is actually 
measured relative to a standard 'hydrogen elec- 
trode' taken as zero; this consists of platinum over 
which hydrogen is bubbled so as to produce a 
standard concentration of hydrogen ions. 

Redox potential is a measure of corrosion of 
anchor bars, cables, etc. 

2.240 Relaxation — Rate of reduction of stress in 
a material due to creep. An alternate term is 
stress relaxation. 



2.241 Residual Shear Strength — Shear strength 
along a failure surface after a large displacement. 

2.242 Residual Stresses — Residual stresses are 
defined in the sense of the theory of elasticity as 
*locked-m' stresses associated with the previous 
Theological history of the rock. They may exist 
where viscoelastic eff'ects of erosion have not com- 
pletely relaxed. A visco-elastic substance can- 
not retain residual stresses indefinitely, but some 
material possessing a yield stress can do so. 

2.243 Resonance — Where a small periodic force 
is applied to a system capable of oscillation, the 
system is usually set into forced oscillations of 
small amphtude and, as the frequency, /, of the 
excitant force approaches the natural frequency 
of the system, f^, at which point the system is 
said to be in resonance with the excitant force. 

2.244 Rheology — Science dealing with the flow 
or deformation of matter. The study of time- 
dependent strain in both solids and liquids. Some- 
times, rheology describes the study of afl types of 
deformation, elastic and viscous, particularly the 
plastic flow of solids and flow of non-Newtonian 
liquids. 

2.245 Rock — Any naturally formed aggregate 
of minerkl matter occurring in large masses or 
fragments. 

2.246 Rock Anchor -- A steel rod or cable instal- 
led in a hole in rock to resist pull or shear force 
in principle same as the rock bolt, but generally 
used for rods longer than about four metres. 

2.247 Rock Bolt — A steel rod placed in a hole 
drilled in rock used to reinforce the rock together. 
One end of the rod is firmly anchored in the hole 
by means of a mechanical device and/or grout, 
and the threaded ( projecting ) end is equipped 
with a nut and plate which bears against the rock 
surface. The rod can be pretensioned. 

2.248 Rock Burst — Sudden explosive like release 
of energy due to the failure of a brittle rock of 
high strength in an underground opening. 

2.249 Rock Fall — The relative free falling of 
newly detached segments of bed rock of any size, 
from cliff", steep slope, cave or arch. 

2.250 Rock Mass — Rock mass is in-situ rock 
which has been rendered discontinuous by systems 
of structural features such as joints, faults and 
bedding planes. 

2.251 Rock Mass Quality ( ^ ) -- A numerical 
index depending upon the rock mass quality and 
geological conditions, used to classify a rock mass. 
It is equal to (RQD/Jn) (Jr/A) (J^ISRF), 
where RQD -- rock quality designation Jn = 
joint set number, J^ = joint roughness number, 
7a = joint alteration number, Jw == joint water 
reduction factor and SRF ^ stress reduction 
factor. 



12 



IS : 11358 . 1987 



2.252 Rock Mass Rating ( RMR ) ~ A numerical 
index depending upon the quality of a rock mass 
and geological conditions, used to classify a rock 
mass. It is the sum of ratings for uniaxial com- 
pressive strength, spacing, condition of joints, 
ground water conditions, RQD and joint orienta- 
tion. 

2.253 Rock Material ~ This is the smallest ele- 
ment of rock not cut by any fracture; there 
are always some micro-fractures in the rock 
material. 

2.254 Rock Pressure ( Vertical ) — The rock 
pressure acting vertically on the tunnel supports 
is called vertical rock pressure, 

2.255 Rock Quality Designation ( RQD ) — This 
is the percentage of sound cores recovered in 
pieces greater thaa or equal to 10 cm length with 
respect to the total core run. 

2.256 Rock Reinforcement — The placement of 
rock bolts, rock anchors or tendons at a fairly 
uniform spacing to consolidate the rock and rein- 
force the rock's natural tendency to support itself, 
It is also used in conjunction with shotcrete on 
rock surface. 

2.257 Rock Slide — The downward, usually rapid 
movement, of newly detached segments of the bed 
rock sliding on bedding planes, joint or fault sur- 
faces or any other plane of separation. 

2.258 Rock Weathering — The physical disintegra- 
tion of rocks at or near the earth surface due to 
composition of minerals caused by the climatic 
change. 

2.259 Roof Truss — The concept of roof truss 
support of openings in a rock mass is based on 
the development of a truss in the form of rock 
bolts and cable supports. Inclined holes are used 
at the ends which are tiexi up by a cable. The 
compression produced by the rock bolts and cables 
develops the effect of a truss within the rock mass 
in the opening. 

2.260 Rotational Side — A relative displacement 
of points on opposite sides of a fault, measured 
on the surface of the fault, a minor fault or a 
shde. 

2.261 Round — A set of holes drilled and charged 
in a tunnel or quarry which are fired instantane- 
ously or with short-delay detonators. 

-2.262 Rupture — Failure of a material with deve- 
lopment of fractures or shear planes. Deforma- 
tion characterized by loss of cohesion. 



2.263 Safe Blasting Criterion — Particle velocity 
has been found to be the best criterion for predic- 
ting damage to structures due to blasting vibra- 
tions. It has been recommended that particle 
velocity near any structure should not be allowed 
to exceed 50 mm per second. 



A rock mass with many thin 



2.264 Sagging — Usually occurs in sedimentary 
rock formations as separation and downward 
bending of sedimentary beds jn the roof of an 
underground opening. 

2.265 Sample — The rock submitted to the labora- 
tory for testing. 

2.2^6 Scabbing — Fracturing of rock in the form 
of slabs, due to interference between the wave 
front of an incident compressive wave and its re- 
flection from rock surfaces. 

2.267 Scaling — Removing loose pieces of rock 
in a tunnel after blasting. 

2.268 Schistosity ~ The variety of foliation that 
occurs in coarse-grained metamorphic rocks and 
is generally the result of the parallel arrangement 
of platy and ellipsoidal mineral grains within the 
rock substance. 

2.269 Sealed Distance — The sealed distance is a 
term used in predicting the effect of blasting vibra- 
tions on the buildings and other structures on the 
surface. Generally, it is taken to be DjW^^^, 
where D is the distance from the source of blast- 
ing to the structure under consideration and W 
is the weight of explosive per delay. 

2.270 Seamy 
layers. 

2.271 Secondary Lining ™ The finally placed, or 
permanent structural lining of a tunnel which may 
be of concrete, steel or masonry. 

2.272 Secondary Stress ( Induced ) — Creation of 
an underground opening modifies the stress dis- 
tribution around the opening. These modified 
stresses are known as the induced, secondary or 
-post-excavation stresses. 

2.273 Sedimentary Rock — Rocks formed by the 
accumulation of sediments derived from the break- 
down of earlier rocks by chemical precipitation, 
or by organic activity, for example, sandstone, 
limestone, shale, etc. 

2.274 Self-Supporting Opening — In good quality 
rock masses, an opening may be made without 
using any kind of support system and it will stand 
for long periods of use. Such openings are called 
self-supporting openings. 

2.275 Shaft — Generally, a vertical or near verti- 
cal excavation driven downward from the surface 
as access to tunnels, chambers or other under- 
ground workings. 

2.276 Shear Failure ( Failure by Rupture ) — 

Failure in which movement is caused by shearing 
stresses in a rock mass. 

2.277 Shear Modulus ( Modulus of Rigidity ) — 

The ratio of shear stress to shear strain for a 
material determined either from the slope of the 
tangent or of the secant of a stress-strain curve. 



13 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.278 Shear Strength of a Rock Mass — The 

maximum resistance of a rock mass ( including 
joints ) to shearing stresses. 

2.279 Shear Strength of Rock Material — The 

maximum resistance of a rock material ( exclud- 
ing joints ) to shearing stresses. 

2.280 Shear Zone — A zone in which shearing 
has occurred on a large scale so that the rock is 
crushed and brecciated. 

2.281 Shield — A steel cylinder with open or 
closed face equal to the tunnel diameter for tun- 
nel excavation in soft grounds. 

2.282 Shock Waves — A shock wave is an inelas- 
tic wave. In fractured rock, the mass tangential 
modulus of elasticity increases with increasing 
strain. Any pulse will then tend to acquire a 
steep front and travel faster than the elastic waves. 
This phenomenon gives rise to a shock wave 
which has a great damaging potential or reflection 
from an open surface. 

2.283 Short-Term Rock Pressure — Pressure 

generated immediately after excavation, 

2.284 Shotcrete ~ A pneumatically applied con- 
crete mix projected on an uneven rock surface. 
Shotcrete provides an effective protection of rock 
against weathering. 

2.285 Silt — The term silt applies to unconsoli- 
dated material finer than sand and coarser than 
clay. In the non-technical sense, sih is the 
muddy, fine sediment carried and laid down by 
rivers or by the ocean in bays and harbours. 

2.286 Sink Hole — Any slight depression in the 
land surface, specially one having no outlet, one 
of the hollows in limestone regions ( limestone 
sinkholes ) often communicating with a cavern or 
subterranean passage so that water running into 
it is lost. 

2.287 Size EflFect or Scale Eflfect — The strength of 
rocks decreases with increasing size of the speci- 
men particularly under tensile stresses. This affect 
is known as size effect or scale effect. 

2.288 Slabbing — The creation of axial cracks 
due to uniaxial compressive stresses, results in 
slabs of rock popping out into the cavity. 

2.289 Slake Durability Index (h) — The percen- 
tage ratio of the final dry mass to the initial dry 
mass of a sample after being subject to one 
10 minute slaking cycle in a slake durability 
apparatus. 

2.290 Slaking — When an air-dried or oven-dried 
sample of fine particled soil is placed in water, 
the soil slakes. The force of surface tension draws 
the water into the voids and compresses the air 
trapped inside. The pressure in the air may be- 
come so high that the corresponding tension in 
the soil causes the slaking. 



2.291 Slickenside — A polished and smoothly 
striated surface that results from friction along a 
fault plane. 

2.292 Slip Lines — Orthogonal curves whose 
directions at any point bisect the angles between 
the principal axes at that point. 

2.293 Smooth Blasting — Smooth blasting is used 
to minimize damage to the rock mass due to blast- 
ing vibrations. It is done by drilling closely 
spaced drill holes and blasting them by light 
charges. 

2.294 Soil — All unconsolidated earth material of 
whatever origin that overlies bedrock, that has 
been in any way altered or weathered. 

2.295 Spalling Rock — A rock mass under stress 
that yields thin slabs or wedges of rock by rapid 
failure. Slabs commonly form parallels to the 
walls or arch of an opening in rock. 

2.296 Specific Gravity ( Gm )— Ratio of weight of 
a given volume of dry rock to the weight of equal 
volume of distilled water at a standard tempera- 
ture. 

2.297 Specimen ~ The portion of the sample 
upon which the test is to be performed. 

2.298 Spring Line — The place on the side of a 
tunnel where the tunnel starts curving into the 
arch. 

2.299 Squeezing Xiround Condition — A situation 
where a rock tries to squeeze inside the cavity 
soon after excavation, both in horizontal and 
vertical direct ons ( any rock can behave as squee- 
zing rock if in-situ stresses are high ). 

2»300 Squeezing Pressure — Rock pressure exer- 
ted on supports by squeezing ground. 

2.301 Stage Grouting — See groutirig. 

2.302 Stand Up Time — This is the time lapse bet- 
ween excavation and the instant when the first 
rock piece falls from the roof, in a newly excavat- 
ed tunnel or opening. 

2.303 Stick-Slip Oscillations — When a rock mass 
is sheared along smooth or rough joint surface, 
oscillations in the shear force v^ slip curve may be 
observed. These are called stick-slip oscillations. 
Though the rate of shearing is constant, the actual 
slip takes place in jerks. While there is no motion, 
it is called stick and when motion starts, it is call- 
ed slip. The total motion is called stick-slip 
motion. 

2.304 Storage Co-efficient ( 5 ) — It is the change 
in the discharge out of an acquifer per unit change 
of head. 

2.305 Strain Ellipsoid — The representation of 
the strain in the form of an ellipsoid mto which a 
sphere of unit radius deforms and whose axes are 
the principal axes of strain. 



14 



IS : 11358 - 2987 



2.306 Strain Energy Release Rate — It is the rate 
of strain energy released per unit area of the ex- 
cavated surface in the underground minor tunnel 
openings. If the strain energy release rate is more 
than a limiting value, rock burst is likely to occur. 

2.307 Strain Hardening — If upon loading beyond 
the yield point, the stress-strain curve continues 
to rise within the inelastic domain above the yield 
point, the material is said to be strain hardened. 

2.308 Strain Softening — During uniaxial or tri- 
axial testing of rocks, it is generally observed that 
strength decreases after certain strain. This is 
known as strain softening. 

2.309 Stratum — A layer or bed of rock or soil. 

2.310 Strength Anisotropy Index — The ratio of 
the corrected point load strength indices for tests, 
perpendicular and parallel to planes of weakness 
in samples of an intact rock. 

2.311 Stress Concentration Factor — Stress con- 
centration takes place when a cavity is excavated 
in a rock mass. The stress concentration factor 
is defined as the ratio of tangential stress at a 
particular point along the periphery and the ini- 
tial stress before excavation at that point. The 
higher the stress concentration factor, the greater 
are the chances of failure of the rock mass or rock 
burst. 

2.312 Stress Ellipsoid — The representation of 
the state of stress in the form of an ellipsoid 
whose semi-axes are proportional to the magnitude 
of the principal stresses and lie in the principal 
directions. The coordinates of a point P on this 
ellipsoid are proportional to the magnitudes of the 
respective components of the stress across the 
plane normal to the direction OF, where O is the 
centre of the ellipsoid. 

2.313 Stress Reduction Factor (SRF) — The 

parameter SRF is a measure of : ( a ) loosening 
pressure in the case of excavation through shear 
zones and clay bearing rock masses, ( b ) rock 
stress, qchi in a competent rock mass where qc is 
uniaxial compressive strength of rock mass and a^ 
is the major principal stress before excavation, 
and ( c ) squeezing or swelling pressure in incom- 
petent rock masses. SRF, hence, can be regarded 
as a total stress parameter. 

2.314 Strike — It is the direction of a line form- 
ed by the inter-section of the structural surface 
( for example, a bedding or fault plane ) and a 
horizontal plane. 

2.315 Subsidence — Settlement of ground above 
the workings of underground operations. 

2.316 Support — Structure or structural feature 
built into an underground opening for maintaining 
its stability. 

2.317 Surface Energy — The surface of a crack 
is supposed to possess surface energy per unit area. 



associated with rupturing of atomic bonds when 
a crack is formed. A crack can propagate only 
when the strain energy release rate is more than 
the surface energy of the crack. 

2.318 Surface Porosity — It is the porosity of 
voids on a given surface of rock. It is defined as 
the area of voids to the total surface area of rock 
material. 

2.319 Suspension Bolt — Rock bolts which are 
used to suspend weak rock layers or a fractured 
rock mass are known as suspension bolts. These 
bolts are anchored into the competent thick rock 
layer or rock mass. 

2.320 Swelling — Swelling can be defined as a 
time-dependent volume increase of the natural 
ground caused by stiess changes, increase in water 
content or by a combination of both: 

a) Swelling Pressure Index ( ice ) — The 
maximum axial stress recorded upon a 
radially and axially confined specimen 
after it is fully saturated; 

b) Swelling Strain Index ( sru) — The maxi- 
mum increase in axial strain, expressed as 
a percentage, of a radial confined speci- 
men under a standard axial load upon 
saturation; and 

c) Unconfined Swelling Strain ( svc ) — The 
maximum increase in strain, expressed as 
a percentage, in a dimension of an uncon- 
fined specimen upon saturation. 



2.321 Talus — Fragments which are broken off 
by the action of the weather from the face of a 
steep rock, accumulate at its foot, forming a slop- 
ing heap called talus. 

2.322 Tectonic Creep — Fault creep of tectonic 
origin, also called slippage. 

2.323 Tensile Strength ( ^t ) — It is ultimate 
strength of a material subjected to a tensile load- 
ing. Tensile strength is not a unique property of 
rock and depends very much upon the type of the 
test. 

a) Uniaxial Tensile Strength — Tensile 
strength of rock specimen subjected to 
uniaxial tensile stress. 

b) Flexural Strength — Tensile strength of a 
rock layer or beam subjected to bending 
moment. Flexural strength is obtained 
by a beam test on rocks and is significa- 
ntly higher than the uniaxial tensile 
strength. 

c) Brazilian Tensile Strength — Tensile 
strength obtained from the Brazilian test 
on rock disc. 



15 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.324 Tension Crack — Vertical cracks which 
occur on the top terrace of a slope which is under 
distress. These cracks are called tension cracks, 
as they develop due to existence of tensile stresses 
in that region. Tension cracks can also occur 
along the slope but this is usually rare. 

2.325 Terrace — Any level topped surface, with a 
steep escarpment, whether it be solid rock or loose 
material. It is step like in character. 

2.326 Texture — It is the relationship between the 
grains of minerals forming a rock. 

a) Porous — Rock material with cellular 
structure and large voids; 

b) Fragmental — Rock material having frag- 
ments of minerals which are loosely pack- 
ed; 

c) Granitoid — Rock material with grains 
large enough to be readily recognized — 
average grain granite; 

d) Porphyritic — Rock with large crystals in 
fine grained mass; and 

e) Dense — Rock with grain structure too 
small to identify with the naked eye, 

2.327 Thermal Stress — Internal stress, caused in 
part by uneven heating, 

2.328 Three-Dimensional Wedge Failure ( of 
Slopes ) — When two discontinuities strike obli- 
quely across the slope face and their line of inter- 
section day lights in the slope face, the wedge of 
rock testing on these discontinuities will slide 
down along the line of intersection, provided this 
is greater than the angle of friction. 

2.329 Throw — The projection of broken rock 
during blasting. 

2.330 Tight — Rock remaining within the mini- 
mum excavation lines after completion of a blast- 
ing round. 

2.331 Toughness — Extent to which a material 
absorbs energy without fracture. 

2.332 Trench — Usually a long, narrow, near 
vertical sided cut in rock or soil such as is made 
for utility lines. 

2.333 Tunnel — A passage in rock or soil open at 
both ends. 

2.334 Tunnel Supports ^ A support system used 
in a tunnel is known as a tunnel support. These 
are of two types: 

a) Stiff Supports — These are supports which 
do not deflect significantly with increase 
in rock pressure and are known as rigid 
or stiff rock supports such as concrete 
linings or steel supports of every heavy 
section; and 



b) Flexible Support — Those supports which 
deflect significantly with increase in rock 
pressures are known as flexible supports 
such as steel supports of thin section with 
gravel packing and shotcrete. The ad- 
vantage of a flexible support system is to 
dissipate the strain energy stored in the 
rock mass by allowing squeezing of rock 
mass. 

U 

2.335 Ultimate Rock Pressure — Pressure which 
will eventuaUy develop on supports during the 
life time of an opening. 



2.336 Unconiined Compressive Strength 

axial compressive strength. 



See uni- 



2.337 Unconiined Swelling Strain ( Svc ) — The 
maximum increase in strain, expressed as a per- 
centage, in a dimension of an unconfined speci- 
men upon saturation. 

2.338 Undulating Rock Profile — If the profile of 
the rock mass below a soil cover is undulating, it 
is called an undulating rock profile. This may 
happen in soluble rocks. 

2.339 Uniaxial Compressive Strength ( q^, F/L^) — 

The maximum uniaxial compressive load carried 
by a right cylindrical specimen of rock divided by 
the cross-sectional area of the sample. It is 
classified as 5i, *S'2, S^, S^, S^ for uniaxial compres- 
sive strengths of 2 000, 600-2 000, 200-600, 
60-200 and < 60 kg/cm^, respectively. This 
notation is used in the basic geotechnical descrip- 
tion ( BGD ). 

a) Unit Weight ( y Flr^ ) 

b) Dry Unit Weight — Vd ( FL'^ ) — The 
weight of even dry rock per unit of total 
volume of rock. 

c) Saturated Unit Weight — Ysat ( FL~^ ) ~ 
The unit weight of a rock material when 
saturated. 

2.340 Unsupported Span — It is the distance bet- 
ween face of excavation and first line of support or 
the width of the opening whichever is minimum. 
It affects the stand-up time. 

2.341 Uplift Pressure — Either the upward force 
on a dam base due to water pressure in the foun- 
dations or the upward heaving of earth caused by 
the escape of water under high pressure from a 
dam or other confined area. 



2.342 Vesicles — Voids formed due to emanation 
of gases in flows of volcanoes. 



16 



IS : 11358 - 1987 



2.343 Virgin Rock Stresses — See Primitive stress. 

2.344 Void Index ( /v ) — Void ratio defined as 
the mass of water contained in a rock sample 
after a one hour period of immersion, as a per- 
centage of its initial desiccator-dry mass. 

2.345 Volumetric Joint Count ( /v ) — It is the 

total number of joints in a unit cube of rock mass 
of 1 m^ volume. 

W 

2.346 Water, Interstitial — Water that exists in 
the interstices or voids in rock, soils or other 
kinds of porous media. 

2.347 Water^ Meteoric — Water that is in or deri- 
ved from the atmosphere. The term has been 
used in various ways, sometimes to include all 
sub-surface water of external origin and some- 
times to include only that derived by absorption, 
excluding specially the connate ocean water. 

2.348 Wave Front — ^ The surface which is the 
locus of all points, having their motion in identi- 
cal phase propagating in a wave, the direction of 
propagation being perpendicular to the wave 
front. 



2.349 Weathering — The process of rock break- 
down and decomposition instigated by external 
agencies, such as wind, rain, change in tempera- 
ture, plants, etc. Two main types exist, namely, 
mechanical ( physical ) and chemical. The former 
involves break-up processes, the latter chemical 
alteration. Weathering together with subsequent 
transportation comprise erosion. 



2.350 Yield Stress — The stress at which strain 
increases without accompanying increase in stress. 
It is an indication of maximum stress that can be 
developed in a material without causing plastic 
deformation. It is the stress at which a material 
exhibits a specified permanent deformation and is 
a practical approximation of elastic limit, 

2.351 Yielding Supports— Supports capable of 
undergoing substantial deformation so as to modi- 
fy stress distribution around the supports. 



2.352 Young's 
modulus. 



Modulus — See axial Young's 



2.353 Zone of Weathering — That layer of super- 
ficial deposits subject to weathering and broadly 
coinciding with the belt of soil water. 



17 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones : 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to alt Offices ) 

Reg/onal Offices: Tefepfione 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, /3 31 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 13^1 1375 

♦Eastern : 1/14, C 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. i. P. Road, 36 24 99 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 



♦Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. 0. Princep Street 
Calcutta 700072 

fSales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 
Bombay 400007 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. 72 18 43 

CHANDtGARH 160036 13 16 41 

r41 24 42 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 ^ 41 25 19 

L41 29 16 

tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 M!DC, Marol, Andheri ( East), 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, f2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 12 63 49 

Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore /38 49 55 

Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 \38 49 56 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 67 16 

BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 

53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, — 

5th By lane, GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C, L N. Gupta Marg (Nampally Station Road), 
HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 
11 7/41 8B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ), RIy Station Road, 
TRIVANDRUM 695001 

inspect/on Offices ( With Sale Point ): 

Pushpanjali, 205-A West High Court Road, 
Bharampeth Extension, NAGPUR 440010 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 
PUNE 411005 



23 10 83 


/6 34 71 
\6 98 32 


r21 68 76 
L21 82 92 


6 23 05 


/6 21 04 
\j6 21 17 


2 51 71 


5 24 35 


27 68 00 


89 65 28 



Printed at Kapoor Art Press, New Delhi, India 



