**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11641 (1986) : General Requirement and Testing of Marine 
Inflatable Liferafts [TED 19: Marine Engineering and Safety 
Aids] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11641 - 19U& 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 
TESTING OF MARINE INFLATABLE LIFE RAFTS 



UWJ 62^- 12553 : 629 V25 1 H : &10 I 




® Copyright lOBfi 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 HAllADUR Si [All ZATAR MARfi 

NEW DELHI HOW? 

Q, 5 Augsii 1986 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 
TESTING OF MARINE INFLATABLE LIFERAFTS 

Marine Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee, MGPD 4 

Chairman Representing 

Capt P. S. Barve Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 

Members 

Shri A. K. Prasad ( Alternate to 
Capt P. S. Barve) 
Capt S. B. A<3a Ericon & Richards, Bombay 

Cdr S. S. Bajdwant Directorate of Standardization ( Ministry of 

Defence ) [ DGI (N) ], New Delhi 

Lt A. Bhowmick ( Alternate ) 
Capt N. N. Bhansali Company of Master Mariners of India, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Chopra Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri S. Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Roy Chowdhury Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Shri D. K. Bansrjee ( Alternate ) 
Deptjtr Director Ministry of Defence ( NHQ,) 

Lt Cdr A. Anand ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Easwaran Mather and Piatt ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shut D. R. Bapat ( Alternate ) 
Capt S. B. Kundargi Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Capt R. Nath ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Manoharan Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 

Shri S. Gopalan ( Alternate ) 
Shri W. R. Patwardhan Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay 

Shrt D. C. Kandpal ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Ramamurthy Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. Visakhapatnam 

Shri P. L. Narasimham ( Alternate ) 
Capt N. H. Sadarangani Indian National Shipowners* Association, Bombay 

Capt A. K. Ranade ( Alternate ) 
Shrt Jitendra R. Salot Vijay Fire Protection Systems Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. Raj Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. A. Shaparia Shaparia Dock & Steel Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. N. Mistry ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri R. Soundhirarajan Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi B. L. Raina, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri V. K. Sehgal 
Joint Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



Life Saving Equipment and Accessories Subcommittee, MCPD 4 : 6 

Convener 
Capt A. K. Prasad Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay 

Members 
Shki M. Apparao Mazagon Dock Limited, Bombay 

Capt N. N. Bhansat.i Company of Master Mariners of India, Bombay 

Shbi S. Gopalan Aero Marine Industries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Srri T. M. Govindan ( Alternate ) 
Capt K. V. Hora Meridian Inflatables Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Capt S. K. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Capt T. S. Khar a Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Capt S. B. Kundargi ( Alternate ) 
Shri Shareef Moloobhoy Ahmed S. Moloobhoy & Sons, Bombay 

Shri Arife Munjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. K. Nangia Geeta Engineering Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. K, Batra ( Alternate) 
Shri Fulchand N. Patel R. L. & Co, Bombay 

Capt Mohan RamaK Ministry of Defence, Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 

Capt N. H. Sadarangani Indian National Shipowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri P. A. Shaparta Shaparia Dock & Steel Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. N. Mistry (Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Sinha Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Shri K. K. Na^di ( Alternate } 
Shri V. Srinivasan" Swastic Rubber Products Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Y. S. Marathe ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. Y. Banavalikar ( Alternate II ) 
Shri K. S. Subramaniam Institute of Marine Technologists, Bombay 

Shri P. K. Banerjee (Alternate I ) 

Shri J. S. Bhatti ( Alternate II ) 

Capt B. D. Katarxa ( Alternate III ) 
Shri S. SttryanarayanaN Bharat Traders, Bombay 

Cdr S. Verma Ministry of Defence (R&D) 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND 
TESTING OF MARINE INFLATABLE LIFERAFTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 April 1986, after the draft finalized by the Marine 
Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 In the preparation of this standard, current work of ISO/TC 8 'Ship- 
building and marine structures' and the provisions under SOLAS* 
convention of the International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) has been 
taken into account. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard gives the general requirements, equipments to be 
carried and tests for marine inflatable liferafts. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Lifelines — These are grab lines becketed all around and on the 
inside of liferafts in such a manner as to provide a number of loops. 

2.2 Q,uoit — A buoyant ring attached to the end of a rope used for 
rescue work. 

2.3 Painter — A minimum length of 24 metres of rope one end of which 
is suitably attached on the liferaft for the purposes of towing. 

2«4 Sea Anchor ( Drogue ) — A nylon cloth of suitable area with a 
small reinforced central hole and the corners being connected together 
by a suitable length of nylon rope to form a pyramid when in use and 
act as a drag to the liferaft in bad weather or choppy seas. 



♦Safety of life at sea. 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

3. CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 The inflatable liferafts shall consist of a main unit, comprising main 
buoyance chamber, main floor, canopy support, canopy and thwart as 
required, accessories to the main unit, emergency equipment and 
container or valise. The liferaft shall be of sufficiently robust construc- 
tion to remain afloat when fully laden for at least 30 days. There shall 
be no deterioration involving loss of seaworthniness when the raft is 
subjected to the 30 days exposure. The liferaft shall be so constructed 
that when inflated and floating with the cover uppermost it will be stable 
in a seaway. 

3.2 All material and components used in the construction of a liferaft, 
its accessories and container shall be able to withstand world-wide 
seagoing climatic conditions. A liferaft and its accessories when stowed 
in the liferaft container shall be resistant to the effect of humidity and all 
materials, for example, fabrics, cordage; webbing and thread shall be 
inherently rot-proof or rot-proofed by an acceptable method. The life- 
raft assembly shall be able to withstand weather deck stowage on board 
ship with a minimum of protection to the operational valise or 
container. 

3.2*1 Buoyancy Chamber — The buoyancy chambers of the liferaft shall 
be so arranged as to ensure by a division into an even number of separate 
compartments, half of which shall be capable of supporting out of the 
water the number of persons which the liferaft is permitted to accommo- 
date, that there is a reasonable margin of buoyancy if the raft is damaged 
or partially fails to inflate. 

-3.2.2 Main Floor — The floor of the liferaft shall be water-tight, and 
shall be capable of providing thermal insulation from the water in which 
it is floating. Where this is achieved by means of inflation, provision 
shall be made for deflating the compartment. The floor shall be 
sufficient area for the number of persons which the liferaft is classified to 
carry. 

3.2*3 Canopy Support — The canopy support shall be erected automa- 
tically to extend the canopy when the liferaft is inflated. The canopy 
shall remain erect if any of the main chambers are deflated. 

3.2.4 Thwart — The inflatable liferaft may be fitted with a thwart 
which is inflatable. In the case of the single buoyancy tube liferaft, the 
thwart shall be inflated by gas automatically, and if any of the compart- 
ments of the buoyancy tube is deflated, the intact compartment(s) together 
with the thwart shall form the boundray of and maintain the stability of 
the liferaft. 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

3.2.5 Canopy — The canopy shall erect automatically on inflation of 
the liferaft and shall have at least the following requirements provided: 

a) It shall be of double construction consisting of an outer cover and 
an inner cover with an adequate air space in between for provid- 
ing thermal insulation. Entrance shall be similarly insulated. 

b) At least two entrances shall be provided, each on an opposite side 
of the raft, with effective means for closing, except that on rafts 
classified for eight or less persons one such entrance may be 
accepted, provided that adequate ventilation is available. 

c) The height of the canopy shall be such that the occupants can 
sit comfortably upright on the floor. 

d) Means of collecting rainwater shall be provided in the outer 
cover. It shall be possible to collect this water inside the raft 
when the entrance is closed. For such purposes, the outer cover 
material shall not contain substances known to impart injurious 
qualities to the drinking water collected from the cover. 

e) The canopy shall have a marker lamp provided at the top and a 
room lamp in the interior, each receiving current from its own 
water activated cell, or from other suitable source of supply. The 
marker lamp and room lamp shall be served by separate circuits 
and suitable means shall be provided to save discharging in day 
time. The luminous intensity of each lamp shall be at least 0*3 
candela. The water activated cells shall have the capacity to 
light the marker lamp and room lamp for at least 12 hours. 

3.2.6 Liferafts for Use with Launching Appliance — The devit-launched 
liferaft shall have a device adapted for connection to a launching 
appliances and means of holding a suspended raft to the side of the ship 
at the boarding station so that the liferaft with full complement and 
emergency equipment can be launched safely. 

4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Types — The inflatable liferafts shall be of the following types: 

a) Types for use by jettisoning; 

b) Types for use with launching appliance. 

4.2 Temperature Range — The inflatable liferaft shall be capable of 
operating throughout the temperature range 66 to — 30°C. 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

4.3 Working Gas 

4.3.1 Kind of Gas — The working gas used for inflation of inflatable 
liferafts shall be a high pressure liquefied carbon dioxide gas, or a 
mixture of a high pressure liquefied carbon dioxide gas and a high 
pressure nitrogen gas or any other suitable gas or mixture of gases which 
are similarly non-toxic and non-inflammable. 

4.3.2 Purity of Gas — The gas shall be of a purity of at least the 
following values: 

Moisture Content in Purity in Percent 

Percent by Weight, by Weight, 

Max Min 

Liquefied carbon 0*015 99*5 

dioxide gas 

Nitrogen — 99*5 

4.3.3 Amount of Gas — The amount of gas provided shall be such that 
in the case of jettisoning types, the raft shall inflate to the extent that the 
inflatable chambers shall assume their full shape and the canopy shall be 
sufficiently erect to allow occupants to get under the cover within the 
time of 3 minutes at ambient temperature of — 30°C; and in the case of 
devit- launched types, the raft shall attain the full working pressure within 
the same time at the same temperature. 

4.3.4 Filling Ratio — The gases shall be filled in a ratio as specified in 
IS : 8198(Part3)-1976*. 

4.4 Carrying Capacity 

4.4.1 Types by Capacity — Inflatable Jiferafts are classified according to 
the carrying capacity. Following 6 types are recommended: for 6, 12, 
15, 16, 20 and 25 persons. 

4.4.2 Calculation of the Capacity — The capacity shall be the smaller of 
the numbers calculated as follows: 

a) Maximum integer obtained by dividing by 96 the volume ( in 
cubic decimetres ) of the main buoyancy chamber in the inflated 
condition, which for this purpose shall include neither the canopy 
supports nor the thwarts; 

b) Maximum integer obtained by dividing by 3 720 the area (in 
square centimetres ) of the floor in the inflated condition, when 
measured to the inside periphery of the buoyancy chambers, 
which for this purpose may include the thwarts but shall not 
include the area occupied by the canopy supports. 



♦Code of practice for steel cylinders for compressed gases: Part 3 High pressure 
liquefiable gases. 

6 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

In both cases, the raft shall be inflated to the designed working 
pressure. 

Where the capacities and areas are obtained by direct calculation 
from material sizes these capacities and areas shall be confirmed on an 
inflated raft. 

4.5 Mass — The total mass of the inflatable liferaft with its emergency 
equipment and container or valise shall not exceed 180 kg. 

5. ACCESSORIES TO THE MAIN UNIT 

5.0 The accessories to the main unit of inflatable liferafts shall be 
compatible with the main unit with respect to the material and construc- 
tion and shall comply with the requirements of 5.1 through 5.7. 

5.1 Cylinder — The cylinder shall be as per IS : 8198 ( Part 3 )-1976*. 

5.2 Sealing Discs 

5.2.1 Safety Disc ( Bursting Disc ) — The cylinder shall have a corrosion 
resistant safety disc or other device incorporated to prevent bursting of 
the cylinder 

5.2.2 Sealing Plate ( Destructive Valve) — A sealing plate (destructive 
valve ) shall be used to retain the gas in the cylinder until the time of 
release of gas into the liferaft. A valve ( check valve ) may be used as 
an alternative to the sealing plate. 

5.3 Inflation Apparatus — Release of the gas in the cylinder into the 
inflatable liferaft shall be carried out by the operation of an inflation 
apparatus: 

a) The apparatus shall be designed to release the gas out of the 
cylinder into the raft by pulling an operating cable ( or painter ) 
strongly to pierce the sealing plate ( destructive valve ) or to 
open the valve ( check valve ). After operation of the cylinder, 
it shall be ensured that the painter load is transferred to the 
towing point of the raft. 

b) The check valve of the inflation apparatus shall be operated and 
opened fully when the operating cable is filled with a force not 
exceeding 150 N and with a travel of not more than 200 mm. 

c) Positive means shall be provided to see if the inflation apparatus 
is really operated when it has been set to operate and also to 
retain the valve in the open position when it has been operated. 

d) The operating cable assembly shall be made of corrosion resistant 
materials and shall be tested with a load of at least 450 N. The 
operating cable assembly shall be protected in a suitable flexible 
conduit, if necessary, to prevent chafing of the fabric and to 
ensure that the cable does not become kinked. 

7 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

5.4 High Pressure Hose Assembly — A high pressure hose assembly 
provided to convey the gas from the cylinder to inflatable chambers shall 
comply with the following requirements: 

a) Every assembly shall pass a hydraulic test of 12*5 MPa for at least 
one minute, without any leakage. 

b) It shall operate satisfactorily over a temperature range of — 30 
to + 66°C. 

c) As a type test, it shall be capable of being bent through 180 
degrees over a former having a radius of 5 cm at — 30°C. 
Thereafter, it shall pass the hydraulic test of 12*5 MPa. 

d) Metal parts shall be corrosion resistant and free from sharp 
edges. 

e) The hose assembly shall be of a type which has a minimum 
bursting pressure of 21 MPa at normal temperature and 4'2 MPa 
at — 30°C. 

5.5 Valve 

5.5.1 Non-Return Valve — Non-return valves shall be provided at each 
point where gas enters ani-inflatable chamber either from the cylinder or 
from another inflated chamber. 

5.5.2 Topping-Up Valve and Deflation Plug 

a) Each chamber, including canopy supports and thwarts shall be 
provided with a topping-up non-return valve of a self-sealing 
type which will allow air to be pumped into the chamber by a 
bellows or topping-up pump. 

b) Deflation plugs shall be provided for discharging gas out of each 
chamber or alternatively the topping-up valve may combine the 
function of a deflation plug. 

5.5.3 Relief Valve 

a) A relief valve shall be fitted to any chamber which is inflated 
directly from the gas cylinder to prevent the pressure in the 
chamber exceeding twice the designed working pressure and to 
reseat when the pressure is reduced to the designed working 
pressure. 

b) The relief valve may combine the function of a deflation plug 
and/or topping-up valve. 

c) Arrangements shall be made so that the excess gas is vented to 
the atmosphere and not into the raft. 

8 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

5.6 Cordage and Webbing — The materials shall be inherently rot- 
proof not to be affected by oil or oil products and when made up into a 
fitting or part they shall be attached to the raft in such a manner that if 
accidentally detached, the raft structure will not be damaged. Specific 
items shall conform to the details given in Table 1. 



TABLE 1 QUALITY OF CORDAGE AND WEBBING 



Item 

Painter of operating 
line 



External and internal 
lifeline 



Material 

Inherently rot-proof fibre of 
suitable resistance to atmo- 
spheric degradation and 
lengths of exposed painter 
shall also have suitable 
resistance to sunlight de- 
gradation 



Inherently rot-proof fibre of 
suitable resistance to atmos- 
pheric degradation 



Quality 

1) The painter length shall be 
sufficient at the least dra- 
ught condition to allow for 
ihe stowage position of the 
liferaft taking into account 
list, trim and wave actions 



2) The breaking load of the 
painter system including 
the attachment to the life- 
raft shall not be less than 
10*0kN for liferafts carry- 
ing 9 persons or more and 
not less than 7*5 kN for 
liferafts carrying less than 
9 persons 

1) Shall be suitable to grab 
and not hurt the hand nor 
slip. If cordage it shall be 
not less than 8 mm dia, 
if webbing shall be not 
less than 25 mm wide 



2) Breaking load of the life- 
lines shall not be less than 
2 kN and that of fastening 
points not less than 1 kN 

3) Each loop of external life- 
line shall reach within 
75 mm of water when raft 
is in loaded condition 



5.7 Other Accessories — The inflatable liferaft shall be provided at 
least with the accessories and the equipments incorporated directly into 
the raft as given in Table 2. Any cordage, webbing or thread shall be 
rot-proof. 



IS : 11641 - 1986 



TABLE 2 QUALITY OF ACCESSORIES 

( Clause 5.7 ) 



Item 

Boarding arrange- 
ment 



Sea anchors ( with 
lines ) 



Quantity 

1 at each 
entrance 



Water pockets 

Righting arrangement 
Rain water collector 
Marker lamp 
Room lamp 
Water activated cells 



Retro-reflective 
tapes 



Remarks 

Every liferaft shall be fitted at each open- 
ing with a semi-rigid boarding ramp or 
equivalent means to enable exchausted 
persons to enter the liferaft from the sea. 
The inflation of the ramp should be so 
arranged to prevent deflation of the liferaft 
in the event of damage to the ramp 

One permanently attached by a line not less 
than 9 m in length and fitted with a swivel 
at each end. The line shall be attached to 
the liferaft so that when the sea anchor is 
first deployed the liferaft will float with its 
openings at 90° to the direction of the wind, 
but by adjusting the bridle the survivors 
may turn the liferaft so that its openings are 
in line with the wind. The construction 
and performance of the sea anchor shall be 
tested as per statutory regulations 

Sufficient in number and size to meet the sta- 
bility requirements of the raft to the satis- 
faction of the administration 

See 9.1.14 

See 3.2.5(d) 

See 3.2.5(e) 

See 3.2.5(e) 

Shall be proof against leakage of chemicals 
which might damage or cause deterioration 
of the liferaft fabric. Shall be able to func- 
tion satisfactorily in water of varying salinity 
and temperatures varying from freezing 
point to topical heat 

Shall be proof against moisture whilst the 
4*aft is stowed in its container 

Retro-reflective tapes of approximately 
50 mm by 300 mm shall be fitted around 
the canopy at intervals or approximately 
500 mm at the half heigh of the canopy 
measured from the point of attach- 
ment of the canopy to the buoyancy 
tubes. A cross shaped or similar marking 
of two such tapes shall be fitted on or at the 
top. On the underside of the floor four 
retro-reflective tapes of approximately 
50 mm by 300 mm shall at equal intervals 
be fitted around the edges of the floor or 
of the bottom of the liferaft 

( Continned ) 



10 



IS: 11641- 1986 



Item 

Rescue quoit 
( with line ) 



Safety knife 



Aerial attachment 



TABLE 2 QUALITY OF ACCESSORIES — Contd 



Quantity Remakks 

1 A buoyant rescue quoit shall be provided in 

the interior of the liferaft near the boarding 
entrance for throwing overboard to aid men 
in a wreck 

A buoyant rescue line of at least 30 m in 
length and of breaking strength not less than 
1 kN shall be fitted to the rescue quoit, and 
the other end of the line shall be secured at 
the liferaft 

The line shall be properly coiled or flaked so 
that the quoit may be quickly thrown to the 
maximum distance 

2 for rafts carry- Safety knife ( knives ) shall be provided at a 

ing 13 persons readily accessible place in the inflatable 

or more and 1 liferaft 

for rafts carry- The knife shall be secured to the liferaft by a 

ing less than lanyard and shall be stowed in the vicinity 

13 persons of the painter attachment 

The safety knife is for the use cutting the pain- 
ter for sheering the liferaft off the side of the 
vessel, and it shall therefore be stored in a 
manner so that it will not damage the life- 
raft in the course of dropping 

It shall be of buoyancy so that it can float 
even when it is dropped inadvertently into 
the sea 

Another knife may be storted in the equip- 
ment bag or container 

1 Shall permit easy erection of the aerial of the 

portable radio equipment and be so posi- 
tioned that the entrances are not obstructed 



6. CONTAINER OR VALISE 

6.1 Each liferaft together with its necessary equipment shall be properly 
packed in a valise or container so designed as to provide maximum 
protection from the weather and so constructed as to be capable of 
withstanding hard wear and affording protection to the liferaft and its 
equipment under all seagoing conditions. 

6.2 The inside of the valise or container shall be smooth so as not to 
cause any damage to the fabric of the liferaft by chafing. 



11 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

6.3 The valise or container shall be so constructed that the liferaft will 
break free on inflation. It shall be a neat fit for the packed liferaft to 
prevent chafing of the liferaft fabric. 

6.4 The aperture in the container through which the painter runs shall 
be so arranged that the container will free itself from the painter on 
inflation without damage to the painter. 

6.5 Suitable means shall be provided for carrying the liferaft in its valise 
or container prior to launching. Effective means for drainage shall be 
fitted in the lower parts of rigid containers. 

6.6 The manufacturers of inflatable liferafts shall state any recommenda- 
tions relating to its installation when packed ready for operation. 

7. COLOUR 

7.1 Components of inflatable liferaft shall be coloured as given in 
Table 3. 

TABLE 3 COLOUR OF COMPONENTS OF INFLATABLE LIFERAFT 

Item Colour 

Main buoyancy chamber Dark colour 

Floor chamber Dark colour 

Exterior canopy Flame orange or other highly conspi- 

cuous colours 

Inside of the liferaft The interior surface colour shall be 

chosen so as not to produce eye glare 
or discomfort to the raft occupants 

8. EQUIPMENT 

8.1 The normal equipment for every liferaft shall consist of: 

a) Two sponges; 

b) Two paddles; 

c) One repair outfit capable of repairing punctures in the inflatable 
chambers; 

d) Three tin openers of special safety type; 

e) One approved first-aid outfit in a waterproof container; 

f) One rust-proof graduated drinking vessel ( see IS : 5314-1969* ); 



♦Specification for graduated drinking vessels for lifeboats and liferaft sea-going ships. 

12 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

g) One waterproof electric torch suitable for signalling in the more 
code together with one spare set of batteries and one spare bulb 
in a waterproof containers; 

h) One day light signalling mirror and one signalling whistle; 

j) Two parachuts distress rocket signals of an approved type, 
capable of giving a bright red light at a high altitude 
(see IS : 3580-1966* ); 

k) Six hand flares of an approved type, capable of giving a bright 
red light ( see IS : 3580-1966* ); 

m) One set of fishing tackle; 

n) 340 grammes of suitable non-thirst provoking food providing at 
least 2 200 calories per 450 grammes weight and 170 grammes of 
barley sugar of other equally suitable sweets for each person the 
liferaft is deemed for to accommodate; 

p) Watertight preceptacles containing one and a half litres of fresh 
water for each person the liferaft is permitted to accommodate, 
of which half a litre per person may be replaced, by a suitable 
desalting apparatus capable of producing an equal amount of 
fresh water; 

q) Six anti-sea sickness tablets for each person the liferaft is certified 
to accommodate; 

r) Instructions printed m English and Hindi on how to survive in 
the liferaft; and 

s) One copy of the illustrated table of rescue and distress signals. 

8.1.1 This equipment shall be stowed in readily accessible containers 
easily opened and closed by a survivor with cold hands. These 
containers shall be secured inside the raft, shall provide protection against 
damage and penetration of water and shall remain buoyant for 30 
minutes in water. 

A list of contents shall be clearly shown on the outside of the 
container. 

9. TESTING 

9.1 Type Tests — When a new type of inflatable liferaft is produced, it 
shall be subjected to the following type approval tests to ensure that it 
conforms to the requirement of the respective test items. The test shall 
be done under conditions of normal temperature and normal atmospheric 
pressure, unless otherwise specified. 



♦General requirements for distress signals for lifeboats and liferafts. 

13 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

9.1.1 Visual Inspection — Inflating the liferaft to the designed working 
pressure, check the conformance to design of the shape, construction, 
dimensions and markings. 

9.1.2 Mass Checking — Mass checking shall be carried out of a complete 
set of liferaft with emergency equipment, packed in a container or valise. 
The total mass shall not exceed 180 kg. 

9.1.3 High Pressure Test — The main buoyancy chamber and canopy 
support shall be inflated with relief valves plugged to an air pressure of 
twice the designed working pressure. They shall be allowed to stand for 
10 minutes. There shall be no rupture, peeling, deformation or other 
damage. 

9.1.4 Air Tightness Test 

a) The main buoyancy chamber, canopy support, and floor chamber 
if it is inflatable for the insulation, shall be inflated to an air 
pressure of the designed working pressure. They shall be allowed 
to stand for at least half an hour. Then the internal pressure of 
the respective chambers and compartments shall be adjusted to 
the working pressure. At the end of 1 hour after corrections for 
the temperature, a value not less than 90 percent of the original 
pressure shall be maintained for the main buoyancy chamber 
and canopy support at their compartments and at the end of half 
an hour a value not less than 80 percent of the original pressure 
for the floor chamber. 

b) Where there is a variation of temperature exceeding 3°C in the 
test chamber, the test result shall not be acceptable. The accept- 
able correction for temperature variation is calculated by 0*4 kPa 
for 1°C. 

c) With the canopy support and its associated buoyancy tube inflated 
to working pressure the buoyancy shall be deflated. At the end 
of half an hour the canopy support shall still be sufficiently rigid 
to support the canopy. 

d) Where an inflatable boarding ramp is fitted on deflation of the 
ramp, the buoyancy to which it is attached shall remain 
sufficiently inflated. 

9.1.5 Relief Valve Function Test — The main buoyancy chamber and 
canopy support shall be inflated with an air pressure, and the internal 
pressures at which relief valves operate to relieve and to reseat of itself 
shall be measured. They shall be within the design limits. 

9.1.6 Inflation Tests 

9.1.6.1 Normal temperature inflation test — The liferaft packed in a 
container or valise shall be inflated by operating the attached gas inflation 

14 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

device in an ambient temperature of 27 =fc 2°C, and the time required 
for inflation shall be measured: 

a) The main buoyancy chamber shall be inflated within 30 seconds 
to its full shape and diameter to permit embarkation on the 
lifer aft. 

b) The canopy shall be erected within 90 seconds. 

c) The liferaft shall reach its full designed internal pressure within 
3 minutes. 

The inflation associated whh the drop test may be accepted in place 
of this test. 

9.1.6.2 High temperature inflation test — For the inflation at 66°C the 
operationally packed raft in a container or valise which need not be 
sealed shall be placed in a heating chamber for not less than 7 hours. 
The first 2 hours may be utilized for heating the chamber to 66°C. 
After a period of 5 hours at the full temperature the raft shall be inflated 
by pulling the painter. Under these conditions the gas pressure relief 
valves shall be of sufficient capacity to prevent damage to the raft by 
overpressure. Although it is preferred that the raft be heated in a 
chamber large enough to permit it being inflated therein, removal from 
the hot chamber prior to inflation is permitted provided the removal 
and inflation are carried out promptly. 

9.1.6.3 Low temperature inflation test — The liferaft contained in a 
container or valise shall be allowed to stand for 24 hours in a room 
cooled to a temperature of — 30°C. Then, at the room temperature at 
— 30°C, it shall be inflated by operating the attached gas inflation gear, 
and the time required for inflation shall be measured. Within 3 minutes, 
the main buoyancy chamber shall be inflated to an extent sufficiently for 
the occupants to get under cover. 

Davit-launched liferaft shall reach its full working pressure. 

The low temperature inflation test shall stipulate that as a result of 
the test there shall be no slippage, cracking or other defect in the liferaft 
and that it shall be ready for use in all respects. Two consecutive 
successful tests shall also be required. 

Where liferaft is not tested at — 30°C, such a liferaft shall be marked 
on the valise stating minimum temperature to which it has been tested. 

9.1*7 Drop Test — Each type of complete liferaft in its container or 
valise shall be subjected to at least two drop tests from a height of 18 
metres into the water. At least one drop test is to be carried out with 
the liferaft packed with each proposed type of emergency pack in any 
combination of pack are valise or container. If the raft is to be stowed 
on the ship at a height above the water of more than 18 metres it shall 

15 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

be dropped from a height at least equal to the height at which it is to be 
stowed. The free end of the painter shall be attached to the point of 
suspension so that it pays out as the raft drops, thus simulating actual 
conditions. It shall be left floating for 30 minutes and at the end of this 
period be inflated by pulling the painter. The raft shall inflate upright 
within the accepted time ( see 9.1.6.1 ). 

It shall then be lifted from the water to permit thorough inspection 
of the raft, the container or valise and the contents of the emergency 
pack. In the inflatable Jiferafts of the type where they start inflating as 
the operating cable gets automatically pulled in the process of drop, one 
of the two tests required shall be carried out in accordance with the 
description above, while in the other test, the start of inflation in the 
process of drop shall be tested. 

In both cases, there shall be no damage or failure which will affect 
the functioning of the main unit or emergency equipment. 

In any case, the main unit shall be confirmed by an airtightness test 
as specified in 9.1.4. 

9.1.8 Seating Test — It shall be ascertained that the number of persons 
for which the liferafts is designed can be comfortably seated when each 
is wearing an approved lifejacket suitable for an adult and that there is 
sufficient space for them to carry out necessary tasks. 

9.1.9 Freeboard Test — Upon the inflation of the liferaft into an 
operative condition, the freeboards under no load conditions and loaded 
conditions on water shall be measured. These values shall be not less 
than the designed values and in the fully loaded condition shall be not 
less than 300 mm. 

9.1.10 Stability Test — The full complement of the raft shali be crowded 
to one side and then to one end and in each case the freeboard shall be 
recorded. Under these conditions the freeboard shall be such that there 
is no danger of the liferaft being swamped. 

The stability of the liferaft during boarding may be ascertained as 
follows: 

Two men each wearing approved life-jacket suitable for an adult 
should board the empty raft. It should then be demonstrated that 
the two persons in the raft can readily assist from the water a third 
person who is required to feign unconsciousness. The third person 
must have his back towards the entrance so that he cannot help 
himself into the raft, The Inspecting Authority is to be satisfied that 
the water pockets adequately counteract the upsetting moment on 
the raft. 

16 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

9.1.11 Damage Test — When the liferaft is fully loaded with the 
number of persons it can accommodate, with either half of its buoyancy 
fully deflated it shall be confirmed that the liferaft is capable of carrying 
effectively the full rated load under this condition, 

9*1.12 Swamp Test — The liferaft shall be inflated into an operative 
condition, floated on the water, loaded with the full rated load and then 
be swamped up to the upper surface of the main buoyancy chambers. 
Under this condition, it shall be demonstrated that the liferaft is capable 
of carrying the full rated load with no serious distortion nor damage. 

9.1.13 Boarding Test — The boarding test shall be carried out in a 
swimming pool by a team of not more than four persons acceptable to 
the inspecting authority who should be of mature age and of differing 
physiques. Preferably they shall not be strong swimmers. For this test, 
they shall be clothed in shirt and trousers or a boiler suit and shall wear 
approved life-jackets suitable for an adult. They shall each swim about 
90 m before reaching the raft to attampt the boarding, dressed as above 
and wearing the approved life-jackets. There shall be no rest period 
between the swim and the boarding attempt. Boarding shall be 
attarnpted by each man individually, that is, with no assistance from 
other swimmers or persons already in the raft. The raft shall be in 
water too deep to permit the men obtaining any assistance from the 
bottom of the swimming pool. The arrangements shall be considered 
satisfactory if three of the men board unaided and the fourth boards 
with the assistance of any one of the others. 

9.1.14 Righting Test — For this test the raft shall be inverted. The 
righting test shall be carried out by the same team of 'survivors' similarly 
clothed and wearing approved life-jackets and after preconditioning as 
in boarding test. Each man shall attempt to right the raft unaided. 
The raft shall be in water too deep to permit the man's obtaining any 
assistance from the bottom of the pool when mounting the inverted raft. 
The righting arrangements will be considered satisfactory if each man 
rights the raft unaided. 

9.1.15 Davit-launched Liferaft Board Test — In addition to the test in 
9*1.13, it shall be demonstrated that the devit-launched liferaft inflated 
and suitably suspended and pulled toward a simulated ship deck at a 10° 
trim and a 15° adverse list, shall be boarded by a number of persons at 
least equal to its full complement wearing approved life-jackets unaided 
and without undue distortion to the liferaft. The boarding shall be 
timed and such time recorded. 

9.1.16 Lowering Test 

a) The loaded liferaft which had been boarded as in 9.1.15 shall be 
released from tha simulated ship's side left hanging for 5 minutes 
and then lowered to the floor or water. It shall show no signs of 
undue distortion or strain. 

17 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

b) A liferaft fully loaded by people or an equivalent weight shall be 
lowered a total distance of 18 m against a structure erected to 
represent the side of a ship; having a 15° adverse list. 

9.1.17 Overload Test — The devit-launched liferaft shall be inflated and 
loaded in its actual manner with a weight equivalent to 4*5 times the 
total mass of the liferaft, its emergency equipment and the number of 
persons corresponding to its carrying capacity ( 75 kg per person ), lifted 
and left hanging for at least 5 minutes then lowered to water or floor The 
liferaft shall be lowered safely, being free from any damage hazardous 
for its survival. The liferaft used for this test shall not be used as a life- 
saving appliance. 

9.1.18 Jumping Test — Upon inflation, the liferaft shall be set afloat 
on water, and a sand bag of 75 kg shall be dropped from a height of 
4*5 metres above sea level on to the canopy of the liferaft. The liferaft 
shall be free of any damage. 

9.1.19 Towing Test — It shall be demonstrated that the fully loaded 
liferaft is capable of being satisfactorily towed at a speed of 3 knots in 
calm weather and that the towing arrangements and painter provide a 
factor of safety of 3. 

9*1.20 Canopy Closure Test — To ensure the effectiveness of the canopy 
closures in preventing water entering the raft the efficiency of the closed 
enterances shall be demonstrated by means of a hose test or by any 
other equally effective method. 

The requirement for the hose test is that about 2 270 dm 3 of water 
per minute be directed for 3 minutes at and around the entrances 
through 63*5 mm hose from a point 3*7 m away and 1*5 m above the 
level of the buoyancy tubes. A significant amount of water shall not 
enter the raft. 

9.1.21* Manoeuvrability Test — It shall be demonstrated that the paddles 
provided are capable of propelling the raft when fully loaded in calm 
conditions at a speed of at least 0*5 knots over a distance of at least 
23 m. 

9*1*22 Inherent Buoyancy Test — To cater for hydrostatically released 
life-rafts it shall be demonstrated that the container or valise opera- 
tionally packed with the raft has sufficient inherent buoyancy for setting 
the inflation system in action by means of the actuating line in the even 
of the ship sinking. 

9.1.23 Mooring Out Tests — The inflatable liferafts shall be loaded with 
mass equal to the total number of persons for which it is to be approved 
and its equipment and moored in a location at sea or in a sea-water 
harbour. The liferaft shall remain afloat in that location for 30 days. 
However, the pressure may be topped-up once a day using the manual 
pump. 

18 



IS : 11641 - 1986 

The liferaft shall not sustain any damage that would impair its 
performance. Further the inflatable liferafts shall be tested to a pressure 
equal to 3 times the working pressure and there shall be no seam 
slippage, cracking or other defects in the liferaft. 

9.2 Production Tests — For manufacture of inflatable liferafts of the 
type having passed the type approval tests, the manufacturers shall 
perform on every liferaft mass checking as at 9.1.2, air tightness test 
at 9.1.4, relief valve function test at 9.1.5. The inflation test at 9.1.6.1 shall 
be carried out on a proportion of the production decided by statutory 
authorities. Every new devit-launched liferaft shall be tested by loading 
with a mass equivalent to 1*1 times the total mass of the liferaft, the 
equipment and the number of persons corresponding to its carrying 
capacity calculated at 75 kg per person. The loaded raft shall be lifted 
from the floor and left hanging for 5 minutes, after removal of the load 
there shall be no signs of undue distortion or strain. 

10. MARKING 

10.1 Markings shall be in the language or languages stipulated by the 
statutory authorities. The inflatable liferaft and its container or valise 
shall have the markings of at least the items given in Table 4 provided 
at a readily visible location in a clear and indelible manner without 
harmful effects to the adjacent materials. 

TABLE 4 MARKINGS FOR LIFERAFT AND ITS CONTAINER 

Markings -you Markings for Container 

Liferaft or Valise 

1. Carrying capacity, that is, No. of 1. Carrying capacity, that is, No. of persons 

men 

2. Maker's name or trade-mark 2. Marker's name or trade-mark 

3. Serial No. of manufacture 3. Approving authority 

4. Date of manufacture 4. To be serviced not later than 

5. Approving authority 5. Emergency pack type 

6. Symbols or signs to indicate posi- 6. Painter length 

tions of equipment and emer- 
gency actions Note — Also to be indicated on the painter 

7. Date of last servicing 7. Maximum dropping height metres 

8. Temperature to which it has been 8. Serial number 

tested 

9. SOLAS ( DATE ) 

Note — Qualification may be 10. TOP 

shown on log card stowed within 
liferaft. 

11. Instruction to launch 

12. Temperature to which it has been tested 
19 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
Base Unit* 



Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


k* 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


moi 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W = 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


lWb = l V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m* 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


lHz=l c/s (s' 1 ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V - 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa-1 N/in* 



