**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11612 (2004) : Code of practice for eddy current testing 
of non-ferrous seamless pipes and tubes [MTD 21: 
Non-Destructive Testing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 11612: 2004 

*777cft7 WFFfy 
3Teffe ^W ^f%cT XTT^tt afft ^TfeRtf WcT ETRT 

( WcTT jrfttfW ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EDDY CURRENT TESTING 
OF NON-FERROUS SEAMLESS PIPES AND TUBES 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 77.040.20, 23.040.15 



© BIS 2004 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



December 2004 Price Group 3 



Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 

This standard was first published in 1984. While reviewing this standard the committee felt to revise this standard 
in view of the accepted current practice for eddy current testing of non-ferrous pipes and tubes. 

In this revision following modifications have been made: 

a) Scope has been modified; 

b) Terminology clause has been modified; and 

c) Clause 4.4 and 5.4 has been modified. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical value {revised)' . The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 11612: 2004 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EDDY CURRENT TESTING 
OF NON-FERROUS SEAMLESS PIPES AND TUBES 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the methods of eddy current 
detection of defects in seamless pipes and tubular 
products of outer diameter from approximately 3.0 to 
50.0 mm. This standard is applicable only to non- 
ferrous pipes and tubes including cupronickel of 
uniform cross-section and composition. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

2. 1 Depth of Penetration — For a given material and 
for given conditions of test coil assembly, frequency 
of alternating current supplied to coil etc, the magnetic 
field strength and consequently the intensity of induced 
eddy currents in the material decreases in value from 
the surface (close to the coil) towards the interior of 
the material. The depth of which the magnetic field 
strength or the intensity of induced eddy current has 
decreased to Me (or 37 percent) of its surface value is 
celled 'depth of penetration' where e is the base of 
neperian logarithm. Synonymous terms are 'standard 
depth of penetration' and 'skin depth' (see Annex A). 

2.2 Eddy Current — Electrical currents caused to flow 
in a conductor by the time or space variation, or both, 
of an applied magnetic field. 

2.3 Effective Depth of Penetration — Though 
theoretically the intensity of induced currents reduced 
to zero at infinite depth, for practical purposes 
considering the test system and detection capability, 
the induced eddy currents in the material do reach zero 
value at infinite depth beyond which the test system 
does not 'see' the material. This depth in the material 
at which the induced eddy-current intensity practically 
reduces to zero is called 'effective depth of 
penetration'. In effect, the test system does not detect 
any defect situated beyond the effective depth of 
penetration in the material. 

NOTE — The frequency of alternating current fed to the coil 
assembly shall be chosen that wall thickness of the material is 
less than the effective depth of penetration and the condition 
stipulated in 5.4 is satisfied. 

2.4 End Effect (or Edge Effect) — The effect of the 
magnetic field caused by the geometric boundaries of 



the test specimen that makes it impractical to apply 
electromagnetic test methods to the associated regions 
of the test specimen. A large indication generally 
develops which masks the indication of discontinuities 
in this region. 

2.5 Saturation — Magnetic saturation is needed to 
suppress the effect the effect of permeability variation 
due to ferromagnetism in cupronickel tubes. The level 
of saturation the tube is to be decided by trial and error 
method so as to get best signal to noise ratio. The 
saturation unit should be capable varying saturating 
currents. Precaution should be taken to avoid over 
heating of saturating coil. 

3 PRINCIPLE OF TEST 

The test is performed to passing the tube through or 
in the proximity of a coil(s) energized with alternating 
current at one or more frequencies. This alternating 
current induces eddy-currents to flow in the tube as a 
result of electromagnetic induction. The test coil 
detects the resultant electromagnetic flux related to 
these currents. The presence of discontinuities in the 
tube will cause change in flow of eddy-currents. 
Where a discontinuity is present, the eddy-current 
flow is impeded and changed in direction, causing, 
significant changes in the associated electromagnetic 
field. 

During the passage of the tube the changes in 
electromagnetic response caused by the presence of 
discontinuities in the tube are'detected by the test coil 
which are amplified and modified in order to actuate 
audio/or visual indicating device (such as a cathode 
ray oscilloscope/or a recorder), a mechanical marker 
or a combination of these. 

4 EQUIPMENT 

4.1 Electronic Unit 

The main apparatus shall consist of a source of 
alternating current of a fixed or variable frequency 
applied to a test coil assembly, and an electronic 
detecting system to sense and indicate variations in 
the output of the coil assembly. The detecting system 
may include a phase selector and filter circuit. The 
frequency, selected for the test shall be such that the 



1 



IS 11612: 2004 



effective depth of penetration is greater than the wall 
thickness of the tube under inspection. For guidance 
of users, a graph indicating the variation of depth of 
penetration with frequency of alternating current 
through the test coil for various non-ferrous material 
is given in Annex A. 

4.2 Test Coil Assembly 

One or more coils supplied with alternating current and 
placed in proximity to and therefore, electromagnetically 
coupled to the material being tested and responds to 
variations in these eddy-currents caused by 
discontinuities in the material. The coil may be either a 
probe coil or an encircling coil of the absolute or 
differential type. 

4.3 Transport Assembly 

A material transport and guiding system shall be 
provided if necessary, which will advance the tube at 
the required rate. There shall be no excessive vibration 
or mis-orientation of the tube and the feed speed shall 
be constant within ±10 percent. The transport assembly 
shall in no way damage the tubes being tested. 

4.4 Filters 

It is a network that transmits energy at frequencies 
within one or more frequency bands and attenuates 
energy at all other frequencies. The continuous variable 
HI PASS and LOW PASS filters are desired. For a 
given speed optimum filter setting is to be done. 

4.5 Saturation System 

Saturation unit and saturation coil is needed to inspect 
the (ferro magnetic) cupronickel tubes effectively. The 
provision to vary the saturation level should be 
provided. Suitable demagnetization shall be provided 
to demagnetize the tube to an acceptable limit, namely 
— less than 8 Gauss. (The value of demagnetization 
to be pre-decided by buyer and seller of tubes.) 



4.6 Other Accessories 

Either a recorder, an alarm or a marking system along 
with a sorting system shall be used along with the main 
equipment to keep the records of inspection for further 
reference as decided by buyer and seller of tubes. 

5 TEST PROCEDURE 
5.1 Reference Standard 

5.1.1 A reference standard free from natural defects 
shall be prepared from a length of tube of the same 
size, composition and metallurgical conditions of the 
tubes to be inspected. 

5.1.2 The artificial discontinuities shall be introduced 
as follows: 

a) Drilled holes — Three holes of the same 
nominal diameter shall be drilled through the 
wall and perpendicular to the surface of the 
calibration standard. The three holes shall be 
displaced circumferentially at 120° from one 
another, and sufficiently apart from each other 
axially and from the end of the tube to ensure 
that signals from each can be easily resolved 
and are not influenced by end effect (see Fig. 1 ). 

b) The holes shall be drilled radially through the 
wall using a suitable drill jig that has a bushing 
to guide the drill, care being taken to avoid 
distortion of the tube and the hole while 
drilling. The diameter of the drilled hole shall 
be in accordance with Table 1 and shall not 
vary by more than +0.025 mm, -0.000 mm 
of the hole diameter specified. 

Such a reference standard shall not be construed as a 
measure of the size of any imperfection detectable by 
eddy-current testing. 

NOTE — The reference standard should be frequently 
examined for damages like scars and dents. 




<k 



7* 



■-'«*: 



cfc* 



C7J* 



■o 




A = Space to provide signal resolution adequate for interpretation. 
Fig. 1 Calibration Standard with Three Holes 



IS 11612 :2004 



5.1.3 The diameter of the holes may be as per the 
product specification and be subject to agreement 
between the contracting parties. Table 1 may be used 
as a guideline for the dimension of the reference holes. 

Table 1 Diameter of Drilled Holes 

(Clauses 5.1.2 and 5 A 3) 

All dimensions in millimetres. 



Outside Diameter of Tube 




Diameter of Drilled 




^ 




Holes 


Over 


Up to and Including 




(I) 


(2) 




(3) 


3 


6 




0.50 


6 


19 




0.65 


19 


25 




0.80 


25 


32 




0.95 


32 


38 




1.05 


38 


44 




1.15 


44 


50 




1.30 



5.1 End Effect 

The end effect shall be determined by drilling a series 
of holes near one or both the ends of a special 
calibration tube and passing the tube through the tester 
to determine the distance from the tube and up to which 
discontinuity is detected. 

When holes are made at one end only, pass the tube 
through the coil twice, once each with holes at the 
leading and trailing ends. 

The end effect shall be determined only once for each 
size, gauge, speed and test frequency. It need not be 
repeated during each calibration check. 

5.3 Surface Preparation 

The surface of the tube shall be free from such metallic 
particles, other foreign materials and roughness that 
may interfere with the interpretation of the test results. 

5.4 Temper Condition 

Eddy-current testing of tubes should be conducted on 
tubes in drawn condition prior to final heat treatment 
in absence of special agreement between the supplier 
and the purchaser, 

The tubes are either pre-straightened or made to pass 
in straight position while testing is performed. The 
automation for handling the tubes is to be decided by 
the purchaser and the supplier of eddy-current tester. 

5.5 Adjustment of the Instrument 

The reference standard shall be passed through or in 
the proximity of the test coils at the same speed and in 
the same manner as the tubes would be passed during 
inspection. The instrument settings and frequency and 
the speed of the test shall be optimized to consistently 
detect all the three reference defects, the instrument 



should be set to mark such detected effects. This setting 
of the instrument shall not be altered during testing of 
the lot. The alarm level and the marking mechanism 
shall be so set that an alarm or a mark is given each 
time a defect passes the test coil. 

5.6 Mode of Testing 

5.6.1 The tubes shall be passed through or in the 
proximity of the test coil with speed being maintained 
within ±10 percent of its nominal value. Wobbling, 
vibrations and the mis-orientation of tube axis with 
respect to coil axis shall be kept minimum. Any section 
or length of tubing giving a defect indication equal to 
or greater than that produced by the reference standard 
shall be segregated from the material producing 
indication of lesser electrical magnitude. 

5.6.2 Unless otherwise specified amplitude (all phase) 
mode of inspection shall be used. The phase sensitive 
and sector mode may be used by mutual consent of 
tube manufacture and the user. 

5.7 The proper functioning of the equipment shall be 
checked: 

a) at the beginning of the test, 

b) every one hour during production run or after 
a batch of 50 tubes, 

c) after finishing test, and 

d) whenever malfunctioning is suspected. 

If malfunctioning is confirmed all the tubes which have 
been tested since the last satisfactory calibration shall 
be retested. 

6 LEVEL OF ACCEPTANCE 

6.1 The acceptance standard shall be based on the 
setting of the instrument to a sensitivity adequate to 
detect all the 3 artificial defects of the reference sample. 

7 REPORT OF TEST RESULTS 

7.1 The test report shall contain the following 
information: 

a) Component drawing reference number where 
applicable; 

b) Specification of material, including its 
dimension; 

c) Surface condition of the tubes; 

d) Make of the instrument; 

e) Description of the coil assembly, including 
inner diameter of test coil, method of 
magnetic saturation; 

f) Frequency used and instrument setting; 

g) Location size and extent of defects; 
h) Recorder chart where available; and 

j) Any unusual occurrence encountered during 
the test. 



IS 11612: 2004 

ANNEX A 
(Clauses 2.1 and 4 A) 

VARIATION OF DEPTH OF PENETRATION WITH FREQUENCY 
OF ALTERNATING CURRENT 

A-l Figure 2 indicates the variation of depth of where 

penetration with frequency of alternating current g = of penetration in mm; 

through the test coil for various non-ferrous metals. . . . 

Figures indicates the same for different type of alloys. /»" resistlvlt y of the W bem 8 tested > ,n ohm - 

cm; 

For theoretical estimation of depth of penetration, the u ^ magnet j c permeability (1 for non-magnetic 

following formula may be used: material); and 

S - 50 292 ffitf f = fi* e q uenc y in hertz - 




FREQUENCY (f JIN HERTZ 



Fig. 2 Variation of Depth of Penetration with Frequency of Alternating Current 
Through the Test Coil for Various Non-ferrous Metals 



o 
o 



6 

E 



if) 



< 

DC 

t— 
LU 

z 

Hi 
GI- 
LL. 
O 



DL 

IXI 

Q 



1U 81 










































- 










6 - 




















































4- 


















AD BRASS 


























2 - 
1 


















,-20/10 CUPRO-NICKEL 
















1 8- 
6- 




















70/30 


CUPRO- 


-NICKEL 














4- 




















































2 - 

-1 
in 




















































10 "8- 
6- 
4- 
2_ 






7 


0/30 & 


6oy 


4.c 


) E 


IRA 


^SS 


































-2 




















































iu 




















































- 
C 




















































D - 

4- 




















































10 3 

1 




















































o : 


> 


1 


1, 

3 io l ; 


> 


e 


> ii 


d 3 : 


> 


6 10 4 2 


> 


6 10 5 . 


> 


6 10 6 2 


6 


10 7 : 


> 


6 10 



C/l 






O 
O 
4*. 



FREQUENCY (f) IN HERTZ 



Fig. 3 Variation of Depth of Penetration with Frequency of Alternating Current 
Through the Test Coil for Various Non-ferrous Alloys 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 

and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MTD 21 (4347). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 9402 



Regional Offices 
Central 



Eastern 



Western 



Brandies 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

T2323 7617 
\_2323 3841 

T2337 8499, 2337 8561 
\_2337 8626, 2337 9120 



{ 



60 3843 
60 9285 



J2254 1216,2254 1442 
\2254 2519, 2254 2315 

("2832 9295,2832 7858 
\2832 7891, 2832 7892 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZ1ABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



