**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12811 : ins 

... n I I ( Reaffirmed 1999) 

Indian Standard 

OPTICAL AND MATHEMATICAL 

INSTRUMENTS — SHORT RANGE INFRARED 

DISTANCE MEASURING INSTRUMENTS — 

SPECIFICATION 



UDC 528-514 : 681-75 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1990 P"ce G™"P '* 



Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee, LMD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 17 November 1989, after the 
draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

Distance measurement on the surface of the earth has been in use since long. Except invar wires, 
other mechanical devices are not capable of measuring distances with good accuracy. Besides, due 
to short lengths of these devices, longer distances cannot be measured rapidly. Invar wires, though 
very accurate, involve laborious drill and take enough time to measure even short distances. These 
problems have now been solved by using electromagnetic distance measuring (EDM) instruments which 
are accurate as well as capable of measuring considerable distances within short times. 

EDM instruments use microwave, infrared or visible light as carrier wave and accordingly they have 
been named. Someof them are capable of measuring long distances while some can measure only 
short distance. Instruments measuring short distances generally use infrared and are, therefore; called 
short range infrared distance measuring instruments. 

This instrument consists of a transmitting and a receiving system ( Fig. 1 and 2 ). The infrared 
radiation is emitted by the gallium arsenide diode which is operated with measuring wave frequencies 
produced by quartz crystals. The emitted carrier infrared radiation is, therefore, automatically 
modulated by measuring waves. This radiation is transmitted out as parallel beam by the transmitting 
lens system ( optics ) of the instrument. The retro-reflector ( comer cube prism ), placed at the other 
end of the distance, reflects modulated infrared beam into the receiving system of the instrument. 
The receiving optics focusscs the infrared beam on to a photodiode which converts it into electrical 
form. The phase difference between transmitted and received measuring waves is measured which 
gives the distance. The transmitting and receiving systems are placed either parallel to each other or 
are co-axial. These, together with gallium arsenide diode, photodiode and electronic system, etc, are 
contained in a mechanical housing. This housing also carries the front panel, displays, various 
switches and meters, etc, A sighting telescope is fitted with this housing for locating the distant 
reflector. The housing is mounted on a theodolite or the systems contained in it can form integral 
part of the theodolite. A battery is used to operate this instrument. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 12888 : 1*89 



Indian Standard 



OPTICAL AND MATHEMATICAL 
INSTRUMENTS — SHORT RANGE INFRARED 
DISTANCE MEASURING INSTRUMENTS- 
SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements of 
short range infrared distance measuring instru- 
ment used for measuring distances up to 2 km. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard ; 



IS No. 
988 : 1959 

1399 : 1959 

10236 

( Part 2 ) 
(Part 3) 
( Part 6 ) 
( Part II) 
( Part 14 ) 



1982 
1982 
1982 
1985 
1986 



Title 

General requirement for 
optical components 

Glossary of terms used 
in optical technology 

Procedure for basic cli- 
matic and durability tests 
for optical instruments : 

Dry heat test 

Cold test 

Salt mist test 

Vibration test 

Driving rain test 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For'the purpose of this standard, the defini- 
tions given in IS 1399:1959 and the following 
definitions shall apply. 



3-2 Carrier Wave 

The wave which carries measuring/modulation 
wave. In these instruments, infrared works as 
carrier wave. The wave length is around 0.9 
micron. 

3.3 Co-axial System 

The system in which the transmitting and receiv- 
ing optical systems are placed on the same axis 
( Fig. 1 ). 

3.4 Collimation Error 

The error caused due to lack of parallelism 
between distance measuring instrument and theo- 
dolite when the former is mounted over the latter. 
This is due to improper fitting between the two 
and occurs in separate systems. This error makes 
alignment of the instrument on the reflector 
difficult and sometimes even impossible. 

3.5 External Attenuator Screen 

It is a plastic mesh fitted or moulded with a 
plastic/metal frame. It is to be fitted over the 
objective lens to attenuate the infrared (IR) 
signal while measuring very short distance. 

3.6 Front Panet 

It contains a display ( LCD/LED ) and control 



TOeo As DIOM TRANSMITTINO LENS 



PHOTO OIOOE 




OUT 



. SWITC H FOR INTERNAL 
REFERENCE USING 
PRtSM AND LIGHT PIPE 




CORNE R CUBE PRISM 
(RETR0-Rr:7L ECTOR) 



Fig. 1 Co-axial Sysifm 



IS 12888 : 1989 



switches ( membrane/touch type or electromecha- 
nical ) to ensure operation by the operator. 

3.7 Gallium Arsenide Diode 

A semiconductor diode which emits infrared 
radiation ( Fig. 1 and 3 ). 

3.8 Integrated System 

An EDM instrument combined with a theodolite 
such that the whole system is integrated together 
and cannot be separated ( Fig. 2 ). 

3.9 Measuring/Modulating Wave 

The wave produced by crystal oscillators in the 
instrument to measure the distance. It modulates 
the carrier infrared and is, therefore, also known 
as modulating wave. 

3.10 Parallel System 

The system in which the transmitting and receiv- 
ing optical systems are placed parallel to each 
other ( Fig. 3 ). 

3.11 Photodiode 

A semiconductor type of photocell in which the 



incident light controls the current flaw between 
the electrodes. This component converts the 
infrared into electrical form, after being reflected 
and received from the reflector ( Fig. 1 and 3 ). 

3.12 Power Switcb 

An OFF/ON switch to connect the main instru- 
ment to the battery through a cable. 

3.13 ppm 

This is abbreviated form of parts per million. An 
accuracy of 1 ppm means an accuracy of 1 mm 
at 1 km ( 10" or 1 million mm ). 

3 14 Rain and Dust Cover 

It is a plastic jacket to protect IR distancer from 
light, rain and dust while the instrument is not in 
use in the field. 

3.15 Refro-Reflector/Prism 

This is a corner cube prism used for reflecting 
infrared. In this prism, three surfaces meet at 
right angles at the corner and reflect the beam in 
the incident direction ( Fig. 4 ). 




Fig. 2 iNThtiKA liD SYSTtM 



IS 12888 : 1989 



TRANSMITTING LENS 



Ga As DIODE 



PHOTO DIODE 




RECEIVING LENS 




CORNE R CUBE PRISM 
(RETRO REFLECTOR) 



Fig. 3 Parallel System 







FUi. 4 Rin KO-Rhl-LhCTOR 



3.16 Separate System 

The system in which EDM is senarated with 
theodolite and the former is mounted over the 
latter with the help of adapter ( Fig. 5A, 5B and 
5C). 

3.17 Transmitting/Receiving Systems 

The optical systems which transmit collimated 
infrared to retro-reflector and receive the reflected 
beam to focus at the photodiode. Either two 
similar lens systems, placed parallel to each other, 
can be used for transmitting and receiving or they 
can be placed on the same axis. 

3.18 Tribrach 

A mechanical device to hold the retro-reflector 
( prism ) or theodolite on the tripod. It is pro- 
vided with an optical plument for centring on 
ground. 

3.19 Wrapper 

A weather resistant casing of the instrument to 
protect internal opto-eleclronic components 
against adverse atmospheric conditions and clima- 
tic conditions. 

3.20 Yoke 

A mechanical lixlure, in U-shape, to hold tlie 
instrumenl with the thcodolile or tribrach. The 
provision for horizontal and vertical movements 
for IR distancer arc provided in this yoke. A 
sighting telescope is also provided to locate the 
retro-reflector. 





(b) Back Side 






(a) Front Side 



mm 




(c) Back Side 
FiG. 5 SbPARATE System 



IS 12888 : 1989 



3.21 Zero-Error ( Additive Constant ) 

The separation between mechanical and electronic 
centres of the instrument. The electronic centre is 
imaginary point in the instrument depending 
upon the positioning of transmitting and receiving 
components and also due to delays caused by 
electronic circuits. It is the point from which the 
instrument measures distance. Mechanical centre 
is the point in the instrument with respect to which 
the instrument is centred on the ground-point. 
The zero error is either added or subtracted from 
the measured distance, depending upon its sign. 

4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Each part of the instrument shall be made 
from materials of suitable strength and shall be 
suitably fmished. 

4.2 Coating, plating, anodizing and painting on 
the requisite parts shall be durable to resist dis- 
coloration, wear and rust and shall be resistant 
to corrosion 

4.3 Optical parts shall conform to IS 988 : 1959 
and shall be free from fog and moulds. 

4.4 The optical parts shall be coated with the 
anti-reflection coating for near infrared region in 
accordance with 4.2. 

4.5 The opto-electronic system shall be suitably 
sealed. 

4.6 The case of the instrument shall be made of 
fibreglass and shall be internally fitted with 
cushioning material for protecting the instrument 
and accessories from shock and vibration, etc. 
Space shall be made in the cushioning material 
for accommodating the instrument, battery and 
prisms, thermometer, barometer, lens cleaning 
brush, etc. 

5 FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Key board switches shall be membrane/ touch 
type or electromechanical type and shall be fool 
proof. 

5.2 Internal opto-electronic part shall be sealed 
in such a way that dust particles, moistuie and 
excessive heat do not affect the function of these 
parts. 

5.3 The colour of key board and functional 
switches shall be different from that of the main 
instrument to enable the operator for easy identi- 
fication in poor light condition. 

5.4 The markings on the switches shall be easily 
readable even in insufficient light condition. 

5.5 When the instrument is connected to the 
battery the indicating lamp or ready light shall 
work immediately. 



5.6 The instrument shall either be an integrated 
system with theodolite or only the distance 
measuring one. In the latter case, the instrument 
shall either be supplied with yoke for independent 
mounting on tripod or with suitable adaptor for 
mounting on the desired theodolite. 

5.7 The instrument shall be capable of measuring 
distance even with slight interruption of infrared 
beam. 

6 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 The instrument shall meet the following 
technical specifications. 

6.1.1 Range 

Range Tn Poor Normal Excellent 

Weather Condition Condition 
Condition 

With 1 Prism 500 m 1 000 m 1 500 m 

With 3 Prisms 800 m 1 500 m 2 000 m 

a) Poor Weather Condition 

Strong haze with visibility up to about 3 km or 
very bright sunlight with severe heat shimmer. 

b) Normal Weather Condition 

Light haze with visibility up to about 15 km or 
moderate sunlight with light heat shimmer. 

c) Excellent Weather Condition 

Overcast sky, no haze, visibility up to about 
30 km, no heat shimmer. 

6.1.2 Standard Deviation ( Accuracy ) : ± ( 5 mm 
+ 5 ppm ). 

6.1.3 Display to be Provided : Seven digits LCD/ 
LED. 

6.1.4 Mode of Distance Display : Metres. 

6.1.5 Mode of Angle Display ; Degrees, minutes, 
seconds. 

6.1.6 Least Count for Distance Display : 1 mm. 

6.1.7 Operating Temperature : 20° to -f 55X. 

6.1.8 Atmospheric Correction : Provision for 
applying atmospheric correction to be made in 
display. 

6.1.9 Prism Constant Correction : Prism constant 
to be supplied by the manufacturer and the pro- 
vision for applying prism correction to be made 
in display. 

6.1.10 Indication for Alignment on Target 
( Prism ) : Signal strength meter/audio sound to 
be provided. 



IS 12888 : 1989 



6.1.11 PoY/er Supply : Rechargeable 12 V, 2 Ah 
to 7 Ah Ni-Cd battery pack and provision to use 
12 V vehicle battery also to be made. 

6.1.12 Tilting Angle on Yoke ; Up to ± 45" and 
to be able to measure with the prism supplier in 
tilting condition. 

6.1.13 Sighting Telescope {for use with yoke ) ; 
Errect image, 8 x magnification. 

6.1.14 Automatic Attenuation : Provision to be 
made for strong signals. 

6.1.15 Self Checking/Test Mode : Provision to be 
made in the instrument for test mode indications. 

6.1.16 Automatic Power Cut Off: Provision to be 
made when battery starts discharging. 

6.1.17 Battery Check : Provision to be made. 

6.1.18 Battery Charger : Suitable for battery 
supplied. 

6.1.19 Angle Input : Up to 360°. 

6.1.20 Measuring Mode : Slope and horizontal 
distances and elevation-difference. 

6.1.21 Scan : Provision to be made. 



6.1.22 Mounting : 
with adapter on 
purchaser. 

7 ACCESSORIES 



Provision with yoke and also 
theodolite, to be used by the 



7.1 The following accessories shall be supplied 
with each instrument: 

Accessory No. 



a) Carrying case 

b) Instrument of battery cable 

c) Instrument to external ( vehicle ) 
battery cable 

d) External attenuator screen 

e) Rain and dust cover 

f) Yoke with sighting telescope 

g) Telescopic tripod for instrument 
( with plumb bob ) 

h) Tribrach for instrument 
j) Adaptor for instrument 
k) Battery 12 V, between 2 Ah to 7 Ah 
m) Charger for battery 
n) Single triple prism assembly 
p) Telescopic tripod for prism 

( with plumb bob ) 
q) Tribrach for prism ( with optical 

centring device ) 
r) Adaptor for prism 



Accessory No. 

s) ppm chart ( device ) 1 

t) Instruments operation manual 1 

u) Tool kit 1 Set 

v) Thermometer ( degree Celsius ) 1 

w) Barometer ( mb/mm ) 1 

x) Atmospheric correction graph I 

y) Lens cleaning brush 1 

8 TESTS 

8.1 The instrument shall be tested to comply with 
the requirements laid down in 4, 5 and 6. 

8.2 The instrument shall be tested for improper 
fitting, missing components and damage or 
deterioration to various parts which shall not be 
allowed. 

8.3 The instrument shall be subjected to test mode 
operation and it shall be ensured that proper dis- 
play/indication, as laid down in the operation 
manual, is seen. 

8.4 CoUimation Test 

The instrument shall be subjected to this test by 
placing the reflector at short distance, say, 100 m, 
and it shall be ensured that a return signal is 
received when the telescope cross wires are sighted 
on the prism. Only slight turn of horizontal and 
vertical slow motion screws should be able to 
optimize the return signal for measuring. If not, 
coHimation error shall exist which shall be 
adjusted in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in the operation manual. It shall be ensured 
that this adjustment is possible. 

8.5 Climatic and Environmental Tests 

8.5.1 Cold Test 

The instrument, in non-working condition, shall 
be subjected to cold test at a temperature of 
— 10°C for a period of 4 hours as specified in 
IS 10236 ( Part 3 ) : 1982. After the test, there 
shall not be any deterioration to any part of the 
instrument, namely, jamming of joints and deterio- 
ration of paint, etc. The instrument shall work 
well after the test. 

8.5.2 Dry Heat Test 

The instrument, in non-working condition, shall 
be subjected to dry heat test at a temperature of 
55°C for a period of 16 hours as given in IS 10236 
( Part 2 ) : 1982. There shall not be any deterio- 
ration to any part of the instrument after the test 
namely, looseness of joints and deterioration of 
paint, etc. The instrument shall work well after 
the test, 



IS 12888 : 1989 



8.5.3 Rain Test 

The instrument in non-working condition, shall 
be subjected to this test as given in IS 10236 
( Part 14 ) : 1986 at severity I ( see 6.1 ). After 
the test, there shall not be any deterioration of 
any part, namely, ingress of water inside, 
deterioration to optical surfaces and paint, etc. 
The instrument shall work well after the test. 

8.5.4 Vibration Test 

The instrument, in non-working condition, shall 
be subjected to the test for frequency range of 
5 to 50 Hz t see 6.1.1 ), displacement amplitude 
of 2'5 mm ( Table 2 ) and a duration of 3 hours 
( see 6.1.3.2 ) as in IS 10236 ( Part 11 ) : 1985 
[ see Table 4 (i) also ]. After he test, there shall 
not be any deterioration to any part, namely, 
looseness of joints, breakage of components, etc 
The instrument shall work well after the test. 

8.5.5 Salt Mist Test 

The instrument, in non-working condition, shall 
be subjected to this test as given in IS 10236 
( Part 6 ) : 1982 at severity- 1 ( see 7.1 ). After 
the test there shall not be any deterioration of any 
part, namely, ingress of water deterioration to 
optical surfaces and paint, etc. The instrument 
shall work well after the test. 

8.6 Cyclic Error 

The instrument shall be subjected to this test as 
given in the operation manual and it shall be 
ensured that the error does not exist. The set up 
for this test, used by the manufacturer, may be 
used- 

8.7 Range and Accuracy 

The instrument shall be tested for its full range 
on a known base line. For this, the range shall 
be measured by the instrument after feeding 
internally the prism constant and the atmospheric 
correction obtained from the manual. Alterna- 
tively, the atmospheric correction may be read 
from chart and applied by calculations, after 
getting the distance. To get this correction, 
temperature and pressure readings at instrument 
and reflector stations shall be taken and mean 
values accepted for the chart. This corrected 



distance will be slope distance which shall be 
converted into horizontal distance either auto- 
matically by feeding the vertical angle from the 
theodolite to the instrument or by calculations, 
using the differential height between the instru- 
ment and the reflector stations. In the latter case, 
the formula C=/sh^/2S shall be used, where C js 
the slope correction, A^ is difference between 
heights of instrument and reflector stations and S 
is the corrected slope distance. The horizontal 
distance shall be the corrected slope distance (S) 
minus slope correction C. While determining 
height, the height of the instrument and the reflec- 
tor above the ground shall be added to the 
respective station heights above mean sea level. 
To measure height above ground, the central 
point of the instrument and reflector shall be 
taken. 

The horizontal distance so obtained shall be 
corrected for the zero error ( additive constant ) 
of the instrument. The zero error shall be first 
determined by any of the methods given in 
Annex A. It shall be added, with proper sign to 
the horizontal measured distance to get the zero 
error corrected horizontal distance. This distance 
will be the representative distance obtained from 
the instrument for that range. Ten such values 
shall be obtained and mean calculated. The 
difference between this mean value and the known 
distance ( range ) will give the accuracy of the 
instrument which shall conform to the specified 
value. For example, the accuracy so obtained at 
1 km range, shall be ± { 5 mm + 5 ppm ) =± 
( 5 mm+5 mm ) == ± 10 mm. 

NOTE — In fact the standard deviation has been 
specified as C7— ± ( 5 mm + 5 ppm ) but statistically, 
in 66 percent ( that is, majority ) of the cases, the 
accuracy shall be Iff, namely, this value of 10 mm, 
and therefore this shall be accepted as standard. 

9 MARKING 

9.1 The instrument shall 
indication of the source of 
year of manufacture, 

10 PACKING 



be marked with the 
manufacture and the 



10.1 The instrument and its accessories shall be 
placed in its case and suitably packed for transit. 
While packing, suitable cushioning materials shall 
be used to avoid damage during transportation. 



IS 12888 : 1989 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 8.7 ) 

METHODS OF ZERO ERROR DETERMINATION 



A-1 METHOD 1 
A-1.1 Known Base Line 

In case of a known base line ( which should be 
more accurate than the distance measuring 
accuracy of the instrument ) the additive constant 
( zero error ) can be determined by measuring 
various sections. Such a base line may be that 
established with invar wires. The method is as 
follows: 



shall be measured with the instrument in the same 
way as mentioned in Method 1. The zero-error 
shall be determined as below: 



ZE ( zero error ) = 



n 
AC— I. 



di 



For better accuracy, more than 5 sections may be 
made in the line AB. 



1 
-e- 



2 

-e- 



3 

-e- 



t. 



5 

-e- 



6 
-©- 



7 
-©- 

B 



Suppose, AB is a base line having 7 points so that 
there are 6 sections. Out of these 6 sections, 
21 combinations of distances may be obtained, 

such as, 12. 13 17; 23,24.-27; 34,35 

37; 45, 46, 47; 56, 57; and 67. All these distances 
can be computed as the value of individual sec- 
tions are predetermined by invar wires or any 
other better means. 

A-1.1.1 While measuring each of 21 sections, 
about 10 observations will be taken with the 
EDM instrument which will be slope distances. 
The mean shall be taken. The mean slope distance 
shall then be corrected for meteorological condi- 
tions. In case there is provision of applying 
meteorological correction automatically in the 
instrument, the same may be done and then one 
will get 10 corrected slope distance for a section. 
The mean of corrected slope distance will be 
taken and the same converted into horizontal 
distances, that is, in the same term as the sections 
of the base line are known. This will be the 
accepted horizontal distance for each section. 

A-1. 1.2 Thus 21 measured values of 21 sections 
arc obtained with the EDM instrument and their 
differences with corresponding known values will 
give 21 values of zero error. The mean of 21 
values will be accepted as zero error ( additive 
constant ) for that instrument. 

A-2 METHOD 2 

A-2.1 Unknown Base Line 

Suppose AB is as known base line in which there 
are n unknown unequal sections. All the sections 



A-3 PRECAUTIONS 



A-3.1 While determining zero error, the weather 
selected should be as normal as possible. The 
measurements may not be taken during noon 
when a lot of shimmering is expected. 

A-3.2 The instrument should be used with will 
charged battery and all the precautions for 
measurement with EDM instrument, namely, their 
centring on ground points, collimation adjustment 
between the aiming head ( transmitting and receiv- 
ing optical system ) and sighting telescope, using 
umbrella on instrument and reflector, etc, should 
be observed. 

A-3.3 It may be preferred to use shorter base line 
having a length of 500 m or so to get almost 
uniform atmospheric condition during measure- 
ments. 

A-3.4 The points should be properly aligned so 
as to be in the same straight line. 



A-^ 



Ol 



da 



dn 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc : No. LMD 20 ( 4994 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Poblication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 33113 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Offices) 

Regional OflBces : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r331 oi 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 (331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 37 g6 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern ; C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 -41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches t AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers. Delhi, India 



