**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11210 (1984) : Code of practice for stains removal from 
textiles and clothing [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



JS : 11210- 1984 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

STAINS REMOVAL FROM 
TFXTJLES AND CLOTHING 



UDC 677 BU -5 : 646 : Gi : 006 76 




4) Cofcrighi K'B5 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
M ANAK HHAVAN, 9 BAflADI K SHAH /.AFAR MAR ft 

NEW DELHI ] 10002 

Gr 7 September \9B5 



IS : 11210 • 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

STAINS REMOVAL FROM 

TEXTILES AND CLOTHING 

Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 

Chairman Representing 

Dr ( Kumari ) M. D. Bhavsar The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 

Members 

Shri Jamshed D. Adrianvala The Tata Mills Limited, Bombay 
Dr V. G. Agnihotri National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. K. BaNdopaphyay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Kumari L. G, Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Basu Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspec- 

tion Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri A. K. SaigaL ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. L. Behrani Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri N. Kasturia ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Bhattacharya Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, 

Vadodara 
Shri D. K. Chattopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Chatter jee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Destkan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shhi M, D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Dr B. R. Manjunatha Intcxa India, Bombay 

Shut Sunie S. Meiita Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay 

Dr*. A. S, MtTKHEitJEE Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Dr ( Shrimati ) U. Nandurkar Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Dr S. N. PaNdey Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 

( ICAR ), Bombay 
Kitmart I. G, JiKATT ( Alternate ) 
Dr (Shrimati) G. R. Phal- Textiles Committee, Bombay 

gumani 
Siiri P. R. V. Ramanatst Central Excise & Customs ( Ministry of Finance ), 

New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Khere ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Representative Crescent Dyes & Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta 

Representative Development Commissioner for Handlooms, 

New Delhi 
Shri N. S. Saraiya The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Ananthakrishna Binny Limited, Madras 

Setty 

Dh M. G. Modak ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. J. Shah The Bombay MUiowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri Jamnadas K. Shah The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmadabad 

Shri K. G. Shah Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co 

Ltd, Ahmadabad 
Dr J. I. Setalwai> ( Alternate } 
Shri S. S. Trivedi Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 
Shri J. N. Vohra Punjab State Hosiery & Knitwear Development 

Corporation Limited, Chandigarh 
Shri P. T. BaNeiui ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. I. Mipha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 



Director ( Tex ) 



Secretary 

Shri M. S. Verma 
Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Chemical Test Methods Subcommittee, TDC 5:14 

Convener 

Shri S. S. Trivjedi Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmadabad 

Members 

Shri D. K* Jain ( Alternate to 
Shri S. S. Trivedi ) 
Dr V. G. Agnihotri National Peroxide Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Bandopadhyay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Ktjmari L. C. Patex, ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Desikan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Dr B. L. Ghosh Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, Calcutta 

Dr K. P. Das ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimatj ) U. NaNDURkak Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shrimati G. P. Rake ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) G. R. Phal- Textiles Committee, Bombay 

GUMAttI 

Shri N. S. Saraiya The Bombay lextiie Research Association, Bombay 

Shri J. J. Shah The Bombay Millowners* Association, Bombay 

Shri Jamnadas K. Shah Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmadabad 

Shri Ishwakbhai M. Pat*;!* ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Shah SLM-Maneklal Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Tarapokewala The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

STAINS REMOVAL FROM 

TEXTILES AND CLOTHING 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 14 December 198-1-, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0.2 Stains, whether on fabric or on garments, are unwelcome, On 
fabrics, they reduce the consumer appeal; so pieces containing stains have 
to be marketed at low prices as seconds and fents. On a garment, they 
generate a tendency fot avoiding its use. Proper removal of stains is, 
therefore, important for the launderers and drycieaners, as well as at 
home. 

0.3 Textile fabrics are of large varieties and complexities in their 
chemical and physical composition. Also the stains are often complex 
in nature since a stain may be composed of several staining substances. 
Stains of various types are apt to occur from time to time during the 
manufacturing processes and in actual use. This standard prescribes 
general guidelines for removal of spots and stains effectively and 
economically in the common household, as well as it provides the dry- 
cleaner with ready references to stain removing chemicals and the 
methods of their applications* 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes general guidelines for the removal of various 
types of spots and stains on textiles and clothing that may be encountered 
during every day use. It also provides general information, precautions, 
method of treatments and identification of various types of spots and 
stains occurring on textiles and clothing. 

2. GENERAL INFORMATION AND PRECAUTIONS 

2.1 Remove the stains promptly because easeness with which it can be 
removed depends upon time. The chances of complete removal lessen 
as time goes by, and old stains are sometimes impossible to remove. 

3 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

2.2 Determine whether the cloth is washable or non-washabIe s A tag 
or label may reveal this information or, if this is lacking, it may be 
considered washable if it has been previously washed successfully. 

2-3 Give careful treatment and time to act for stain remover. Work 
lightly and rapidly. Vigorous rubbing is often injurious to cloth, its 
colour or its finish. 

2.4 Test the stain remover and use it sparingly. Test the stain remover 
on an inconspicuous spot, such as an unexposed seam or hem. Observe 
whether it injures the colour or dye or finish or the fibre and select suitable 
stain remover. Better results are obtained by many short applications 
than one long one. 

2.5 Use light brushing motions starting well outside the stain and 
brushing towards the centre. 

2.6 Flush out the stain remover or any chemical which has been used for 
the purpose of neutralizing acid or alkaline stain. Avoid the use of 
strong acids and alkalis which weaken the cloth. 

2.7 Dry the treated area rapidly which avoids damage due to the 
prolonged action of the solvent. 

2.8 Keep the brush, spatula, working area clean. After use, rinse the 
brush well and hang it to dry. 

2*9 Dry the area after using water-soluble stain removers and then only 
use non-water-soiubie solvents if required. 

2»10 Treat a wet stain carefully. Avoid scratching or working the stain 
too strongly. 

2.11 Soften a hard stain with the recommended softener because other- 
wise there is risk of breakage of fibres during rubbing. 

2.12 Detergents may contain alkalis that could set some stains. So test 
prior to their use as in 2.4. 

2.13 Avoid forcing staining material into the fabric. 

2.14 Remove built up stains with a spoon. 

2.15 Do not allow dry cleaning solvent to come in contact with skin, 

2.16 Work in a ventilated area. Avoid breathing solvent fumes. 

2.17 Any unidentified stain should be treated with the dry procedure 
first and then with the wet procedure, if necessary ( see 4A V 

2.18 Do not use chlorine bleaches on fabrics that contain silk, wool, 
elastane or special finishes unless the label states that it is sale to use 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

chlorine bleach. Test all dyed fabrics before using chlorine bleach. Do 
not put bleach solution in a metal container. 

2.19 Taffeta ( silk ) fabrics should always be kept smooth during cleaning 
otherwise permanent wrinkles and even splitting of the fabric may occur. 
Tapping and light brushing should be used for this fabric. 

2.20 In case of chiffon fabric ( silk and rayon ) light tapping is best 
but brushing should be avoided. A crinkled crepe chiffon may take 
water spots and react unfavourably to many spotting agents. So stain 
remover should be tested before use as in 2.4. 

2.21 While cleaning mousseline de soie ( silk ) fabrics, it is 
preferable to stretch the area involved by means of embroidery hoops 
and mechanical action should be avoided. 

2.22 Wetting an area of pongee, shantung, tussah ( silk) fabrics changes 
the appearance which should be rectified by dipping the whole fabric in 
the cleaning fluid. 

2.23 It is preferred to work on the underside of the satin fabrics and give 
tapping motion. Creasing and pinching should be avoided because this 
will damage the surface. 

2.24 In case of crepe fabrics light tapping motion is preferred. 

2.25 Vigorous action should be avoided on pile fabrics and they should 
be worked on the back side of pile to prevent possibility of pulling out of 
the pile fibres. After stain removal, drying should be slow so that the 
pile can be brushed to hold its original position. Acetate rayon velvets 
should be treated with dry stain removers because wetting causes the pile 
to loose its original form. 

2.26 In case of woollen suitings, vigorous action should be avoided as it 
causes permanent felting of fibres on the surface. Wool, because of its 
tendency to shed water is likely to form rings after stain removing 
treatment. So it is usually preferred to dry-clean the whole fabric after 
spotting to give it uniform appearance. 

3. IDENTIFICATION OF FIBRES AND STAINS 

3.1 Identify the fibre(s) as given in IS : 667-1981* by simple preliminary 
test. 

3.2 Identify the stains as far as possible by the following parameters. 

3,2.1 Colour — For example, a red colour often identifies a lipstick 
stain, the brown colour an iodine stain. 



* Methods fur identification of textile fibres {first revision ). 



IS: 11210-1984 

3*2.2 Appearance of the Surface of Fabric — For example, ink penetrates 
a fabric surface; paint builds up on a fabric. 

3,2.3 Shape — For example, stain follow the yarns with the least degree 
of twist in a fabric. If the yarns are of equal twist in both the warp and 
the weft, a perfect cross will appear, 

3*2.4 Ultraviolet Light — Under ultraviolet or black light, rust stains 
look black; stains on polyester glow; sugar stains flourescess. The 
breakdown of a flourescent dye or tint appears grey. 

3.2*5 Odour — For example perfume, cold wave-solution ( faint odour 
of bromine), or medicinal stains. 

3.2.6 Location — Perspiration stains occur in the under arm area of a 
suit or blouse, food stains on ties and on dress or suit fronts. 

3.2.7 Feel — Egg may be recognized by its stiffness, glue and adhesive 
are sticky, paint may be rough or smooth, nail polish may be built upon 
the fabric surface. 

4. GENERAL PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS 
4.1 Spotting 

4.1.1 Dry Procedure 

4.1.1.1 Place a towel under the stained area. White towel is 
preferable. 

4.1.1.2 Apply the solvent to the stain. Saturate the area with 
solvent. 

4.1.1.3 Rub the stain lightly with fingertips. Do not press it into 
the fabric. Let the solvent loosen the staining substance and rinse it 
through the fabric into the towel. Continue rubbing with the fingers 
until the staining material is gone. 

4.1*1.4 Remove the towel. 

4.1.1.5 Moisten a piece of cheese cloth with the cleaning solvent and 
wipe lightly around the outside edges of the spotted area. Wipe towards 
the centre. This is to prevent a ring. 

4.1.1.6 Allow to dry. 

4.1.2 Wet Procedure 

4.1.2.1 Place a towel under the stained area. White towel is 
preferable. 

4.1.2.2 Apply plain, cool water to stain. Do not mix it with any- 
thing. Saturate the stained area. 

6 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

4.1.2.3 Rub-lightly with finger tip to loosen the stain so that it will 
wash through the fabric into the towel. 

4.1.2.4 If water alone does not loosen the stain, add liquid detergent 
and work similarly with the finger tips. 

4.1.2.5 Then wet a cheese cloth heavily with water and squeeze over 
the stained area to flush out the detergent. Detergent left in the fabric 
can cause a ring. 

4.1.2.6 When the stain and detergent have both been washed out, 
remove the towel. 

4*1.2.7 Then wipe with a wet cheese cloth around the edges of the 
stained area to prevent a ring. Wipe toward the centre. 

4.1.2.8 Allow to dry. 

Note — In both the procedures given above, check frequently to see whether the 
staining substance has transferred to the towel. Change the positiou of the towel so 
that a clean portion of it is next to the stained area, 

4.2 Chemical Treatment 

4.2.0 For stains that require chemical stain removers, follow the 
procedure given below. 

4.2.1 Place absorbent towel under stain. 

4.2.2 Dampen stain with cool water. 

4.2.3 Apply chemical remover ( liquid ) with medicine dropper, or 
sprinkle powdered or crystalline removers on the dampened spot. 

4.2.4 Do not allow stain remover to dry on fabric. Keep area wet 
with a pad of cotton or cheese cloth, wet out with the stain remover 
solution. Use a pad dampened with water if a powder or crystalline 
stain remover is being used. 

4.2.5 Rinse stain removal solution or powder from washable fabric 
locally with water or rinse the entire garment/fabric in water. 

4.2.6 If fabric is dry cleanable, follow above procedure locally. Do 
not rinse entire garment in water. 

Note — Try mild treatment first. For a stronger treatment, lengthen the time of 
treatment and/or use a more concentrated stain remover solution. 

4.3 Bleaching Treatment 

4.3.0 For bleaching treatment, follow the procedure as given below. 

4.3.1 Chlorine Bleach 

4.3.1.1 Use sodium hydrochlorite solution containing 1 g/1 available 
chlorine for mild treatment. For strong treatment, use sodium 

7 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

hypochlorite solution containing 3 g/1 available chlorine, Max* Maintain 
a pH of 9'5 to 10*5 by adding sodium silicate. 

4.3.1.2 Use medicinal dropper to apply to small stains; soak larger 
stains in solution. 

4.3.1.3 Treat for 5 to 15 min at room temperature. Rinse with 
water. Repeat if necessary to bring stained area at j&H of 7 to 7'5. 

Notk 1 — Do not use sodium hypochlorite bleach on fabrics that contain silk, wool, 
elastane, polyester, nylon or special finishes unless the label or hand tag states it is 
safe to use sodium hypochlorite. 

Note 2 — Test all dyed fabrics before using chlorine bleach. Follow directions on 
package for powder or granulated bleach. 

4.3.2 Powdered Peroxygen Bleaches 

4.3.2.1 Use 3-5 g of powdered bleach mixed with 100 ml of luke- 
warm water ( 35-40°C), for use on silk, wool, modacrylic fabrics. Use hot 
water ( 50-60°C ), for other fabrics. Maintain a pH of 8'5-9'5 by adding 
sodium carbonate, if required. 

4.3.2.2 Cover stained area with solution or soak entire article for 
5-15 minutes. Rinse well or wash. 

Note — For dry-cleanable fabrics sprinkle 3-5 g of powdered peroxygen bleach on 
stain. Cover with a cotton pad dampened with lukewarm water. Keep damp until 
stain is removed. Rinse well. 

4.3.3 Hydrogen Peroxide andjor Sodium Perborate Bleach 

4.3.3.1 Moisten the stain with a few drops of 3 percent hydrogen 
peroxide and/or 2 g/1 sodium perborate solution at a temperature of 50 
to 60°C. Maintain a pH. of 8 5 to 9*5 by adding sodium carbonate, if 
required. 

4.3.3.2 Acid hydrogen peroxide/sodium perborate solution as needed 
to keep the stained area moist until stain is removed. Rinse well. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Good Light Source — to observe effectiveness of cleaning 
operations. 

5.2 Spotting Brush — for loosening and removing particles of stains — 
Medium bristle brush with a handle. 

5*3 A Clean Smooth Surface — A board, glass, or enamel surface, 
etc, to provide an efficient means of spreading out the stained area. 

5.4 Dye Pads, Dye Pencils, Crayons — As means of restoring colour. 

8 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

5.5 Magnifying Glass ( 10 to 20 Magnification ) — to identify the 
cloth, to examine a pretreated stain, and then to observe the progress of 
stains removal. 

5.6 Spatula — For working the stain-remover into the stain and for 
breaking up a stain built upon the surface. 

Note — It must be used with care, however, since it may injure the fibres of the 
cloth. 

5.7 Absorbent Material — Cheese cloth, white blotting paper, white 
towel, cleansing tissue, etc, to be placed under the stained area which 
absorbs excess liquids and prevent spreading to untreated areas. 

5.8 Bottles — with attached droppers for holding the various cleaning 
agents and serving as a convenient means of applying them. 

5.9 Sponge — useful in taking up excess liquids. 

5.10 Electric Fan — For quick drying after a cleaning operation. 

6. STAIN REMOVING AGENTS 

6.0 Quality of Agents — Unless otherwise specified pure chemicals 
shall be used. A pure chemical is one which docs not contain impurities 
that affect the results desired. 

6.1 Pre-spotters 

6.1.1 Dry Spotter — It consists of one part coconut oil to eight parts 
dry cleaning solvent by mass. If coconut oil is not available, mineral oil 
may be used. 

6.1.2 Wet Spotter — It consists of one part hand dish washing detergent, 
one part glycerine and eight parts water by mass. 

6.2 Absorbent Powders — Chalk, starch, talc, corn meal, flour, 
fuller's earth, etc. 

6.3 Dry Cleaning Solvents — Carbon tetrachloride; perchloroethylene; 

trichloroethylene; denatured alcohol; petroleum based solvents, for exam- 
ple, naphtha, gasoline; amyl acetate ( chemically pure ); benzole; 
chloroform; acetone; benzene; ethylacetate; and glycol ethyl ether. 

Note — Denatured alcohol is flammable, poisonous and fades some dyes. 
Amylacetate is flammable, poisonous. 

6.4 Protein Digestants — These are enzyme preparations capable of 
converting insoluble albumin, protein and starch into water oluble 
substances. They should not be used for protein fibres or on fabrics 
converting a finish or size consisting of such proteins as casein or casein 
like substance. It is preferred to test these agents on an inconspicuous 
portion on the fabric before use, 

9 



IS : 11210 * 1984 

6.5 Detergents — Soap solution concentrate consisting of soft soap 
based on potassium, liquid detergents, and soapless shampoo. 

6.6 Acids — Acetic acid solution ( 5-10 percent, tnh ) or citric acid 
solution ( 5 percent, m v ), oxalic and hydrochloric acid ( 1 gjl ). 

6.7 Alkalis — Ammonium hydroxide solution ( 10 percent, m/v ). 

6.8 Oxidising or Bleaching Agents — Hydrogen perioxide solution 
3 percent, hydrogen perioxide-sodium perborate solution ( 2 g of sodium 
perborate per litre of 3 percent hydrogen peroxide solution ), sodium 
chlorite solution, and sodium hypochlorite solution, etc. 

Note — Chlorine bleaches are poisonous. 

6.9 Oils and Lubricants — Mineral oil, pine oil, glycerine, turpentine 
oil, coconut oil, kerosene oil, and banana oil. 

6.10 Mild Tincture of Iodine 

6.11 Sodium Silicate Solution — 1 percent ( m/v ). 

6.12 Sodium Thiosulphate Crystals or Solution — 10-20 percent 
m/v. 

7. METHODS FOR REMOVAL OF SPOTS AND STAINS 

7.0 General — No single procedure, or basic method exists for the 
removal of the hundreds of different types of stains that occur on the 
variety of fabrics used in wearing apparel and household items. Most 
stains can be classified into one of nine 'families' or 'groups'. All the 
stains in each of these families or groups are removed by almost similar 
procedure and with same or similar stain removing agents. However, 
a few stains are too complex to fit into one of these groups, and will 
require more varied removal procedures. Some of them are listed at 
the end under 'Miscellaneous Stains'. The procedures given under each 
group are general guidelines for the users serving as ready reference and 
suitable treatment as given in each group is to be selected by the user 
depending upon the need for removal of stain, nature and intensity of 
stain, the structure and composition of the fabric and that of the stain 
removing agent. Relevant procedures given under 4 should be followed 
for each type of treatment given in 7. When the user has no knowledge 
of the cause of stain, procedure given under 8 may be followed* 

Note « — Quick reference chart is given in Appendix A for some important spots 
and stains removing chemicals from clothing and garments. 

10 



7.1 Group I 
Dyes 



IS : 11210 - 1984 



Fats, Oils, Waxes, Grease, Some Pigments and 



7.1.0 The stains included in this group and their solvents are given 
below: 



Stains 

Adhesive tape 
Crayon 

Dye-shoe polish 
Eye-liner, pencil, shadow, 
mascara 

Grease, oil 

Hairy spray 

Ink-India, felt tip, marker, 
typewriter ribbon 

Insecticides 

Lotion: Calamine, hand 

Make up: Powder, rouge 

Nosedrops 

Ointment 

Paint 

Smoke, soot 
Tar 

Wax-car, floor, furniture 

Note — Any dry solvent may be used. 
used for individual spot or stain. 

7.1.1 Method of Removal 



Solver, ts 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Naphtha 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride or perchlo- 
roethylene 

Carbon tetrachloride or perchlo- 
roethylene or trichloroethylene 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Naphtha, gasoline 

Naphtha, gasoline 

Naphtha, gasoline 

Naphtha, gasoline 

Naphtha, gasoline 

Naphtha, gasoline 

Kerosene oil, turpentine oil, 
alcohol, benzene or carbon 
tetrachloride 

Naphtha 

Carbon tetrachloride, glycolethy- 

lether 
Carbon tetrachloride 

Solvents listed under 7.1.0 are'generally 



7«1«1«1 Washable fabrics — Sponge with dry-solvent, apply dry 
spotter, and rub gently. Flush with dry solvent. If stain remains, repeat 
above procedure. Dry, sponge with water, apply wet spotter and 
ammonia. Rub gently with brush. Rinse with water, launder. 

7.1.1.2 Dry cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics, but do 
not launder. 



11 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

7.2 Group II — Food Stains Containing Oils and Fats 

7.2.0 The stains included in this group are as under: 

Stains Solvents 

Catsup Carbon tetrachloride 

Chilli sauce Carbon tetrachloride 

Chocolate Alcohol 

Cocoa Alcohol 

Cream Carbon tetrachloride 

Gravy Carbon tetrachloride 

Ice cream Carbon tetrachloride 

Mayonnaise Carbon tetrachloride 

Milk Carbon tetrachloride 

Pudding Carbon tetrachloride 

Salad dressing Carbon tetrachloride 

Sauce Carbon tetrachloride 

Soup Carbon tetrachloride 

Note — Though solvents are mentioned against each spot or stain yet any dry 
solvent as given in 6.3 may be used. 

7.2.1 Method of Removal 

7.2.1.1 Washable fabrics — Sponge with dry solvent, apply dry spotter, 
and rub gently. Flush with dry solvent and dry. Soak in water solution 
of detergent and ammonia. Rinse with water. Soak in water solution 
of enzyme product for 30 min. Launder. Repeat if stain remains, 

7.2.1.2 Dry-cleanable fabrics — Sponge with dry solvent, apply dry 
spotter, and rub gently. Flush with dry solvent and dry. Sponge with 
water. Apply wet spotter and ammonia. Rub, 

7.3 Group III — Albuminous and Starchy Materials and Foods 
7,3.0 The stains included in the group are as follows: 

Bath oil 

Blood 

Body discharge 

Egg 

Egg drops 

Fish slime 

Leather 

Lotion, after shave 

Mouth wash 

12 



IS : 11210 - 1984 



Mucus 
Sherbert 
Starch 
Vomit 

7.3.1 Method of Removal 

7.3.1.1 Washable fabrics — Soak in water solution of detergent and 
ammonia. Rinse with water. Soak in water solution of an enzyme 
product for 30 minutes. Launder. Repeat if stain remains. 

7.3*1.2 Dry- cleanable fabrics — Sponge with water. Apply wet spotter 
and ammonia. Rub into stain. Rinse with water. Add an enzyme 
product and keep area moist for 30 min. Flush with water. Repeat if 
stain remains. 

7.4 Group IV — Plastics, Some Pigments and Dyes 

7.4.0 The stains included in this group and the corresponding solvents 
are as under: 



Stains 

Airplane glue 

Carbon paper 

Cement, household 

Corn removers 

Correction fluid, 
mimeograph 

Cuticle oil 

Cuticle remover 

Fingernail polish 

Lacquer 

Mimeograph ink 

Mucilage, paste 

PJastic 

Plastic glue 

Solder, liquid 

Typewriter ribbon 



Note — Instead of carbon tetrachloride any 
also be used. 



Solvents 

Carbon tetrachloride 
Carbon tetrachloride 
Carbon tetrachloride 
Carbon tetrachloride 
Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Amylacetate 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride 

Carbon tetrachloride, 
gasoline 

other solvent as mentioned in 6,3 may 



13 



IS : 11210- 1984 

7.4.1 Method of Removal 

7.4.1.1 Washable fabrics — Sponge with dry solvent, apply dry 
spotter, and rub gently. Tamp gently with brush after adding more 
dry spotter. Flush with dry solvent. Dry. If stains remains, repeat 
above procedure. Dry. Apply amyl acetate and rub or blot. Keep 
moist with amylacetate for 15 minutes with occasional blotting. Flush 
with dry solvent. Dry. 

7.4.1.2 Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics. 

7.5 Group V — Tannin and Reducing Sugars, Some Vegetable 
Colouring Materials 

7.5.0 The stains included in this group are as follows: 



Bath oil 
Beer 


Home permanents 
Molasses 


Tea 
Tobacco 


Berry juce 
Betal 


Mouthwash 
Mud 


Toothpaste 


Caramelized sugar 
Coffee 

Casein glue 
Cordials 


Shaving cream 
Soft drinks 


Vegetables 
Vinegar 
( coloured ) 
Whiskey 
Wine 


Cough syrup 
Fruit 


Suntan lotion 
Syrup 





7,5.1 Method of Removal 

7.5.1.1 Washable fabrics — - Soak in a water solution of detergent and 
vinegar. Rinse. Sponge with alcohol. Launder. If stain remains, 
soak in water solution of an enzyme product for 30 minutes. Rinse and 
launder. 

7.5.1-2 Dry-cleanable fabrics — Sponge with water. Apply wet 
spotter and vinegar. Rub into stain. Rinse with water. Apply alcohol 
and rub into stain. Dry. If stains remain, apply an enzyme product 
for 30 minutes. Rinse with water. Dry. 

7.6 Group VI — Red Dyes, Deodorants, Perspiration, Urine 

7.6.0 The stains included in this group are as follows: 

Antiperspirants Merthiolate 

Candy Metaphen 

Deodorants Paint, water colour 

14 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

Dye: Clothing, food, hair Perspiration 

Inks, red Picric acid 

Mercurochrome Urine 

7.6.1 Method of Removal 

7.6.1.1 Washable fabrics — Soak for one hour in a water solution of 
detergent and ammonia. Rinse with water. Soak for one hour in a 
water solution of vinegar. Rinse and dry. Apply alcohol and rub 
gently. Rinse with water. Launder. 

7*6.1.2 Dry-cleanable fabrics — Sponge with water. Apply wet 
spotter and ammonia. Blot stain with blotting paper. Keep area wet 
for 30 min with occasional rubbing. Rinse with water. Apply wet 
spotter and vinegar. Rub gently. Rinse and dry. Apply alcohol and 
rub gently. Rinse with water. Dry. 

7.7 Group VII — Blue, Black, Green, Violet Dyes 

7.7.0 The stains included in this group are as follows: 

Blueing 

Dye: Clothing, food, hair, shoe 

Gentian violet 

Ink: green, violet, blue, black 

Paint: water colours 

7.7.1 Method of Removal 

7.7.1.1 Washable fabrics — Soak for 30 minutes in a water solution 
of a detergent and vinegar. Rinse with water and dry. Apply alcohol 
and rub gently. Dry. Soak for 30 minutes in a water solution of 
detergent and ammonia. Launder. 

7.7.1.2 Dry-cleanable fabrics — Sponge with water. Apply wet 
spotter and vinegar. Blot with blotting paper. Keep area wet for 
30 min and blot occasionally. Flush with water and dry. Apply alcohol 
and rub gently. Dry. Sponge with water. Apply wet spotter and 
ammonia. Keep area wet for 30 minutes and blot occasionally. Flush 
area with water. Dry. 

7.8 Group VIII — Oxidising Oils, Rubber, Cement, Gum 

7.8.0 The following stains are included in this group: 

Stains Solvents 

Asphalt Naphtha, gasoline 

Butter Carbon tetrachloride 

15 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

Cement, rubber Carbon tetrachloride 

Chewing gum Carbon tetrachloride 

Corn oil Carbon tetrachloride 

Linseed oil Carbon tetrachloride 

Vegetable oil Carbon tetrachloride 
Note — Any other solvent as given in 6-3 may also be used. 
7.8,1 Method of Removal 

7*8*1.1 Washable fabrics — Apply dry solvent and dry spotter. Rub 
or tamp gently with brush. Keep area wet with dry solvent and dry 
spotter for 30 min with occasional rubbing. Rinse with dry solvent. 
Dry. 

7*8.1.2 Dry-cleanahle fabrics — same as for washable fabrics. 

7.9 Group IX — Iodine. Penicillin. Silver Salts 

7.9.0 This group includes the following stains; 

a) Silver albuminate ( use enzyme product first ), 

b) Iodine ( do not use iodine in method of removal ), 

c) Penicillin, 

d) Photodeveloprnent fluid, and 

e) Silver nitrate. 

7.9.1 Method of Remoial 

7.9.1.1 Washable fabrics — Sponge area with water, and a few drops 
of iodine. Add a few drops of hypo solution and a few drops of ammonia. 
Flush well with water. Launder. 

7.9.1.2 Dry-cleanable fabrics ~- Same as for washable fabrics, but do 
not launder. 

7.10 Miscellaneous Stains 

7.10.0 This group includes the following stains: 

Acids Flavouring extracts 

Alkalis Fly specks 

Animal stains Fly paper 

Arnica Grass 

Awning drippings 

Black walnut Hair dressing, hair tonic 

16 



IS : 11210 - 1984 



Ink, ball point pen 

Lipstick 
Meat juices 
Meat sauces 
Menstrual blood 
Mildew 
Mustard 
Pencil 
Perfumes stains 



Bronzing liquids 

Candle wax 
Chlorine 



Cologne 

Corrosion 

Embalming fluid 

Eye drops 

Rust 

Scorch 

Shellac 

Shoe polish ( white ) 

Stamp-pad ink 

Turmeric 

7.10.1 Methods of Removal 

7.10.1J Acids: 

a) Washable fabrics — Sponge with water, add ammonia, and let 
stand. Sponge and rinse well with water. Launder immediately. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1.2 Alkalis: 

a) Washable fabrics — Sponge with water, add vinegar, and let 
stand. Sponge and rinse well with water. Launder immediately. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7*10.1.3 Animal stains — These stains are made by household pets 
and are usually found on rugs, upholstery fabrics, and garments. Flush 
out the stain with water. Apply a few drops of 10 percent acetic acid 
solution. Flush out with water and dry. If stain remains, apply 3 
percent hydrogen peroxide solution. Flush out with water and dry. 

7.10.1.4 Arnica ( Source: antiseptic dressings ) — Sponge the stain with 
an alcohol and water mixture. Add a few drops of 10 percent acetic acid 
solution. Apply a soapless shampoo. Brush to loosen the stain. Flush 
out with alcohol-water mixture. Flush out with water and dry. 



17 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

7*10.1.5 Awning drippings — These stains are caused by rains washing 
down such materials as soot, soil, rust, etc. Place an absorbent, such as 
starch, over the stain. Apply a soapless shampoo. If stain remains, 
apply a 3 percent hydrogen peroxide-sodium perborate solution. Flush 
out with water and dry. 

7.10.1.6 Black walnut — The stains are composed largely of tannin. 

a) Washable fabrics — Sponge with water, apply wet spotter and 
vinegar. Brush gently. Repeat if necessary. If the stain does 
not disappear and the fabric permits, bleach with 3 percent 
hydrogen peroxide-sodium perborate solution, flush out with 
water. Feather out and dry. If fabric does not permit bleaching, 
launder it. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1.7 Bronzing liquids ( Source: bronze paint, Gold paint) — Apply a 
paste of amyl acetate and starch. Loosen the stain with a brush. Flush 
out with naphtha or gasoline. Feather out and dry. 

7.10.1.8 Candle wax: 

a) Washable fabrics — Remove excess with dull knife. Place stained 
area between blotting papers and iron. Replace blotters with 
fresh ones and iron until melting stops. Sponge with dry solvent 
( carbon tetrachloride ). 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics. 

7.10.1.9 Chlorine: 

a) Washable fabrics — Flush out the area with generous quantity of 
water and sponge with sodium bisulphite. Rinse with water 
and dry. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — same as for washable fabrics. 

7.10.1.10 Cologne: 

a) Washable fabrics — Sponge with water, apply wet spotter, and 
rub gently. Rinse with water. Apply alcohol and rub. Rinse 
with water. Launder. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — same as for washable fabrics, but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1.11 Corrosion — (It consists of a greenish stain due to brass or 
copper ) — Apply a soapless shampoo and work into the stain with brush. 
Flush out with water and dry. If stain remains give rust removing 
treatment. Flush out with water and dry. 

18 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

7.10.1.12 Embalming fluid (Source: morgue stains, post mortem stains, 
dissection stains, autopsy stains, cadaver stains, morgue odor ) — Moisten the stain 
with water. Apply a paste of protein digestent and leave it for 30 min. 
Keep moist with warm water. Flush out with water and dry. If stain 
remains, apply a 3 percent hydrogen peroxide solution, if fabric permits. 
Flush out with water and dry. 

7.10.1.13 Eye drops — Moisten the stain with water. Sponge with 
an alcohol-water mixture in equal proportion. Add several drops of 
10 percent acetic acid solution. Loosen the stain with brush. Flush out 
with water and dry. 

7.10.1.14 Flavouring extracts — Apply warm glycerine to the stain 
( 50°G ) and leave it for about 20 min. Loosen the stain with brush. 
Flush out with water and dry. To remove a persistent stain, apply an 
alcohol-water mixture. Add a few drops of 10 percent acetic acid 
solution. Flush out with water and dry. If stain remains, apply 
3 percent hydrogen peroxide solution. Flush out with water and dry. 

7.10.1.15 Fly specks — Moisten the stain with water. Apply a 
soapless shampoo. Add a few drops of 10 percent ammonia. Loosen 
the specks with brush. Flush out with water and dry. 

7.10.1.16 Flypaper, sticky 

a) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Sponge the stain with naphtha or 
gasoline. Feather out and dry, 

b) Washable fabrics — Wash in warm, soapy water. Rinse well and 
dry. 

7.10.1.17 Grass: 

a) Washable fabrics ■ — Sponge with dry solvent, rub gently. Dry. 
Apply amyl acetate and rub gently. Flush with dry solvent and 
dry. Sponge with water, apply wet spotter and vinegar. Rub 
gently. Rinse with water and dry. Sponge with alcohol. Rub 
gently. Dry. Bleach or launder if necessary. Or work with 
kerosene, sponge with dry solvent and bleach if required. Or 
wash in warm soapy water. Bleach if necessary. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1.18 Hair dressing, hair tonic — Moisten the stain with water. 
Apply a soapless shampoo, loosen the stain with a brush. Apply a few 
drops of 10 percent acetic acid solution. Flush with water and dry. 

11) 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

7*10.1.19 Ink, ball-point pen; 

a) Washable fabrics — Apply lukewarm ( 50°C ) glycerine to stain, 
blot, and rub gently. Keep area wet with glycerine for 30 minutes 
with occasional blotting. Flush with water. Apply wet spotter 
and ammonia, tamp gently. Rinse with water. Dry. Apply 
amyl acetate to the stain. Flush out with naphtha. Dry. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics. 
7*10.1.20 Lipstick ( Contents: fats, oils, waxes and dyes ): 

a) Washable fabrics — Apply dry solvent ( naphtha ), add dry spotter. 
Press area with clean blotter. Repeat until bleeding stops. If 
stain spreads, flush with dry solvent. Repeat until bleeding stops. 
Wash in warm, soapy water and dry. Sponge with water, apply 
wet spotter and ammonia. Rub gently. Flush with water, apply 
wet spotter and vinegar. Rub gently. Rinse with water and 
dry. Sponge with alcohol, if fabrics permits. Rub gently and 
dry. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10*1.21 Meat juices — Moisten the stain with water. Apply a soap 
solution concentrate. Add a few drops of 10 percent ammonia water. 
Work lightly with a brush. Flush out with water. If a stain persists 
apply a paste of protein digestant and leave it for 30 minutes. Keep 
moist with warm water and dry. 

7.10.1.22 Meat sauces — Flush out the stain with water. Apply warm 
glycerine ( 50°C ) and work it with a brush. Flush out with water. 
Apply a soapless shampoo. Apply a few drops of 10 percent acetic acid 
solution. Flush out with water and dry. 

7.10.1.23 Menstrual blood — Flush out the stain with water Apply 
a paste of protein digestant and leave it for 30 minutes. Keep moist with 
warm water. Flush out with water containing a little 10 percent 
ammonia. Flush out with water. Bleach with hydrogen peroxide — 
sodium perborate solution. Flush out with water thoroughly and dry. 

7.10.1.24 Mildew: 

a) Washable fabrics — Wash the stains with soap and water. Bleach 
if fabric permits. Rinse out well and dry. Flush with dry 
solvent. Apply dry spotter, amylacalate, and brush gently. 
Flush well with dry solvent. Dry. Sponge with water. Apply 
wet spotter and vinegar. Rub gently. Flush with water. If 
stain remains, apply wet spotter and rub gently. Rinse and dry. 
If stain remains, apply alcohol and rub. Dry. Bleach if fabric 
permits. 

20 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1/25 Mustard: 

a) Washable fabrics — Carefully scrap off excess dried mustard. 
Flush with dry cleaning solvent. Tamp lightly with a brush. 
Flush with dry cleaning solvent. Allow to dry. Sponge with 
water and vinegar. Tamp lightly with brush. Flush with water. 
If any stain is left, wet the stain with hydrogen peroxide and 
acid a drop of ammonia. Do not bleach longer than 15 minutes. 
Flush with water and dry. Or sponge with water. Rub glycerine 
into the stain. Soak in warm soapy water. Rinse well. Bleach 
in hydrogen peroxide. Rinse well and dry. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1.26 Indelible pencil: 

a) Washable fabrics — Erase excess with soft eraser. Flush with 
alcohol. Apply dry spotter and rub gently. Let it stand for 
30 minutes. Flush with alcohol and dry. Sponge with warm, 
soapy water, apply wet spotter and ammonia. Rub gently. 
Rinse with water. Repeat if necessary. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1.27 Perfume stains — Same as for meat sauces. 

7.10*1.28 Rust stains — Moisten the stain with water. Apply dilute 
oxalic acid/hydrochloric acid and leave for about 30 minutes. Work 
into the stain with brush. Flush out well with water and dry. Alter- 
natively rub in paste made of table salt and 10 percent acetic acid and 
leave it for 30 minutes. Rinse well. Repeat this procedure if the stain 
persists. 

7.10.1.29 Scorch — ( It is an area of fabric or fibre charred or burned 
to some degree ): 

a) Washable fabrics — Soap in soapy water. Wash and rinse well. 
If the stain persists, apply hydrogen peroxide-sodium perborate 
solution. Rinse out well and dry. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Brush the stain to remove the charred 
fibres. If the fabric permits, apply a 3_ percent hydrogen 
peroxide solution. Flush out with water. Repeat, if necessary. 
Feather out and dry, 

21 



IS : 11210 - 1984 

7. 10.1.30 Shellac ( A resinous substance dissolved in alcohol ): 

a) Washable fabrics — Sponge with dry solvent, apply dry spotter and 
tamp gently. Repeat and dry. If fabric is other than cellulose 
acetate rayon, apply alcohol and tamp. Dry. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics. 

7.10.1.31 Shoe polish , white ( Contains waxes, resins ): 

a) Washable fabrics — Sponge with dry solvent, add dry spotter, and 
brush. Rinse with dry solvent. Sponge with amylacetate and 
brush. Rinse with dry solvent and dry. Sponge with water, 
add wet spotter and vinegar. Brush gently. Rinse with water, 
dry and launder. 

b) Dry-cleanable fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 

7.10.1*32 Stamp-pad ink — Moisten the stain with glycerine and work 
with brush. Apply a soap-solution concentrate. Add a few drops of 
10 percent ammonia water. Flush out with water and dry. If the stain 
remains, bleach with 3 percent hydrogen peroxide solution. Flush out 
with water and dry. 

7.10,1,33 Turmeric — Same as for stamp pad ink. 

8. REMOVING AN UNKNOWN STAIN 

8.1 Washable Fabrics — Sponge with dry solvent. Apply dry spotter 
and rub gently- Flush with dry solvent. Apply amylacetate and rub 
gently. Flush with dry solvent. Dry. Sponge with water, apply wet 
spotter and vinegar and rub. Flush with water, apply wet spotter and 
ammonia. Rinse with water and dry. Sponge with alcohol and dry. 
Launder and bleach if safe for fabric and dry. 

8.2 Dry-Gleanable Fabrics — Same as for washable fabrics but do not 
launder. 



22 



IS : 11210 - 1984 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 7.0 ) 

READY REFERENCE BOX CHART FOR SPOT AND STAIN 
REMOVAL IN CARE OF CLOTHING AND GARMENTS 

Note 1 — Do not use bleaching agent on dyed fabrics without testing as in 2.4. 
Note 2 — For a bleach on animal fibres, use peroxide bleach. 
Note 3 — For a bleach on vegetable fibres, any bleach may be used. 

Treatment 



Sponge with water and ammonium 
hydroxide solution* 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Overnight soaking in 1 percent 
sodium silicate solution. 

Dip in hot glycolethylether for 5 
minutes. 

Sponge with few drops of ammo- 
nium hydroxide in 3 percent 
hydrogen peroxide. 

Sponge with enzyme preparation. 



SI 

No. 


Spot or Stain 


Material 


1. 


Acid 


Any 


2. 


Adhesive 


Any 


3. 


Albumins 


Cotton 


4. 


Bituminous 


Except 
acetate rayon 


5. 


Blood 


Wool and 
silk 



6. 
7. 

8. 

9. 



Blood 
Blood 

Blueing 

Butter 



Any 

Heavy goods Use raw starch paste. Keep apply- 
ing to spot until it disappears. 



10. Candle wax 



11. Candy 

12. Chewing gum Any 



Any 

Rayon, silk 
and wool 

Other fibres 
Any 

Any 



Use detergent and 0"3 percent ether. 
Rub carefully. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Wash in warm water and soap. 

Scrape off excess wax with knife 
and then sponge with carbon 
tetrachloride. 

Sponge with water and soap solution. 

Rub with a piece of ice and remove 
hardened gum with knife. Sponge 
with carbon-tetrachloride and rub 
back of stain. 



23 



IS : 11210 - 1984 



SI 
No. 


Spot or Stain 


Material 


13. 


Chocolate 


Silk and 
wool 

Others 


14. 


Cocoa 




15. 


Coffee 


Wool 



23. Grass 



Others 



16. 


Coffee with 
cream 


Cotton and 
others 


17. 


Cream 


Silk and 
wool 
Others 


18. 


Egg 


Any 


19. 


Fruits 


Cotton 

Silk 


20. 


Furniture 
polish 


Any 


21. 


Glue 


Any 


22. 


Graphite 


Any 



Silk and 
wool 



Others 



Treatment 

Sponge with hot water and soap 
and bleach if required. 

Soak in alcohol and ammonia. 
Same as in case of chocolate. 

Soak in a solution of 1 part glycerine 

to 9 parts water by mass for one 

hour. 
Pour boiling soft water from a 

height of over 80 cm and soap if 

necessery. 

Dry the material and sponge with 
carbon tetrachloride. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Wash in soap and water. 

Scrape off excess with knife and 
then sponge with water and soap. 

Pour boiling water from a height or 
bleach with hydrogen peroxide. 

Sponge with alkali ( ammonia ) 
and alcohol mixed in equal pro- 
portion. 

Sponge with water and soap solu- 
tion. 

Sponge with soap solution. 

Sponge with dry spotting soap ( 2 
parts oleic acid, 1 part each of 
chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, 
benzol, 1/5 part denatured 
alcohol, 1/12 parts ammonia ). 

Apply ammonia and cold water, 
wash in warm water and soap or 
bleach in hydrogen peroxide and 
ammonia. 

Wash in hot water and soap, or 
sponge with alcohol. 

24 



IS : 11210 ■ 1984 



SI 

No. 


Spot or Stain 


Material 


24. 


Grease, oil 


Any 


25. 


Gum 


Any 


26. 


Hair oil 


Any 


27. 


Ice cream 


Any 


28. 


Indelible 
pencil 


Any 


29, 


India ink 


White goods 


30. 


Ink 


Any 



31. Iodine 

32. Iron rust 



Any 

Cotton 9 
linen 



33. Lead pencil Any 



34. 


Leather 


Any 


35. 


Linseed oil 


Any 


36. 


Lipstick 


Any 



Treatment 



Sponge with carbon tetrachloride 
on back side of the cloth. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride 
on back side of the cloth. 

Sponge and rub with dry spotting 
agent ( 1 part each of chloroform, 
benzol and carbon tetrachloride ) # 

a) Sponge with water and soap and 
then bleach^ or. 

b) Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 
Sponge with alcohol or soap solution. 

Sponge and rub the fresh stain with 
soap solution. 

a) Sponge with water and soap and 
then bleach. 

b) Soak the fabric in lemon juice and 
salt or in sour milk. 

Sponge with denatured alcohol or 
sodium thiosulphate solution* 

a) Sponge with weak solution of ox- 
alic acid and hydrochloric acid. 
Apply ammonia and rinse with 
water. 

b) Sprinkle salt, squeeze juice of 
lemon over it and Jay in sunshine 
or hold steam from kettle. 

Try erasing. Sponge with carbon 
tetrachloride or use soap solution. 

Sponge with soap and water. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Use colourless grease such as 
petroleum jelley, or vaseline or 
glycerine. Rub and sponge with 
carbon tetrachloride. 



25 



IS: 


: 11210 - 1984 




SI 

Mo. 


Spot or Stain 


Material 


37. 


Medicine 


Any 


38. 


Mercuro- 
chrome 


Any 


39. 


Metallic 
stains 


Any 


40. 


Mildew 


Silk and 
wool 

Others 


41. 


Milk 


Any 


42. 


Mud 


Any 


43. 


Mustard 


Any 



44. Nail polish 



45. 

46. 



48. 

49, 
50. 



Nail varnish 



Old paint/ 
oiled varnish 



Acetate 
rayon 

Others 

Except 
acetate 



rayon 



47. Paint 



Pencil marks 

Perspiration 

Salad 
dressing 



Any 

Any 

Any 
Any 
Any 



Treatment 

Sponge carefully with alcohol and 
then with soap solution. 

Sponge with soap solution, bleach 
and rinse with water. 

Sponge carefully with acetic acid 
and rinse well. 

Sponge with lukewarm water and 
dry. Then sponge with carbon 
tetrachloride. 

Soap, wash well and bleach. 

Sponge with soap solution. 

Allow to dry, brush, sponge from 
back with soap solution or carbon 
tetrachloride. Rinse. 

Sponge with glycerine ( 50°C ). 
Apply water and then 20 percent 
acetic acid and then sponge with 
water. Bleach and sponge again 
with water. 

Sponge with amylacetate or banana 

oil. 
Sponge with ethyl acetate. 

Sponge with acetone. 

Sponge vigorously with care with 
equal parts of alcohol and 
benzene or use turpentine oil. 

Sponge vigorously with care with 
turpentine oil or benzene or 
kerosene. 

Try erasing. Sponge with soap and 
water. 

Use soap and water. Bleach if 
required. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 



26 



IS : 11210 - 1984 



SI 


Spot or Stain 


Material 


51. 


Scorch 


Any 


52. 


Shellac 


Any 


53. 


Shoe polish 


Silk and 
wool 

Others 


54. 


Sugar 


Any 


55. 


Tar, road oil, 
creosote oil 


Any 


56. 


Tea 


Any 


57. 


Tin foil 


Any 


58. 


Tobacco 


Any 


59. 


Tomato 


Any 


60. 


Varnish 


Any 


61. 


Vaseline 


Any 


62. 


Water colours 


Any 


63. 


Wax 


Any 


64. 


White sauces 


Any 



Treatment 

Sponge with soap solution and 
bleach. 

Sponge with alcohol or benzene. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Wash in soap and water. 

Sponge with hot water. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Sponge with soap solution or pour 
boiling water. 

Sponge with soap and water. 

Sponge with hot water and soap. 

Sponge with soap solution. 

Sponge with alcohol or benzene. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Sponge with soap solution. 

Sponge with carbon tetrachloride. 

Sponge with soap and water. 



27 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
Base Units 



QUANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


9 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Unit* 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


st e radian 


*r 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N « 1 kg.m/i* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.in 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W ~ IJ/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


lWb=l V.< 


Flux density 


testa 


T 


1 T - I Wb/m f 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz - 1 c/s (s" 1 ) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa=l N/m* 



