**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11797 (1985) : Radiation detectors for instrumentation 
and protection of nuclear reactors [LITD 8: Electronic 
Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Intiilfit Sinndiifii 



IS: 11797-1989 
lEC Pab 51S(1^7S) 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



SPECIFJCAjrON FOR RADIATION DCTECTORS FOR 
INSTRUMENTATION AND PROTECT [ON OF 
NUCLEAR REACTORS 

(lEC Tillc : RaiJialicin Dettctors for the tnstniinentatLon nnd Frotectian 
qF Nuclear t^edctocs Characteristics and Test Methods) 



UDC i2l-31Ti9 : 539' ( 0744 : 539- 1 2 (Ml : WlMS^^Z-d 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAk UHAVAN, 9 BAflADUR SHAH £AFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI ] lOOua 

'^J' ^ OctaBtt J957 



IS : 11797-1985 

UDC 621-317 39; 5391-074.8:5391208:62r039*5/-6 lEC Pub 515 (1975) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR RADIATION DETECTORS FOR 
INSTRUMENTATION AND PROTECTION OF 
NUCLEAR REACTORS 
(lEC Title : Radiation Detectors for the Instrumentation and Protection 
of Nuclear Reactors; Characteristics and Test Methods) 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with lEC Pub 515 (1975) 'Radiation detectors for the 
instrumentation and protection of nuclear reactors; characteristics and test methods' issued by the Interna- 
tional Electrotechnical Commission, was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommen- 
dation of the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecom- 
munication Division Council. 

Wherever the words International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be read 
as *lndian Standard'. 

Cross References 

In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective places the following: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

lEC Pub 50(66) (1968) Detection and measurement of^ IS : 1885 (Part 63)-1985 Electrotechnical 

ionizing radiation by electric means [Superscd- ! vocabulary: Part 63 Nuclear instni- 

ed by lEC Pub 50(391) and 50(392)] V mentation 

lEC Pub 50(391) (1975) Detection and measurement | 
of ionizing radiation by electric means J 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this Indian Standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following lEC standards and decided that they are acceptable for use in conjuction with 
this standard. 

lEC Pub 231 (1967) General principles of nuclear reactor instrumentation 

lEC Pub 232 (1966) General characteristics of nuclear reactor instrumentation 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in 
this Indian Standard. 



Adopted 28 August 1985 



® October 1987, BIS 



Gr9 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BitAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 117^-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

CONTENTS 



Section One — Introduction Page 
Clause 

1. Scope 3 

2. Definitions 3 

3. Interpretation of this standard 5 

Section Two — Preliminary 

4. General 5 

5. Types of radiation to be measured 5 

6. Detector operating conditions 6 

7. Conditions of detector measurement 6 

8. Connectors and cables ^ 

Section Three — Characteristics 

9. General 7 

10. Pulse mode neutron detectors 10 

11. Current mode neutron detectors 12 

Section Four — Test Methods 

12. General 14 

13. Specific tests for pulse fission ionization chambers 15 

14. Specified tests for boron trifluoride and boron-lined proportional counter tubes 17 

15. Specific tests for helium-3 proportional counter tubes 18 

16. Specified tests for compensated boron current ionization chambers 18 

17. Specific tests for uncompensated boron current ionization chambers 21 

18. Specific tests for current ionization chambers for gamma radiation 22 

19. Specific tests for fission current ionization chambers 22 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 



SECTION ONE — INTRODUCTION 

1. Scope 

The aim of this publication is to establish a standard concerning the characteristics and test methods of gas-filled 
radiation detectors used for the instrumentation and protection of nuclear reactors. 

These detectors function as electrical transducers and are used particularly in: 

— assemblies for measuring power and rate of change of power by means of neutron fluence rate (flux); 

— periodmeters or reactivity meters; 

— reactor warning and safety monitoring assemblies; 

— assemblies for measuring power by means of gamma radiation. 

The detectors examined in this standard are not used for personnel dosimetry purposes. 

In so far as they do not conflict with the present standard, lEC Publication 231, General Principles of Nuclear 
Reactor Instrumentation, and I EC Publication 232, General Characteristics of Nuclear Reactor Instrumentation, 
should be followed, as well as general recommendations and safety standards for electrical equipment which have 
already been issued. 

The detectors subject to this standard are: 

— boron CAirrent ionization chambers ; 

— fission current ionization cham^bers or pulse ionization cham^bers; 

— ionization chambers for gamma radiation ; 

— boron trifluorlde proportional counter tubes ; 

— iioron-lined proportional counter tubes ; 

— heiium-3 proportional counter tubes. 

Note, — This list is not restrictive and it is hoped that all types of radiation detectors used in reactor installations will benefit from the 
present standard. The standard for tests also applies to connecting cables and connectors when they form an integral part of 
the detector. 



2. Definitions 

Preliminary note 

Definitions given in Sub-clauses 2.1, 2.2 and 2.4 to 2.9 are taken from or based on lEC Publication 50(391), 
Detection and Measurement of Ionizing Radiation by Electric Means. The other definitions are still under 
consideration and given here to facilitate understanding of this standard. 

2.1 Concomitant radiation 

Radiation which is associated with the radiation to be measured but which is not the object of the measurement, 
and whose effects on the measurement should preferably be eliminated. 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

2.2 Sensitivity (of a measuring assembly) 

For a given value of the measured quantity, the ratio of the increase of the observed variable to the corresponding 
increase of the measured quantity. 

variation of output quantity (detector response) 



variation of input quantity (radiation to be measured) 



2 . 3 Influen ceab ility 

If the operation of a detector is disturbed by a concomitant radiation, the detector is said to be "influenceable" 
by this other radiation. The concomitant radiation is an influence quantity. 

The influenceabihty of a detector to concomitant radiation is given by: 

variation of the output quantity (detector response) 



S 



variation of the input quantity (concomitant radiation) 



with all other influence quantities held constant at specified values. Oth^r factors such as temperature, pressure, 
polarizing potential, etc., may also be influence quantities, 

2.4 Compensation factor (of a compensated ionization chamber) 

The ratio of the sensitivity to concomitant radiation of the compensated ionization chamber to the sensitivity 
to the same concomitant radiation of the same chamber, if it were not compensated. 

2.5 Compensation ratio (of a compensated ionization chamber) 

The inverse of the compensation factor used as an index of performance of a compensated ionization chamber. 

2.6 Sensitive material (of a neutron detector) 

The material used in certain neutron detectors either, for example, in a lining or a filling gas, which is intended to 
produce directly ionizing particles from the neutrons by nuclear reaction. 

Note. — The word "particle" is used here in a general sense '\n<z\\x6\Vk% fission fragments, 

2.7 Burn-up life (of a neutron detector) 

An estimated ^we/ic^ of neutrons of a given energy distribution after which the sensitive material will be consumed 
to such an extent that the detector characteristics exceed the specified tolerances for a specified purpose. 



2.8 Useful life (of a detector) 

Operational life, under irradiation and environmental conditions restricted within specified limits, after which the 
detector characteristics exceed the specified tolerances. Useful life can be expressed in incident particle fluence, 
number of produced pulses, etc. 

2.9 (Particle) fluence rate ( particle flux density) 

Increment of fluence A during a suitably small interval of time A / divided by that interval of time. 



In many applications where the detector has a linear characteristic and negligible output for zero input 

output quantity 



S - 



input quantity 



IS : 11797-1985 
^ , , lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

Symbol: <p 

A 

w = 

A / 

Note, — Fluence rate is identical with the product of the volume particle jdensity and the average speed. 

2. 10 Unperturbed neutron fluence t ate (flux) 

Mean neutron fluence rate in a position without the neutron detector placed in the same position. 

2.11 Perturbed neutron fluence rate (flux) 

Spatial mean neutron fluence rate in a position with the neutron detector placed in the same position for measure- 
ment. This quantity is equal to the detector output divided by its sensitivity and is, in practice, approximated by the 
neutron fluence rate averaged over the detector surface. 

3. Interpretation of this standard 

The verbs listed below have the following implications in this standard : 
Mandatory: "shall" or "must". 
Recommendation: "should". 
Permissible : "may". 

SECTION TWO — PRELIMINARY 

4. General 

Although each category of detector and each type of apparatus has its own particular conditions of use and range 
of application, it is possible to define general principles of use which depend essentially on the following: 

a) the intrinsic characteristics of each type of detector; 

b) the limitations resulting indirectly from the quantity measured, e.g. activation of the materials by neutrons; 

c) the measuring sub-assembly used, the characteristics of which must be suited to those of the detector ; 

d) the characteristics of the medium surrounding the detector and particularly the influence quantities. 

The mode of use of the ionization produced must be defined: the pulse mode, the direct current mode and the 
mean square or variance current mode are examples. 

If detectors are operated in more than one mode, their characteristics shall be given for each mode. 



5. Types of radiation to be measured 

The two principal types of radiation to be measured are neutrons and photons. They are represented by neutron 
fluence rate (flux) in the first case and by either the absorbed dose rate or the exposure rate in the second case. 

Each detector is preferably constructed to measure one single kind of radiation but it is almost always influenced 
by other radiations which surround it. This means: 

— the superposition on the measuremeht of a background which impairs accuracy and can reduce the range of 
measurement; 

— if the influence of the concomitant radiation becomes significant, the radiation to be measured may be obscured. 
In particular, residual gamma radiation often impairs the measurement of neutrons. 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

All radiation in the detector environment has to be considered in the conditions of use. The characteristics may be 
altered by activation of the detector materials by neutrons, the release of heat by the absorption of radiation and 
therefore changes in material properties, or by other changes to the filling gas. 



6. Detector operating conditions 

Detectors placed in or near the core of reactors are subject to very stringent design regulations, particularly with 
reference to the materials used. 

The variables which impose a limitation on the use of detectors should be specified together with their limits for 
each type of detector. 

The significant variables, in general, are neutron fluence rate (flux) and spectrum, environmental temperature, 
pressure, hum.idity, etc. 



7. Conditions of detector measurement 

Measuring conditions are characterized mainly by the following: 

— a large range of measurement (often of the order of six to ten decades); 

— the severity of the ambient conditions due to high-flux values^ a high intensity of concomitant radiation and high 
pressures and temperatures; 

— the activation of materials, often resulting in replacement difficulties even when the reactor is shut down. 

7.1 Limits due to the detector 

For an ionization chamber, the upper limit of the measuring range is set by the rate of recombination of ions 
causing deviation from proportionality between the neutron fluence rate (flux) and the output signal. 

This upper limjt of the m.easuring range may be determined by a specifi.ed deviation from, proportionality for a 
given polarization voltage or by the output current at which a given ratio or difference between t/j , and Uq^ is 
obtained (see Sub-clause 16.4.1). 

For pulse detectors, an absolute upper limit to the measuring range is set by the resolving time of the detector 
together with its associated measuring assembly. 

The intrinsic lower limit of the measuring range is determined by the output signal in the absence of the primary 
ionizing radiation under given ambient conditions. 

It is desirable not to exceed a given value of the neutron fluence rate (flux) beyond which activation of materials 
would produce a gamma or beta background large enough to make subsequent low-level measurements difficult. 

An important case is that of highly sensitive detectors used for reactor start-up (in particular boron trifluoride 
or boron-lined counter tubes) where the activity of materials may be prejudicial to immediate re-use. 



7.2 Limits due to the measuring sub-assembly 

The limits due to the measuring sub-assembly are determined essentially by the resolving time, bandwidth, 
noise level and input impedance in the case of pulse measuring systems, and by the current sensitivity, drift, zero 
off*set and input impedance in the case of current measuring sub-assemblies. 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

7.3 Limits due to surrounding gamma radiation 

Frequently, the surrounding gamma radiation imposes a lower limit in the use of detectors. Gamma radiation 
generates spurious ionization current in current ionization chambers and modifies the counting plateau to give 
false counts in ionization pulse chambers. This limit can be lowered in neutron current ionization chambers by 
compensation, and in pulse fission chambers by reduction of the chamber and amplifier assembly resolving 
time. Improvements can also be made by suitably shielding the detector against gamma radiation. 



In the particular case of boron current ionization chambers, the lower limit imposed by gamma radiation is 
relatively high. When the chambers are compensated, the lower limit of practical use can be calculated with the 
following relation : 

e S^ 
in which : 

9P^in = minimum neutron fluence rate (flux) measurable with the required accuracy 

e ~ required maximum ratio of the gamma current to neutron current expressed as a percentage (%) 

/ — compensation factor expressed as a percentage (%) 

5n =^ sensitivity of the chamber to neutron radiation in amperes per unit of neutron flux density (A • n"^ • cm^ • s) 

Sy == influenceability of the chamber to gamma radiation without compensation, in amperes per unit of exposure 
rate (A • R"i • h) 

X — exposure rate (R • h'^) 
In some designs, the compensation factor can be changed, for example by adjusting the compensation voltage. 

The compensation factor can depend on the intensity of the radiation y and its energy spectrum. The compen- 
sation should therefore allow for variation in conditions with respect to the gamma radiation source and the source 
to detector geometry. 



8. Connectors and cables 

Connectors and cables are often an integral part of a detector assembly and should be designed so as not to limit 
detector performance. 

The design of connectors and cables should enable them to be easily manipulated by hand or by remote handling 
devices without risk of damage. 

Care should be taken in particular to avoid electrical interference which could interfere with the operation of 
measuring sub-assemblies. To reduce electrical interference, detectors may need to be electrically shielded and the 
outer shield insulated from the common side of the measuring circuit and from electrical contact whith the external 
frame (for example see I EC Publication 232). 

It is also necessary to ensure the continuity of connections and it is desirable for connectors to include a device 
enabUng continuity to be checked at any time. 

Detector terminations shall be marked. 



SECTION THREE — CHARACTERISTICS 
9. General 

The list below gives the data which, where applicable, shall be supplied by the manufacturer. 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

9.1 Characteristics of detectors 

9.1.1 Mechanical data 
An outline drawing shall be supplied. 

Dimensions : 

— length; 

— diameter; 

— weight; 

— position of sensitive volume. 

Principal materials : 

— metals; 

— insulators; 

— sensitive lining (type and amount); 

— major impurities. * 

Temperature : 

— range of normal operation; 

— maximum permissible V-alue. 

Filling gas : 

— analysis of main constituents; 

— pressure. 

External pressure : 

— maximum permissible value. 

Shock and vibration : 

— limit values. 

9.1.2 Electrical and nuclear data 
Mode of operation. 

Polarizing voltages : 

— polarity; 

— recommended operating value or values; 

— maximum permissible value or values. 

Compensation conditions: 

— compensation voltage polarity, recommended value and permissible range; 

— compensation factor. 



In particular, elements which may cause excessive parasitic detector signals, post-irradiation activity in the detector body and thermal 
neutron absorption. 



IS : 11797-li»85 
lECPub 51511975) 

Capacitances and insulation resistances : 

— electrode to electrode 

— electrodes to casing 

— casing to frame or interference shielding 
Electric charge delivered per ionizing event for both the radiation to be nfieasured and the main concomitant 

radiation. 
Charge collection time. 



as a function of tenxperature. 



Sensitivity: 

— pulse mode; 

— current mode; 

— mean square mode (fluctuations). 
Range of measurement. 

Influenceability : 

— pulse mode ; 

— current mode; 

— mean square mode (fluctuations). 

Background signal (ah undesired signal produced by natural or induced radioactivity in the materials of the detector) : 

— initially; 

— after a given period in a known neutron flux. 
Maximum permissible neutron fluence rate (flux). 
Maximum permissible gamma exposure rate. 

Sensitive material : 

— type; 

— purity. 
Burn-up life. 

Useful life : 

—- the detector manufacturer shall also supply the test data produced by the tests described in this standard. 



9.2 Characteristics of connectors 

9.2. 1 Mechanical data 

The physical quantities mentioned in Sub-clause 9.1 and applicable to connectors shall be specified as such by 
the manufacturer. 

Particularly important factors are : 



I 


Plug 


Socket 


Dimensions 


Outside diameter 
Coupling description 
Centre conductor dimensions 
Overall length 


Outside diameter 
Coupling description 
Dimensions for mating plug and pin 
Overall length 


Materials 


Body 
Centi-e pin 
Insulation 


Body 

Centre pin 
Insulation 

. : • 1 • ■ "rni 1 III, 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

9.2.2 Electrical characteristics 
Characteristic impedance and leakage resistance at rated temperature and nominal conditions of use. 

Maximum ratings : 

— voltage between electrodes and between electrodes and the casing; 

— temperature; 

— external pressure; 

— ambient humidity. 

9.3 Characteristics of cables 

9.3.1 Mechanical data 

Dimensions : 

— outside diameter; 

— centre conductor diameter; 

— length; ^ 

— minimum bending radius; 

— weight. 

Materials : 

— inner conductor; 

— outer screens ; 

— insulation. 

9.3.2 Electrical characteristics 

— leakage resistance (minimum) at rated temperature and humidity; 

— capacitance per unit length; 

— characteristic impedance and pulse attenuation (where applicable); 

— any nuclear Hmitations on use. 

Maximum ratings : 

— voltage between conductors; 

— temperature; 

— external pressure ; 

— ambient humidity. 



10. Pulse mode neutron detectors 

10.1 Principles 

Pulse mode neutron detectors include the fission pulse ionization chamber, the boron trifluoride counter tube, the 
boron-lined counter tube and the helium-3 proportional counter tube. 

a) Fission ionization chambers contain a fissile element — for example, uranium 235 whose nuclei, after capturing 
neutrons, disintegrate into ^'fission fragments". The latter have considerable kinetic energy which is partly 
expended in the filling gas to produce ionization, 

10 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

Fission chambers can be utilized in pulse counting assemblies, in mean current measuring assemblies or in mean 
square current measuring assemblies (fluctuations). 

b) Boron trifluoride counter tubes are thermal neutron detectors which use the reaction: 



'*B + V -> 'He + 'Li 

in the boron trifluoride filling gas. The ionization due to the alpha particle and lithium nucleus is multiplied by an 
electric field and the counter tube is operated under proportional conditions. 

c) Boron-lined counter tubes also use the nuclear reaction of thermal neutrons with boron which is deposited in 
the form of a solid lining on the inside of the counter wall. The filling gas can therefore be chosen to obtain other 
required characteristics such as a particular collection time, 

d) Helium-3 proportional counters are thermal neutron detectors which use the reaction of the neutron in the 
gas helium-3. 

'He + \ -^ 'H + 'H 

10.2 Sensitivity in the linear range 

The sensitivity of a pulse mode neutron detector is determined by dividing the mean counting rate, excluding 
background, by the thermal neutron fluence rate (flux) at the detector. It is specified in units of counts per second 
per unit neutron fluence rate (flux) (counts n"^ • cm*). This sensitivity must be measured with defined electrical 
characteristics in the detector and the measuring sub-assembly, and it must be stated whether the neutron fluence 
rate is perturbed or unperturbed. 

10.3 Range of measurement 

The theoretical range of measurement of the detector is determined by its lower and upper limits. The lower 
limit is fixed for the pulse fission chamber by "alpha pile-up" and by the background due to spontaneous fissions. 
The upper limit depends on the resolving time^ which is a function of the charge collection time and the electrical 
characteristics of the measuring sub-assembly. 

In practice, the lower operating limit may be set by other factors such as counting statistics, gamma radiation 
and amplifier noise. The practical limitations are explained in Clause 7. 

10.4 Effect of gamma radiation 

The presence of gamma radiation is indicated by the degradation of the pulse spectrum, the bias plateau length 
and, in certain cases, by the reduction of the multiplication factor of proportional counter tubes. 

10.5 Operating temperature 

The range of operating temperatures is determined by the structural materials and the technology of manufacture. 
At high temperature, the principal problem is to maintain satisfactory insulator performance. 

10.6 Burn-up and useful life (see definitions in Sub-clauses 2.7 and 2,8) 

The burn-up life depends on consumption of the sensitive material. It is measured by the number of counted 
events or by the value of the neutron fluence corresponding to a specified quantity of sensitive material consumed* 

The useful life depends on the ambient conditions and the influence quantities. 

If storage conditions can affect the useful life of the detector, they must be clearly defined. 

10.7 Polarization voltage 

The polarization voltage is defined by polarity and magnitude. In the pulse mode, the polarization voltage of the 
chamber is commonly a positive voltage applied to the collecting electrode rela;tive to the case. 



11 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

For proportional counters, the multiplication factor depends on the value of the polarization voltage. The 
curves characterizing the relationship shall be given by the manufacturer. 

For some types of detectors, the characteristics of the measuring sub-assembly and the required life of the detector 
should be taken into account when selecting the operating polarization voltage. 

10.8 Response to a nuclear event 

The mean electrical charge developed per event in the detector must be known. It is expressed in coulombs. 
In the case of a proportional counter tube, this variable is a function of the multiplication factor and may be difficult 
to measure. 

The charge collection times and the pulse output current are also important data. 



10.9 Insulation resistance 

For the range of specified temperature, pressure and voltage, the insulation resistance shall have a sufficiently 
high resistance to restrict leakage current to a reasonable value and shall be free from the pulse breakdown effect, 
i.e. the generation of spurious pulses which can simulate signal pulses. 

For detectors and any associated connector and cable which will operate at high temperature, attention shall be 
given to variation of the insulation resistance with temperature. 

10.10 Electrical capacitance 

The electrical capacitance is an important characteristic when it has an appreciable effect on the time constant of 
the input circuit of the measuring sub-assembly. 



1 1 . Current mode neutron detectors 

11.1 Principles 

Current detectors include the fission ionization chamber, the boron ionization chamber and ionization chambers 
sensitive to gamma radiation. 

a) Fission current ionization chambers (see item a) of Sub-clause 10.1). 

b) Boron current ionization chambers. These are thermal neutron detectors which use the reaction: 

''b + 'n^ -V *He + \\ 

5 th 2 3 

A great part of the ionization charge caused by the alpha particle and the recoil of the lithium nucleus in the 
filling gas is collected as a current, whose mean value is generally measured. These chambers may also be used in 
the mean square current mode. 

Boron is utilized in these chambers in the form of a solid lining on the electrodes or sometimes in the form of a 
gaseous compound. 

To reduce the influence of gamma radiation, compensated chambers use the measuring principle of current 
difference. They generally comprise two nearly identical chambers. One contains a sensitive lining and collects the 
charge produced by ionization due to the effects of both neutron and gamma radiation, while the other collects 
only the charge produced by the effect of gamma radiation. 

By choice of the polarity of the polarization voltages, the output currents of these chambers are made to oppose 
each other so that the net output from the detector is essentially due to neutrons. 

c) Similar detectors may be used as ionization chambers sensitive to gamma radiation. These differ only troni 
uncompensated boron ionization chambers in the omission of the neutron sensitive material. They can be tested 
in a similar wav 



12 



IS : 11797-1985 
,,.„.,,,.,. lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

1 1.2 Sensitivity in the linear range ^ ^ 

As has been stated in Sub-clause 2.2, the neutron and gamma sensitivity of current detectors {S^ and Sy ) is deter- 
mined by dividing the mean or mean square output current by the perturbed thermal neutron fluence rate (flux) or 
gamma exposure rate with a specified energy spectrum in the detector. For d.c. measurements, it is specified in units 
of current per unit of neutron or gamma flux density (A • n"^ • cm^ • s or A • R"^ • h). 



11 .3 Range of measurement 

The theoretical range of measurement appropriate to the detector is determined by its lower and upper limits. 

The lower limit is fixed by parasitic current due to chamber activation, insulation leakage or background alpha 
currcn+ in the case of a fission chamber. 

The upper limit is fixed by recombination effects. 

The practical limitations are explained in Clause 7. 

11.4 Influenceability by concomitant radiation 

For neutron detectors, the main concomitant radiation to be considered is gamma radiation. 

Influenceability is determined by dividing the output current due to gamma radiation alone by the value of the 
exposure rate which produces this current. It is measured in A • R'^ • h. For a compensated chamber, the influence- 
ability is reduced by the compensation factor. 

If ly is the current delivered by an uncompensated chamber in the presence of gamma radiation, the current 
delivered by an identical but compensated chamber would be ly */, where ly -/is the product of ly and the com- 
pensation factor/. 

For gamma ionization chambers, the concomitant radiations to be considered are neutron flux and induced 
gamma radiations. 

1 L5 Operating temperature 

The range of operating temperature is determined mainly by the structural materials and the technology of 
manufacture. At high temperature, the principal problem is to maintain satisfactory insulator performance. 



1 1 .6 Burn-up and useful life (see definition in Sub-clauses 2, 7 and 2.8) 

The burn-up life depends on consumption of the sensitive material. It is measured by the total output charge or 
by the value of the neutron fluence corresponding to a specified quantity of sensitive material consumed. 

The useful life depends on the ambient conditions and the influence quantities. If storage conditions can affect 
the useful life of the detector, they must be clearly defined. 

1 1 .7 Polarization vohages 

The polarization voltages are defined by polarity and magnitude. 

Tiie compensation voltage is usually negative with respect to the chamber case and may be adjustable or fixed, 
depending on the design of the chamber. 

The main polarization voltage is generally positive with respect to the chamber case and is chosen to ensure 
saturation of the chamber over the operating range. This choice shall be based on data furnished by the saturation 
curves. 

Polarization characteristics for the detector shall be furnished by the manufacturer to allow proper determination 
of voltage regulation requirements. 



13 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

11.8 Response to a nuclear event 

In some applications, the mean and mean square electric charge released per detected neutron or gamma photon 
is of interest. For mean square measurements, the electron and ion collection time is also important. 



1 1 .9 Insulation resistance 

The insulation resistance of the collector electrode shall be such that leakage current does not introduce significant 
error within the measurement range. The value chosen shall be related to the performance of the measuring sub- 
assembly. 

11.10 Electrical capacitance 

The electrical capacitance is an important characteristic when it has an appreciable effect on the time constant 
of the input circuit of the measuring sub-assembly. 



SECTION FOUR — TEST METHODS 
12. General 

12.1 Introduction 

The tests specified are final tests in the production process. They shall be performed by the manufacturer on each 
detector and its cable (if the cable is an integral part of the detector) except where the detector is in large quantity 
production. In this case, the tests shall be performed on an adequate sample. 

The test methods described in this standard relate to electrical, nuclear and mechanical characteristics and serve 
as the basis for acceptance of production detectors. 

Wherever neutron or gamma radiation tests involving detector sensitivity, compensation, activation, influence- 
abihty, etc., are required, the energy spectrum and intensity of the radiation should be specified. For these tests, 
a known isotropic fiuence rate ox gamma radiation rate is necessary. 

Certain special or additional tests should be carried out on prototypes or on detectors selected at random from a 
batch. 

Examples of these special tests are : burn-up and useful fife, long-term stability at maximum temperature, influence- 
ability of pulse fission ionization chambers, high-stress mechanical tests, variation of neutron sensitivity with 
temperature, vibration, saturation characteristics at high neutron fluence rate (flux) or gamma level. This 
information should be available from the manufacturer. 



12.2 Choice of test methods 

In selecting test methods, consideration should be given to the fact that detectors for the instrumentation and 
protection of reactors are designed primarily for relative measurements of nuclear radiation and not for absolute 
measurements. 

Test methods used shall be such that the results are not influenced by electrical interference. 



1 2.3 List of typical tests 
The following tests should be carried out wherever they are applicable: 

a) Mechanical tests : 
— microphony. 



14 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

b) Electrical tests : 

— insulation resistance; 

— dielectric strength ; 

— electrical capacity; 

— background. 

c) Nuclear tests : 

— sensitivity; 

— influenceability ; 

— compensation; 

— saturation voltage or counts plateau; 

— charge developed per event; 

— collection time; 

— discrimJnation curve or pulse spectrum.; 

— multiplication factor, 

dj Special tests: may be required by the particular detector specification. 

12.4 Climatic conditions 
Unless otherwise specified, the tests shall be carried out under the following conditions (see also Sub-clause 12.2): 

— ambient temperature: 25 rh 15 °C; 

— relative humidity: between 45% and 75%. 

The actual atmospheric conditions shall be stated on the test sheets. In accordance with good practice, they shall 
not be subject to large or rapid variations during a series of tests. A practical method for avoiding such variations 
is to place the detector in a climatic chamber at constant temperature. 



12.5 Mechanical tests 

Mechanical tests should be performed first and then followed by the electrical and nuclear tests. 

The mechanical tests shall comprise at least a visual inspection supplemented by such tests as are required for the 
specific application. 

Vibration and imipact tests shall be performed on a prototype according to specifications. 



13. Specific tests for puise fission ionization chambers 

13.1 General 

These tests shall be carried out when the detector sub-assembly is complete in all respects including connectors 
and integral cables. They may form the basis of final acceptance. 

The equipment used for all the tests shall comprise suitable measuring instruments which have been accurately 
set up. It will include a capacitance bridge, appropriate voltage sujjplies, radiation sources, ovens, etc. 

It is necessary that measuring sub-assemblies used for tests should be identified in such a way that their character- 
istics can be accurately reproduced. In addition, means must be provided to check the calibration at any time either by 
pulse generators or by a standard chamber. 



15 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

The important factors are : input circuit type (charge, voltage or current sensitive), input circuit impedance, overall 
frequency response, input level, discriminator dead time, dynamic range and recovery time. 



13.2 Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12.5) 

13.3 Electrical and nuclear tests 

13.3.1 At ambient temperature 

a) Where possible, the capacitance between the electrodes and between the electrodes and the chamber case 
shall be measured and the continuity of all connecting cables verified. 

b) The leakage current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified 
voltage. 

c) The chamber alpha current plus the leakage current between the electrodes shall be measured over a specified 
voltage range and, where applicable, the leakage current between the electrodes and the chamber case shall be 
measured at a specified voltage. 

d) The chamber shall be connected to the measuring sub-assembly and a discriminator curve plotted for zero 
polarizing voltage and for the specified operating polarizing voltage. 

The zero voltage curve shall be used to determine that amplifier noise is satisfactory, and the operating voltage 
curve shall be recorded to define the alpha activity of the chamber. 

The effective discriminator level shall be expressed in identifiable units of current or charge. Absolute units are 
preferable for this purpose although other, non-absolute units such as "ion pairs" are in common use. 

e) The chamber shall be exposed to a reproducible perturbed neutron fluence rate (flux) which gives a count 
rate of at least 10 counts • s'^ at the specified operating voltage. A discriminator curve shall be plotted. 

f) The polarizing plateau characteristic curve shall be plotted using a selected discriminator level. 

g) When required, the mean electron collection time of the chamber shall be measured. 

In the case of current pulses (time constant of the measuring circuit much shorter than the collection time), the 
electron collection time is represented by the pulse base width.* In the case of charge collection (time constant of 
the measuring circuit much greater than the collection time), the collection time is measured by the resultant 
pulse rise time as defined in lEC Publication 50(66), I.E.V. 66-10-375. 

h) The electric charge or current per pulse at the specified polarizing potential and at a given discriminator level 
shall be recorded. This may be determined from the characteristics of the pulse or by a special measurement. 



13.3.2 At maximum operating temperature 

This test does not need to be carried out on those chambers whose maximum working temperature shall not 
exceed 100 °C. 

a) The chamber and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature raised to the 
maximum operating temperature within defined limits. All connecting cables shall be verified for electrical con- 
tinuity where possible. 

The leakage current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a suitable 
voltage. 



* The pulse width is defined by the interval of time measured on the straight line parallel to the time axis and between points with an 
ordinate equal to 10% of the pulse amplitude. 



16 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

b) The chamber alpha current plus the leakage current between the electrodes shall be meas--red over a specified 
voltage range and, where applicable, the leakage current between the electrodes and the chamber case shall be 
measured at a specified voltage. 

c) The chamber shall be connected to the measuring sub-assembly and a discriminator curves plotted for zero 
polarizing voltage and for the specified operating polarizing voltage. 

The zero voltage curve shall be used to determine that amplifier noise is satisfactory, and the operating voltage 
curve shall be recorded to define the alpha activity of the chamber. 

d) The chamber shall be exposed to the same neutron fluence rate (flux) used in Item e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 
above and a discriminator curve plotted. The curve shall agree with that obtained in Item e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 
within the specified limits. 

e) The polarizing plateau characteristic curve shall be plotted using the discriminator level defined after tne 
test under Item e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1. 

f) When required, the mean electron collection time of the chamber shall be measured. 

gj The chamber and its cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 100 h. At 
the end of this time and while the chamber and its cables are still at this temperature, the tests under Items a), 
b)y c), d)y e),f) and g) of Sub-clause 13.3.2 shall be repeated. 

The results obtained shall be the same within the specified limits. 

13.3.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature 

After the tests at the maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient 
temperature. The tests under Items a), b), c), d), e),f) and g) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 shall be repeated. The results 
obtained should remain within the specified limits. 

If the tests of Sub-clause 13.3.2 have been omitted because the operating temperature is less than 100 ^C, at least 
100 h must elapse between the tests of Sub-clauses 13,3.1 and 13.3.3, 

13.4 Neutron sensitivity in the linear range 

The chamber neutron sensitivity at a specified operating voltage shall be determined and expressed in the units 
given in Sub-clause 10.2. This may be done by measuring the neutron flux density used in Item ej of Sub-clause 
13.3,1 or by a special measurement. 



14. Specified tests for boron trifluoride and boron^lined proportional counter tubes 

14.1 General (see Sub-clause 13 J) 

14.2 Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12,5) 

14.3 Electrical and nuclear tests 

14.3.1 At ambient temperature 

a) The leakage current between the anode wire and the counter case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

b) The counter tube shall be exposed to a reproducible perturbed neutron fluence rate (flux) and the output of the 
measuring sub-assembly amplifier shall be connected to a multi-channel analyser. The polarizing voltage shall be 
applied to the counter tube and adjusted until the peak of the spectrum on the analyser is at a predetermined 
position. The applied voltage and the spectrum full width at half -magnitude shall be recorded. For the boron- 
Uned proportional counter tube, other data such as the whole spectrum may be recorded instead of full width at 
half-magnitude. 



17 



IS : 117^-1985 
lEC Pyb 515 (1975) 

c) A polarizing voltage plateau curve shall be plotted at a specified discriminator level. 
A discrimination curve should be plotted at a specified polarizing potential. 

14.3.2 At maximum operating temperature 

This test does not need to be carried out on those counter tubes whose maximum working temperature will not 
exceed 100 °C. 

a) The counter tube and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature raised to 
the maximum operating temperature within defined limits. 

b) The tests under Items a) and b) of Sub-clause 14.3. 1 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same 
within the specified limits. 

c) The counter tube and its cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 100 h. 
At the end of this time and while the counter tube and its cables are still at this temperature, the foregoing tests 
under Items a) and b) of Sub-clause 14.3.1 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same within the 
specified limits. 

14.3.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature 

After the tests at the maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient 
temperature. The tests under Items a) and b) of Sub-clause 14.3.1 shall be repeated and the results obtained shall 
be the same within the specified limits. 

If the tests given in Sub-clause 14,3.2 have been omitted because the operating temperature is less than 100 °C, 
at least 100 h shall elapse between the tests given in Sub-clauses 14.3.1 and 14.3.3. 

14.4 Neutron sensitivity in the linear range 

The counter tube neutron sensitivity at a specified operating voltages shall be determined and expressed in the 
units given in Sub-clause 10.2. This may be done by measuring the neutron flux density used in Item b) of Sub- 
clause 14.3.1 or by a special measurement. 

14.5 Influenceability by gamma radiation 

For specified applications in which gamma influenceability is particularly important, the following tests should 
be performed : 

The counter tube shall be connected to a specified measuring sub-assembly and exposed to a specified gamma 
exposure rate. The output count rate should be determined and should be less than a specified value. 

For boron trifluoride counter tubes, this test should be repeated after not less than 100 h. 

In some applications, the gamma radiation can influence the response of a counter tube to neutrons. In such 
cases, special tests would then be necessary. 



15. Specific tests for helium-3 proportional counter tubes 

Details of tests on these detectors are not given because they are similar to the tests apphed to boron trifluoride 
counter tubes. 



16. Specified tests for compensated boron current ionization chambers 

1 6. 1 General 

These tests shall be carried out when the detector sub-assembly is complete in all respects including connectors 
and integral cables. They may form the basis of final acceptance. 

18 



IS : 11797-liW5 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

The equipment used for the tests shall comprise suitable measuring instruments which have been accurately set 
up. It will include a capacitance bridge, appropriate voltage supplies, radiation sources, ovens, etc. 

16.2 Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12,5) 

1 6.3 Electrical tests 

16.3.1 At ambient temperature 

a) The capacitance between the collector and each of the polarizing voltage electrodes, and between the collector 
and the chamber case, shall be measured. 

All connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity. 

b) With both polarizing electrodes connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the collector and 
the case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

c) With the collector and gamma polarizing electrodes connected to the chamber case, the leakage current 
between the neutron polarizing electrode and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

d) With the collector and neutron polarizing electrodes connected to the chamber case, the leakage current 
between the gamma polarizing electrode and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

e) The leakage current between the chamber casd and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified 
voltage. 

16.3.2 At maximum operating temperature 

This test does not need to be carried out on those chambers whose maximum working temperature does not exceed 
lOD °C. 

a) The chamber and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature raised to the 
maximum operating temperature within defined limits. All connecting cables shall be verified for electrical 
continuity. 

b) Repeat test under Item b) of Sub-clause 16.3.1. 

c) Repeat test under Item c) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 

d) Repeat test under Item d) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 

e) Repeat test under Item e) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 

f) With the neutron polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the collector current shall be determined 
as a function of potential applied to the gamma polarizing electrode. The readings obtained should be less than 
specified values at all potentials up to a specified limit. 

g) With the gamma polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the collector current shall be determined 
as a function of potential applied to the neutron polarizing electrode. The readings obtained should be less than 
specified values at all potentials up to a specified limit. 

h) The chamber and its integral cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 
100 h. At the end of this time and while the chamber and its integral cables are still at this temperature, the fore- 
going tests under Items a)y b), c), d) and e) of Sub-clause 16.3.2 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall 
be the same within specified limits. 

16.3.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature 

After the tests at maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient tem- 
perature. The tests under Items a),b),c), d) and e) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 shall be repeated and the results obtained 
shall be the same within specified limits. 

19 



IS : 11797-1985 
lECPub 515(1975) 

If the tests given in Sub-clause 163,2 have been omitted because the operating temperature is less than 100 °C, 
at least 100 h must elapse between the tests given in Sub-clauses 16.3.1 and 16.3.3. 

16.4 Nuclear tests 

16.4.1 Influenceablllty by gamma radiation and compensation factor 

The chamber shall be exposed to a known gamma exposure rate of known energy spectrum in a stated geometrical 
relationship with the source. These factors having been chosen with a view to obtaining adequate accuracy in the 
following tests. 

a) A potential Uy shall be applied to the gamma polarizing electrode and a saturating positive potential shall 
be applied to the neutron polarizing electrode. Collector current shall be measured for both positive and reverse 
values of Uy. 

Gamma current in the compensating section of the chamber is given by half the difference between the two 
collector currents. This current shall be evaluated and plotted as a function of the potential Uy, 

b) A positive potential U^ shall be apphed to the neutron polarizing electrode and the collector current shall 
be measured with positive and reverse operating potentials applied to the gamma polarizing electrode. The current 
in the neutron section of the chamber is given by half the sum of these two currents. This current shall be evalu- 
ated and plotted as a function of the potential U^^. 

The voltage at which the current is 90% and 110% of its plateau value shall be determined and designated as 
C/^ 0.9 and U^,^,, 

An upper limjt to the value of U^ which may be applied in this test m.ay be specified lower than that which 
causes a 10% increase in saturation current, since it is recognized that some ionization chamber assemblies 
cannot be tested to U^ j j v/ithout exceeding their maxim.um rated voltage 

The gamma influenceability of the neutron-sensitive volume shall be determined from the saturation current 
obtained in this way and the known gamma exposure rate. 

c) The compensation factor is given by the difference between the currents given in a) and in 6j, this difference 
being divided by the current given in b). It shall be determined as a function of Uy for a specified value of U^. 
This should be repeated for specified source to detector geometries. 

On some compensated ionization chambers, reversal of the gamma polarizing potential may introduce errors. In 
such cases, it may be possible to reverse the neutron polarizing potential and to modify the above procedure 
accordingly, 

16.4.2 Neutron sensitivity in the linear range 

The chamiber shall be exposed to a known perturbed stationary neutron fiux with negligible gamma radiation. 
The neutron saturation characteristics of the neutron-sensitive section shall be determined using the method given 
in Sub-clause 16.4.1 

A positive potential t/„ shall be applied to. the neutron polarizing electrode and the collector current shall be 
measured with positive and reverse operating potentials applied in turn to the gamma polarizing electrode. The 
current due to neutrons is given by half the sum of these two currents. 

This current shall be evaluated and plotted as a function of the potential U^, 

The voltage at which the current is 90% and 110% of the saturation value shall be determined and designated as 

An upper limit to the value of t/„ which may be applied in this test may be specified for the reason given in 
Item b) of Sub-clause 16.4.1. 

From^ the saturation current and the knov/n neutron fluence rate (flux), the neutron sensitivity of the cham.ber 
shall be determined and limits of accuracy shall be stated. 



20 



IS : 117^7-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

17. Specific tests for uncompensated boron current ionization chambers 

1 7. 1 General (see Sub-clause 16. 1) 

The tests on uncompensated chambers are based on those for compensated chambers but are simpler because of 
the absence of a gamma polarizing electrode. 

17.2 Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12 J) 

17.3 Electrical tests 

17.3.1 At ambient temperature 

a) The capacitance between the collector and the polarizing electrodes and between the collector and the chamber 
case shall be measured. 

As far as possible, all connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity. 

b) With the polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the collector and 
the case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

c) With the collector connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the polarizing electrode and 
the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

d) The leakage current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified 
voltage. 

17.3.2 At maximum operating temperature 

This test does not need to be carried out on those detectors whose maximum working temperature does not 
exceed 100 °C. 

a) The chamber and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature raised to the 
maximum operating temperature within defined limits. 

As far as possible, all connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity. 

b) With the polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the collector and 
the case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

c) With the collector connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the polarizing electrode and 
the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. 

d) The leakage current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified 
voltage. 

e) The collector current shall be determined as a function of potential applied to the polarizing electrode. 
The readings obtained shall be less than specified values at all potentials up to a specified Hmit. 

f) The chamber and its cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 100 h. At 
the end of this time, and while the chamber and its integral cables are still at this temperature, the foregoing tests 
under Items a), b), c) and d) of Sub-clause 17.3.2 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same 
within specified limits. 

17.3.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature 

After the tests at maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient tempera- 
ture. The tests under Items b), c) and d) of Sub-clause 17.3.1 shall be repeated and the results obtained should 
be the same within specified limits. 



21 



IS : 11797-1985 
lEC Pub 515 (1975) 

If the tests of Sub-clause 17.3.2 have been omitted because the operating temperature is less than 100 °C, at least 
100 h must elapse between the tests of Sub-clauses 17.3.1 and 17.3.3. 

17.4 Nuclear tests 

Neutron sensitivity and inftuenceability by gamma radiation 

The polarization voltage, neutron sensitivity, influenceability by gamma radiation and background for an un- 
compensated ionization chamber shall be determined by the test methods given in Sub-clauses 16.4.1, 16.4.2 and 
16.4.3, as applicable. 



18. Specific tests for current ionization chambers for gamma radiation 

The tests for current ionization chambers are identical to those for uncompensated boron current ionization 
chambers except that the primary and concomitant radiations are interchanged. 



19. Specific tests for fission current ionization chambers 

The tests for fission current ionization chambers are identical to those for uncompensated boron current ioniz- 
ation chambers. Alpha activity of the chamber coating will, however, influence leakage current measurements and 
should be taken into consideration. It will influence the tests under Items b) and c) of Sub-clauses 17.3.1 and 17.3.2 
as well as Sub-clause 17.3.3, and may also cause errors in the primary and concomitant sensitivity measurements 
unless adequate radiation strengths are used. 



22 



