**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11973 (1986) : Code of practice for treatment of rock 
foundations, core and abutment, contacts with rock, for 
embankment dams [WRD 8: Foundation and Substructures] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Stamhrd 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
TREATMENT OF ROCK FOUNDATIONS, CORE 
AND AiUTMHHT CONTACTS WITH ROCK, FOR 
EMBANKMENT DAMS 



U DC 62T'fl24-3 2 BW 1 3l ^SSi OOfl- 76 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STAI^DARDS 

MANAkC bi-LAVAN. ^ BAHAlJ'l^a &UML ^\FAK 3HAtlti 

N£W DELHI l]0Cili9 



IS : 11973 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

TREATMENT OF ROCK FOUNDATIONS, CORE 

AND ABUTMENT CONTACTS WITH ROCK, FOR 

EMBANKMENT DAMS 

Foundation and Substructure Sectional Committee, BDC 52 

Chairman 

Shri K. R. Datye 

Rehem Mansion 2 
44 Bhagat Singh Road, Golaba, Bombay 

Members Representing 

Additional Chief Engineer Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 
( Buildings ) 
Shri R. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. N. Bansal Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh 

Shri S. P. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shpi Mahavir BiDASABiA Fcrro Concrete Co ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Indore 

Shri Ashok Bidasaria ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ghakrabarti Gammon India Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. L Desai ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer (IP) and Special Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar 
Secretary to Govt of Gujarat 

SUP3RINTENDINQ ENGINEER ( Alternate) 
Chief Engineer ( Medium & MiKor Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Irrigation ) 
Director ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Supa Dam Irrigation Department Government of Karnataka, Mysore 

Construction ) 
Director ( ERDD }-II Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director { ERDD )-II ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. H. Divanji Asia Foundation and Construction Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. N, Jangle ( Alternate ) 
Km Divatia E. National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited, New Delhi 

Shri Brtjendek Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Goyal Tata Consulting Engineers, Bangalore 

Shri Brijender Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Panthaky Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. M. Savur ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Punja Cemindia Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. J. Ketkar ( Alternate ) 
Research Officer Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay 

Shri Damodar Sahoo Government of Orissa, Irrigation and Power Department 

Shri C. Sudhindra Central Soil and Materials Research Station, Ministry of Irrigation, 

New Delhi 
Deputy Director ( Soil ) ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer ( Bridges Roads Wing, Ministry of Shipping and Transport, New Delhi 
AND Standards ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. Sadasivam 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication it protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in 
part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of 
copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11973 - 1986 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

TREATMENT OF ROCK FOUNDATIONS, CORE 

AND ABUTMENT CONTACTS WITH ROCK, FOR 

EMBANKMENT DAMS 



0. F O R E W O R D 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Indian Standards Institution on 29 August 1986, 
after the draft finalized by the Foundation and Sub- 
structures Sectional Gomtnittee had been approved 
by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 The treatment of foundations and abutments 
for embankment dams on rock foundations is an art 
of applying the knowledge of local geology and 
certain basic principle covering positive cut off 
extending to bed rock. It would not be practicable 
to prepare a rigid set of rules or stipulate standard 
procedures which would require to be enforced 
without leaving any latitude for the exercise of 
discretion by the site engineer. The aim of these 
recommendations is to summarize well-known and 
proved principles and to describe commonly used 
procedures, equipment and techniques in order to 
enable an engineer incharge to draft specifications 
for a specific case. The need for following an ex- 
perimental approach and learning through trial is 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 The scope of this standard is limited to earth 
and rockfill dams where the control of seepage is 
achieved primarily by a positive cutoff extending to 
bed rock so that the core is seated on rock all along 
the foundation as well as the flanks and abutments. 
The shell or casing zones may however rest on over- 
burden. 

1.2 Treatment of rock foundation for strengthening 
and stabilization of slopes is excluded from this 
standard. The scope is limited to treatment requi- 
red for control of seepage. 

2. ALIGNMENT OF THE DAM 

2.1 Excessive skewness of the dam axis with respect 
to the valley ahgnment is to be avoided. Diver- 
gence of abutment contours with reference to the 
axis of the dam is to be avoided by choice of align- 
ment, and the axis of the dam may be adjusted to 
avoid divergence of contours with reference to 
dam axis. 

2.2 Despite these adjustments, because of irregula- 
rity of rock surface, there may still be areas of core 
contact where the rock contours have an undesirable 
orientation. Trimming of rock shall then be done 
to attain a maximum 90° angle with the axis on a 
horizontal plane ( see Fig. 1 ). Such trimming 
should be accommodated with the core contact and 
transitions. 



emphasized while providing guidelines which would 
permit a site engineer to use his discretion without 
compromising the overall design requirements. 

0.3 This standard is to be read with: 

IS : 4999-1968 Grouting of pervious soils 

IS : 5050-1968 Code of practice for design, 
construction and maintenance of relief 
wells 

IS : 6066-1984 Recommendations for pressure 
grouting of rock foundations in river valley 
projects {first revision ) 

IS : 84:14-1977 Guidelines for design of under- 
seepage control measures for earth and 
rockfill dams 

IS : 11293 ( Part 1 )-1985 Guidelines for the 
design of grout curtains: Part 1 Earth and 
rockfill dams 




ACCEPTABLE 

FOUNDATION 



CENTRAL 
CONTACT 
AREA 



ORIGINAL 
PROFILE 



FILTER 



TRANSITIONS 



AXIS OF DAM 



Fig. 



FLOW 



1 Plan of Rock Contact at 
Central Contact Area 



THE FOUNDA- 



3. ROCK PROFILE ALONG 
TION 

3.1 Rock profiles should be examined both along 
the axis and in the transverse direction. The beha- 
viour of the core material and the cracking hazard 
is dependent on the pattern of stresses developed 
from the interaction of the rock and the core 



IS : 11973 -^ 1986 



material. In the following paragraph, guidelines are 
furnished stipulating requirement of rock profile 
along the axis and in the transverse direction. The 
consequence of rock geometry in the longitudinal 
and transverse directions creating zones of tensile 
stress in the core should be examined. These may 
require special consideration and adverse conse- 
quences of such geometries may be mitigated by 
filling with concrete in critical area and providing 
supplementary features as filters plastic concrete 
septums, etc, 

3.1.1 Abrupt changes in section, for example, 
benches on the abutment slopes, should be avoided 
to minimize the hazard of transverse cracking 
because of differential settlement between the deep 
and shallow portions of the dam. If a site with 
a bench on the abutment is to be developed, 
trimming or rounding of the bench should be 
considered. 

3.1.2 Necessary crimming or excavation of the 
abutments should be done very carefully. The line 
of excavation should be presplit or cushion blasting 
used to minimize damage to the rock beyond the 
excavation line. Surfaces against which material is 
to be placed commonly are excavated to a slope not 
steeper than J horizontal to 1 vertical ( see Fig. 2 ). 
Flatter slopes or rounding may be necessary, parti- 
cularly in upper portions of the abutment. 

3.1.3 Changes in slope should be limited to 20° 
and the number of changes in slope should be mini- 
mum. This can be achieved by excavation of rock 
or placing concrete against the rock. 

3.1.4 Removal of overburden materials under the 
upstream and downstream shells may not be neces- 
sary. Removal of overburden may however be 
required if excessive settlement of the shell sections 
would develop under their weight, if overburden 
materials are so weak as to result in slides, or if see- 
page passing through the core or through the 
foundation materials cannot be controlled and 
discharged safely with the overburden in place. 



3.1.5 The hazard of slides in either overburden 
materials or rock during excavation for the core, 
spillway, or shells shall be given careful considera- 
tion in planning and in the layout of the dam. 

4. ROCK PROFILE ACROSS CUT- 
OFF TRENCH 

4.1 The excavated slope of the cut off trench should 
be 1:1 or flatter irrespective of the slopes required 
for stability of excavation. Adequately designed 
filter, single or multiple layer, should be provided 
against the downstream face of the cut-off trench. 
The filter should be capable of preventing internal 
erosion of core material and satisfy the filter 
criteria. The consequences of the loosening of the 
rock due to construction operations should be 
examined while establishing filter requirements for 
the downstream rock face. 

4.2 Alternatively, excavated surface through 
weathered rocks may be treated with shotcrete. 
Where loosening of the rock by excavation may 
create open voids, low pressure pack grouting should 
be done of the rock contact. 

4.3 The minimum width of the core trench should 
be larger than 4 m or 10 percent of head. If it 
is not possible to accommodate a cut-off trench of 
top width detailed as above within the core width, 
consideration should be given to use the plastic 
concrete diaphragm in part of the cut-off depth. 

5. FOUNDATION PREPARATION 

5.1 Basically, the surface under the entire core and 
under a portion of the upstream filter and down- 
stream transition zone shall be completely excavated 
to such rock as will offer adequate resistance to 
erosion of fines in the core. 

All loose or semi-detached blocks of rock should 
be removed. The quality of rock shall be judged 
in terms of the characteristic of core material. Rock 
of 'Lugeon' values in percolation test within 10 
( Ten ) will generally be free of cracks larger than 




ESTIMATED 
BEDROCK SURFACES- 
EXISTING GROUND 
SURFACES 

ROCK OVERHANGS AND 

OTHER SURFACE 

IRREGULARITIES TO BE 

EXCAVATED AND 
OR INFILLED WITH 
CONCRETE AS 
DIRECTED 

ALL OVER BURDEN AND 
SLUMPED ROCK TO 
BE EXCAVATED 



MAX. CHANGE IN SLOPE 20 



EXCAVATED SURFACE TO BE 

SOUND ROCK 
VERTICAL AND NEAR 
VERTICAL BEDROCK SURFACES 
IN SOUND ROCK TO BE 
EXCAVATED TO MAXIMUM SLOPE 
OF 1/2 H TO IV 
ESTIMATED BEDROCK SURFACE 



CONCRETE IN-FILl 
WHERE DIRECTED 



Fig. 2 Typical Gore Abutment Excavation Detail 



IS : 11973 - 1986 



0*025 mm. Erosion of fines from core materials 
commonly used would not occur through such 
cracks. Grouting may be necessary to bring down 
'Lugeon' values to above allowable limits in the 
contact zone. 

5.2 The amount of care required in treating the 
rock suface is' controlled by the character of the core 
material. If the core material is resistant to piping, 
especially if it contains considerable coarse material 
with adequate proportion of sand, surface treatment 
is less demanding than if the core materia] is susce- 
ptible to piping; for example, a fine silty sand and 
very lean clays. In the latter case, extreme care 
should be taken and the core material should be 
placed only after very careful inspection of 
the treated surface. For dispersive clays, special 
precauutionSj such as protection by filter fabric or 
plastic concrete may be required. 

5.3 Blasting should be kept to the minimum 
practical in order not to open up joints or other- 
wise disturb the rock surface, and no blasting 
should be done on surfaces that have been grouted 
or slush-grouted. 

5.4 All knobs and overhangs should be removed by 
barring and wedging or by light blasting. Cracks 
and joints that are exposed in these operations 
should be cleaned ( usually to a depth of not less 
than three times their width at the surface ) using 
air and water, picks, or other tools, as necessary, to 
remove completely soil or weathered rock which 
would be subject to erosion. Such joints and cracks 
should then be filled with grout under a small 
gravity head, say, of 3 m. Wherever possible, a pipe 
should be set to the bottom of the joint or crack and 
grout pumped in until the joint or crack is comple- 
tely filled. Grout should then be broomed and 
brushed across the top of the joint to ensure that the 
contact with the core material will be tight and 
non-erodible. In the absence of gravity grouting, 
slush grouting alone may not be effective because 
complete filling may not be assured. Grout used 
for this purpose should be highly plastic buttery. 
The maximum size of sand for the slush grout used 
for filling cracks should not exceed one-third the 
width of the crack to be filled. 

5.5 Concrete with admixtures of approved quality 
and sufficient water to achieve a slump of 100-150 
mm may be easily compacted by hand and 
used for backfilling of irregularities such as depres- 
sed areas, holes and potholes. 

5.6 Small ribs and similar irregularities should be 
filled with plastic concrete to produce slopes not 
steeper than about 1:1 where the difference in 
elevation is a few centimetres to a metre or so. 
Surface treatment in this fashion should extend 
upstream to approximately the mid-point of the 
upstream filter and downstream at least 0*6 to 0*9 m 
beyond the downstream edge of the fine filter. In 
particularly adverse situations, such as where there 
are joints wider than the coarser particles of the 
filter, surface treatment as described may be 
necessary under the entire transition zone. 



5.7 The final rock surface should have smooth 
contours against which soil can be compacted by 
heavy equipment. Hand compaction is generally 
unsatisfactory and it is advisable to place plastic 
concrete in core contact areas of conduit trenches 
and other irregularities transverse to the dam axis 
for a width at least 0*5 H or preferably I'O H. 

5.8 Surface treatment as described may be difficult 
to accomplish on steeply sloping abutments. In this 
case, gunite rnay be used for filling depressions 
after the cracks and joints have been cleaned and 
sealed. If there is extensive jointing, especially if 
the joints slope upward away from the face, 
adequate sealing of the joints may require construc- 
ting a concrete slab, which is dowelled to the rock, 
and then grouting through the slab. 

5.9 The depth of excavation necessary in weathered 
rock is difficult to establish during initial design. 
The depth of weathering is usually very irregular, 
being controlled by minor variations in joint spac- 
ing and rock type. Abrupt changes in elevation 
of the surface of ^groutable rock' probably will be 
found. Overhangs, some of large size, should be 
anticipated. 

5.10 Usual practice is to select material, preferably 
a plastic soil, for the first lift over the rock 
surface. If plastic soils are limited, the most 
plastic soil available should be used. Gravel or 
stone exceeding about 50 mm in size should be 
removed or excluded from the material placed in 
this first layer over the rock to improve compaction 
at the contact. The surface on which the core 
material is placed should be moist but free of 
standing water, and the material when placed 
should be wet of optimum. In dry climates or 
during dry weather, difficulty may be experienced 
with this first lift becoming excessively dry where it 
feathers out on a gentle to moderate slope. In 
such a case the edge of the fill should be sloped 
slightly downward toward the contact with the 
rock. Against steep rock faces or adjacent to 
concrete structures, sloping the fill slightly upward 
near the contact is desirable to provide better clear- 
ance and better compaction at the contact. 

6. FOUNDATION CLEAN-UP 

6.1 All foundation areas should be dewatered for 
final inspection after clean-up prior to the placement 
of core material. The prepared rock surface in 
the central contact area should be free of water at 
the time when embankment material is placed and 
for foundation treatment measures, such as slush 
grouting and crack-grouting. 

6.2 Where existence of deep depressions and 
occurrence of springs complicate the clean up, 
special provisions should be made to dry up the 
foundation in preparation for placing embankment 
fill. Gravel filled drains channellizing the water 
from the springs to central sumps and submersible 
pumps or pneumatically operated sump pumps 
( placed inside the sumps ) have been found to be 



IS : 11973 - 1986 



effective. A cover of polythene should be placed 
over the gravel to prevent contamination of the 
gravel by the fill material. Stand pipes should be 
provided for discharge of water from the sumps. 
The top of stand pipes should correspond to the 
static head. 

6.3 Where rock is friable and subject to cracking 
by exposure and drying, coating of asphalt emul- 
sion or slush grout cojnprising a workable mix of 
cem-ent, sand and bentonite is desirable. 

6.4 To prevent cracks from developing in surfaces 
already prepared, all necessary excavation requir- 
ing blasting shouM be completed before starting 
grouting and surface treatment and clean up. 

7. TREATMENT OF ROCK DEFECTS AND 
DISCONTINUITIES 

7.1 In evaluating and planning for excavation and 
seepage control measures, special attention shall be 
given to discontinuities such as faults and relief 
(sheet) joints, which may extend for long distance as 
nearly plane surfaces. Relief joints may exist 
naturally or may open during excavation. They are 
most likely to occur in deep, steep-walled valleys, 
specially in brittle rocks, or where high modulus 
rock is underlain by low modulus rock. Since they 
are roughly parallel to the valley wall, they may 
cause slides during construction. Openings of 
several centimetres have been observed. Control 
of seepage through such joints becomes a major 
problem. Installation of concrete cutoffs across 
particularly bad joints may be warranted or 
extensive grouting may be necessary. Drainage 
from such joints shall be provided. 

7.2 When seam? are filled with silt, clay, etc, or in 
faults with gauge, it is essential to excavate and 
backfill the seam and gauge zones in the entire 
core contact zone. It is advisable to excavate and 
backfill a further length on the upstream for a 
distance equal to ihe reservoir head and backfill it 
with concrete. On the downstream side the seams 
should be excavated and backfilled with a well 
designed and adequate filter again for a distance 
equal to the reservoir head. 

8. GROUTING 

8,1 There are three main objectives in the grouting 
programme ( see also IS : 6066-1984* ), These are 
as follows: 

a) To reduce the seepage flow through the 
dam foundation; 

b) To prevent possible piping or washing of 
fines from the core into cracks and fissures 
in the foundation; and 



♦Recommendations for pressure grouting of rock founda- 
tions in river valley projects {first revision ). 



c) To reduce the hydrostatic pressure in the 
downstream foundation of the dam. The 
latter is generally a problem only for dams 
on fairly weak foundations and critical 
abutment configurations. This is usually 
accomplished in conjunction with an 
abutment drainage system. 

8.2 To prevent possible piping of the fine core 
material through the foundation, blanket grouting 
is accomplished as determined by the rock condi- 
tions. If the core foundation of the dam consists 
of closely fractured and jointed rock, a blanket 
grout pattern is used with holes spaced at 3 m to 
5 m with depths of 6 m to 10 m. If the foundation 
rock is massive, no blanket grouting is done. Loca- 
lised area consisting of faults, fissures, or cracks are 
generally grouted upstream of the cutoff and 
sometimes downstream. 

8.3 If the rock does not respond to cement grouting 
and post grouting *Lugeon' values remain above 10 
(Ten) locally, the nature and size of cracks should 
be carefully examined. When the high *Lugeon* 
values are attributable to fine cracks, closely spaced, 
cement grouting may not be effective in reducing 
the permeability. In hard inerodible rocks, such 
fine cracks may be permitted. In other cases such 
as gauge zones supplementary measures should be 
resorted to for prevention of internal erosion ( see 
IS : 6066-1984*). 

9. DRAINAGE 

9«1 Galleries or tunnels are sometimes excavated 
into abutments and foundations to provide access 
for drilling drain holes and grout holes into the 
foundation or into the embankment foundation 
contact. Drilling from these tunnels after filling of 
the reservoir is subjected to the hazard of uncontro- 
lled 'blow in' under high heads. If tunnels are 
provided, the elevations should be judiciously chosen 
so that the hazard of 'blow in* can be prevented by 
lowering the reservoir before undertaking the drilling 
operations for corrective grouting or drainage, 

9.2 Relief wells and drainage trenches are often 
used at downstream toes of dams on pervious over- 
burden to provide relief of seepage pressure and to 
control seepage discharges without permitting 
piping. Installation of relief wells and their monitor- 
ing shall be done as per IS : 5050-19681- When 
drain holes are installed in rock containing fines the 
drain should be protected by a filter system as 
shown in Fig. 3. 

9.3 On projects where the foundation is such that 
seepage could cause migrati n of particles from the 
foundation materials, the drainage blanket shall 
be filter graded with respect to the foundation. 
Drain pipes may be included in the blanket to 
ensure ample discharge capacity. 

♦Recommendations for pressure grouting of rock founda- 
tions in river valley projects {first revision ) . 

fCode of practice for design, construction and maintenance 
of relief wells. 



15:11973-1986 



9.4 It is essential to ensure continuity of filter downstream side of cutoff trench as shown in 
system from the drain to the core contact on the Fig. 4. 

DOWNSTREAM FACE 
OF EMBANKMENT 




tp LO mm 

COUPLING 



SAND CEMENT GROUT 
PL^^ PACKER 




(#>T00mm 



l-5m min 



fi^Omm SLOTTED BRASS PIPE 
OR PVC WITH FILTER FABRIC 
AS REQUIRED- 



Fig. 3 Installation of Horizontal Drain in Abutment of High 

Embankment Dam 



CHIMNEY 
DRAIN 




^^^W /P VV^VXAW 



ROCK 



■^^^=^:^ 



NOTE CONTINUOUS FILTER SYSTEM FROM CHIMNEY 
DRAIN TO DOWN STREAM SLOPE OF CUTOFF 
TRENCH FILTER TO BE EXTENDED TO BOTTOM 
OF CUTOFF TRENCH. 



Fig. 4 Filter System for Cutoff Trench 



