**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11713-2 (1986) : Guide for physical planning of computer 
complexes, Part 2: Safety [LITD 14: Software and System 
Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2). 1986 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) r ^ fr ^ It 

Indian Standard tn F** .*** * 

"REAFFIRMED 199T 

GUIDE FOR PHYSICAL PLANNING OF 
COMPUTER COMPLEXES 

PAflT 2 SAFETY 



UDC (J8T324 16148 




© Copyrig/if 1987 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

UANAK BHAVAN, 5 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAi MAAO 

NEW DELHI 1J0CO2 

Cr2 February I9&7 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR PHYSICAL PLANNING OF 
COMPUTER COMPLEXES 

PART 2 SAFETY 



Computers, Business Machines, and Calculators Sectional 
Committee, LTDC 24 

Chairman Representing 

Dr N. Seshagiri Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Members 

Dr K. Subramanian {Alternate to 
Dr N. Seshagiri ) 
Shri R. P. Ahuja Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd, New 

Delhi 
Shri C, K. Bapiraju State Bank of India, Bombay 

Shri S. K. Bhatia Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri PVS ChellapATHI Rao ( Alternate ) 
Or Vijay P. Bhatkar Kerala State Electronics Development Corpo- 

ration Ltd, Trivandrum 
Dr S. N. S. Rajesekran ( Alternate ) 
Dr C. R. Chakravarthy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri K. N. Dheer Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shri IshwarDutt Electronics Trade & Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri Deepak Gupta Tata Electric Companies, Bombay 

Shri R. M. Nair ( Alternate ) 
DrA.Lahiri Department of Science & Technology, New 

Delhi 
Shri N. Lakshmanan Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Shri P. P. Malhotra Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

Industries ), New Delhi 
Shri M. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Arun Mehta Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr S. C. Mehta Steei Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri S. L. N. Murthy Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K^S. Perinanayagam ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. pandey International Computers Indian Manufacturers 

Ltd, Pune 
Shri H. Das ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Shri G. Raghukumar 



Representing 



The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, New 
Delhi 

Shri A. N. Pawar ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. S. Ramachandran Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 

Dr J. Gopala Rao Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Dr V. K. Ravindran PSI Data Systems Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. L. Deshpande ( Alternate ) 

Rrof R. Sadananda Computer Society of India, Bombay 

Shri K. L. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ashis Sen Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 

Shri Umesh P. Shah ORG Systems, Vadodara 

Shri P. K. Sridharan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Shankralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri V. R. Unniraman Telecommunication Research Centre, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. M. Viswanathan Hindustan Teleprinters Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Devarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, 1SI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. S. Rawat 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Panel for Computer Infrastructure, LTDC 24/P1 



Convener 
Shri R. Thiagarajan 

Members 

Shrt R. K. Dutta 
Shri S. P. Ghothoskar 
Dr M. Ibramsha 
Shri M. M. N, Kapur 
Dr Vinay Matri 

Dr S. S. Pillai 

BrigV. M. Sundaram 



Department of Science and Technology, New 
Delhi 

Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi 
Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi 
School of Planning and Architecture, New 

Delhi 
Indian Agriculture Statistical Research Institute, 

New Delhi 
International Computers Indian Manufacturers 

Ltd, New Delhi 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR PHYSICAL PLANNING OF 
COMPUTER COMPLEXES 

PART 2 SAFETY 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 23 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Com- 
puters, Business, Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 Normally computer installations are located in cities and townships 
where protection from hazards, such as fire, floods, etc, is invariably 
provided due to the regulations imposed by the city authority. However, 
it is possible that even within city limits these hazards have caused 
untold damage to offices and other equipment. In the case of computer 
installations in particular, the extent of damage due to hazards can be 
very huge to the organization mainly because of the fact that the 
operations of the organization could come to a stand still if large scale 
damage is caused to the computer hardware as well as to the data stored 
in the storage devices. 

0*3 While the actual advent of a natural hazards cannot be predicted 
with any accuracy whatever, what can be done by the computer centre 
management is to take steps to prevent the occurrence of such natural 
hazards in the first instance. Later, when such hazards actually take 
place, to minimize the extent of damage. Also, it would be advisable to 
make efforts to retrieve as much data and equipment as possible 
belonging to the computer installation in case hazards occur. 

Due attentions must also be paid to the fact that while hazards such 
as fire should be handled expeditiously, chemicals used for entinguish- 
ing fire should be such that they should not cause any harm to the 
personnel working in the computer environment at the time the fire 
breaks out. 

0.4 An attempt is being made in this standard to bring togethere various 
aspects including reference to other standards which will have a bearing 
on how to handle hazardous situations in computer installations. 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) provides guidelines for safty measures in 
computer installations from hazards, such as fire, flood, earthquakes, 
magnetic fields, pests and rodents. 

Note — For the purpose of this standard, * Safety ' means provision of protec- 
tion against damage or loss to personnel and equipment. 

2. FIRE 

2.0 Fire may occur in a computer installation due to a number of reasons 
ranging from a simple spark to deliberate sabotage. Among all hazards, 
fire is the most commonly found one and causes the maximum damage. 
Adequate measures must, therefore be taken in every computer installa- 
tion against this hazard. The measures that may be taken are discussed 
here. 

2.1 Preventive Measures 

2.1.1 Selection of Site — Some Suggestions — As a guiding principle, 
computer installations should preferably be located away from hazardous 
environments such as chemical, plastic, paint, petroleum and similar 
industries. In case a computer installation is expected to be located 
within such an industrial complex, then extra precautions must be taken 
to protect the computer installation from fire hazards. 

2.1.2 Construction of the Building — Some Guidelines — In order to 
ensure that the computer room is well protected from fire, it is advisible 
that the frames of the structure, floors, walls and roof should be built 
from non-combustible material. The computer room should also be 
separated from the adjoining area by double fire doors. With regard to 
the walls, flooring, ceiling and partitions, fire retardant materials should 
be used and in no event whatever should expanded polystyrene 
( thermocol ) should be used. 

Orders must by very clearly stated as well as implemented to the 
effect that no smoking should be permitted in or around the computer 
room and the storage area in order to prevent fire hazards. 

2.1.3 Storage of Records — Magnetic tape and other records should be 
stored in fire-proof rooms. In addition, magnetic storage media such as 
tapes, disks, etc, must be kept in fireproof and heat insulated containers 
or cabinets. 

2.1.4 Electrical Wiring — Since overload may cause fire, all wiring 
should be periodically checked for its capacity to carry the required 
electrical loads. Also, all fuses must be of sufficiently low amperage 
rating in order that the circuit may be protected in case of short circuit 
or overload. 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

2.2 Detection Measures 

2.2.1 Wherever possible, an automatic fire detection system must be 
installed. The detection system should indicate all failures including 
power failure on a control panel with a built-in alarm system which 
should alert security personnel. The location and spacing of detectors 
would be dependent on the following factors: 

a) Potential fire sites, 

b) Location of equipment, and 

c) Direction and valocity of flow of air. 

2.2.2 For detecting fire, it would be preferable to install smoke 
detection systems in areas where electronic equipment are located in 
preference to air temperature detection equipment since false alarms may 
be raised even during normal times of operation of such electronic 
equipment, heat generated by which may raise false alarms. 

2.3 Recovery Measures 

2.3.1 Fire Fighting Equipment — In every computer complex, suitable 
fire fighting equipment as per Indian Standard must be provided. It is 
preferable to provide portable fire extinguishers. Even though chemi- 
cal fire extinguishers are useful for putting out fire at critical places 
where hardware, disk or tape is located, such extinguishers may cause 
injury to personnel. Therefore, adequate precautions must be taken 
while using such extinguishers and, personnel should be alerted and 
informed through hailers when necessary. 

2.3.2 Guidelines for Fire Control — Apart from the normal measures 
taken to prevent and control fire which may occur, appropriate guide- 
lines and regulations must be formulated* Personnel working in the 
complex must also be trained in such guidelines and each person must be 
aware of his duties in the even of a fire. Some of the sample elements 
to be covered in the guidelines are mentioned at Appendix A. 

3. FLOOD 

3.1 While it is an acknowledged fact that the planner of the computea 
complex would have taken adequate steps to locate it away from flood- 
prone areas, it is quite likely that dampness may be caused due to sewage 
or water mains which may pass close to the walls of the computer 
complex. Thus, damage due to dampness may occur more often than 
due to flood. It is also possible that floods may result from heavy rains. 

3.2 With a view to preventing damage due to dampness and flooding, 
drainage and water pipes should preferably be routed away from the 
hardware area. Further, the walls, flooring and roofing of the computer 
room should be periodically inspected to detect dampness and leakage 
of water. 



IS : 11713 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 

3.3 All structures of the computer installation should be provided with 
water proofing treatment as per standards laid down in IS : 3067-1966*. 

4. EARTHQUAKES 

4.1 Earthquakes, whether they are of a voilent nature or otherwise can 
cause extensive damage to the computer equipment. Even mild tremors 
may cause fall of debris on the computer equipment causing extensive 
damage. Therefore, wherever possible, location such as hillside land 
filled areas and tall structures should be avoided. 

5. LIGHTENING 

5,1 As a rule, all tall buildings are provided with lightening conductors. 
In respect of computer installations, however, even if the building is not 
too tall, it is preferable to provide lightening conductors as per 
IS : 2309-19691- The earth provided for lightening conductors should be 
kept away from the building's earth. 

6. ELECTRO-MAGNETIC FIELDS 

6.1 Very strong electro-magnetic fields may cause errors in the perfor- 
mance of computers and also in the data stored on magnetic media. In 
order to prevent damage due to heavy magnetic fields, the computer 
complex should be located away from TV/Radio stations, micro wave 
stations, heavey electrical equipment, etc, 

6.2 The electro-magnetic radiations found in the computer complex 
should be measured periodically and should be maintained below the 
following limits: 

Below Field Strength of Frequency 

Range 

a) Pulsed type radiation 200 millivolts/meter 150 kHz 

( Broad Band ) per megnigde 400 MHz 

bend width 

b) Continuous wave radia- 300 millivolts/meter 150 kHz 
tion ( Narrow Band ) 400 MHz 

c) Continuous wave 300 millivolts/meter 150 kHz 

400 MHz 

6.3 In case location of a computer complex in an electro-magnetic 
induction area is unavoidable, the following must also be provided: 

a) wire mesh as a Faraday cage or walls surrounding the installa- 
tion; 

*Code of practice for general design, details and preparatory work for damp- 
proofing and waterproofing of buildings. 

tCode of practice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against 
lighting (first revision), 

6 



IS: 11713 ( Part 2 )- J98£ 

b) Aluminium mesh screening of the windows facing the radar 
anetenna; and 

c) Grounding window screens and other leakage metal surfaces. 

7. ELECTROSTATIC CHARGE 

7.1 Computer hardware is highly susceptible to electrostatic damage. 
Electrostatically safe environment can be provided through the use of 
floor and table mats and wrist straps for maintenance staff. The purpose 
of the floor mat is to remove the static charge from transient personnel 
who approach the static sensitive environment. The conduction table 
mat, besides providing static free work surface, removes static change 
from non-conducting items placed on it. Non-conducting objects such 
as persons, trays, containers, cups, etc, acquire electrostatic charge with 
potential difference as much as 10 kV to cause serious damage. The 
precautions as laid down in IS : 10087-1981* should be observed and 
accordingly facilities may be provided in maintenance area. 

8. PESTS AND RODENTS 

8.1 Pests and rodents can be a cause of considerable damage to electrical 
installation and hardware. Adequate measures for pest and rodent 
control as per relevant Indian Standards are recommended. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 2.3.2 ) 

SAMPLE ELEMENTS TO COVER IN REGULATIONS 
FOR FIRE FIGHTING 

a) Officers authorized and the chain of commend ( one executive 
must be designated specifically as a fire officer ). 

b) Telephone numbers for contact in case of emergency. 

c) Display of telephone numbers of firebrigade, hospitals and 
concerned officers. 

d) Instructions for contact and emergency steps for fire fighting, 
evacuation of persons, preventive and salvage instructions for 
the equipment and other valuable goods. 

e) Checking of equipment once every three months — instructions 
for these should be drawn. 

f) Training of staff and drills ( at least once in three months ) for 
fire fighting, first aid, etc. 

g) Availability and access to fire fighting equipment and regulation 
at all times. 



•Code of practice for handling of electro-static sensitive devices. 

7 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) 
Base Units 

Unit Symbol 

metre m 

kilogram kg 

second s 

ampere A 

keivin K 



Quantity 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 



candela 
mole 



cd 
mol 



Supplementary Units 

Quantity Unit Symbol 

Plane angle radian rad 

Solid angle steradian sr 



Derived Units 




Quantity 


Unit 


Force 


newton 


Energy 


joule 


Power 


watt 


Flux 


weber 


Flux density 


tesia . 


Frequency 


hertz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


Electromotive force 


volt 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 



Symbol Definition 

N IN =1 kg.m/s* 

J 1 J = 1 N.m 

W 1 W = 1 J/s 

Wb 1 Wb = 1 V.S 

T 1 T = 1 Wb/m s 

Hz 1 Hz = 1 cMs" 1 ) 

S IS = 1 A/V 

V i v = 1 W/A 

Pa 1 Pa = 1 N/m 2 



