**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mrjsssss^^ft^: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13420 (Parti): 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

Indian Standard 

CABLED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS FOR 
TELEVISION AND SOUND SIGNALS 

PART 1 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT AND SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 

( Second Revision ) 



ICS 33.060.40 



© BIS 2002 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



September 2002 Price Rs 500.52 



Radiocommunication Sectional Committee, LTD 20 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) which is identical with IEC 60728-1(2001) 'Cabled 
distribution systems for television and sound signals — Part 1 : Methods of measurement and system 
performance' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) was adopted by the Bureau 
of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Radiocommunication Sectional Committee and 
approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

This standard (Part 1) was originally published in 1992 and subsequently revised in 1994. The original 
version was based on IEC 60728-1 (1 986). The first revision was published to incorporate the Amendment 
1 (1 992) to IEC 60728-1 (1 986). This standard is now being revised once again to bring it in line with the 
latest (third) edition of IEC, namely IEC 60728-1(2001). 

In this adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. 
Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words'lnternational Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian 
Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed 
below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: 

international Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of 

Equivalence 



IEC 60728-3 Cabled distribution IS 14231 (Part 3) : 1995 Cabled Technically 

systems for television and sound distribution systems for television and equivalent 

signals — Part 3 : Active coaxial sound signals: Part 3 Active coaxial 

wideband distribution equipment wideband distribution components 

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following International Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use 
in conjunction with this standard: 

IEC 60050-71 3 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary — Part 71 3 : Radiocommunications : 

transmitters, receivers, networks and operation 

ISO/IEC 1 381 8-1 Information technology — Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 

audio information — Part 1 : Systems 

ISO/IEC 1 381 8-2 Information technology — Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 

audio information — Part 2 : Video 

ISO/IEC 1 381 8-3 Information technology — Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 

audio information — Part 3 : Audio 

ISO/IEC 1 381 8-4 Information technology — Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 
audio information — Part 4 : Conformance testing 

ITU-T Recommendation J.61 Transmission performance of television circuits designed for use 
in international connections 

(Continued on third cover) 



IS 13420 < Part 1 ) : 2002 
1EC 60728-1 (2001) 



CONTENTS 



1 Scope 3 

2 Normative references 3 

3 Terms, definitions, symbols and abbreviations 4 

3.1 Terms and definitions 4 

3.2 Symbols 10 

3.3 Abbreviations 11 

4 Methods of measurement 14 

4.1 Mutual isolation between system outlets 15 

4.2 Amplitude response within a channel 16 

4.3 Chrominance-luminance gain and delay inequalities 17 

4.4 Non-linear distortion 19 

4.5 Carrier to noise ratio 28 

4.6 Echoes 30 

4.7 AM-VSB television, FM radio and FM television signal level 31 

4.8 Data echo rating and data delay inequality 32 

4.9 Interference in FM sound radio channels 32 

4.10 Methods of measurement for digitally modulated signals 32 

5 Performance requirements 46 

5.1 Impedance 47 

5.2 Carrier levels at system outlets 47 

5.3 Mutual isolation between system outlets 49 

5.4 Frequency response within a television channel at any system outlet 49 

5.5 Long-term frequency stability of distributed carrier signals at any system 

outlet 50 

5.6 Random noise 50 

5.7 Interference to television channels 51 

5.8 Video baseband requirements 52 

5.9 Hum modulation of carriers in television channels 53 

5.10 Requirements for data signal transmission 53 

5.1 1 Digitally modulated signals - Additional performance requirements 54 

5.12 FM sound radio - Additional performance requirements 55 

Annex A (normative) Calibration of modulation depth... 80 

Annex B (normative) Equipment required - additional items 81 

Annex C (normative) Preliminary checks on the measuring equipment for carrier to 

noise ratio 82 

Annex D (normative) Correction factors 83 

Annex E (normative) Calibration of the measuring receiver 84 

Annex F (normative) Correction factors for noise 85 

Annex G (normative) Null packet and PRBS definitions 87 

Annex H (normative) Digital signal level and bandwidth 89 

Annex I (normative) Correction factor for a spectrum analyzer 92 

Bibliography 93 

1 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
i j- r»* «^.~J ,EC 60728-1 (2001) 

Indian Standard 

CABLED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS FOR 

TELEVISION AND SOUND SIGNALS 

PART 1 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT AND SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 

( Second Revision ) 

1 Scope 

This part of IEC 60728 is applicable to any cabled distribution system (including individual 
receiving systems) having a coaxial cable output and primarily intended for television and 
sound signals operating between about 30 MHz and 2 150 MHz. 

This standard specifies the basic methods of measurement of the operational characteristics 
of cabled distribution systems having coaxial cable outputs in order to assess the 
performance of these systems and their performance limits. 

All requirements refer to the performance limits which are obtained between the input(s) to 
the headend or headends and any system outlet when terminated in a resistance equal to the 
nominal load impedance of the system, unless otherwise specified. Where system outlets are 
not used, the above applies at the subscriber's end of the subscriber's feeder. 

NOTE 1 Basic methods of measurement are described in this standard. However, any equivalent method that 
ensures. at least the same accuracy may be used. 

NOTE 2 If the system operator wishes to subdivide the system into a number of parts, the accumulation of 
degradations should not exceed the figures given below. 

NOTE 3 An extension of the frequency range to that from 5 MHz to 3 000 MHz will be considered for future work. 

2 Normative references 

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this part of IEC 60728. For dated references, subsequent 
amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply. However, parties to 
agreements based on this part of IEC 60728 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. For undated 
references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. Members of IEC 
and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. 

IEC 60050-713, International Electrotechnical Vocabulary - Part 713: Radiocommunications: 
transmitters, receivers, networks and operation 

IEC 60728-3, Cabled distribution systems for television and sound signals - Part 3: Active 
coaxial wideband distribution equipment 

ISO/IEC 13818-1, Information technology - Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 
audio information: Systems 

ISO/IEC 13818-2, Information technology - Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 
audio information: Video 

ISO/IEC 13818-3, Information technology - Generic coding of moving picture and associated 
audio information - Part 3: Audio 

ISO/IEC 13818-4, Information technology - Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 
audio information - Part 4: Conformance testing 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

ITU-T Recommendation J. 61, Transmission performance of television circuits designed for 
use in international connections 

ITU-T Recommendation J. 63, Insertion of test signals in the field-blanking interval of mono- 
chrome and colour television signals 

ITU-R Recommendation BT.470-6, Conventional television systems 

ITU-R Recommendation BT. 500-10, Methodology for the subjective assessment of the quality 
of television pictures 

EN 300421, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for 11/12 GHz satellite services 

EN 300429, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for cable systems 

EN 300468, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Specification for Service Information (SI) in 
DVB systems 

EN 300473, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): DVB Satellite Master Antenna Television 
(SMA TV) distribution systems 

EN 300744, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for digital terrestrial television 

ETR 211, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB guidelines on implementation and usage of 
Service Information (SI) 

3 Terms, definitions, symbols and abbreviations 

3.1 Terms and definitions 

For the purpose of this part of IEC 60728, the following terms and definitions apply. 

3.1.1 
headend 

equipment which is connected between receiving antennas or other signal sources and the 
remainder of the cabled distribution system, to process the signals to be distributed 

NOTE The headend may, for example, comprise antenna amplifiers, frequency converters, combiners, separators 
and generators. 

3.1.2 

local headend 

a headend which is directly connected to the system trunk feeders or to a short haul trunk 
feeder replacement link 

3.1.3 

hub headend 

a headend used to feed the entire operating network in the service area 

3.1.4 

remote headend 

a headend from which signals are delivered to a local headend via a long-distance terrestrial 
link 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

3.1.5 
distribution point 

a point where signals are taken from the trunk feeder to energize branch and/or spur feeders 

NOTE In some cases, a distribution point may be directly connected to the headend. 

3.1.6 
feeder 

a transmission path forming part of a cabled distribution system. Such a path may consist of a 
metallic cable, optical fibre, waveguide, or any combination of them. By extension, the term is 
also applied to paths containing one or more radio links. 

3.1.7 

supertrunk feeder 

a feeder which connects only between headends or between a headend and the first 
distribution point 

3.1.8 

trunk feeder 

a feeder used for the transmission of signals between a headend and a distribution point or 
between distribution points 

3.1.9 

branch feeder 

a feeder used for connecting a distribution point to spur feeders 

3.1.10 
spur feeder 

a feeder to which splitters, subscriber taps, or looped system outlets are connected 

3.1.11 
subscriber feeder 

a feeder connecting a subscriber tap to a system outlet or, where the latter is not used, 

directly to the subscriber's equipment 

NOTE A subscriber feeder may include filters and balun transformers. 

3.1.12 

antenna amplifier 

an amplifier {often a low-noise type) associated with an antenna 

3.1.13 

trunk amplifier 

an amplifier to compensate for the attenuation in a trunk feeder 

3.1.14 

bridger amplifier 

a) an amplifier for connection in a trunk feeder to energize a distribution point 

b) an amplifier for connection in a branch feeder, to energize one or more branch or spur 
feeders 

3.1.15 

trunk-bridger amplifier 

an amplifier to compensate for the attenuation in a trunk feeder and also to energize a 
distribution point 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

3.1.16 

distribution amplifier 

an amplifier designed to feed one or more branch or spur feeders 

NOTE This is a general term embracing branch amplifier and spur amplifier. 

3.1.17 

branch amplifier 

an amplifier to compensate for the attenuation in a branch feeder 

3.1.18 

spur amplifier (line extender) 

an amplifier to compensate for the attenuation in a spur feeder 

3.1.19 

automatic level controlled amplifier 

an amplifier which includes means to control automatically the level of the signal(s) at its 
output. 

NOTE This may be achieved by controlling the variation of gain or slope or both, by means of: 

• one or more pilot carriers; 

• a temperature sensing device; 

• remote control. 

3..1.20 

frequency converter 

a device for changing the carrier frequency of one or more signals 

3.1.21 
combiner 

a device in which signals arriving at two or more input ports are fed to a single output port 

NOTE Some forms of this device may be used in the reverse direction as splitters. 

3.1.22 
separator 

a device in which the signal energy, covering a frequency band, at one input port is divided 
between two or more output ports each of which covers a part of that frequency band 

NOTE 1 For example, a diplexer is a two-output separator. 

NOTE 2 Some forms of this device may be used in the reverse direction for combining. 

3.1.23 

splitter (spur unit) 

a device in which the signal power at the (input) port is divided equally or unequally between 
two or more (output) ports 

NOTE Some forms of this device may be used in the reverse direction for combining signal energy. 

3.1.24 

directional coupler 

a splitter in which the attenuation between any two output ports exceeds the sum of the 
attenuations between the input port and each of those output ports 

3.1.25 
equalizer 

a device designed to compensate, over a certain frequency range, for the amplitude/ 
frequency distortion or the phase/frequency distortion introduced by feeders or equipment 

NOTE This device is for the compensation of linear distortions only. 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

3.1.26 
subscriber tap 

a device for connecting a subscriber feeder to a spur feeder 

3.1.27 
system outlet 

a device for interconnecting a subscriber feeder and a receiver lead 

3.1.28 

looped system outlet 

a device through which the spur feeder passes and to which is connected a receiver lead, 
without the use of a subscriber feeder 

3.1.29 
receiver lead 

a lead which connects the system outlet to the subscriber's equipment 
NOTE A receiver lead may include filters and balun transformers in addition to the cable. 

3.1.30 

signal adaptor 

a device which modifies the input signal to achieve conformity with the appropriate ITU 
system, without changing the baseband characteristics, for use in a cabled distribution system 
which distributes television signals not conforming to any ITU system (only in respect of RF 
structure) 

3.1.31 
decibel ratio 

ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of two quantities of power P-, and P 2 i.e. 

10lg-^- <dB) 

NOTE May also be expressed in terms of voltages. 
20lgA-(dB) 

3.1.32 

standard reference power P 

in cabled systems, the standard reference power P is 1/75 pW 

NOTE This is the power dissipated in a 75 CI resistor with a voltage drop of 1 uV RM s across it. 

3.1.33 
level 

the decibel ratio of any power P, to the standard reference power P 0> i.e. 

10lgA ( d B) 

the decibel ratio of any voltage V, to the standard reference voltage V , i.e. 
20lg-^-(dB) 

This may be expressed in decibels (relative to 1 uV in 75 Q) or more simply in dB(uV) if there 
is no risk of ambiguity. 

3.1.34 
attenuation 

the ratio of the input power to the output power of an equipment or system, usually expressed 
in decibels , 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

3.1.35 
gain 

the ratio of the output power to the input power of any equipment or system, usually 
expressed in decibels 

3.1.36 

automatic gain control (AGC) 

the automatic control of a device to maintain constant the level of the signal at its output, 
using that signal as the control stimulus 

3.1.37 

frequency amplitude response 

the gain or loss of an equipment or system plotted against frequency 

3.1.38 
slope 

the difference in gain or attenuation at two specified frequencies between any two points in a 
system 

3.1.39 
signal tilt 

the difference in level deliberately established between specified signals at any point in a 
system. If groups of signals are established at differing levels, this is referred to as block tilt 

3.1.40 
crossview 

the effect on a wanted television signal of the undesired transfer of one or more television 
signal(s) from other circuit(s) 

3.1.41 
crossmodulation 

the undesired modulation of the carrier of a desired signal by the modulation of another signal 
as a result of equipment or system non-linearities 

3.1.42 
intermodulation 

the process whereby non-linearity of equipment in a system produces output signals (called 
intermodulation products) at frequencies which are linear combinations of those of the input 
signals 

3.1.43 

carrier to intermodulation ratio 

the difference in decibels between the carrier level at a specified point in a piece of 
equipment or a system and the level of a specified intermodulation product or combination of 
products 

3.1.44 

carrier to noise ratio 

the difference in decibels between the vision or sound carrier level at a given point in a piece 
of equipment or a system and the noise level at that point (measured within a bandwidth 
appropriate to the television or radio system in use) 

3.1.45 

mutual isolation 

the attenuation between two specified system outlets at any frequency within the range of the 
system under investigation. It is always specified, for any particular installation, as the 
minimum value obtained within specified frequency limits 

8 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

3.1.46 

echo rating £ 

The result of a system test with a 2T sine-squared pulse -(as determined in ITU-T 
Recommendation J.61 and ITU-T Recommendation J. 63) using the boundary line on a 
specified graticule (e.g. figure 25) within which all parts of the received pulse fall 

NOTE The object of the graticule design is to ensure that the subjective effect of an echo of rating E % is the 
same as that of a single echo, with displacement greater than 727", of (£/2) % relative to the peak amplitude of the 
test pulse. 

3.1.47 

frequency designations 

the frequency designations and abbreviations of IEC 60050-713 is to be used in relation to 
cabled systems (e.g. a VHF system includes frequencies between 30 MHz and 300 MHz) 

3.1.48 
well-matched 

the matching condition when the return loss of the equipment complies with the requirements 
of table 1 of IEC 600728-3 

3.1.49 

definitions for digital radio 

under consideration 

3.1.50 

definitions for return paths 

under consideration 

3.1.51 

definitions for satellite broadcasting 

outdoor unit 

part of the TVRO installed in a position within line of sight to the satellite(s) to be received 

It normally comprises two main parts: 

a) the antenna sub-system which converts the incident radiation field into a guided wave. 
The antenna sub-system consists of: 

• the main reflector, the secondary reflectors (if any) and the radiator; 

• the feed network, which may include optional polarizing devices, to receive orthogonal 
linear polarizations, in a simultaneous or exclusive way. 

Instead of reflector(s) / feed network sub-system, other types of antennas may be used, for 
example flat array antennas; 

b) the LNB(s), which may include an optional filter, is a device with very low internal noise 
that amplifies the received signals in the radio frequency (RF) band and converts them to 
intermediate frequencies, (often called the 1st IF), for transmission to one or more indoor 
units where tuning, demodulation and decoding of the received signals are performed. 

3.1.52 

definitions for scrambled signals 

under consideration 

3.1.53 

definitions for teletext 

under consideration 

3.1.54 
MPEG-2 

refers to the ISO/IEC 13818 series. System coding is defined in part 1. Video coding is 
defined in part 2. Audio coding is defined in part 3 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

3.1.55 
multiplex 

a stream of all the digital data carrying one or more services within a single physical channel 

3.1.56 

service information (SI) 

digital data describing the delivery system, content and scheduling/timing of broadcast data 
streams, etc. It includes MPEG-2 program specific information (PSI) together with 
independently defined extensions 

3.1.57 

transport stream (TS) 

a data structure defined in ISO/IEC 13818-1. It is the basis of the digital video broadcasting 
(DVB) related standards 

3.1.58 

E b IN 

ratio between the energy of the bit (£ D ) ar >d the noise density power {N ) 



3.2 Symbols 

Symbols 


Terms 




dB 




Attenuator 












G 




Sine-wave generator 
















Band-pass filter 



Symbols 




Amplifier 



Oscilloscope 



Modulator 



RF-choke 



Detector 






J> 





Terms 



Variable attenuator 



Low-pass filter 



Variable band-pass filter 



RF amplifier 



Mixer 



Demodulator 



Resistor 



Directional coupler 



10 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



3.3 Abbreviations 

AC 

AFC 

AGC 

Al 

ALC 

AM 

ASCII 

ATM 

AWGN 

BAT 

BEP 

BER 

BPSK 

bslbf 

BW 

C/N 

CA 

CATV 

CENELEC 

COFDM 

CPE 

CRC 

CS 

CSO 

CTB 

CW 

D/A 

DAB 

DC 

DFT 

DSR 

DVB 

DVB-C 

DVB-CS 

DVB-MC 

DVB-MS 



alternating current 

automatic frequency control 

automatic gain control 

amplitude imbalance 

automatic level control 

amplitude modulation 

American standard code for information interchange 

asynchronous transfer mode 

additive white Gaussian noise 

bouquet association table 

bit error probability 

bit error rate 

binary phase shift keying 

bit string, left bit first 

bandwidth 

carrier to noise ratio (ratio of RF or IF power to noise power) 

conditional access 

community antenna television 

Comite Europeen de Normalisation Electrotechnique 

coded orthogonal frequency division multiplex 

common phase error 

cyclic redundancy check 

carrier suppression 

composite second order beat 

composite triple beat 

continuous wave 

digital-to-anaiogue converter 

digital audio broadcasting 

direct current 

discrete Fourier transform 

digital satellite radio 

digital video broadcasting 

digital video broadcasting baseline system for digital cable television 
(EN 300429) 

digital video broadcasting baseline system for SMATV distribution 
systems (EN 300473) 

digital video broadcasting baseline system for multi-point video 
distribution systems below 10 GHz (EN 300749) 

digital video broadcasting baseline system for multi-point video 
distribution systems at 10 GHz and above (EN 300748) 



11 



IS 13420 ( 
IEC 60728 

DVB-S 

DVB-T 

EB 

EIT 

EMM 

EN 

ENB 

END 

ES 

ETR 

ETS 

FDM 

FEC 

FFT 

FIFO 

FM 

HDTV 

HEX 

HP 

ICI 

IF 

IFFT 

ITS 

ITU 

LDTV 

LO 

LP 

LSB 

MATV 

MMDS 

MPEG 

MSB 

MUX 

MVDS 

NICAM 

NTSC 

OCT 

OFDM 

PAL 



Part 1 ) : 2002 
1 (2001) 



digital video broadcasting baseline system for digital satellite television 
(EN 300421) 

digital video broadcasting baseline system for digital terrestrial 
television (EN 300744) 

error block 

event information table 

entitlement management message 

European norm 

equivalent noise bandwidth 

equivalent noise degradation 

errored second 

ETSI technical report 

European telecommunication standard 

frequency division multiplex 

forward error correction 

fast Fourier transform 

first-in, first-out shift register 

frequency modulation 

high definition television 

hexadecimal notation 

high priority bit stream 

inter-carrier interference 

intermediate frequency 

inverse fast Fourier transform 

insertion test signal 

International Telecommunication Union 

limited definition television 

local oscillator 

low priority bit stream 

least significant bit 

master antenna television 

microwave multipoint distribution systems 

moving picture experts group 

most significant bit 

multiplex 

microwave video distribution systems 

near-instantaneously companded audio multiplex 

national television system committee 

octal notation 

orthogonal frequency division multiplex 

phase alternation line 



12 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



PCR 

PID 

PRBS 

PSK 

QAM 

QEF 

QPSK 

RF 

RMS 

RS 

RSBW 

SDTV 

SECAM 

SFN 

SMATV 

TC8PSK 

TPS 

TV 

TVRO 

UHF 

uimsbf 

UTC 

VHF 

VSB 



program clock reference 

packet identifier 

pseudo-random binary sequence 

phase shift keying 

quadrature amplitude modulation 

quasi error free 

quaternary phase shift keying 

radio frequency 

root mean square 

Reed-Solomon 

resolution bandwidth 

standard definition television 

sequenciel couleur a memoire 

single frequency network 

satellite master antenna television 

trellis coded 8 phase shift keying 

transmission parameter signalling 

television 

television receive only 

ultra-high frequency 

unsigned integer, most significant bit first 

universal time co-ordinated 

very high frequency 

vestigial side band 



13 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 > : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

4 Methods of measurement 

General 

The methods of measurement listed below are applicable to analogue and/or digitally 
modulated signals as indicated in table 1. 

Table 1 - Application of the methods of measurement 



Methods of measurement 
Subclause reference 


Modulation of carriers 


Analogue 


Digital 


Television 


Radio 
FM 

TV 
sound 
carrier 

FM/AM 


Television 


Radio 


Vision carrier 
AM-VSB 


Vision 

and 

sound 

carriers 

FM 


Vision and sound 
DVB 


Sound 


NTSC 


PAL 


SECAM 


PSK 


QAM 


OFDM 


NICAM 


DAB 


DSR 


4.1 Mutual isolation 

between system outlets 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


4.2 Amplitude response 
within a channel 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


4.3 Chrominance- 
luminance gain and 
delay inequalities 




X 


X 


















4.4 Non-linear distortion 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 














4.5 Carrier to noise ratio 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 














'4.6 Echoes 


X 


X 


X 


















4.7 AM-VSB television, FM 
radio and FM television 
signal level 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 














4.8 Data echo rating and 
data delay inequality 


X 


X 


X 


















4.9 Interference in FM 
sound radio channels 










X 














4.10 Methods of 

measurement for 
digitally modulated 
signals 












X 


X 


X 








4.10.3 Signal level 












X 


X 


X 




X 




4.10.4 S/N 












X 


X 


X 




X 




4.10.5 BER 












X 


X 


X 




X 




4.10.6 BER versus EJN 












X 


X 


X 




X 




4.10.7 Noise margin 












X 


X 


X 




X 




4.10.8 MER 












X 


X 










4.10.9 Phase jitter 












X 


X 










4.10.10 Phase noise of an 
RF carrier 












X 


X 


X 




X 





14 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

4.1 Mutual isolation between system outlets 

4.1.1 Introduction 

Although the method described applies also to the far ends of subscribers' feeders when no 
system outlets are used, isolation will usually be measured between: 

a) system outlets connected to adjacent subscribers' taps; 

b) system outlets connected to the same multiple subscribers' tap; 

c) adjacent looped system outlets. 

4.1.2 Equipment required 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

NOTE 1 "Wideband" is understood to mean of sufficient bandwidth to cover the full frequency range of the system 
under investigation. 

NOTE 2 Some sweep frequency generators may include a terminating wideband detector. 

a) A sweep frequency generator, with frequency range or ranges to suit the system to be 
examined, equipped with a frequency marking system. 

b) A terminating wideband detector. 

c) A variable attenuator, adjustable in steps of not more than 1 dB up to a value greater than 
the maximum mutual isolation to be measured. 

d) A wideband amplifier with sufficient gain to raise the signal ievel at the system outlet to a 
level suitable to drive the detector. 

e) An oscilloscope or other display unit suitable for operation with the sweep frequency 
generator. 

f) A suitable coaxial cable of sufficient length to reach from one system outlet to an adjacent 
one in the cabled distribution system. 

4.1.3 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 4. 



4.1.4 Measurement procedure 

a) With the equipment connected as shown in figure 4a, set the variable attenuator to a value 
just greater than the maximum value of mutual isolation expected to be measured. Note 
this value a^ 

b) Adjust the output level of the sweep generator to give a level at the input to the amplifier 
approximately equal to that available at a system outlet. 

c) Adjust the oscilloscope and amplifier gain controls to produce a display and note the 
amplitude of the display over the frequency range under inspection. 

d) Remove from the section under test, the signals normally distributed on the system 
whilst maintaining the correct terminating conditions. Connect the equipment as shown in 
figure 4b. Note that the output from the sweep generator is connected to the "local" 
system outlet and the long cable (according to 4.1.2 f) ) is used to connect to the "remote" 
outlet. 

e) Reduce the attenuator setting until the peak of the display just reaches the same 
amplitude as that noted in item c) of this subclause for the frequency at which the peak 
occurs. 

f) Note the new value of the attenuator a 2 . 

g) Mutual isolation is given by a, - a 2 . 

h) If the system outlets are of dual socket design, for example, TV - radio, the mutual 
isolation should also be measured at the appropriate frequencies between one socket, for 

15 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

example TV, of the "local" system outlet and the alternate socket, for example, radio, of 
the "remote" system outlet and vice versa. In these cases, it will be necessary also to 
measure mutual isolation with the unused sockets in both terminated and open-circuit 
conditions. The conditions of measurement should be stated when tabulating results. 
When unused sockets are terminated, the terminating resistance shall be 75 Q. 

i) Where the measurements are made in a number of discrete frequency bands, the lowest 
result obtained shall be taken as the mutual isolation between the two system outlets 
under investigation. 

4.1,5 Presentation of the results 

The results shall be presented in a table listing the values obtained for each couple of 
measured system outlets. 

4.2 Amplitude response within a channel 

4.2.1 Introduction 

The method described is applicable to the measurement of the amplitude response of cabled 
distribution systems over the frequency range of an individual channel between two specified 
points within the system. 

However, where input signals to the system are received at, or are reduced to, baseband, and 
modulated onto the system carrier frequencies, the response of any demodulator and 
modulator shall not be included. If it is required to include the characteristics of these items, a 
separate assessment shall be made using test techniques applicable to such equipment. 

Where the system contains frequency changing equipment between the antenna input and the 
system outlet at which the tests are to be made, the calibration of the equipment (as detailed 
in 4.2.4 a) to 4.2.4 g)) shall be carried out at the output frequencies, having first checked that 
the output of the sweep frequency generator is also flat over the input channel. 

4.2.2 Equipment required 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

a) A sweep frequency generator. 

b) A terminating RF detector. 

c) Two variable attenuators. 

d) An amplifier. 

e) A dual-trace oscilloscope. 

f) A high output (at least 300 mV RMS terminated) signjl generator of known frequency 
calibration over the frequency range of the channel to be tested. 

g) A balanced mixer. 

h) A low-pass filter with cut-off at approximately 200 kHz for television channels or 
approximately 10 kHz for FM sound radio. 

i) A directional coupler suitable for use in the frequency range of the channel to be tested. 

j) A termination to match the output of the filter specified in item h) of this subclause. 

4.2.3 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 5a. If the tests are to be carried out in the 

presence of other signals on the system, a filter may be necessary at the input of the amplifier 

to prevent distortion of the display. This filter shall have a flat response and shall match the 

system correctly over the channel to be tested. It shall have sufficient attenuation at the 

frequencies of the other signals to reduce them to about 20 dB below the level of the swept 

test signal. 

16 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

4.2.4 Measurement procedure 

a) With the equipment connected as shown in figure 5a, adjust the output frequencies of the 
sweep generator to cover the channel to be tested and set the variable attenuator A1, so 
that the level of the signal at its output is that which will be required when connected to 
the system input. 

b) Set the variable attenuator A2, so that the level of the signal at the input to the amplifier is 
about 3 dB to 4 dB below that expected at the system outlet at which the test will be 
made. 

c) Adjust the oscilloscope controls to obtain a satisfactory display on the Y1 channel, which 
shall be DC coupled, locking the timebase to the leading edge of the display. 

NOTE It may be necessary to operate the oscilloscope at a repetition rate equal to half that of the sweep 
generator and examine the "second" displayed response. 

d) Adjust the frequency of the signal generator to that of the lower limit of the channel under 
investigation and arrange the level of this signal and the gain and shift controls of the Y2 
channel of the oscilloscope to produce a satisfactory "marker". 

e) Move the "marker" to the upper frequency limit of the channel and carefully note the 
amplitude of the display between the two marks (see "reference" in figure 6) and the level 
of the display during the blanking period. 

f) Adjust the attenuator A2 to values 3 dB either side of that set as specified in item b) of this 
subclause and check that the shape of the reference curve does not alter materially. 

g) Connect the equipment to the cabled distribution system as shown in figure 5b removing 
the normal signal input to the channel under test, but retaining any pilot signals which may 
be necessary to maintain correct operation of the system. 

NOTE Signal-operated AGC systems may not function correctly on swept input signals and may have to be 
rendered inoperative and manual gain control used during these tests. 

h) Adjust the attenuator A2 to produce the same general amplitude of display as obtained in 
item c) of this subclause, using the "reference" curve and carefully aligning the blanking 
level with that obtained in item e) of this subclause. 

i) Mark the frequency limits of the channel as described in item d) and item e) of this 
subclause. 

j) Using the attenuator A2, set up the display so that within the frequency limits marked in 
item i) of this subclause: 

1) the curve crosses the "reference" at the vision carrier frequency, interpolating if 
necessary; note the value ao, with correction for interpolation; 

2) the "peak" of the response touches the "reference", interpolating if necessary; note the 
value a 1f with correction for interpolation. 

The "trough" of the response touches the "reference", interpolating if necessary. 

Note the value a 2 , with correction for interpolation. 

k) The variation of amplitude/frequency response within the channel is given by (a-\ - ao) and 
(a 2 - a ). 

4.2.5 Presentation of the results 

The results are presented in a table or by a curve showing the amplitude response within the 
measured channel. 

4.3 Chrominance-luminance gain and delay inequalities 

NOTE This is relevant only for PAL and SECAM standards. 

4.3.1 Introduction 

The methods described are applicable to the measurement of chrominance/luminance gain 
and delay inequalities for complete systems and constituent items of equipment. The test 

17 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

signals employed are in both cases those recommended in ITU-T Recommendation J. 61, and 
are shown in figure 7 and figure 8. 

It is intended that these measurements are carried out with test signals inserted at the system 
headend. They may be either of the full frame type or, where convenient, may be inserted in 
the field blanking periods. The use of inserted test signals available on the broadcast 
television channel is not generally recommended as these are subject to variations beyond 
the control of the user. However, where such signals, of known stability and of adequate 
quality, are available, they may be used to carry out these measurements. 

4.3.2 Equipment required 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

a) An oscilloscope which will not contribute significant distortion to the signal displayed. 

b) A modulator (unless transmitted test signals in the field blanking interval are to be used) 
having the following characteristics: 

1) radio-frequency characteristics (excluding sound) corresponding to ITU-R 
Recommendation BT.470, and appropriate to the television transmission system used; 

2) video signal input requirement of 1 V peak-to-peak composite; 

3) a modulated output signal of a convenient amplitude. 

c) A synchronous demodulator having characteristics appropriate to the television 
transmission system used. 

d) Two attenuators variable in steps of not more than 1 dB. 

e) A test signal generator (unless transmitted test signals are used) providing signals having 
characteristics appropriate to the television transmission system under consideration, as 
specified in ITU-T Recommendation J. 61, and containing composite pulse and bar signal 
elements B2 and F. 

NOTE 1 Most commercially available test signal generators will provide this signal as part of a composite test 

line. 

NOTE 2 For measurement on system I, a composite pulse of half-amplitude duration = 1 ps would be an 
acceptable alternative to that shown as element F. 

f) A test set capable of providing calibrated variable .delay and attenuation in either the 
chrominance or luminance areas of the video spectrum. 

4.3.3 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 9. 

4.3.4 Measurement procedure 

a) With point A directly connected to point B (see figure 9), adjust attenuator A-j for an output 
level sufficient to drive the system to be tested and attenuator A2 to obtain the correct 
input level to the demodulator. 

b) Adjust the oscilloscope Y gain, Y shift and time base to obtain a suitable display of the 
composite pulse. 

For convenience, the oscilloscope may be triggered so that the top of the bar is superimposed 
over the pulse, as in figure 7. 

Ensure that the distortion of the test signal due to the control loop (test equipment) is small 
compared with the limit specified for the system or equipment to be tested. 

c) Connect the system or equipment to be tested between points A and B. 

Adjust the attenuator A2 to return the input level to the demodulator to that given in item a) of 
this subclause. 

d) Using the oscilloscope controls, obtain a display as in item b) of this subclause. 

18 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

e) With the controls on the test set, null the delay inequality so that the bottom edge of the 
pulse is symmetrical about the vertical centre line of the pulse (see figures 10b and 11b). 

f) Using the calibrated attenuator on the test set, null the gain inequality so that the peak-to 
peak amplitude of the chrominance signal equals that of the luminance bar. 

g) If necessary, repeat the procedure of 4.3.4 e) and 4.3.4 f). 

h) Read the gain and delay inequalities from the calibrated test set. 

NOTE 1 If the measurement is made in the presence of echoes generated by discontinuities in the system 
under test, the result obtained will be subject to an error of magnitude not exceeding that of the echo. 

NOTE 2 It is possible, without the use of the test set, to estimate the delay or gain inequality by direct 
observation of the pulse against a calibrated graticule, and use of a suitable nomograph. The nomograph 
employed is that applicable to the half-amplitude duration of the particular composite pulse employed for the 
test. However, where non-linear distortion is present, particularly quadrature distortion in the demodulator, the 
results will be substantially in error. 

4.3.5 Presentation of the results 

The results are presented in a table showing the measured value of the cnrominance- 
luminance gain and delay inequalities related to the measured channel. 

4.4 Non-linear distortion 
General 

See IEC 60728-3. The methods described there are applicable to PAL and SECAM systems. 

4.4.1 Intermodulation 

See IEC 60728-3. 

4.4.2 Composite beat 
General 

The method of measurement of composite beat using AM television signals is applicable to 
the measurement of the ratio of the carrier-to-composite beat at a specified point in a cabled 
distribution system. The method can also be used to determine the composite beat 
intermodulation performance of individual items of equipment. This measurement is made 
using the existing channels in the system with their normal modulation. 

4.4.2.1 Introduction 

When the input signals are at regularly spaced intervals (as is common in most frequency 
allocations for TV channels), the various distortion products tend to cluster in groups, close to 
the vision carriers and at other regular positions within the TV channels. The number of 
different products in each cluster increases rapidly with the number of channels. They 
combine in different ways, depending on the degree of coherence between the generating 
signals, and the relative phases of the different distortion products. 

The method described in this subclause measures the non-linear distortion of a device or 
system by the composite effect of all the beats clustered close to the vision carrier or at other 
positions within a TV channel. During the measurement, that channel has to be turned off. 
The composite beat measured is that generated by all carriers except that or those of the 
measured channel. 

NOTE On systems carrying more than 10 channels, removal of the wanted channel does not significantly affect 
the result. 

If the major contribution to the composite beat is due to distortion products of a particular 
order, the composite beat will follow the standard level variation for that order. If the 

19 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

composite beat, as measured, does not follow a standard level variation, it shall have 
significant contributions from distortion products of different orders. 

The method is used to support a specification of the following general format: 

"The composite beat ratio for (list of carriers) in channel (A) at (B) dB(uV) is (C)dB". 

(A) designates the channel in which the test is made. If omitted, the specification is 
understood to be a minimum specification for measurements at all the channels specified by 
the list of carriers. 

(B) is the reference level at which all carriers are set during the measurement, unless 
otherwise specified. If all carriers are not at the same level, the specification should clearly 
indicate the level of each carrier relative to the reference level, which is that of the highest 
carrier level. 

(C) is the composite beat ratio, usually given as a minimum specification. 

The list of carriers will usually be specified as a list of standard channel designations, 
signifying test signals at the frequencies of the corresponding vision carriers. 

The ratio of carrier-to-composite beat may not vary with output signal level in the way 
expected for distortion of a given order, and it may therefore be necessary to repeat the tests 
at levels higher and lower than those initially used. Repeat the tests at levels 2 dB higher and 
lower. It is recommended that these repeat tests are done on the channel which produced the 
lowest beat ratio during the test. 

4.4.2.2 Equipment required 

a) A spectrum analyzer with 30 kHz IF bandwidth and 10 Hz video bandwidth capability. 

NOTE When using a spectrum analyzer with minimum video filtering capabilities greater than 10 Hz, the 
composite third-order distortion may be noisy and should be read at the middle of the trace. 

b) A variable 75 Q attenuator, adjustable in 1 dB steps. 

c) A bandpass filter for each channel to be tested or a tunable bandpass filter. This filter 
should attenuate the other channels present on the system to be tested sufficiently to 
ensure that the products generated by non-linearity in the spectrum analyzer itself do not 
contribute significantly to the composite beat products to be measured. The passband of 
this filter shall at least be flat within 1 dB over the frequency range of interest. 

NOTE If the linearity of the spectrum analyzer is sufficient and known, this filter is not necessary. 

4.4.2.3 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment is connected as in figure 14. 

4.4.2.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Connect point A directly to point B and disconnect the bandpass filter (see figure 14). 

b) Adjust the spectrum analyzer as follows: 

IF bandwidth: 30 kHz 

Video bandwidth: 10 Hz 

Scan width: 50 kHz/div. 

Vertical scale: 10 dB/div. 

Scan-time: 0,2 s/div 

20 



IS 13420 < Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

c) Tune the spectrum analyzer to the channel in which the measurement is to be made so 
as to display the vision carrier in a frequency range of 0,5 MHz towards the sound 
carrier. 

d) Adjust the sensitivity of the spectrum analyzer together with its internal and external 
input attenuator in such a way that the response to the vision carrier corresponds to a 
full scale reference. At the same time the noise level shall be at least 60 dB, and 
preferably 65 dB, below the reference level. 

e) Insert the bandpass filter (if necessary) corresponding to the channel to be measured 
and adjust the input attenuator to correct for the attenuation of the filter. 

f) Disconnect the signal feed for the channel to be measured and terminate the input 
socket with its nominal impedance. 

g) Verify that the intermodulation products generated in the spectrum analyzer over the 
entire channel are below the reference level by an amount at least 20 dB greater than 
the required distortion distance. If this is not the case, disconnect the bandpass filter 
and repeat the steps d) to g) of this procedure with an increased input attenuation of 
the spectrum analyzer. 

h) Note the setting of the sensitivity control or the reference level control. 

i) Reconnect the signal feed for the channel and repeat steps c) to h) of this procedure 
for all channels. 

j) Connect the system to be tested between points A and B. 

k) Adjust the centre frequency of the spectrum analyzer as in step c) and insert the 
appropriate band-pass filter, if necessary. 

I) Adjust the input attenuator (internal and/or external) to return the response of the 
spectrum analyzer to the vision carrier to full scale with the appropriate setting of its 
sensitivity control (see step h)). 

NOTE The external attenuator should be set to a minimum of 10 dB if the filter is in use, otherwise the 
system under test will see a serious mismatch. 

m) Disconnect the signal feed for the channel to be measured and terminate the input 
socket with its nominal impedance. 

n) Note the frequencies' at which intermodulation products occur and the level of these 
products compared with the reference level in the frequency range displayed by the 
spectrum analyzer. 

o) Reconnect the signal feed for the channel, adjust the analyzer tuning so as to display 
the next 0,5 MHz range. 

p) Repeat steps k) to o) until the entire channel has been examined. 

q) If the composite beats are clustered about the vision carrier, then the signal/composite 
beat ratio is read directly off the screen of the spectrum analyzer. In cases where there 
are several clusters, then the ratio is calculated and the subjective effect will be 
obtained by using the following formula which assumes power addition of the beats: 

M 

Signal / composite beat = -10lg^10" ((ii+ ^ )/10) 

where 

M is the number of different frequencies at which intermodulation products clusters occur; 

L s corresponds to the ratio, expressed in decibels, of the reference level, at the relevant 
frequency, to that of the intermodulation product; 

Kj is the weighting factor expressed in decibels at the relevant frequency as obtained 
from figures 12, 13, 15 and 16. 

NOTE A cluster is a group of beats {intermodulation products) falling around a carrier or inside a TV channel. 

r) Repeat the steps k) to p) of this procedure for every channel used in this test. 

21 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

s) The signal/composite beat ratio for the system under test is taken to be the lowest 
obtained in step r). 

4.4.2.5 Presentation of the results 

The results are presented in a table showing the measured values of composite beats 
(CTB/CSO) for each relevant TV channel. 

4.4.3 Composite crossmodulation 

Under consideration. 

4.4.4 Hum modulation of carriers 

4.4.4.1 Introduction 

This is a method of measurement of the amplitude modulation (AM), at supply frequencies 
and harmonics thereof, of the signals on cabled distribution systems primarily intended for 
television and sound. 

A simplified procedure for use where lower sensitivity will suffice is outlined in 4.4.4.6. For 
relatively high levels of hum modulation, the two methods will yield the same result. Both of 
the above methods use a DC reference. 

An alternative method using an AC reference is described in 4.4.4.7 to 4.4.4.9. 

NOTE These methods, are not suited to the measurement of "hum" modulation resulting from the use of switched- 
mode power supplies, due to the insertion of the 1 kHz low-pass filter. It may be possible to obtain such a 
measurement without the filter in the circuit, but the results may be inaccurate due to the presence of wide-band 
noise. A revised method of measurement is currently under consideration. 

4.4.4.2 Definition 

The signal / hum ratio measured by this method is defined as: 

o;„„oi/h..,v, inu reference modulation . n 

signal/hum =20 Ig ; — 7 t—,^ — B . , .. — dB 

3 ^ peak - to - peak hum modulation 

When the reference modulation is a vision signal, its amplitude is that of the peak-to-peak 
composite signal. For an AM sound signal, the reference modulation depth is taken to be 40 
% (see figure 17). 

4.4.4.3 Equipment required for DC method 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

NOTE 1 The items a), b), c) and e) of this subclause, if applicable, should preferably be powered from batteries 
(see also 4.4.4.4 b)). 

NOTE 2 In item b) of this subclause "negligible" means small compared with the level of hum modulation 
expected to be measured. 

a) A CW signal generator with output frequency range and output level to suit the system to 
be tested (see note 1). 

b) A tuned signal amplifier to raise, with negligible distortion, the level of the test signal at 
the point of measurement to about 2 Vrms (see notes 1 and 2). 

c) An oscilloscope: dual channel, DC coupled, with differential facility, capable of 
measurement of a signal of 1 mV peak-to-peak (see note 1). 

d)- A terminating RF detector of impedance equal to the ZO of the system under test. 

e) A low-pass filter with 1 kHz cut-off; impedances to suit the detector output. 

22 



IS 13420 < Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

f) Two attenuators, variable in steps of 1 dB. 

g) A calibrated potential divider (as shown in figure 19). 
h) A stable variable DC source (as shown in figure 20). 

4.4.4.4 Connection of the equipment 

a) If battery-powered equipment is available, this shall be connected as in figure 18. 

b) If mains-powered equipment is to be used, point A should be linked to point B and a check 
carried out in accordance with 4.4.4.5 a) and 4.4.4.5 c) to 4.4.4.5 f), to ascertain that the 
level of hum modulation within the test equipment is such that it may be neglected. It shall 
be small compared with the maximum allowed by the relevant system performance 
requirement. If this check is satisfactory, the system to be tested may be connected as 
shown in figure 18. 

4.4.4.5 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal generator frequency to that of the vision carrier (or sound carrier) of the 

channel to be tested. 

b) Adjust attenuator Ai to provide the correct level of CW signal at the input to the system. 

This level is equal to the RMS value of the relevant television signal during its modulation 
peaks, or the unmodulated carrier level for sound. 

c) Adjust attenuator A2 to give a signal of about 2 Vrms across the RF termination of the 

detector. 

d) With the switch of the potential divider set to "a", adjust the oscilloscope controls and the 

DC offset voltage to the Y 2 input to obtain a display of the demodulated hum signal. Note 
the peak-to-peak amplitude of the display. 

e) Move the potential divider switch to "b" or "c", depending upon the amplitude of the 

displayed hum, and keeping all other settings adjusted as described in step d) of this 
subclause, note the change in DC level of the display. This change is equivalent to an 
amplitude reduction of 0,07 % for position "b", and of 0,3% for position "c". 

f) Interpolate the result obtained in step d) of this subclause, in relation to the change 

observed in step e) of this subclause, as a percentage of peak-to-peak (see figure 21). 

g) Calculate the signal/hum ratio (in dB) as follows: 

signal/hum = 20 Ig ( — )-R (dB) 

% peak - to - peak hum 

where R is appropriate to the system, as given in table 2. 

4.4.4.6 Simplified procedure 

a) Where suitable equipment is available and the levels of hum modulation to be measured 
are relatively high (signal/hum » 34 dB to 40 dB), a simplified procedure may be adopted. 

b) This entails the use of a tuned demodulator, for example, a signal level meter (having a 
DC coupled video output) and the measurement, with a suitable oscilloscope, of the DC 
and AC components of the hum modulated test carrier. Battery operation of the test 
equipment is again advisable and a low-pass filter (similar to that described in 4.4.4.3 e)) 
will also be required. 

c) The calculation of signal/hum ratio (in dB) is then as follows: 

i/u or, 1 / measured DC voltage . „ ,_, 

signal/hum = 20 Ig ( )-/? (dB) 

measured peak - to - peak AC voltage 



23 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Table 2 - Residual carrier reduction factors 



Maximum modulation depth 
% 


Residual carrier 
% 


Reduction factor R 
dB 


95 


5 


0,5 


90 


10 


1 


80 


20 


2 


40 (see note) 


(see note) 


2 


NOTE In the case of AC amplitude modulation of a sound carrier, the term "residual carrier" is 
not appropriate. 



4.4.4.7 Equipment required for AC method 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

a) A CW signal generator, with output frequency range and output level to suit the system to 
be tested, and with provision for sinewave modulation at a frequency up to 1 kHz (see 
notes 1 and 3). 

b) A tuned signal amplifier, to raise, with negligible distortion, the level of the test signal at 
the point of measurement to about 2 Vrms ( see notes 1 and 2). 

c) Two variable RF attenuators Ai and A2, variable in 1 dB steps and suitable for the 
frequency of operation and for the impedance of the system under test. 

d) A terminating RF detector of impedance equal to that of the system under test. 

e) An audio frequency amplifier, AC coupled and having sufficient gain to Taise the level of 
the detected hum signal to a value providing a suitable display on the oscilloscope, and of 
output impedance to match the attenuator (see item f) and note 1). 

f) An audio frequency attenuator A3 variable in 1 dB steps and having a minimum range of 
60 dB. 

g) A low-pass filter with a 1,0 kHz cut-off frequency and impedance to match the output of 
the audio frequency attenuator (see item f) and note 3). 

h) An audio frequency termination having an impedance matching the output of the low-pass 
filter (see item g)). 

i) A single channel audio frequency AC coupled oscilloscope having a sensitivity depending 
on the choice of amplifier (see item e) and note 1). 

NOTE 1 The equipment of items a), b), e) and i) of this subclause should be powered preferably from batteries. 
See also 4.4.4.9 b). 

NOTE 2 "Negligible" is understood to mean small compared with the level of hum modulation expected to be 

measured. 

NOTE 3 The use of a modulation frequency as low as 200 Hz with a corresponding Jow-pass filter may be 
preferable when the detected hum is largely affected by random noise. 

4.4.4.8 Connection of the equipment 

If battery-powered equipment is available this is connected as shown in figure 22. 

If mains-powered equipment is to be used, point A should be linked to point B and a check 
carried out in accordance with 4.4.4.9 to ascertain that the level of hum modulation within the 
test equipment is such that it may be neglected. It shall be small compared with the maximum 
allowed by the relevant system performance requirement. If this check is satisfactory the 
system to be tested may be connected as shown in figure 22. 



4.4.4.9 Measurement procedure 

a) Ensure that the modulation depth indicator on the signal generator is correctly calibrated 
at the frequencies and modulation depths to be used in the measurement, see annex A 
and step c) below. 

24 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

b) Set the signal generator frequency to that of the vision carrier (or sound carrier) of the 
channel to be tested. 

c) Modulate the carrier to a depth of 1 % at a suitable frequency in the range 100 Hz to 1 
kHz. 

d) Adjust attenuator A-| to provide the correct mean level of modulated CW signal at the input 
to the system. This level is equal to the RMS value of the relevant TV signal during its 
modulation peaks, or to the unmodulated carrier level for sound. 

e) Adjust attenuator A 2 to give a signal of about 2 Vrms across the RF termination of the 
detector. 

f) With the audio attenuator A 3 set to 60 dB attenuation, adjust the oscilloscope controls and 
audio amplifier gain, if necessary, to provide a suitable display on the oscilloscope. Note 
the peak-to-peak amplitude of the display. 

g) Remove the modulation of the carrier. 

h) Readjust the audio attenuator to provide on the oscilloscope a display of the hum having a 
peak-to-peak amplitude equal to that noted in step f). Note the change in the attenuator 
reading a. 

i) Calculate the signal/hum ratio (in dB) as follows: 

signal/hum = 34 + (a- R) dB 

where 

a is the change in attenuator reading (in step h)); 

R is a reduction factor given in table 2 of 4.4.4.6 c)). 

4.4.4.10 Presentation of the results 

The results are presented in a table showing the measured values of hum modulation for the 
vision carrier (or sound carrier) of each relevant TV channel. 

4.4.5 Differential gain and phase 

4.4.5.1 Introduction 

The methods described are applicable to the measurement of differential gain and differential 
phase for complete systems and constituent items of equipment. The test signals employed 
are, in both cases, those recommended in ITU-T Recommendation J. 61, and are shown in 
figures 23a and 23b. The definitions are also those given in the same recommendation. 

It is intended that these measurements are carried out with test signals inserted at the system 
headend. They may be either of the full field type or, where convenient, may be inserted in 
the field blanking period. 

The use of inserted test signals available on the broadcast TV channels is not generally 
recommended as these are subject to variations beyond the control of the user. However, 
where such signals, of known stability and of adequate quality are available, they may be 
used to carry out these measurements. 

A) Differential gain 

4.4.5.2 Definition 

Differential gain is expressed by two values: x % and y %, which represent the two peak 
amplitudes of the sub-carrier relative to the amplitude of the sub-carrier at blanking level. In 
the case of a monotonic characteristic, either x or y will be zero. 

Differential gain, in percentage referred to blanking level, can be found from the expressions 
below: 

25 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

x = 100(-^_-1) and >> = 1 00 (^^- -1) 

Peak-to-peak differential gain can be found from the expression: 

100 Anax-^min = y _ y 

where 

>4 max and A mm are defined as shown in figure 25; 

A is the amplitude of the received sub-carrier at blanking level; 

A is the amplitude of the sub-carrier of one of the other treads of the staircase. 

4.4.5.3 Equipment required 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

a) An oscilloscope which will not contribute significant distortion to the signal displayed. 

b) A modulator (unless transmitted test signals in the field blanking interval are to be used) 
having the following characteristics: 

1) radio-frequency characteristics (excluding sound) corresponding to ITU-R Recom- 
mendation BT.470, and appropriate to the television transmission system used; 

2) video signal input requirement of 1 V peak-to-peak composite; 

3) a modulated output signal of a convenient amplitude. 

c) A synchronous demodulator having characteristics appropriate to the television 
transmission system used. 

d) Two attenuators variable in steps of not more than 1 dB. 

e) A band-pass filter having f = 4,43 MHz or 3,58 MHz (the chrominance sub-carrier 
frequency) and a bandwidth of 0,5 MHz. 

f) A test signal generator (unless transmitted test signals are used) providing signals having 
characteristics appropriate to the television transmission system under consideration, as 
specified in ITU-T Recommendation J. 61 (signal D2), although a lower chrominance 
amplitude would be acceptable. 

NOTE Most commercially available test signal generators will provide this signal as part of a composite test 

line. 

4.4.5.4 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 26. 

4.4.5.5 Measurement procedure 

a) With point A directly connected to point B (see figure 26), adjust attenuator A-| for an 
output level sufficient to drive the system to be tested and attenuator A 2 to obtain the 
correct input level to the demodulator. 

b) Insert the appropriate band-pass filter after the demodulator (see figure 26) and measure 
the differential gain by examining the modified staircase waveform (see figure 25 and 
4.4.5.2). 



26 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 } : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

c) Ensure that the distortion of the test signal caused by the control loop {test equipment) is 
small compared with the maximum distortion allowed for the system or equipment to be 
tested. 

NOTE Where the linearity of the modulator/demodulator is such that on systems B and G (10 % residual 
carrier) this requirement cannot be met, it will be necessary either to reduce the sub-carrier amplitude or to 
ignore the sixth (uppermost) tread. 

d) Connect the system or equipment to be tested between points A and B, and disconnect 
the band-pass filter. Adjust attenuator A2 to return the input level to the demodulator to 
that used in step a). 

e) Reinsert the band-pass fitter and measure the maximum differential gain by examining the 
modified staircase waveform (see figure 25 and 4.4.5.2). 

NOTE This result includes the distortion due to the test equipment as well as the system under test. 

B) Differential phase 

4.4.5.6 Definition 

Differential phase is expressed by two values x and y, in degrees, which represent the two 
peak phases of the sub-carrier relative to the phase of the sub-carrier at blanking level. In the 
case of a monotonic characteristic, either x or y will be zero. 

Differential phase, in degrees, referred to blanking level, can be found from the expressions 

below: 

* = <*>max - #0 and y = <D min - <D 

Peak-to-peak differential phase can be found from the expression: 

3>max - <E>min = x - y 

where 

<£> is the phase of the received sub-carrier on one of the other treads of the staircase; 

Oo is the phase of the received sub-carrier at blanking level; 

q> max is the maximum value of O obtained by examining each tread of the staircase; 

O m j n is the minimum value of <& obtained by examining each tread of the staircase. 

4.4.5.7 Equipment required 

a) A modulator (unless transmitted test signals in the field blanking intervals are to be used) 
having the following characteristics: 

1) radio-frequency characteristics (excluding sound) corresponding to ITU-R 
Recommendation BT.470, and appropriate to the television transmission system used; 

2) video signal input requirement of 1 V peak-to-peak composite; 

3) a modulated output signal of a convenient amplitude. 

b) A synchronous demodulator having characteristics appropriate to the television 
transmission system used. 

c) Two attenuators variable in steps of not more than 1 dB. 

d) A test set capable of measuring the difference in phase of the sub-carrier at each tread of 
the staircase, compared with that at the reference (black) level. 

e) A test waveform generator (unless transmitted test signals in the field blanking intervals 
are to be used) providing signals having characteristics appropriate to the television 
transmission system under consideration, as specified in ITU-T Recommendation J. 61 

27 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 {2001) 

(signal D2), although a lower amplitude of the chrominance component would be 
acceptable (see the note to 4.4.5.3 f)). 

NOTE Certain types of test sets (see item d)) require the presence of a colour burst during the back porch 
period of the test signal. 

4.4.5.8 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 26. 

4.4.5.9 Measurement procedure 

a) With point A directly connected to point B (see figure 26) adjust attenuator A-j for an 
output level sufficient to drive the system to be tested and attenuator A 2 to obtain the 
correct input level to the demodulator. Connect the differential phase test set. 

b) Ensure that the distortion of the test signal due to the control loop (test equipment) is 
small compared with the maximum distortion allowed for the system or equipment to be 
tested (see also note to 4.4.5.5 c)). 

c) Connect the system or equipment to be tested between points A and B. Adjust attenuator 
A2 to return the input level to the demodulator to that used in step a) of this subclause. 

d) Determine the relative sub-carrier phases corresponding to the six treads of the staircase 
waveform. The differential phase (x and y) of the system or equipment under test is the 
phase change between the blanking level tread and that of any other tread of the staircase 
as defined in 4.4.5.6. The peak-to-peak differential phase can be calculated according to 
4.4.5.6. 

4.4.5.10 Presentation of the results 

The results of the measurement of the differential gain shall be presented indicating the two 
measured values x % and y %, referred to the relevant TV channel. 

The results of the measurement of the differential phase shall be presented indicating the two 
measured values x and y, in degrees, referred to the relevant TV channel. 

4.5 Carrier to noise ratio 

4.5.1 Introduction 

The method described is applicable to the measurement of the carrier to random noise ratio 
within a television channel at a specified point within a cabled distribution system. The 
method of measurement actually determines carrier (plus noise) to noise ratio; however, the 
difference between this and the carrier to noise ratio is very small if the value exceeds 20 dB.. 

The method assumes that the random noise is evenly distributed within the channel. 

4.5.2 Equipment required 

a) A measuring receiver with a known noise bandwidth less than that of the channel to be 
measured. 

b) A CW signal generator covering the frequencies at which the tests are to be carried out. 

c) A variable attenuator with a range greater than the carrier to noise ratio expected. 

d) A shielded terminating resistor. 

NOTE Additional items may be necessary, for example, to ensure correct calibration and operation of the test 
equipment (see annex B). 

4.5.3 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 27. 

28 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001} 

4.5.4 Measurement set-up 

4.5.4.1 General 

a) The test set-up shall be well-matched and the sensitivity of the measuring equipment (see 
annex C) shall be known over the frequency range of the channel to be measured. 

b) Where the system to be measured includes: 

1) automatic gain control (AGC), tests should be carried out at minimum and maximum 
levels of signal input; 

2) automatic level control (ALC), pilot signals of the correct type, frequency and level 
shall be maintained throughout the tests. 

c) The measuring receiver shall be calibrated and checked for satisfactory operation as 
explained in the next subclause. 

4.5.4.2 Calibration 

• Level correction, average/RMS or peak/RMS (see annex D). 

• Noise bandwidth (see annex E). 

4.5.4.3 Other checks 

• Sensitivity (see annex B). 

• Noise (see annex C). 

• Intermodulation (see annex C). 

• Overload (see annex C). 

4.5.5 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal generator frequency to the vision carrier frequency of the channel to be 
tested and adjust its output, and those of the different points of the system as far as the 
point of measurement, to obtain the specified system operating levels throughout. 

b) Connect the variable attenuator and measuring receiver (and other items if required - see 
annex B) to the point of measurement. Tune the measuring receiver to the reference 
signal and note the attenuator value <x-| required to obtain a convenient measuring receiver 
reading R. The attenuator value oci should be slightly greater than the signal-to-noise ratio 
expected at the point of measurement. 

c) Disconnect the generator and replace it by the shielded terminating resistor, or, if the 
reference signal is used for AGC, retune the measuring receiver within the channel such 
that it is influenced only by random noise. Reduce the attenuator setting to the value 0.2 
required to obtain the same measuring receiver reading R. 

d) The carrier to noise ratio in decibel is given by: 
C / N = a-i - a 2 - C m - C b 

where 

oci is the attenuator value for the reference signal; 

c(2 is the attenuator value for the noise; 

C m is the measuring receiver level correction factor (see annex D); 

Cb is the bandwidth correction factor (see annex D). 

4.5.6 Presentation of the results 

The result of the measurement of the carrier to noise ratio shall be presented indicating the 
measured value referred to the relevant TV channel. 



29 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

4.6 Echoes 

4.6.1 Introduction 

The method described is applicable to the measurement of the amplitude and time 
displacement of an echo at a specified point within a cabled distribution system by the use of 
a 2T-sine-squared pulse with the graticule as shown in figure 28. From these measurements 
an "echo-rating" is derived. 

4.6.2 Equipment required 

The test set-up shall be well-matched. 

a) A test waveform generator providing a sine-squared pulse of half amplitude duration equal 
to 27, where 7 is the period time; 7= 100 ns. The test signals are in accordance with ITU- 
T Recommendation J. 61. 

b) A modulator having RF characteristics (excluding sound) appropriate to the television 
system under consideration (see ITU-R Recommendation BT.470) and input 
characteristics to suit the generator in item a). 

c) A synchronous demodulator having characteristics appropriate to the television system 
under consideration. 

d) Two attenuators variable in 1 dB steps. 

e) An oscilloscope of negligible distortion up to 5 MHz, fitted with a graticule as shown in 
figure 28. 

4.6.3 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment shall be connected as in figure 24. 

4.6.4 Measurement procedure 

a) With the equipment connected as shown in figure 24, adjust the oscilloscope time-base 
speed to correspond with the T-scale on the graticule. Adjust the vertical gain and position 
controls to "fit" the pulse between the zero line and the pulse peak reference point. 
Examine the performance of the test equipment (control loop), which shall be such that an 
E-rating of not greater than 3 % is achieved. When frequency conversion is involved, the 
test equipment shall be checked at both the input and output channels. 

b) Connect the test equipment to the system as shown in figure 24. Adjust the variable 
attenuator Ai to provide an input signal to the system at a level equal to that at which it 
normally operates. Adjust the attenuator A2 to provide an input signal to the demodulator 
equal to that used in step a) of this subclause. 

c) Using the graticule as a reference, as before, determine the E-rating for each echo and 
note that of the echo with the highest rating. 

d) Using the horizontal shift control of the oscilloscope slowly move the display to the left and 
examine any long-distance echoes. These should be rated using the parallel section of the 
graticule at the extreme right. Note the highest rating. 

e) The E-rating for the system is the higher of the two figures noted in steps c) and d) of this 
subclause. 

NOTE This result will not be that of the system alone. It is modified by the inherent distortion in the test 
equipment, usually due to group delay errors. 

4.6.5 Presentation of the results 

The result of the measurement of the echo shall be presented indicating the measured value 
of the E-rating referred to the relevant TV channel. 

30 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

4.7 AM-VSB television, FM radio and FM television signal level 

The method of measurement described is applicable to the measurement of AM or FM 
carriers. 

4.7.1 Definitions for NTSC, PAL and SECAM systems 

4.7.1.1 Signal level for AM-VSB vision carriers 

The vision carrier signal level is the RMS value of the vision carrier at the peak of the 
modulation envelope, expressed in dB(uV) and measured across a 75 Q termination or 
referred to 75 Q. 

This will correspond, in 'negative modulation systems, to the carrier amplitude during 
synchronizing pulses and, in positive modulation systems, to that at peak white level without a 
chrominance signal, as in ITU-R Recommendation BT.470, figure 1. 

4.7.1.2 AM or FM sound carrier level 

The level of an AM or FM sound signal is the RMS value of the unmodulated carrier 
expressed in dB(uV) and measured across a 75 Q termination or referred to 75 Q. 

4.7.1.3 Signal level for FM radio or FM television 

The level of an FM radio or a FM TV signal is the RMS value of the unmodulated carrier 
expressed in dB(uV) and measured across a 75 Q termination or referred to 75 Q. 

4.7.2 Equipment required 

A "well-matched" radio-frequency measuring receiver having: 

a) a nominal input impedance of 75 Q. or transformed to 75 Q and being calibrated in dB(uV); 

b) a detection system capable of attaining the peak of the AM carrier to be measured; 

c) facilities to adjust the detector characteristics for the measurement of AM and FM carriers; 

d) a passband of at least 120 kHz, with sufficient selectivity to ensure that carriers other than 
those measured shall not influence the result. 

NOTE The accuracy of the radio-frequency measuring receiver is not specified, since this will depend on the 
purpose of the measurement. Laboratory instrumentation can achieve better than ±0,5 dB, but most level 
measurements on an operating cabled distribution system are concerned with levels at system outlets. For this 
application, less expensive portable equipment, whose overall accuracy is unlikely to be better than ±2 dB, is 
usually found to be acceptable. A spectrum analyzer can also be used. 

4.7.3 Measurement procedure 

a) When signal levels are to be measured where a high ambient field is present, the 
measuring receiver or the spectrum analyzer shall be checked for spurious readings. 
Connect a shielded termination to its input cable, place both meter and lead approximately 
in their measurement positions and check that there is a negligible reading at the 
frequencies and on the meter ranges to be used. 

b) Connect the measuring receiver or spectrum analyzer to the point of measurement by 
means of a suitable coaxial cable, taking care to maintain correct impedance matching. 

c) Read the signal level in accordance with the instructions provided by the instrument 
manufacturer and note the results. When recording the results, the measurement accuracy 
of the instrument shall be stated. 

If the input impedance of the measuring receiver or spectrum analyzer is other than 75 £1 and 
a matching device is required, or if any other interface equipment is employed, then an 
allowance shall be made for the resultant change in voltage level. Losses in the 
interconnecting cables, where these are significant, shall also be taken into account. 

31 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

For positive AM-VSB modulation TV systems, the measuring receiver shall remain connected 
for a sufficient period to ensure that the maximum reading is obtained. It may therefore be 
necessary to observe the picture in order to ensure that peak white is present in the signal 
during the measurement. 

In the case of a dual outlet, the unused outlet shall be terminated with the correct 
characteristic impedance during the measurement. 

When using a spectrum analyzer the peak hold mode shall be used. 

4.7.4 Presentation of the results 

The result of the measurement of the signal level shall be presented indicating the measured 
value, expressed in dB(uV) (being measured across a 75 Q termination or referred to 75 Q), 
and referred to the vision or sound carrier of the relevant TV channel. 

4.8 Data echo rating and data delay inequality 

Under consideration. 

4.9 Interference in FM sound radio channels 

Under consideration. 

4.10 Methods of measurement for digitally modulated signals 

4.10.1 Introduction 

The methods of measurement for digitally modulated signals differ from those for analogue 
modulation for several reasons: 

a) the carrier is not present in the modulated signal and therefore cannot be measured (i.e. 
DVB systems using PSK or QAM modulation) or there are thousands of carriers (i.e. DVB 
systems using OFDM modulation); 

b) the modulated signal has a spectrum that is flat in the bandwidth and is similar to noise; 

c) the parameters that affect the quality of the received signal are related to the bit and word 
errors introduced by the channel {noise, amplitude and phase response inequalities, 
echoes, etc.) before demodulation and error correction. 

4.10.2 Basic assumptions and measurement interfaces 

The methods of measurement for digitally modulated signals are based on the assumption 
that: 

a) the MPEG-2 transport stream (TS) is the specified input and output signal for all the 
baseline systems, i.e. for satellite, cable, SMATV, MMDS/MVDS and terrestrial 
distribution; 

b) the digitally modulated signals received by satellite are modulated in the PSK format, i.e. 
according to EN 300421 for the QPSK format, and can be distributed in the same format in 
cable systems (SMATV systems); 

c) the digitally modulated signals received by satellite are distributed in CATV systems in the 
QAM format, i.e. according to EN 300429; 

d) the digitally modulated signals received from terrestrial broadcasting in the OFDM format 
are distributed in SMATV/CATV systems in the same OFDM format; 

e) a l/Q baseband signal source for PSK, QAM or OFDM formats is available, as described in 
figure 29; appropriate interfaces are accessible and are consistent with the DVB-SI 
documents (see document ETR 211 and EN 300468); 

32 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

f) a reference receiver for PSK, QAM or OFDM formats is available as described in figure 
30, where appropriate interfaces are indicated; 

g) the decoder implementation will not affect the consistency of the results. The MPEG-2 
T-STD model constrains, as defined in ISO/IEC 13818-1 (MPEG-2 system), shall be 
satisfied as specified in ISO/IEC 13818-4 (MPEG-2 compliance testing). 

4.10.3 Signal level 

4.10.3.1 Introduction 

This measuring method applies to the measurement of the level of digitally modulated signals 
using PSK, QAM, OFDM formats. 

Because the modulated signal is similar in characteristics to white noise, the measurement is 
based on the use of a suitable spectrum analyzer, able to tune the frequency range of the 
channel and to display the whole bandwidth, to measure spectral power density. 

NOTE Also a vector signal analyzer can be used or a suitable measuring set designed and calibrated for signal 
level measurement of digitally modulated signals. 

The measurement can be performed at the system outlet, at the output of a distribution 
equipment (passive or active), at the output of the headend or at the output of an outdoor unit 
(SHF receiver) for satellite reception. 

4.10.3-2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is a spectrum analyzer having a known noise bandwidth and a 
calibrated display of the tuned signal. 

The calibration accuracy should be preferably within ±0,5 dB and shall be stated with the 
results. 

The equipment shall be able to tune to the nominal frequency range of the system. 

4.10.3.3 Connection of the equipment 

Connect the measuring equipment to the system outlet or to the point where the measurement 
shall be performed, using suitable cable and connectors, taking care to maintain correct 
impedance matching. 

4.10.3.4 Measurement procedure 

a) When signal levels are to be measured where a high ambient field is present, the 
measuring equipment shall be checked for spurious readings. Connect a shielded 
termination to its input cable, place both the meter and the lead approximately in their 
measuring positions and check that there is a negligible reading at the frequency(ies) and 
on the meter ranges to be used. 

b) Tune the spectrum analyzer on the channel that shall be measured (selecting the centre 
frequency of the spectrum analyzer) and select the span and level settings to show the 
whole channel whose bandwidth depends on the type of modulation used. Examples of the 
equivalent signal bandwidth (BW) for digitally modulated signals are indicated in annex H. 

c) Set the resolution bandwidth (RSBW) of the spectrum analyzer to 100 kHz and set the 
video bandwidth to 100 Hz or lower to obtain a smooth display. 

d) Measure the level (S) of the flat top of the displayed signal in dB(uV) or in dB(mW) using 
the display line cursor if this feature is available. 

NOTE If the spectrum of the signal does not have a flat top, due to echoes, measure the signal level at the 
centre frequency of the channel. 

33 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

e) Measure on the displayed channel the two frequencies at which the level is 3 dB lower 
than the maximum level (S); the difference between these two frequencies is assumed to 
be the equivalent signal bandwidth (BW). 

f) Calculate the level (LS) of the signal using the following formula: 



BW 



RSBW 



+ ^sa 



L5 = 5 + 10lg 

where 

LS is the signal level in dB(uV) or in dB(mW); 

S is the flat top signal level in dB(uV) or in dB(mW); 

SIV is the equivalent signal bandwidth of the channel in kHz (annex H); 

RSBW is the resolution bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer in kHz; 

K sa is the correction factor of the spectrum analyzer. 

The correction factor (K sa ) depends on the measuring equipment used and shall be provided 
by the manufacturer of the measuring equipment or obtained by calibration. The value of the 
correction factor for a typical spectrum analyzer is about 1 ,7 dB (see annex I). 

The correction factor is not necessary if the measuring equipment can be set to display the 
level in dB(mW/Hz) units. In this case, the level (LS) of the signal can be obtained from the 
measured maximum level (S) using the following formula: 

LS = S+ 10 Ig (BW). 

NOTE This measuring method actually measures the S+N level. The contribution of noise is considered negligible 
if the level of noise displayed outside the equivalent signal band is at least 15 dB lower than the maximum level 
displayed within the equivalent signal band. This noise level includes that of the measuring equipment (spectrum 
analyzer) which should be at least 10 dB lower than the noise level displayed outside the channel band in order not 
to affect the results. Otherwise, the contribution of noise (due to the system or the equipment under test and to the 
measuring equipment) should be taken into account in the measurement of signal level (S) (see annex F). 

4.10.3.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured level is expressed in dB(jiV) referred to 75 £2 or in dB(mW). The accuracy of 
the measuring equipment shall be stated with the results. 

4.10.4 Signal to noise ratio (SIN) 

4.10.4.1 Introduction 

This measuring method applies to the measurement of the signal to noise ratio (SIN) of 
digitally modulated signals using PSK, QAM, OFDM format. 

Because the modulated signal is similar to noise distributed in the bandwidth of the channel, 
the measurement is based on the use of a suitable spectrum analyzer, able to tune the 
frequency range of the channel and to display the whole bandwidth. 

NOTE Also a vector signal analyzer can be used. 

The measurement can be performed at the system outlet, at the output of a distribution 
equipment (passive or active), at the output of the headend or at the output of an outdoor unit 
(SHF receiver) for satellite reception. 

4.10.4.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is a spectrum analyzer having a calibrated display of the tuned 
signal. 

The equipment shall be able to tune the nominal frequency range of the system or equipment 
under test. 

34 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



4.10.4.3 Connection of the equipment 



Connect the measuring equipment to the system outlet or to the point where the measurement 
shall be performed, using suitable cable and connectors, taking care to maintain correct 
impedance matching. 

4.10.4.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Tune the spectrum analyzer on the channel that shall be measured (selecting the centre 
frequency of the spectrum analyzer) and select the span and level settings to show the 
whole channel whose bandwidth depends on the type of modulation used. Examples of the 
equivalent signal bandwidth (BW) for digitally modulated signals are indicated in annex H. 

b) Set the resolution bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer to 100 kHz and the video bandwidth 
to 100 Hz. If a different setting is used, this shall be the same when measuring the signal 
level and the noise level. Select a display line cursor if the spectrum analyzer supports 
this feature. Otherwise select a normal marker. 

c) Measure the maximum level (S) of the displayed signal in dB(jiV) or in dB(mW). 

NOTE If the spectrum of the signal is not flat, due to echoes, measure the S value at the centre frequency 
(carrier frequency) of the signal spectrum. This value approaches the useful power. 

d) Switch-off the channel at the input of the system or at the input of the device under test, 
terminating the input port with a matched impedance (or depointing the antenna, if the 
measurement is performed at the output of an outdoor unit for satellite reception) and 
measure the noise level (N) in the same units as the signal level (in dB(nV) or in dB(mW)). 

NOTE When switching-off the input signal, all equipment with built-in AGC will show a different behaviour. In 
this case, the noise level shall be measured in between the channels. 

e) Calculate the signal to noise ratio (SIN) by the following formula: 

(S/A/) dB = S-N (dB) 

where 

(S/A/)d B is the signal to noise ratio in dB; 

S is the signal level in dB(uV) or in dB(mW); 

N is the noise level in dB(nV) or in dB(mW). 

NOTE This method of measurement actually measures the (S+N)IN ratio. The measuring equipment (spectrum 
analyzer) should have a noise level at least 10 dB lower than the noise level displayed outside the channel 
band in order not to affect the results. Otherwise, the contribution of the measuring equipment noise in the 
measurement of the noise level (W) should be taken into account (see clause F.2). 

4.10.4.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured signal to noise ratio {SJN) is expressed in dB. 

4.10.5 Bit error rate (BER) 

4.10.5.1 Introduction 

This method of measurement applies to the measurement of bit error rate (BER) of digitally 
modulated signals using PSK, QAM, OFDM formats. 

BER is the primary parameter which describes the quality of the digital transmission link and 
shall be related to the signal to noise ratio at the input of the receiver. 

The bit error rate is defined as the ratio between erroneous bits and the total number of 
transmitted bits. 

If error rates are ranging from 10~ 2 to 10~ 4 the measurement can be done in a reasonable 
amount of time. Above a BER of 10~ 4 , the result is assumed to be inaccurate. 

35 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

This measuring method shall be performed under out of service conditions. 

4.10.5.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is listed below: 

a) l/Q baseband signal source for PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format (figure 29); 

b) RF modulator for PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format (figure 29); 

c) power splitter; 

d) spectrum analyzer able to tune the nominal frequency range of the system; 

e) reference receiver (figure 30) with good equalizer (influence of linear distorsion of the 
cable network to the BER measurement should be negligible); 

f) counter of BER connected at the appropriate interface (V or U) of the reference receiver, 
depending where BER shall be evaluated. If it is connected after the Reed-Solomon 
decoder (interface Y or Z), decoding should be deactivated in order to reduce the duration 
of the measurement. 

4.10.5.3 Connection of the equipment 

The measuring set-up for BER measurement is showed in figure 31. The measuring 
equipment shall be connected taking care to maintain correct impedance matching. 

4.10.5.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal source (base band) to generate a sequence defined as the null transport 
stream packet in ISO/IEC 13818-1 with all bytes set to 0x00 (see annex G). A sequence of 
four bytes followed by a PRBS (pseudo random binary sequence) can also be used. 

NOTE The null transport stream packet is defined as the four byte sequence 0x47, 0x1 F, OxFF, 0x10, 
followed by 184 zero bytes (0x00). This sequence can be available as an encoding system option. 

b) Apply the signal source I and Q channels at the input of the RF modulator to obtain the 
desired PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format. 

c) Set the carrier frequency of the RF modulator to that of the channel where the 
measurement shall be performed. 

d) Adjust the output carrier level of the RF modulator to obtain the same level at the system 
outlet as in normal operating conditions, so that non-linear distorsions (i.e. CSO, CTB) 
have no impact on BER measurement. 

e) Tune the receiver and the spectrum analyzer to the same channel. Select the centre 
frequency of the spectrum analyzer, the span and level settings to show the whole 
channel. 

f) Set the resolution bandwidth (RSBW) of the spectrum analyzer to 100 kHz and the video 
bandwidth to 100 Hz. Select a display line cursor if the spectrum analyzer supports this 
feature. Otherwise select a normal marker. 

g) Switch-off the modulation and measure the carrier level (C) in dB(uV) or in dB(mW). 

NOTE In case of QAM modulated signals, the carrier level (C) is assumed to be that measured according to 
4.10.3, because the carrier level upon switching-off the modulation does not coincide with the carrier peak 
level. 

h) Measure the noise level N beside carrier (Af > 0,5 MHz) in the same units as the carrier 
level (in dB(uV) or in dB(mW)). 

NOTE Pay attention to the amplitude response of the noise spectrum within the channel. If it is not white 
Gaussian spectrum (flat amplitude response) take care not to measure at maximum or minimum frequency 
points, but take the frequency points where the energy of noise reaches its average. 

i) Calculate the carrier to noise ratio (C/N) by the following formula: 
(C//V) dB = C - N -1 Ig (BW/RSBW) - K sa 
where 

36 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

(C//V) dB is the carrier to noise ratio in dB; 

C is the carrier level in dB(|.iV) or in dB(mW); 

N is the noise level in dB(^iV) or in dB(mW); 

BW is the equivalent signal bandwidth of the channel in kHz (annex H); 

RSBW is the resolution bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer in kHz; 

K sa is the correction factor of the spectrum analyzer. 

The correction factor (K sa ) depends on the measuring equipment used and shall be 
provided by the manufacturer of the measuring equipment or obtained by calibration. The 
value of the correction factor for a typical spectrum analyzer is about 1,7 dB (see annex I). 

The correction factor is not necessary if the measuring equipment can be set to display 
the noise level in dB(m"W/Hz) units. In this case, the CIN ratio can be obtained from the 
following formula: 

(CIN) dB = C [dB(mW)] - N [dB(mW/Hz)] - 10 Ig (BW). 

j) Switch-on the modulation and measure the BER counting the error bits for a sufficient long 
time to count at least 100 error bits and refer this number to the total number of 
transmitted bits in that time. This is the gross bit rate that is referred to the measured CIN 

value. 

NOTE 1 When measuring a QAM modulated signal, the CIN value referred to the net bit rate can be 
calculated using the RS rate, i.e. using the following conversion factor for RS(204, 188) code: 

10 Ig (204/188) = +0,35 dB 

NOTE 2 When measuring a PSK or a OFDM modulated signal, the CIN value referred to the net bit rate value 
can be calculated taking into account both the inner code rate and the RS rate. If the inner code rate is 3/4 the 
conversion factor can be calculated as follows: 

10 Ig (4/3)<204/188) = +1,6 dB 

4.10.5.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured BER is indicated with reference to a certain CIN value. If the measured BER is 
referred to the gross bit rate or the net bit rate it shall be stated with the results. The interface 
point where the measurement of BER has been performed shall be indicated with the results. 

4.10.6 BER versus E b /A/ 

4.10.6.1 Introduction 

This measuring method applies to the measurement of bit error rate (BER) of digitally 
modulated signals using PSK, QAM, OFDM formats. The measurement of BER versus E b IN 
enables a graph to be drawn which shows the implementation loss of the system over a range 
of bit error rates. The residual BER at high E b /N values is an indicator of possible network 
problems. The BER range of interest is 10~ 7 to 10~ 3 . 

The measurement is performed at the system outlet of a cabled distribution network, while the 
modulated signal with the appropriate format is applied at the input of the headend or at the 
input of the distribution network, depending which part of the system is to be measured. 

The headend can include modulation converters (from PSK to QAM format). 

This measuring method shall be performed under out of service conditions. 

4.10.6.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is listed below: 

a) l/Q baseband signal source for PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format (figure 29); 

b) RF modulator for PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format (figure 29); 

- 37 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

c) noise source; 

d) adjustable attenuator; 

e) power combiner; 

f) power splitter; 

g) spectrum analyzer able to tune the nominal frequency range of the system; 

h) reference receiver (figure 30) with good equalizer (influence of linear distorsion of the 
cable network to the BER measurement should be negligible); 

i) counter of BER connected at the appropriate interface (V or U) of the reference receiver, 
depending where BER shall be evaluated. If it is connected after the Reed-Solomon 
decoder (interface Y or Z), decoding should be deactivated in order to reduce the duration 
of the measurement. 

4.10.6.3 Connection of the equipment 

The measuring set-up for BER versus E^IN measurement is shown in figure 32. 

The measuring equipment shall be connected taking care to maintain correct impedance 
matching. 

4.10.6.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal source (base band) to generate a sequence defined as the null transport 
stream packet in ISO/IEC 13818-1 with all bytes set to 0x00 (see annex G). A sequence of 
four bytes followed by a PRBS (pseudo random binary sequence) can also be used. 

NOTE The null transport stream packet is defined as the four byte sequence 0x47, 0x1 F, OxFF, 0x10, 
followed by 184 zero bytes (0x00). This sequence can be available as an encoding system option. 

b) Apply the signal source I and Q channels at the input of the RF modulator to obtain the 
desired PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format. 

c) Set the carrier frequency of the RF modulator to that of the channel where the 
measurement shall be performed. 

d) Adjust the output carrier level of the RF modulator to obtain the same level at the system 
outlet as in normal operating conditions, so that non-linear distorsions (i.e. CSO, CTB) 
have no impact on BER measurement. 

e) Tune the receiver and the spectrum analyzer on the same channel. Select the centre 
frequency of the spectrum analyzer, the span and level settings to show the whole 
channel. 

f) Set the resolution bandwidth (RSBW) of the spectrum analyzer to 100 kHz and the video 
bandwidth to 100 Hz or lower to obtain a smooth display. 

g) With the noise generator switched-off, measure the BER at the receiver output. 

h) Switch-off the modulation and measure the carrier level (C) in dB(uV) or in dB(mW). 

NOTE In the case of QAM modulated signals, the carrier level (C) is assumed to be that measured according 
to 4.10.3, because the carrier level upon switching-off the modulation does not coincide with the carrier peak 
level. 

i) Measure the noise level N beside carrier (Af > 0,5 MHz) in the same units as the carrier 
level (in dB(u,V) or in dB(mW)). 

NOTE Pay attention to the amplitude response of the noise spectrum within the channel. If it is not white 
Gaussian spectrum (flat amplitude response), take care not to measure at maximum or minimum frequency 
points, but take the frequency points where the energy of noise reaches its average. 

j) Calculate the carrier to noise ratio (CIN) by the following formula: 

(C//V) dB = C - N - 10 Ig (BWIRSBW) - K sa 

where 

(C/A/) dB is the carrier to noise ratio in dB; 

38 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

C is the carrier level in dB(uV) or in dB(mW); 

N is the noise level in dB(|xV) or in dB(mW); 

BW is the equivalent signal bandwidth of the channel in kHz (annex H); 

RSBW is the resolution bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer in kHz; 

K sa is the correction factor of the spectrum analyzer. 

The correction factor (K sa ) depends on the measuring equipment used and shall be 
provided by the manufacturer of the measuring equipment or obtained by calibration. The 
value of the correction factor for a typical spectrum analyzer is about 1,7 dB (see annex I). 

The correction factor is not necessary if the measuring equipment can be set to display 
the noise level in dB(mW/Hz) units. In this case, the C/N ratio can be obtained from the 
following formula: 

(C/Af) d B = C [dB(mW)] - N [dB(mW/Hz)] - 10 Ig (BW). 

k) Calculate the E^IN Q from the following formula: 

(Eb/N )dB = (C/W)dB + 10 WW) - 10 lg(f s ) - 10 Ig m 
where 

f s is the symbol rate; 

m is the number of bits per symbol (m = 1 for BPSK, m = 2 for QPSK and TC8PSK, m = 
4 for 16 QAM, m = 6 for 64 QAM) modulating the carrier (PSK or QAM) or each pilot 
carrier (OFDM). 

I) Switch-on the modulation and the noise generator, add noise changing the attenuator 
setting and measure again the BER at the receiver output and the E D /N at the input of the 
receiver. Repeat this step several times to obtain the plot of BER versus EblN . 

NOTE 1 When measuring a QAM modulated signal, the EyN value referred to the net bit rate can be calculated 
using the RS rate, i.e. using the following conversion factor for RS(204, 188) code: 

10 Ig (204/188) = +0,35 dB 

NOTE 2 When measuring a PSK or an OFDM modulated signal, the E b /N value referred to the net bit rate value 
can be calculated taking into account both the inner code rate and the RS rate. If the inner code rate is V*. the 
conversion factor can be calculated as follows: 

10 Ig (4/3){204/188) = +1,6 dB 

4.10.6.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured BER is plotted versus E^INq (dB). An example of measurement of BER versus 
E^INq is shown in figure 33. The interface point where the measurement of BER has been 
performed shall be indicated with the results. 

4.10.7 Noise margin 

4.10.7.1 Introduction 

This measuring method applies to the measurement of noise margin of digitally modulated 
signals using PSK, QAM, OFDM formats. 

The purpose of this measuring method is to provide an indication of the reliability of the 
transmission channel. The noise margin measurement is a more useful measure of system 
operating margin than a direct BER (bit error rate) measurement due to the steepness of the 
BER curve versus E^IN ratio. 

The measurement is performed at the system outlet of a cabled distribution network, while the 
modulated signal with the appropriate format is applied at the input of the headend or at the 
input of the distribution network, depending which part of the system is to be measured. 

39 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

The headend can include modulation converters (from PSK to QAM format). 
This measuring method shall be performed under out-of-servjce conditions. 

4.10.7.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is listed below: 

a) l/Q baseband signal source for PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format (figure 29); 

b) RF modulator for PSK, QAM or OFDM modulation format (figure 29); 

c) noise source; 

d) adjustable attenuator; 

e) power combiner; 

f) power splitter; 

g) spectrum analyzer able to tune the nominal frequency range of the system; 

h) reference receiver (figure 30) with good equalizer (influence of linear distorsion of the 
cable network to the BER measurement should be negligible); 

i) counter of BER connected at the appropriate interface (U or V) of the reference receiver, 
depending where BER shall be evaluated. If it is connected after the Reed-Solomon 
deeoder (interface Y or Z), decoding should be deactivated in order to reduce the 
duration of the measurement. 

4.10.7.3 Connection of the equipment 

The measuring set-up for noise margin measurement is the same as that for the measurement 
of BER versus EblN and is shown in figure 32. 

The measuring equipment shall be connected taking care to maintain correct impedance 
matching. 

4.10.7.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal source (base band) to generate a sequence defined as the null transport 
stream packet in ISO/IEC 13818-1 with all bytes set to 0x00 (see annex G). A sequence 
of four bytes followed by a PRBS (pseudo random binary sequence) can also be used. 

NOTE The null transport stream packet is defined as the four byte sequence 0x47, 0x1 F, OxFF, 0x10, 
followed by 184 zero bytes (0x00). This sequence can be available as an encoding system option. 

b) Apply the signal source I and Q channels at the modulator to obtain the desired PSK, 
QAM or OFDM modulation format. 

c) Set the carrier frequency of the RF modulator to that of the channel where the 
measurement shall be performed. 

d) Adjust the output carrier level of the RF modulator to obtain the same level at the system 
outlet as in normal operating conditions, so that non-linear distortions (i.e. CSO, CTB) 
have no impact to BER measurement. 

e) Tune the receiver and the spectrum analyzer to the same channel. Select the centre 
frequency of the spectrum analyzer, the span and level settings to show the whole 
channel. 

f) Add noise to the modulated signal at the cable network output until BER is 10-4. 

g) Switch-off the modulation and measure the noise level N1 (dB(mW)) beside the 
carrier (Af >0,5 MHz). 

NOTE Pay attention to the amplitude response of the noise spectrum within the channel. If it is not white 
Gaussian spectrum (flat amplitude response), take care not to measure at maximum or minimum frequency 
points, but take the frequency points where the energy of noise reaches its average. 

40 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

h) Switch-off the noise source and measure the noise level A/2 (dB(mW)) beside the carrier. 
i) Calculate the noise margin NM by the following formula: 
A//W dB = A/1 - A/2 (dB) 

4.10.7.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured noise margin is expressed in dB. An example of measurement of noise margin 
is shown in figure 33 where BER versus E D /A/ is also plotted. The interface point where the 
measurement of BER has been performed shall be indicated with the results. 

4.10.8 Modulation error ratio (MER) 

4.10.8.1 Introduction 

This measuring method is able to provide a single "figure of merit" analysis of the received 
signal. 

This figure is computed to include the total signal degradation likely to be present at the input 
of a commercial receiver's decision circuits and so give an indication of the ability of that 
receiver to correctly decode the signal. 

The measurement is performed at the system outlet of a cabled distribution network, while the 
modulated signal with the appropriate format is applied at the input of the headend or at the 
input of the distribution network, depending which part of the system is to be measured. 

The headend can include modulation converters (from PSK to QAM format). 

This measuring method shall be performed under out-of-service conditions. 

4.10.8.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is listed below: 

a) i/Q baseband signal source for PSK or QAM modulation format (figure 29); 

b) RF modulator for PSK or QAM modulation format (figure 29); 

c) reference receiver (figure 30); 

d) constellation analyzer 

4.10.8.3 Connection of the equipment 

The measuring set-up for the modulation error ratio (MER) measurement is shown in 
figure 34. 

The measuring equipment shall be connected taking care to maintain correct impedance 
matching. 

4.10.8.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal source (base band) to generate a sequence defined as the null transport 
stream packet in ISO/IEC 13818-1 with all bytes set to 0x00 (see annex G). A sequence of 
four bytes followed by a PRBS (pseudo random binary sequence) can also be used. 

NOTE The null transport stream packet is defined as the four byte sequence 0x47, 0x1 F, OxFF, 0x10, 
followed by 184 zero bytes (0x00). This sequence can be available as an encoding system option. 

b) Apply the signal source I and Q channels at the input of the modulator to obtain the 
desired PSK or QAM modulation format. 

41 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

c) Set the carrier frequency of the RF modulator to that of the channel where the 
measurement shall be performed. 

d) Adjust the output carrier level of the RF modulator to obtain the same level at the system 
outlet as in normal operating conditions. 

e) Tune the receiver to the channel where the measurement shall be performed. The 
measurement of the modulation error ratio does not assume the use of an equalizer. 
However the measuring receiver may include a commercial quality equalizer to give more 
accurate results when the signal at the measurement point has linear impairments. 

f) Connect the constellation analyzer to the appropriate interface (S or T of the reference 
receiver shown in figure 30). If the constellation analyzer has its own tuner, the use of the 
reference receiver can be avoided. 

g) The carrier frequency and symbol timing are recovered, which removes frequency error 
and phase rotation. Origin offset (e.g. caused by a residual carrier or DC offset), 
quadrature error and amplitude imbalance are not corrected. 

h) A time record of N received symbol co-ordinate pairs {/j, Qj) is captured by the 
constellation analyzer. N shall be significantly larger than the M symbol points. 

i) For each received symbol a decision is made as to which symbol was transmitted. The 
error vector is defined as the distance from the ideal position of the chosen symbol (the 
centre of the decision box) to the actual position of the received symbol. 

j) The distance can be expressed as a vector (5/j , 8Qj). 

An example of representation of the constellation diagram for a 64 QAM modulation format 
and the distance (S/j , SQj) for each of the N received symbols in the ith point from the ideal 
position (/j, Qj) is shown in figure 35. 

The sum of the squares of the magnitude of the symbol error vectors is divided by the sum 
of the squares of the magnitudes of the ideal symbol vectors. The result, expressed as a 
power ratio in dB, is defined as the modulation error ratio (MER): 

2,(81 f+SQj 2 ) 



MER = 10 lg —. — — (dB) 



I< 

NOTE Before starting the measurement, check the modulator performance, connecting the receiver with the 
constellation analyzer at the output of the signal generator modulated by the digital source. The displayed 
constellation diagram shall be noted and assumed as the reference position for the measurement. 

4.10.8.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured modulation error ratio (MER) is expressed in dB. The interface of the receiver 
where the measurement has been performed shall be stated with the results. 

4.10.9 Phase jitter 

4.10.9.1 Introduction 

This measuring method is able to provide an indication of the phase or frequency fluctuations 
of an oscillator used in a piece of equipment of the cabled distribution system (i.e. in a 
frequency converter). Using such an oscillator with digitally modulated signals may result in a 
sampling uncertainty in the receiver, because the carrier regeneration cannot follow the phase 
fluctuations. 

The measurement is performed at the system outlet of a cabled distribution network, while the 
modulated signal with the appropriate format is applied at the input of the headend or at the 
input of the distribution network, depending which part of the system is to be measured. 

The headend can include modulation converters (from PSK to QAM format). 

42 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

This measuring method shall be performed under out-of-service conditions. 

4.10.9.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is listed below: 

a) l/Q baseband signal source for PSK or QAM modulation format (figure 29); 

b) RF modulator for PSK or QAM modulation format (figure 29); 

c) reference receiver (figure 30); 

d) constellation analyzer. 

4.10.9.3 Connection of Jhe equipment 

The measuring set-up for the phase jitter measurement is shown in figure 34. 

The measuring equipment shall be connected taking care to maintain correct impedance 
matching. 

4.10.9.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the signal source (base band) to generate a sequence defined as the null transport 
stream packet in ISO/IEC 13818-1 with all bytes set to 0x00 (see annex G). A sequence of 
four bytes followed by a PRBS (pseudo random binary sequence) can also be used. 

NOTE The null transport stream packet is defined as the four byte sequence 0x47, 0x1 F, OxFF, 0x10, 
followed by 184 zero bytes (0x00). This sequence can be available as an encoding system option. 

b) Apply the signal source I and Q channels at the input of the modulator to obtain the 
desired PSK or QAM modulation format. 

c) Set the carrier frequency of the RF modulator to that of the channel where the 
measurement shall be performed. 

d) Adjust the output carrier level of the RF modulator to obtain the same level at the system 
outlet as in normal operating conditions. 

e) Tune the receiver to the channel where the measurement shall be performed. The 
measurement of the phase jitter does not assume the use of an equalizer. However the 
measuring receiver may include a commercial quality equalizer to give more accurate 
results when the signal at the measurement point has linear impairments. 

f) Connect the constellation analyzer to the appropriate interface (S or T of the reference 
receiver shown in figure 30). If the constellation analyzer has its own tuner the use of the 
reference receiver can be avoided. 

g) The carrier frequency and symbol timing are recovered, which removes frequency error 
and phase rotation but not phase jitter. Origin offset (e.g. caused by residual carrier or DC 
offset), quadrature error and amplitude imbalance are not corrected. 

h) A time record of N received symbol co-ordinate pairs (/j, Qj) is captured by the 
constellation analyzer. N shall be significantly larger than the M symbol points. 

i) The signal points affected by phase jitter are arranged along a curved line crossing the 
centre of each decision boundary box as shown in figure 36 for the four "corner decision 
boundary boxes". 

The phase jitter can be calculated using the following procedure. For each received 
symbol: 

• calculate the angle between the l-axis of the constellation and the vector to the received 

symbol (/ rcV d. Qrcvd) : 

<h = arctan (Qrcvd^'rcvd) 

43 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

• Calculate the angle between the l-axis of the constellation vector to the corresponding 
ideal symbol (/ideal. Qideal) : 

02 = arctan (Qideal/'ideal) 

• Calculate the error angle: 

<j> E = ( j, 1 _ $ 2 

From these N error angles, calculate the RMS phase jitter (PJ): 



PJ = ^lN)^<j> Ei 2 -0lN 2 W<t> El 

NOTE Before starting the measurement, check the modulator performance, connecting the receiver with the 
constellation analyzer at the output of the signal generator modulated by the digital source. The displayed 
constellation diagram should t)e noted and assumed as the reference position for the measurement. 

4.10.9.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured phase jitter is expressed in degrees. The interface of the receiver where the 
measurement has been performed shall be stated with the results. 

4.10.10 Phase noise of an RF carrier 

4.10.10.1 Introduction 

This measuring method is able to provide an indication of the phase noise of a carrier due to 
the phase or frequency fluctuations of an oscillator used in an equipment of the cabled 
distribution system (i.e. in a frequency converter). 

For PSK or QAM modulation formats, using such an oscillator with digitally modulated signals 
may result in a sampling uncertainty in the receiver, because the carrier regeneration cannot 
follow the phase fluctuations. Phase noise outside the loop bandwidth of the carrier recovery 
circuit leads to a circular smearing of the constellation points in the l/Q plane. This reduces 
the operating margin (noise margin) of the system and may directly increase the BER. 

In an OFDM system, the phase noise can cause common phase error (CPE) which affects all 
carriers simultaneously, and which can be corrected by using continual pilots, and inter- 
carrier interference (ICI) which is noise that cannot be corrected. 

The effects of CPE are similar to any single carrier system and the phase noise, outside the 
loop bandwidth of the carrier recovery circuit, leads to a circular smearing of the constellation 
points in the l/Q plane. This reduces the operating margin (noise margin) of the system and 
may directly increase the BER. 

The effects of ICI are peculiar to OFDM and cannot be corrected for. This has to be taken into 
account as part of the total noise of the system. 

The measurement is performed at the system outlet of a cabled distribution network, while an 
unmodulated carrier is applied at the input of the headend or at the input of the distribution 
network, depending which part of the system is to be measured. 

The headend can include modulation converters {from PSK to QAM format). 

This measuring method shall be performed under out-of-service conditions. 

4.10.10.2 Equipment required 

The equipment required is listed below: 

44 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

a) RF signal generator for the frequency bands of input signals at the headend or the 
distribution network; 

The phase noise characteristic of the signal generator shall be sufficiently lower (at least 
10 dB) than that to be measured, if it is not known, a preliminary check should be 
performed. 

b) spectrum analyzer able to tune the nominal frequency range of the system. 

4.10.10.3 Connection of the equipment 

The measuring set-up for the phase noise measurement is shown in figure 37. 

The measuring equipment shall be connected taking care to maintain correct impedance 

matching. 

4.10.10.4 Measurement procedure 

a) Set the carrier frequency of the RF signal generator to that of the channel where the 
measurement shall be performed. 

b) Adjust the carrier level of the RF signal generator to obtain the same level at the system 
outlet as in normal operating conditions. 

c) Tune the spectrum analyzer on the same channel. Select the centre frequency of the 
spectrum analyzer, the span and level settings to show the carrier and its sidebands due 
to - the phase noise. 

d) Set the resolution bandwidth (RSBW) of the spectrum analyzer to 300 Hz arid the video 
bandwidth to 30 Hz or 10 Hz. 

e) Measure the unmodulated carrier level (C) in dB(mW). 

f) Measure the level [PN(f m )] t in dB(mW), of each component in one noise sideband and 
note its frequency (r" m ) 

g) Convert the measured value of PN to one hertz bandwidth, using the following formula: 

PN (f m ) = PN(f m ) - 10 lg (RSBW) + K sa dB 

where 

RSBWis the resolution bandwidth of the spectrum analyzer. 

The correction factor (K sa ) depends on the measuring equipment used and shall be 
provided by the manufacturer of the measuring equipment or obtained by calibration. The 
value of the correction factor for a typical spectrum analyzer is about 1,7 dB (see annex I). 

The correction factor is not necessary if the measuring equipment can be set to display 
the noise level in dB(mW/Hz) units. In this case, the PN (f m ) value is obtained directly. 

h) Calculate the phase noise performance of the carrier, defined as the ratio of the measured 
power in one sideband component, on a per hertz bandwidth spectral density basis, to the 
total signal power: 

a('m) = PN (f m ) - C (dB(Hz" 1 )). 

NOTE For this measurement, it is assumed that contributions from amplitude modulation to the noise 
spectrum are negligible compared to those from frequency modulation and that the measurement bandwidth 
(RSBW) is much smaller than f m . 

4.10.10.5 Presentation of the results 

The measured phase noise, expressed in dB(Hz" 1 ), is plotted versus the frequency distance 
(f m ) away from the carrier. 

45 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

For the measurement of CPE (OFDM system) the spectrum mask shall be specified at least in 
three points {frequency offsets and levels, as seen in the example of figure 38. 

For the measurement of ICI (OFDM systems), the use of multiples of carrier spacing is 
recommended for the frequencies f a , f^ and f c indicated in table 3. 

Table 3 - Frequency offsets for 2k and 8k systems 



Symbol rate 


f. 


fb 


fc 


2 k system 


4,5 kHz 


8,9 kHz 


13,4 kHz 


8 k system 


1,1 kHz 


2,2 kHz 


3,4 kHz 



5 Performance requirements 

General 

This clause defines system performance limits which will, with an unimpaired input, produce 
picture and sound signals where the impairment to any single parameter will be not worse in 
normal operating conditions for any channel than grade four on the five-grade impairment 
scale contained in ITU-R Recommendation BT.500 as given below: 

5 - imperceptible; 

4 - perceptible but not annoying; 

3 - slightly annoying; 

2 - annoying; 

1 - very annoying. 

The system parameters specified are mainly related to analogue frequency division 
multiplexed (FDM) signals. When different techniques are used, the overall quality 
requirements should be met. A supplement with relevant new parameters will be issued later. 

The performance limits set out in this clause apply when the methods of measurement given 
in clause 4 are employed, and, where appropriate, in the presence of ail the signals for which 
the system was designed. The performance limits shall be met for those specified conditions 
of temperature, humidity, mains supply voltage and frequency which apply to the location in 
which the system is situated. 

NOTE1 If a higher grade than 4 is desired, the figures quoted in clause 5 should be modified accordingly. For 
instance for grade 4.5, the figures quoted in 5.6 and 5.7 should be increased by 3 dB; the echo rating in 5.8.2 
should be reduced to 3 %. 

NOTE 2 If PALplus signals are conveyed in a system at the same level as PAL and SECAM signals, they will have 
a slightly lower grade than the PAL or SECAM signals. 

NOTE 3 Performance requirements that are frequency dependent are specified up to 2 150 MHz. Requirements 
for the frequency range 2 150 MHz to 3 000 MHz are under consideration. 

For digital signals, the system performance limits ensure a service that is quasi-free of 
interruption, corresponding to a bit error rate, before Reed-Solomon error correction, of 10~ 4 
in a DVB signal. 



46 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



5.1 Impedance 



The nominal impedance of the system shall be 75 Q. It should be noted that this value applies 
to all coaxial feeder cable and system outlets and shall be used as the reference impedance 
for ali measurements, 

5.2 Carrier levels at system outlets 

5.2.1 Minimum and maximum carrier levels 

The minimum and maximum carrier levels will depend on many factors including the 
performance of typical receivers in use and local installation practices. The maximum levels 
shall not exceed, and the minimum levels shall be not less than those shown in table 4. 

Table 4 - Carrier signal levels at any system outlet 



Type of service 


Systems 


Modulation 


Frequency range 


Minimum level 

dB(uV) 


Maximum level 

dB(uV) 


Television 


PAL-SECAM 


AM-VSB 


VHF/UHF 


60* 


80" 


NTSC 


AM-VSB 


30 to 300 MHz 


57 


83 


NTSC 


AM-VSB 


300 to 1 000 MHz 


60 


83 


PAL-SECAM 


FM 


1st IF 


47 


77 


NTSC 


FM 


240 to 770 MHz 


60 


83 


NTSC 


FM 


1 035 to 1 335 MHz 


57 


81 


DVB-S 


QPSK 


1st IF 


47 


77 


DVB-C 


64 QAM 


VHF/UHF 


47 


67 


DVB-C 


16 QAM 


VHF/UHF 


u.c. 


u.c. 


DVB-C 


256 QAM 


VHF/UHF 


u.c. 


u.c. 


DVB-T 


CODFM 


VHF/UHF 


u.c. 


u.c. 


Radio 


Sound mono- 


FM 


VHF 


40 


70 see note 1 


Sound stereo 


FM 


VHF 


50 


70 see note 1 


DSR 




HF 


56 


see note 3 


DSR 




1st IF 


47 


see note 3 


* 57 dB(uV) for systems with 8 MHz and 12 MHz spacing only. 

** 77 dB(|iV) for systems with >20 channels load. 

NOTE 1 In order not to overload certain receivers, the figures quoted above for the maximum levels might have 
to be reduced for example by means of a separate attenuator at a specific outlet. 

NOTE 2 The level of the television sound carrier relative to that of the vision carrier which is permissible varies 
according to the television system and performance of typical receivers. 

NOTE 3 Signal levels and methods of measurement for these transmission standards are under consideration. 

NOTE 4 Other types of modulation are under consideration. 



47 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

5.2.2 Carrier level differences 

The differences in carrier levels shall not exceed the values given in table 5. 

Table 5 - Maximum level differences at any system outlet 
between distributed television channels 



Systems 


Modulation 


Frequency range 


Maximum level 
difference 

dB 


PAL-SECAM 


AM-VSB 


47 MHz to 862 MHz 


12 


NTSC 


AM-VSB 


30 MHz to 1 000 MHz 


15 


NTSC 


AM-VSB 


30 MHz to 300 MHz 


12 


PAL-SECAM 


AM-VSB 


Any 60 MHz range 
in VHF 


6 


NTSC 


AM-VSB 


Any 60 MHz range 
in VHF 


8* 


PAL-SECAM, NTSC 


AM-VSB 


Adjacent channel 


3 


PAL-SECAM 


FM 


950 MHz 
to 2 150 MHz 


15 


NTSC 


FM 


950 MHz 
to 2 150 MHz 


u.c. 


PAL-SECAM 


FM 


up to 470 MHz 


15 


NTSC 


FM 


up to 470 MHz 


u.c. 


DVB-S 


QPSK 


950 MHz 
to 2 150 MHz 


u.c. 


DVB-C 


64 QAM 


Adjacent channel 


3 


DVB-C 


64 QAM 


Adjacent channel to 
AM-VSB 


13" 


DVB-T 


COFDM 


Adjacent channel 


u.c. 


DVB-T 


COFDM 


Adjacent channel to 
AM-VSB 


u.c. 


* The 64 QAM signal must be below the level of the adjacent AM signal. 
** NOTE - Values for other QAM signals are under consideration. 



If FM sound signals are present at the system outlet intended for AM-VSB television signals, 
the level of any FM carrier shall be at least 3 dB lower than the lowest television signal level 
at the outlet. 

NOTE 1 The difference applies to signals having the same type of modulation. 

NOTE 2 The value includes the possible coexistence of signals of 27 MHz bandwidth FM and 7 MHz to 12 MHz 
bandwidth AM-VSB which may be in the close vicinity. They also take into account the characteristics of the 
connected customers' receivers (selectivity, image rejection, oscillator radiation). In some cases, it may be 
necessary, in order to obtain that figure, to incorporate channel by channel processing. The levels of FM satellite 
channels relative to AM-VSB terrestrial channels should be to -10 dB. 

NOTE 3 When equal level FM radio signals are transmitted from the headend, then the maximum difference 
between these signals at the system outlet should be 6 dB. 



48 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

5.3 Mutual isolation between system outlets 

5.3.1 Isolation between two subscribers 

The minimum isolation at any frequency between any two subscribers' system outlets 
connected separately to a spur feeder system shall be as in table 6 below. 

Table 6 - Mutual isolation 



Type of service 


Frequency range 


Mutual isolation 

dB 


TV /TV 


47 MHz to 862 MHz 


42* 


TV /TV 


950 MHz to 2 150 MHz 


30 


FM sound / FM sound 


VHF 


42 


TV / FM sound 




u.c. 


* 36 dB for frequency ranges having 8 MHz or 12 MHz channel spacing 

NOTE 1 For systems carrying channels chosen so that TV local oscillators do not fall 
within any distributed channels, the figure for mutual isolation may be reduced. 

NOTE 2 In systems using a return path, the requirement cannot be fulfilled at the lower 
frequency of 47 MHz but at a convenient higher frequency, depending on the return path 
band. 



5.3.2 Isolation between individual outlets in one household 

Under consideration. 

5.4 Frequency response within a television channel at any system outlet 

5.4.1 Amplitude response 

The amplitude response variations within any television channel shall not exceed the values 
given in table 7. 

Table 7 - Amplitude response variation 



Signal modulation 


Occupied or channel 
bandwidth 

MHz 


Maximum variation 
(peak-to-peak) 

dB 


Maximum 
slope of variation 

dB/MHz 


AM-VSB television 


6 
8 


2 
2,5 


1 
1 


FM television 


27-36 


u.c. 


u.c. 


QPSK (DVB-S) 
TC8PSK (Japan) 


37,125 
34,5 


8 


0,25 


64 QAM (DVB-C) 
64 QAM (Japan) 


8 
6 


8 

6 


1,5 
u.c. 


COFDM (DVB-T) 
OFDM (Japan) 


8 
6 


8 
6 


u.c. 
u.c. 



49 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

5.4.2 Group delay 

The group delay variation within any television channel shall not exceed the values given in 
table 8. 

Table 8 - Group delay variation 



Signal modulation 


Frequency range 

MHz 


Maximum group delay 
variation 

ns 


AM-VSB television (PAL) with teletext 


0,5-4,43 


100 


AM-VSB television (PAL) without teletext 


0,5-4,43 


200 


QPSK 


u.c. 


u.c. 


OFDM 


u.c. 


u.c. 


QAM 


u.c. 


u.c. 



5.5 Long-term frequency stability of distributed carrier signals at any system outlet 

The frequency stability is determined by the headend equipment and the figures given for 
headend equipment apply. 

At any system outlet the maximum frequency deviation from the nominal value of the carrier 
frequency of the channel shall not exceed the values given below. 

For FM television the conversion frequency (i.e. the difference between the frequency of an 
input signal and the output frequency of that signal) shall not deviate by more than ±5 MHz 
from its nominal value with the following factors taken into account: 

a) temperature variations in the range -20 °C to +55 °C; 

b) supply voltage variations: as stated by the manufacturer; 

c) LO setting error: as stated by the manufacturer; 

d) ageing. 

The deviation of the conversion frequency from the nominal value due to a) and b) above 
together shall not exceed ±3 MHz. 

For QPSK digitally modulated signals (DVB-S) the conversion frequency (i.e. the difference 
between the frequency of an input signal and the output frequency of that signal) shall not 
deviate by more than ±1,5 MHz from its nominal value. 

For 64 QAM digitally modulated signals (DVB-C) the conversion frequency (i.e. the difference 
between the frequency of an input signal and the output frequency of that signal) shall not 
deviate by more than ±100 kHz from its nominal value. 

For COFDM digitally modulated signals (DVB-T) the conversion frequency (i.e. the difference 
between the frequency of an input signal and the output frequency of that signal) shall not 
deviate by more than ±30 kHz from its nominal value. 



5.6 Random noise 

At any system outlet, the level of the noise voltage generated in the system in any channel 
shall be such that the carrier to noise ratio shall be not less than the values shown in table 9. 
The test method for TV carrier to noise ratio is given in 4.5. For FM sound radio signals the 
same method can be used, but in this case, the noise bandwidth is taken to be 200 kHz. 

50 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Table 9 - Carrier to noise ratios at system outlet 



Type of 
service 


Systems 


Modulation 


Minimum carrier to 
noise ratio 

dB 


Equivalent noise 
bandwidth BW 

MHz 


Television 


1 

B, G, D1 

L 

D, K 

NTSC 

System M 


AM-VSB 


44 
44 
44 
44 
43 
42 


5,08 
4,75 
5,00 
5,75 
u.c. 
u.c. 


PAL-SECAM 


FM 


15 


27 


NTSC 


FM 


14 


DVB-S- 


QPSK 
Code rate 2/3 


11 


Independent of 
bandwidth 


DVB-C 


64QAM 


31 


Independent of 
bandwidth 


DVB-C 


16QAM 


u.c. 




DVB-C 


256QAM 


u.c. 




DVB-T 


COFDM 

8k 

Code rate 2/3 


24 


Independent of 
bandwidth 


Radio 


Mono 


FM 


38 (Pal-Secam 
countries) 

41 (NTSC countries) 


0,2 


Stereo 


FM 


48 (Pal-Secam 
countries) 

51 (NTSC countries) 


0,2 



5.7 Interference to television channels 

5.7.1 Single frequency interference 

This subclause refers to single frequency interference which may result from intermodulation 
or the presence of other interfering signals (e.g. local oscillators, ingress signals). 

At any system outlet the level of any unwanted signal within the system shall be such that the 
lowest carrier to interference ratio within a wanted television channel shall be not less than: 

• 57 dB for AM signals; 

• 33 dB for FM signals; 

• 35 dB for DVB - 64QAM signals; 

• 1 3 dB for DVB - QPSK signals; 

• u.c. for DVB - 16QAM and 256QAM. 

Where a frequency assignment, taking account of known future off-air and distributed 
channels, is adopted so that interference signals fall only in the less sensitive areas of the 
television channel spectrum, a limit lower than that given above is acceptable (see curves 
given in figures 12, 13, 15, 16). The test methods are given in 4.4.1. 

Single freguency interference NTSC digital subcarrier: 

• not lower than 31 dB. 

51 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

NOTE Special precautions may be needed when the dual sound channel is carried in a lower adjacent channel if 
interference between the additional subcarrier and the lower vestigial sideband of the adjacent channel is to be 
avoided. 

5.7.2 Single channel intermodulation interference 

In this special case of single frequency interference, the ratio of the reference level relative to 
the interference signal shall be not less than 54 dB. 

NOTE This subclause does not apply to television channels carrying DVB signals. 

5.7.3 Multiple frequency intermodulation interference 

At any system outlet, the level of the multiple frequency intermodulation interference, in any 
wanted television channel, shall be such that the carrier to interference ratio shall be not less 
than: 

• 57 dB for each cluster of composite beats in negative modulation; 

• 52 dB for each cluster of composite beats in positive modulation; 

• 52 dB for negative modulation and 47 dB for positive modulation for the summed clusters, 
calculated according to the method of measurement given in 4.4.2; 

• 37 dB for the sum of all clusters falling within a DVB - 64QAM channel; 

• 13 dBfor DVB-QPSK; 

• u.c. for FM television. 

NOTE 1 When coherent carriers are used lower limits are acceptable. 

NOTE 2 Because intermodulation products between multiple, closely spaced, digital TV channels are similar to 
random noise, this intermodulation shall be taken into account in the carrier to noise measurements. 

5.7.4 Crossmodulation 

The wanted signal to intermodulation ratio at any system outlet shall be not less than 
46 + 10 lg(/V-1), where N is the total number of television channels for which the system is 
designed. 

5.8 Video baseband requirements 

5.8.1 Differential gain and phase in any television channel 

The differential gain and phase in any television channel shall not exceed the figures given in 
table 10. 

Table 10 - Differential gain and phase in television channels 



Systems 


Maximum peak-to-peak differential gain 

% 


Maximum peak-to-peak differential phase 


PAL 

SECAM 

NTSC 


10 
40 
10 


12 
32 

5 


NOTE This clause does not apply to channels carrying DVB signals. 



5.8.2 Echoes 

The echo rating in any television channel, at any system outlet, when measured by the 
method defined in 4.6 shall not exceed 7 %. 



52 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

5.8.3 Amplitude and phase response for PALplus signals 

Under consideration. 

NOTE The recommended test method is to use a sin x/x ITS signal. 

5.9 Hum modulation of carriers in television channels 

At any system outlet the unwanted modulation of any vision carrier at the frequency of the 
supply mains and harmonics thereof shall be such that the reference modulation to hum 
modulation ratio is not less than 46 dB. 

The unwanted modulation of any AM sound carrier shall be such that this ratio is not less than 
60 dB. 

For system M, the vision carrier ratio of reference modulation to hum modulation shall not be 
less than 35 dB. 

The hum modulation of NTSC digital subcarrier shall be not less than 50 dB. 

The test method for both cases is given in 4.4.4. 

Hum modulation requirements for FM television and DVB are under consideration. 

5.10 Requirements for data signal transmission 

5.10.1 Data signals carried in the structure of a television signal 

Under consideration. 

5.10.1.1 Data signals carried in the vertical interval of a television signal 

Under consideration. 

5.10.1.1.1 Data echo rating 

E d < 10 %. 

5.10.1.1.2 Data delay inequality 

The data delay inequality in any television channel shall not exceed 50 ns. 

5.10.1.2 Data signals using the whole television field 

Under consideration. 

5.10.1.2.1 Data echo rating 

E d < 10% 

5.10.1.2.2 Data delay inequality 

The data delay inequality in any television channel shall not exceed 50 ns. 

5.10.1.3 Data signals on the audio or additional carriers within a television signal 

Under consideration. 

53 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

5.10.1.4 Data signals using other parts of the television signal 

Under consideration. 

5.10.2 Data signals other than those carried within the structure of a television signal 

Under consideration. 

5.11 Digitally modulated signals - Additional performance requirements 
5.11.1 DVB (PSK, QAM, OFDM) performance 

5.11.1.1 BER 

For a service quasi-free of interruption the bit error rate (BER) for any DVB signal shall be 
lower than 10~ 4 , before Reed-Solomon error correction. 

5.11.1.2 Noise argin 

For any DVB signal received by satellite, the noise margin shall be higher than 4 dB. 

5.11.1.3 MER 

For any DVB signal the modulation error ratio (MER) shall be not lower than the value given in 
table 11. 

Table 11 - Modulation error ratio (MER) of a DVB signal 



■ Signal modulation 


MER 

dB 


QPSK 


15 


64 QAM 


30 


COFDM 


30 



5.11.1.4 Phase jitter 

For any DVB signal the phase jitter shall be lower than the value given in table 12. 

Table 12 - Phase jitter of a DVB signal 



Signal modulation 


Phase jitter 

(degrees) 


QPSK 


±15 


64 QAM 


+5 


COFDM 


±5 



5.11.1.5 Phase noise of a RF carrier 

For any RF carrier of a digitally modulated signal (PSK or QAM) the phase noise shall be 
lower than the value given in table 13 at the frequency distance f m from the carrier. 



54 



IS 13420 < Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Table 13 - Phase noise of a DVB signal (PSK and QAM) 



Signal modulation 


Phase noise 

dBlHz" 1 ) 


Frequency distance 


QPSK 


u.c. 


10 kHz 


64QAM 


-50 
-70 


100 Hz- 10 kHz 
100 kHz 



For a digitally modulated signal in the OFDM format the phase noise can cause common 
phase error (CPE) which affects all the carriers simultaneously and inter-carrier interference 
(ICI). 

For any RF carrier of a DVB signal modulated in the OFDM format, measured with the method 
of measurement given in clause 4.10.10, the value of CPE and that of ICI shall be lower than 
the values L a , Lb, L c given in table 14 at the frequency distances f a , r"t>. fc from the carrier. 

Table 14 - Phase noise of a DVB signal (OFDM) 



Signal 
modulation 


Frequency 
distance 


CPE 

dB 


ICI 

dB 


U 


L b 


U 


U 


L b 


L c 


COFDM 
2 k system 


U.f*. U 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c. 


10 kHz 


50 kHz 


500 kHz 


4,5 kHz 


8,9 kHz 


13,4 kHz 


COFDM 
8 k system 


U,U, h 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c. 


u.c'. 


u.c. 


■2 kHz 


10 kHz 


100 kHz 


1,1 kHz 


2,2 kHz 


3,4 kHz 



5.11.2 NICAM performance 

The performance for NICAM systems is determined largely by the headend equipment and the 
limits given in IEC 60728-5 apply. 

5.11.3 DAB/DSR performance 

Under consideration. 

5.12 FM sound radio - Additional performance requirements 

5.12.1 Amplitude response within a FM channel 

The amplitude response as a function of frequency for the entire system shall be such that the 
maximum amplitude variation over any FM channel (bandwidth appropriate for the 
transmission system in use) is not more than 3 dB with the slope not exceeding 0,3 dB per 10 
kHz within 75 kHz of the carrier. 

5.12.2 Phase response within a FM channel 

Under consideration. 

5.12.3 Interference within a FM channel 

Under consideration. 

5.12.4 AM hum modulation on FM sound carriers 

Hum modulation sidebands shall be at least 46 dB below the carrier level. 

55 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

5.12.5 Echoes within an FM channel 

Under consideration. 



Receiving antenna system 
terrestrial and/or satellite 



frequency converter - 



TJ 






xiiiY : 



0^J2\ 



_L 



* 



Combiner 



Antenna amplifier 
Amplifier 



Trunk feeder 
Splitter (3 outputs) 



Headend 
Trunk amplifier 

Branch amplifier 



Distribution 
amplifier X- 




o 



o 



-O O CD O 



-o 






o — g — o 



o- 



Distribution 
S amplifier 



-o 



Terminating resistors 

Figure 1 - Example of a master antenna television system for terrestrial (MATV) 
and/or satellite (SMATV) reception 



56 



Multi dwelling unit (MDU) 



Local terrestrial antenna 



Remote terrestrial antenna 



in 



E/O 



Super 

n"" n> o 



O/E 



Remote 
headend 



Satellite antenna 






Optical 
receiver 



Studio 



Network control 



Customer terminal 
control 



Headend system 



System outlet 



Coaxial trunk feeder 
TA TA TA 



BF 



BA 





n house distribution 
amplifier 



TV outlet 



SF EA \ 2R 



SF 

{J4t?a~£H !«Sub S cn n ber°sy S st 
TDA TBA TBA 



E/O 



n 



PS 
Super trunk feeder 



o. 



TBA 



I 
SF 

TBA TDA TBA 



In house repeating ampl fier 
em . I 



h 



Customer 
terminal 



TV 



(Optical trunk feeder) 



O/E 



TF 



Optical 
transmitter 



Optical 
node 



BA 

4i 



BF 



Dwelling unit 



TA: trunk amplifier 

f DA: trunk distribution amplifier 

TBA: trunk bridger amplifier 

BA: bridger amplifier 

EA: spur amplifier(line extender) 

TF: trunk feeder 

BF: branch feeder 

SF: spur feeder 

TAP: subscriber tap 



Transmission - Distribution system 



TaD 



System 
outlet 




Single dwelling unit 



- , ^ Subscriber system ^ 



Figure 2 - Example of a cabled distribution system for television and sound signals 



m eo 
O 

0> CO 
O 4s» 

N> O 
CO A 

8- 



ro 

o 
o 
ro 



Remote-terristrial antenna 



00 



Remote 
headend 



Super trunk feeder 




Trunk feeder 
$ 



Distribution 
point 



Branch feeder 



Subscriber tap 



Spur feeder 



Subscriber feeder 
(Drop feeder) 



System outlet 



m 


CO 


o 






-a 


0) 


W 


o 


*> 


«j 


w 


N> 


o 


00 


— 


_i 


■a 


^^ 


a> 


M 


3 


O 
O 


-» 


_>i 


"■^ 


^— 


• • 




N) 




O 




o 




N> 



Figure 3 - System model of a cabled distribution system for television and sound signals 



Sweep generator 



ii -i 



RF output Low-loss cable 

— ». o 



Marker 



/ 



dB 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



U^l 




Figure 4a 




"Remote" system outlet 



dB 



All other connections 
as in figure 4a 



Figure 4b 

Figure 4 - Arrangement of test equipment for measurement of mutual isolation 

between system outlets 





A 1 . 


^f"i— '2 




f 


/ 


/ 
dB 









dB -O O^ dB 



Filter if required 



/(see 4.2.3) 



Directional 
coupler 




Input system (including receiver 
or modulator (see 4.2)) 



Figure 5b (otherwise as figure 5a) 

Figure 5 - Arrangement of test equipment for measurement of frequency response 

within a channel 



59 



IS 13420{ Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Reference 



Y, 



Trough touches reference 
at A 2 setting = a 2 




Curve crosses "reference" at vision 
frequency at A 2 stteing = a 

Peak touches "reference" at A 2 setting = a 1 




Frequency marks at channel edges 



Blanking level coincides on all displays ' 



Figure 6 - Interpretation of displays for measurement of frequency response within a channel 



v 

1,00 



0,65 



0,30 



Sin 2 X 




Half-amplitude 
duration = 20 us 



% 
100 



50 



Figure 7 - Test signal (signal F for 625 line systems) employed for chrominance/luminance gain 

and delay inequality 



60 



V 
1,0 
0,93 f- 



0,65 - 



0,31 - 
0,30 



Signal B2 
10 us 



u 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



% 

100 
90 



50 



H 10 





Rise time: approximately 200 ns 



NOTE In France, the nominal rise time B2 is approximately 110 ns. 

Figure 8 - Test signal (signal B2 for 625 line systems) employed for chrominance/luminance gain 

and delay inequality 



Oscilloscope 




Figure 9 - Arrangement of test equipment for measurement of chrominance/luminance gain 

and delay inequality 



61 



IS 13420 < Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

100 % 



Bar top 




Figure 10a - Before nulling delay Figure 10b - After nulling delay 

Figure 10 - Displayed pulses: chrominance low and lagging 



100 % 




Bar top 




m 



-5 



-10 



o -15 

o 

£ -20 

n 

<D 

2-25 



-30 



Figure 11a - Before nulling delay Figure 11b - After nulling delay 

Figure 11 - Displayed pulses: chrominance high and leading 



























\ 














\ 
















\ 














1 -.,, 

















-2-10 1 2 3 4 5 

Frequency of interfering signal (MHz) with reference to the vision carrier 



Figure 12 - Weighting curve for 625 lines system B, G and D1 (PAL); 
CW interference with no special (frequency offset) control 



62 



O 






IS 13420 (Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 




-2-10 1 2 3 4 5 

Frequency of interfering signal (MHz) with reference to the vision carrier 



Figure 13 - Weighting curve for 625 lines system I (PAL); 
CW interference with no special (frequency offset) control 



Band-pass 


filter 








^ 






System 
headend 


A,., 






' 






/• 










Spectrum 
analyzer 


A B / 


dB 




' 


t" "t 




V y° 


I I 






































System or device 
under test 







Figure 14 - Connection of test equipment for the measurement of non-linear distortion 

by composite beat 



63 



FS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 




-2-10 1 2 3 4 5 

Frequency of interfering signal (MHz) with reference to the vision carrier 



Figure 15: Weighting curve for 625 lines systems D and K (PAL); 
CW interference with no special (frequency offset) control 




-2-10 1 2 3 4 5 

Frequency of interfering signal (MHz) with reference to the vision carrier 

Figure 16 - Weighting curve for 625 lines system L (SECAM); 
CW interference with no special (frequency offset) control. 



100% 




x% 



Figure 17 - Hum modulation envelope 

(x = percentage peak-to-peak hum modulation) 



64 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 




(see figure 20) 



Figure 18 - Connection of equipment for measurement of hum modulation (DC method) 



Input from 
detector 



I 







Output to 
oscilloscope 



NOTE These values take account of the input impedance of a typical oscilloscope (1 MCI). 

Figure 19 - Calibrated potential divider 




NOTE 1 Arrange polarity to suit detector and oscilloscope in use. 

NOTE 2 Values chosen to suit the voltage of the battery and the Zener diode employed. 

NOTE 3 Multi-turn potentiometer preferred for precise setting. 

Figure 20 - Stable variable OC source 



65 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



DC shift V, 




V 2 Peak-to-peak hum 




Percentage peak-to-peak hum = V 2 / V, x 0,07 % for position "b" or 

V 2 / Vi x 0,3 % for position "c" 

Figure 21 - Oscilloscope display 



Switch in 
position "a" 



Switch in 
position "b" or "c" 




Figure 22 - Connection of equipment for hum modulation measurement (AC method) 



66 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 




i i 1 1 i i i i i i i i i i 1 1 i i i i i i i i i i i i 

10 14 18 22 26 30 32 us 



NOTE In full field-test signals, each tread of the staircase may have a duration of 8, 

Figure 23a - Signal D2 for 625-line system 
Signal D2 



6S jis. 



IRE scale 


units 


90 


r 


72 




54 




36 




18 











40 x 



128 



NOTE 1 Scale refers to tread levels. 

NOTE 2 Sub-carrier amplitude is ±20 IRE units. 

Figure 23b - Signal D2 for 525-line system 
Figure 23 - Signal D2 



Test waveform 
generator 



'X- 



dB 



dB 




Oscilloscope 



Figure 24 - Arrangement of test equipment for measurement of echo rating 



67 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



rr-rr- 


rrm 






1 


n I 

Li 






I 


' 


i 

A ■ 


A 


I 




1 





Figure 25 - Example of the modified staircase waveform 



Test waveform 
generator 






V 








A ■ — 


/ 


dB 


A 




\ 




1 








1 



dB 



System 
under test 



Filter 




Oscilloscope 



Differential phase 
test set 



Figure 26 - Arrangement of test equipment for measurement of differential gain and phase 







Meter 
preamplifier 


Attenuator and filter 

r ~ - i 

— i dB '— i ^ ! - 

r 




Signal 
generator 










System 
under test 




,r 






,.^ 


/ 
dB 
















V 


ariahlo 


s 


elective 






attenuate 


voltmeter 


I . 




1 
1 
1 
1 


Measuring equipment 




Shielded terminating 
resistor 


T 




Pilot signal 
generator 





NOTE Dotted lines signify additional items which may be required. 

Figure 27 - Arrangement of test equipment for carrier to noise ratio measurement 



68 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



100 % 




+ 7 


Maximum amplitude for a given E rating (%) 


3 


6 


9 





+ 100,-12 


+ 100,-24 


+ 100,-36 


2 


+12 


+24 


+36 


4 


±6 


±12 


±18 


8 


±3 


±6 


±9 


12 


±1,5 


±3 


±4,5 



Figure 28 - Echo rating graticule 



69 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Null 

transport 
stream 
packet 

generator 



MPEG-2 

TSMUX 

adaptation 

and 

energy 

dispersal 



Outer 

reed 

Solomon 

coder 



Outer 
interleaver 



Inner 


I 




— w 








conv. 














coder 




Baseband 




PSK 




Frequency 


and 




shaping 




modulator 




converter 


PSK 


Q 












mapping 


— m- 













RF output 



Figure 29a 



Null 

transport 
stream 
packet 

generator 


-* 


MPEG-2 

TSMUX 

adaptation 

and 

energy 

dispersal 



Outer 
reed 

Solomon 
coder 



Outer 
interleaver 





I 












QAM 
mapping 


Q 


Baseband 
shaping 




QAM 
mapping 


— *- 


Frequency 
converter 



RF output 

(VHF/UH) 



Figure 29b 



Null 

transport 
stream 
packet 

generator 


— 


MPEG-2 

TS MUX 

adaptation 

and 

energy 

dispersal 




Outer 
interleaver 


— 


Inner 
coder 




Inner 
interleaver 



OFDM 

mapping 



Frame 
adaptation 



Pilot 

and 

TPS 

signal 




l/Q 
modulation 




Frequency 
converter 



RF output 
(VHF/UH) 



Figure 29c 

NOTE The null transport stream packet generator can be replaced by a PRBS (pseudo random bit sequence) 
generator. 



Figure 29 - l/Q signal source and RF modulator: 

a) PSK modulation (QPSK, BPSK or TC8PSK) 

b) QAM modulation 

c) OFDM modulation 



70 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 } : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



2nd 



RF 



1st IF 

tuner 

0,95 GHz- 

2,15 GHz 




PSK 
demodulator 


I 
Q 


LPF 
1/2 Nyq. 




Equalizer 

channel 

correct. 




PSK 

viterbi 

decoder 




Outer 




de-inter- 


LPF 
1/2 Nyq. 


leaver 



Outer 

reed 

solomon 

decoder 



De- 
scrambler 



MPEG2 

transport 

stream 



W 



Figure 30a 



RF 



2nd 
F 



VHF/UHF 
tuner 



QAM 
demodulator 


I 
Q 

— ■*• 


LPF 
1/2 Nyq. 


— fr> 


Equalizer 

channel 

correct. 


— »- 


QAM 
decoder 




LPF 
1/2 Nyq. 




Outer 

reed 

solomon 

decoder 



scrambler 

De- 
scarmbler 



MPEG2 

transport 

stream 



Figure 30b 



RF 




l/Q 

conver., 

FFT 


Q k 


Equalizer 
channel 
correct. 



Demux. 
de-mapping 



Inner 
de-inter- 
leaver 



Inner 
decoder 



W 



scrambler 



Outer 
de-inter- 
leaver 



Outer 

reed 

solomon 

decoder 



De- 
scarmbler 



MPEG2 
-»• transport 
stream 



W X Y Z 

Figure 30c 

NOTE The frequency range of the bands for the 1st I.F. and VHF/UHF tuners depends on the frequency allocation 
plan of each country. Examples are given below: 
1st IF. : 0,95 GHz to 2,15 GHz 

VHF/UHF: 40 MHz to 862 MHz (Europe) 

90 MHz to 770 MHz (Japan) 



Figure 30 - Reference receiver: 

a) PSK demodulation (QPSK, BPSK or TC8PSK) 

b) QAM demodulation 

c) OFDM demodulation 



71 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Signal 
source 




BER 
measuring 

set 


1 


, Q 












ii 


RF 
modulator 


— 


Network 




Power 
splitter 


— ^- 


Receiver 










1 








Spectrum 
analyzer 





Figure 31 - Test set-up for BER measurement 



Signal 
source 



Q 



RF 
modulator 



Network 


— »- 


Power 
combiner 


— »- 


Power 
splitter 






1 


i 




I 




Attenuator 




Spectrum 
analyzer 




■ 


i 








Noise 
source 






Figure 32 - Test set-up for BER measurement versus EblN and noise margin measurement 

1.00E+00 
1.00E-01 
1.00E-02 
1.00E-03 
1.00E-04 
a: 1.00E-05 

LU 

1.00E-06 
1.00E-07 
1.00E-08 
1.00E-09 
1.00E-10 
1.00E-11 
1.00E-12 



Actual 




NOTE The theoretical curves are for QPSK and 64 QAM modulation format. 

Figure 33 - Example of BER measurement versus E D /N 



72 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Signal 
source 




Constellation 
analyzer 


'I l Q 








i 




RF 
modulator 




Network 


— m 


■ Receiver 



Figure 34 - Test set-up for modulation error ratio (MER) measurement 
and phase jitter measurement 




Figure 35 - Example of constellation diagram for a 64 QAM modulation format where the i tn 
point has been enlarged to show the co-ordinates of the symbol error vector 



Q k 



I 



Arc section through a 

"corner decision boundary box" 

for calculation of the phase jitter 



Figure 36 - Example of constellation diagram for a 64 QAM modulation format where are shown 
the "corner decision boundary boxes" for the phase jitter measurement 



Signal 
generator 




Network 


— 


Spectrum 
analyzer 



Figure 37 - Test set-up for phase noise measurement 

73 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Carrier 




Frequency offsets 



fa Hz 
— fb kHz 
fc MHz 



OdB 



-La (dB) 

-Lb (dB) 
-Lc (dB) 



i 1 — i — i- 



Figure 38 - Example of mask for CPE measurements (points A, B and C to be defined) 



Groupdelay 



+400 



+150 
+100 



-100- 
-150 - 



-400 



1 2 3 

Frequency MHz 
Figure 39 - Mask group delay characteristic for PAL signals with FM-FM sound (Netherlands) 




74 






IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



fin 












































^ 














^--~ 


.^ 








1 
Pal 
















w 








''*s 










v v 




/ 








B, G, H 










4^ 






Ss 


'a 












X / 












I 










H,l, 


\.// 


i 

J- 






































40 




Secam \ 




/, 


-1 


B, G 






































^ 




in 


j* / 


/ 
f 






"b 












































































25 








?n 








































15 














a: without any f 


reque 

St 


ncy control 














in 














b: w 


ith lin 


eoffs 


















5 






































n 
















































' 

































-2 -1,5 -1 -0,5 0,5 1 1,5 2 2,5 3 3,5 4 4,5 5 5,5 6 6,5 7 

AF MHz 

Figure 40 - Templates for the B, G, H, I, L standards RF protection ratio (France) 



60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 



-10 
-7 











































/ 










\ 


















/! 










\ 
















/ 












\ 
















I 


I 
i 










\ 
















I 


i 










I 


\ 














I 

-1,25 


i 

-0,5 










I 
-4,75 



































-6-5-4-3-2-10 12 3 4 5 6 7 

(single frequency interference frequency)-(vision carrier frequency) MHz 

Figure 41 - Single frequency interference (VSB-AM NTSC) (Japan) 



75 



IS 13420 < Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



cu " 

> 

_ > 

co a> 

c 7" 



to ■ 



CD 



&8 
iz> 2 



£\) - 












10- 


-10 
-20 






/ 




\ 






/ 




\ 




, 


/ 




\ 




/ 






\ 




/ 




-Jl) 




\ 




/ 




-40 1 




\ 




/ 






/ 




-50 
—fin 




^ 


/ 






-70 













-10 



-5 



10 



15 



Frequency differences single frequency interference 
to AM-HDTV carrier frequency MHz 



Figure 42 - Single frequency interference (VSB-AM HDTV) (Japan) 



9>ca 



CO <B -10- 

c > 



m 



CO 



"5>3 



-20- 



-30 



r 



1 h 

-3,3 -3 3 3.3 

Frequency differences single frequency interference 
to 64QAM carrier frequency MHz 



Figure 43 - Single frequency interference (64QAM digital) (Japan) 



76 



40 

35 
30 



10 25 



20 

15 

10 

5 





10 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

































/ 










































/ 


/ 


/ 














Reflections admissible 




















































TV ^ 














































FM 










/ 


) 


y 
















































































Reflections inadmissible 
































































100 



1000 



10 000 



Timedelay ns 



Figure 44 - Requirement for echo loss in relation to the time delay of the reflected signal 

(Netherlands) 



m 

■o 


-10 n 
























> 
QJ 


-15 ■ 
























S 


-20 
























t 


























s 




























O 




























> 
<0 


-25 - 


























o 


-30- 


























<u 




























O 

l- 


-35 




























z 




























5 
< 


-40 





























0,2 0,25 0,5 1 1,5 2 4 

Echo delay time to AM-NTCS signal |is 



Figure 45 - Echoes (VSB-AM NTSC) (Japan) 



77 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 






£ -20 



-25 



-30 



-35 



-40 



0,01 




0,05 0,1 

Echo delay time to FM-NTSC signal (is 



0,5 



Figure 46 - Echoes (FM NTSC) (Japan) 



> 

t- 
Q 
I 



- iu - 






































lo - 














































































































—oU - 






































-40- 







































0,01 



0,05 0,1 

Echo delay time to FM-HDTV signal jis 

Figure 47 - Echoes (FM HDTV) (Japan) 



0,5 



78 



m 



Q 

X 



-24 



-26 



-28 



-30 



-32 



-34 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



x 














^\ 




\ 



0,01 0,1 

Echo delay time to AM-HDTV signal us 

Figure 48 - Echoes (VSB-AM HDTV) (Japan) 

























CO 






















05 -10- 
> 

TO 






















CO 

5 






















o 


p 




















> 
o 


I 




















UJ 

-35- 























0,25 1,0 1,5 

Echo delay time to 64QAM signal (is 

Figure 49 - Echoes (64QAM digital) (Japan) 



3,0 



Table 15 - Test carrier frequencies for CTB measurement (France) 



n 


f/MHz 


n 


f7MHz 


n 


f/MHz 


n 


f/MHz 


1 


136 


9 


327,25 


17 


519,25 


25 


711,25 


2 


160 


10 


339,25 


18 ** 


543,25 


26 


735,25 


3 


184 


11 


351,25 


19 


567,25 


27 


759,25 


4 


208- 


12 


363,25 


20 


591,25 


28 


783,25 


5 


232 


13 


375,25 


21 


615,25 


29 


807,25 


6 


256 


14 


399,25 


22 


639,25 


30 


831,25 


7 


280 


15 


471,25 


23 


663,25 






8 


303,25 


16 


495,25 


24 


687,25 







79 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Calibration of modulation depth 



A.1 Equipment required 

A.1.1 A signal generator, G2, capable of being tuned to within about 10 MHz of the test 
frequency. 

A. 1.2 A balanced wide band mixer suitable for the test frequencies. 

A.1.3 An oscilloscope suitable for a frequency of around 10 MHz. 

A. 1.4 A low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of about 15 MHz if required. 

A.2 Connection of the equipment 

The equipment is connected as in figure A.1. 

A.3 Calibration procedure 

A.3.1 Set the signal generator G1 to the test frequency ^ and the modulation of the carrier to 
an indicated depth of 10 %. 

A.3. 2 Set the signal generator G2 to ^ ± 1 MHz. 

A. 3. 3 Adjust the attenuator to ensure correct operation of the mixer and a convenient display 
on the oscilloscope. 

A. 3. 4 The actual modulation depth is then determined from the oscilloscope display; if 
necessary the modulation depth is then readjusted to the required 10 % and the calibration 
correction noted. 

See 4.4.4.7 




Figure A.1 - Calibration of modulation depth 



80 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

Annex B 

(normative) 

Equipment required - additional items 

B.1 Measuring receiver preamplifier 

If the sensitivity of the measuring receiver is not adequate for the levels of noise expected at 
the point of measurement, a suitable preamplifier of the correct input impedance and flat 
response over the channel to be measured will be necessary. This preamplifier should be 
included as part of the measuring equipment when making the checks described in annex C. 

B.2 Measuring receiver input filter 

If the selectivity of the measuring receiver is not adequate to reduce to an insignificant level 
the effects of "out-of-channel" signals on the measurement of the noise voltage, a suitable 
filter having a flat response over the channel to be measured will be required as shown in 
figure 24. 

In this case, it is important that the matching between the filter and the preceding equipment 
shall be such that it results in a return loss ratio of not less than 20 dB within the frequency 
range of the channel to be measured, and that the whole measuring equipment shall satisfy 
all the requirements of annex C. 

Where this is in doubt, an attenuator of sufficient value to satisfy this requirement should be 
included as shown in figure 24. 



81 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Annex C 

(normative) 



Preliminary checks on the measuring equipment 
for carrier to noise ratio 



C.1 Noise 



With the input to the measuring equipment terminated and the variable attenuator set to zero, 
tune the measuring receiver over the frequency range of interest and check that the reading 
remains negligible relative to that expected when measuring the system noise. 

C.2 Intermodulation 

Connect signals, corresponding to those which will be present at the point of measurement, 
via a matched directional coupler, to the measuring equipment. Tune the meter to any 
significant intermodulation products and note the lowest value of the signal/intermodulation 
ratio within the channel being considered. 

This ratio should exceed the minimum carrier to noise ratio expected at the point of 
measurement by an amount relevant to the accuracy desired. For example, 20 dB would 
result in an error of less than 1 dB. 

If this requirement is not met, an appropriate channel pass-band filter to attenuate one of the 
signals should be included as indicated in figure 24, and the checks indicated in clauses C.1 
and C.2 should be repeated. 

NOTE This check relating to intermodulation is necessary only if automatic level control (ALC) pilot signals or 
other signals are present during the carrier to noise ratio tests. 

C.3 Overload 

Connect signals as in clause C.2 and attenuate one of them to a level comparable with that of 
the noise voltage expected at the point of measurement. Tune the meter to the low level 
signal. Tune the low level signal and the meter in step over the frequency range of the 
channel to be measured and check that the meter reading does not change when the high 
level signals are switched off and on. 

If this requirement is not met, a filter to attenuate one or more of the signals should be 
included as indicated in figure 24 and all the above checks should be repeated as 
mentioned in clause C.2. 



82 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

Annex D 

(normative) 

Correction factors 

D.1 Level correction factor C m 

If a measuring receiver responding to the average value of the applied voltage but calibrated 
in RMS values (assuming a sinusoidal input signal) is employed, it will indicate a level 
approximately 1 dB below the RMS value of the applied noise voltage in its noise bandwidth. 
In this instance C m may be taken as 1 dB. 

If a measuring receiver of the peak reading type is used, a correction appropriate to the 
particular instrument shall be employed as C m . 

D.2 Bandwidth correction factor C b 

This correction factor takes into account the difference between the noise bandwidth of the 
measuring receiver S m and that of the appropriate television system Sj V . 

C b =10lg4 I ^(dB) 



83 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

Annex E 

(normative) 

Calibration of the measuring receiver 

Norse bandwidth (B m ) 

A well-matched noise generator is required, having a known bandwidth B g (see note 1), and 
an output voltage of known RMS value V g sufficient to give a convenient reading on the 
measuring receiver. 

The measuring receiver is connected to the noise generator (see note 2) and tuned to a test 
frequency. The true RMS voltage V m is measured (see annex D). This procedure is repeated 
at each test frequency. The noise bandwidth of the measuring receiver (S m ) is given by: 

Bm = B g (V m /V g f 

where 

8 m and S g are in the same units, for example megahertz, and 

V m and Vg are in the same units, for example microvolts. 

NOTE 1 B g will usually be taken as 1 MHz and V g is calculated for this bandwidth from information provided by the 
manufacturer of the noise generator. 

NOTE 2 The noise generator may consist of a noise diode source followed by an appropriate amplifier. 



84 



IS 13420 { Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Annex F 

(normative) 

Correction factors for noise 



F.1 Signal level measurement 

When measuring a signal level, the contribution of noise can be taken into account by 
reducing the measured signal level (S m ) by an amount (CF) that depends on the difference 
(D) between the measured signal (S m ) and noise (N m ) levels. 

Firstly calculate the difference D 



D = S n 



N„ 



then f rom table F.1 or figure F.1 derive the correction factor (CF) and apply it to obtain the 
signal level (S) using the following formula: 

S= S m ~CF 



F.2 Noise level measurement 

When measuring a noise level, the contribution of the measuring equipment noise can be 
taken into account by reducing the measured noise level by an amount given by the correction 
factor (CF) indicated in table F.1 and in figure F.1, that depends on the difference (D) 
between the noise level (/V m ) measured when the measuring equipment is connected to the 
system or equipment under test and that (A/ E ut) measured when the input of the measuring 
equipment is terminated on its characteristic impedance. 



Firstly, calculate the difference D: 



D = N m - A/ EUT 



then from table F.1 or figure F.1 derive the correction factor (CF) and apply it to obtain the 
noise level (N) using the following formula: 

N = N m - CF 

NOTE If the level difference (D) is lower than 2 dB, the reliability of the measurement becomes very low due to 
the big value of the correction factor (CF). 

Table F.1 - Noise correction factor 



Level difference D 

dB 


Correction 
factor CF 

dB 


Level difference D 

dB 


Correction 
factor CF 

dB 


1,5 


5,35 


6,0 


1,26 


2,0 


4,33 


7,0 


0,97 


3,0 


3,02 


8,0 


0,75 


4,0 


2,20 


9,0 


0,58 


5,0 


1,65 


10,0 


0,46 



85 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 > : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



00 



o 











































































































































































































































































































































































5 00 H 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































4 00 • 
































































































































































































































































































































































































































































3 00 • 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































2 00 - 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































1 00 - 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































0,00 - 



























































































0123456789 10 

Level difference D dB 

Figure F.1 - Noise correction factor (CF) dB versus measured level difference (D) dB . 



86 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

Annex G 

(normative) 

Null packet and PRBS definitions 

G.1 Null packet definition 

The null packet defintion from ISO/IEC 13818-1 is extended for the purpose of the 
recommended test mode. 

ISO/IEC 13818-1 defines a null transport stream packet for the purpose of date rate stuffing. 

Table G.1 sh'ows the structure of a null transport stream packet using the method of 
describing bit stream syntax defined in 2.3 of ISO/IEC 13818-1. 

This description is derived from table 2-2 Transport packet in ISO/IEC 13818-1. The 
abbreviation "bslbf" means "bit string, left bit first", and "uimsbf" means "unsigned integer, 
most significant bit first". 

The column titled "Value", gives the bit sequence for the recommended null packet. 

A null packet is defined by IEC/IEC 13818-1 as having: 

• payload_unit_start_indicator = '0'; 

• PID = 0x1FFF; 

• transport_scrambling_control = '00'; 

• adaptation_field_control value = '01'. This corresponds to the case "no adaptation 
field, payload only" 



The remaining fields in the null packet that shall be defined for testing purposes are: 

• transport_error_indrcator which is '0' unless the packet is corrupted: for testing 
purposes this bit is defined as '0' when the packet is generated; 

• transport_priority which is not defined by ISO/IEC 13818-1 for null packet. For 
testing purposes this bit is defined as '0'; 

• continuity_counter which ISO/IEC 13818-1 states is undefined for a null packet. For 
testing purposes this bit field is defined as '0000'; 

• data_byte which ISO/IEC 13818-1 states may have any value in a null packet. For 
testing purposes this bit field is defined as '00000000'. 



87 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Table G.1 - Null transport stream packet definition 



Syntax 


No of bits 


Identifier 


Value 


null_transport_packet(){ 








sync_byte 


8 


bslbf 


'01000111' 


transport_error_indlcator 


1 


bslbf 


'0' 


payload_unit_start_indicator 


1 


bslbf 


'0' 


transport_priority 


1 


bslbf 


'0' 


PID 


13 


uimsbf 


•111111111111 


transport_scrambling_control 


2 


bslbf 


1' 

'00' 

•Q1- 

'0000' 

'00000000' 


adaptation_field_control 


2 


bslbf 


continuity_counter 

for (i=0;i<N;i++){data_byte} 

} 


4 
8 


uimsbf 
bslbf 



G.2 PRBS definition 



A PRBS (pseudo random bit sequence) generator can be used instead of a null packet 



■>23 



generator. A PRBS of 10-1 inverted is recommended. 



88 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 > : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Annex H 

(normative) 

Digital signal level and bandwidth 



H,1 RF/IF power ("carrier") 

When describing the quadrature amplitude modulated (QAM) signals employed by DVB-C or 
the quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) signals employed by DVB-S, it is common to refer 
to the modulated RF/IF signal as "carrier" (C), mainly to distinguish it from "signal" (S) which 
is generally used to refer to the baseband demodulated signal. 

Strictly, it is incorrect to describe this signal as "carrier" because QAM and QPSK (which is 
equivalent to 4-state QAM) are suppressed carrier modulation schemes. For OFDM, with 
thousands of suppressed carriers and assorted pilot tones, the label "carrier" is even more 
inappropriate. 

Therefore the term "wanted information power" should be more appropriately used to consider 
the "RF/IF power" in the transmitted channel, but most of the engineers and technical people 
involved in CATV work will continue to use the term "carrier" for this parameter, particularly 
when talking about the "carrier" to noise ratio. 

The "carrier", or the "RF/IF power", is the total power of the modulated RF/IF signal as would 
be measured by a thermal power sensor in the absence of any other signals (including noise). 

If the measuring set is able to measure the power in a small part of the channel spectrum, the 
total power can be obtained taking into account the bandwidth of the channel or what is called 
"equivalent signal bandwidth" of the digital channel. 

H.2 Bandwidth of a digital signal 
H.2.1 Occupied bandwidth 
a) QAM/PSK modulation 

For DVB systems using the QAM/PSK modulation the passband spectrum is shaped by root 
raised cosine filtering with a roll-off factor (a) of: 

• 0,15 for DVB-C systems (QAM); 

• 0,18 {ITU-T J.83, annex B) USA (QAM); 

• 0,13 (ITU-T J.83, annexC) Japan (QAM); 

• 0,35 for DVB-S systems (QPSK). 

For an ideal QAM/PSK system this means that all the RF/IF power will lie in the frequency 
band f c ± (1+a) f s /2 

where 

fc is the carrier frequency; 

f"s is the symbol rate of the modulation; 

a is the filter roll-off factor. 

89 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

This means that the occupied bandwidth is given by the formula: 

BWoCC(QAM/PSK) = O + °0 fe ( H - 1 ) 

The RF/IF power (or "carrier") is the total power in this "rectangular" bandwidth, with no 
further filtering applied. This bandwidth is used for defining the channel width, the transponder 
bandwidth and so on. The formula above can be used to obtain the useable symbol rate in a 
given channel bandwidth: r"s = BWocd(^ + &)- 

b) OFDM modulation 

For DVB systems using OFDM modulation the definition of occupied bandwidth is expressed 
differently because of the radically different modulation technique, although the principle is 
very similar. The OFDM "shoulders" are not considered to be wanted information power, and 
are not included in the RF/IF power calculation, even though the power does actually come 
out of the transmitter: 

BWoCC(OFDM) = n X ^SPACING ( H - 2 ) 

where 

n = 6 817 (8 k mode) and Spacing = 1 116 Hz (8 k mode) (DVB-T) 

n = 1 705 (2 k mode) and /spacing = 4 464 Hz (2 k mode) (DVB-T) 

n = 5 617 (mode 3) and /spacing = 992 Hz (mode 3) (ISDB-t) Japan 

n = 2 809 (mode 2) and /spacing = 1 984 Hz (mode 2) (ISDB-T) Japan 

n = 1 405 (mode 1) and /spacing = 3 968 Hz (mode 1) (ISDB-T) Japan. 

In a multi-signal system (e.g. a CATV network) measurement of the RF/IF power in a single 
channel requires a frequency selective technique. This could employ a thermal power meter 
preceded by a suitably calibrated channel filter, a spectrum analyzer with band power 
measurement capability, or a measuring receiver. Depending on the measurement technique 
a filter may be required to exclude the "shoulders" of a single OFDM signal. 

H.2.2 Noise bandwidth 

The transmission of digitally modulated signals employs Nyquist filtering split equally between 
the transmitter and receiver. 

a) QAM/PSK modulation 

The noise bandwidth of the receiver equals the symbol rate f s . This is considered to be 
appropriate for C/N measurements of digital TV systems since this reflects the amount of 
noise entering the receiver. This leads to the following formula: 

SWnOISE(QAM/PSK) = / s (H.3) 

b) OFDM modulation 

Because the OFDM "shoulders" are not considered to be wanted information power, the noise 
bandwidth can be assumed to equal the occupied bandwidth: 

BWnoISE(OFDM) = e WoCC(OFDM). ( H - 4 ) 



90 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



H.2.3 Equivalent signal bandwidth 



The transmission of digitally modulated signals employs Nyquist filtering split equally between 
the transmitter and receiver; therefore the RF/IF channel bandwidth (transmitter bandwidth) 
has a -3 dB bandwidth that is equal to the receiver bandwidth. 



a) QAM/PSK modulation 

The "equivalent signal bandwidth" (BW) (-3 dB bandwidth) is equal to the receiver noise 
bandwidth for QAM/PSK modulation: 



6W(QAM/PSK) = fe 

b) OFDM modulation 



(H.5) 



Because the OFDM "shoulders" are not considered to be wanted information power, the 
"equivalent signal bandwidth" (BW) (-3 dB bandwidth) can be assumed equal to the 
occupied bandwidth for OFDM modulation: 



SW(OFDM) = SWOCC(OFDM). 



(H.6) 



H.3 Examples 

In table H.1, examples for the "occupied bandwidth" or "channel bandwidth", the "noise 
bandwidth" and the "equivalent signal bandwidth" for the QAM, PSK and OFDM modulation 
techniques are indicated. 

Table H.1 - Examples of bandwidths for digital modulation techniques 



Digital modulation 


Roll-off factor 

a 


Occupied or 

channel 
bandwidth 

MHz 


Noise bandwidth 

(BWno.se) 

MHz 


Equivalent signal 
bandwidth 

(BW) 

MHz 


QPSK (DVB-S) 
TC8PSK (Japan) 


0,35 
0,35 


37,125 
34,5 


27,5 
28,860 


27,5 
28,860 


QAM (DVB-C) 
64QAM (Japan) 


0,15 
0,13 


8 

7 
6 


6,95 
6,09 
5,274 


6,95 
6,09 
5,274 


COFDM (DVB-T) 
OFDM (ISDB-T) (Japan) 


- 


8 

7 
6 


7,61 

6.66 

5,573 (mode2) 


7,61 

6,66 

5,573 (mode 2) 



91 



IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 

Annex I 

(normative) 

Correction factor for a spectrum analyzer 

The correction factor (K sa ) for a typical spectrum analyzer is about 1,7 dB and is due to two 
contributions: 

• a +2,5 dB term for the effect of the detector/log amplifier (it accounts for the correction of 
1,05 dB due to the narrowband envelope detection and the 1,45 dB due to the logarithmic 
amplifier); 

• a -0,8 dB term that takes into account that the equivalent noise bandwidth of the IF filter 
of the spectrum analyzer is greater than its nominal resolution bandwidth (RSBW) by a 
factor of 1,2. 



92 



IS 1 3420 ( Part 1 ) : 2002 
IEC 60728-1 (2001) 



Bibliography 



IEC 60728-9, Cabled distribution systems for television and sound signals - Part 9: Interfaces 
of cabled distribution systems for digitally modulated signals 

ISO/IEC 13818-9, Information technology - Generic coding of moving pictures and associated 
audio information - Part 9: Extension for real time interface for systems decoders: 

ETR 154, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB implementation guidelines for the use of 
MPEG-2 Systems, Video and Audio in satellite, cable and terrestrial broadcasting applications 

ETR 290, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Measurement guidelines for DVB systems 



93 



(Continued from second cover) 

ITU-T Recommendation J.63 Insertion of test signals in the field-blanking interval of mono- 
chrome and colour television signals 

ITU-R Recommendation BT.470-6 Conventional television systems 

ITU-R Recommendation BT 500-10 Methodology for the subjective assessment of the quality 
of television pictures 

EN 300421 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for 11/12 GHz satellite services 

EN 300429 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB framing structure, channel coding and 
modulation for cable systems 

EN 300468 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB Specification for Service Information (SI) in 
DVB systems 

EN 300473 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB Satellite Master Antenna Television (SMATV) 
distribution systems 

EN 300744 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel coding and modula- 
tion for digital terrestrial television 

ETR 21 1 Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); DVB guidelines on implementation and usage of 
Service Information (SI) 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in this 
Indian Standard. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LTD 20 (1997). 



Amend No. 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 



Regional Offices 
Central 



Eastern 



Western 



Branches 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 1 10 002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLK.ATA700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

("323 76 17 
\323 38 41 

J337 84 99, 337 85 61 
L337 86 26, 337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



("254 12 16,254 14 42 
\254 25 19,254 13 15 

f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



