**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12180-1 (2000) : Tractors and Machinery for Agriculture 
and Forestry - Noise Measurement - Method of Test, Part 1: 
Noise at The Operator's Position - Survey Method [FAD 11: 
Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i juas^N^fes i rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



reaffirm::) 



mr" 



IS 12180 (Parti): 2000 
ISO 5131 :1996 

(Reaffirmed -2012) 



Indian Standard 

TRACTORS AND MACHINERY FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND FORESTRY — NOISE MEASUREMENT — 

METHOD OF TEST 

PART 1 NOISE AT THE OPERATOR'S POSITION — SURVEY METHOD 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 17.140.20; 65.060.01 



©BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



April 2000 Price Group 6 



Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, FAD 32 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) which is identical with ISO 5131 : 1996 'Acoustics — Tractors and 
machinery for agriculture and forestry — Measurement of noise at the operator's position — Survey 
method' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 



This standard was first published in 1987 and based on ISO 5131 
ISO 5131 in 1996, it has been decided to revise this standard also. 



1982. With the revision of 



In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is drawn specially to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

While adopting this standard ambient temperature during the test (see 5.2) shall be in the range of 
-5°Cto40°C. 

In this adopted standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following: 



International 
Standard 

ISO 2204 : 1979 Acoustics — 
Guide to International Standards 
on the measurement of airborne 
acoustical noise and evaluation of 
its effect on human beings 

ISO 5353 : 1995 Earth-moving 
machinery, and tractors and 
machinery for agriculture and 
forestry — Seat index point 

IEC 651 : 1979 Sound level meters 

I EC 1260 : 1995 Electro-acoustics 
— Octave band and fractional- 
octave-band filters 



Corresponding Indian 
Standard 

IS 9876 : 1981 Guide to the 
measurement of airborne 
acoustical noise and evaluation of 
its effect on man 



Degree of 
Equivalence 

Related 



IS 11113 
machinery 
revision) 



1993 Earth moving 
Seat index point (first 



IS 9779 : 1981 Sound level meters 

IS 6964 : 1973 Octave, half-octave 
and third octave band filters for 
analysis of sound and vibrations 



do 



Identical 
Related 



The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions 
of the following IEC standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this 
standard. 



IEC 942: 1988 



Sound calibrators 



In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
obseived or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance, with IS 2 : 1960, 'Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. 



IS 12180 ( Part 1):2000 
ISO 5131 : 1906 



Indian Standard 

TRACTORS AND MACHINERY FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND FORESTRY — NOISE MEASUREMENT — 

METHOD OF TEST 

PART 1 NOISE AT THE OPERATOR'S POSITION — SURVEY METHOD 

( First Revision ) 



1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies a method for 
the measurement of the noise at the position of the 
operator(s) of a tractor or machine used in agriculture 
and forestry The measured noise relates only to the 
basic machine and applies to self-propelled tractors 
and machines with either machine-carried or pedestrian 
operators The results will provide information which 
will enable operators to avoid exposing themselves to 
noise levels which could put their hearing at risk 

The test procedures specified in this International 
Standard are survey methods as defined in ISO 2204 

This International Standard also specifies the general 
conditions for measuring and reporting the noise at an 
operator's position on agricultural and forestry tractors 
and field machines 

Additional conditions for measurements in connection 
with particular types of machines are specified in 
annexes as follows 

Annex A — Agricultural and forestry tractors 
Annex B — Self-propelled agricultural machines 



Annex C 

Annex D — Forestry forwarders and skidders 



Pedestrian-controlled agricultural ma- 
chines 



The conditions specified for the operation of the 
machines during the measurements are designed to 
provide a realistic and repeatable assessment of the 
maximum noise to which an operator should be sub- 
jected when operating a machine 

NOTE 1 Further annexes specifying, for example, ad- 
ditional conditions for other types of agricultural and for- 
estry machinery may be included in future revisions of this 
International Standard 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this International Standard At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this International Standard are encouraged to in- 
vestigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below Members 
of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid 
International Standards 

ISO 2204 1979, Acoustics — Guide to International 
Standards on the measurement of airborne acoustical 
noise and evaluation of its effects on human beings 

ISO 5353 1995, Earth-moving machinery, and tractors 
and machinery for agriculture and forestry — Seat 
index point 

IEC 651 1 979, Sound level meters 

IEC 942 1988, Sound calibrators 

IEC 1260 1995, Electroacoustics — Octave-band and 
fractional-octave-band filters 



3 Measurement requirements 

3.1 All readings of the sound level meter shall be 
taken with the time weighting S 

3.2 The values measured shall be A-weighted sound 
pressure levels for the overall sound levels, expressed 
in decibels 



IS 12180(Pmt1):2000 
ISO 5131 : 1906 



3.3 Spectral analysis is optional. When it is required, 
the values measured shall be octave-band sound 
pressure levels, in decibels. 



4 Measuring equipment 

4.1 A sound level meter which meets at least the 
requirements of IEC 651 for a type 1 instrument shall 
be used, although compliance in this respect will not 
necessarily be sufficient to meet the requirement for 
precision stated by the user of this International Stan- 
dard or by the regulatory authority. 

4.2 If alternative measuring equipment, including 
for example a tape recorder and/or level recorder, is 
used, the tolerances of the several sections of the 
measuring chain shall not exceed the tolerances given 
in the relevant clauses of IEC 651 . If a tape recorder is 
used as part of the measuring equipment, it may be 
necessary to include suitable weighting networks for 
recording and reproduction to provide an adequate 
signal-to-noise ratio over the whole frequency range of 
interest. 

4.3 Measurement of the sound frequency spectrum 
shall be carried out using a frequency analyser fitted 
with octave filters in accordance with the require- 
ments of IEC 1260 for a class 1 filter. 

NOTE 2 Care should be taken, particularly when a micro- 
phone with a diameter of more than 13 mm is used, to 
ensure that microphone characteristics do not lead to errors 
when the sound is directional. It is recommended that, 
when necessary, a random incidence adaptor be used to 
ensure that the omnidirectionally is not worse than that of 
a type 2 sound level meter as specified in IEC 651 . Within a 
cab the multidirectional nature of the sound will normally 
avoid errors due to the microphone directional character- 
istics. 

4.4 The calibration of the equipment at the time 
of the measurements shall be in accordance in all 
respects with IEC 651. Checking of the equipment 
shall be carried out at appropriate intervals and at least 
immediately before and after the measuring session 
using a sound calibrator in accordance with the re- 
quirements of IEC 942 for a class 1 calibrator. 

The calibrator shall be checked annually to verify its 
output and its initial calibration shall be traceable to 
national standards. 



shall be no obstacle likely to reflect significant sound, 
such as a building, solid fence, tree or other vehicle. 
Where a dynamometer vehicle or recording vehicle 
is used, this shall be towed or driven to a distance 
remote enough to avoid interference. 

5.2 The air temperature shall be in the range from 
-5 °C to 30 °C and the wind velocity shall not exceed 
5 m/s at the operator's position. Other meteorological 
conditions shall be such that they do not influence the 
measurements. 

5.3 The level of the background noise and the 
A-weighted sound pressure level of the noise of the 
wind shall be at least 10 dB below the level measured 
during the test. Where a spectral analysis is required, 
the level of background noise shall be at least 10 dB 
below the corresponding level in each frequency band 
measured during the test. 

5.4 No person other than the operator of the tractor 
or machine shall be in the driving position or cab dur- 
ing measurements. Where the noise at the position of 
other operators on the machine is being measured, 
the usual number of operators shall be present. No 
person other than the operator(s) shall be in such a 
position as to influence the noise measurements. 



6 Condition of tractor or machine 

The tractor or machine shall comply with the manu- 
facturer's product specification and shall be operated 
in accordance with his instructions. Engine, trans- 
mission and hydraulic systems shall be operated as 
appropriate to stabilize temperatures before making 
the measurements. 

Specific conditions for the particular types of ma- 
chines covered by this International Standard are 
given in annexes A to D. 



7 Operators 

For pedestrian-controlled machines and those with a 
standing operator, the operator shall be chosen to 
have a stature of 1,72 m !§;]§ m. Operators shall not 
wear abnormally thick clothing or any hat or scarf 
which might influence the sound measurement. 



5 Acoustical environment, weather 
conditions and background noise 



8 Microphone location 



5.1 The test area shall be a flat open space and shall 
be within at least 20 m of the test machine. There 



8.1 For seated operators, the microphone shall be 
located 250 mm ± 20 mm to the side of the centre 



IS 12180 ( ParM ):2000 
ISO 5131 : 1996 



plane of the seat, the side being that on which the 
higher sound pressure level is encountered. The axis 
of the microphone shall be horizontal and the dia- 
phragm shall face forwards. The centre of the micro- 
phone shall be 700 mm ± 20 mm above the seat index 
point and 100 mm ± 20 mm forward of that point. Ex- 
cessive vibration of the microphone shall be avoided. 

The seat index point shall be determined in accord- 
ance with ISO 5353. 



8.2 For standing and pedestrian operators, the micro- 
phone shall be mounted on an open-frame helmet 
worn on the operator's head or on a shoulder harness, 
in such a way that the microphone axis is horizontal 
and its diaphragm is 250 mm ± 20 mm to the side of 
the centre plane of the operator's head, in the same 
vertical plane as his eyebrows and facing forwards. 
The side of the head chosen for the microphone shall 
be that for which the higher sound pressure level is 
encountered. The operator shall continue to face for- 
wards during the noise measurement. 



9 Noise measurement procedure 

Make at least three measurements at each micro- 
phone position, as defined in clause 8, and for each 
operating condition. If the spread of results of the 
A-weighted sound pressure level obtained under the 
measuring conditions exceeds 3dB, make further 
measurements until the readings of three successive 
measurements fall within 3 dB. Take the arithmetic 
mean value of these three readings as the test result. 

Measure the level of the noise obtained with the trac- 
tor or machine operating as specified in the appropri- 
ate annex. State the frequency weighting A and the 
time weighting S settings of the meter clearly in re- 
ports of the measurements. Take measurements after 
a 10 s period of stabilized running. 

When sound pressure levels fluctuate widely because 
of the characteristics of the machine type and the 
3 dB requirement for successive readings, specified 
above, cannot be met, the number of separate 



measurements shall be greater than the fluctuation 
range in decibels. Take the arithmetic mean as the 
test result. 

In all cases, any peak which is obviously out of charac- 
ter with the general sound pressure level being read 
shall be ignored. 

Give as the reported value the integer part of the 
result obtained from the above procedures. 

NOTE 3 Optionally, at the manufacturer's request, octave- 
band pressure levels over the centre frequency range 
31,5 Hz to 8 000 Hz may be determined and reported in 
addition to A-weighted sound pressure levels. 



10 Test report 

The test report shall include the following particulars: 

a) reference to this International Standard; 

b) report number and date when tested; 

c) all necessary information for the complete iden- 
tification of the tractor or machine; 

d) all necessary information for the complete iden- 
tification of the cab, if fitted; 

e) place where tested; 

f) surface condition and nature of the ground on 
which the tractor or machine was tested; 

g) instrumentation used for the test; 

h) engine speed appropriate to the test conditions; 
forward speed of tractor, or forward speed of 
machine, if appropriate; results of measure- 
ments obtained from the test in accordance with 
the appropriate annex; 

i) in addition to the above, the test report may also 
include details of the operator who performs the 
test, including working position; 

j) testing authority. 

A specimen report form for the reporting of results is 
given in annex E. 



IS 12180 ( Part 1 ): 2000 
ISO 5131 : 1006 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Agricultural and forestry tractors 



A.1 General 

For tractors, the measurements shall be made away 
from agricultural or forestry work. The test with the 
tractor loaded should, preferably, be carried out using 
a draught load provided by a dynamometer vehicle. 



A.2 Tractor operation 

For these measurements, tractors with pneumatic 
tyres shall be operated on a dry, concrete or tar- 
macadam surface, horizontal to within 2°, free from 
gravel, leaves, snow, etc. Tracked and metal-wheeled 
tractors shall be operated on a smooth, horizontal 
grassland or soil surface free from long grass and 
vegetation. The test track or course shall have a 
straight section of at least 150 m to ensure that the 
tractor speed is stabilized for an adequate time for 
measurements to be made. 

The tractor shall be unballasted. Wheeled tractors 
shall be fitted with normal agricultural pneumatic 
tyres, not more than 50 % worn. Before the noise 
measurement, it shall be established by a power take- 
off power test or other means that the power of the 
tractor is within 5 % of the manufacturer's rated 
value. 



A.3 Cabs and auxiliaries 

A.3.1 If a cab is fitted, the sound pressure level shall 
be measured with all openings, doors, windows, 
hatches and windscreen closed. 

An additional optional set of measurements may be 
taken with all openings open, providing that they have 
been designed to operate in the open position and 
that they do not cause a hazard during normal use of 
the tractor. The exception to this is that the wind- 
screen shall remain closed. 

NOTE 4 Measurements with doors, windows and hatches 
open are made for information purposes only, to ensure 
that the user is made aware of any operating conditions 
where sound pressure levels could be harmful and exceed 
those measured in a closed cab. 



When the measurements are being made, parts 
which normally operate at the same time as the en- 
gine (e.g. engine cooling fan) shall be functioning, but 
extra equipment powered by the engine or self- 
powered (e.g. windscreen wipers, heating and venti- 
lating fans, power take-off) shall not be functioning. 

A.3-2 Additional noise measurements may option- 
ally be made with the engine running at maximum 
speed and all auxiliary air-conditioning equipment 
working. The heating or ventilating fans shall run at 
the maximum setting. 

A.3.3 Additional noise measurements may option- 
ally be made with the engine stopped and auxiliaries 
such as ventilating fans, defrosters and other elec- 
trical facilities working at maximum settings. It shall 
be confirmed that at least the nominal energy input of 
the auxiliary equipment is applied to the equipment 
terminals. 



A.4 Noise measurements 

A.4.1 General 

Noise measurements shall be made whilst operating 
the tractor either 

a) with no drawbar load, or 

b) with a load applied to the drawbar. 

Wheel slip during these measurements shall not ex- 
ceed 15 % and track slip shall not exceed 7 %. 

In the case of measurements made on a four-wheel 
drive (4WD) tractor, the sound pressure level assigned 
to the two-wheel drive (2WD) version shall be taken 
as the higher of the two measurements recorded with 
and without the front axle engaged. 



A.4.2 No-load method 

The microphone shall be placed at that side of the 
operator giving the highest sound pressure level, as 



IS 12180 ( Part 1 ): 2000 
ISO 5131 : 1996 



determined in a preliminary check made with the trac- 
tor operating with no load in the gear or condition 
giving a forward speed as near as possible to 7,5 km/h 
at the manufacturer's rated engine speed. 

The noise measurements shall be made operating 
with no load in the gear or condition giving a forward 
speed as near as possible to 7,5 km/h at the manufac- 
turer's rated engine speed. 

The throttle shall be fully open or the governor control 
lever set for maximum engine speed, as appropriate. 

The stabilized level of noise found during the run shall 
be recorded together with an optional octave analysis. 



A.4.3 Drawbar-load method 

A.4.3.1 The microphone shall be placed at that side 
of the operator giving the highest sound pressure 
level as determined in a preliminary check made with 
the tractor operating under load with the throttle lever 
fully open, or governor control lever set for maximum 
engine speed, as appropriate, in the gear or condition 
giving a forward speed as near as possible to 7,5 km/h 
at the manufacturer's rated engine speed. 

A.4.3.2 The A-weighted sound pressure level 
measurement with an optional octave analysis shall be 
made in the gear or condition giving a speed as near 



as possible to 7,5 km/h at the manufacturer's rated 
engine speed. 

The governor control lever shall be fully open. Starting 
with no load, the load shall be increased until the 
maximum sound pressure level is found. After each 
increase of load, time shall be allowed for the level of 
noise to stabilize before making the measurements. 
The load condition shall be such that the engine is 
always operating under the control of the governor. 

A.4.3.3 The noise shall be measured in all other 
gears or conditions using the same procedure. Only 
sound pressure levels exceeding that recorded in 
4.3.2 by more than 1 dB shall be recorded, together 
with an optional octave analysis. 

For infinitely variable transmissions, noise measure- 
ments shall be made at four equally spaced speeds 
over the range from 4 km/h up to 1 6 km/h. 

A.4.3. 4 The noise shall also be measured and re- 
ported at the maximum design speed of the tractor 
but with no load applied. 



A.5 Test report 

The test report shall be in accordance with clause 10 
and shall contain the results of measurements made 
according to clause 9 and A.4. 



IS 12180 ( Part 1 ): 2000 
ISO 5131 : 1996 



Annex B 

(normative) 

Self-propelled agricultural machines 



B.I Operation off the machine 

Noise measurements shall be made with the machine 
stationary on a short-grass or soil surface complying 
with the acoustic requirements of clause 5. The en- 
gine of the machine shall be operating at the manufac- 
turer's rated speed and all mechanisms shall be 
functioning as in typical continuous field work but 
without crop or other materials passing through the 
machine. All tanks or hoppers for crop or other ma- 
terials shall be empty. 

The microphone shall be placed at that side of the 
operator giving the higher sound pressure level. 

NOTE 5 From information available in the case of combine 
harvesters, it appears that the level measured with the 
machine stationary and with all mechanisms operating will 
not significantly be exceeded during work. 



NOTE 6 Measurements with doors, windows and hatches 
open are made for information purposes only, to ensure 
that the user is made aware of any operating conditions 
where sound pressure levels could be harmful and exceed 
those measured in a closed cab. 

B.2.2 Additional noise measurements may optionally 
be made with the engine running at maximum speed 
and all auxiliary air-conditioning equipment working. 
The heating or ventilating fans shall run at the maxi- 
mum setting. 

B.2.3 Additional noise measurements may optionally 
be made with the engine stopped and auxiliaries 
such as ventilating fans, defroster and other electrical 
facilities working at maximum settings. It shall be 
confirmed that at least the nominal energy input of 
the auxiliary equipment is applied to the equipment 
terminals. 



B.2 Cabs and auxiliaries 



B.2.1 If a cab is fitted, the sound pressure level shall 
be measured with all openings, doors, windows, 
hatches and windscreen closed. 

An additional optional set of measurements may be 
taken with all openings open, providing that they have 
been designed to operate in the open position and 
that they do not cause a hazard during normal use of 
the machine. The exception to this is that the wind- 
screen shall remain closed. 



B.3 Noise measurement 

The A-weighted sound pressure level and, optionally, 
octave-band pressure levels shall be measured and 
reported for the operational conditions defined above. 



B.4 Test report 

The test report shall be in accordance with clause 10 
and shall contain the results of measurements made 
according to clause 9 and B.3. 



6 



IS 121tO(Pert1):2000 
ISO 5131:1996 



AnnexC 

(normative) 

Pedestrian-controlled agricultural machines 

C.1 Operation off the machine C.2 Noise meesurement 

N0TE7 Equipment which is carried by the operator during The A-weighted sound pressure level and. optionally. 

work is excluded. octavetond pressure levels shal be measured and 

reported at the one operating oondMo n as defined 
Noise measurements shall be made with the machine above, 
stationary on a short-grass or soil surface complying 
with the acoustic requirements of clause 5. The en- 
gine of the machine shad be operating at the manufac- 
turer's rated speed and all mechanisms shal be ^ ^ ^ 

functioning as in typical field work. Tillage or moving C.3 Test report 
components shall not engage with the soil or crop. 

The test report shal be in accordance with clause 10 

The microphone shad be placed at that side of the and shal contain the results of measurements made 

operator giving the higher sound pressure level. according to clause 9 and C.2. 



IS 12180(Part1):2000 
ISO 5131 : 1996 



Annex D 

(normative) 

Forestry forwarders and skidders 



D.1 Definitions 



the machine. The exception to this is that the wind- 
screen shall remain closed. 



D.1.1 forwarder: A self-propelled machine, usually 
self loading, designed to transport trees or parts of 
trees by carrying them completely off the ground. 



D.1.2 skidder: A self-propelled machine designed to 
transport trees or parts of trees by dragging. 



D.2 Machine operation 



NOTE 8 Measurements with doors, windows and hatches 
open are made for information purposes only, to ensure 
that the user is made aware of any operating conditions 
where sound pressure levels could be harmful and exceed 
those measured in a closed cab. 

When the measurements are being made, parts 
which normally operate at the same time as the en- 
gine (e.g. engine cooling fan) shall be functioning, 
but extra equipment powered by the engine or self- 
powered (e.g. windscreen wipers, heating and venti- 
lating fans, power take-off) shall not be functioning. 



For these measurements, machines with pneumatic 
tyres shall be operated on a dry, concrete or tarmac- 
adam surface, horizontal to within 2°, free from gravel, 
leaves, snow, etc. Tracked or metal-wheeled ma- 
chines shall be operated on a smooth, horizontal 
grassland or soil surface free from long grass veg- 
etation. The test track or course shall have a straight 
section of at least 1 50 m to ensure that the machine 
speed is stabilized for an adequate time for measure- 
ments to be made. 

The machine shall be unballasted. Wheeled machines 
shall be fitted with normal pneumatic tyres, not more 
than 50 % worn. Before the noise measurements, it 
shall be established by a power take-off test or other 
means that the power of the machine is within 5 % of 
the manufacturer's rated value. 



D.3.2 Additional noise measurements may option- 
ally be made with the engine running at maximum 
speed and all auxiliary air-conditioning equipment 
working. The heating or ventilating fans shall run at 
the maximum setting. 



D.3.3 Additional noise measurements may option- 
ally be made with the engine stopped and ventilating 
fans, defrosters and other electrical facilities, etc., 
working at maximum settings. It shall be confirmed 
that at least the nominal energy input of the auxiliary 
equipment is applied to the equipment terminals. 



D.3 Cabs and auxiliaries 



D.3.1 The measurement procedure applies whether 
or not the machine is fitted with a cab. 

If a cab is fitted, the sound pressure level shall be 
measured with all openings, doors, windows, hatches 
and windscreen closed. 

An additional optional set of measurements may be 
taken with all openings open, providing that they have 
been designed to operate in the open position and 
that they do not cause a hazard during normal use of 



D.4 Noise measurement 

The microphone shall be placed at that side of the 
operator giving the higher sound pressure level. 

The A-weighted sound pressure level and, optionally, 
octave-band pressure levels shall be measured and 
reported at the following modes of operation: 

a) driving forwards in the highest gear at no load 
with the governor control lever fully open; 

b) driving forwards at no load with the governer 
control lever fully open, in the gear giving a 
speed as near as possible to 4km/h at the 
manufacturer's rated engine speed. 



8 



IS 12180 ( Part 1 ): 2000 
ISO 5131 : 1996 

NOTE 9 When, optionally, octave-band sound pressure 0,5 Test report 

levels are measured, it is recommended that the machine 

be operated under the mode of operation which gives the ThQ test report $ha|| be jn accordance with dause 10 

highest sound pressure level. and sha|| contain the fesu|ts of measurements made 

according to clause 9 and D.4. 



9 



IS 12180 ( Part 1 ): 2000 
ISO 5131 : 1996 



Annex E 

(informative) 

Specimen report form 



Note test in accordance with ISO 5131 



Report No Date tested 

Machine details: 

1) Manufacturer 

2) Model No 

3) Rated PTO power and corresponding speed 



4) Max. no-load engine speed 

5) Type of transmission 

6) Seat type/types 

7) Tyre or track sizes: 

Front 

Rear ~ 

8) Number of driving wheels . 



Specifications of cab or protective structure 



a) Brief description 



b) Details of materials used for sound proofing the protective structures: 

1) Interior padding: 

Roof material and sizes 

Doors material and sizes 

Floor material and sizes 

Front panel material and sizes 

Rear panel material and sizes 

Instrument panel and steering column 

(upper part) material and sizes 

2) Draught proofing material and sizes 

3) Glass (type and thickness) 

4) Other electrical facilities (make and type) 



10 



IS 12180(Part1):2000 
ISO 5131:1096 



Test conditions 



a) 
b) 
c) 



Where tested (location) 

Test surface 

Instrumentation 



Type 



Serial No. 



1) Sound level meter 

2) Microphone 

3) Octave filter set 

4) Tape recorder 

5) Sound calibrator 

6) Octave analyser 



Results in accordance with appropriate annex (example given for annex A) 



Gear/ 

condition/ 

procedure, 

clause reference 



Drawbar pull, 

kN 



Travel speed, 

km/h 



A-weighted sound pressure levels, dB 



Closed cab 



4WD 2WD 



Open cab 



4WD 2WD 



2WD 



A.4.2 



None 



A.4.3.2 



A.4.3.3 
2nd gear 
8th gear, etc. 



A.4.3.4 



None 



Octave-band sound pressure levels 



Gear/ 

condition/ 

procedure, 

clause reference 



Sound pressure levels, dB 



31,5 



63 



125 



Centre frequency, Hz 

250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000 



A.4.2 



A.4.3.2 
gears 



A.4.3.4 
gears 



Operator 

Height mm 

Working position 
General observations: 



Testing authority ... 
Test conducted by 



Approved by 



11 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
k BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 32 (902). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 
Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBA1 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

/323 76 17 
\323 38 41 

1*337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



J 235 02 16,235 04 42 
\235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1.832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prmtograph, New Ddh, Ph.: 5726847 



