**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13672 (1993) : Application layer structure in open 
systems interconnection for information technology [LITD 
14: Software and System Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13672: 1993 
ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989 

_ ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

C\ NO 

Indian Standard 

APPLICATION LAYER STRUCTURE IN OPEN 
SYSTEMS INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION 

TECHNOLOGY 



UDC 681*327-8-01 



©BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1993 Price Group 7 



Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee, LTD 36 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/IEC 9545 : 1989 'Information technology — 
Open systems interconnection — Application layer structure', issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
the recommendation of the Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee 
( LTD 36 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

In this Indian Standard, the following international standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following: 

International Standard Indian Standard 



IS 12373 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 Basic reference 
model of open systems interconnection for 
information processing systems : Part 1 
( Identical ) 

IS 12373 (Part3):1993 Basic reference 
model of open systems interconnection for 
information processing systems : Part 3 
Naming and addressing ( Identical ) 

IS 13615: 1993 Service defintion for the 
association control service element in open 
systems interconnection for information 
processing systems ( Identical ) 

Doc LTD 36 (1636) Connection oriented 
presentation service definition in open 
systems interconnection for information 
processing systems ( under preparation ) 
( Identical ) 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following ISO Standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use In 
conjunction with this standard: 

ISO/TR 9007 : 1987 Information processing systems — Concepts and terminologies for the 
conceptual scheme and the information base 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting 
it in this standard. 



ISO 7498 : 1984 Information processing 
systems — Open systems intercon- 
nection — Basic reference model 

ISO 7498-3 : 1989 information process- 
ing systems — Open systems 
interconnection — Basic reference 
model — Part 3 : Naming and 
addressing 

ISO 8649 : 1988 Information processing 
systems — Open systems intercon- 
nection — Service definition for the 
association control service element 

ISO 8822 : 1988 Information piocessing 
systems — Open systems intercon- 
nection — Connection oriented 
presentation service definition 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/I EC 9545 :1989 



Indian Standard 

APPLICATION LAYER STRUCTURE IN OPEN 
SYSTEMS INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION 

TECHNOLOGY 



1 Scope 

This International Standard refines the Basic 
Reference Model for OSI to provide a framework for 
co-ordinating the development of existing and future 
Application Layer standards. It is provided for 
reference by Application Layer standards. 

In particular this International Standard: 

a) defines the nature of standards in the 
Application Layer and the relationships among 
them; 

b) defines the architectural framework in which 
individual OSI Application Layer protocols shall 
be developed. 

c) defines the categories of identifiable objects 
which are necessary for the specification and 
operation of protocols; 

d) relates distributed information processing 
activities to the standards in the Application 
Layer. 

This International Standard does not specify services 
and protocols for OSI. It is neither an implementation 
specification for systems, nor a basis for appraising 
the conformance of implementations. Further, it 
addresses neither the requirements for, nor the form 
of, documentation of such services and protocols. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this International Standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this International Standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards listed below. Members of 
IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid 
International Standards. 

ISO 7498 : 1984, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference 
Model. 

ISO 7498-3: 1989, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Part 3: Naming and 
Addressing. 

ISO 8649: 1988, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Sen/ice Definition for 
the Association Control Service Element. 

ISO 8822: 1988, Information processing systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Connection - 
oriented presentation service definition. 

ISO/TR 9007: 1987, Information processing systems - 
Concepts and terminologies for the conceptual 
schema and the information base. 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



3 Definitions 

3.1 For the purposes of this International Standard, 
the following terms as defined in ISO 7498 apply: 

a) application-process; 

b) application-entity; 

c) (N)-function; 

d) (N) -layer; 

e) (N)-protocol; 

f) (N)-protocol-control-information; 

g) (N)-protocol-data-unit; 
h) real open system; and 
i) transfer syntax. 

3.2 For the purposes of this International Standard, 
the following terms as defined in ISO 7498-3 apply: 

a) (N)-association; 

b) (N)-directory-function; 

c) (N)-protocoi-addressing-information; and 

d) (N)-service-access-point-address. 

3.3 For the purposes of this International Standard, 
the following terms as defined in ISO/TR 9007 apply: 

a) Conceptual Schema; 

b) information Base; and 

c) Universe of Discourse. 

3.4 For the purposes of this International Standard, 
the following terms as defined in ISO 8822 apply: 

a) abstract syntax; and 

b) presentation context. 



3.5 For the purposes of this International Standard, 
the following definitions apply. 

3.5.1 application-association, association: A co- 
operative relationship between two application-entity- 
invocations for the purpose of communication of 
information and co-ordination of their joint operation. 
This relationship is formed by the exchange of 
application-protocol-control-information using the 
Presentation Service. 

3.5.2 application-context: A set of rules shared in 
common by two application-entity-invocations in 
order to enable their co-operative operation (see 5.7). 

NOTE 1 — An application-context is a shared conceptual 
schema for the universe of discourse for communication. 

3.5.3 application-context-definition: The description 

of an application-context. 

3.5.4 application context name: A name that 
unambiguously identifies an application-context- 
definition. 

3.5.5 application-entity-invocation: A specific 
utilization of part or all of the capabilities of a given 
application-entity in support of the communications 
requirements of an application-process-invocation. 

3.5.6 application-entity-type: A description of a 
class of application-entities in terms of a set of 
capabilities defined for the Application Layer. 

3.5.7 application-process-invocation: A specific 
utilization of part or all of the capabilities of a given 
application-process in support of a specific occasion 
of information processing. 

3.5.8 application-process-type: A description of a 
class of application-processes in terms of a set of 
intenvorking capabilities. 

3.5.9 application-service-element: A set of 

application-functions that provides a capability for the 
interworking of application-entity-invocations for a 
specific purpose. 

NOTE 2 —This definition refines the original definition of 
application-service-elements in ISO 7498. 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/I EC 9545 :1989 



3.5.10 association control service element: An 

appfication-service-element that provides the 
exclusive means for establishing and terminating ail 
application-associations. 

NOTE 3 — The functionality of this application-service- 
element is defined in ISO 8649. 

3.5.11 multiple association control function: A 

component of the application-entity-invocation that 
co-ordinates the interactions among multiple 
associations within an application-entity-invocation in 
order to provide a co-ordinated service. 

3.5.12 single association control function: The 

component of a single association object that 
represents the use of those rules in the application- 
context concerning interactions among application- 
service-elements within a single association object. 

3.5.13 single association object: The collection of 
things in an application-entity-invocation related to a 
single application-association. 

4 Abbreviations 



ACSE 


Application Control Service 




Element 


AE 


application-entity 


AP 


application-process 


APDU 


application-protocol-data-unit 


APCI 


application-protocol-control- 




information 


ASE 


application-service-element 


MACF 


multiple association control 




function 


OSI 


Open Systems Interconnection 


SACF 


single association control function 


SAO 


single association object 



5 Application Layer Concepts 



5.1 Introduction 



5.1.2 The Application Layer is supported by the lower 
layers in OSI. In particular, the Presentation Layer 
contains facilities for representing information 
exchanged between application-entities (AEs), and 
the Session Layer contains mechanisms that may 
be used for controlling interactions between AEs. 

5.1.3 The Application Layer differs from the other 
layers of OSI in several important respects. Entities 
in the Application Layer are made up of a collection of 
application-service-elements (ASEs), each of which is 
defined by a set of service and protocol standards. 
These ASEs are combined in various ways to form 
various types of AEs. The Application Layer, as the 
highest layer of OSI, does not provide connections 
within the Application Layer. As a result, relationships 
formed by the transfer of information between AE- 
invocations in the Application Layer have particular 
significance. 

5.2 Fundamental concepts 

5.2.1 In ISO 7498, the co-operative operation of real 
open systems is modelled in terms of the interactions 
between application-processes (APs) in these 
systems. An AP is an abstract representation of 
those elements of a real open system which perform 
information processing for a particular application. 
Depending upon the nature of an application, an AP 
may only needi to communicate with other APs 
intermittently; moreover, the set of APs involved in 
distributed processing for an application may change 
with time. 

5.2.2 Co-operative operation between APs requires 
that they share sufficient information to interact and 
carry out processing activities in a compatible 
manner. 

NOTE —This shared information is referred to as a universe 
of discourse in the terminology of ISO/TR 9007. The 
description of a universe of discourse is a conceptual 
schema. 



5.1.1 International Standards for OSI are intended to 
support the communication requirements of 
applications (i.e., information processing tasks) 
requiring co-ordinated processing activities in two or 
more real open systems. In particular, standards for 
the OSI Application Layer define procedures for the 
support of distributed information processing, 



5.2.3 The information determining the nature of the 
interactions between AP-invocations is of three kinds: 

a) Information describing the set of objects 
(using this term in its most general sense) which 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



are the subject of distributed information 
processing activities. 

b) Information describing the procedures to be 
used to effect communication between the AP- 
invocations for the control and co-ordination of 
distributed information processing. 

c) Information representing the net effect (i.e., 
state) of past interactions between the AP- 
invocations. 

NOTE — This is a portion of the shared information base in 
the terminology of ISO/TR 9007. 

The purpose of OSi Application Layer standards is to 
provide definitions of procedures for interworking 
which are related to these three kinds of information. 

5.2.4 The structuring of the Application Layer into 
components described in this International Standard 
does not prescribe whether the information contained 
in any. one of these components is, or is not, 
accessible to any other component that may be 
present in the AE-invocation of which it is a part. 

5.3 Application-Processes 

5.3.1 An AP represents a set of resources, including 
processing resources, within a real open system that 
may be used to perform a particular information 
processing activity (the AP concept is defined in ISO 
7498). An AP may organise its interactions with other 
APs in whatever way is necessary to achieve a 
particular information processing goal: no constraints 
are imposed by this International Standard either on 
the form of these interactions or on the possible 
relationships that may exist between them. 

NOTE-For instance, an AP could schedule its interactions 
with other APs to take place either sequentially or 
concurrently, 

5.3.2 The activity of a given AP is represented by one 
or more AP-invocations. Co-operation between APs 
takes place via relationships established among AP- 
invocations. At a particular time, an AP may be 
represented by none, one or more AP-invocations. 
An AP-invocation is responsible for co-ordinating its 
interactions with other AP-invocations. Such co- 



ordination is outside the scope of this International 
Standard. 

5.4 Application-Entities 

5.4.1 The aspects of an AP which need to be taken 
into account for the purpose of OSI are represented 
by one or more AEs. An AE represents a set of OSI 
communication capabilities of a particular AP. 

5.4.2 An AE represents one, and only one, AP in the 
OSI environment. Different APs may be represented 
by AEs of the same AE-type. An AP may be 
represented by a set of AEs: each AE in this set is of a 
different AE-type. 

5.4.3 An AE-invocation represents a specific use of 
the capabilities of an AE. It represents specific 
communication activities of an AP-invocation and is 
an integral part of that AP-invocation. The aspects of 
an AP-invocation that need to be taken into account 
for the purposes of open systems interconnection 
are represented by one or more AE-invocations. 

5.4.4 An AE-invocation models the communication 
functions together with the associated state 
information for particular communication activities of 
an AP-invocation. Such activities are progressed 
through communication between AE-invocations 
related by application-associations. 

5.4.5 An AE-invocation may be a partner in a 
number of application-associations either 
consecutively or concurrently. The number of these 
application-associations may change with time. In 
particular, there may be periods of time when an 
AE-invocation is not a party to any application- 
associations. The lifetime of an AE-invocation is not 
determined by the duration of the application- 
associations in which it is a participant. 

5.4.6 The state information modelled by an AE- 
invocation reflects the net effect of its 
communications with other AE-invocations. The 
existence of this state information provides a basis for 
modelling the co-ordinated consecutive or 
concurrent use of multiple application-associations. It 
also provides a basis for modelling a relationship, 
between a pair of AE-invocations, whose duration is 
not bound to the lifetime of a particular application- 
association. For example, this provides one possible 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



method for modelling the continuation of an activity 
following the loss of an application-association. 

5.4.7 The lifetime of an AE-invocation is controlled 
by the AP-invocation which it represents in the OSI 
environment. An AP-invocation may have a longer 
lifetime than any or all of its AE-invocations. There 
may be zero or more AE-invocations representing an 
AP-invocation at any particular time. 

5.5 Application-Service-Elements 

5.5.1 An ASE is a set of functions that provides OSI 
communication capabilities for the interworking of 
AE-invocations for a specific purpose. 

NOTE - Different functions can be grouped into one single 
ASE or split into several ASEs. In Order to avoid 
unnecessary proliferation of different ASEs, the following 
should be considered: 

a) grouping of functions into an ASE must contain at 
least all the functions and the corresponding APDUs 
which are required for a protocol machine which is 
logically complete and consistent in itself; 

b) the grouping of functions into different ASEs has to 
occur in such a way that the ASEs can be specified 
independently of each other. 

5.5.2 The capabilities of an ASE shall be defined by 
the specification of a set of application-protocol-data- 
units (APDU) and the procedures governing their 
use. This constitutes the application-protocol between 
two ASEs of the same kind. 

5.5.3 An AE may be composed of one or more ASEs 
of different kinds in order to realize a specific 
composite communication capability for a particular 
purpose. 

5.6 Application-Associations 

5.6.1 An application-association is a co-operative 
relationship between two AE-invocations for the 
purpose of communication of information and co- 
ordination of their joint operation. This relationship is 
formed by the exchange of application-protocol- 
control-information (APCI) using the Presentation 
Service. The properties of this relationship are 
characterised by a set of rules and state information 



governing the mutual communication behaviour of 
the particular pair of AE-invocations. 

NOTE _ The pair of AE-invocations in an application- 
association may have different roles; as a consequence they 
may exhibit complementary rather than similar 
communication behaviours. 

5.6.2 When communication is required between two 
AEs to meet the needs of an application, one or more 
application-associations are established between 
AE-invocations of the two AEs. An AE-invocation 
may support a number of application-associations 
simultaneously, sequentially or both, with one or 
more other AE-invocations. 

5.6.3 An application-association-identifier may be 
associated with an application-association. This 
application-association-identifier is unique within the 
scope of the pair of associated AE-invocations. It 
provides the means to identify the related state 
information in each AE-invocation. 

5.7 Application-Context 

5.7.1 A pair of AE-invocations must have shared 
knowledge, and follow a common set of rules that 
governs their communication. Such a set of rules is 
called an application-context. 

NOTE - An application-context is a shared conceptual 
schema for the universe of discourse for communication. 

5.7.2 An application-association has only one 
application-context. The set of rules that make up the 
application-context may contain rules for alteration of 
that set of rules. The set of rules may contain 
alternatives, together with rules for selecting among 
these alternatives according to the requirements of 
the APs. 

NOTE — The use of a rule to select among alternative rules 
within an application-context does not constitute an 
alteration of the application-context. However, the use of a 
selection rule does change the state information 
maintained by AE-invocations with respect to an 
application-association. 

5.7.3 An application-context includes the rules that 
describe a set of things that must be known by both 
AE-invocations, relationships among those things, 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



actions which may be performed on them, and 
permitted states of affairs concerning them. The set 
of things which must be known by both AE- 
invocations includes those which may be the subject 
of communications with respect to an application- 
association, including those things which provide 
capabilities for exchanging information (such as 
ASEs) and information to be exchanged between AE- 
invocations (categories of APCI to be exchanged). 

NOTE — An application-context-definition does not specify 
the nature of the co-operative processing tasks carried out 
by the partners of an application-association. 

5.7.4 The set of rules in an application-context will 
always include a specification of a set of ASEs (by 
reference to the ASE specification standards), and 
may also include (but is not limited to): 

a) specifications of the logical structure of 
information to be exchanged or referenced; 

b) specification of invocation dependencies 
between the ASEs, beyond those dependencies 
contained within the ASE specifications; 

c) rules concerning the selection and use of 
optional features of the ASEs; 



i) rules concerning the addition, modification and 
deletion of rules. 

5.7.5 The sequencing rules for the use of the services 
of the ASEs in combination specify a composite 
service. The resulting operation of the ASEs in 
combination generates the composite protocol that 
supports that service. 

5.7.6 An application-context may contain rules 
describing mechanisms that enable AE-invocations to 
transfer information for multiple association co- 
ordination purposes. It may also contain shared rules 
governing the use of such mechanisms for the 
purpose of multiple association co-ordination. 

5.7.7 The definition of an application-context may be 
written in a natural language, or in a formal language. 
Such a definition is called an appiication-context- 
definition. An application-context-definition may 
directly define some application-context rules and 
may reference others that have been defined 
elsewhere (e.g. in other application-context-definitions 
or in ASE standards). 

5.7.8 The application-context that applies to an 
application-association is determined during its 
establishment in either of the following ways: 



d) any additional rules, beyond those 
contained in the ASE specifications, governing 
the sequence of use of the service primitives, 
and in consequence the sequence of the 
APDUs, of each ASE; 



a) by identifying a 
context-definition; or 



pre-existing application- 



b) by transferring an actual description of the 
application-context. 



e) rules for the co-ordinated operation of ASEs 
(such as rules for the interleaving of service 
requests and APDUs from different ASEs); 

f) rules concerning the mapping of the APCI 
from ASEs on to the services of either the 
Presentation Layer and/or of other ASEs; 

g) designation of application-functions, such as 
application directory functions, and rules 
governing their use; 

h) rules concerning information that has a lifetime 
that is greater than the lifetime of an application- 
association; and 



\n particular, a name may be used to identify a pre- 
existing application-context-definition. 

NOTES 

1 The predominant method of determining application- 
contexts is expected to be by reference to pre-existing 
application-context-definitions. 

2 The allocation of names to pre-existing application- 
context-definitions will be the subject of registration 
procedures as described in clause 9 of this International 
Standard. 

5.7.9 The communications behaviour of an AE- 
invocation over an application-association is 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



constrained to be compatible with a generic 
behaviour defined by the application-context in use. 

5.7.10 An application-context shall be defined in such 
a manner as to ensure that the ASEs it references use 
Presentation and ACSE services in a compatible 
manner. 



5.10 Multiple Association Co-ordination 

5.10.1 Co-ordination of related activities on several 
application-associations may require: 

a) sequencing of activities on different 
associations; 



5.7.11 When an AE-invocation supports a number of 
concurrent application-associations, there is no 
architectural requirement that each of these 
application-associations use the same application- 
context, 

5.8 Single Association Object 

5.8.1 A single association object (SAO) is the 
component of an AE-invocation that models the 
functions and state information related to the 
operation of an individual application-association. The 
lifetime of an SAO is identical to the lifetime of the 
association it supports. It does not model the 
existence of state information or application-functions 
related to multiple association co-ordination 
functions. An SAO contains one or more ASEs (one 
of which is always the Association Contro\ Service 
Element - ACSE) and a Single Association Control 
Function. 

5.8.2 The application-context for an individual 
application-association contains rules for the 
composition and operation of the SAO supporting 
that application-association within the AE-invocation. 

5.8.3 At a particular time an AE-invocation may 
contain none, one or more SAOs. When an AE- 
invocation contains more than one SAO, the 
combinations of ASEs within them may be different. 

5.9 Single Association Control Function 

The Single Association Control Function (SACF) is 
the component of the SAO that models the co- 
ordination of the interactions among the ASEs 
contained in the SAO and also models the co- 
ordination of their use of the Presentation Service. 
The rules concerning these interactions are defined 
by the application-context of the application- 
association. 



b) maintenance of consistency relationships 
between activities on different associations; and 

c) any other rules necessary for the utilization of 
multiple associations. 

5.10.2 Co-ordination of related activities may be the 
responsibility of a single AE-invocation or may be 
shared by a group of co-operating AE-invocations in 
two or more open systems. 

5.10.3 A set of application-functions that co-ordinates 
related activities on several associations is 
represented in the structure of an AE-invocation by a 
multiple association control function (MACF). A 
MACF together with the objects that are under its 
control provide a composite service. 

NOTE — The co-ordination activities in multiple AE- 
invocations representing one AP-invocation may operate 
together to provide an integrated co-ordination capability. 

5.10.4 A MACF may provide either or both of the 
following forms of co-ordination: 

a) localized co-ordination, resulting from the 
autonomous operation of an AE-invocation, 
which does not require explicit communications; 

b) distributed co-ordination, resulting from the 
co-operative operation of AE-invocations in 
different open systems, which does require 
explicit communications. 

NOTE — The distribution of co-ordination functions among a 
group of AE-invocations in two or more open systems 
requires agreement on the co-ordination functions 
performed by each of the AE-invocations. 

5.10.5 When it is necessary for two AE-invocations to 
have a shared understanding of the rules for co- 
ordination of multiple associations, those shared rules 
will be contained within the application-context- 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



definition. Localized co-ordination rules are not part of 
the application-context-definition. 

5.10.6 The communications requirements of a MACF 
are supported by the generation of protocol on 
individual associations. 

5.10.7 Those rules of an application-context providing 
support for multiple association co-ordination may 
be contained in specifications of ASEs, specifications 
of abstract syntaxes, or be part of the rules for the 
combined operation of ASEs. 

5.10.8 Within an AE-invocation, a MACF may co- 
ordinate the activity on all or only a subset of the 
application-associations. 

5.10.9 A MACF specification comprises: 

a) a definition of the set of services made 
available by the combined operations over the 
associations; 

NOTE — Services within the scope of such a co- 
ordination may or may not be made visible by the 
MACF specification. 

b) a specification of the use of services 
provided by objects under its control; this may 
include: 

1) temporal ordering rules for the services; 

2) the interrelationships between the use of 
services; 

3) the specification of information which 
must be exchanged between AE-invocations 
for the purpose of co-ordination. 

5.11 Names and Directory Functions 

5.11.1 As specified in ISO 7498-3, application- 
directory-functions process presentation-addresses, 
AE-titles, and application-protocol-addressing- 
information to provide mappings among these 
categories of information. Conceptually, these 
functions are performed by the AE-invocation to 
derive the addressing information required. 



5.11.2 Information on these mappings may be held 
locally and made available for access by 
application-directory-functions, or it may be held 
remotely. It is a locarresponsibility to retrieve the 
information and make it available to an application- 
directory-function, if this information is stored 
remotely, OSI protocols may be used to access that 
information. 

NOTE ~H is not required that every AE contain an ASE that 
provides the service to retrieve this remote information; local 
system management may obtain this service from another 
AE, even another AE in another AP. 

5. 1 1 .3 The procedures which constitute the 
application-directory-functions are modelled within 
the AE independent of any particular ASE. 

NOTE — Application-directory-functions are an example of 
application-functions that are modelled within the AE 
independent of any particular ASEs. Other such application- 
functions may support aspects of security activities, 
management activities, etc. 

5.11.4 In ISO 7498-3, several kinds of name are 
defined in order to enable the identification of certain 
objects in the Application Layer. These kinds of name 
are: 

a) application-process-title; 

b) application-entity-title; 

c) application-process-invocation-identifier; 

d) application-entity-invocation-identifier; 

e) application-association-identifier; 

f) appiication-process-type-title; 

g) application-entity-type-title; and 

h) system-title. 

The ways in which they may be used in the operation 
of application-directory-functions and the 
identification of specific Application Layer objects are 
described in ISO 7498-3. 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



6 Operation 
Invocations 



of Application-Entity- 



6.1 Use of Application Associations 

6.1.1 Capabilities for the establishment and 
termination of application-associations are contained 
in a specific ASE: the ACSE. This ASE is a necessary 
part of AEs. 

6.1.2 In establishing an application-association, an 
AE-invocation specifies to the Presentation Service 
the location of a peer AE by its presentation-address. 
Additionally, It may use one or more of the following 
identifiers for the selection of a peer AE-invocation: 

a) AP-invocation-identifier; 

b) AE-invocation-identifier. 

An AE-invocation may also use an application- 
association-identifier in order to identify the 
application-association and the SAOs within the 
related AE-invocations. 

6.1.3 In addition, related AE-invocations may transfer 
AP-title and AE-title information during the 
establishment of an application-association. This 
information identifies the peer AEs in a way that is 
independent of their presentation-addresses. 

6.1.4 The termination of an application-association 
results from the action of the related AE-invocations. 
AE-invocations may take such action in response to a 
failure in communications visible in the Presentation 
Service. 

6.2 Use of the Presentation Service 

6.2.1 An AE is attached to one or more presentation- 
service-access-points in order to make it addressable 
in the OSI environment. 



transfer these APDUs between AE-invocations using 
the Presentation Service it is necessary to establish 
one or more presentation-contexts for each abstract 
syntax. During an association, occurrences of these 
APDUs are linked to presentation-contexts. Each 
presentation-context specifies a pairing of a particular 
abstract syntax with a transfer syntax. 

6.2.4 An application-association is bound to a single 
presentation-connection, it does not span concurrent 
or consecutive presentation-connections. 

NOTE In this way ft is a restricted use of the (N)- 
association concept. The general (N)-association concept 
allows such spanning. 

6.3 Co-ordination of ASE Activities 

6.3.1 Communication within an application- 
association makes use of one or more ASEs in each 
of its AE-invocations. There are two aspects to the co- 
ordination of ASEs: 

a) co-ordination of ASEs within an SAO; 

b) co-ordination of peer ASE activities in related 
SAOs. 

Both of these aspects are governed by means of 
rules in the application-context of the application- 
association. 

6.3.2 The operation of ASEs in an SAO may be 
organised in whatever way is necessary for a 
particular association, as defined by the application- 
context that applies to the association. In some 
cases the operation of ASEs may be organised so as 
to enable the shared use of particular presentation- 
services by means of the concatenation of APDUs 
from different ASEs. 

NOTES 



6.2.2 The communicating AE-invocations use the 
Presentation Service to transfer APDUs between 
each other. The method of use of the Presentation 
Service is prescribed by the rules of the application- 
context of an application-association. 

6.2.3 The structure of the APDUs of an ASE is 
specified by at least one named abstract syntax. To 



1 The specification of an ASE should take into account any 
particular requirements for Ks operation in combination with 
other ASEs in an SAO. Such requirements may concern the 
co-operative use of ASE services and presentation-services. 

In particular, assumptions regarding the way in which the 
establishment and termination of associations is achieved 
can seriously affect the feasibility of the combined operation 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



of ASEs. For instance, an ASE may require access to ACSE 
services; alternatively, or perhaps optionally, it may be 
capable of using a pre-existing association, 

2 The relationship between the initialization phase of an 
application-protocol and procedures for application- 
association establishment needs to be clearly defined. The 
initialization phase of an application-protocol may be 
related to such procedures in one or both of the following 
ways: 

a) it may be invoked at the time of association 
establishment; 

b) it may be invoked at points during the lifetime of an 
association. 

6.4 Co-ordination of the Activities of an AE- 
Invocation 

An AE-invocation may control its activities within 
several application-associations either to ensure their 
independence or to co-ordinate them in ways 
necessary to satisfy a specific communication 
requirement 

6.5 Error Recovery within an Application- 
Association 

6.5.1 The action to be taken in the event of errors that 
are visible within an application-association is 
prescribed by rules in the application-context of the 
application-association. Following such errors, the 
application-association may be terminated or, in 
some cases, communication may be resumed from a 
mutually acceptable point. 

6.5.2 An application-association-identifier may be 
used to denote a particular application-association as 
part of the error recovery procedures specified in an 
application-context. 

7 Description of Application-Service- 
Element Standards 

7-1 An ASE is defined in terms of a service definition 
and a protocol specification. 

7.2 An important part of an ASE definition may be the 
description of a model explaining the requirements of 
the service user. Such a model may include reference 



to more general models. Their descriptions must 
remain conceptual, carrying the appearance within 
OSI of their real operation. No implementation 
conformance requirements can be derived from such 
models. 

7.3 A service definition conveys the understanding of 
the function carried out by the ASE. It is the first step 
that leads to the specification of the corresponding 
protocol. By analogy with the service definitions at the 
OSI layer boundaries, the service definitions for ASEs 
are conceptual and do not imply conformance. 

7.4 A protocof specification defines the structure for 
the exchange of information between peer ASEs. In 
so doing, the protocol specification may make use 
of other Application Layer services and/or the 
Presentation Service. 

8 Abstract Syntax Definition 

8.1 An abstract syntax is made up of those aspects 
of the rules used in the formal specification of data 
which are independent of the encoding techniques to 
represent the data. 

8.2 For a given ASE the structure of the APDUs is 
specified by a set of one or more abstract syntaxes. 
The structure of any user information conveyed 
within these APDUs on an association is specified by 
another set of one or more abstract syntaxes. 

8.3 A name may be assigned to the definition of an 
abstract syntax. Such a name may be used in the 
specification of requirements for the establishment of 
a presentation context by the Presentation Service. 

9 Registration Requirements 

9.1 The use of Application Layer International 
Standards requires the establishment of registration 
procedures for the assignment of names (which are 
unambiguous throughout the OSI environment) for 
the following objects: 

a) The Application Layer related objects from the 
list in 13.1 of ISO 7498-3; 

b) The following additional objects: 

1) abstract syntaxes; 



10 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



2) application-contexts; 

3) application-entities. 

9.2 An abstract syntax definition or an application- 
context-definition that is registered may be an 



international or national standard, a published 
definition developed by a community of interest, or a 
private agreement. 

9.3 The registration procedures used in each of these 
situations should be compatible with an internationally 
recognized framework for registration procedures. 



11 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Examples of the structure of AE-lnvocations 



This annex provides tutorial material which is 
intended to aid in understanding the relationships 
between some of the Application Layer structuring 
concepts described in this International Standard. 



In particular, figures are provided to illustrate the 
internal structure of an AE-invocation as it might be 
viewed at a particular instant in time. 



A.1 A simple AE-invocation 




key: 
ACSE = Association Control Service Element 
ASE = Example Application Service Element 
SACF = Single Association Control Function 
SAO = Single Association Object 
m - application-association 



Figure A.1 — Simple AE-invocation 



Figure A.1 illustrates a simple case, where an AE- 
Invocation is engaged in exactly one application- 
association at the time, and therefore contains one 
SAO. 



The SAO contains two ASEs (ACSE and a simple 
"user" ASE in this example) and a SACF, which 
models the use of the rules in the application-context 
that concern interactions between the two ASEs. . 



12 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



IS 13672 :1993 
ISO/IEC9545 :1989 



A.2 A complex AE-invocation 



; 






















VPPLilV^/Vl XU1N— £j!N X X JL X X1N V W^rtX lUli 








MACF 


















n*'~* i r> 7v r\ o c* A /^ O 






b/ 


S 


L 

ASE1 


>jt 


S 


ASE3 




S 


ASE5 










A 
C 






A 
C 






A 
C 












ASE2 




ASE4 




ASE6 










F 






F 






F 












ACSE 




ACSE 




ACSE 








■ 


m 


■ 




■ ■ ■ 






■ ■ ■ 


key 






ACSE 


= Association Control Service Element 


ASE = 


Example Application Service Element 


SACF 


= Single Association Control Function 


SAO 


= Single Association Object 




■ 


= Application-Association 




■ 







Figure A.2 — Complex AE-invocation 



Figure A.2 illustrates a more complex case in which 
the AE-invocation is simultaneously engaged in three 
application-associations, and therefore it contains 
three SAOs. The first of these associations is used in 
a manner that is independent of the activities taking 
place in the other associations. The second and third 
associations are used in a manner that requires co- 
ordination of their activities, therefore the MACF is 
present in this AE-invocation to control these two 
SAOs. In order for the MACF to communicate with the 
MACF in the correspondent AE-invocation, the 
second and the third SAOs may contain one or more 
ASEs that have functions to provide communication 
capabilities on this individual association in support of 
the MACF. 



support the communications requirements of the 
MACF, as necessary; 

b) some or all of the SAOs supporting the 
multiple associations for a single AE-invocation 
may be under the control of the MACF as 
necessary; 

c) the associations controlled by the MACF in a 
single AE-invocation may exist and be used 
sequentially and/or simultaneously; 

d) in order to support its own communications 
requirements, the MACF may utilize one or more 
ASEs in one or more SAOs; 



The following should be noted: 

a) SAO 2 and SAO 3 might both contain none, 
one, or more ASEs that provide functions to 



e) in some cases, the MACF may have no 
communications requirements of its own. 



13 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indium 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook : and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. LTD 36 ( 1570 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstfaa 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 J 33 1 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola (37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 (37 86 26, 37 86 62 

C53 38 43, 53 16 40 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 j 53 23 g4 

(235 02 16, 235 04 42 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 < 235 ]5 ^ ^ ^ 5 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) [632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BtfOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE 
FARIDABAD. GHAZ1ABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prmtwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



