**************** 


^  tOTH: 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New"  ' 


fe&vijfi^^ii^^^ff/iJA^VN:^^ig^isb^^irt^^>p;»^^^uiKaa?^^ 


IS  15024  (2011) :  Technical  product  documentation 
management  [PGD  24:  Drawings] 


Document 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-:gv 


^^35^* 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 

(Superseding  IS  15025  :  2001) 


Indian  Standard 

TECHNICAL  PRODUCT  DOCUMENTATION  — 
DOCUMENT  MANAGEMENT 

(  First  Revision ) 


ICS  01.110:35.240.10 


©  BIS  2011 

BUREAU   OF   INDIAN   8TANDARD8 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

August  201 1  Price  Group  6 


Drawings  Sectional  Committee,  PGD  24 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision)  which  is  identical  with  ISO  1 1442  :  2006  Technical  product 
documentation  —  Document  management'  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization 
(ISO)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Drawings  Sectional 
Committee  and  approval  of  the  Production  and  General  Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  was  originally  published  in  2001  in  four  parts  which  were  identical  with  ISO  1 1 442  -1  to 
4  :  1 993.  This  first  revision  has  been  harmonized  with  ISO  1 1 442  :  2006  by  adoption  to  make  pace 
with  the  latest  developments  taken  place  at  international  level.  The  Committee  has  decided  that  in 
addition  to  the  above  standards,  IS  1 5025  :  2001  Technical  product  documentation  —  Requirements 
for  computer-aided  design  and  draughting  —  Vocabulary'  shall  be  treated  as  withdrawn  after  publication 
of  this  standard. 

The  text  of  ISO  Standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  an  Indian  Standard  without 
deviations.  Certain  terminology  and  conventions  are,  however,  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian 
Standards.  Attention  is  particularly  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear,  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should 
be  read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  current 
practice  is  to  use  a  point  (.)  as  the  decimal  marker. 

In  this  adopted  standard,  reference  appear  to  the  following  International  Standard  for  which  Indian 
Standard  also  exists.  The  corresponding  Indian  Standard,  which  is  to  be  substituted  in  its  place,  is 
listed  below  along  with  its  degree  of  equivalence  for  the  edition  indicated: 

International  Standard  Corresponding  Indian  Standard  Degree  of  Equivalence 

ISO  10209-1  :  1992  Technical  product  IS  8930  (Part  1)  :  1995  Technical  Identical 

documentation  —  Vocabulary  —  product       documentation       — 

Part  1 :  Terms  relating  to  technical  Vocabulary:  Part  1  Terms  relating  to 

drawings:  General  and  types  of  technical  drawings:  General  and 

drawings  types  of  drawings  (first  revision) 

The  technical  committee  has  reviewed  the  provisions  of  the  following  International  Standards  referred 
in  this  adopted  standard  and  has  decided  that  they  are  acceptable  for  use  in  conjunction  with  this 
standard: 

International  Standard  Title 

ISO  1 601 6  :  2000  Technical  product  documentation  —  Protection  notices  for  restricting  the  use 

of  documents  and  products 

lEC  82045-1  :  2001         Document  management  —  Part  1 :  Principles  and  methods 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


Indian  Standard 

TECHNICAL  PRODUCT  DOCUMENTATION  — 
DOCUMENT  MANAGEMENT 

(  First  Revision  ) 

1  Scope 

This  International  Standard  specifies  basic  rules  for  the  management  of  technical  documents. 

2  Normative  references 

The  following  referenced  documents  are  indispensable  for  the  application  of  this  document.  For  dated 
references,  only  the  edition  cited  applies.  For  undated  references,  the  latest  edition  of  the  referenced 
document  (including  any  amendments)  applies. 

ISO  10209-1 ,  Technical  product  documentation  —  Vocabulary —  Part  1:  Terms  relating  to  technical  drawings: 
general  and  types  of  drawings 

ISO  16016,  Technical  product  documentation  —  Protection  notices  for  restricting  the  use  of  documents  and 
products 

3  Terms  and  definitions 

For  the  purposes  of  this  document,  the  terms  and  definitions  given  in  ISO  1 0209-1  and  the  following  apply. 

3.1 
analysis 

part  of  the  product  development  process  where  a  specification  of  requirements  is  prepared 

3.2 

approval  phase 

stage  in  which  the  document  content  is  formally  checked  and  approved 

3.3 

archive  master 

document  replica  for  long-term  storage  in  a  trusted  encoding  format 

3.4 

archiving  phase 

stage  in  which  product  documents  are  removed  from  the  storage  of  active  documents  to  an  historic  archive 

3.5 
authorization 

(of  a  user)  privileges  that  give  access  to  designated  activities 

3.6 

basic  design 

part  of  the  product  development  process  where  one  or  more  design  proposals  are  evaluated  and  the  basic 
documentation  for  design  is  prepared 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


3.7 

conceptual  design 

part  of  the  product  development  process  which  includes  the  preparation  of  design  specifications  and  design 
proposals  for  a  product 

3.8 

creation  phiase 

stage  in  which  the  design  documentation  work  is  carried  out 

3.9 

detailed  design 

part  of  the  product  development  process  which  includes  the  preparation  of  the  final  product  definition 

3.10 
document 

fixed  and  structured  amount  of  information  that  can  be  managed  and  interchanged  as  a  unit  between  users 
and  systems 

[lEC  82045-1:2001] 

3.11 

document  replica 

true  or  close-to-true  copy  of  an  original  document 

3.12 
document  issue 

identified  version  of  a  document 

3.13 

document  status 

step  or  stage  in  the  life-cycle  of  a  document  issue 

3.14 

original  document 

document  onto  which  the  technical  description  or  definition  of  a  product  is  recorded  and  which  forms  the  base 
for  future  changes 

3.15 

release,  verb 

making  an  approved  document  available  for  its  intended  purpose 

3.16 

release  phase 

stage  in  which  a  document  is  released 

3.17 

replica  fidelity 

level  of  ability  of  a  document  replica  to  promote  the  information  of  the  original  document 

3.18 

revision  notice 

document  part  or  separate  document  recording  all  the  revisions  made  on  a  product  document 

3.19 

revision  phase 

stage  in  which  changes  to  product  documents  are  made 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 

3.20 

specification  of  requirements 

compilation  of  market,  autinority  (e.g.  laws,  regulations,  directives)  and  company  related  requirements 

3.21 

storage/active  phase 

stage  in  which  the  active  product  documents  are  stored 

3.22 

signature  document 

copy  of  the  original  document  with  the  addition  of  approval  required  by  customer  or  authority,  constituting  an 
original  for  a  certain  approval  stage. 

3.23 
viewing  copy 

document  replica  for  viewing,  commenting  and  for  production  of  hard  copies 


4     Original  and  reproduced  documents 

4.1  General 

The  following  descriptions  are  used  in  order  to  assist  in  the  application  and  understanding  of  the 
documentation  system: 

4.2  Original  document 

An  original  document  is  a  document  that  intentionally  has  no  identified  source  document.  A  single  original 
document  or  a  structure  of  associated  originals  shall  constitute  the  technical  definition  or  description  of  a 
product  and  shall  also  form  the  basis  on  which  changes  are  made  during  the  lifetime  of  the  product. 

Each  approved  original  document  shall  be  filed  in  an  original  storage  archive  (vault)  to  which  document 
access  shall  be  controlled  through  check-in/check-out  procedures.  A  computer-based  original  document  shall 
be  stored  in  an  identified  file  format  on  a  trusted  medium  (e.g.  magnetic  or  optic).  In  the  manual  production  of 
documents,  the  medium  for  representation  data,  in  the  form  of  figures  and/or  text,  shall  be  suitable  for 
reproduction,  e.g.  paper  or  draughting  film.  Any  revision  required  shall  be  based  on  the  original  document. 

When  and  if  the  preferred  file  format  can  no  longer  be  supported  (e.g.  vector  format),  the  original  status  shall 
be  transferred  to  a  file  format  intended  for  long-term  stability  (e.g.  raster  format),  generally  with  an  accepted 
loss  of  information  (see  4.5).  The  transfer  to  another  file  format  may  also  depend  on  local,  company 
procedures. 

4.3  Signature  document 

Original  documents  require  ordinary  approval  procedures,  but  may  also  need  approval  by  customer  or 
authority.  A  signature  document  carries  this  additional  approval.  This  document  is  usually  paper-based,  being 
a  copy  of  the  original  document,  and  shall  not  be  subject  to  any  form  of  change  without  the  stamp  and 
signature  it  may  require  for  approval. 

4.4  Viewing  copy 

A  viewing  copy  is  a  document  replica  used,  e.g.  for  viewing,  commenting  and  for  production  of  hard  copies 
(printed  replicas).  In  computer-aided  design  this  can  be  a  raster  document  for  on-screen  viewing  or  an 
aperture  card  directly  or  indirectly  produced. 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


4.5    Archive  master 


In  computer-based  documentation  a  document  replica  (see  4.6)  should  be  produced  for  long-term  storage  in  a 
trusted  neutral  format.  The  archive  master  shall  be  retrievable  and  reproducible  for  a  defined  period  of  time 
(e.g.  depending  on  the  product's  lifetime).  The  representation  shall  be  openly  specified  and  forwardly 
independent  of  tool  versions. 


NOTE 


Typical  formats  for  digital  archive  masters  are  TIFF  raster,  SGML,  XML  and  STEP. 


4.6     Document  replica,  replica  fidelity 

A  document  replica  is  a  true  or  almost-true  copy  of  an  original  document.  A  replica  may  have  lost  information 
relative  to  its  source.  The  degree  of  fidelity  shall  be  classified  due  to  the  ability  of  the  document  replica  to 
promote  the  information  of  the  original  document. 

Values  of  replica  fidelity  shall  include 

—  clone  (  exact  copy), 

—  equivalent  (with  loss  of  information,  for  a  dedicated  purpose  equivalent),  and 

—  essential  (some  properties  of  the  original  may  have  been  lost,  like  colour) 

5     Phases  in  the  design  documentation  work 

5.1     General 

The  following  description  shows  where  different  documents  can  be  generated  within  the  design  cycle  The 
activities  during  the  product  development  process  can  be  divided  into  analysis,  conceptual  design,  basic 
design  and  detailed  design,  as  described  in  the  example  below.  See  Figure  1. 

Normally,  an  initial  task  will  be  to  establish  a  specification  of  requirements,  compiled  and  evaluated  with  the 
requirements  from  the  market,  authorities  and  the  company  itself. 

Based  on  this,  design  specifications  are  produced  as  a  base  for  further  development.  These  may  indicate 
possible  functional  solutions  and/or  shape  representations,  which  will  be  the  basis  for  one  or  more  proposals 
to  be  evaluated.  The  result  of  the  evaluation  constitutes  the  basic  documentation  for  design. 

During  the  detailed  design  the  documents  are  finalised  for  its  intended  purpose  and  formalised  to  more  strict 
rules  for  document  management. 


Analysis 


Conceptual  design 


Basic  design 


Detailed 
design 


In  service/ 
Disposal 


Market 
require- 
ments 


Authority 
require- 
ments 


Company 
require- 
ments 


Rules  for  document  revision  (See  Ciause  7) 


Specification 

of 
requirements 


Functional 
solutions 


Stiape 
represen- 
tations 


Proposal 
n°1 


Proposal 
n°2 


Proposal 
n°3 


Basic 

document- 

tation  for 

design 


Geometric 

models, 

assembly 

drawings, 

Item  lists, 

specifications, 

calculations 

diagrams, 

etc. 


Figure  1  —  Product  development  process 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


5.2     Management  of  technical  product  documents 

Throughout  the  different  stages  of  the  design  documentation  process  data  shaii  be  stored,  moved  and 
presented  according  to  strict  ruies.  The  document  management  process  is  divided  into  different  phases, 
shown  with  their  respective  activities,  in  Figure  2. 

The  transfer  of  data  from  one  phase  to  another  shaii  be  made  in  accordance  with  estabiished  procedures 
adapted  to  the  need  of  the  activity.  These  procedures  shaii  be  weii  documented. 


Non-network-integrated  users 


D 


O 


Creation  phase 

Create 
Design 


Approvai  pfiase 

Cfiecl< 
Approve 


Release  ptiase 


Re  i  ease 


Storage/active  pfiase 

Distribute 
Store 
Lend 


Revision  phase 
Revise 


Archiving  phase 
Withdraw 


Networl<-connected 
users 


Figure  2  —  Phases  in  thie  design  documentation  worl< 


5.3     Creation  phase 


The  phase  in  which  the  actuai  content  of  the  document  is  estabiished  is  termed  the  "creation  phase". 
Documents  exist  in  this  phase  from  document  status  "in  preparation"  untii  the  "in  review"  status  is  initiated.  A 
document  in  the  creation  phase  is  the  property  of  its  creator.  The  document  shaii  therefore  be  considered 
preiiminary;  for  exampie,  it  shaii  not  be  used  for  binding  agreements. 

If  speciai  business  requirements  demand  the  eariy  usage  of  documents  in  this  phase  for  binding  agreements 
(e.g.  ordering  of  raw  materials  or  design  of  tooiing  for  iong  iead-time  items)  a  ciear  indication  shaii  be  given  to 
which  extent  the  usage  for  dedicated  purposes  is  possible. 

Any  use  of  the  document  shall  be  checked  with  the  creator. 


5.4    Approval  phase 

When  the  creator  considers  the  document  to  be  finished  the  approval  phase  shall  be  initiated.  This  is  indicated 
by  the  document  status  "in  review".  A  document  with  this  status  is  still  the  property  of  the  creator  and  the 
same  restrictions  as  for  "in  preparation"  apply  regarding  its  use.  If  the  document  is  rejected  it  shall  be  brought 
back  to  the  creator  and  to  the  document  status  "in  preparation"  before  necessary  modifications  may  be  made. 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


The  final  status  of  the  document  in  the  approval  phase  is  "approved".  If  necessary  this  shall  be  shown  as  a 
separate  document  status  indication.  In  other  cases  the  document  shall  be  directly  transferred  to  the 
release/issuing  activity. 

5.5  Release  phase 

Release  is  an  activity  independent  of  approval.  The  timing  can  therefore  be  chosen  to  coordinate  with  other 
document  issues  and  other  activities  within  the  project. 

When  a  document  has  been  checked  and  approved  according  to  the  procedures  within  the  responsible 
department's  organization  it  can  be  released.  This  is  the  department  responsible  for  the  content  of  the 
document  within  the  organization  of  the  legal  owner. 

A  released  document  is  officially  valid  and  is  allowed  to  be  used  for  its  intended  purpose.  This  shall  be 
indicated  by  the  status  "released".  In  local  environment,  specific  naming  conventions  for  this  status  could 
occur  and  shall  be  clearly  defined. 

5.6  Storage/active  phase 

The  storage/active  phase  means  that  released  documents  shall  be  stored  and  be  available  to  authorized 
users  for  reading  and  copying. 

A  normal  form  for  distribution  is  when  a  document  is  made  available  for  users  within  a  dedicated  system. 
Attachments  to  electronic  mail  or  alternative  media  (aperture  card,  paper  printout,  tape,  diskette,  CD,  etc.) 
may  also  be  distributed  to  users  who  do  not  have  on-line  distribution  or  are  not  integrated  in  the  network. 

The  distribution  may  be  supported  by  a  document  list,  showing  all  documents  which  are  released 
simultaneously,  usually  belonging  to  the  same  project,  equipment,  etc. 

5.7  Revision  phase 

Revision  implies  that  a  clone  of  a  stored  document  is  checked  out,  raised  in  revision  and  assigned  the  status 
"in  preparation".  The  original  document  is  still  valid  and  available  to  users  but  the  system  shall  provide  a 
warning  "under  revision"  that  a  revised  version  is  expected.  It  is  then  up  to  the  user  to  check  with  the 
responsible  unit  and  decide  whether  to  use  the  existing  version  or  wait  for  the  expected  revision.  See  Figure  3. 

The  copy  being  amended  has  a  new  revision  index  and  the  status  text  "in  preparation"  until  its  approval  phase 
is  initiated.  When  the  revision  is  approved  and  released  the  document  shall  be  transferred  to  the 
storage/active  phase. 

When  a  document  is  released  and  distributed  for  further  use,  formal  rules  and  procedures  describing  how 
changes  are  managed  shall  be  introduced.  For  detailed  revision  rules,  see  Clause  7. 

5.8  Archiving  phase 

The  archiving  phase  shall  be  initiated  by  the  removal  of  documents  from  the  storage  for  active  documents  to 
an  archive  for  archive  master  documents.  The  access  time  could  be  considerable.  This  might  involve 

—  previous  versions  of  active  documents, 

—  replaced/superseded  documents, 

—  withdrawn  documents,  or 

—  documents  for  obsolete  products. 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 

6     Document  life-cycle  status 

During  the  different  pinases  a  document  can  exist  in  different  document  statuses  as  sinown  beiow.  Tine  status 
ieveis  sinaii  be  sinown  via  document  printout  or  an  aiternative  system  function. 

—  In  preparation  means  that  the  document  exists  but  is  not  yet  officiaiiy  reieased  for  its  final  use. 

—  In  review  means  that  the  document  has  been  prepared  and  is  subject  to  review,  endorsement,  checking 
and  approval. 

—  Approved  means  that  the  document  is  suitable  for  release  but  is  not  yet  officiaiiy  released  for  its  intended 
use. 

—  Released  means  that  the  document  has  been  prepared,  reviewed,  checked  and  approved.  The  document 
is  allowed  to  be  used  for  its  intended  purpose. 

—  Replaced  means  that  the  document  is  still  available  but  has  been  replaced  or  superseded  by  another. 

—  Withdrawn  means  that  the  document  is  no  longer  available  as  an  active  document. 

Figure  3  shows  the  process  flow  for  a  document  as  it  passes  through  the  different  life-cycle  statuses.  In 
addition  to  the  statuses  defined  above  a  locally  defined  process  with  smaller  steps  in  the  document  lifecycle 
may  occur. 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


In  preparation 

First  issue 


0! 


in  review 

irst  issue 


Approved 

First  issue 


In  preparation 

Second  issue 


In  review 

Second  issue 


Approved 

Second  issue 


In  preparation 

Third  issue 


0 


In  review 

Third  issue 


Approved 

Ttiird  issue 


/ 


^ 


0 


Released 

First  issue 


Released 

First  issue 

Flag:  Under  revision 


0 


Released 

Second  issue 


Released 

Second  issue 
Flag:  LInder  revision 


Released 

Third  issue 


-A' 

(  I 

I  (etc.  for  repeted  revisions)  | 


\ 


V7  /-^-N 


v~ov. 


Released 

First  issue 

Flag:  Not  iatest  revision 


Released 

Second  issue 

Fiag:  Not  iatest  revision 


_L 


Replaced/superseded 
or  withdrawn 


7     Rules  for  revision 


Figure  3  —  Document  life-cycle  statuses 


Based  on  the  type  of  revision  or  the  reievant  period  in  the  iifetime  of  the  document,  there  is  a  need  to 
distinguish  the  revisions  with  regard  to  the  activities  required  by  the  revision. 

Depending  on  the  document,  its  subject,  iegai  effects  or  how  far  it  is  advanced  in  the  product  deveiopment 
process,  different  ruies  for  revision  can  appiy.  See  Annex  A. 


A  procedure  shaii  be  produced  and  maintained  to  cieariy  define  which  ruies  for  revision  are  appiicabie  and 
when  they  shaii  be  applied. 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 

8     Protection  of  information 

8.1  General 

Procedures  defining  ieveis  of  information  access  by  users  sinaii  be  appiied.  In  addition,  tinere  may  be  specific 
requirements  to  define  procedures  for  tine  allowed  purpose  of  the  access  and  the  allowed  environment  the 
access  is  granted,  managed  and/or  executed  by. 

These  procedures  should  cover  single  user  actions  as  well  as  system  functions. 

8.2  Authorization 

Procedures  shall  be  established  defining  the  authorization  to  create/design,  read/copy,  check/approve  and 
revise  document  contents,  and  to  transfer  documents  to  archive.  See  Table  1 . 

Table  1  —  Examples  of  access  to  documents  in  different  document  life-cycle  statuses 


Life  cycle  of  a  document 

Users  within  the 
organization  of  the  creator 

Normal  users  in 

accordance  with  agreed 

rules 

On  special  request 

In  preparation 

X 

In  review 

X 

Approved 

X 

Released 

X 

Replaced 

X 

Withdrawn 

X 

When  using  computer-based  systems,  the  identification  of  users  shall  be  controlled  by  sufficient  methods,  e.g. 
user  identification  (user  ID)  and  passwords  (electronic  identification  card,  etc.)  enabling  authorization 
procedures  to  be  executed. 

8.3     Protection  notices 

In  order  to  prevent  improper  use  of  documents  a  protection  notice  according  to  ISO  1 601 6:2000  shall  be  used. 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


Annex  A 

(informative) 

Typical  rules  for  document  revision 


A.1  Simplified  rules  for  revision 

Simplified  rules  for  revision  are  primarily  used  by  the  issuer  of  the  document  in  connection  with  design 
changes  that  can  affect  parallel  or  subsequent  development  activities  like 

—  changes  in  the  design  prerequisites, 

—  new  design  as  a  consequence  of  inadequate  function,  space  or  quality, 

—  the  desire  of  a  manufacturer  to  introduce  a  design  change  in  order  to  fit  a  certain  manufacturing  process, 
or 

—  a  simplification  of  the  product  in  order  to  reduce  the  costs  of  material. 

The  revision  information  may  contain  a  description  of  the  technical  changes  as  well  as  information  on  how  the 
changes  affect  the  cost  estimates. 


A.2  Formal  rules  for  revision 

During  the  latter  part  of  the  product  development  documents  are  often  widely  distributed  and,  as  a 
consequence,  activities  are  initiated  which  require  formal  rules  for  revision.  These  may  be  divided  into  two 
types  of  revisions. 

a)  Technical  changes  with  requirement  for  interchangeability  between  the  old  and  the  new  version.  The 
form,  fit  and  function  of  the  component  is  not  affected,  and  consequently  the  identification  number  is 
retained. 

b)  Technical  changes  when  the  revised  version  and  the  old  version  of  the  component  are  no  longer 
interchangeable.  The  changes  affect  the  form,  fit  and  function  of  the  component  and,  consequently,  the 
identification  number  is  changed. 

Documents  in  the  storage/active  phase  are  checked  out  for  revision.  A  new  issue  of  the  document  is  prepared 
and  a  revision  notice  is  established,  clearly  indicating 

—  the  signification  of  the  change, 

—  the  position  of  the  change, 

—  the  reason  for  the  change  (if  necessary), 

—  the  consequences  of  the  change, 

—  when  the  change  is  to  become  effective  for  concerned  components,  and 

—  other  information  necessary  to  document  regarding  the  changes. 

The  revised  product  documents  are  transferred,  together  with  the  revision  notices,  to  the  approval  phase  for 
check/approval  and  then  further  on  to  the  distribution  phase,  where  the  revised  documents  are  copied  and 
distributed  to  subscribers  in  accordance  with  a  document  issuing  list. 


10 


1815024:2011 
18011442:2006 


Bibliography 

[1  ]         ISO  9001 :2000,  Quality  management  system  —  Requirements 

[2]         lEC  82045-1 :2001 ,  Document  management  —  Part  1:  Principles  and  methods 


11 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  establisined  under  tine  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1 986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  course  of  imple- 
menting the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  No.:  PGD24(1163). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amendment  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 1 0002 

Telephones:  2323  0131 ,  2323  3375, 2323  9402  Website:  www.bis.org.in 

Regional  Offices:  Telephones 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  (23237617 

NEW  DELHI  1 1 0002  \  2323  3841 

Eastern    :  1/14,  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I. P.  Road,  Kankurgachi  (  2337  8499,2337  8561 

KOLKATA  700054  (  2337  8626,  2337  9120 

Northem   :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  1 60022  ( 260  3843 

(  260  9285 

Southern  :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113  (22541216,22541442 

(2254  2519,2254  2315 

Western   :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  (  2832  9295,  2832  7858 

MUMBAI  400093  (  2832  7891 ,  2832  7892 

Branches:  AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR.  PARWANOO  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANATHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published  by  BIS,  New  Delhi 


