***•••*•**•••••• 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



&v i jiA:^:^ifc^^:V/ffiJ4^^N:^.^ 3^^is:sa ^i rr ^^ >^»^> a 



IS 10808 (1984) : Code of Practice for Installation 
Operation and Maintenance of Hydraulic Rams [FAD 17: Farm 
Irrigation and Drainage Systems] 



C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im l7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



^^-^^^^W.^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS t T060S ' 1SIE4 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 

Indian Standard 



CODE OF l^RACTJCE FOR INSTALUTION 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

HYDRAULIC RAMS 



ODC621'22r005-7;fl0e*76 







® Copyrighi 1984 

l^DrA^■ STA^»AFDR iNSTiTtfiiow 

MANAK HIlAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAKQ 

NEW DELHI \mm 
Ct3 May ^M 



IS : 1080S - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

HYDRAULIC RAMS 

Irrigation Equipment and Systems Sectional Committee, AFDC 58 

Chairman Representing 

Dr H. S. Chauhan G. B. Pant University of Agricultural & 

Technology, Pantnagar 

Members 

Shri Ravi Kumar Agarwal Shri Ganga Rolling Mills, Allahabad 

Dr A. K. Bhattacharya Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ). 

New Delhi 
Shri T. K. Chakraborty Directorate of Agricultural Engineering, Govern- 

ment of West Bengal, Calcutta 
Chief Engineer ( Agril Engg ) Department of Agricultural Engineering, Govern- 
ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Superintending Engineer 
( Agril Engg ) ( Alternate ) 
Prof J. F. Correia Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur 

Shri S. James Fredrick Coromandal Indag Products Private Limited, 

Madras 
Shri G. Paul Lamech ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Iyer Voltas Limited, Bombay 

Shri A. S. Kothekar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Kaushish Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Shri H. S. Lohan Directorate of Agriculture, Government of 

Haryana, Chandigarh 
Shri A. N. Medhora Andhra Pradesh State Irrigation Development 

Corporation Limited, Hyderabad 
Shri H. R. Mishra Ministry of Irrigation, New Delhi 

Shri M. Parthasarthy Polyene General Industries Private Limited, 

Madras 
Shri S. R. Anujan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. J. Pook Premier Irrigation Equipment Limited, Calcutta 

Shri Suman Shankardass ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Raqhunath Jindal Aluminium Limited, Bangalore 

Shri M. S. Mruthyunjayappa ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 1080S - 1984 



{Continued from page I ) 
Members 



Representing 



Shri K. R. Rangarajan Wavin India Limited, Madras 

Shri M. S. MaHENDRU ( Alternate ) 



Shri B. S. Sandhu 
Shri Santokh Singh 

Shri T. C. Paul ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. P. Shrivastava 

Shri Jai Pal Singh 

Shri N. K. Tyagi 
Shri T. Purnanandam, 
Director ( Agri & Food ) 



Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 
Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amritsar 

Directorate of Agriculture, Government of Bihar, 

Patna 
State Planning Institute, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 
Shri K. Anbarasu 
Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



15:10808-1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

HYDRAULIC RAMS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 17 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Irrigation Equipment 
and Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
an3 Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 The hydraulic ram is a simple automatic device with which the energy 
of a quantity of water with small head is used to lift proportionate 
quantity of this water to a greater height. Considering its advantages over 
conventional method of lifting water, particularly in hilly areas, its 
manufacture and use is increasing. A need has, therefore, been felt to 
prepare a standard giving guidelines for proper installation and operation 
of hydraulic rams for people engaged in use, manufacture and extension 
of this equipment. 

0.3 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following organizations: 

a) Machinery Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of 
India, New Delhi; and 

b) State Planning Institute, Planning Department, Government of 
Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides guidelines for installation, operation and 
preventive maintenance of hydraulic rams, also known as hydrams, 

2. GENERAL LAYOUT AND FUNCTIONING 

2.1 A general layout of the hydraulic ram system is shown in Fig. 1 for 
guidance. 

2.2 Water from the stream flows through the intake tank and the intake 
pipe into the valve chamber, Since the impact valve rests at the bottom 
position due to its mass, water flows through the waste water outlet. As 
the velocity of wftter in the intake pipe increases 4vie to the hydraulig 



IS : 10808 - 1984 

gradient provided, the force on the hinged impact valve increases and 
closes it suddenly thus causing water hammer in the system. This 
results in sudden increase in the water pressure which lifts the delivery 
valve and pushes the pressurised water into the air chamber. Air in the 
air chamber gets compressed to give a cushioning effect and the water 
is gradually forced into the delivery pipe. After the momentum of water 
into the intake pipe is spent, the compressed air and the pressurised water 
closes the delivery valve. Simultaneously backward motion of water in the 
intake chamber and intake pipe occurs causing a negative pressure in the 
valve chamber. The impact valve which is hinged on a steep angle in the 
valve chamber, falls back due to this vacuum and to its own mass and 
allows water to flow through the waste water outlet. As the velocity of 
the water in the intake pipe increases, the impact valve again closes 
suddenly and the cycle is repeated. The waste water from the waste water 
outlet of the hydrani may also be used for flow irrigation at lower spots. 



•STORAGE 

TANK 




STREAM 



l-NTAKE GATE 
VALVE 

NTAKE \ 



,•//; ■ TANK 




DEL^VERY 



mpact vauv^' 






base 



WA^TE 
/ WATER 



Fie. 1 General Layout and Functioning of Hydram 



IS : 10808 - 1984 

3. SELECTION OF SITE FOR HYDRAM 

3.1 The following points should be taken into consideration while 
selecting the site for hydrams: 

a) Quantity of water available in the stream during the cropping 
season, 

b) Gradient of the stream, 

c) Height of the field from stream bed, 

d) Distance of the highest cultivated field from the stream, 

e) Total cultivable land proposed for irrigation, 

f ) Existing and proposed cropping pattern, 

g) Average monthly rain fall, and 

h) Depth and frequency of irrigation. 

4. SELECTION OF HYDRAM 

4.1 Proper size of hydrams (see IS: 10809-1984*) shall be selected on 
the basis of data obtained under 3.1. Normally hydram functions at 
2 to 30 lift magnification. 

5. INSTALLATION 

At some places, only ordinary stone wall will divert the required quantity 
of water into supply channel and the desired drop is obtained. But in 
most of the cases it is essential to raise the level of water which is possible 
only through gravity dams. 

5.2 Supply Channel — A supply channel, mostly pucca should be con- 
structed to convey the water into intake tank. The size of channel may be 
decided on the basis of water needed to operate the hydram. 

5.3 Intake Tank — It is also known as feeding tank or filteralion tank. 
It should be strong enough to resist the vibration of water hammering. 
The capacity of supply tank for various sizes of hydram is given in 
Table 1 for guidance. 



♦Specification for hydraulic rams. 



IS : 10808 - 1984 










TABLE 1 CAPACITY OF TANK 








( Clause 5.3 ) 




Sl 


Size op Hydbam 


Capacity 


No. 








(1) 




(2) 
mm 


(3) 
1 


i) 


50 


X 25 


200 


ii) 


75 


X 38 


1 000 


iii) 


100 


X 50 


2 000 


iv) 


150 


X 75 


6 000 


V) 


200 


X 100 


10 000 


vi) 


300 


X 150 


25 000 



5.3.1 The depth of the tank should be minimum 1 m and 0'5 to 07 m 
head of water should be maintained in the intake tank above the mouth 
of intake pipe to avoid sucking of air in intake pipe during operation. A 
portion of this tank may also be used for separation of straw, leaves, etc 
through Alteration, and sand through sedimentation. 

5.4 Hydram Foundation — The foundation of the hydra m for sizes 
exceeding 100 X 50 mm and for heads exceeding 30 m should be con- 
structed with reinforced cement concrete in accordance with the 
instructions of the manufacturer. The hydram should be held in horizontal 
position with adequately strong foundation bolts. A hard packing should 
be placed under the ram to avoid effect of vibration on the foundation. 

5.4.1 The hydram units shall be well protected from flood water, land 
slide, etc. 



5.5 Intake Pipe — Intake pipe should be of high pressure type to with- 
stand water hammer. In length it should be laid eight times of the intake 
head and at an angle of 7^. 

5.6 Delivery Pipe — The discharge of a hydram is inversely proportional 
to the delivery head. When water is tapped at low head, the discharge and 
velocity of water are higher than at a higher head, assuming the delivery 
line to be uniform size. Under such condition there is greater frictional 
head caused unnecessarily. In order to raise the efficiency of the hydram 
under a situation of high discharge egainst low head, it is desirable to use 
larger diameter pipe at the base of the delivery line and to reduce the 
size of the delivery line in steps subsequently. The size of the delivery 
pipe line at different levels in relation to the intake pipe should be selected 
according to the magnification factor as given in Table 2. 



iB i 10808 . 1^4 





TABLE 2 




( Clause 5.6 ) 


Sl 
No. 


Magnification Factor Ratio of Diameter of Delivery 

Pipe to Intake Pipe 


U) 


(2) (3) 


i) 

ii) 

iii) 


Up to 10 1:2 

10 to 20 1:4 
20 to 30 1:6 



5.6.1 For example if the drop is 6 metres lifting height ranges to 180 m 
and the diameter of intake pipe is 200 mm, the delivery pipe line should 
be laid as follows: 

Delivery Head Size of Delivery Pipe 
Up to 60 m 100 mm 

60 to 120 m 50 mm 

120 to 180 m 40 mm 

5.6.2 It is advisable to lay the delivery pipe on the shortest possible 
route to economise cost and to achieve high efSciency. Hydrants should 
be provided in the delivery pipe line at different levels to irrigate fields 
with the minimum pumping head. Also in the laying of delivery pipe line, 
sharp bends should be avoided to reduce frictional resistance to the flow 
of water for achieving higher efficiency. 

5.7 Reservoir — In case of a big size hydram or battery of hydrams, water 
may be efficiently applied to the field directly, particularly if an 
underground irrigation system is laid. But in most of the cases, it is 
desirable to store water overnight in a reservoir to apply it through the 
water channels in the day time. A reservoir may be earthen with appropriate 
lining or of cement construction. The capacity of reservoir depends upon 
the pumping capacity of the hydram for the height or maximum for 24 
hours. Reservoirs normally required are in the capacity range of 50 to 
150 m^ 

5.8 Drain — Arrangement should be made to drain out the waste water 
through a pucca channel or pipe line to the point where it may not harm 
the Hydram foundation. 

5.9 Utilization — Lifted water may be utilized either for irrigation or for 
drinking purpose. For irrigation, systems, like gravity flow, sprinkler, etc, 
may be used depending upon the situations. 



IS ! 10808 - 1984 

5.10 Battery of Hydrams — Hydraulic rams may be installed in a battery 
under following situations: 

a) The pumping capacity of the biggest available size of the hydram 
may not meet the requirement. 

b) When discharge of the water available from the stream varies 
significantly over the season, the hydrams are installed in a 
battery to operate one or more according to the availability of 
water. 

c) After having installed a hydram, it may be experienced that not 
full discharge of the water in the stream is made use of. 

5.10.1 Another hydram of a suitable size may be added in a battery to 
increase the discharge instead of going for a completely new bigger 
hydram at a very high cost. The size of the delivery pipe may be increased 
initially to accommodate the discharge of the additional hydram or a 
separate delivery line may be placed up to the lowest hydrant. Then it 
may be connected to existing line. 

6. OPERATION 

6.1 Starting of the Hydram — Following points should be observed while 
starting the hydrams: 

a) Check that there is no leakage in the pipeline. 

b) Close the gate valve on delivery pipe line. Open the gate valve 
fully on the intake pipehne and wait till no-air-bubbles come 
out of the drive pipe. 

c) Operate the impact valve for about 15 strokes till it starts 

working automatically. For this purpose use a stick, plier or a 
pair of tongs. Do not hold the bolt of the impact valve with 
hand lest it is injured with impact of the valve. Use starting 
handle, if provided. 

6.2 Tuning of the Hydram ^ Tuning aims at maximizing the output of 
the hydram for the highest efficiency. Increase in the time duration of the 
cycle of the impact valve ( or in other words decreasing the number of 
cycles per minute ) increases the water input through the hydram because 
of attainment of full velocity. Because of the high velocity of drive water, 
effect of hammering is the highest and the conversion of the kinetic 
energy into pressure energy is the maximum. Higher delivery heads require 
lesser frequency of the cycles of impact valve. For reducing the frequency 
of the cycles of impact valve, either extra mass is added to it or the 
adjustable bolt is unscrewded. For increasing the frequency of the impact 
valve ( for low or medium head ) reduce mass on the valve or screw in the 
bolt. Take actual measurement of discharge of water while tuning. 



IS : 10808 - 1984 



7. MAINTENANCE 

7.1 Hydratn operates continuously for years without requiring much 
maintenance as there are only two moving valves in the machine. The 
rubber thrust pads on the impact valve and the delivery valve require to 
be changed once or twice in a year. The hmge pins are water lubncatcu 
and their wear is very slow. 

7.2 The pump and the pipe lines when not in operation should be drained 
off particularly in extreme winter co.iditions to prevent bursting of the 
pipes. 



8. TROUBLE SHOOTING 

8.1 Some of the common troubles and their remedies are given 
the guidance of the user: 



below for 



Trouble 

a) Unusual noise from the 
hydram and intense 
vibration at the deli- 
very pitJe 



b) Impact valve remains 
closed or open after 
repeated starting by 
hand 



c) Impact valve works for a 

few strokes and then 
stops 

d) Hydram works without 

any discharge of water 



Remedy 



There is no air in the chamber. Stop the 
hydram, close the delivery gate valve 
and release water from air chamber to 
induce air in it. Ensure that there is no 
leakage of air at the air vessel joints 
before restarting. 

When the impact valve remains closed 
the mass on it is less. In case it 
remains open the mass on it is more. 
Adjust the mass accordingly. Also 
ensure that the valve hinges do not 
stick and there is no blockage of water 
through leaves and straw in the ram. 

There is air in the drive pipe line. 
Evacuate the air by closing impact 
valve for some time. 

The seat of the delivery valve may be 
worn out and leaking. Replace the 
valve packing and recondition the seat. 
Also ensure that magnification factor 
dogs not e^pepd 30. 



