**************** 


*■  *Z**K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 
Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


mrjsssss^^t^: 


,_A» 


**************** 


BLANK  PAGE 


<_<ii££ 


UJ> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  11601  :  2002 

( w?n  jfitim ) 

Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  SAFETY  EVALUATION  OF 

SYNTHETIC  DETERGENTS  —  TESTS  FOR 

SKIN  IRRITATION  AND  SENSITIZATION 

POTENTIAL  OF  SYNTHETIC  DETERGENTS 

(  First  Revision  ) 


ICS  71.060.50,71.100.40 


©BIS  2002 

BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9    BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  1 10002 

September  2002  Price  Group  4 


Soaps  and  Other  Surface  Active  Agents  Sectional  Committee,  CHD  25 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  ( First  Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by 
the  Soaps  and  Other  Surface  Agents  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Chemical  Division  Council. 

Detergents  are  used  almost  universally  on  regular  basis.  Their  safety  aspect  has  been  the  subject  of  numerous 
investigations  in  the  past.  The  committee  responsible  for  formulation  of  this  standard  felt  the  need  for  specifying 
test  methods  which  can  evaluate  the  safety  aspects  of  synthetic  detergents  used  by  the  consumers. 

Detergent  products  which  come  in  contact  with  skin  should  be  free  from  skin  sensitizing/skin  allergy  producing 
components.  Such  components  even  when  present  in  minute  levels  ( ppm — part  per  million  concentration )  in  the 
formulation,  would  cause  itching,  redness,  swelling  and  blister  formation  on  the  skin.  The  onset  of  such  episodes 
is  usually  a  delayed  response  from  the  time  of  first  contact  with  the  product  which  makes  it  difficult  to  identify  the 
incriminating  product/ingredient,  even  by  an  experienced  medical  expert.  The  detection  involves  cumbersome 
procedure  of  patch  testing  on  skin  with  all  suspect  materials  on  people  who  are  susceptible  to  such  skin  allergy. 
The  intractable  nature  of  this  skin  condition  may  cause  unnecessary  hardships  to  the  consumers.  Hence,  it  is 
essential  that  manufacturers  of  detergent  products  make  sure  that  their  products  are  free  from  such  hazard,  by 
subjecting  their  products/ingredients  to  a  predictive  skin  sensitization  test  using  a  sensitive  animal  model.  The 
allergic  skin  reaction  described  above  is  not  caused  by  toxic  or  irritant  properties  of  the  substance  (  which  need 
to  be  tested  separately  )  but  is  due  to  the  increased  sensitivity  and  harmful  immunological  response  to  these 
substances  caused  by  repeated  contact.  Identification  of  such  allergenic  irtgredients/products  is  possible  through 
the  Guinea  Pig  Maximization  Test  ( GPMT  ). 

The  rationale  of  the  choice  of  guinea  pigs  for  skin  sensitization  test  are: 

a)  Guinea  pigs  are  the  most  sensitive  species  for  assessing  skin  sensitization;  and 

b)  Ethical  considerations  prevent  testing  of  new  formulations  directly  on  human  subjects,  unless  one  is 
sure  of  the  safety  of  formulations.  If  the  formulation  happens  to  be  a  sensitizer,  it  would  cause  irreparable 
damage  and  misery  to  the  volunteer,  unlike  the  short  duration  skin  irritancy  test.  The  latter  would  only 
have  a  reversible  transient  effect.  Skin  sensitization  test  can  be  performed  by  any  one  of  the  two  methods, 
namely,  Buehler  Test  or  Magnusson  and  Kligman  Guinea  Pig  Maximization  Test.  Even  though  Buehler 
Test  is  not  as  sensitive  as  the  Magnusson  Kligman  Guinea  Pig  Maximization  Test,  regulatory  agencies, 
such  as  US  FDA,  OECD,  EPA,  etc,  have  approved  of  this  test  for  the  purpose  of  substantiation  of  safety 
of  chemicals  from  the  point  of  sensitization. 

This  standard  was  initially  published  in  two  parts,  namely,  IS  11601  'Methods  of  safety  evaluation  of  synthetic 
detergents  :  Part  1  Method  of  test  for  irritant  potential  of  synthetic  detergents,  and  Part  2  Method  of  test  for  skin 
sensitization  potential  of  synthetic  detergents  ( Guinea  Pig  Maximization  Test  )\ 

In  this  standard  both  the  parts  have  been  merged  to  make  it  user  friendly  as  well  as  a  complete  standard.  There  is 
a  strong  movement  the  world  over,  to  reduce  the  usage  of  animals  for  experimental  purposes.  The  existing  version 
is  primarily  based  on  animal  experimentation  to  assess  the  irritancy  potential  of  fabric  washing  synthetic  detergent 
products.  With  a  view  to  reduce  such  animal  experimentation,  an  alternative  test  involving  human  subjects  —  the 
species  of  concern  —  is  incorporated  in  this  revision.  For  assessing  skin  sensitization  potential,  a  single,  stringent 
but  most  sensitive  test  (  Magnusson  and  Kligman )  was  given.  However  in  this  revision  in  addition  to  the  above 
test  a  simpler  test  (  Buehler  )  involving  only  topical  application  is  prescribed. 

In  line  with  the  other  Indian  Standards,  that  is,  IS  401 1  :  1997  'Methods  of  test  for  safety  evaluation  of  cosmetics 
(  second  revision  )',  it  is  recommended  that  formulations  are  made  conforming  to  the  updated  versions  of 
IS  4707  (  Parts  1)  :  2001  'Classification  for  cosmetic  raw  materials  and  adjuncts  :  Part  1  Dyes,  colours  and  pigments 
( second  revision )'  and  IS  4707  (  Part  2  ) :  200 1  'Classification  for  cosmetic  raw  materials  and  adjuncts  :  Part  2  List 
or  raw  materials  generally  not  recognized  as  safe  for  use  in  cosmetics  (  second  revision  )',  guidelines  of 
CTFA  (  Cosmetics  Toiletries  and  Fragrance  Association ),  EEC  (  European  Economic  Community  ),  Directive  and 

(  Continued  on  third  cover  ) 


IS  11601  :  2002 


Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  SAFETY  EVALUATION  OF 

SYNTHETIC  DETERGENTS  —  TESTS  FOR 

SKIN  IRRITATION  AND  SENSITIZATION 

POTENTIAL  OF  SYNTHETIC  DETERGENTS 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  prescribes  methods  of  test  for  skin 
irritation  and  skin  sensitization  potential  of  synthetic 

detergents. 

2  REFERENCE 

IS  7597  :  2001  'Glossary  of  terms  relating  to  surface 
active  agents',  is  a  necessary  adjunct  to  this  standard. 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following 
definitions  along  with  the  definitions  given  in  IS  7597 
shall  apply. 

3.1  Allergic  Reactions  —  Symptoms/signs  caused 
by  exposure  of  an  allergic  individual  to  the 
corresponding  substance. 

3.2  Dermatitis  —  Inflammation  of  the  skin. 

3.3  Erythema  —  Redness  of  the  skin  due  to  dilatation 

of  the  blood  vessels. 

3.4  Hypersensitivity  —  A  state  where  an  individual 
is  capable  of  developing  an  allergic  reaction  due  to 
some  external  agent. 

3.5  Occlusion  Area  —  An  area  of  skin  which  is  cut 
off  from  the  environment. 

3.6  Repeated  Insult  Irritant — An  agent  which  causes 
an  irritant  reaction  only  after  repeated  applications 
to  the  surface  of  the  skin. 

3.7  Sensitization  —  A  process  in  which  an  individual 
develops  the  capability  of  reacting  in  an  allergic 
(  abnormal )  manner  to  a  particular  substance. 

4  SKIN  IRRITANCY  TEST  ON  HUMAN 
SUBJECTS  — HAND  IMMERSION  TEST 

4.1  Outline  of  the  Method 

Human  volunteers  immerse  one  of  their  hands  in  the 
solution  of  the  detergent  product  to  be  tested  while 


the  other  hand,  simultaneously  in  a  solution  of  a  positive 
control  for  10  min,  twice  daily  for  4  consecutive  days 
under  supervision.  Monitor  the  hands  for  any  adverse 
skin  responses  prior  to  and  after  each  immersion  and 
finally  on  the  morning  after  the  last  immersion.  If  the 
skin  responses  with  the  product  tested  are  very  similar 
to  that  manifested  by  the  positive  control,  the  product 
could  be  judged  to  have  an  unacceptable  level  of  skin 
irritancy  potential. 

4.2   Procedure 

4.2.1  Volunteers 

Select  24  healthy  adult  volunteers  (  except  pregnant 
ladies  and  breast  feeding  mothers  )  between  the  age 
of  18  and  55  years,  with  no  known  acute  or  chronic 
diseases  or  no  adverse  skin  responses  to  cosmetics, 
personal  wash  or  fabric  wash  products  and  no  skin 
blemishes  on  their  hands  and  forearms.  They  should 
not  be  under  any  medication,  particularly  anti- 
inflammatory drugs.  Inform  the  volunteers  about  the 
study  in  detail  including  the  likely  hazards  and  obtain 
a  signed  informed  consent  from  each  of  them. 

4.2.2  Products 

Carry  out  the  test  on  newly  formulated  fabric  washing 
synthetic  detergent  products,  the  skin  irritancy 
potential  of  which  is  in  doubt,  prior  to  marketing.  Store 
samples  for  the  test  properly  to  prevent  contamination 
or  spoilage.  Do  not  use  spoiled  or  contaminated  sample. 
Preserve  adequate  quantity  of  the  sample  which  is 
used  for  testing  for  at  least  2  years  for  any  re-testing. 
Identify  each  sample  with  an  unique  code  number  and 
make  appropriate  entry  in  the  records.  Ingredients  used 
in  the  formulation  should  be  of  appropriate  quality 
and  have  sufficient  data  to  support  safety  at  the  level 
which  is  used  in  the  product.  In  order  to  have  a  realistic 
approach  for  product  dosing  in  the  test,  use  the 
dosage  regime  given  on  the  pack,  however,  in  the 
event  of  not  having  such  recommendation  on  the 
pack,  a  dosage  of  7,  10  or  14  g/1  is  recommended 
depending  on  the  BIS  grade  of  the  product,  namely, 
1 ,  2  or  3  as  these  are  the  levels  commonly  found  in 
wash  liquor  w'th  these  grades. 


IS  11601  :  2002 


4.2.3  Positive  Control 

A  3  percent  (  wlv )  solution  of  sodium  lauryl  sulphate 
(  SLS )  with  99.9  percent  purity  (  analytical  grade  )  in 
water  is  used  as  positive  control. 

4.2.4  Method 

Prepare  fresh  solution  of  the  product  and  the  positive 
control  at  the  concentration  mentioned  above  ( see 
4.2.2  and  4.2.3  respectively  )  using  warm  (  37°C  ) 
municipal  water  on  each  of  the  immersion  days. 
Determine  the  pH  and  buffering  capacity  of  the 
detergent  solution  andpH  of  SLS  solution  on  all  the 
treatment  ( immersion )  days.  Transfer  500  ml  of  the 
respective  solution  into  a  suitable  beaker/container 
for  each  volunteer  for  every  immersion.  Organize  the 
seating  arrangements  of  volunteers  for  hand  immersion 
in  a  convenient/comfortable  manner.  50  percent  of 
the  volunteers  in  a  test  immerse  their  left  hand  in  the 
test  product/sample  coded  as  'A'  and  right  hand  in 
the  positive  control  coded  'B\  the  other  50  percent, 
vice  versa.  Each  volunteer  immerses  his/her  respective 
hand  up  to  the  wrist  in  the  solution  with  constant 
movement  of  the  fingers  for  agitating  the  liquid  for 
10  minutes  twice  a  day  (  one  in  the  morning  and  the 
other  in  the  afternoon  with  a  gap  of  about  4  h  between 
two  immersions  )  for  4  consecutive  days.  After  each 
immersion,  the  volunteers  wash  the  hands  thoroughly 
with  tap  water  and  gently  wipe  with  a  dry  towel. 

4.2.5  Assessment  and  Scoring 

Assess  the  skin  reactions  and  score  them  (  Double 
blind  )  as  per  the  scale  given  in  Table  1 ,  before  each 
immersion  under  a  constant  light  source  by  a  trained 
assessor.  The  assessor  should  not  know  which  hand 
received  what  product  treatment.  The  final  assessment 
and  scoring  shall  be  carried  out  on  the  morning  after 
the  last  treatment.  Add  up  the  scores  obtained  at  each 
assessment  ( total  9  assessments  )  and  the  mean  of 
this  score  (  total  score  divided  by  9  )  is  used  for 
evaluating  the  product.  Examine  carefully  the  back 
of  the  hand,  palm  and  the  webs  for  scaling  and  glaze. 
Any  sensation  felt  by  the  volunteer  either  during  or 
after  the  immersion,  and  any  other  comments  shall 
be  taken  into  consideration  in  evaluating  the  product. 
Skin  pU,  hydration  and  trans  epidermal  water  loss 
(  TEWL  )  may  also  be  monitored  (  purely  optional ) 
and  recorded,  to  support  the  clinical  observation. 

4.2.6  Analysis  of  Data  and  Conclusion 

Analyse  the  final  score  using  student's  paired  Mest 
for  determining  the  significance  between  the  product 
and  the  positive  control.  If  the  product  tested  is  found 
to  cause  adverse  skin  responses  very  similar  to  that 
manifested  by  the  positive  control,  such  a  product 
could  be  judged  to  have  unacceptable  level  of  skin 
irritancy  potential. 


Table  1  Scale  for  Assessing  the  Skin  Reaction 

(Clause  4.2.5) 


SI  No. 

Skin  Reactions 

Score 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

i) 

No  reaction 

0 

ii) 

Very   slight  reaction   (   barely 
perceptible  dryness  and  scales ) 

1 

iii) 

Slight    reaction     (  perceptible 
dryness  and  scales  usually  in  a 

small  area  ) 

2 

iv) 

Moderate  reaction  (  perceptible 
dryness  and  scales  in  a  major  or 

whole  area  ) 

3 

v) 

Severe  reaction  (  severe  dryness 
and  scales  in  the  whole  area  with 

or  without  cracking  ) 

4 

4.2.7  Reporting 

The  report  shall  contain  the  following  information: 

a)  Location  of  the  study  and  date, 

b)  Identification  of  the  sample, 

c)  Number  of  volunteers  used, 

d)  Procedure  followed  and  any  deviation, 

e)  Result  of  the  test  in  tabular  form, 

f)  Any  unusual  findings, 

g)  Conclusion,  and 

h)    Name  of  the  investigator. 

5  SKIN  SENSITIZATION  TEST  ON  GUINEA 
PIGS  —  BUEHLER  TEST 

5.1  Outline  of  the  Method 

Apply  the  material  at  a  suitable  concentration  topically 
on  the  clipped  skin  of  guinea  pigs  under  covered  patch 
for  6  h  once  a  week,  for  3  consecutive  weeks  for  inducing 
sensitization.  Challenge  the  animals  topically  2  weeks 
later  with  the  highest  non-irritant  concentration  of 
the  test  material  in  an  identical  manner  as  was  done 
for  sensitization  induction.  Assess  the  resulting  skin 
reactions  24  h  and  48  h  after  removal  of  the  patch  and 
compare  them  with  the  reactions  produced  on  the 
control  group  of  animals  treated  simultaneously  with 
vehicle. 

5.2  Procedure 

The  test  is  carried  out  in  two  phases: 

a)  Preliminary  irritancy  test  —  To  determine 
the  suitable  concentrations  of  the  test  material 
for  sensitization  induction  and  challenge 
treatments. 

b)  Main  test — Carry  out  induction  and  challenge 
treatments  with  the  test  substance  using  the 


IS  11601  :  2002 


concentrations  determined  in  the  preliminary 
irritancy  test. 

5.2.1  Animals 

Use  equal  number  of  male  and  non-pregnant  female 
healthy  albino  guinea  pigs,  weighing  about  300- 
400  g  each.  Use  4  animals  for  the  preliminary  irritancy 
test  and  30  animals  (  20  for  the  test  substance  and  10 
as  control )  for  the  main  test.  Select  a  few  more,  two 
days  prior  to  the  treatment,  to  replace  the  ones  which 
may  be  found  unsuitable  due  to  skin  blemishes,  at 
the  start  of  the  test.  Keep  the  animals  individually 
in  cages  located  in  a  room  maintained  at  23  ±  3°C, 
relative  humidity  40-70  percent,  light  dark  cycle  of 
12  h  in  24  h,  with  adequate  ventilation  and  air  changes. 
Animals  should  have  access  to  standard  feed  and  water 
all  the  time.  Prior  to  each  treatment  remove  hair  from 
the  flanks  by  clipping  depending  on  the  nature  of  the 
treatment.  Assess  sensitivity  of  the  animal  stock  every 
6  months  by  the  use  of  any  one  of  the  positive  control 
substances,  for  example,  dinitro  fluoro  benzene 
(  DNFB  ),  dinitro  chloro  benzene  (  DNCB  ),  hexyl 
cinnamic  aldehyde  (  HC  ),  etc,  which  are  strong  to 
moderate  sensitizers.  These  compounds  should  give 
a  response  in  1 5  percent  (  for  non-adjuvant  tests  ) 
or  more  of  the  animals.  For  such  confirmation  use 
the  same  method  described  in  this  standard.  In  the 
event,  the  animals  are  sourced  from  an  outside  agency, 
where  the  sensitivity  monitoring  is  not  conducted, 
carry  out  sensitivity  test  using  the  same  stock  ideally 
before  carrying  out  the  actual  test  or  in  parallel  with 
the  test  on  another  group  of  animals.  A  test  carried 
out  on  an  insensitive  stock  is  invalid. 

5.2.2  Test  Patches  for  Topical  Treatment 

Fold  2.5  cm  wide  surgical  cotton  gauze,  into  12  ply  of 
2.5  cm  x  2.5  cm  dimension.  Place  this  on  a  2cm  x  2cm 
thin  polythene  sheet  which  is  stuck  at  the  centre  of 
a  2. 5 -cm  wide  and  6-7  cm  long  surgical  adhesive  plaster. 

5.2.3  Samples 

Store,  preserve  and  identify  the  samples  as  described 
under  4.2.2. 

5.2.4  Preparation  of  sample 

Prepare  solutions/suspension  on  a  weight-to-weight 
basis  using  distilled  water.  For  water  insoluble  material 
(  some  of  the  positive  controls  )  use  either  refined 
groundnut  oil  or  pharmaceutical  grade  paraffin  oil  or 
propylene  glycol. 

Prepare  adequate  quantity  of  the  solution/suspension 
in  a  single  batch  to  complete  all  treatments  of  the  day. 
When  a  very  low  concentration  is  required,  it  is  best 
to  prepare  a  concentrated  stock  solution/suspension 
and  dilute  a  quantity  of  the  stock  to  the  required 
concentration  for  treatment.  Use  a  mechanical  agitator 
and  heat  ( not  more  than  38°C )  to  facilitate  solution 


preparation,  if  required. 

5.2.5  Preliminary  Irritancy  Test 

Select  four  treatment  sites,  two  on  the  right  and  two 
on  the  left  flanks,  each  approximately  2.5  cm  x  2.5  cm, 
from  the  clipped  area  of  each  animal.  Take  0.5  ml  each 
of  4  serial  concentrations  (  for  example  0.5,  1 .0,  2.0, 
5.0  percent  and  so  on  )  of  the  test  substance  on  4 
different  patches  supported  by  polythene  sheets. 
Apply  them  on  the  four  selected  sites  of  each  animal. 
Cover  the  patches  and  hold  them  tightly  by  the  aid 
of  cloth  bandage  and  return  the  animals  to  their 
respective  cages.  After  six  hours,  remove  the  patches 
and  mark  the  four  corners  of  each  test  sites  with  indelible 
ink.  Assess  the  sites  for  skin  irritancy  response  24  h 
after  the  removal  of  the  patches  (  30  h  after  the 
application  of  the  patch  ).  Select  the  concentration 
which  produces  a  mild  irritation  ( score  1  on  a  scale 
of  0  to  3  as  described  in  5.2.6.3,  based  on  the  mean 
of  readings  from  four  animals )  for  topical  induction, 
select  the  highest  concentration  (  based  on  the  mean 
of  readings  from  four  animals )  which  does  not  produce 
any  irritancy  response  as  the  challenge  concentration. 

5.2.6  Main  Test 

In  the  main  test  induction  and  challenge  treatments 
are  carried  out. 

5.2.6.1  Induction 

As  mentioned  in  5.2.1,  use  20  animals  for  inducing 
sensitization  with  the  test  sample  and  10  as  control. 
Induction  treatment  is  given  once  a  week  for  3  weeks. 
Take  0.5  ml  of  the  solution/suspension  of  the  test 
sample  at  the  selected  concentration  on  a  single  patch 
(  see  5.2.2  ),  apply  on  the  left  flank  of  the  animal  of 
the  test  group,  bandage  as  described  earlier 
(  see  5.2.5  )  and  allow  a  contact  period  of  6  h.  Give 
the  control  group  a  similar  treatment  but  with  vehicle 
(  distilled  water  )  in  place  of  the  test  substance.  At 
the  end  of  the  contact  period  remove  the  patches  and 
any  substance  sticking  to  the  treatment  site  with 
moistened  tissue  paper.  Repeat  the  application  7  days 
and  14  days  later  on  the  very  same  treatment  site  on 
each  animal. 

5.2.6.2  Challenge 

Fourteen  days  after  the  last  induction  treatment,  give 
the  untreated  flank  of  all  the  animals  ( including  that 
of  the  control  group  )  a  challenge  treatment,  using 
the  highest  non-irritant  concentration  of  the  test 
substance  in  the  same  manner  as  described  earlier 
( see  5.2.5  ).  After  6  hours  remove  the  patches,  clean 
the  area  with  moistened  tissue  paper  and  mark  with 
indelible  ink.  After  21  hours  of  the  removal  of  the 
patches,  examine  the  area  and  clip  the  hair  if  necessary. 
Approximately  3  h  later,  assess  the  skin  reactions 
(  double  blind  )  under  a  constant  artificial  day  light 


IS  11601  :  2002 


source  and  grade  them  as  per  Table  2.  Assess  the 
reaction  again  24  h  later  that  is,  48  h  after  the  patch 
removal.  If  the  response  in  the  first  challenge  is  not 
conclusive,  then  a  second  challenge  treatment  may  be 
given  one  week  later  using  anew  set  of  control  animals. 

5.2.6.3  Scale  for  Evaluation 

Scale  for  evaluation  is  given  in  Table  2. 

Table  2  Scale  for  Evaluation 

( Clauses  5.2.6.2,  5.2.6.3  and6.2.7 ) 


Reaction        Scale 

(3)  (4) 

No  reaction  0 


SI  No.  Observation 

(1)  (2) 

i)        No  visible  change 

ii)         Discrete      or      patchy        Mild  reaction        1 
erythema 

iii)        Moderate  and  confluent       Moderate  2 

erythema  reaction 

iv)        Intense    erythema    and        Severe  3 

swelling  reaction 

5.2.7  Conclusion 

Consider  a  reaction  in  a  test  animal  as  positive  if  it  is 
significantly  greater  than  the  response  on  the  control 
animals.  When  there  is  no  reaction  on  the  control 
animals,  a  reaction  score  of  1  or  more  in  any  of  the 
test  animal  is  considered  to  be  a  positive  sensitization 
response.  Fabric  washing  synthetic  detergent  product 
producing  a  positive  sensitization  in  15  percent  of  the 
animals  in  this  test  poses  a  risk  to  the  consumer. 

5.2.8  Reporting 

1  he    test    report    shall     include    the    following 

information: 

a)  Location  of  the  study  and  date; 

b)  Identification  of  the  sample; 

c)  Guinea  pigs:  Strain,  source,  number,  age,  sex, 
housing  conditions,  diet.  Date  and  results 
of  the  last  sensitivity  check  including  the 
substance  and  vehicle  used.  Individual  weight 
of  animals  at  the  start  and  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  test; 

d)  Procedure  followed  and  any  deviation; 

e)  Result  of  the  preliminary  irritancy  study  with 
conclusion  on  induction  and  challenge 
concentration  to  be  used  in  the  test; 

t)  Result  of  the  main  test  should  be  summarized 
in  tabular  form,  giving  skin  reactions  of  each 
animal  at  each  observation  along  with  any 
narrative  description  of  the  nature  and  degree 
of  effects  observed; 

g)     Any  unusual  findings; 

h)    Conclusion;  and 

j)      Name  of  investigators. 


6  SKIN  SENSITIZATION  TEST  ON  GUINEA 
PIGS  —  MAGNUSSON  AND  KLIGMAN  GUINEA 
PIG  MAXIMIZATION  TEST 

6.1  Outline  of  the  Method 

Inject  the  test  material  along  with  Freund's  Complete 
Adjuvant  (  FCA  )  intradermally  for  inducing 
sensitization  in  guinea  pigs.  FCA  enhances  the 
sensitivity  of  the  immune  system  of  the  animals.  Boost 
the  induction  further  with  the  help  of  a  closed  patch 
application  of  the  test  material  on  the  injected  sites 
after  a  week.  This  is  followed  by  topical  challenge 
treatments  with  the  test  material  a  fortnight  later  to 
finally  assess  the  allergenicity  potential.  Necessary 
concentrations  of  the  test  materials  for  the  above 
mentioned  treatments  are  determined  through 
preliminary  irritancy  studies  as  described  below. 

6.2  Procedure 

Carry  out  the  test  in  two  phases: 

a)  Preliminary  irritancy  test  —  To  determine 
suitable  concentrations  of  the  test  material 
for  sensitization  induction  and  challenge 
treatments. 

b)  Main  test  —  Induction,  boosting  and 
challenge  treatments  with  the  test  substance 
using  the  concentrations  determined  in  the 
preliminary  irritancy  test. 

6.2.1  Animals 

Use  a  total  of  26  albino  guinea  pigs  (  8  for  preliminary 
irritancy  test,  10  for  the  test  material,  4  for  treated 
control  and  4  for  untreated  control )  of  either  sex  bred 
from  a  stock  which  is  disease-free  as  well  as  showing 
positive  sensitization  response  with  a  well  known  skin 
sensitizers.  Select  a  few  more,  2  days  prior  to  the 
treatment,  to  replace  the  ones  which  may  be  found 
unsuitable  due  to  skin  blemishes,  at  the  start  of  the 
test.  House  the  animals  and  look  after  them  as  described 
earlier  (  see  5.2.1  ).  Follow  the  currently  described 
procedure  to  assess  the  sensitivity  of  the  animal  stock 
and  30  percent  (  for  adjuvant  test )  or  more  animals 
should  show  a  positive  response  in  the  sensitivity 
test.  Prior  to  each  treatment  hair  from  the  flanks/ 
shoulder  is  removed  by  clipping  depending  on  the 
nature  of  the  treatment. 

6.2.2  Samples 

Store,  preserve  and  identify  the  samples  as  described 
under  4.2.2. 

6.2.3  Preparation  of  Sample 

Prepare  solutions/suspension  on  a  weight  to  weight 
basis  using  distilled  water/normal  saline.  Prepare 
adequate  quantity  of  the  solution/suspension  in  a 
single  batch  to  complete  all  treatments  of  the  day. 


IS  11601  :  2002 


When  a  very  low  concentration  is  required,  it  is  best 
to  prepare  a  concentrated  stock  solution/suspension 
and  dilute  a  quantity  of  the  stock  to  the  required 
concentration  for  treatment.  Use  a  mechanical  agitator 
and  heat  (  not  more  than  38°C  )  to  facilitate  solution 
preparation,  if  required. 

6.2.4   Preliminary  Irritancy  Test 

6.2.4.1  Intradermal  irritancy  test 

This  test  is  done  to  find  out  the  suitable  intradermal 
induction  injection  concentration  which  will  be  used 
for  sensitizing  the  animals.  Inject  intradermally  (  at 
least  1  cm  apart  on  the  clipped  and  shaved  flank  of 
4  guinea  pigs  of  the  same  sex  and  weighing  around 
300  g  each )  with  0. 1  ml  each  of  0. 1, 0.25, 0.5  ,  1  percent 
or  more  of  the  test  substance  in  normal  saline 
(  0.9  percent  sodium  chloride  )  using  a  sterilized 
tuberculin  or  disposable  syringe  fitted  with  26  gauge 
needle.  Return  the  animals  to  their  individual  cages. 
After  24  h  examine  the  intensity  and  extent  of  reactions 
by  size  in  millimetres  ( length  and  breadth )  for  erythema 
(  redness  )  and  oedema  (  swelling  ).  Select  the 
concentration  which  produces  a  slightly  irritant 
reaction,  namely,  7  mm  x  7  mm  erythema  and  oedema 
(  mean  from  4  animals  )  for  intradermal  induction 
injection  concentration. 

6.2.4.2  Test 

Saturate  eight  millimetre  diameter  chromatography 
paper  (  Whatman  No.  3  )  discs  with  a  range  of 
concentrations,  for  example.  0.5,  1,2,5,  10  percent 
and  so  on  of  the  test  material  in  distilled  water/suitable 
solvents  and  place  them  in  10  mm  diameter  aluminium 
discs/cup.  Locate  these  cups/discs  at  least  1  cm  apart 
on  the  clipped  and  shaved  flank  of  four  guinea  pigs, 
each  weighing  about  400  g.  Hold  the  patch  test  discs/ 
cups  containing  the  paper  in  such  a  way  that  the  paper 
is  in  contact  with  the  skin.  Fasten  the  discs/cups  to 
the  trunk  with  surgical  adhesive  plaster  tapes  and  cloth 
bandage.  Leave  the  animals  in  their  individual  cages. 
Remove  the  patches  24  h  after  application.  Examine 
the  treated  sites  24  h  and  48  h  after  the  removal  of 
patches.  Score  the  resulting  reactions  for  irritation 
on  a  0-3  scale  as  described  under  5.2.6.3 
( see  Table  2  ).  For  boosting  the  sensitization  response 
through  topical  application,  select  the  concentration 
giving  a  slightly  irritant  ( score  1  )  reaction.  Select 
the  highest  concentration  which  causes  no  visible 
reaction  (  score  0  )  for  challenge  treatment  (  final 
treatment ). 

6.2.5   Main  Sensitization  Test 

Select  1 0  guinea  pigs  weighing  about  300  g  each  from 
the  stock  as  described  under  6.2.1. 

6.2.5.1   Sensitization  treatment  —  Induction 

Carry  out  the  sensitization  treatment  in  two  stages  : 


Intradermal  injection  followed  one  week  later  by 
topical  application. 

a)  Intradermal  injection  —  Clip  the  hair  from 
a  2  cm  x  4  cm  area  of  skin  on  the  dorsal 
shoulder  region  and  give  3  pairs  of  intradermal 
injections  within  the  clipped  area 
( see  Fig.  1 )  using  a  sterilized  tuberculin  or 
disposable  syringe  fitted  with  a  23  gauge 
needle  in  the  following  manner: 

i)  Two  0. 1  ml  injections  of  50  percent  FCA 
in  normal  saline  on  sites  marked  T. 

ii)  Two  0.1  ml  injections  on  sites  marked  '2' 
of  the  test  material  in  normal  saline  at 
the  concentration  selected  for 
sensitization  induction  from  the  intra- 
dermal irritancy  test  ( see  4.2.4.1 ). 

iii)  Two  0. 1  ml  injections  on  sites  marked  '3 ' 
of  test  material  in  normal  saline  mixed  with 
1  :  1  FCA,  such  that  the  final  concentration 
of  test  substance  injected  is  the  same 
as  that  in  (ii)  above. 

b)  Topical  treatment  :  boosting  —  One  week 
after  the  injection,  clip  and  shave  the  same 
2  cm  x  4  cm  treated  area.  Saturate  a  2  cm  x  3  cm 
chromatography  paper  ( Whatman  No.  3  )  with 
the  test  material  at  the  selected  concentration 
as  determined  under  6.2.4.2  and  place  over 
the  shaved  site.  Cover  this  by  4  cm  x  6  cm 
piece  of  thin  polyethylene  sheet.  Hold  the 
paper  saturated  with  test  substance  covered  by 
polyethylene  sheet  in  place  for  48  h  by  surgical 
adhesive  plaster  tape  and  cloth  bandage. 
Remove  the  patches  at  the  end  of  48  h. 


Fig.  1  Guinea  Pig  Viewed  From  Above  Showing  The 
Sites  of  Intradermal  Induction  Injections 


IS  11601  :2002 


6.2.5.2    Topical  challenge 

Fourteen  days  after  the  boosting  treatment,  challenge 
(  final  treatment  to  determine  sensitization )  the  guinea 
pigs  using  an  occluded  patch.  For  each  animal,  saturate 
an  8  mm  diameter  chromatography  paper  (  Whatman 
No.  3  )  disc  with  the  test  material  at  the  selected 
challenge  concentration  (highest  topical  non-irritant 
concentration  ( see  6.2.4.2  )  and  place  it  in  a  1 0  mm 
diameter  aluminium  patch  test  disc/cup.  Apply  this 
on  to  the  clipped  and  shaved  flank  ( see  Fig.  2  )  and 
hold  in  position  using  surgical  adhesive  plaster  tape 
and  cloth  bandage  for  24  h.  Examine  the  challenged 
site  for  inflammatory  response,  redness  ( erythema ), 
swelling  (  oedema )  24  h  and  48  h  after  removal  of  the 
patches.  One  week  after  the  first  challenge,  a  further 
challenge  on  the  opposite  flank  may  be  given  exactly 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  first  one.  Provide  a  third 
challenge  one  week  later  on  the  opposite  flank  if  the 
earlier  challenge  results  are  inconclusive. 


Fig.  2  Site  of  Topical  Challenge  on  Guinea  Pig 
6.2.6    Treated  and  Untreated  Controls 
6.2.6.1  Treated  control 
At  the  same  time  as  the  main  test,  select  4  guinea  pigs 


of  the  same  weight  range  as  treated  controls.  Give 
them  mock  sensitization  treatment  at  the  same  time 
and  in  the  same  way  as  for  the  main  test  animals  except 
that  the  test  substance  is  omitted  from  the  intradermal 
injection  induction  and  topical  application  boosting. 
But  treat  them  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the  test  animals 
at  every  challenge  with  the  test  material. 

6.2.6.2   Untreated  controls 

Challenge  4  animals  which  did  not  receive  any  treatment 
previously  but  are  of  the  same  weight  range  as  the 
main  test  animals,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
test  and  treated  control  animals. 

6.2.7  Scale  for  Evaluation 

Score  the  skin  reactions  resulting  from  treatment  using 
the  scale  given  in  5.2.6.3  (  see  Table  2  ). 

6.2.8  Conclusion 

Consider  a  reaction  in  a  test  animal  as  positive 
response  if  it  is  significantly  greater  than  the 
response  on  treated  and  untreated  control  animals. 
When  there  is  no  reaction  on  treated  and  untreated 
control  animals,  a  reaction  score  of  1  or  more  in  any 
of  the  test  animals  is  considered  to  be  a  positive 
sensitization  response.  Fabric  washing  synthetic 
detergent  product  producing  a  positive  sensitization 
response  in  30  percent  of  the  animals  in  this  test  poses 
a  risk  to  the  consumer. 

6.2.9  Reporting 

The  test  report  must  include  the  information  as  required 
under  5.2.8. 


IS  11601  :  2002 


ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Soaps  and  Other  Surface  Active  Agents  Sectional  Committee,  CHD  25 


Organization 
Drugs  Controller  General  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Central  Board  of  Excise  and  Customs,  Ministry  of  Finance, 
New  Delhi 

Central  Pollution  Control  Board,  Delhi 

Consumer  Guidance  Society  of  India  {  Regd.  ),  Mumbai 

Consumer  Education  and  Research  Centre,  Ahmedabad 

Department  of  Industrial  Development,  Ministry  of  Industry, 
New  Delhi 

Development  Commissioner,  Small  Scale  Industries,  New  Delhi 

Directorate  General  of  Supplies  and  Disposals  (  Inspection 
Wing  ),  New  Delhi 

Federation  of  Associations  of  Small  Scale  Soap  and  Detergent 
Manufacturers  of  India,  Delhi 

Godrej  Soaps  Limited,  Mumbai 

Gujarat  Detergent  Manufacturers  Association,  Ahmedabad 

Hindustan  Lever  Limited,  Mumbai 

Indian  Soaps  and  Toiletries  Manufacturers  Association,  Mumbai 

Karnataka  Soaps  and  Detergents  Limited,  Bangalore 

Khadi  and  Village  Industries  Commission,  Mumbai 
K.  S.  Krishnan  Associates  (P)  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGQA  ),  Kanpur 

Nand  Kishore  Khanna  and  Sons,  Mumbai 

National  Test  House,  Kolkata 

Nirma  Limited,  Ahmedabad 

Oil  Technologists  Association  of  India,  Kanpur 

Procter  and  Gamble  India  Hygiene  and  Healthcare  Limited, 
Mumbai 

Resarch, Designs  and  Standards  Organization  (  Ministry  of 
Railways  ),  Lucknow 


Representative(s) 

Shri  Ashwini  Kumar  (  Chairman  ) 

Shri  B.  R.  Wadhawan  (  Alternate  ) 

Chili- Chemist 

Deputy  Chief  Chemist  (  Alternate  ) 

DR  A.IAY  AC'iARWAL 

Dr  M.  Q.  Ansari  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  N.  G.  Waci.e 

Shrimati  R.  Talwani  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  C.  J.  Shishoo 

Shri  Santosh  Yellore  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Shaish  Kumar 

Shri  B.  B.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  J.  S.  Rekhi 

Shri  P.  Jayakumaran 

Shri  M.  A.  Khan  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Santosh  Kumar 

Shri  R.  C.  Doshi  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  Rangarajan 

Dr  (  Shrimati  )  Rohini  Thakkar  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  S.  A.  Patel 

Shri  Mahendra  Vyas  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  V.  R.  Dhanuka 

Shri  iCP,  Menon 

Dr  K.  B.  Patil 

Shri  S.  G.  Kulkarni  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  G.  K.  Ghosh 

Shri  K.  S.  Krishnan 

Shri  S.  Krishnan  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  M.  S.  Sultania 

Shri  Surjit  Ghose  ( Alternate  ) 

Shri  P.  P.  Khanna 

Shri  A.  C.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  K.  Chakravorty 

Shri  P.  K.  Chakraborty  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  K.  K.  Patel 

Shri  Ashish  R.  Patel  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  B.  R.  Gaikwad 

Shri  P.  K.  Tiwari  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  S.  Mazumdar 

Shrimati  Shweta  Purandre  (  Alternate  ) 

Deputy  Director  (  Chemicals  ) 

Assistant  Research  Officer  (  CM  II ) 
(  Alternate  ) 


(  Continued  on  page  8  ) 


IS  11601  :  2002 

(  Continued  from  page  7  ) 

Organization 
The  Non-Power  Soap  Manufacturers  Association,  Mumbai 

Colgate  Palmolive  (  I  )  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Kopson  Surfactants,  Chennai 
BIS  Directorate  General 


Representative(s) 

Shri  R.  C.  Doshi 

Shki  Y.  R.  Doshi  (  Alternate  ) 

Shki  Sunn.  Agarwai. 

Shki  Vilas  Tui.i.k  (  Alternate  ) 

SHRI  S.  S.  KoiMMKAR 

Shki  S.  K.  Chaudhuri,  Director  &  Head  (  Chem  ) 
[  Representing  Director  General  (  Ex-officio  )  ] 


Member-Secretary 

Shrimati  Chitra  Gupta 

Deputy  Director  (  Chem  ),  BIS 


Raw  Materials  and  Methods  of  Tests  Subcommittee,  CHD  25  :  6 

Organization 
Consumer  Guidance  Society  of  India  (  Regd.  ),  Mumbai 


Albright  Morarji  and  Pandit  Ltd,  Amber 

Central  Institute  of  Research  Cotton  Technology,  Mumbai 

Colgate  Palmolive  India  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Consumer  Education  and  Research  Centre,  Ahmedabad 

Federation  of  Associations  of  Small  Scale  Soap  amd  Detergent 
Manufacturers  of  India,  Delhi 

Galaxy  Surfactants,  Mumbai 

Godrej  Soaps  Limited,  Mumbai 

Harcourt  Butler  Technological  Institute,  Kanpur 

Hindustan  Lever  Limited,  Mumbai 

Helkal  SPIC  India  Ltd,  Karaikal 

Indian  Institute  of  Chemical  Technology,  Hyderabad 

Karnataka  Soaps  and  Detergents  Limited,  Bangalore 

National  Test  House,  Kolkata 

Nand  Kishore  Khanna  and  Sons,  Mumbai 

Nirma  Limited,  Ahmedabad 

Procter  and  Gamble  Hygiene  and  Healthcare  India  Limited, 

Mumbai 

Reliance  Industries  Limited,  Mumbai 

Regional  Testing  Centre,  New  Delhi 

Shriram  Institute  for  Industrial  Research,  Delhi 

Tata  Chemicals,  Pithampur 

University  Department  of  Chemical  Technology,  Mumbai 


Shri  N.  G.  Wagle  (  Convener  ) 

Shri  A.  R.  Shenoy  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  V.  Paranjape 

Shrimati  Vatsala  Iyer 

Ms  C.  R.  Raje  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Sunii.  Ac.arwal 

Shri  Vilas  Tulle  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  (  Shrimati  )  Falguni  Mazumdar 

Shri  Santosh  Yellore  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Santosh  Kumar 

Shri  R.  C.  Doshi  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Surhir  Patil 

Dr  Kashinath  Pandit  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  Rangarajan 

Dr  R.  K.  Trivedi 

Dr  V.  Krishnan 

Dr  V.  R.  Dhanuka  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  V.  R.  Veerappan 

Dr  A.  B.  Afzalpurker 

Dr  K.  B.  Patil 

Dr  B.  R.  Ramesh  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  S.  K.  Aggarwal 

Shrimati  Shashi  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  P.  P.  Khanna 

Shri  A.  K.  Khanna  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  K.  K.  Patel 

Dr  M.  A.  Bhatt  (  Alternate  ) 

Shki  S,  Mazumdar 

Shrimati  Shweta  Purandare  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  C.  B.  Khanpara 

Dr  S.  K.  Kapoor 

Shri  S.  K.  Checker 

Representative 

Representative 


(  Continued  from  second  cover  ) 

guidelines  of  IFRA  ( International  Fragrance  Association  ).  Products  formulated  on  the  above  lines  are  likely  to 
be  safe  and  such  products  may  not  warrant  any  safety  testing.  However,  if  the  manufacturer  feels  it  necessary  to 
generate  data  on  such  formulations,  he/she  has  the  freedom  to  do  so.  Whereas,  products  which  contain  novel 
ingredients  will  require  safety  assessment  using  the  methods  as  given  in  this  standard. 

All  testing  whether  involving  animals  or  human  subjects  are  to  comply  with  the  legislative/regulatory  requirements 
with  reference  to  animal  experimentation/testing  on  volunteers.  All  animal  tests  should  comply  with  the  '■Prevention 
of  Cruelty  to  Animals  Act,  1960  and  Breeding  of  and  Experiments  on  Animals  (Control  and  Supervision  )  Rules, 
1998'  updated  from  time  to  time.  Any  study  involving  human  subjects  should  be  as  per  the  'Ethical  Guidelines  for 
Biomedical  Research  on  Human  Subjects'  formulated  by  ICMR  and  revised  from  time  to  time. 

The  composition  of  the  Committee  responsible  for  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  A 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  1 960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  ( revised)'.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the 
rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and 
attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

B I S  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications .  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  CHD  25  ( 1058 ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 1 0  002  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

Telephones :  323  0 1  3 1 ,  323  33  75, 323  94  02  (  Common  to  all  offices  ) 

Regional  Offices :  Telephone 

Central :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  J  323  76  1 7 

NEWDELHI 110002  \  323  3841 

Eastern :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi  f  337  84 99, 337  85  61 

KOLKATA700054  1337  8626,3379120 

Northern:  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  f 603843 

\  60 20  25 

Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI 600  1 1 3  f  254  12  16, 254  1 4  42 

\  25425  19,254  13  15 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  J  832  92  95, 832  78  58 

MUMBAI400093  1832  7891,832  78  92 

Branches.  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  NALAGARH.PATNA.  PUNE  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurja.  India 


