**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  14593  (1998) :  Design  and  construction  of  bored 
cast-in-situ  piles  founded  on  rocks  -  Guidelines  [CED  48: 
Rock  Mechanics] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14593  :  1998 

( Reaffirmed  2003 ) 


Indian  Standard 

DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF  BORED 
CAST-IN-SITU  PILES  FOUNDED  ON  ROCKS  - 

GUIDELINES 


ICS    93.020 


©BIS   1998 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

September  1998 

Price  Group    5 


Rock  Mechanics  Sectional  Committee,  CED  48 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Rock 
Mechanics  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering  Division  Council. 

Pile  foundations  provide  an  effective  means  of  transmitting  large  concentrated  loads  through  overburden  soils 
to  underlying  rock  or  socketed  into  rock.  Bored  casi-in-situ  piles  has  the  advantages  of  increasing  the  load 
carrying  capacity  by  socketing  the  pile  into  rock.  However  the  load  transfer  mechanism  or  distribution  of  load 
support  of  socketed  pile  is  still  in  the  development  stage  and  depends  upon  the  substrata  condition  and  the  type 
of  rock  modulus  of  rock,  strength  and  unfavourable  condition  of  rock.  Tne  rock  material  can  vary  from  hard, 
fresh  bed  rock  stronger  than  concrete,  to  highly  weathered  rock  with  properties  of  hard  clay .  Rock  socketed  piles 
derive  their  load  carrying  capacity  from  two  components'  shearing  resistance  at  the  concrete-rock  interface 
around  the  vertical  cylindrical  surface  of  the  socket  and  end  hearing  resistance  at  the  pile  tip.  There  are  several 
factors  which  control  the  load  carrying  capacity  of  rock  socketed  pile,  like  quality  and  strength  of  rock,  efficiency 
of  the  load  transfer  mechanisms  between  the  concrete  pile  and  its  rock  socket. 

Construction  of  such  rock  socketed  piles  requires  careful  choice  of  method  of  construction  including  effective 
cleaning  of  the  socket  portion.  As  the  techniques  for  measurements  of  the  rock  mass  properties  of  foliated/ jointed 
rock  are  not  well  developed,  the  mechanisms  for  side  resistance  and  base  resistance  in  rocks  exhibit  complex 
differences  from  those  relevant  to  soils.  Therefore,  a  separate  standard  covering  bored  cSLSUin-situ  piles  socketed 
into  rock  has  been  formulated  for  design,  construction,  and  interpretation  of  test  results. 

The  information  trom  various  international  practices,  designers,  executing  agencies,  construction  agencies  being 
practiced  in  this  country  and  the  technical  discussions  thereon,  including  the  available  literature  and  considerable 
assistance  from  National  Thermal  Power  Corporation  Ltd  have  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  this  standard.  It 
has  been  decided  to  use  the  standard  as  guidelines  initially,  before  adopting  this  standard  as  a  code  of  practice. 

Technical  Committee  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  A. 

In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or 
calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  I960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical 
values  (revised)'. 


IS  14593 :  1998 

Indian  Standard 

DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF  BORED 
CAST-IN-SITU  FILES  FOUNDED  ON  ROCKS  — 

GUIDELINES 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  covers  the  design  of  load  bearing 
concrete  bored  cs^i4n-situ  piles  of  diameter  less  than 
or  equal  to  1  500  mm  which  transmit  the  load  of  the 
structure  to  the  rock  through  resistance  developed 
either  at  the  pile  tip  by  end  bearing  or  along  the 
interface  surface  by  pile  rock  adhesion  or  through 
both. 

This  standard  does  not  cover  well  foundations. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  Indian  Standards  given  below  contain  provisions 
which  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute 
provision  of  this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication, 
the  editions  indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are 
subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on 
this  standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the 
possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the 
standards  indicated  below: 


12070:  1987 


IS  No. 
456 :  1978 


Tide 


Code  of  practice  for  plain  and  rein- 
forced concrete  (third  revision) 
Code  of  practice  for  subsurface 
investigation  for  foundation 
Method  of  standard  penetration  test 
for  soils  (first  revision) 
Glossary  of  terms  and  symbols 
relating  to  soil  engineering 
Code  of  practice  for  design  and  con- 
struction of  pile  foundations. 
Concrete  piles 

Sec  lto3):  1979 

(Part  4)  :  1985    Load  test  on  piles  (first  revision) 

Code  of  practice  for  planning  and 
design  of  ports  and  harbours:  Part  4 
General  design  consideration 
(second  revision) 

Code  of  practice  for  calculation  of 
settlement  of  foundations: 
Shallow  foundations  subjected  to 
symmetrical  static  vertical  loads 
Deep  foundations  subjected  to 
symmetrical  static  vertical  loading 
Glossary  of  terms  and  symbols 
relating  to  rock  mechanics 


1892 :  1979 


2131  : 1981 


2809 :  1972 


2911 


(Parti/ 


4651 
(Part4):1989 

8009 
(Part  1) :  1976 
(Part  2):  1980 

11358:  1987 


IS  No.  Title 

Code  of  practice  for  design  and  con- 
struction of  shallow  foundations  on 
rocks 
13063:  1991  Code  of  practice  for  structural 
safety  of  buildings  on  shallow  foun- 
dation in  rocks 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  definition  of  tonnt 
given  in  IS  2809  and  IS  1 1358  shall  be  applicable  in 
addition  to  the  following. 

3.1  Rock  Socket 

That  portion  of  pile  shaft  which  penetrates  into  a  rock 
formation  beneath  the  overburden. 

4  NECESSARY  INFORMATION 

4,1  For  the  satisfactory  design  and  construction  of 
bored  cast-m-j/fw  piles  in  rock,  the  following 
information  is  necessary  : 

a)  Information  as  per  IS  291 1  (Part  1/Sec  2). 

b)  Geotechnical  investigation  data  as  laid  down 
as  per  IS  1892,  IS  13063  or  any  other  relevant 
IS  code. 

c)  The  rock  profile,  contours,  the  geological  data 
and  the  necessary  information  as  listed  in 
IS  13063  along  with  the  engineering  and 
physical  properties  of  the  rock  strata/mass. 

d)  Information  of  rock  below  the  anticipated  level 
of  pile  tip,  generally  not  less  than  5  m  in 
bed-rock  or  more  if  othei  wise. 

e)  In  case  of  bridge  on  pile  foundations  data  on 
high  flood  level,  maximum  scouring  depth, 
normal  water  level  during  working  season,  etc. 

f)  In  case  of  marine  construction  necessary  infor- 
mation as  per  IS  465 1  (Part  4). 

g)  Results  of  chemical  tests  to  ascertain  the 
chemical  constituents  like  chlorides,  sulphates, 
alkali  and/or  any  other  deleterious  chemical 
content  of  soil/rock  and  ground  water, 

5  EQUIPMENT  AND  ACCESSORIES 

The  equipment  and  accessories  would  depend  upon 
the  type  of  subsoil  strata,  ground  water  conditions,  the 


IS  14593 :  1998 


type  of  rock/founding  material  and  the  required  depth 
of  embedment  therein  whichever  appUcable.  Among 
the  commonly  used  plants,  tools  and  accessories,  there 
exists  a  large  variety  of  suitability  on  the  subsoil  and 
rock  type  conditions  and  manner  of  operations,  etc. 

5.1  Boring 

Boring  operations  are  generally  done  by  rotary  or 
percussion  type  drilling  rigs  using  direct  mud 
circulation  or  reverse  mud  circulation  methods  to 
bring  the  cuttings  out.  Bailer  and  Chisel  method  if 
employed  should  be  used  with  caution  to  avoid  the 
effect  of  suction.  Over  cutting  especially  at  the  change 
of  strata  should  be  done  with  caution. 

5.2  Chiseling 

Chiseling  may  be  resorted  to  in  rock  strata  to  penetrate 
up  to  required  depth. 

5.3  Cutting  Tod 

The  size  of  the  cutting  tool  should  not  be  less  than  the 
diameter  of  the  pile  by  more  than  75  mm. 

5.4  DrUlingMud 

Use  of  drilling  mud  in  stabilizing  sides  of  b(»^oles  is 
also  made  where  appropriate  or  necessary.  Drilling 
mud  should  satisfy  the  basic  properties  as  defined  in 
IS2911(Partl/Sec2). 

5.5  Cleaning 

Proper  cleaning  of  piles  after  boring,  after  lowering  the 
reinforcement  and  before  concreting  shall  be  done. 
On  completion  of  pile  bore  up  to  required  depth,  the 
bottom  of  pile  bore  shall  be  cleaned  to  remove  rock 
debris,  pile  bore  soil,  etc.  Rope  cq>erated  grabbing  or 
kelly  mounted  hydraulically  operated  grab  can  be 
used.  Use  of  air  lift  technique  is  also  effective  in 
removing  the  rock  debris. 

5.6  Liner 

Permanent  liner  may  be  used  to  avoid  tfie  aggressive 
action  of  ground  water  or  otherwise.  In  case,  liner  is 
used  and  the  pile  bore  is  filled  with  water  or  drilling 
mud,  the  bottom  part  may  be  concreted  using  tremie 
so  that  the  liner  is  effectively  sealed  against  ingress  of 
ground  water,  the  upper  part  may  be  concreted  in  dry 
condition  after  inspection  of  the  top  surface  of  the 
concrete  already  placed. 

6  DESIGN  CONSIDERATIONS 

6.1  General 

Pile  foundations  socketed  in  rock  strata  shall  be 
designed  in  such  a  way  that  the  load  from  the  structure 
it  supports,  is  transmitted  to  the  rock  without  causing 
any  rock  failure  and/or  without  causing  such 
settlement  (differential  or  total)  under  permanent/ 
transient  loading  as  may  result  in  structural  damage 


and/or  functional  distress.  The  pile  shaft  should  have 
adequate  structural  capacity  to  withstand  all  loads 
(vertical,  compression  or  uplift  and  moments  which 
are  transmitted  to  the  rock  mass). 

6.2  The  various  factors  to  be  considered  during   ' 
design  are  as  per  IS  12070. 

6.3  Loading  on  Piles 

6.3*1  Depending  on  the  nature  of  the  superstructure, 
the  loads  can  form  any  combination  of  axial  forces 
(either  compressive  or  tensile),  lateral  forces  and 
moments.  The  various  load  combinations  of  dead 
load,  live  load,  wind  load,  earthquake  load  and  uplift 
load  to  be  considered  should  satisfy  the  requirements 
of  IS  456. 

63.2  The  overburden  soil  may  exert  negative  skin 
friction  on  pile  shaft  resting  on  rock.  This  should  be 
accounted  for  in  design  of  piles. 

6.4  The  load  carrying  capacity  of  a  pile  is  dependent 
on  the  properties  of  the  rock  in  which  it  is  embedded/ 
socketed.  Axial  load  from  a  pile  is  nc^mally 
transmitted  to  the  rock  through  adhesion  at  the 
interface  of  pile  and  rock  and  end  bearing  at  the  pile 
tip. 

6.4.1  A  single  pile  is  normally  designed  to  carry  load 
along  its  axis.  The  horizontal  load  on  a  vertical  pile  is 
transmitted  to  the  subsoil  primarily  by  horizontal 
subgrade  reaction  generated  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
shaft.  Transverse  load  bearing  capacity  of  a  single  pile 
depends  on  the  soil  reaction  developed  and  the 
structural  capacity  of  the  shaft  under  bending. 

6.4.2  The  permissible  load  carrying  capacity  of  pile 
may  be  estimated  using  the  proposed  methods. 
However,  it  should  be  confirmed  by  an  initial  load  test 
on  trial  pile  IS  291 1  (Part  4). 

6.4.3  The  settlementof  pile  obtained  at  safe  load  from 
load  test  results  on  a  single  pile  shall  not  be  directly 
used  in  forecasting  the  settlement  of  a  structure  unless 
experience  from  similar  foundations  on  its  settlement 
behaviour  is  available. 

6.4.4  The  average  settlement  may  be  assessed  on  the 
basis  of  properties  of  subsoil/rock  and  loading  details 
of  the  structure  as  a  whole  using  the  principle  of  rock 
mechanics  or  as  given  in  6.6. 

6.5  Estimation  of  Load  Carrying  Capacity 

6.5.1 .  Compression 

Rock  socketed  piles  can  be  designed  to  carry 
compressive  loads  in  side  wall  shear  only  or  end 
bearing  only,  or  a  combination  of  both.  The  most 
important  factors  that  influence  the  design  procedure 
are  the  strength,  degree  of  fracturing  and  modulus  of 
deformation  of  rock  mass,  the  condition  of  the  walls 
and  base  of  the  socket  and  the  geometry  of  the  socket. 


IS  14593 :  1998 


Depending  upon  the  type  of  rock,  any  one  of  the 
following  methods  shall  be  used  for  computing 
compression  capacity: 

a)  Based  on  uniaxial  compressive  strength  of 
rock, 

b)  Based  on  limit  pressure  of  rock. 

c)  Based  on  shear  strength  of  rock,  and 

d)  Structural  strength  of  pile. 

NOTES 

1  Minimum  length  of  socket  for  preliminary  design  may  be 
taken  from  Table  1 ,  although  it  should  be  estimated  from  static 
computations  given  in  this  standard  and  preferably  verified  by 
load  test. 

2  The  rock  up  to  depth  of  at  least  one  diameter  below  the  base 
of  the  socket  is  either  intact  or  tightly  jointed  (no  compressible 
or  gougefilled  scores), 

3  There  ate  no  solution  cavities  or  voids  below  the  base  of  the 
pile. 

Table  1  Suggested  Minimum  Length  of  Socket 

(Clause  b.5  A,  Note  1) 


6.5.1.1  Based  on  uniaxial  compressive  strength 

a)  Where  the  rock  is  sound  the  strength  of  the 
foundation  rock  is  generally  much  in  excess  of 
the  design  requirements,  provided  the  walls  of 
the  discontinuity  are  closed  and  they 
are  favourably  oriented.  Refer  to  Fig.  1  of 
IS  12070.  with  respect  to  the  applied  forces 
then  the  data  to  be  investigated  shall  be  as 
given  in  6  of  IS  12070. 


j3s  =  gcNjN^p^cTtDka^ 


..(1) 


where 
D 

/s 

a 


Ni     = 


discontinuity  is  greater  than  300  mm  and 
aperture  (opening)  of  discontinuities  less 
than  10  mm  (15  mm  if  filled  with  soil  or 
rock  debris.  Otherwise  Table  4  of  IS  12070 
is  applicable). 

a  values  are  given  in  Fig.  1  based  on  rock  strength  and 
values  of  j5  in  Fig.  2  based  on  mass  factor. 

Where  the  rock  is  relatively  homogeneous  and 
competent  and  comparable  with  concrete  in  strength, 
in  Equation  (1). 


safe  load  capacity  of  pile,  in  tonnes; 

uniaxial  compressive  strength  of  rock, 

T/m^ 

depth  factor  =  0.8+0.2  IJD,  lunited  to  2; 

area  of  pile  toe,  rcD  /4; 

diameter  of  pile,  in  m; 

socket  length  into  the  rock,  in  m; 

rock  socket  slide  resistance  reduction 

factor  (Fig.  1); 

rock  socket  correction  factor  (Fig.  2);  and 

values  as  per  Fig.  2    of   IS    12070    are 

applicable,       when     the     spacing     of 


9c 

= 

safe  strength  of  concrete,  T/m  ; 

Ni 

ss 

03; 

a 

& 

0.05; 

fi 

= 

l;and 

N6 

s 

1. 

Rock  Type 

Is 

(1) 

(2) 

ec 

Sound  relatively  homogeneous  rock 
including  granite,  gneiss 

lto2D 

Moderately  weathered,  closely  jointed 
including  schist,  slate 

2to3D 

Soft  mcks,  sedimentary  rocks  including 
haid  shale,  sandstones,  siltstone,  mudstone 

3to4D 

NOTE  —  Z)  is  the  diameter  of  pile. 

8S 

10000 


UNIAXUL   COMPRESSIVE   STRENGTH 


Fig.  1  Side  Resistance  Reduction  Factor 
Reflecting  Variation  of  Rock  Strength 


0         0-2        0-4        0-6        0  8        1-0 
MASS   REDUCTION  FACTORj^-pL 

Fig.  2  Side  Resistance  Reduction  Factor 
Reflecting  Variation  of  Mass  Factor 


IS  14593 :  1998 


6.5.1.2  Bastd  on  pressuremeter  test 

This  method  is  suited  for  weathered  or  closely  jointed 
rocks  and  for  soft  rocks. 

Qu  =  [Po  +  ^b  (Pi  -  Po )]  Ap  +yi7cD/s  ...(2) 


where 
G« 

Po 

/Cb 

Pi 


yi   = 


ultimate  pile  capacity  in  compression,  T; 

overburden  pressure  at  the  elevation  of  pile 
tip,  T/m^; 

bearing  capacity  coefficient  depending  on 
socket  length  as  given  in  Table  2; 

limit  pressure  determined  from 
pressuremeter  test  in  the  zone  extending 
two  times  the  pile  diameter  above  and 
below  pile  toe  (top),  T/m^;  and 

frictional  resistance  component. 
Table  2  Values  of  ^b 


Socket  Length 
PUe  Diameter 

0 

1 

2 

3 

5 

7 

^b 

0.8 

2.8 

3.6 

4.2 

4.9 

5.2 

Values  of /i  depending  on  limit  pressure  are  given  in 
Fig.  3,  for: 


,2: 


p\  <  150  t/m  in  highly  weathered  rocks;  and 


iH 


t/m  for  moderately  weathered  rocks. 


The  value  of  ^  should  be  limited  to  0.05  times  the 
safe  strength  of  concrete. 


FfirCTION    TO  SE    IGNORED 
FROM  Z-0   TO   -0'3m  +  fi 


where 

Cu 


a 

Ps 

is 


0  50  100  ^150 

P|    IN    T/m' 

Fig.  3  Frictional  RESISTANCE  OF  PILES 
(SOFT,  Weathered  Rocks) 

6.5.1.3  Estimation  of  compression  capacity  using 
shear  strength  parameters 


ultimate  capacity  of  pile  in  comiM^ssion,  T; 

shear  strength  of  rock  below  pile  tip,  tW; 

bearing  capacity  factor  (equal  to  9); 

average  shear  strength  of  rock  adjacent  to 

the  shaft  in  the  socketed  length  (Fig.  4), 

tW; 

0.9  (recommended  value); 

6  (factor  of  safety);  and 

socket  length,  m. 


Qu   -  CuNc  X  nD^/4  +   aCs  K  Dk 


...(3) 


Fig.  4    Influence  Factors  for  Settlement 

wrrH  Different  Embedment  Ratios  (of  Socket 

Length) 

The  above  method  is  applicable  for  siltstone,  mud- 
stone  and  weathered  sandstone.  The  partially 
mobilized  frictional  resistance  offered  by  the  soil  may 
be  neglected. 

6.5.1.4  Structural  capacity 

The  piJes  shall  have  necessary  structural  strength  to 
transmit  loads  imposed  on  it,  ultimately  to  tiie  rock  as 
peris  2911  (Part  1/Sec  2). 

6.6  Settlement 

Settlement  for  piles  could  be  estimated  from  one  of  the 
following  methods. 


IS  14593 :  1998 


6.6.1  Based  on  IS  8009  (Part  2),  settlement  *S'  can  be 
estimated  as  follows: 

5  =5p  +  5i  ...(4) 

where,  5p  is  elastic  compression  and  is  given  by: 

PL 


'^   -  A,E, 

Si 

^    immediate  settlement  of  pile 

L 

=    length  of  the  pile 

Si  = 

ApEa 

...(5) 


where 

S     »    total  settlement  of  the  pile; 

Sp    =    elastic  compression  of  pile; 

Si     =    immediate  settlement  of  pile; 

P     =    design  load  on  pile; 

£p    ~    modulus  of  elasticity  of  pile; 

^     =    pmsson's  ratio  of  rock; 

Ed    ^    modulus  of  deformation  of  rock  mass; 

Ei    3=    modulus  of  defcnmation  of  rock  material; 

and 
/      =    influence  factor  [value  of  influence  factor 

can  be  taken  as  specified  in  IS  8009 

(Part  1)]. 

6.6.2  For  hcHnogeneous  and  stratified  rock  mass,  the 
following  method  shall  be  used  for  computing  the 
settlement: 


S  = 


PD 


9  OCm  Em  An 


...(6) 


where 

Em    — 

am  = 


average  pressuremeter  modulus  in  the  zone 
extending  3  diameters  below  the  pile  toe 
a  coefficient  which  is  a  function  of  the 
structure  of  the  rock  mass  {see  also  Table  3) 

Table  3  Values  of  am 


Spacing  of  3.0  0.9-3.0      03-0.9       O.l-OJ 

Discontinuities  (m) 


Om 


1  0.75  0.5  0.25 


6.6.3  For  settlements  of  pile  with  both  adhesion  and 
end  bearing,  for  varying  rock  moduli  ranging  from 
moderately  weathered  to  very  strong  rock,  the 
following  method  shall  be  used  for  computation: 


This  method  is  applicable  to  homogeneous  and 
stratified  rock  masses.  In  the  latter  case  the  modulus 
to  be  used  in  the  formula  is  taken  as  the  weighted 
average  of  the  moduli  measured  in  the  different  strata, 
provided  the  moduli  do  not  differ  by  more  than  a 
factor  10. 

The  effect  of  thin  horizontal  joints  or  compressible 
seams  cannot  be  taken  into  account  in  this  method  and 
the  results  may  be  misleading  if  such  joints  or  seams 
occur. 


S  = 


2Plr 


Ed  Is 


...(7) 


where 

P  =  design  load,  T; 

£d  =  modulus  of  the  rock  mass,  T/m  ; 

It  -  influence  factor  as  given  in  Fig.  4;  and 

/g  =  length  of  socket. 

6.6.4  The  elastic  compression  of  pile  shall  be  added 
to  the  settlement  estimated  from  6.6.2  and  6.6.3. 

6.7  Lateral  Load  Capacity 

6.7.1  The  capacity  of  a  socketed  pile  to  withstand 
l^eral  loads  depends  on  the  rigidity  of  the  pile  as  well 
as  the  load-deformation  characteristics,  thickness  of 
die  soil  and  rock  strata  in  which  tiie  pile  is  socketed. 

6.7.2  For  calculating  the  capacity  of  the  pile  socketed 
in  rock  requires  determination  of  the  depth  of  fixity, 
lateral  deflection  and  maximum  moment.  Three 
different  embedments  of  pile  in  rock  are  encountered 
and  the  design  is  made  accordingly. 

a)  Pile  passing  through  soil  of  considerable  thick- 
n^s  [Fig.  5(a)], 

b)  Intermediate  thickness  of  soil  and  rock  [Fig. 
5(b)],  and 

c)  Pile  fully  embedded  in  rock  [Fig.  5(c)]. 

6.7.3  Design  Considerations 

6.7.3.1  Case  (a) 

When  the  rock  into  which  the  pile  penetrates  is 
covered  by  a  relatively  thick  layer  of  soil  Fig.  5(a),  the 
influence  of  the  rock  is  negligible,  and  the  method  of 
estimation  for  capacity  can  be  done  similar  to  the 
method  as  mentioned  in  IS  291 1  (Part  1/Sec  2). 

6.7.3.2  Case{h) 

In  case  of  intermediate  pile  Fig.  5(b),  the  end  restraint 
condition  of  the  socketed  pile  should  be  accounted  for 
in  the  estimation  of  the  lateral  capacity,  that  is: 


if^<4 


..-(8) 


where 

Ls    =    length  of  pile  in  soil,  and 

R     =    relative  stiffness  factor  as  per  IS  29 1 1  (Part 

1/Sec2). 

The  contribution  of  the  rock  can  also  be  accounted  for 
taking  into  account  the  variation  in  the  modulus  of 
subgrade  reaction  with  depth. 


IS  14593 :  1998 


^vi^Jig 


vrrT7 


SCflL 


/f^vmimw 


.>* 


1 — T 


3 


ROCK 


I        I        I        I         - 

(a) 
PILE  SUPPORTING  SOIL 
WITH  MINIMUM  ROCK 
PENETRATION 


a 


/j^'**  ^^/ 


SOIL 


W^ 


S<4 


rzE 


CI 


"hOCK 


Jill 

ih) 

PILE  FULLY  FIXED  IN 
HOCK  BELOW  A  THICK 
SOIL  LAYER 


"7»nW/ 


a 


ROCK 


ni 


rz 


riE 


rir 


Cc) 

PILE  FULLY  EMBEDDED 
IN  ROCK 


Fig.  5  Different  Amounts  of  Embhjments  in  Rocks 


6.7.33  When  the  pile  is  fully  embedded  in  rock,  as 
shown  in  Fig.  5(c)  with  a  higher  modulus  than  that  of 
the  pile  material,  the  lateral  C24>acity  it  can  resist  is 
determined  by  the  capacity  of  its  section  to  resist  shear 
forces. 

6.8  Upltft  Capacity 

6.8.1  Socketed  piles  can  be  designed  to  resist  uplift 
forces  either  by  enlarging  or  belling  the  base,  or  by 
developing  sufficient  side  wall  shear  resistance. 
While  belling  the  base  of  pile  is  conmion  in  soils,  this 
can  be  an  expensive  and  difficult  operation  in  rock. 
Moreover,  since  a  significant  amount  of  side  wall 
shear  resistance  is  developed  in  rock  sockets,  it  is 
usually  more  economical  to  deepen  the  socket  in  rock 
than  to  construct  a  shorter,  belled  socket. 

6*8.2  Uplift  Resistance  in  Side  Wall  Shear 

6.8.2.1  The  preliminary  design  for  uplift/tension 
piles,  can  be  carried  out  using  the  methods  given  for 
compression  piles  with  due  allowance  for  side 
adhesion  and  the  factors  shall  be  as  per  IS  12070. 
However,  full  scale  uplift  load  tests  should  be 
performed  to  determine  the  allowable  side  wall  shear 
resistance  and  the  load  displacement  behaviour. 

6.8.2.2  The  results  of  load-displacement  tests 
performed  on  tension  piles  can  be  used  to  calculate  the 
shear  stress  developed  on  the  side  wall  and  the  actual 
displacement  can  be  compared  with  the  theoretical 
displacement  from  elastic  theory  for  compression 
piles. 

In  all  cases  the  minimum  length  of  socket  is  2  times 
the  socket  diameter  of  pile. 

6.9  Factors  Affecting  the  Lo^d  Capacity  and 
Settlement  of  Socketed  Pile 

a)    Geometry  of  the  socket  defined  by  the  length 
to  diameter  ratio; 


b)  Modulus  of  deformation  of  the  rock  mass  both 
around  the  socket  and  below  the  base; 

c)  Strength  of  the  rock  in  the  walls  of  the  socket 
ami  below  the  pile; 

d)  Condition  of  the  side  walls  with  respect  to 
roughness,  and  the  presence  of  drill  cuttings  or 
bentonite  cakes; 

e)  Condition  of  the  end  of  the  pile  with  respect  to 
the  removal  of  drill  cuttings  and  other  loose 
material  fi-om  the  bottom  of  the  socket; 

f)  Layering  in  the  rocks  and  the  response  of 
seams  with  differing  strengths  and  moduli; 

g)  Setriement  of  the  pile  in  relation  to  the  elastic 
limit  of  side  wall  shear  strength; 

h)  Creep  of  the  material  at  the  rock-concrete 
interface  resulting  in  increasing  settlement 
with  time;  and 

j)    Effect  of  ground  water  table. 

6.10  Spacing  of  PUes 

Similar  provision  as  laid  down  in  IS  291 1  (Pan  1/Sec  2). 

6.10.1  For  pile  founded  in  bed  rock  spacing  of  twice 
the  pile  diameter  may  be  adopted.  In  case  of  weak  and 
weathered  rock  a  minimum  spacing  of  two-and-a-half 
times  the  pile  diameter  may  be  provided. 

6.11  Pile  grouping  similar  provisions  as  laid  down  in 
IS2911(Partl/Sec2). 

6.11.1  Pile  cap  design  shall  conform  to  the  provisions 
laid  down  in  IS  291 1  (Part  1/Sec  2). 

6.12  Factor  of  Safety 

642.1  Factor  of  safety  should  be  judiciously  chosen 
considering  the  various  factors.  However,  the 
minimum  factor  of  safety  on  static  formula  shall  be  6. 
The  final  selection  of  factor  of  safety  shall  take  into 
consideration  the  load  settlement  characteristics  of  the 
structure  as  whole  at  a  given  site. 


IS  14593 :  1998 


6.12.2  The  factor  of  safety  may  be  increased  in  case 
of  unfavourable  conditions  of  rock,  deterioration  with 
time,  vibrations  from  the  structure/equipments. 

6^3  Transient  loading  similar  provision  as  laid  down 
inIS2911(Partl/Sec2). 

6.14  Overloading  similar  provisions  as  laid  down  in 
IS2911(Partl/Sec2). 

6.15  Reinforcement  similar  provisions  as  laid  down 

inIS2911(Partl/Sec2). 

7  MATERIALS  AND  STRESSES 
CONFORMING  TO  IS  2911  (Part  l/Sec  2) 

Cement  steel  and  materials  and  methods  of 
manufacturer  of  concrete  shall  conform  to  the 
provisions  of  IS  291 1  (Part  1/Sec  2). 

8  WORKMANSHIP 

Workmanship  shall  conform  to  IS  291 1  (Part  1/Sec  2). 
Control  of  piling  installation,  concrete  operations, 
method  of  placing  concrete,  convenience  of 
installation,  concrete  above  cut  off  level,  cause  and 
remedies  for  defective  piles,  recording  of  piling  data 
shall  conform  to  the  provisions  of  IS  291  l(Part  1/Scc  2). 
in  addition  to  the  above,  after  ensuring  cleaning  of  pile 
bore  including  socket  as  specified  concreting  shall  be 
done  immediately  and  shall  be  unintemipted. 

9  LOAD  TEST 

9.1  To  confirm  the  estimated  load  capacities  in 
compression,  lateral  and  in  pullout  modes,  pile  load 
test  shall  be  conducted  on  initial  pile.  The  number  of 
test,  test  procedure,  method  of  test  shall  be  similar  to 
the  provision  of  IS  291 1  (Part  4),  Test  on  working  pile 
shall  also  be  carried  out.  The  interpretation  of  results 
shall  be  made  by  competent  geotechnical  engineer  as 
given  in  the  following  clauses. 

9.2  Vertical  Load  Test 

9.2.1  The  initial  test  pile  may  be  tested  up  to  two-and- 
a-half  times  the  estimated  safe  load  or  up  to  failure 
load  whichever  occurs  earlier. 


9.2.2  The  safe  load  on  single  pile  shall  be  the  least  of 
the  following: 

a)  Fifty  percent  of  the  load  at  12  mm  settlement 
unless  otherwise  required  in  a  given  case  on 
the  basis  of  performance  requirement. 

b)  One  third  of  the  ultim.ate  failure  load. 

9.2.3  Routine  load  test  shall  be  carried  out  for  a  test 
load  of  at  least  one-and-a-half  times  the  working  load, 
the  maximum  settlement  of  test  loading  in  position 
shall  not  exc^d  8  mm. 

93  Lateral  Load 

9J.1  The  initial  test  pile  may  be  tested  up  to 
two-and-a-half  times  the  estimated  safe  load  or  up  to 
failure  load  whichever  occurs  earlier. 

93.2  For  piles  embedded  in  rock  [Fig.  5  (b)and  5  (c)], 
the  safe  lateral  load  should  be  least  of  the  following; 

a)  Fifty  percent  of  the  final  load  at  which  the  total 
displacement  increases  to  8  mm. 

b)  Final  load  at  which  the  total  displacement  cor- 
responds to  4  mm. 

c)  Load  corresponding  to  any  other  displace- 
ment. 

933  Routine  load  test  shall  be  carried  out  for  a  test 
load  of  at  least  one-and-a-half  times  the  working  load, 
the  maximum  deflection  of  test  loading  in  position 
shall  not  exceed  4  mm. 

93.4  For  condition  of  Fig.  5(a),  the  provisions  of 
IS  291 1  (Part  4)  will  be  applicable. 

9.4  PulloatLoad 

9.4.1  The  initial  test  may  be  tested  up  to 
two-and-a-half  times  the  estimated  safe  load  or  up  to 
failure  whichever  occurs  earlier. 

9.4.2  The  safe  load  shall  be  taken  as  the  least  of  the 
following: 

a)  Fifty  percent  of  the  load  at  which  the  total 
displacement  is  1 2  mm  or  the  load  correspond- 
ing to  a  specified  permissible  uplift. 

b)  Forty  percent  of  the  load  at  which  the  load 
displacement  curve  shows  a  clear  break. 


IS  14593  :  1998 


ANNEX  A 

(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Rock  Mechanics  Sectional  Committee,  CED  48 


Chairman 
Prof  Bhawani  Singh 

Members 
Prof  P.  K.  Jain 

Shri  N.  K.  Samadhya  (  Alternate  ) 
AssiST.iNT  Research  Officer 
Dr  R.  L.  Chauhan 
Chief  Engineer  (R  &  D) 

Director (Enoo)  {Alternate) 
Shri  Dadbshwar  Gangadhar  Dhayagude 

Shri  Arun  Dattatraya  Joski  ( Alternate ) 
Director  &  Secretary 
Dr  a,  K.  Dube 

Shri  A.  K.  Soni  ( Alternate ) 
DrV.K,  Sinha 
Shri  A.  Ghosh 

Dr  G. S. Mehrotra  (Alternate) 
Director 
Shju  icarmvir 
Director 

Shri  B.  M.  Rama  Gowda  ( Alternate ) 

Dr  UDAY  V.  KULKARNl 
Dr  R.  P.  KULKARNI 

Member  Secretary 

Director (C)  (Alternate) 
Dr  D.  N.  Naresh 
Shri  M,  D=  Najr 

Shw  B.  K.  Saigal  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  D.  M.  Panchou 
Shri  V.  S.  Brahambhatt 
Scientist  in<:haroe 
Dr  K.  S.  Rao 
Prof  T.  Ramamurthy 

Dr  G.  V.  Rao  ( Alternate ) 
ShriS.  D.  Baratha 

ShriT.  S.  NarayanaDas  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  K,  Dhawan 
Shri  Jitindra  Singh 

Shri  D.  K.  Jain  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  P.  J.  Rao 

Shri  D,  S,  Toua  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  Ranjodh  Singh 
SHRi  U.  S.  Rajvanshi 
Dr  J.  L.  Jethwa 
Dr  V.  M.  Sharma 
Shri  Vinod  Kumar, 
Director  (Civ  Engg) 


Representing 
University  of  Roorkee,  Rooikee 

University  of  Roorkee,  Roorkee 

Irrigation  Department,  U.P. 

Regional  Engineering  CoUege,  Hanurpur 

Irrigation  Department,  Haryana 

Asia  Fouttdations  &  Constructions  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Central  Qround  Water  Board,  New  Delhi 
Central  Mining  Research  Station  (CSIR),  Roorkee 

Centcal  Mining  Research  Institute,  Dhanbad 
Central  Building  Research  Institute  (CSIR),  Roorkee 

Geological  Survey  of  India,  Calcutta 
IrriMrinn  &  Fowmr  Departmem,  Chandi^h 
Centcal  Water  &  Power  Research  Station,  Pune 

Hindustan  Construction  Co  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Irrigation  Department,  Maharashtra 

Central  Board  of  Irrigation  &  Power,  New  Delhi 

National  Thermal  Power  Corporation  Ltd,  New  Delhi 
Associated  Instrument  Manufacturers  (I)  Pvt  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Irrigation  Department,  Government  of  Gujarat 
Gujarat  Engineering  Research  Institute,  Vadodara 
National  Geophysical  Research  Institute,  Hyderabad 
Indian  Geotechnical  Society,  New  Delhi 
Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  New  Delhi 

Kamataka  Engineering  Research  Station,  Kamataka 

Central  Soil  &  Materials  Research  Station,  New  Delhi 
Engineer-in-Chiefs  Branch,  New  Delhi 

Central  Road  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi 

Naptha  ihakri  Power  Corporation,  Shimla 

In  personal  capacity  {KC-38  Kavi  Nagar,  Ghaziabad) 

In  personal  capacity  (Scientist  in-Charge,  CMR1  Station  Unit,  Nagpur) 

In  personal  capacity  (ATES,  New  Delhi) 

Director  General,  BIS  {Ex=officio  Member) 


Secretary 

ShriW.  R.Paul 

Joint  Director  (Civ  Engg),  BIS 


(Continued  on  page  9) 


IS  14593 :  1998 


{Continued  from  page  8) 


Rock  Slope  Engineering  and  Foundation  on  Rock  Subcommittee,  CED  48:4 


Convener 
Prof  P.  K,  Jain 


Representing 
University  of  Roorkee,  Roorkee 


Members 
Dr  a.  K.  Dhawan 

DrU.N.  SiNHA 

Shri  a.  Ghosh  ( Alternate  ) 
Prof  T.  Ramamurthy 

Dr  K.  G.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  Yudhbir 
Dr  KishoreKaur 

Dr  V.  V.  S.  Viswanathan  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  V,  K.  Katwala 

Shri  D.  Sengupta  (  Alternate ) 
DrV.  K.  Singh 
DrV.  K.  Mehrotra 
Shri  Y.  A.  K.Singh 
ShriD.  G.  Kadkade 

Shri  R.  K.  Jain  ( Alternate ) 
ShriB.K.  Sharma 
Or  V.  Venkateswaralu 
Shri  S.  K.  Mathur 
Shri  V.  V.  Nayak 

ShriP,  S.  Sengupta  {Alternated 


Central  Soil  and  Materials  Research  Station,  New  Delhi 
Central  Building  Research  Institute  (CSIR),  Roorkee 

Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  New  Delhi 

Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  Kanpur 
Central  Road  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi 

Central  Mine  Planning  and  Design  Institute,  Nagpur 

Central  Mining  Research  Institute,  Dhanbad 
U.  P.  Irrigation  Departnient,  Roorkee 
P  W  D,  Manipur 
Jai  Prakash  Associates  Pvt  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

National  Hydroelectric  Power  Corporation  Ltd,  New  Delhi 
National  Institute  of  Rock  Mechanics,  Kamataka 
RiTES,  New  Delhi 
Trafalgar  House,  Mumbai 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  pronnote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Handbook*  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.    CED  48  (  5464  ). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN   STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110  002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central      :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110  002 

Eastern      :  1/14  C.  I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700  054 

Northern   :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 
Southern   :  C.  1.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113 


Western     :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400  093 


Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


{ 


Telephone 

323  76  17 
323  38  41 


r  337  84  99,337  85  61 
\   337  86  26,337  91  20 


{ 


60  38  43 
60  20  25 


{ 
{ 


235  02  16,235  04  42 
235  15  19,235  23  \5 

832  92  95,832  78  58 
832  78  91,832  78  92 


Branches  :  AHMAD ABAD.  BANGALORE,  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.GHAZIABAD.GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR,  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  PATNA.  PUNE.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Prmtograph,  New  Delhi,  FTi  :  5726847 


