**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11466-1 (1985) : Guidelines for packing, stowage and 
securing of cargo inside the freight containers. Part 1 
General cargo [TED 12: Freight Containers and Pallets] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



LS : 11466 (Part 1 > - 19BS 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR PACKING, 

STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO 

INSIDE THE FREIGIIX CONTAINER 

PART 1 GEKERAL CARGO 



UDG 62ta69'BSa : 656 073 423"0O43;-4t 020 } 




© CopjfTiRht 1B8G 

INBIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK l^HAVAN, 9 BAlIAnUK SIlAH ZAFAR UhUG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR PACKING, 

STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO 

INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINER 

PART 1 GENERAL CARGO 

Freight Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 7 

Chairman Representing 

Capt N. a. Tamhane Container Information & Services Go, Bombay 

Members 

Shri MurarilaIi Bahbi The Indian Roads & Transport Development 

-Association, Bombay 

Shbi M. p. Sanghvi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Bajaj Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & 

Labour Institute, Bombay 

Shbi V. L. Kathane ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Bishnoi Bahner Lawrie & Go Ltd, Galcutta 

Shbi P. Seth ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. R. Ghoksi The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi N. L. Dalmia Trans-Freight Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shbi S. Mittal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B, R. Dave Department of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shbi P. G. Deshmukh Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shiu Pravin Kanakia Federation of Freight Forwarders' Association in 

India, Bombay 

Capx N. a. Tamhane ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V, Kaxjshik Voltas Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. V, Bai. ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. R. Khabe Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shbi Madan L. Kochhab American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri R. G. Bhavanani ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ram V. Kotak Intermodal Transport and Trading Systems Pvt Ltd, 

Bangalore 

Shbi M. O. Sharieff ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. L. Kbishnamubthy Cochin Port Trust, Cochin 

Shri M. Velu ( Alternate ) 
Capt S. B. Kundargi The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay 

Gapt C. P. Alexander ( Alternate )' 
Capt S. B. Kundabgi Indian National Shipowners* Association, Bombay 

Shri D. Madhok Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shbi J. N. Goswamy ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 11466 (Part 1 ) ■« 1985 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shui a. K. Majumdar Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta 

Shui N. N. Mookherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. E. L Mampillt Bombay Port Trust, Bombay 

Shri M. J. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Manerkar Federation of Association of Stavadorcs, Madras 

Shri J. S. Marwaha Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow 

Shri K, L. Nirwak ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Obhan Indian Federation of Transport Operators, Bombay 

Shri Harkirat Singh Kohi,i ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. M. Prabhakar Sea Lord Containers Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. G. Mkhta ( Alternate ) 
Shri L N. Pradhak In personal capacity ( Jsfarain JSfiwas, 21 N&rth Avenue, 

SantacruZy West Bombay ) 
Shri S. R. Prasad The UK & Continental Shipping Conferences, 

Bombay 
Shri M, G, Scih^oiA Peninsular European & Asian Container Express, 

Bombay 
Shri R. G, Sharma Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), 

New Delhi 

Shri Love Dev Raj ( Alternate ) 
Shri Raj Jaswant Singh Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri Kamal Krishna ( Alternate ) 
Shri G, C. Sinosal Mahindra Owens Ltd, Pune 

Shri B. V. Baliga ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Srivastav Ministry of Defence (R&D), New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Thakur Ministry of Shipping and Transport, New Delhi 

Shri S, N. Sum an ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Veekatachalam Nathani Steel Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. V. Jagannath ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. B. Wabrier Bureau Veritas, Bombay 

Shki M. C. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. L. Raina, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri V. K. ^ehgal 
Joint Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR PACKING, 

STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO 

INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINER 

PART 1 GENERAL CARGO 



0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 September 1983, after the draft finalized by the Freight 
Containers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, 
Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended as a guide to the essentials of safe packing 
for use by those responsible for the packing and securing of cargo in 
freight containers. Earlier, the securing of cargo on boardships was 
done by the skilled stevedore labour. Now it is the responsibility of the 
shipper who does the loading and securing of goods inside the container 
at factory of warehouse, often with less skilled manpower. 

0.3 Damage to goods transmitted in containers is usually due to more 
faulty stowing and securing than due to severe stresses during trans- 
portation. Therefore, it is necessary to prevent cargo shifting within the 
container which may cause damage to the container and/or to the cargo. 

0.4 While this part of the standard deals with general cargo, the 
guidelines for packing, stowage and securing of dangerous goods inside 
the freight container are given in the Part 2 of this standard. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) gives guidelines for safe packing, stowage 
and securing of general cargo in a freight container. 

2. FORCES ACTING ON CARGO 

2#1 During Road Transport — Once cargo is loaded inside a container 
and when the container moves by road, following hazards exist: 

a) Impact against loading docks, 

b) Braking and acceleration, 

c) Sway on curves, 

d) Coupling impact, and 

e) Vibration and shocks, 

2.1.1 Rapid acceleration and deceleration from sudden stops can create 
forces ranging from 3 to 8 'G' ( gravity ). This places a tremendous 
strain on individual pieces as well as the entire load. When the cargo 
bounces inside a container 'G' forces can be severe specially on loads at 
the rear of the container. It also experiences horizontal centrifugal 
forces during turning and cornering. 

2.2 During Rail Transport 

a) Acceleration and deceleration, 

b) Coupling impact, 

c) Sway on curves, and 

d) Vibrations. 

2.2.1 Movement of container on land at times is accomplished through 
rail transportation and the goods are subjected to the same stresses as in 
the case of truck ( highway ) transportation. In addition, hard braking 
can occur during shunting. This creates retardation, a sudden force and 
aft movement of cargo. 

2.2.2 Shocks and vibrations produced in rail movements are greater 
than those of the road transportation. It is not unusual to liave fre- 
quencies of 2'5 to 5 hertz with shock intensities of up to 1'25 Gs. 

2.3 During Sea Voyage — A vessel at sea may be subjected to extreme 
weather conditions. 

2#3,1 A ship has the following movements of rotation about its axis 

( see Fig. 1 ): 

a) Rolling, 

b) Pitching, and 

c) Yawning. 

4 



IS t 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

2.3.2 A ship has also the foHowing body motions as shown in Fig. 1: 

a) Heave, 

b) Sway, and 

c) Surge. 

YAWING 



"-^^%. 




Fig. 1 Body Motion 

2.3.3 A ship may move in a single motion or in any combination of 
all of these motions at one instance making it a confusing and extremely 
complex action. 

2.3.4 A loaded container may travel 21 metres with each complete roll 
as often as 7 to 10 times per minute. In high seas a roll of 45** is not 
uncommon. The toughest leg of the journey of a container is the sea 
and the cargo in the container should be loaded and secured to with- 
stand this toughest journey. 

3. GUIDELINES FOR VISUAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
CONTAINER 

The container should be inspected both inside and outside, before it 
is loaded with cargo. Containers that are damaged, may pose a risk to 
the personnel handling or transporting them. If a container appears 
to be severly damaged, the container operator should be contracted with 
a view to obtain replacement. The following checklist may be used as a 
guide to inspect the container before loading of cargo is started. 

3.1 Interior 

3.1.1 The container should be free from major damage or broken floor 
planks or protrading nails that can damage the cargo, 

5 



IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) » 1985 

3«1,2 The container should be clean, dry and free of residue and 
persistant odours from previous cargoes. 

3.1*2*1 If the container has been used for the transportation of goods 
with a pungent or obnoxious smell or germinating cargoes, internal 
cleaning or even disinfection may be necessary. 

3.1.3 The container should be weather proof ( unless it is so constructed 
that this is obviously not required, that is flats ). The risk of water 
leaking into the container may be checked by entering the container, 
closing the doors and seeing if any light comes through. In particular, 
previous patches or repairs should be checked for possible leakage. If 
this type of checking is carried out, care should be taken lo ensure that a 
person does not inadvertantly get locked inside. 

3.1.4 Ventilation openings, if fitted should be securely closed unless 
specifically instructed otherwise. 

3.1*5 Most of the dry freight containers have built-in tie-down on 
fittings ( bull rings/D rings ) which are used to secure and brace on cargo 
inside the container. These tie-down on fittings, where provided, should 
be in good condition and well anchored. 

3.1.6 Folding containers or other containers with movable or removable 
main components should be correctly assembled. Care should be taken 
to ensure that removable parts, not in use, are packed and secured inside 
the container. 

3.2 Exterior 

3.2.1 The doors of the container should be checked to see that they 
work properly and can be securely locked and sealed. Door gaskets and 
weather strips should be checked to see that they seal tightly upon 
closing the doors, 

3.2.2 The corner fittings usually on both the top and bottom of the 
container are extremely important for the safe handling and transpor- 
tation of the container. They should be free of damage and there 
should be no visible cracks, 

3,2*3 It is important that the walls, floor and roof are in good 
condition, intact and not distorted. 

3.2«4 The structural strength of the container depends to a great 
extent on the metal bottom and top raih and vertical posts which form 
the frame of the container. If they are bent this may be evidence that 
the container is severely weakened and should not be used. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

4. GUIDELINES ON THE STOWINXJ, PACKING AND SECURING 
OF GOODS IN A CONTAINER 

4,1 Before Packing 

4.1. 1 When a container on a vehicle is manoeuvered up to a loading 
dock or bay, the vehicle's brakes should be applied or wheels checked 
before loading of the container begins. If a container on a semi-trailer 
is positioned, at a loading bay and the tractor unit is removed, trailer 
may become unstable and pivot about trailer landing legs during the 
loading process, particularly, if a forklift truck is used inside the con- 
tainer. In such circumstances a suitable prop should be positioned 
under the fifth v^heel plate of the trailer. 

4.1.1.1 When forklift trucks are used, the dynamic load on the floor 
of the container due to the forklift truck shall be limited as follows: 

Front axle mass 5 460 kg. Max 

Mass per front wheel 2 730 kg, Max 

Contract area/wheel 142 cm^, Min 

Wheel width Not less than 180 mm 

Wheel centres About 760 mm 

4.1.2 Loading pattern should be planned for each commodity prior 
to commencement of loading in container. The pre-planning leaves the 
minimum gap inside the container and avoids overloading one end of 
the container or the container sides. 

4.1.2.1 The maximum permissible intensity of loading should not 
exceed the following limits; 

For 20-ft container 4*5 ton/m^ 

For 40-ft container 3 ton/m^ 

4.1.2.2 Cargo packages of an appropriate strength and type should 
be selected to be placed adjacent to each other, so as to gain the desired 
tightness of stowage and compatibility between the items. 

4.1.3 The planned load of the container should not exceed the 
container's weight capacity which is usually marked on the container. In 
addition, the relevant highway or road axle weight limitations in the 
countries of loading, destination or transit, should not be exceeded. 

4.1.4 When cargo comprises heavy units, it may be necessary to spread 
their weight over the container floor using timber, steel plates or other 
arrangements. In this re^^ard, the size of the bearing area upon which 
the weight presses against the floor in relation to the design strength 
of the container is the most important factor. 



IS: 11466 ( Part 1 )- 1985 

4,1«5 Unboyed machinery should be belted on a skid made of sound 
timbers so that the lower members extend length-wise in the container 
for the proper distribution of weight. 

4.1.6 Particular care should be taken when securing heavy units within 
a container to prevent their movement. Batten nailed to wood floor 
( where fitted ), securing against corner post or longitudinal rails, lashings 
to the built-in securing points or combination of any of these should be 
used to ensure proper securing of the cargo. 

4.1.6.1 Portable anchor plates are available which can be placed 
and secured at strategic locations depending on the cargo to be lashed. 

4.2 Packing and Securing 

4.2.1 It is essential to make the cargo in the container secure against 
movement from any reasonable cause and, therefore, all cargo should 
be blocked tightly against adjacent goods or .surfaces. 

4.2.2 In the first instance, it is best to obtain a tight stowage by using 
the cargo itself and building with a reasonable solidity from side-wall 
to side-wall. This may mean some space has to be left but each item 
should be in contact with some part or the other. If this cannot be 
the case, intervening spaces should be filled with appropriate dunnage 
material, that is, timber folded, cardboard, hardboard, air bags, etc. 
Where timber is used, due account should be taken of any quarantine 
regulations applying in the country of destination. 

4.2-3 Cargo weight should be evenly distributed over the floor of the 
container. Where cargo items of varying weight are to be packed into 
a container or where the container will not be full ( either because of 
insufficient cargo or because the maximum weight allowed will be 
reached before the container is full ), then the stowage should be 
arranged and secured in such a manner that the approximate centre 
of gravity of the cargo is close to the mid length of the container. In 
no case, more than 60 percent of the load should be in less than half 
of the length of the container. 

4.2.3.1 Longitudinally, the centre of gravity may be out of middle 
by the following limits: 

20-ft container ±0*60 m 
40-ft container ±0*90 m 

4.2.4 Heavy goods should not be placed on top of lighter goods. 
Wherever possible, the centre of gravity should lie in the lower half of 
the height. Cargo with high centre o^ gravity shall require more 
decking and bracing in a container than the one with a lower centre of 
gravity. 



IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 

4.2»5 Stowing of incompatible goods in the container should be 
avoided. For example, dust producing goods, such as cement should 
not be stowed next to or on top of goods which are susceptible to damage 
by dust, that is, foodstuffs or fine machinery. 

4.2.5.1 Goods with sharp projections or unusual shapes should be 
stowed apart from other type of packages, particularly bags. If possible, 
separation timber should be used to avoid damage. 

4,2.6 Barrels and drums should usually be packed with bungs upper- 
most. Proper stowage for barrels is on their side, laid on battens with 
bulge free and each securely cushioned. Vented packages should be 
packed so that the vent is in no way blocked. 

4.2»7 In order to avoid cargo damage from condensation, wet cargoes, 
moisture inherent cargo, or cargoes liable to leak must not be loaded 
with goods susceptible to damage by moisture. Wet dunnage, pallets 
or wet packaging should not be used. 

4.2.8 Damaged packages should not be loaded into a container unless 
there is clear evidence that the contents will not spill or leak. 

4.2.8.1 In case, the packages develop leakage during voyage, in 
order to avoid damage in that case double tier of dunnage keeps cargo 
off the floor and above the pool of liquid, 

4.2.9 When solids and liquids are stowed in the same container, solids 
should always be placed above the liquids to avoid possibility of damage 
from leakage. 

4.2.10 Permanent securing equipment incorporated in the design of 
the container should be used wherever necessary to obtain tight stowage 
and prevent cargo movement. 

4.3 On Completion of Packing 

4.3.1 After the packing of the container is completed, steps 
should be taken to ensure that the cargo will not fall out when the doors 
are opened. Suitably positioned lashing points and wire rope or 
strapping hands should be used to leave a restraining net across the face 
of the cargo or a gate should be positioned to prevent direct pressure on 
the door. Where medium sized packages are concerned, care should be 
taken to interweave the cargo itself so as to effectively build a wall and 
thus reduce the need for a reliance opened lashings or net alone. 

4.3.2 If goods are packed in wooden receptacles or wood is used for 
securing purposes and the goods are destined for countries having wood 
treatment quarantine regulations, it is a desirable practice to place a 
copy of the wood treatment certificate in a conspicuous place in the 
container. 

9 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base UniU 



Q,UANTITY 


Unit 


Symboi. 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mass 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


s 


Blecuic current 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


ketvim 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


c^ftdela 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 


Supplementary Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 


Derived Units 






QlTANTlTy 


Unit 


Symbol 


Force 


newton 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

1 N - 1 kg.m/s' 
1 J === 1 N.m 
1 W= IJ/s 
1 Wb = 1 V.s 
1 T -= 1 Wb/m« 
1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-*) 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V = 1 W/A 
1 Pa = 1 N/m» 



