**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14621 (1998) : Photography - Electronic Flash Equipment - 
Determination of Light Output and Performance [MED 32 : 
Photographic Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14621 :1998 
ISO 2827 :1988 



Indian Standard 

PHOTOGRAPHY — ELECTRONIC FLASH 

EQUIPMENT — DETERMINATION OF LIGHT 

OUTPUT AND PERFORMANCE 



ICS 37.040.10 



©BIS 1998 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELH1 110002 

November^998 Price Group 3 



Photographic Equipments Sectional Committee, LM 24 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 2827 : 1988 'Photography — Electronic flash 
equipment — Determination of light output and performance', issued by the International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of 
the Photographic Equipments Sectional Committee and approval of the Light Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention 
is drawn especially to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard'appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exist. The coresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below 
along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of 

Standard Equivalence 

ISO 1 230 IS 1 4620 : 1 998 Photography — Determination Identical 

of flash guide numbers 

ISO 5763 IS 1 4622 : 1 998 Photography — Electronic flash do 

equipment — Automatic control of exposure 

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of ISO 1 229 and ISO 3028 referred in 
this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1 960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)'. The number of significant 
places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



tS 14621 : 1998 
ISO 2827 : 1988 



Indian Standard 

PHOTOGRAPHY— ELECTRONIC FLASH 

EQUIPMENT — DETERMINATION OF LIGHT 

OUTPUT AND PERFORMANCE 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies methods of nneasurennent 
and sets standards of performance for light output, angle of 
coverage, ready indication, recycle time and number of flashes 
for electronic flash equipment of the single flash type, which is 
primarily intended to provide illumination for photography with 
cameras in which the contacts that control the flash are closed 
when the shutter of the camera is fully or ne9rly fully open. 



2 References 

ISO 1229, Photography — Expendable photoflash lamps 
Determination of the light output. 



ISO 1230, Photography 
numbers. 



Determination of flash guide 



ISO 3028, Photography ~ Camera flash illuminants — Deter- 
mination of ISO spectral distribution index (ISO/SDI). 

ISO 5763, Photography — Electronic flash equipment ~ 
Automatic control of exposure. 



3 Definitions 

For the purposes T)f this international Standard, the definitions 
given in ISO 1230 and the following definitions apply. 

3.1 flash : Pulse radiation of intense light having inconstant 
flux, used for photographic purpose. 

3.2 electronic flash tube : A light-transmitting envelope 
having electrodes and containing a gas through which the 
energy from a storage capacitor is discharged, thereby produc- 
ing a flash of light. 

The spectral energy distribution of this light depends on the 
type of gas and other design factors. 

3.3 electronic flash equipment : An electronic flash tube, 
usually mounted in a suitable reflector, and the appropriate 
apparatus for activating and controlling the electronic flash 
tube. 



3.5 half angle of coverage : The angle between the axis of 
the reflector and the direction where the luminous intensity falls 
to one half of the value in the axis. 

On symmetrically designed reflectors the angle of coverage is 
equal to twice the half angle of coverage. For flash equipment 
producing a pattern which deviates significantly from ^ circle, a 
rectangle within which the luminous intensity does not vary by 
more than ± 50 % from the value on the axis may be specified 
by two angles in horizontal and vertical directions of the rec- 
tangle. For large flash sources, for example studio flash 
sources, where the dimensions are not smaller than 2 m, the 
method of specifying angle of coverage is not applicable. 



3.6 light output (for bare flash tubes) : The light output 
measured in two mutually perpendicular equatorial lines around 
the bare tubes. The cross-line of the planes through the 
equatorial lines shall be parallel to the optical axis of the lens of 
the camera. 



3.7 beam light output : The time integral of the luminous 
intensity of flash equipment in the direction specified by the 
axis of the reflector, expressed in candela seconds. 



3.8 stored energy {EpI : The energy stored in the main 
capacitor expressed in joules (watt seconds) and determined by 
the following formula 



^n = 



where 



CU^ 



C is the capacitance of the combined main capacitor in 
farads; 

U is the peak voltage in volts (see 3.14). 



3.9 effective flash duration (^0,5) : The time interval from 
the instant the flash reaches one-half of its peak intensity to the 
instant it decays to the same value. 



3.4 automatic flash equipment : Equipment that varies 
the intensity or duration or both of a flash in such manner as to 
achieve the necessary exposure of the film independent of the 
object distance from the flash equipment within given limits 
(see ISO 5763). 



3.10 total flash duration (^q j) : The time interval from the 
instant the flash reaches 10 % of its peak intensity to the 
instant it decays to the same value. 



IS 14321 : 1998 
ISO 2827 : 1388 



3.11 Guide Number (GIM) : See ISO 1230. For flash equip- 
ment to which the inverse-square law applies, the guide 
number is a constant for a given filmspeed. Guide numbers do 
not apply to flash equipment or working conditions where the 
inverse-square law does not apply, which is the case when the 
area or size of the light source is large with respect to the 
distance between source and object. This condition may exist 
for very large studio type sources (umbrellas) or in extreme 
close-up photography. Guide numbers also do not apply to 
automatic electronic flash equipment when used in the 
automatic exposure mode. For studio type equipment to which 
the inverse-square law does not apply the light output shall be 
measured at a fixed distance of 2 m and calculated into the cor- 
responding camera lens /-number based on a given film speed. 



3.12 number of flashes per battery {pertaining to equip- 
ment capable of operation from primary type batteries which 
are not rechargeable) : Capacity of the equipment in terms of 
the total successive flashes, obtainable over a prescribed duty 
cycle, to an end point. 

The end point is reached when the ready indicator will no 
longer appear within a 60 s time period. 

NOTE — On equipment capable of changing the energy per flash by 
use of^ for example, a power selector or exposure control system, the 
operating conditions of the equipment should be fully specified and the 
number of flashes given for each nnode (see clause 6). 



3.13 number of flashes per charge (pertaining to equip- 
ment operating from secondary type battery supplies capable 
of complete recharge after each disabling energy depletion) 

See 3.12. Additional conditions should be specified such as the 
initial battery conditioning, the battery charging time and the 
input power requirements for the charger unit. 



3.14 peak voltage : The maximum voltage at the energy 
storage capacitor during a charging cycle when the increase 
during a 10 s interval is less than 1 %. 

Following the procedure outlined in 7.1, the voltage readings 
are taken at the same time as beam light output is measured. 



3.18 spectral energy distribution : See ISO 3028. The 
spectral energy distribution of the flash radiation should match 
that of "photographic daylight D55" as close as possible in 
order to achieve a good colour rendition with colour films 
designated for primary use for daylight illumination. 

Spectral energy distribution is expressed as a three number ISO 
spectral distribution index as described in ISO 3028 (see A. 6.1). 



4 Test conditions 

4.1 Test arrangement for beam light output 
and angle of coverage 

The lamp head of the electronic flash equipment shall be held in 
a suitable fixture. The fixture shall permit rotation of the lamp 
head 90° each side, pivoting about the centre of the reflector 
aperture, or, if no reflector is used, about the centre of the bare 
flash tube with the tube oriented in the position it is normally 
used with the camera. 

The fixture shall be calibrated in degrees with an error ncTt ex- 
ceeding 0,5 ° and shall hold the flash equipment so that the 
front cover of the reflector can be correctly adjusted to face the 
detector of a flash exposure meter. Measurements shall be 
made in dark, non-reflective surroundings. Other measuring 
apparatus may be used which permit measurement to the 
specified tolerances. 



4.2 Measuring distances 

4.2.1 ^Distance from flash source to light meter sensor 

For measurement of the beam light in the manual mode the 
light meter sensor shall be placed at a distance approximately 
2 m in front of the cover of the flash head. 



4.2.2 Distance for angle of coverage test 

The light output measurements for determination of angle of 
coverage of the flash illumination shall be made at a distance 
approximately 2 m in front of the cover of the flash head.. 



3,15 regulated voltage (storage capacitor) 
trolled by a regulating system. 



Voltage con- 



For equipment with voltage regulating systems operating in its 
controlling mode, the peak voltage is the minimum voltage to 
which the regulating system permits Jhe voltage to build during 
a charge cycle. 



3.16 ready indication : A means, usually visible, of in- 
dicating that the equipment is ready to flash. 



4.3 Test apparatus for beam output and flash 
duration 

A flash exposure meter measuring incident light from the flash 
equipment may be used to determine beam light output. 

For determination of the time integral parameters, suitable elec- 
tronic integration equipment or mechanical integration of the 
time intensity curve (such as a photograph of an oscilloscope 
trace) may be employed. The time intensity curve may also be 
used to determine the flash duration. 



3.17 recycle time : The period between release of the flash 
and subsequent ready indication. 



These instruments shall meet the following conditions : 
— accuracy : ± 7 % of indicated reading (+ ^/^OEJ; 



IS 14621 :1998 
ISO 2827: 1988 



— spectral response of sensor : shall approximate the 
luminosity curve of the CIE Standard Observer (photopic 
response) so that the error by measuring a light source with 
a colour temperature between 3 500 K and 7 000 K does not 
exceed ± 5 %. See clause A.l of the annex. 

— flash duration : shall be capable of measuring time 
intervals as short as 10 ^is {see A.2); 

~ general : the instrument shall be linear within the above 
limits and be able to measure the high intensities and short 
durations encountered in this work; 

— sensor size : the sensor shall have a maximum diameter 
of 50 mm. 



4.4 Details and precautions 

Additional details and precautions for the test are given in 
clauses A.2 to A. 5 of the annex. 



5 Conditioning of flash equipment 

5.1 General conditions 

For each test the equipment under test shall be fully charged 
and in an operable condition with the storage capacitor formed 
as specified by the manufacturer. This usually involves 
operating the equipment for a specified period of time or 
flashes. 

The test shall be conducted at 23 ± 3 °C. 

5.2 Primary batteries 

Primary batteries shall be fresh and representative of the type 
specified by the manufacturer of the flash equipment. 

5.3 Rechargeable batteries 

Rechargeable batteries shall be charged prior to the test in ac- 
cordance with the instructions furnished with the equipment. 
Measurements shall be started no sooner than 1 h after 
recharge of the equipment. 

5.4 Line power operation 

Flash equipment or chargers intended for operation on alter- 
nating current shall be tested at the ac mains voltage specified 
on the equipment, or the mean of the voltage range, if specified. 



6 Selection of operating mode 

6.1 Selection of operating mode — 
Non-automatic flash equipment 

The primary data for recycle time, number of flashes and beam 
light output shall be given for full power, manual operation. 



Additional data, if applicable, shall be given for half power, 
quarter power, etc., modes. 

6.2 Selection of operating mode — Automatic 
flash equipment 

Automatic flash equipment usually permits selection of the 
operating mode, manual or automatic. 

In the automatic mode some equipment permits a range selec- 
tion of different /-numbers for a given film speed. 

Recycle time, number of flashes and beam light output for 
equipment in which the depth of capacitor discharge is affected 
by the automatic exposure system shall be stated in three ways, 
(see ISO 5763) 

a) full power and manual mode; 

b) automatic mode at the distance from the standard test 
object specified in ISO 5763; 

c) automatic mode at the closest working distance from 
the standard test object. This distance shall be indicated 
and shall be the closest one the manufacturer claims still 
gives proper exposure. 

If the amount of exposure can be additionally controlled, the 
setting shall be specified. 

Clause A. 6 of the annex displays a suggested listing of data. 



7 Method of measurement 

7.1 Time integral of luminous intensity (beam 
*!ght output) 

The equipment shall be switched on and left on during the test 
in its full power and manual mode. 

Prior to measuring the beam light output the equipment shall 
be flashed five times. 

Every flash shall be released after 60 s. 

The time integral of luminous intensity shall then be determined 
from the following three successive flashes released in intervals 
of 60 s. The average of the three flashes is the total energy 
measured divided by three. 

7.2 Angle of coverage 

To determine the angle of coverage the flash head shall be 
rotated about the mutually perpendicular and diagonal reflector 
axis as described in 4.1 and measurements of light output made 
at 0°, 2,5°, and at increments of 5°. An alternative method may 
be used, for example with the detectors located on a spherical 
surface of 2 m radius from the centre of the reflector aperture. 
For analytical display, these measurements may be plotted on a 
graph to show the light output versus angle of rotation. The 
measured angles of coverage shall describe a circle or rec- 
tangle, in which the luminous intensity shall vary by not more 
than 50 % of the value in the axis. 



IS 14621 : 1998 
ISO 2827:1938 



7.3 Recycle time 

The equipment shall be switched on and left on at full power 
and in manual mode. It shall be flashed at the moment of each 
ready indication. The three intervals between the sixth and the 
seventh, the seventh and the eighth, the eighth and the ninth 
flashes shall be measured. 

The claimed recycle time is the average of the measured time 
intervals, in seconds. 

Recycle times for any additional operating modes and stated 
test distances may be determined using the same discharge 
schedule. 

NOTE — For flash equipment, for which in certain operating modes 
ready indication is never .extinguished, recycle times according to this 
International Standard (3.17) are not defined and therefore cannot be 
measured using the method specified in 7.3. 

7.4 Ready indication 

The light output shall be measured under the following condi- 
tions : 

~ when ready indication appears; 

— when testing beam tight output (see 7.1). 

The differences shall be expressed in exposure values {l:J from 
nominal beam light output. 

7.5 Number of flashes per battery or per charge 

7.5.1 Conditioning 

The equipment under test shall be in the condition specified in 
clause 5. 

Rechargeable batteries shall have undergone five complete 
charge-discharge cycles with the depth of discharge being 
almost equivalent to the end point defined in 3.12. 

The batteries shall be recharged for the time specified by the 
manufacturer. 

7.5.2 Discharge schedule for primary batteries (high and 
low voltage non-rechargeable type) 

One flash jshall be made every 60 s. 

The test shallbe run until the ready indicator does not appear 
within the 60 s period. 

7.5.3 Discharge schedute for rechargeable battery 

One flash shall be made every 60 s. 

The test shall be run until the ready indicator does not appear 
within the 60 s period. 



8 Performance 

For equipment using a battery the performance of the equip- 
ment is dependent upon the condition and/or type of battery; 
these factors affect the following parameters : 



a) measurement of the light output; 

b) recycle time; 

c) number of flashes per battery or per charge. 

Consequently the type and manufacturer of battery used for 
performance measurements shall be recorded. 

8.1 Beam light output/guide number 

The measured guide number shall be within ± 0,5 E^ of the 
claimed guide number { ^ j^'^ ^J^ in the guide number value) . 

If the measured guide number is within this tolerance the claim- 
ed guide number may be referred to as an "ISO guide number 
(ISO/GN)" in accordance with ISO 1230. Because instant 
picture cameras and some colour reversal films with limited ex- 
posure latitude require a tolerance of only ± M3E^ (-206%) 
an additional photographic check with flash equipment for the 
appropriate exposure may be necessary when using the above 
mentioned systems. 

Any indication of guide numbers shall be accompanied by the 
angle of coverage of light of the system. 

8.2 Angle of coverage 

The measured angles of coverage of light shall be equal to or 
greater than the corresponding angles of the camera lens/film 
system for which the flash equipment is to be used. No con- 
spicuous dark or bright spots shall be allowed in the claimed 
picture area. 

8.3 Ready indication 

Whenever ready indication appears the measured guide 
number shall not deviate more than 1 E^ from the claimed 
guide number ( -29,3 % in the guide number value). Under 
these conditions the ready indication may be called a "Stan- 
dard ready indication" 

For units with regulated voltage for the storage capacitor the 
ready indication may be set to about 100 % of the stored 
energy. If the measured guide number varies by not more than 

0,1 E, 



{ ^^^ ^^° in the guide number value) whenever the ready 



indication is on, the ready indication may be called "100 % 
ready indication". 

8.4 Recycle times 

The measured recycle time shall be not greater than 1,3 time^ 
the claimed recycle time. Under these conditions the recycle 
time may be called "Standard recycle time". 

For units with "100 % ready indication" the recycle time may 
be called "100 % recycle time". 

8.5 Number of flashes 

The measured number of flashes shall be not less than 0,8 
times the claimed number of flashes. 



IS 14621 : 1998 
ISO 2827: 1988 



Annex 
Additional data 

(This annex does not form part of the standard.} 

A.I Photopic response 

Photopic response of the sensor is chosen as it is innplied by the choice of photometric units. 

A. 2 Light meter requirements 

In measuring photometric parameters of the electronic flash equipment very high light intensities are encountered; the illumination on 
the light meter sensor may reach peaks of several 10^ Ix. 

Precautions have to be taken to ensure that the sensors are not overloaded. The use of stable, calibrated neutral density filters may aid 
in reducing the illuminance levels to within the linear range of the sensors, and will also facilitate the calibration of sensors against 
incandescent gtandard lamps. The sensor and associated electronics shall be capable of high frequency response in order to follow 
accurately and measure the fast rise and fall times of illuminance. As these times are usually expressed in microseconds equipment 
with a better frequency response than 1 MHz shall be used. 

A. 3 Precautions during testing 

Due precautions should be taken to ensure that meter readings are not influenced by specular or light-coloured surfaces in the test en- 
vironment. This precaution also applies to the flash equipment sensor, when testing automatic flash equipment equipped with sen- 
sors. Objects near the flash equipment lamp head may reflect enough light to the automatic sensor to seriously affect its operation. 
Surfaces with specular reflection, including the light meter sensor head, may adversely affect sensors in automatic flash equipment. A 
larger room with low-reflecting walls (less than 5 % reflectance) is recommended. The test arrangement should be such that no 
objects are interposed between the flash equipment lamp head and the light meter sensor. 

A. 4 Spectral energy distribution of the flash radiation 

Spectral energy distribution is affected by the loading of the flash tube, flash duration and characteristics of flash tube, reflector and 
accessories. When specifying the ISO spectral distribution index the test conditions shall be specified. A variation in spectral distribu 
tion index may also be specified for different operating conditions. 

A. 5 Energy and voltage measurements 

Electrolytic capacitors typically used in electronic flash equipment are affected by non-use. The forming procedure recommended by 
the electronic flash equipment manufacturer should be followed prior to making measurements of capacity. The energy storage 
capacity of the equipment should not be calculated from the nominal or labelled values of the capacitors since these components can 
vary widely in normal commercial practice. In order to determine the actual capacitance it is necessary to make measurements with an 
accurate capacitance bridge in the range of the values being measured. Capacitance measurements shall be made at 100 or 120 Hz. 

The measurement of capacitor voltage shall be made without a significant electrical load on the circuit. A voltmeter with an input 
impedance of 1 MO or more HO MQ is desirable) will meet this requirement. 

As the period between the release of the flash and the following indication of readiness for flash release may be very short, an 
automatic release of the flashes and a photoelectric time measurement is recommended. Recording of events on a strip chart recorder 
has been found very useful. 

A. 6 Suggested display of data for flash equipment (assumed values) 
A. 6.1 Manual operation 

ISO guide number (ISO/GN) : 32 m (100 ft) 

Angle of coverage of light : 60"^ (diagonal) 

Spectral quality : ISO/SDI 2/0/1 



IS 14621 :1998 
ISO 2827: 1988 



Number of flashes per charge^* : 
Recycle time^* : 
Effective flash duration 1/0,5) : 
Beam light output : 

A. 6. 2 Automatic operations 



120 
7s 

1/600 s 
2 000 cd-s 

Table ~ Distance range 



ISO 100 


ISO 25 


Distance 

m ft 


;V2,8 
//5,6 

./■/11 


7"/ 1,4 
//2,8 
/y5,6 


1 to 10 
0,6 to 6 
0,3 to 3 


3 to 33 
2 to 20 

1 TO 10 



Number of flashes per charge ^^ 

120 to 1 200, depending on flash to subject distance and reflectance of subject; 

400 at 2 m, //2,8, ISO 100; 

1 200 at 0,3 m,//11, ISO 100. 
Recycle time"" 

1 to 7 s, depending on flash to subject distance; 

2 s at 2 m, //2,8, ISO 100; 

1 sat 0,3 m,//11, ISO 100. 
Effective flash duration itQi^) : 1/600 to 1/20 000, depending on flash to subject distance. 
Angle of response of sensor for automatic operation {see ISO 5763) : 20°. 



1) These data are dependent upon the condition and/or type and manufacturer of battery. For measuring the data type LR 6 (1.5 V x 2) batteries 
were used. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country, 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permisision in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handboolc' and 'Standards Monthly Additions' 

This Indian St<mdard has been developed from Doc: No. LM 24 (0183). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zaliir Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 CLT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : CLT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 40rO93 

Branches : AHMADAB/J). BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



r235 0216,235 04 42 
12351519,235 23 15 

r 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Pnnted at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



