**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14356 (1996) : Guide for protection of information 
resources [LITD 17: Information Systems Security and 
Biometrics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



hidkm Standard 

GUIDE FOR PROTECTION OF 
INFORMATION RESOURCES 



ics 35.tnmj 



■"BJS I'J*'* 
BLRGAt OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK HHAVAM. -^ HAHADUk SHAH7AFAR MAKti 



Infomiation System Security Sectional Committee, LTD 38 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by tlie Bureau ol Indian Siand;u^ds, after Uie draft finalized by Information 
System Security Sectional Committee, had been approved by Electronics and Telecommunication Division 
Council. 

The proliferation of personal computers, lociU iu-ea networks and distributed processing have drastically 
chiinged llie way infomiation resources iae protected. There has been a trend of concentration of more and 
more information in computers to tacilitate the use of timely and accurate information. Since the information 
technology has changed so rapidly, internal controls and the ct)ntrol points needed for protection that were 
present in tJie past, do not provide a good solution for tlie present day computerised information system. Also, 
while in die past users have fully depended on computer technologists for die protection of information, they 
lire now recognising Uiat computers and computer related problems must be undersux)d »md managed like any 
other resources. 

Reliance upon inadequately controlled information system can have serious consequences, including: 

i) Loss of integrity of information impairing tlie organisations ability to perform its functions, 

ii) Inability to provide needed services to die users, 

iii) Loss of competitive edge due to leakage of contldential information, and 

iv) Loss of credibility or embarrassment to tlie organisation. 

To avoid Uiese consequences, a broad set of information security issues must be addressed effectively and 
comprehensively for taking appropriate measures. 

The purpose of die protection service is to protect the integrity and confidentiality of data and ensure diat die 
infomiation is available when required and only to those who :u-e authorized and genuine user. 

Thus Management of protection of infomiation resources has three basic components: 

i) Integrity — Safeguarding die accuracy and completeness of hifomiation. 
ii) ConfidentiiUity — Protecting sensitive inft)miation from a unauUiorised disclosure, 
iii) Availability — Ensuring availability of information when required. 

The integrity of die hifomiation has to be ensured by providing protection against the following: 

i) IJnautliorised data modification/deletion, and 
ii) Unaudiorised data creation/insertion. 

The confidentiality of information is aimed at to protect infonnation from unauUiorized disclosure to individual 
or processes. It ensures Uie following: 

i) Confidentiality of a data unit as well as specific field widiin daui unit, 
ii) Confidentiality of data in a connected environment, 
iii) ftotection from direct or indirect derivation of information of from observation of information 

triiffic communicated over a network. Since infomiation is represented dirough data, information 

cim be derived from diim in a number of ways: 

(Continued on third cover) 



IS 14356 : 1996 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR PROTECTION OF 
INFORMATION RESOURCES 



1 SCOPE 

This guide is intended to be used as a guide for policy 
makers, managers and employees of an organisation 
who are responsible for initiating, implementing and 
maintaining protection of computer systems and data 
processed witliin dieir organisation. It is aimed at 
providing help for developing a structured and de- 
fined process for protection of information resources 
and implementing tliat. It is also meant to serve as a 
guide I'or identifying die range of controls required 
for most situations encountered in tlie context of 
information system. This guide is also benetlcial in 
such cases where infonnation flows tlirougli network 
as it provides a fnmiework for enabling a meciianism 
for establishing mutual trust between organisations 
which are networked partners, and a basis for facili- 
liesmanagemeni between hifonnation users and serv- 
ice providers. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Information Resource — Information lakes 
many forms. It can be stored on computen transmit- 
ted across die networks, printed at or written down t>n 
paper etc. This Infonnation Resource is defined as 
any and all infonnation, regiyd less of fonn, that is 
contained in or possessed by tlie organization's com- 
puter system facilities, communication networks, or 
storage media. Infonnation resource may consist of 
trade secrets, confidential documents, or oUier infor- 
mation considered to be valuable as.sets. 

3 THREATS TO INFORMATION RESOURCES 

Major xiireats to die infonnation resources is due to 
people, belonging boUi from inside or outside the 
organisation. By fiu, tlie most costly losses to infor- 
mation resources incurred by organisiitions result 
from human errors, accidents and omissiop.s by em- 
ployees resulting in loss of integrity and confidenti- 
ality. In addition, diere may be physical direat to 
infonnation resources. 

3.1 Threats to Information Integrity 

Integrity attacks aim at defeating die mechanism used 
to provide integrity of infonnation. Thus, tliey can be 
put under die following clas.ses: 



i) Attacks aimed at suboniing access preven- 
tion mechanisms. Such attacks include: 

a) Aattacks on the mechanism itself, 

b) Penetration of die services die mecha- 
nism relies upon like routing control and 
access control, and 

c) Exploitation of utilities widi unintended 
side-effects. 

ti) Attacks aimed at defeating cryptographic 
mechanisms or at exploiting weaknes.ses of 
such mechanisms. Such attacks include : 

a) Penetration of die cryptographic mecha- 

nisms like digital signature or func- 
tions, and 

b) Deletion and replication. 

iii) Attacks aimed at defeating die contextual 
mechanism used. Such attiicks include : 

a) Massive, coordinated changes of data- 

item replicas, and 

b) Penetration of the context estabii.shing 

mechanism. 

iv) AlUicks aimed at defeating detection and 
acknowledgement mechanisms. Such 
attacks include: 

a) False acknowledgements, and 

b) Exploitation of faulty sequencing be- 
tween the acknowledgement mecha- 
nism and the treatment of die received 
data. 

v) Attacks dirough Viruses and odier Malicious 
Code such attacks include: 

a) Viruses : Prognmis which modify odier 

prognuns and repR)duce endlessly, in- 
fecting other prognmis, 

b) 'Wonns' and Trojan Horses* often cause 

diuiiage to the software, and 

c) Electronic Bulletin Boards: AlUioughin 

general, Uiey offer usetulinibnnation, a 
small percentage of bulletin boiu-ds, 
however, are not hsmnless. 



LS 14356 : 1996 



vi) Threat piirticuhir to media. Such ilireats 
include: 

a) Threat against tlie media in which infor- 
mation is stored> and 

b) Threat against tlie media tiirough which 
infonnation is transmitted. 

3.2 Threats to Infcirmation Confidentiality 

The threat to tlie protected datii is an unaulliorised 
disclosure of information encoded in tlie data or 
disclosure of the diita chiiracteristics. The piurticular 
threat that exist in different environments are 
addressed as following: 

i) Threats when contldentiality is provided 
tlirough access prevention. Such Uireats 
include: 

a) Penetration (*f tl)e access prevention 
mechanism, 

b) F*enetration of the integrity mechanism 
used to protect certificates, 

c) Exploitation of system utilities tliat may 
disclose, directly or indirectly, infor- 
mation about Uie system, and 

d) ('overt channel. 

ii) Threats when confidentiality is provided 
tlirough infonnation hiding. Sucli threats 
include: 

a) Penetration of the cryptographic mech- 
anism, 

b) Traffic analysis, 

c) Analysis of protocol data unit headers, 

d) Browsing and eavesdropping, and 

e) Covert channel. 

3.3 Threats to Information Avaiiability 

3.3.1 Improper Operation 

vSome improper operations carried out inadvertently 
or deliberately may lead to daihage of computer 
system network (if applicable), t)r the information 
resource. 

3.3.2 Uick of Proper Maintenance of Hardware 

This sometimes may lead to system unavailability 
due to lack of maintenance or maintenance by incom- 
petent agency 

3.3.3 Lack of Proper Maintenance of Infmnation 

Uniess a systematic procedure is followed in a reguliu" 
way towards backup, infonnation may not be avail- 
able when needed. 



3.4 Pliysical Threats to Information Resources 

3.4.1 Fire Dama^^e 

Fire d:image is tlie most significant and prevalent 
physical liireat facing data processing organisations 
which can lead to heavy loss of information 

resources. 

3.4.2 Water Damage 

The compact nature of computers, coupled with their 
high elecu^ical mid cooling heads, niidces data process- 
ing equipment piu'ticuhuly susceptible to even the 
snuillest iunount of moisture. 

3.4.3 Electrical Outages and Fluctuations 

filackouis, power surges iue also possible sources of 
loss of data. 

4 INI ORMATK )N PROTECTION SERVICES 
AND MECHANISMS 

IVotection of infonnation resources is achieved by 
ensuring tlie data integrity and data confidentiality as 
infonnation is stored and transmitted in tlie form of 
data. Thus, infonnation protection services consist of 
protection against integrity violation and protection 
against confidentiality violations. 

4.1 Types of Information Protection Services 

Protection services can be classified according to the 
following criteria: 

4.1.1 liy the type of violation they protect against : 

i) Unauthorised data modification, 
ii) Unauthorised data creation, and 
iii) UnauUiorised data deletion. 

4.1.2 The type of protection they provide : 

i) Protection of data semantics, and 
ii) Protection oi' data semantics associated 
attributes. 

^, 1 .3 Ihe types of at tacks against which the informa- 
tion is protected : 

i) Protection against external attacks, and 
ii) Protection against internal attacks. 

4.1.4 The recovery mechanism they provide : 
i) In ca.se of data corruption, and 

ii) In case of deletion. 

4.1.5 By the type of protection they support : 

i) Prevention of integrity compromise, and 



IS 14356 : 1996 



ii) Detection of integrity compromise. 

4.2 Types of Protection Mechsitiisms 

4,2*1 Those which prevent access to tiie medium. 
Such mechanisms uiclude: 

i) Physically isolated, noise free channels, 

ii) Routing control, and 

iii) Access control, 

4.2.2 Those which detect unautliorised modification 
of diiuior sequence of datii items, including cases of 
diim creation, data deletion and daui replication. 
Such mechimisms include: 

i) Digital signature, 

ii) Daut replication, 

iii) Hashing function in conjunction with 
cryptographic transfonnations, and 

iv) Message sequencing. 

A23 Those which iire mapping techniques tliat render 
the information to be protected relatively inaccessi- 
ble to all but to those possess some critical infonna- 
tion about the mapping techniques. Such techniques 
include: 

i) Enciphemient, and 
ii) Data padding, 

4.2.4 Those who provide confidentiality to ilie data 
through different memis : 

i) Confidentiality provision Uirougli protocol 

data unit header protection, and 
ii) Confidentiality provision through 
contextuiU location. 

5 INFORMATION PROTECTION PROGRAMME 

In order to a successful system for tlie protection of 
Information resources, it is required to plan, imple- 
ment :ind maintain a comprehensive infonnation 
protection prognunme. The person or group in tlie 
organisiition with responsibility of tlie information 
protection should present to senior management a 
clear view of tlireats imd alternative solutions for 
countering tliose threats so tliat after cimying out a 
risk analysis process in temis of weighing potential 
losses versus tlie cost and effort of limiting the 
exposures management can uike appropriate deci- 
sion. 

The information resource security protection pro- 
gnunme Ciin be divided into tlie following stages to 
have proper understanding of the prognunme, help in 
. implemenuition imd also to measure tlie progress of 
pmgnunme implementation : 



i) Adoption of an information resource 

security policy, 
ii) Development and implementation of daui 

classification system, 
iii) Development and implementation of an 

inlbrmation protection standards manual, 
iv) Planning of ilie management infonnation 

protection prognunme, and 
v) Ongoing protection programme maintenance 

and enforcement. 

5.1 Stagel: Adoption of an Information Resource 
Security Policy 

1 he organisation * s policy statement should set gn)und 
rules for the protection of tlie infonnation resources 
and state responsibilities and accountabilities of all 
concerned. The policy should precisely state tlie 
value to the organisation of data, information, re- 
sources and need to procure their integrity, confiden- 
tiality and availability. In addition to identifying 
information as an asset and fixing manager/employee 
infonnation protection responsibility and accounta- 
bility, die information resource security policy state- 
ment should set forth information protection pro- 
grmnnie priorities. Management should set a cleiu* 
direction and demonstnite the effectiveness of tliat in 
the face of accidental or deliberate unautliorised 
disclosure, modificatitni or destruction through tlie 
issue and implementation of an organisation wide 
infonnation resource security policy. The policy 
should also state the requirement tt) provide computer 
security and awareness training to all its employees 
having access to infonnation resources to help in 
deriving standiu*ds and guidelines for implementa- 
tion. The intent of Uiis hifonnation resource policy is 
to accomplish the following: 

i) To ensure the confidentiality, availability 
and integrity of information, 

ii) lo reduce the risk of loss of information by 
accidental or intentional modification, dis- 
closure or destruction, and 

iii) To preserve the organisation's rights and 
remedies in the event of a k)ss. 

The organisation will implement the infonnation 
resource security policy in such a way as to : 

i) Mold individuals accountable for their use of 
organisation's information resources, 

ii) To authorize access lo infonnation on a need 

lo know basi.s,and 
iii) To ensure tlie timely access to infonnation. 



IS 14356 : 1996 



5.2 Stage II : Development and Implementation 
of a Data Classification System 

Infonnation assets must be classitled according to 
tiieir sensitivity and importance to tlie organisation. 
Since it is unrealistic to expect managers and employ- 
ees to maintain absolute control overall inlormalion 
witliin the boundaries ol tiie organisation, it is 
necess;u*y to advise tJiem : 

i) What intonnation should be brought under 

control, 
ii) Which types of information lu-e considered 

more sensitive, and 
iii) How tlie organisation would like that limited 
amount of sensitive infonnation handled and 
protected. 

5.2.1 A siunple of four level of classification is given 
below: 

i) Confident iai 

It is Uiat classification of data of which unauthorized 
disclosure/use could cause serious diunagc to tlie 
organisation (important drawings, design infonna- 
ticm, proprietary software etc.) 

ii) Restricted 

It IS that classification of data of which unauthorised 
disclosure/use would not be in tlie best interest of tlie 
organisation (computer software, perst)nnel data, 
budget infonnation, some documents and drawings). 

iii) Internal Use 

It is tliat classification of data thai does noi require any 
degree of protection against disclosure witl\in tl^e 
company (operating procedures, inter-office memo- 
randums, telephone directory) 

iv) Unclassified 

It is Ltiat classification of data Uiat requires no protec- 
tion against disclosure (published annual reports, 
periodicals, any infonnation/document equivalent t)f 
which is available in some open literature) 

The management should give serious consideration 
to tlie programme prior to implementation. A contin- 
uous process of classification, declassification, 
labeling, storage, access, destruction and reproduc- 
tion of classified data and tlie administrative over- 
head tliis process will create must be considered. 
Failure to maintain a balance between tlie value of tlie 
infonnation classified and the administrative burden 
tlie classification system places on the organisation 
will result in long-term dilficuUies in achieving 



success. Thus, tlie classificatit)n has to be done very 
ciirefully and identify only sensitive infonnation to be 
controlled under classified infonnation. 

5.3 Stage III: Development of Information 
Protection Standards Manual 

The functions needed to provide effective protection 
of tlie information resources of an organisiUion should 
be well defined. In order to facilitate tlie implemen- 
tation of these functions, they iU'e translated in tenns 
of slandiu^ds, procedures and guidelines. 

Ihis manual should contain the defined standiurds, 
procedures and guidelines especially tiiilored to tlie 
specific needs i)f a piirticuhu" orgiuiisation. Thus, the 
standiuds must be derived and developed from the 
policy statement to meet die dechu-ed objectives. 
Pn)cedures should be worked out towiu^ds how to 
c;uTy out Uie activities as stated in Uie standiU'ds. 
Ihe.se procedures should be unmiibiguous and should 
be in luuinony with the working environment of Uie 
organisation, riiey should be made mandatory. Those 
procedures which have not reached Uie level where 
Uiey can be made mandatory, they can be treated as 
guidelines and Uiey slK)uld be encouraged for use till 
tliey take die fonn of prv>cedures. Such slandiuds, 
procedures and guidelines should be developed and 
periodically updated at defined regular intervals. 

The manual is the prinuu^y communication tool for 
specific information protection responsibilities. The 
information protection administrator must maintain 
Uie manual properly so Uiat it will be perceived and 
adhered to with Uie .seriousness it deserves. Stand- 
;u^ds, procedures, and guidelines must be distributed 
in written fonn to all personnel. 

5.3,1 Mana^^emcnt Functional Measures 

i) Policy Statement : 

As mentioned eitflier, the management policy to- 
Wiu^ds protection of infonnation resources should be 
stated in Uiis manual . i1iis should set a cleiu* direction 
and deinonsLrate management support Uirough Uie 
i.ssue of this organisation -wide information .security 
policy. The update policy should also be defined in 
detail, including responsibilitiesand review dates, for 
maintaining the policy document updated and effec- 
Uve. 

ii) Mana{»ement Or\»anization 

To manage information protection wiUiin the organ- 
isatii>n, there me many management functions to be 
ciaried out. A well defined management fnunework 
in terms of its organ isaUon and responsibiliues should 



IS 14356 : 1996 



be establisliCu to initiuie, plan antl coiUn)! tJie iiuple- 
menlaiion of inlonnation pnxeciion system. Some- 
times, a source orspeciahsl's advice may need to be 
established and made available witl\in Uk organiza- 
tion to keep up witli industry trend. stand:uds and 
assessments. 

iii) Owners/lip, Citsutdian and User responsibili' 
ties and Accoimtability 

To maintain appropriate protection of organisation's 
inlbnnation resources, all misjorinlbrmalion resourc- 
es should be accounted lor and each identitied re- 
source should have a nomin.ated owner. 1 Isualiy liie 
person who generates the inlbnnation is tJie natural 
owner of tiie tnlbnnation. As many small pieces oi 
information iu-e integrated the value of the inl\>nna- 
tion increases and so a higher level of responsibility 
for tiie protection of die integrated inlbnnation is 
required. Owner should be assigned respi)nsibilily 
for implementing security measures for protectioii 
which may be delegated but accountability should 
remain with ilie nominated owner i)f the inlonnaiion 
resources. Management at all levels of the organisa- 
tion ;ue responsible for it. vSpecific responsibilities 
iae detailed below: 

Senior Manaj^ement : They iu^e prinuu-ily responsible 
f()restabi!shing and nuuntaining inlbnnation resource 
security widiin tlieir functional laea dial include the 
following: 

a) Evaluating cinporate information and 
implementing controls. 

b) Authorizing an individuafs access to 
infoniialion, 

c) Promptly removing Ids of disgruntled 
employees fn)m system, 

d) (luiading against unlawful acquisition or 
use of informatit)!!, and 

e) Providing a back-up system and niainiain- 
ing operations. 

Data Users : They ;u-e responsible for adhering to all 
policies, standiurds and procedures tl\at include the 
following: 

a) Maintaining conndentialily<)fiiilbnnaii()iu 

b) Maintaining confidentiality of security 
controls and passwords, 

c) Rep()rting suspected violations to 
managetnent, and 

d) Executing a confidentiality or ownership 
agreement. 



Infonmaion Systems Departmem : They ;u e general- 
ly die custodian of inlbnnation resources for all 
functio!ss lhrouglu)ut the ojganisation and include the 
following: 

a) Suppi)rl the organisation in the design, in- 
stallatioti, maintenance, Uaining, and use of 
information security cv>nlrv>ls, both 
automated and inatmal, 

b) Maintain a secure and safe information 
systems envin)nment, 

c) Maintain die integrity of all security con- 
trols, and 

d) Develop and maintain an information 
systems cv)mingency plan il>at provides lor 
data redundancy, aitemalive pn)cessing 
capability, timely rect)very and insurance 
against loss ()f information rest)urces. 

hucrnal Auditing : They are responsible ibr evaluat- 
ing ctMitrols.or procedures and testing compliance 
wiUi security pi)licies, standiads and procedures and 
for reporting to management the adequacy of security 
controls over inlbnnation resources. 

iv) luifarcin:^ Mex lumistn for Adherins^ t<i Fidicy 

I'or adhering to the defined policies stand;u'ds and 
procedures which ;u^e derived ln)m policies must be 
implemented. These stand:u"ds and procedures must 
be enforced in a systematic way in die organisation. 
l'\)r diis implementation plan has it) be drawn ciu-eful- 
ly ct)n,sidering the prevailing practices and environ- 
ment. Fonnal procedure for pennitting deviation 
from tlie detined standards should also be worked i>ut. 
The course of action in case of idenlified breach of 
procedure should also be delined. Noncompliance or 
violation of die defined policy and stand;u-d should 
rcsuU in an action which should be signiltcanv ent)ugh 
to .serve as a deterrent. They may include, but not 
limited to suspension termination, other di.sciplimu-y 
action or civil and/or criminal prosecution. 

v) Measures for user Awareness 

To ensure duit users are avv;u'e t)f .security Uireatsto 
protection of inibmuuion assets and iue equipped Ui 
support die policy and pn)cedures laid out in die 
organisation in diis regiud, user tnust be trained and 
awiu-e of. Users should be given adequate education 
and technical training iii dns regard, lb minimize the 
diunage from .security incidents, malfunctions as well 
as to monitor and learn troni such incidents, incidents 
affecting security must be reported Uirough th^ 
correct channei as quickly as possible. 



IS 14356 : 1996 

5,3.2 Access Control Measures 

Access control measures tire the most elteciive ways 
of ensuring integrity and confidentiality ol an inlbr- 
mation source. As more and more inlbrmation iire 
networked, access control at the computer level, 
network level, application level, user level and ibr 
outside users »u*e discussed. 

i) Computer access control 

To prevent unauthorised ct)mputer access, access U) 
computer facility should be controlled. Access to 
computer facilities needs to be restricted to auiJior- 
ised users. Computer facilities which serve multiple 
user should be capable of: 

a) Identifying iuid verifying die identity of 
each authorised user, 

b) Providing a password management system 
which ensures quality passwords, and 

c) Restriction of connection times to provide 
additional security for high risk application. 

ii) Network Access Control 

To protect information available on the network, 
connections to networked services should be ct)nta)l- 
• led-. These controls should ensure that connected 
users or computer services do not compromi.se the 
security of any otlier network services. Controls 
should include: 

a) Appropriate interfaces between networked 
services, 

b) Appropriate audienlication mechanisms for 
remote users and equipment, and 

c) Control of user access to information 
services. 

Networks may require to be divided into sepiu-atc 
domiiins to facilitate better conuol and be protected 
by a defined security perimeter (sometimes referred 
to as a fire wall) or a network gateway. Access 
between domains can Uius be controlled by security 
gateway inct)rporating appropriate routine and con- 
nection capability controls. The criteria for segrega- 
tion of networks into domains should be based oii 
organisation's access control policy and require- 
ments. 

iii). Application Access Control 

To prevent uiuiutliorised access to infonnation held in 
computer systems. Access to application systems and 
data may require to be controlled through logical 
access ccmtrols. Logical access ti) computer sofiwiu-e 
and data should be restricted to authorised users. 



Appliauion systems should : 

a) Contn>l user access to data and application 
system functions, in accordance with a 
defined business access control policy, 

b) Provide protection from unauthorised 
access forany utility soflwiu-eUiat is capable 
of overriding system orapplication controls, 
and 

c) Not compr(miisc the security of other 
systems with which infonnation resources 
are shiu-ed. 

vSensili ve systems might require dedicated or isolated 
computing environment. For this: 

a) I'he sensitivity of an application systems 
should be explicitly identified and docu- 
mented by the application owner, and 

b) When a sensitive application is to run in a 
shred enviromnent, the application systems 
with which it will sluire resources should be 
identified and agreed wiU) owner of tlie 
sensitive application. 

iv) User Access Coniri>l 

To prevent unauthori.scd computer access, access tt) 
computer^ervices in data should he controlled on the 
basis of requirenienls. 'Hiere^should be formal proce- 
dures to control allocations of access rights to infor- 
matit)n resources. The procedures should cover all 
stages in the life cycle of u.ser access from the initial 
registration of new users to the formal de-registration 
of u.sers who no longer require access to informatit>n 
resources. Special attention should be given, where 
appropriate, to the need to control Uie allocation of 
privileged access rights which allow users to override 
.system contA)ls. In lliis connection, die allocation of 
user pa.ssword slunild be securely controlled and 
access rights should be reviewed at reguhu- intervals. 

v) Third Fttrty Access Control 

The access to Uie information by diird piuty users may 
present a security risk. Where there is a genuine need 
for such an access, a ri.sk analysis should be ciuried 
out to determine the implementation of control 
requirements. The control should be defined in a 
contract and agreVd upon wiUi the third party. 

5.3,3 InWA^rity and Confidentiality Protectittn 
Measures 

Some additional measures required for ensuring 
integrity and confidentiality lae di.scussed below 
which can form p;u-t of the stand;u*ds and procedures. 



IS 14356 : 1996 



i) Software and Hardware Configuration Control 

Managers who are responsible for application sys- 
tems iire also responsible for the security of die 
project or support environment. They should ensure 
tliat all proposed changes lae fonnjilly reviewed and 
they do not compromise tlie security of eitlier tlie 
system or operating environment. It should also be 
ensured that support proguuns iire given access only 
to those piuts of tlie system diat iu-e necessiu*y for Uieir 
work. In addition to ensure correct version of appli- 
cation and system prognuns, aconfigumtion manager 
should be identified. 

Similarly, tlie hardware should also be under strict 
configuration control. These changes must go Uirough 
tiie foniial procedure for apppjval. 

ii) Protection during Exchange of Information 

This is to prevent loss, modification or misuse of data 
during exchanges of clata and software between 
organisations. Exchanges of data and software be- 
tween organisations should be carried out based on 
fonnal agreement. Procedures and stimdards to pro- 
tect media in transit should be established. Consid- 
eration should be given to the security implications 
associated widi various forms of information ex- 
changes like electronic mail, file transfers, etc, and 
tl\e recjuirements for security controls. Cleiir policies 
are retjuired to control tlie security risks associated 
witli electronic otfice systems prevalent these days, 

iii) Network Control 

To ensure the protection of infomiation in networks, 
die security of computer networks should be imple- 
mented. Network managers should ensure uiat ap- 
propriate controls are established for security of data 
in networks and the protection of connected services 
from unauthorised access. 

iv) Application Security 

To prevent loss, modification or misuse of user data 
in application systems, die design and operation 
should confomi to security requirements needed to 
protect infomiation resources. These should include 
input data validation to ensure diat it is correct and 
appropriate, periodic review of contents of key fields 
or data files to confinn dieir integrity, internal proc- 
essing validation to detect processing error or any 
deliberate act for highly sensitive datii, message 
authentication for application involving the 
transmission of sensitive data. In addition which are 
desirable to be exercised to minimise the risk of 
corruption of applicadon systems may include 



updating of operational progrmn dirough nominated 
persons alone, holding oriiy executable code on die 
operational system and not the source code, maintain- 
ing audit log of all updates to operational progrmu, 
and retaining previous versions of softwiu'e for 
contingencies. 

v) Encipherment of Information 

For highly security .sensitive infonnation, added pro- 
tecdon in addition to access control can be provided 
by mapping techniques that render the information to 
be protected reladvely inaccessible to all but those 
who possess some critical information alx)ut die 
mappiui^. They are achieved dirough enciphennent 
of informadon. This is based on eidier symmetric or 
asymmetric encipherment. In symmetric s;une key is 
used for encipher and decipher wliereas in asymmet- 
ric case, public key is used to encipher but 
corresponding private key is used to decipher them. 

5,3,4 Measures for Availahility of Information 
Resources 

i) Protection from Malicious Software 

7'o saieguard the integrity t)f softwiu-e and data, 
precauuons iue required to prevent the introducdon 
of malicious software. Computer softwiu-e is vulner- 
able ti> unaudu>rised modificauon. Some of the 
techniques used for diis purpose include computer 
viruses, network worms, Trojan horses and logic 
bombs. In particular, precaution should be taken to 
detect and prevent computer viruses on personal 
computers. 

ii) Protection during Media Handling 

To prevent d;unage to infonnation assets and hiter- 
ruption to business acdvities, computer media should 
be controlled and physically protected. There should 
be v/ell laid out procedures especially for manage- 
ment of removable computer media, and for handling 
sensitive data. In additit)n, system documentation 
which may contain description of applicadon proc- 
esses, procedures, data structures, and audiorisation 
process, should be protected from unaudiorised 
access. 

iii) Computer Equipment Security 

Equipment's and telecommunication cabling which 
iu*e used for inlbnnadon processing should be placed 
in such a way that it is tree from risks of damage, 
interference and unauthorised access. Ciae should 
also be laketi sucii dial it is protected from power 
failures and other electrical anomalies. 



IS 14356 : 1996 

iv) Physical Security 

Care should be taken to see tluit unnecessary access 
to tlie equipment needing security should be mini- 
mised to facilitate its physical protection. Special 
care should be taken to see diat it is well protected 
from fire, dust, water, smoke, heat, vibration etc, as 
well as interference. 

v) House Keeping in terms of Back up and 
Maintenance 

To maintain die integrity and availability of infonna- 
tion resources, housekeeping measures are required. 
Routine procedures should be established for takhig 
back up copies of data, logging events and faults and 
when appropriate, monitoring xhc equipment envi- 
ronment. 

5.4 Stage IV : Planning for the Management of 
Information Protection 

For planning of protection of an infonnation resourc- 
es, a comprehensive risk analysis is carried out. Any 
risk can be defined as a resultant value derived from 
mapping of perceived iind known Uireats against 
perceived and known vulnerability of die infonnation 
system. Towards carrying out U^e risk analysis, it is 
necessary to take into account die value of the infor- 
mation in tenns of its integrity, mission support and 
continuity. For diis it is important diat diree types of 
information assets namely value of die actual infor- 
mation, value of die hardwiire and softwtire compo- 
nents and value of die services to be provided *u-e 
known. These diree types of infonnation assets 
should be evaluated and assessed based on diree 
criteria of confidentiality, integrity and availability. 

To assess die value of die confidentiality of an 
specific infonnation asset, it is estimated to tind what 
an organisation will pay direcUy or indirectly for 
infonnation or legal damage die organisation may 
experience if infomiadon found its way into wrong 
hands. Since integrity refers to those services 
required to ensure diat infonnation is accurate, 
complete and audientic \yhen it is processed and 
stored. Thus die value of ititegrity refers to diose costs 
which an organisation will pay directly or indirectly 
due to loss of any of die above said attribute. Avail- 
ability can be valued by assessing die impact of 
having a service, infonnation source or a data file 
ceasing to exist. This can be seen eidier due to total 
loss or a temponu-y loss over a period of time. 

Having assessed die value, identification of possible 
direats are carried out to assess die risk due to each 
possible direat knowing its possibility of occunence. 



The economic assessment is used to examine the 
potenUal loss expectancy, given various direat execu- 
tion scenario. Since it is not possible to have a risk 
free environment risks have to be managed. Based on 
the potential impact and probability of a risk, a 
prioritisation should be ciuried out to detennine 
which direats to be controlled and managed. Risks 
are managed by developing and implementing 
countenneasure applications against each identified 
risk. These countenneasures iu*e designed to support 
infonnation security objectives in three different 
capacities, which include: 

i) f^revention mechanism 

ii) Detection mechanism 

iii) Conection mechanism 

After planning for the countenneasures, die residuid 
ri.sksiire analysed to find out wheUier diey iu-e at the 
acceptable level. 

Having identified all die planned countennea.sures. 
iurdier planning is ciuried out to ensure diat for each 
of die countenneasure required, resources iu-e made 
available in tenn of manpower, money, equipment 
and required inlVasuucture, 

Implementation isciuried out according to the e;irlier 
defined plan. However, diere is a need for constant 
monitoring and control of all die activities identified 
in die plan. This is helpful to make required changes 
in the plan and to ensure a successful information 
protection prognunnie. 

5.5 Stage V: Ongoing Information Protection 
Programme and its Maintenance 

There is a need to monitor and assess effectiveness of 
the existing infonnation protection prognunnie via 
internal or extenial audit procedures to see its effec- 
tiveness. The enforcing mechanism for die standiu-ds 
and procedures .should also be well w()rked out. 
Reguliu* update of infonnation resource .security 
pnignimnie is required because of the rapidly chang- 
ing data processing and infonnation .security environ- 
ments. The mechanisms of getting die feedback imd 
update process of die standiyds manual should be 
cleiuly defined. There should be a well identified 
.source in the organisation who can be contacted in 
case of any chu-ilication on die policy or implemen- 
tation issues. Usually he is die chief of infonnation 
system. 

An eftective information protection requires a high 
level of liwiu*ene.ss of all involved. For diis self- 
as.sessment helps to a hu-ge extent. For self-assess- 
ment to achieve a higher degree of managers aware- 



IS 14356 : 1996 

ness, it is recoainiended tiiat all managers periodi- protectii)apr()grtLiiune,ans\yering them will increase 

CtXlly complete a short self-assessment objectiveques- information protection awiireness because mimagers 

tionnaire to ojvswer questions about the information will have to answer objectively. As exposures a-re 

protection witliin tiieir iu-ea of control Apim from identified, actions required to address vulnerability 

assessment of the effectiveness of tlie information can be documented and committed for correction. 



(Continued from second cover) 

a) By understanding tlie semantic of data itself (from Uie value of tlie data), 

b) By using assiKiated attributes of the data to pennit inferring (Ibr eximiple size, dytiiunic 
variation like date of last update, etc), and 

c) By considering context of tlie data Uiat is otlier data objects tliat are associated witii it (from 
knowing where the data exist). 

Availability of information is aimed at protection from tiie following: 

i) Physical destruction of equipment or network segment, 
ii) Inoperability of equipment or network due to equipment miilfunction, strftwiure fiiiiure, or 

sabotage, and 
iii) I>egradati(m of performance from system saturation, link or bit error rate. 

The information protection system should comprehensively ensure tlie security against ail tlie above 
possibilities. After introducing to tlie issues involved, tins document is aimed at providing a guideline to 
implement a comprehensive infonnation protection system spread out in different stages to facilitate its 
implementation. It also provides for tlie flexibility for implementation needed for different organisations 
depending on their size, working methods and existing environment. To tluit extent tiie guideline has been 
deliberately kept generic in nature. 



