**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



m»>!5sss^^w: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11349 I98B 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

OSCILLOSCOPES AND PEAK VOLTMETERS 

FOR IMPULSE TESTS 



UDC 62 \l\ 7755 + 621-317*726 : 621-3J7333 8 




/ 



T A 



\ 






@ \ C&gymfoJ®^ 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAk B3CAVAN, W BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAftG 
NEW DELHI H0002 

Gr 7 February 1936 



IS: 11349 -1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

OSCILLOSCOPES AND PEAK VOLTMETERS 

FOR IMPLUSE TESTS 

High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee, ETDC 1 9 

Chairman Representing 

Prof B. I. Gururaj Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Members 

Dr G. R. Nagabhushna ( Alternate to 
Prof B.I. Gruraj ) 
Shri A. K. Barman Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. Mukhopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. C. Bhatia Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. T. D'silva ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Chopra Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala 

Shri P. S. Satnam ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer (TRANS PLG) Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Superintending Engineer ( PLG 
400 Kv LINES ) (Alternate ) 
Shri V. B. Dfsai Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri V. N. Maixer ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Senior Deputy Director ( Alternate ) 
Director ( EHVD ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( EHVD ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Dwivedi National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shri N. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Engineer Superintendent U. P. Government Pottery Development Centre, 

Khurja 
Joint Director Standards ( TI-1 ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization 

Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
Deputy Director Standards ( E ) C 2 ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Kasturi W. S. Insulators of India Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Rajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Manohar Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri G. K. Venkata Rao ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2) 



© Copyright 1986 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This Publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Kumari Mary Mathew Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shri V. ThulsiRaman ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mukherjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. H. Navkal Bombay Electric Supply and Transport 

Undertaking, Bombay 
SHRi M. L. Dongre ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Paliwal Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri B. N. Ghosh ( Alternate I ) 
Shri K. Natarajan ( Alternate II ) 
Shri S. R. Potnis Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. S. Mam ( Alternate ) 
Shri Mata Prasad U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow 

Shri S. C. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. V. N. Rao Electrical Research and Development Associa- 

tion, Vadodara 
Shri P. K. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sriram Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shri H. H. Rayappa ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Varier Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. Parthasarathy ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. Ganesh 

Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

OSCILLOSCOPES AND PEAK VOLTMETERS 

FOR IMPULSE TESTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 22 July 1985, after the draft finalized by the High Voltage Techniques 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 

0.2 The object of this standard is: 

a) to define the terms specifically related to the oscilloscopes and peak 
voltmeters used for impulse test, 

b) to specify the necessary requirements for such instruments to ensure 
their compliance with the requirements for impulse tests, and 

c) to indicate the tests and procedures which are necessary in order to 
fulfill these requirements. 

0.3 Detailed guidelines on methods of high voltage testing are covered in 
IS : 2071. While IS : 2071 ( Part 3 )-1976* covers requirements for measur- 
ing accuracies of devices used in impulse tests, the present standard is 
envisaged to cover specific characteristics of oscilloscopes and peak volt- 
meters for impulse tests. 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance had been 
derived from IEC Pub 790 (1984) 'Oscilloscopes and peak voltmeters for 
impulse tests' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960-f. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



♦Methods of high voltage testing: Part 3 Measuring devices ( first revision ). 
■(■Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to analogue oscilloscopes and to peak voltmeters 
used for measurements during tests with high impulse voltages and high 
impulse currents. It covers the specific characteristics and calibrations 
required to meet the measuring accuracies specified in IS: 2071 ( Part 3 )- 
1976*. 

1.2 This standard does not cover general instrument requirements because 
they are dealt with in IS : 11018 ( Part 1 )-1984f and IS : 9176-1979J. 

SECTION 1 GENERAL 

2. CONDITIONS OF USE 

2.1 Range of Operating Conditions 

2.1.1 The ranges of operating conditions given in Table 1 are those 
under which the instrument should operate satisfactorily and should meet 
the accuracy requirements when it has been calibrated. 

Any exceptions to the values given in Table 3 shall be explicitly and 
clearly stated with an indication that they are exceptions. 

TABLE 1 NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS FOR INSTRUMENTS 
WITH AC POWER SUPPLIES 



Operating Conditions 




Range 


0) 




(2) 


Environmental Conditions 






Ambient temperature 




+5°Cto +45°C 


Ambient relative humidity 




10 to 90 percent 


Supply Conditions 






Mains supply voltage 


Rated voltage 


±10 percent rms 
±12 percent ac peak 


Mains supply frequency 


Rated frequency 


±5 percent 









♦Methods of high voltage testing: Part 3 Measuring devices (first revision). 
fMethod for expression of properties of cathode-ray oscilloscopes : Part 1 General. 
JRequirements for general purpose cathode-ray oscilloscopes. 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

2.1.2 If the instrument is operated under conditions different from those 
specified in Table 1 , special precautions may be necessary. 

The main supply may have transient overvoltages superimposed on 
it; suitable precautions should be taken to prevent these from affecting the 
operation of the instrument. 

2.1.3 If the instrument is supplied by batteries: 

a) it shall be capable of operating under the above environmental 
conditions; 

b) the manufacturer should indicate the expected operating time at 
the reference temperature and also for the two ambient temperature 
extremes; and 

c) the manufacturer should indicate the range of battery voltages over 
which the instrument will operate satisfactorily. It is useful to 
have a device which indicates when the battery voltage is too low. 

2.2 Reference Conditions — The reference conditions are those for which 
the basic accuracy of the instrument shall be specified and under which 
investigation of the basic accuracy shall be made- These conditions are 
selected from IS : 6700-1972* and IS : 4330-1967f and are given in Table 2. 



TABLE 2 REFERENCE CONDITIONS 


Conditions 


Reference Values 


Tolerance on 
Reference Values 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Ambient temperature 


27°C 


± 2°C 


Ambient relative humidity 


45% to 75% 




Supply voltage 


Rated voltage 


± 1 percent rms 
± 2 percent peak 


Supply frequency 


Rated frequency 


± 1 percent 



Note — The specific temperature used as reference condition should be indicated. 
It is advisable to use the same temperature when checking the basic characteristics 
of the instrument. 



♦Requirements for general purpose cathode-ray oscilloscope. 
tMethods of measurements on cathode-ray oscilloscope. 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

3. GENERAL DEFINITIONS 

3.1 Transfer Characteristic — The transfer characteristic is the relationship 
between the input and the output quantities of the instrument expressed 
either as a function of frequency ( frequency response ) or time ( step respo- 
nse ). The transfer characteristic is usually presented in a normalized 
form by assigning the value of unity to the constant portion of the step 
or frequency response. The requirements on transfer characteristics include 
the effect of any built-in attenuator. 

3.2 Scale Factor — The scale factor of the instrument is the factor by 
which the output indication is multiplied to determine the measured value 
of the input signal to the instrument. The scale factor includes the ratio of 
any built-in attenuator and is either indicated by the manufacturer or 
dertermined by appropriate calibration. 

3.3 Deflection Coefficients — The deflection coefficient of the instrument 
is the ratio of the voltage ( or time ) interval to the corresponding 
deflection of the instrument. This coefficient refers mainly to oscillos- 
copes. 

3.4 Nominal Values of the Deflection Coefficients — The nominal values of 
the deflection coefficients are those corresponding to a specific setting of the 
instrument and are either indicated by the manufacturer or determined by 
proper calibration. 

If the instrument is linear the nominal values of the deflection coeffi- 
cients are equal and constant over the entire scale or screen of the 
instrument. 

If the nominal deflection coefficient is only constant over a limited 
part of the scale or screen, the instrument may still be considered linear pro- 
vided the measurement is made within this linear portion. 

3.5 Non-linearity — Non-linearity is any deviation of the actual deflection 
coefficient at any part on the scale or screen, from the nominal value for 
that part. It is usually expressed in the form of relative error defined as 
the ratio of the deviation to the nominal deflection coefficient. It does not 
include the effects of either ripple or limitation in the transfer characteristic 
of the instrument. 

3.6 Instability — Instability is any variation of the characteristics of the 
instrument with time. It is usually expressed in the form of relative error 
defined as the ratio of the variation to the nominal value of the relevant 
quantity. It does not include the effect of change in the reference 
conditions. 



IS : 11349 - 1985 



3.7 Measuring Area or Scale — The measuring area or scale is the portion 
of the screen or of the scale within which measurements can be made with 
defined accuracy. It is indicated by the manufacturer or determined by 
calibration. 

Note — The use of the word scale in this context applies to analogue and also 
digital type voltmeters. 

3.8 Rated Deflection or Rated Scale — The rated deflection or rated scale 
is the maximum value within the limits of the measuring area or scale. 

3.9 Effective Screen Areas or Effective Scale — The effective screen areas 
are those parts of the measuring area within which measurements can be 
made with the accuracies specified in 7.1. An example of these effective 
screen areas for both vertical and horizontal deflections is shown in Fig. 1. 

The effective scale is that part of the measuring scale where measure- 
ments can be made with the accuracy specified in 8.1. 

Measurements can be made outside the effective screen areas or scale 
but with lower accuracy. 

EFFECTIVE HORIZONTAL 
SCREEN AREA 

E t ^ 4'/, 



EFFECTIVE 
VERTICAL 
SCREEN 
AREA 
E„£ 2V. 




E t = Overall error in time measurement, and 

So = Overall error in voltage ( current ) measurement. 

Fig. 1 Effective Screen Area 



3.10 Warm-Up Time — The warm-up time is measured under the reference 
conditions and is the time interval from when the instrument is first switch- 
ed on, to when the instrument meets all the specifications. 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

Note — The time interval necessary to comply with all accruacy requirements 
may be considerbly extended under adverse operating conditions. 

3.11 Absolute and Relative Error — The absolute error is the difference 
between the estimated or measured value and the true value. The relative 
error is the ratio of the absolute error to the true value and it is often 
expressed as a percentage. 

3.12 Individual Error and Overall Error— The individual error is the error 
is the error of a specific measured quantity or of a specified parameter of 
characteristic of the instrument. 

The overall error of the instrument is the combination of all its indivi- 
dual errors. In the case of digital peak voltmeters, it includes an additional 
error of ±1 digit. This error does not include known corrections applied 
to the instrument reading to obtain the measured value. 

The individual or overall errors may be expressed as absolute or 
relative values. 

4. PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS 

4.0 The performance characteristics of the instrument are divided into two 
groups, the first is technical data supplied by the manufacturer or deter- 
mined by the user through appropriate calibration, and the second is the 
characteristics checked and updated by the user in the performance tests. 

4.1 These are periodic tests carried out to ensure that the instrument 
meets the specified requirements and that its characteristics have not 
changed significantly with time. The long term periodic tests are per- 
formed at regular intervals ( for example, once a year), to check and update 
those characteristics listed under category A ( see 8 and 12 ). The short term 
periodic tests are checks performed regularly ( if necessary, daily ) to ensure 
that the instrument is functioning correctly ( category B, see 8 and 12 ). 

After major repairs, more extensive tests are required to ensure satis- 
factory operation of the instrument and to update those characteristics 
affected. 

4.2 Some recommendations on the test procedures are outlined in Appen- 
dices A and B. 

4.3 The results of the test ( except those of category B ) should be recorded 
in the 'Record of Performance', which also includes the complete list of 
technical data, and is retained and maintained by the user. 

8 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

5. INPUT CHARACTERISTICS 

5.1 Instruments may include an internal attenuator to provide a stepwise 
division of voltage. In such a case, the requirements and definitions apply 
to the instrument including the attenuator. 

The input impedance of an impulse measuring instrument should 
match the impedance of the coaxial cable when used with a resistive 
divider or shunt and should be as high as possible when used with capacitive 
or mixed dividers. It is therefore appropriate to construct the instrument 
with a high input impedance and to provide it with an internal or external 
adaptor to give the lower impedance when required. 

5.2 Usually an input impedance equivalent to a resistance of not less than 
1 MQ in parallel with a capacitance of less than 50 pF is acceptable. 

5.3 In the case of oscilloscopes it has to be varined that the change in 
scale factor of the entire measuring system, due to the input impedance of 
the instrument, does not exceed 5 percent at the greatest time to half value 
of the impulse to be measured. This may require an input impedance 
greater than 1 MQ for impulses having a long time to half value. 

Note — It should be verified that the input impedance of the instrument is not 
affected by the attenuator setting to such an extent as to upset the accuracy of the 
measurement. 

SECTION 2 OSCILLOSCOPES FOR IMPULSE TESTS 

6. GENERAL 

6.0 The oscilloscopes used for impulse tests may be either impulse oscillo- 
scopes specially designed for impulse measurements or general purpose 
oscilloscopes utilised with adequate precautions. 

Impulse oscilloscopes are essentially well screened instruments with a 
high writing speed and a single sweep time base which can be triggered in 
synchronism with the impulse. Special impulse oscilloscopes have normally 
only passive elements between the input terminals and the deflection plates, 
but oscilloscopes using amplifiers may be used. 

General purpose oscilloscopes including those equipped with probes 
are acceptable for recording impulse voltages ( currents ) provided that 
they comply with requirements given in this standard. In this standard no 
distinction is made between impulse and general purpose oscilloscopes. 
Some precautions to be taken are given in Appendix C. When an oscillo- 
scope is equipped with a probe, this probe is considered to be part of the 
instrument. 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

Oscilloscopes have either internal calibration devices for the voltage 
deflection sensitivity and the sweep speed, or calibrated graticule or both. 
This calibration device may or may not include the calibration of built-in 
attenuators. 

In the following it is assumed that the vertical deflection of the 
oscilloscope is used to record voltages or currents and the horizontal one is 
for the time sweep. Sometimes both the horizontal and vertical deflections 
are used to record voltages and currents. In such cases, the measuring 
accuracy of the horizontal deflection system may be lower than that of the 
vertical system. 

When oscilloscopes are used in connection with peak voltmeters 
and are not intended to be applied for an accurate measurement of the 
voltage amplitude, then only the requirements on the accuracy of time 
measurements have to be fulfilled. 

6.1 Writing Speed — The writing speed is the highest speed of the spot 
giving a visible trace on the recording under specified conditions of use. 
Recommendations on the selection of the writing speed according to the 
specific tests for which the instrument is used, are given in Appendix D. 

6.2 Step Response and Rise Time — For oscilloscope it is normal practice 
to characterize the step response by the rise time t T . The rise time t T is the 
time interval within which the response to a rectangular pulse passes from 
10 percent to 90 percent of its steady-state amplitude. 

6.3 Oscilloscope Frequency Response — The frequency response is defined 
by the following parameters: 

a) Lower and upper cut-off frequencies f x and f t — The lower and upper 
cut-off frequencies f x and fo are the frequencies at which the res- 
ponse to a constant sinusoidal input voltage has fallen by 3 dB 
(0707) from the approximately constant level. 

b) Bandwidth — The bandwidth is defined as the difference between 
the upper and lower cut off frequencies. 

7. ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 General — The overall error caused by the use of the oscilloscope should 
be not more than: 

a) 2 percent in the peak voltage (current) measurement, and 

b) 4 percent in the time measurement. 

In order to stay within these limits, recommended limits for indivi- 
dual errors are given below. In some cases, one or more of these limits 
may be exceeded provided the permitted overall error is not exceeded. 

10 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

In such cases, the overall error can be estimated from the individual 
errors by the statistical method given in IS : 8690-1977*. 

7.2 Requirements on Transfer Characteristics — The rise time of the oscillo- 
scope shall meet the following requirement: 

where f mAS is the highest oscillation frequency of significance that can 
appear at the test object, IS : 2071 ( Part 3 )-l976|. 

Furthermore, t t shall be not more than 003r, where T is the 
shortest time to chop which is expected to be measured [ see IS : 2071 
(Part 3)- 1976 ]f. 

The upper cutoff frequency (/J shall be higher than 2f mSiX , and the 
lower cutoff frequency (/J) shall be lower than 0O05/r 2 , where T 2 is the 
longest time to half value of the impulse to be measured. 

Note — In some cases, the above requirements may not be sufficient to ensure 
that the step response of the oscilloscope is appropriate. In such a case, it is neces- 
sary to ascertain that the overshoot of the step response is lower than 10 percent 
and that the decay time is sufficiently long compared to the longest time to half value 
of the impulse to be measured. 

7.3 Requirements on the Accuracy of the Calibration — Calibrators, whether 
internal or external, used in routine checks to determine the values of the 
deflection coefficients should have an error of not more than 0-5 percent of 
each displayed calibration signal. 

More precise calibration, with an error as low as 0- 1 percent, may 
be obtained by using calibrators in conjunction with high precision volt- 
meters. 

7.4 Requirements on Linearity — The linearity error should be not more 
than 1 percent for the vertical ( voltage ) deflection and 2 percent for the 
horizontal time deflection, if only one value of the voltage or time deflec- 
tion coefficients is given. If more than one calibration line or mark is 
used, in addition to the zero line, the linearity error may increase according 
to their number and location. Roughly, for equally spaced calibration 
lines or marks, the linearity error might be increased proportionally to the 
number of calibration lines or marks, without increasing the resulting 
measuring error, provided the measured deflection is included between two 
calibration lines or marks. 

Tn the same manner, for the same linearity error, increasing the 
number of calibration lines or marks reduces the resulting measuring error. 



•Application guide for measuring devices for high voltage testing. 
fMethods of high voltage testing: Part 3 Measuring devices ( first revision ). 

11 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

Note — Since geometric distortions contribute to the nonlinearity, they should be 
kept to a minimum. 

7.5 Requirements on Stability — The variation of any deflection coefficient 
with time shall not exceed the limits given in Table 3. 



TABLE 3 LIMITS OF STABILITY ERROR 

( at constant operating conditions ) 



Oscilloscopes 



1TKM 


With Calibration 

Device Used at 

Every Oscillogram, 

Percent 


Without Calibration 
Device Used at 
Every Oscillogram, 
Percent 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Vertical display 






Short term stability error 


< 1 


Not applicable 


Long term stability error 


Not applicable 


<1 


Horizontal display 






Short term stability error 


<2 


Not applicable 


Long term stability error 


Not applicable 


<2 



If the calibration device is used for every impulse then any long 
term instability will be revealed by variation in the position of the calibra- 
tion lines or time marks. 

The requirement concerning short term stability has to be fulfilled for 
at least 30 minutes following the warm-up time interval. The requirement 
concerning long term stability has to be fulfilled in principle for 8 hours, 
but other times may be specified according to the time between calibration 
checks. 

Since it largely depends on the type of construction and components 
used, the stability of the instrument, for the specified time, shall be 
guaranteed by the manufacturer. 

Note — If the built-in attenuator is not included in the check made by the 
internal calibration device, then its long term stability shall cover a much longer 
period such as one year. 

7.6 Requirements on Ripple — The variation of the deflection coefficient 
during any ripple cycle should be not more than 0-5 percent. 

12 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

7.7 Requirements on the Accuracy of the Reading Process — ■ The method of 
reading the Oscillogram should not produce in the final measurement an 
error or more than 1 percent of the rated deflection. 

7.8 Limits on Interference — The maximun deflection from a reference line 
measured during an interference test, as described in Appendix B, shall be 
less than 1 percent of the expected deflection for the measurement. Greater 
values may be permitted if the interference does not affect the accuracy of 
the measurement. 

8. RECORD OF PERFORMANCE 

8.1 As far as applicable the list of technical data to be specified by the 
manufacturer or, if necessary, determined by the user through appropriate 
calibration, should conform to IS : 11018 ( Part 1 )-1984*. 

Among others, this list should include the following quantities some 
of which are of special importance for the specific use of the instrument for 
impulse measurements: 

a) Deflection coefficients, 

b) Range of time sweeps, 

c) Effective screen area, 

d) Vertical deflection amplifier characteristics ( if applicable ), 

e) Transfer characteristic, 

f ) Accuracy of calibrator ( if applicable ), 

g) Stability of built-in attenuators ( if applicable ), 
h) Stability of deflection coefficients, 

j) Non-linearity of deflection coefficients, 

k) Influence of ripple on deflection coefficients, 

m) Sensitivity to interference, and 

n) Value and duration of the maximum input voltage. 

8.2 The following characteristics will be specifically checked in the perfor- 
mance tests ( for the meaning of A and B, see 4 ). 

Long Term Periodic Tests ( Category A ) 

A — Accuracy of calibrator 



♦Method of expression of properties of cathode-ray oscilloscopes : Part 1 General. 

13 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

A — Effective screen area 

A — Non-linearity ( horizontal and vertical ) 

A — Transfer characteristic 

Short - Time Tests ( Category B ) 

B — Deflection coefficients 

9. RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR OSCILLOSCOPE 
MEASUREMENTS 

9.1 A recommended procedure for obtaining accurate measurements is 
given below. It can be applied to the determination of the deflection 
coefficients in the daily check ( category B, see 8 ) or to the evaluation of 
each oscillogram recording in the case where the requirements on linearity 
are not strictly met. 

Note — When more than one measurements are done on the oscilloscope during 
a day the check shall be made once during the day preferably before the first meas- 
urement. 

Provided the requirements on stability are fulfilled, this procedure 
results in a degree of accuracy limited only by the precision with which the 
calibration voltages and times are known, and to which the corresponding 
deflections can be read. 

9.2 The calibration oscillogram record should contain five traces, all 
obtained at the same time sweep, as shown in Fig. 2. 

Trace 1 — The trace of the voltage, from which the input to the oscillos- 
cope is to be determined. 

Trace 2 — The trace of the time marks. 

Trace 3 — The trace at zero input (the zero line). 

Trace 4 — The trace showing the deflection D, measured from Trace 3, of an 
accurately known voltage U, D, being smaller in magnitude than 
the peak deflection D, on Trace 1. 

Trace 5 — > The trace showing the deflection A,, measured from Trace 3, of 
an accurately known voltage Ub, Dh being larger than D p . 

Note — Traces 4 and 5 can be produced by internal or external calibrators. 

The peak of the voltage to be measured is determined as: 

14 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

If the instrument is essentially linear, either Trace 4 or Trace 5 can be 
omitted. In other cases D x &ndD b should be as close to D v as necessary. 
When the requirement on the short term stability of the deflection coe- 
fficients is met, Traces 4 and 5 need to be included in only a few of the 
oscillogram records, taken at the beginning and at the end of each 
recording session, respectively. In the example the time to chopping 
of the impulse, is determined as: 

T=T l + **~? 1 (L-LJ 



L 2 L x 



1NACE 5 




TRACE U 



TRACE 2 



Fig. 2 Example of Procedure for Oscilloscope Measurements, 

SECTION 3 PEAK VOLTMETERS FOR IMPULSE TESTS 

10. GENERAL 

10.0 Peak voltmeters used for impulse measurements may be either impulse 
peak voltmeters specially designed for impulse measurements or general 



15 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

purpose peak voltmeters utilized with adequate precautions. In this 
standard, no distinction is made between impulse and general purpose peak 
voltmeters. 

10.1 A peak voltmeter measures the highest peak of the impulse. How- 
ever, the highest peak of an impulse does not always comply with the value 
of the test voltage [see IS : 2071 ( Part 2 )-1974 ]*. This situation limits the 
use of the peak voltmeter by itself to those cases where the impulse shape 
is known to be quite smooth with no overshoot or oscillations at the peak. 
In all other cases, the peak voltmeter shall be used in parallel with a suit- 
able recording instrument ( usually an oscilloscope ) so that the reading of 
the peak voltmeter can be corrected ( if necessary ). 

The value may be displayed in either digital or analogue form. 

10.2 If a peak voltmeter is used in connection with a probe, the probe is 
considered to be part of the instrument. 

11. ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS 

11.1 General — In order to meet the requirements on the overall error in 
voltage ( current ) measurement specified in IS : 2071 ( Part 3 )-1976"j", the 
overall error of the peak voltmeter should not exceed 2 percent. In order 
to stay within these limits for all voltages equal to or greater than 0-5 times 
the rated scale voltage shall be of at least Class I accuracy. 

Recommended limits for individual errors are given below. In some 
cases, one or more of these limits may be exceeded provided the permitted 
overall error is not exceeded. In such cases, the overall error can be esti- 
mated from the individual errors by the statistical method given in 
IS: 8690-l977t- 

11.2 Requirements on Transfer Characteristics — An indication of the trans- 
fer characteristics of the instrument can be obtained from the error 
encountered when measuring linearly rising impulses chopped on the front. 
The error of the peak voltmeter however cannot in general be evaluated in 
the same way as for oscilloscopes, that is by means of the step or frequency 
response. The error shall be determined experimentally with single impulses 
of different shapes covering the range of use of the instrument. 

The manufacturer shall indicate the range of double exponential 
impules either full or chopped after the peak for which the error due to the 
transfer characteristics is not more than 1 percent. The range of front- 



*Methods of high voltage testing: Part 2 Test procedures (first revision ). 
tMethods of high voltage testing: Part 3 Measuring devices (first revision ). 
{Application guide for measuring devices for high voltage testing. 

16 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

chopped impulses for which the error is not more than 3 percent shall also 
be indicated. 

11.3 Requirements on Accuracy of the Calibrators — Internal calibrators and 
external calibrators used in routine checks, to determine the value of the 
scale factor shall have an error not exceeding 0-5 percent of each displayed 
calibration signal. 

11.4 Requirements on Linearity — The linearity error shall be not more 
than 1 percent if only one calibration level, in addition to the zero level, is 
provided. 

For more calibration ievels the permissible linearity error may in- 
crease accordingly (see 7.4). 

11.5 Requirements on Stability — The variation of the scale factor with time 
between calibration checks shall be not more than 1 percent. 

11.6 Requirements on Storage Time — According to the type of peak volt- 

iiicitia, Lii*j iiiui^aLiuu liiajr tuii^i u& uao^iia^^u. uuui manual ui auiuuiau^ 

resetting, or decrease slowly after the impulse. In the latter case the manu- 
facturer shall indicate the time for which the decay is not more than 
1 percent. 

11.7 Limits on Interference — The error in the measurement resulting from 
electromagnetic interference shall be small compared with the permitted 
overall error. 

If the measurement is affected by the chopping of the impulse 
it shall be explicitly stated that the instrument may be used only for the 
measurements of full impulses. 

Methods of testing immunity from interference are given in 
Appendix B. 

12. RECORD OF PERFORMANCE 

12.1 As far as applicable, the list of technical data to be specified by the 
manufacturer or if necessary, determined by the user through appropriate 
calibration should conform to IS : 11018 ( Part 1 )-1984*. 

12.2 Among others this list should include the following quantities 
some of which are of special importance for the specific use of the instru- 
ment for impulse measurements: 

a) Scale factor, 

b) Usable scale, 

♦Method of expression of properties of cathode-ray oscilloscopes: Part 1 General. 

17 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

c) Number of digits ( if applicable ), 

d) Transfer characteristic, 

e) Accuracy of calibrator ( if applicable ), 

f) Stability of built-in attenuators ( if applicable ), 

g) Stability of scale factors, 

h) Non-linearity of scale factors, 

j) Storage time ( if applicable ), 

k) Sensitivity to interference, and 

m) Value and duration of the maximum input voltage. 

12.3 The following characteristics should be specifically checked in the 
performance tests ( for the meaning of A and B, see 4 ). 

Long Term-Periodic Tests ( Catagory A ) 

A — Calibrator accuracy 

A — • Storage time ( if applicable ) 

A — Non-linearity 

A — Range of impulse shapes 
Short Term Tests ( Catagory B ) 

B — Scale factor 

13. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MEASUREMENTS WITH PEAK 
VOLTMETERS 

13.1 In order to obtain accurate measurements with a peak voltmeter, 
the following recommendations should be followed: 

The appropriate attenuator position should be selected in order to 
perform the measurement within the effective scale. 

A calibration check should be made at a level as close as possible to 
the voltage to be measured. 

13.2 If the voltmeter has a relatively short discharge time constant, then 
the reading should be noted in as short a time as posssible after the appli- 
cation of the impulse. Such time shall not exceed the maximum permissible 
time specified by the manufacturer. 



18 



IS : 11349 - 1985 
APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4.2 ) 

PROCEDURE FOR PERFORMANCE TESTS 

A-l. GENERAL 

A-l.l This appendix gives some guidance for the measurement of some 
characteristics of the instrument giving rise to individual errors, such as 
precision of the calibrators, deflection and transfer characteristics. 

A-2. OSCILLOSCOPES 

A-2.1 Calibrator Accuracy — Internal calibrators for voltage measurement 
are checked by comparison with a known accurate voltage. In some cases 
this is a dc voltage while in others it is a voltage having a square-wave shape 

The calibrators for the horizontal deflection ( time sweep ) usually 
consist of time marks, sinusoidal oscillations or pulses of decaying oscil- 
lations. These can usually be checked by connecting either an accurate 
time mark generator or a sinusoidal voltage of known frequency or time 
marks displayed with those from the internal calibrator. 

Checks of calibrator accuracies for both vertical and horizontal 
deflections are considered to be in category A ( see 4 ). 

A-2.2 Deflection Characteristics — The method of determining the various 
deflection characteristics such as the deflection coefficients, non-linearity, 
etc, is based on applying known inputs to the instrument and measuring 
the resulting deflections. 

To determine the vertical deflection characteristics, a series of accu- 
rately known voltages are applied and the resulting deflections measured. 
In addition to the zero line, the voltages should range from that level giving 
about 10 percent of the rated deflection to that giving 100 percent. The 
zero line should be made without time marks since the apparent zero of the 
time marks may be shifted from the true zero position. The number of 
levels required will depend on the degree of non-linearity of the deflection. 
For instruments which are essentially linear, eight to ten levels are sufficient 
but if the application of this number of levels indicates that the accuracy 
requirements of 7 are not met, additional levels will be required. 

When the oscilloscope has a high input impedance, dc voltages may 
be used for the input, but for instruments with low impedance input, volt- 
age pulses shall be used to prevent overloading the input circuitry. When 

19 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

voltage pulses are used, the pulse shall have a flat portion on top and the 
voltage level of this portion shall be accurately known. The flat portion of 
the pulse may extend over most of the screen width or only a small portion 
of it. In this latter case, provision should be made to shift the pulse later- 
ally so that calibration can be made over the entire screen width to take 
into account geometrical distortions. This latter procedure is only necessary 
for an initial calibration or when the cathode-ray tube is replaced. There- 
after, one position of the pulse is usually sufficient. This technique is used 
to calibrate the graticule lines when a graticule is used or to check the cali- 
bration of an internal calibrator and determine the number of calibration 
levels required. 

The above calibrations should be carried out with one setting of 

such instrument controls as intensity, astigmatism, focus, etc. Then for 

one particular deflection coefficient, tha effect of changing these controls 
should be examined. 

Many oscilloscopes have vertical deflection coefficients which are 
polarity sensitive or affected by the biasing of the plates. Consequently, 
appropriate measurement of the deflection characteristics should be made. 

The method of determining the horizontal deflection characteristics 
is basically the same as for the vertical ones. However, in this case either 
a time mark generator or as high frequency oscillator is connected to the 
vertical deflection system and the time intervals along the horizontal axis 
measured. The time intervals should be sufficiently numerous to ensure that 
the accuracy specified in 7 is met as in the case of voltage levels for the 
vertical deflection. This calibration should be done on single sweep. If 
the test of the effect of intensity setting, astigmatism, focus, etc., on the 
vertical deflection characteristics indicate sensitivity to these settings, the 
specific settings of these controls should be recorded for each sweep time. 

Where the above tests indicate that the deflection coefficients are 
within the permissible tolerances for only a portion of the screen, the 
nominal deflection coefficients for that portion are determined by averaging 
the actual deflection coefficients for that portion. The determination of the 
vertical and horizontal deflection characteristics are considered to be in 
category B. 

A-2.3 Transfer Characteristics — • One method of determining the transfer 
characteristics is to measure the step response of the instrument in the 
manner described in IS : 8690-1977*. However, for oscilloscopes the low 
voltage step generator is connected directly to the input terminals of the 
instrument or through a matching resistor to the input end of the measur- 
ing cable connected to the instrument. Since no modifications to the system 



♦Application guide for measuring devices for high voltage testing. 

20 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

are required as in the case of complete measuring systems, the true step 
response of the instrument is obtained. The determination of the transfer 
characteristics is considered to be in category A. 

A- 2.4 Attenuators — The ratios of attenuators may be determined in the 
same manner as that used for determining the divider ratio ( see IS : 8690- 
1977*). To check the transfer characteristics of an attenuator, the output is 
measured with a sensitive precision oscilloscope having a high input impe- 
dance when a low voltage step is applied to the input of the attenuator. 
The combined transfer characteristics of the oscilloscope plus attenuator 
must be within the limits given in 7. 

A-3. PEAK VOLTMETERS 

A-3.1 Calibrator Accuracy — The calibration voltage is checked either by 
comparing it to an accurately known voltage or by measuring it with an 
accurate instrument of sufficiently high impedance so that the voltage is un- 
changed. Checks of calibrator accuracy are considered to be in category A. 

A-3.2 Deflection Characteristics — The different characteristics, such as 
deflection coefficients or scale factors, usable scale, etc, are determined in 
a manner similar to that used for the vertical deflection system on an oscillo- 
scope. The voltages used are impulse voltages of both polarities and of 
known amplitudes. The impulses should have a front time and a time to 
half value approximately in the middle of the ranges of the values for which 
the instrument is intended to be used ( see 4 ). 

A-3.3 Transfer Characteristics — Due to the operating principle of peak 
voltmeters, the transfer characteristics shall be determined by using the 
range of single impulse shapes of both polarities for which the instrument 
will be operated. 

This determination may be performed at high voltage by simul- 
taneous comparison with a measurement made with an oscilloscope which 
has been very accurately calibrated ( the oscilloscope should have an upper 
cut-off frequency of at least 20 MH Z ). If the determination is performed 
using low voltage impulses injected after the attenuator, the transfer charac- 
teristics of the attenuator shall be checked separately. 

A-3.4 Attenuators — Attenuators for peak voltmeters may be checked in a 
manner similar to that described for those of oscilloscopes. 



* Application guide for measuring devices for high voltage testing. 



21 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

APPENDIX B 

{Clauses 4.2, 7.8 andW.l) 
INTERFERENCE TESTS 

B-l. GENERAL 

B-l.l The interference test is made in order to prove that the instrument 
has a sufficiently low sensitivity to interference, defined here as the deflec- 
tion caused by any signal entering the instrument by any path, except via 
the measurement terminals. This property also concerns any undesired 
coupling between circuits within the instrument itself. 

The interference affecting the measuring instrument may take diffe- 
rent forms which, for the purpose of this document, can be grouped in the 
following main categories: 

a) Currents reaching the case of the instrument through the shield of the 
measuring cable — Depending on the effectiveness of the shielding 
of the instrument these currents may or may not penetrate into the 
active parts of the instrument, giving rise to erratic deflections. 
Note that they also produce a measuring error caused by a poten- 
tial difference appearing across the cable terminals at the instrument 
side ( see also Appendix C ). 

b) Currents reaching the case of the instrument through the shield of 
control cables ( such as triggering cables ) — • They may penetrate into 
the active parts of the instrument in a similar manner as for the 
measuring cable. 

c) Transients superimposed on the power frequency in the mains wires — 
These transients may or may not affect the active parts of the 
instrument depending on the effectiveness of the isolating trans- 
former and filtering devices. 

d) Electric and magnetic fields directly penetrating, through the cabinet, 
into the active parts of the instrument 

Furthermore (in the case of oscilloscopes ) interference may also be 
produced by parasitic coupling between the internal circuits and the signal 
injected via the external triggering terminals, especially when an antenna is 
used for external triggering. In double beam oscilloscopes, coupling 
between the two beams may also produce interference. 

22 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

B-2. INTERFERENCE CHECK 

B-2.1 This test is made in order to check the overall sensitivity to inter- 
ference of the measuring instrument in a given measuring circuit and for 
given operating conditions. 

During the test the measuring layout ( earthing, routing of measuring 
cable, control, cables and power cables ) and the high voltage circuit ( posi- 
tion of the impulse generator, front capacitor, chopping devices, voltage 
divider) shall be as close as possible to that used for the measurement. The 
measuring cable shall be short-circuited ( or terminated by its surge impe- 
dance ) at the divider end and earthed in the same way as for the normal 
measurement. To avoid incorrect interpretation in the case of oscilloscopes, 
care should be taken that the triggering takes place at the right instant. 

The impulse generator shall be charged to the relevant operating volt- 
age and fired. The test could be performed with full impulses if the system 
is not intended to be used for chopped wave tests. Otherwise, the test shall 
be performed by chopping the impulse in the vicinity of the crest by an 
adequate chopping device. In this case the voltage amplitude may be 
reduced if necessary with respect to the maximum test voltage to avoid 
overstressing the test object if in the circuit. 

Note 1 — An adequate chopping device is the breakdown of an air gap with 
essentially homogenous field, such as a sphere-sphere gap or a multiple chopping 
gap. For special cases, however, the chopping of such a device may not be fast 
enough and other devices, such as compressed gas gaps, may be required. 

Note 2 — For peak voltmeters the chopping of the impulse shall be between 1 
and 3 jjis after the peak of the voltage. The peak voltmeter should exhibit the same 
reading with and without chopping. 

Note 3 — In the case of oscilloscopes, this test may not show interference on the 
time base. To investigate this type of the interference, the measuring cable should 
be disconnected from the oscilloscope, leaving, however, the shield of the cable con- 
nected to the instrument case, and a separate sinusoidal voltage of suitable amplitude 
shall be applied to the oscilloscope. In the same test conditions as above, the record- 
ed sinusoidal oscillation should exhibit negligible distortion. 

B-3. INDIVIDUAL INTERFERENCE TESTS 

B-3.0 These tests are made in order to check the sensitivity of the instru- 
ment to each of the different types of interferences listed above. The tests 
are basically intended for the manufacturer of the instrument, but they 
could also be useful for the user, to ascertain which type of interference is 
most critical for an instrument that failed during the complete interference 
test. 

23 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

Note — Passing the individual interference tests will not necessarily guarantee 
that the instrument will operate satisfactorily in the actual test arrangement. How- 
ever, failing the individual test will be a clear indication of the inadequacy of the 
instrument. 

B-3.1 Current Injection into the Shield of the Cables — This test applies 
to both measuring and control cables ( if any ). The cables shall be con- 
nected to the instrument in the same way as for the normal operation. 
The current to be injected in the shield of the cable should preferably 
consist of a main oscillation having an amplitude of 100 A and a frequency 
of 1 to 2 MHz, and of a superimposed oscillation of amplitude 10 A and 
frequency 10 to 20 MHz. A possible test circuit is shown in Fig. 3. 



[— O O 



i — G F 



Uo I 



EARTH 
TERMINAL 



r^ 

S — current measuring shunt, and 
U = charging voltage. 
Fig. 3 Current Injection into the Shield of the Cable 

B-3.2 Transients Superimposed on the Power Supply — This transient 
should preferably consist of an initial fast rise pulse ( rise time not more 
than 100 ns), followed by a damped oscillation of frequency not less than 
100 kHz superimposed on the main supply voltage, with an open-circuit 
charging voltage of not less than 5 kV and a short-circuit current of not less 
than 200 A. A possible test circiut is shown in Fig. 4. 




uoizrc 



POWER EARTH 
SUPPLY TERMINAL 



U Q — charging voltage. 
Fig. 4 Transient Superimposed on the Power Supply 



24 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

B-3.3 Application of Electric and Magnetic Fields — The instrument, 
including any additional shielding added to it, shall be submitted to rapidly 
changing electric and magnetic fields of approximately 10 kV/m and 1 000 
A/m respectively. 

These fields may be obtained by the discharge of a capacitor via an 
open air sphere gap as shown in Fig. 5. 



s*i r\ 




1 


LINE 


Z 


k 


o u 




? 

1 
1 . 


h l f 




_c 




l' 

1 
1 


INSTRUMENT 


^ r 

1 

i _ 


R 


' 








GROUND INSTRUMENT CLOSE 
PLANE • TO THE END OF 

THE LINE 




z 
c 

h 


= characteristic impedance, 
= 20 nF, 
= 5m, and 
= 1 m. 







For the electric field test U = 40 kV ( R = Z) 
For the magnetic field test U Q = 100 kV ( R = O ) 

Fig. 5 Application of Electric and Magnetic Fields 

For tests with electric field, the line connected to the capacitor, shall 
be terminated by its surge impedance (R = Z). 

For test with magnetic fields the line connected to the capacitor shall 
be short circuited (R = O ). 

The corresponding transient characteristics are determined by the 
parameters of that test circuit and are : for the voltage, a step with a rise 
time of about 50 ns and for the current, a damped oscillation with a 
frequency of about 0-5 MHz. 

The test is not applicable if the instrument is operated in a well 
shielded areas. 

B-3.4 Additional Tests for Oscilloscopes 

B-3.4.1 For oscilloscopes triggered externally via an antenna, an additional 
interference test should be carried out using a time sweep of about 10 ps. 



25 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

The high voltage test circuit should be the same as when making measure- 
ments and should include a shpere gap set to spark over at or near the 
peak of the impulse. The measuring cable should be disconnected 
from the oscilloscopes and short-circuited but the sheath of the cable may 
be connected to the case of the instrument. The input to the measuring 
terminals of the oscilloscope should be a sinusoidal voltage having a fre- 
quency of the order of 1 to 5 MHz and its amplitude should be such 
as to produce a vertical deflection of the order of 5 to 10 percent of full 
scale. The impulse generator is charged to the maximum voltage and 
fired and the recorded sinusoidal oscillation should exhibit negligible 
distortion. 

B-3.4.2 For double beam oscilloscopes the full deflection shall be pro- 
duced on one beam, checking that no erratic deflection is induced on the 
other beam. 

B-4. EVALUATION OF INTERFERENCE TESTS 

B-4.1 For all the tests listed above, the test is considered satisfactory if 
the parasitic deflection produced on the instrument is within the limits 
given in 7.8 or 11.7. 



APPENDIX C 

( Clause 6.0 ) 

PRECAUTIONS IN THE USE OF GENERAL PURPOSE 
INSTRUMENTS 

C-l. GENERAL 

C-l.l General purpose instruments usually suffer from two major 
disadvantages. Their sheilding is normally not adequate for use in a high 
voltage laboratory and the accuracy of built-in calibrators is not sufficient 
for the measuring accuracy required. 

In the case of internal calibrators, their accuracy should be checked 
and, if necessary, external calibrators of adequate precision used instead. 

C-2. OSCILLOSCOPES 

C-2.1 General purpose oscilloscopes shall be capable of operating in the 
single sweep mode for use in recording impulses. A lockout feature may 

26 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

be required to prevent multiple triggering due to interference. The accuracy 
being often outside of the requirements of 7, additional calibrations may 
be needed. 

Interferences are generally excessive on both the vertical and hori- 
zontal axis, especially in the case of chopped impulses. The following 
precautions may reduce the interferences to an acceptable level: 

a) Interferences due to electromagnetic field directly penetrating into 
the instrument may be reduced by placing the entire instrument into 
an auxiliary metal enclosure having bonded joints, and made of 
suitable materials such as aluminium or copper. It is important to 
ensure that the ventilation of the instrument is not impaired when 
this technique is used and ventilation openings covered with copper 
or aluminium mesh should be incorporated. 

b) Interferences due to current flowing in the shield of the measuring 
cable may be reduced by an adequate earthing at the voltage divider 
side, be using double coaxial cable with the outer shield grounded 
at both divider and instrument ends ( or cables running into 
metallic conduits connected at both ends to the local grounds ), 
and by avoiding loops between the measuring cable and the earth 
returns. 

c) Interferences due to potential differences induced or applied between 
the terminals of the measuring cable may be reduced by using an 
input voltage as high as possible, and namely by operating the 
instrument on its maximum deflection coefficient range, or by 
inserting an external attenuator between the cable and instrument. 
Also the use of double shielded cables or cables placed in metallic 
conduits [ see (b) above ] will be effective in limiting the potential 
difference appearing between the cable terminals. 

d) Interferences coming from the mains supply can usually be reduced 
by inserting an isolating transformer with low interwinding 
capacitance between the instrument and the mains supply. It may 
be useful to add, between the isolating transformer and the mains, 
a high frequency filter in order to provide a high series impedance 
between the mains and the isolating transformer and a low parallel 
impedance between the mains terminals and ground, so that the 
interferences coming from the mains are further shunted to earth. 

Note that the isolating transformer and the filter mentioned above 
may also act in the sense of limiting the currents flowing from the 
measuring system, through the cable shield and the instrument 
internal grounds, to the power line ground. 

27 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

C-3. PEAK VOLTMETERS 

C-3.1 These instruments are in general subjected to the same type of 
interference as oscilloscopes, being even more sensitive. Similar approaches 
to those outlined above should be taken. 

Note — Unlike oscilloscope, it is impossible to tell from the instrument reading 
if the interference affects the measurement. Consequently, it is of extreme import- 
ance that interference effects be minimized. 



AP PENDIX D 

( Clause 6.1 ) 

SPECIAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR OSCILLOSCOPES 

D-l. TIME SWEEP AND WRITING SPEED 

D-l.l In principle, the necessary range of sweep times is determined by 
the shape of the voltages to be recorded ( type of tests ). An indication of 
the full deflection times recommended for various standardized tests is 
given in Table 4. 

An adequate sequence of time sweep settings should be provided with 
a ratio of scaling of 1 , 2, 5, 10, etc, and the range of 0.5 ps to 50 ms. 

Mote — The overall range of time sweeps may not be available on the same 
instrument and consequently two instruments may be required for some tests. 

The necessary writing speed is determined by the highest deflection 
steepness to be recorded and by the fastest time sweep to be used. The 
obtainable writing speed depends on the characteristics of the oscilloscope 
( accelerating voltage and type of phosphor ) and on the recording system 
used ( type of camera, object to image ratio, film material, film processing ). 

The values of writing speed thus refer to the combined set of oscillo- 
scope plus camera system. The latter should always be specified when 
indicating a value of writing speed. 

D-l. 2 Table 4 gives recommended values of the writing speed for the 
various standardized tests considered, with reference to a 'normal' size of 
the recorded oscillogram, namely 6 cm x 10 cm. If the recording has a 

28 



IS: 11349-1985 

smaller size, then the required values of writing speed may be reduced 
proportionally to the reduced dimensions. 

The values of Table 4 are an estimate of the minimum values required 
to ensure that the considered impulse shapes are properly recorded on the 
oscillogram. Higher values may be required for the measurement of the 
step response of the oscilloscope, unless a repetitive step generator is used. 

Note — Besides the normal linear deflection, a deflection permitting an expansion 
of the time of recording ( logarithmic or zigzag ) may be useful. 

TABLE 4 RECOMMENDED RANGES OF RATED SWEEP TIMES "~ 

AND MINIMUM WRITING SPEED, FOR VARIOUS 
STANDARDIZED IMPULSE TEST AND 
MEASUREMENTS 

( Clause D-l.l, and D-1.2 ) 



Tests 


Rated Sweep 
Times 


Minimum Writing 
Speed 




From 




To 


cm/(is 


(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


Determination of the response time 
by the sphere gap method 

Impulse chopped on front; 
To between 0-4 and 1 y.s 


0.5 (is 




5 (xs 


200 


Standard lightning impulses 
l'2/50 us full or chopped on 
the tail 


1 [iS 




200 [xs 


50 


Standard impulse currents 
4/10 and 8/20 s*s 


1 [iS 




200 (is 


50 


Standard switching impulses 
250/2500 [is 


50 (is 




5 ms 


10 


Line discharge currents 


50 [is 




5 ms 


10 


Phase-to-phase switching 
impulses 










Switching impulse — AC combined 
tests 


200 jiS 




50 ms 


10 


Lightning impulse — AC combined 

tests 


1 flS 




50 ms 


50 


Duty cycle tests of surge 
arresters 


1 |lS 




50 ms 


50 



29 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

D-2. ATTENUATOR STEPS 

D-2.1 The selection of the attenuator steps should also take into account 
the necessity of obtaining similar deflections with impulses of different peak 
value, in tests consisting of the application of a series of such impulses. 

The following table lists a sequence of attenuator settings which 
has proved to be practical: 

Steps 



Attenuator 1 1-25 1-6 2 2-5 3-2 4 5 6-4 8-0 10-0 



D-3. EFFECTIVE SCREEN AREAS 

D-3.1 The effective screen areas depend essentially on the individual errors 
and on the method of calibration ( number and position of calibration 
levels ). ' 

Assuming that all the individual errors are in accordance with the values 
listed in 7 and considering for the sake of the example only tone calibration 
level in addition to the zero line, the following ranges are obtained: 

Vertical axis : for a calibration level in the vicinity of the centre of 
the rated deflection, the effective area is restricted to 
the part between 050 and 1 times the rated deflec- 
tion. 

Horizontal axis : for a time mark in the vicinity of - 5 of the rated time 
sweep, the effective area of the screen is restricted to 
the part between 03 and 1 times the rated time sweep 
time. 

Figure 1 shows the effective screen areas ( shaded parts ), namely, the 
areas in which the errors in voltage and time measurements are within 
the limits specified in 7.1. Measurements can be made outside the effective 
screen areas but with lower accuracy. 

If more than one calibration level is provided for both deflections, 
larger individual errors may be accepted for the same effective screen area. 

In a similar manner, for the same individual errors, the effective screen 
areas may be increased. However to significantly expand the effective area 
below 0-5 for the vartical axis and below 03 for the horizontal axis the 
reading error shall be reduced with respect to the value specified in 7.7. 

30 



IS : 11349 - 1985 

D-4. DOUBLE TIME BASE 

D-4.1 If double beam oscilloscopes are equipped with two time bases. It 
may be desirable to operate both traces from a single time base, to eliminate 

l-UUb DU11LO UbLTTU;U Mlt LVTU UCIOU3. 

D-5. THICKNESS OF THE RECORDED TRACE 

D-5.1 For all the specified conditions of use the thickness of the 
recorded trace should be not more than 2 percent of the rated deflection. 



31 



