•••••••••••••••• 



^ is^ 





T-^^^i^ 






Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



&^JfflAcgli^^^ffflAfe^icOv^ ^a^T^S^=^Ir t ^^ ^^^ 



IS 14720 (1999) : Documentation - Guidelines for the 
Establishment and Development of Monolingual Thesauri [MSD 
5: Documentation and Information] 




>^^lllfcJ^9>^^bv/ff^feial>^h:>^^Ts;>&^T^FS 



5?aiU I l>ft=55S5&'>S*^ 



^^^^XVVV^i^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



*Tsr- 





^^ 



iA*^*^ 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788: 1986 

^^J^^TfPJ^ (Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

DOCUMENTATION — GUIDELINES FOR THE 

ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF 

MONOLINGUAL THESAURI 

ICS 01.140.20 



©BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1 999 Price Group 11 



Documerrtation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 5 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 2788 : 1986 'Documentation - Guidelines for the 
establishment and development of monolingual thesauri' issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the 
Documentation and Information Sectional Committee {MSD 5) and approval of the Management and 
Systems Division Council. 

The text of the ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention 
is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they s'hould be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, references have also been made to the following International Standards for 
which there are no Indian Standards : 

ISO 5963 Documentation - Methods for examining documents, determining their 

subjects and selecting indexing terms 

ISO 5964 Documentation - Guidelines for the establishment and development of 

multilingual thesauri 

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of 
the above referred ISO standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with 
this standard. 

At the time of publication, the editions of standards mentioned above, were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and users of these standards are advised to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards. 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



Indian Standard 



DOCUMENTATION — GUIDELINES FOR THE 

ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF 

MONOLINGUAL THESAURI 



Introduction 

The effectiveness of a subject index as a means for identifying 
and retrieving documents depends upon a well-constructed in- 
dexing language. This applies to any system where the selec- 
tion of indexing terms calls for human intellectual decisions, in- 
cluding those systems in which a computer is used to store and 
manipulate terms or to identify documents associated with 
terms or combinations of terms assigned by an indexer. 

The compiler of a subject index faces three main tasks 

a) determining the subject matter of documents; 

b) selecting the terms which together summarize the sub- 
ject; 



c) indicating relationships 
represented by these terms. 1' 



between the concepts 



The first of these tasks is described separately in ISO 5963. The 
second and third tasks concern not only the indexer but also 
tiic user oi tiic index, imis international ^tanusru ueais witii 
some aspects of term selection, since it contains recommended 
procedures for vocabulary control, but it is particulariy con- 
cerned with means for establishing and displaying certain kinds 
of relationships between indexing terms. 

Two kinds of inter-term relationships can be distinguished : 

a) syntactical or a posteriori relationships between the 
terms which together summarize the subject of a docu- 
ment. For example, an Indexer dealing with a work on 
"Computers in banks in Amsterdam" may assign three 
terms, "Banks", "Computers" and "Amsterdam", to the 
document. In a post-coordinate system the relationship be- 
tween these terms is not explicitly indicated, and the docu- 
ment would be retrieved if any or all of these terms were 
used as retrieval keys. In a pre-coordinated index the rela- 
tionships between the terms may be conveyed in various 
ways, for example by symbols which express specific rela- 
tionships, the positions of terms within entries, their 
typography and/or their accompanying punctuation. The 
terms in this example are not normally associated according 
to common frames of reference, and their interrelationships 
can therefore be regarded as document-dependent; 



b) those a priori or thesaural relationships between terms 
assigned to documents and other terms which, because 
they form part of common and shared frames of reference, 
are present by implication. In the example above, "Banks" 
would imply a broader term such as "Financial institutions"; 
"Computers" is mentally associated with "Data 
processing"; and "Amsterdam" implies the wider location 
"Netherlands". Any of these mentally-associated terms 
might serve as a user's approach to the subject index. These 
relationships are document-independent, since they are 
generally recognized and could be established through 
reference to standard works, such as dictionaries and 
encyclopaedias. 

The distinction between these two kinds of inter-term relation- 
ships can be displayed as follows: 



Netherlands Financial institutions Data processing 



Amsterdam 



Banks 



Computers 



, 

(a) = a posteriori relationships between indexing terms 
assigned to a document 

(b) = a priori relationships handled by the thesaurus 

This International Standard is especially concerned with those 
a priori relationships which can be displayed in i thesaurus, 
where they then, in effect, add a second dimension to an index- 
ing language, as shown above. 



1 Scope and field of application 

1.1 The recommendations set out in this International Stan- 
dard are intended to ensure consistent practice within a single 
indexing agency, or between different agencies (for example 
members of a network). They should not be regarded, 
however, as mandatory instructions. Optional procedures are 
described in many cases, for example for the display of inter- 
term relationships, without indicating one of these approaches 
as the preferred technique. The choice of procedure will vary 
from one indexing agency to another, depending on manage- 
ment decisions that fall outside the scope of this international 



1) For practical purposes, "term" and "concept" are sometimes used interchangeably. 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



Standard. As far as possible the techniques described in this In- 
ternational Standard are based upon general principles which 
apply to any subject field. It is recognized, however, that an tn- 
dexer working within a limited subject field may sometimes 
need to depart from these general recommendations, and this 
is noted where appropriate. 



1 .2 As far as possible the techniques described in this Inter- 
national Standard are not limited to a particular method of in- 
dexing, whether post-coordinate or pre-coordinate. This Inter- 
national Standard is, however, subject to the following restric- 
tions : 

a) it deals with the display and organization of terms that 
form a controlled subset of natural language, tt does not 
suggest procedures for organizing and displaying 
mathematical and chemical formulae; 

b) it is generally based on the concept of "preferred 
terms" (see 3.5); 

c) its application is limited to agencies in which human in- 
dexers are used to analyse documents and express their 
subjects in the ternjs of a controlled indexing language. It is 
not applicable to these agencies which apply entirely 
automatic indexing techniques, where terms occurring in 
texts are organized into sets according to criteria which can 
be established by a computer, for example their frequency 
of occurrence and/or adjacency in the text. It is considered, 
however, that a well-constructed monolingual thesaurus 
can serve as a useful aid when searching such a free-text 
system; 

d) it deals mainly with procedures for indexing collections 
of documents listed in catalogues or bibliographies. It is not 
concerned with the preparation of "back-of-the-faook" in- 
dexes, although many of its recommended procedures may 
be useful for that purpose. 



1.3 The recommendations contained in this International 
Standard relate to monolingual thesauri, without reference to 
the special requirements of multilingual thesauri, i.e. those 
thesauri in which conceptual equivalences are expressed in 
terms selected from more than one natural language. The con- 
struction and maintenance of a multilingual thesaurus is dealt 
with separately in ISO 5964. Since the principles on which this 
Internationa! Standard is based can be regarded as both 
language-independent and culture-independent, they have also 
been accepted as the basis for the multilingual standard. Con- 
sequently, general principles and procedures which apply 
equally to both kinds of thesauri are fully described only in this 
International Standard, i.e. they are not repeated in ISO 5964. 



2 References 

ISO 5963, Documentation — Methods for examining 
documents, determining their subjects and selecting indexing 
terms. 

ISO 5964, Documentation — Guidelines for the establishment 
and development of multilingual thesauri. 



3 Dsfiniticrts 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply. 

3.1 document: Any item, printed or othenA/ise, that is 
amenable to cataloguing and indexing. 

NOTE - This definition refers not only to written and printed materials 
in paper or microform versions (for example books, journals, diagrams, 
maps), but also to non-printed media (for example machine-readable 
records, films, sound recordings, etc. I, and three-dimensional objects 
or realia used a?? <5nprimens. 



3.2 indexing language ; A controlled set of terms selected 
from natural language and used to represent, in summary form, 
the subjects of documents. 



3.3 thesaurus: The vocabulary of a controlled indexing 
language (see 3.2), formally organized so that the a priori rela- 
tionships between concepts (for example as "broader" and 
"narrower") are made explicit. 



3,4 indexing term: The representation of a concept, 
preferably in the form of a noun or noun phrase. 

NOTE — An indexing term can consist of more than one word, and is 
then known as a compound term (see 3.7). In a controlled indexing 
vocabulary, a term is designated either as a preferred term or as a non- 
preferred term. 



3.5 preferred term : A term used consistently when index- 
ing to represent a given concept; sometimes known as 
"descriptor" . 



3.6 non-preferred term : The synonym or quasi-synonym 
of a preferred term. A non-preferred term is not assigned to 
documents, but is provided as an entry point in a thesaurus or 
alphabetical index, the user being directed by an instruction 
(for example USE or SEE) to the appropriate preferred term; 
sometimes known as "non-descriptor". 



3.7 compound term : An indexing term {see 3.4) which can 
be factored morphologically into separate components, each of 
which could be expressed, or re-expressed, as a noun that is 
capable of serving independently as an indexing term. 

NOTE — The parts of the great majority of compound terms can be 
distinguished as follows : 

a) the focus or head, i.e. the noun component which identifies 
the genera! class of concepts to which the term as a whole refers. 

Examples : 

1) the noun component "indexes" in the compound term 
"printed indexes". 

2] the noun "nospitals" in the prepositional phrase "hospitals 
for children". 



iS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



b) The difference or modifier, i.e. one or more further com- 
ponents which serve to narrow the extension of the focus and so 
specify one of its $ubclasses. 

Examples : 

1} the adjective "printed" in the compound term "printed in- 
dexes". 

2) the preposition-plus-noun combination "for children" in 
the compound term "hospitals for children". 

The focus and its differancefs} may be written as separate words, as in 
"dining rooms" and "soup spoons", or they may be concatenated into 
single words, as in "bedrooms" and "teaspoons '. 



3.8 node label: A "dummy" term not assigned to 
documents when indexing, but inserted into the systematic 
section of some types of thesauri to indicate the logical basts on 
which a category has been divided; sometinnes known as a 
"facet indicator" . 

Examples : 

By occupation 

By purpose 

Parts 
NOTE — See 8.3.3 for a further description of node labels. 



4 Abbreviations and symbols 

4. 1 The following abbreviations, which are used throughout 
this International Standard, are printed as prefixes to terms, 
etc. Each abbreviation indicates the relationship or function of 
the term or note which follows, as explained below : 



SN Scope note; a note attached to a term to indicate its 
meaning within an indexing language 

USE The term that follows the symbol is the preferred 
term when a choice between synonyms or quasi- 
synonyms exists 

UF Use for; the term that follows the symbol is a non- 
preferred synonym or quasi-synonym 

TT Top term; the term that follows the symbol is the 
name of the broadest class to which the specific con- 
cept belongs; sometimes used in the alphabetical 
section of a thesaurus 

BT Broader term; the term that follows the symbol 
represents a concept having a wider meaning 



BTG Broader term (generic) 
BTP Broader term (partitive) 



NT Narrower term; the term that follows the symbol 
refers to a concept with a more specific meaning 

NTG Narrower term (generic) 

NTP Narrower term (partitive) 

RT Related term; the term that follows the symbol is 
associated, but is not a synonym, a quasi-synonym, 
a broader term or a narrower term 

4.2 Abbreviations with equivalent meanings also occur in 
thesauri in other languages. 

Examples : 

French 

NE Note explicative 

EM Employer 

EP Employ^ pour 

MV Nom de la classe la plus g^n^rale 

TG Terme g6n6rique 

TGG Terme g6n6rique g6n6rique 

TGP Terme g6n6rique partitif 

TS Terme sp6cifique 

TSG Terme sp6cifique g^n^rlque 

TSP Terme spdcifique partitif 

VA Voir aussi 

German 

D Definition 

BS Benutzen 

BF Benutzt fur 

SB Spitzenbegrtff 

OB Oberbegriff 

OA Oberbegriff (Abstraktionsrelation) 

SP Verbandsbegriff (Bestandsrelation) 

UB Unterbegriff 

UA Unterbegriff (Abstraktionsrelation) 

TP Teilbegriff (Bestandsrelation) 

VB Venwandter Begriff 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



4.3 The abbreviations listed in 4.T and 4.2 have acquired 
status as generally recognized conventions, and they occur in 
many published thesauri. They have obvious mnemonic value, 
yet it is realized that they are also language-dependent. If this 
characteristic is regarded as sufficiently important to justify 
using a "neutral" system, an agency can adopt the language- 
independent symbols developed by ISO and given in the annex. 

4.4 The following conventions are also used in examples 
throughout this international Standard : 

a) preferred terms are printed in upper case throughout: 
Examples : 

CARS 
ANIMALS 

b) non-preferred terms are printed in lower case except 
when the non-preferred term is a proper name requiring an 
upper case initial, or an abbreviation or acronym which 
should be printed throughout in upper case : 

Examples. 

CARS 

UF automobiles 

ANIMALS 
UF fauna 

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION 
UF WHO 

4.5 A compound term is sometimes factored morphologically 
into components, and these are assigned independently as in- 
dexing terms (see clause 7). If the unfactored form is likely to 
be sought by users, a reference should be made from the com- 
pound term as a whole to the separate terms used in combina- 
tion. 

Example : 

coal mining USE COAL + MINING 



5 Vocabulary control 

5.1 Two principal means for achieving vocabulary control are 
employed in thesauri . 

a) terms are deliberately restricted in scope to selected 
meanings. Unlike the terms in a dictionary, which may be 
accompanied by a number of different definitions reflecting 
common usage, each term in a thesaurus is generally 
restricted to whichever single meaning serves the needs of 
an indexing system most effectively. The structure of a 
thesaurus, notably its display of hierarchical relationships, 
frequently indicates the intended meaning of a term. If this 
technique is not sufficiently explicit, a definition or scope 
note should be appended to the term. This note should 
state the chosen meaning, and it may also indicate other 



meanings which are recognized in natural language but 
which have been deliberately excluded for indexing pur- 
poses; 

b) when the same concept can be expressed by two or 
more synonyms, one of these terms is usually selected as 
the preferred term (see 3.5) which is then used consistently 
in indexing. Reference to the preferred term should be made 
from any synonym which might also function as a user's ac- 
cess point. 

5.2 Further means for achieving vocabulary control are 
reviewed in the foiiowing clauses. These deal with matters such 
as the choice of singular or plural forms, the selection of the 
preferred term when synonyms are encountered, and the ex- 
tent to which a compound term should either'be retained in its 
pre-coordinated form or factored into separate components, 
each expressed as a noun and used independently as an index- 
ing term. 



6 Indexing terms 

6.1 General 

6.1.1 The concepts represented by indexing terms belong to 
general categories such as the following : 

a) Concrete entities 

1) Things and their physical parts 
Examples : 

BIRDS 
LIMBS 

MICROFORMS 
MOUNTAIN REGIONS 

2) Materials 
Examples : 

ADHESIVES 

RUBBER 

TITANIUM 

b) Abstract entities 

1 ) Actions and events 
Examples : 

GLACIATION 

GOLF 

MARKETING 



IS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



2) Abstract entities, and properties of things, materials 
or actions 

Examples : 

ELASTICITY 

NEWS 

PERSOMAUTY 

SPEED 

3) Disciplines or sciences 
Examples : 

ARCHAEOLOGY 
CHEMISTRY 

4) Units of measurement 
Examples : 

HERTZ 

KILOMETRES 

c) Individual eiitities, or "classes-of-one", expressed 
as proper nouns 

Examples: 

SRI LANKA 

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION 

6. 1 .2 The compiter of a thesaurus needs to be aware of these 
classes, since they are likely to affect some of the procedures 
considered in later clauses, for example the choice of singular 
or pJural forms, and applying a test for the validity of a hier- 
archy. 

6.2 Forms of terms 

6.2.1 Nouns and noun phrases 

An indexing term should preferably consist of a noun or a noun 
phrase. Noun phrases belong to tne category of compound 
terms, and occur in two forms ; 

a) adjectival phrases 

Example : 

MARINE BIRDS 

This class also includes those single-word compounds 
which can be factored morphologically into a noun plus a 
modifying difference having an adjectival function : 

Examples : 

FOOTBALL 

MOTORWAYS 



b) prepositional phrases 

Example : 

HOSPITALS FOR CHILDREN 

Those parts of a compound term which function as differences 
Isee item b) of the note to 3.71 should be considered as poten- 
tial sources of extra terms in a thesaurus. When a difference 
consists of an adjective, the noun from which the adjective was 
derived should be preferred as the extra candidate term. If 
these terms are accepted, the thesaurus should display 
reciprocal relationships between the extra term and the com- 
pound term as a whole. 

Examples : 

a) MARINE BIRDS 
RT SEAS 

SEAS 

RT MARINE BIRDS 

b) SCHOOLS FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 
RT HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 

HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 

RT SCHOOLS FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 

6.2.2 Adjectives 

6.2.2.1 Adjectives used alone may occur in an indexing lan- 
guage in special circumstances considered below, but their use 
should be avoided as far as possible. 

6.2.2.2 Adjectives may be accepted as single words in dn 
index or thesaurus in situations such as the following : 

a} when working in a language where adjectives generally 
precede the nouns they modify, the user may be directed, 
on economic grounds, from a noun to an adjective which 
serves as the first component of seyeral compound terms. 
For example, a reference could be made from "France" Uhe 
noun) to "French" (the adjective) if the indexing language 
contains a number of terms such as "French art", "French 
language", "French literature", "French wines". This 
would apply especially when the adjective and the noun 
from which it was derived differ widely in their spellings, for 
example France/ French, Sea/Marine; 

b) in languages where adjectives follow the nouns they 
determine, a reference may be made from an adjective to 
one or more noun phrases containing the adjective. An 
index in French, for example, could contain reference from 
an adjective such as "Pasteuris6" to compound terms such 
as "Cr^me pasteuris6e", "Lait pasteurise", and "Produits 
pasteuris6s". 

6.2.3 Adverbs 

Adverbs such as "Very" or "Highly" should not be used alone 
as indexing terms. A phrase beginning with an adverb should 
not be accepted as an indexing term except when it has acqui- 
red a special meaning within a jargon. 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



Example : 

VERY HIGH FREQUENCY 

6.2.4 Verbs 

Verbs expressed as infinitives or participles should not be used 
alone as indexing terms. Activities should be represented by 
nouns or verbal nouns. 

Examples : 

COOKERY (not "cook") 

DISTILLATION (not "distil"! 

6.2.5 Abbreviations and acronyms 

Abbreviations and acronyms should not be used as preferred 
terms except when they are widely used and readily understood 
within the field covered by the thesaurus. Many acronyms and 
abbreviations can refer to more than one concept, and the full 
form of the name should therefore function as the preferred 
term, with a reciprocal reference from the abbreviated form. 

Example : 

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION 
UF WHO 

WHO USE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION 

Abbreviations and acronyms may function as preferred terms if 
they have become so well established that the full form of the 
name is rarely used or is generally ignored. Reciprocal 
references should still be made between the full term and its ab- 
breviation. 

Example: 

UNICEF 

UF United Nations International Children's Fund 

United Nations International Children's Fund 
USE UNICEF 



6.3 Choice of singular or plural forms 

6.3.1 In those languages where a distinction between 
singulars and plurals can be made, the decision to adopt 
singular or plural forms as indexing terms is likely to t}e affected 
by factors such as the following : 

a) post-coordinate or pre-coordinate indexing 

In a pre-coordinate index, terms selected from a thesaurus 
are organized into index entries in such a way that the entry 
as a whole expresses a subject in summary form. Relation- 
ships between terms may be conveyed in various ways, for 
example by word order and/or the choice of special typo- 
graphy and punctuation. In some systems, terms may be 
organized into phrases linked by prepositions or other 



adjuncts. In these circumstances, the meaning or com- 
prehensibility of the index entry as a whole may be affected 
be the use of singular or plural forms. This does not apply to 
a post-coordinate system, where terms are assigned to 
documents as independent retrieval keys, without in- 
dicating their interrelationships. 

b) cultural factors 

Agencies within different countries tend to work within dif- 
ferent traditions concerning the use of singulars or plurals. 
In English-speaking countries, for example, terms may be 
expressed either as singulars or plurals depending upon 
factors considered below (see 6.3.2). Indexers in other 
language communities, for example French and German, 
tend to prefer the singular form where posisible, so that the 
user can approach the thesaurus or index in the same way 
as a dictionary. In these cases, however, exceptions to the 
general preference are likely to occur for pragmatic reasons 
depending, for example, upon the type of indexing system 
used [see a) above], or an occasional need to avoid ambigui- 
ty where the singular form can refer to more than one con- 
cept, and these could be distinguished by expressing one of 
them as a plural. 



6.3.2 In agencies where either the singular or plural form of a 
term may be adopted, the choice of the preferred term is 
generally related to the kind of concept to which the term 
refers. As noted earlier (see 6.1.1) terms can be divided into 
those that represent concrete entities, and those that refer to 
abstract concepts. These two classes are reviewed separately 
below. 



6.3.2.1 Nouns that represent concrete entities can be divided 
into two further categories : 

a) count nouns, i.e. names of countable objects that are 
subject to the question "How many?" but not "How 
much?". These should be expressed as plurals. 

Examples : 

DOCUMENTS 

PENGUINS 

POLITICAL PARTIES 

WINDOWS 

Special treatment is usually given to the names of parts of 
the body. These should be expressed as plurals when more 
than one occurs in a fully formed organism, but in the 
singular if only one is present. 



Examples : 






EARS 


but 


DIGES 


HANDS 




HEAD 


LUNGS 




NOSE 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



b) non-count nouns, for example names of materials or 
substances which are subject to the question "How much?" 
but not "How many?". These should be expressed as 
singulars. 

Examples : 

PAINT 

QUARTZ 

STEAM 

If the community of users served by the index regards a 
given substance or material as a class with more than one 
member, the class should be expressed in the plural. 

Br.amples : 

PLASTICS 

POISONS 

6.3.2.2 The names of abstract concepts, for example abstract 
entities and phenomena, properties, systems of belief, activi- 
ties and disciplines, should be expressed in their singular 
forms : 

Examples: 

Abstract entities and phenomena : PERSONALITY; 
WINTER 

Properties; BRITTLENESS; OPACITY; SOLUBILITY 

Systems of belief: CATHOLICISM; SHINTOISM 

Activities: CUTTING; IMMIGRATION; RESPIRATION 

Disciplines: PHYSICS; SOCIOLOGY 

When an abstract concept is regarded as a class with more 
than one member, the term representing the class should be 
expressed in the plural. 

Examples : 

CHEMICAL REACTIONS 

PHYSICAL SCIENCES 

SETS 

6.3.3 Where the singular and plural forms of a term refer to 
different concepts both should be entered in the thesaurus. If 
necessary, the distinction should be indicated by a qualifying 
term or phrase. 

Examples : 

WOOD (material) 

WOODS (areas of woodland) 

Note that the added qualifier then becomes an integral part of 
the term; it does not constitute a scope note (see also G.6). 



6.3.4 Where the spelling of the singular and plural differs to 
such an extent that the terms would be separated by unrelated 
terms when filed alphabetically, a reference should be made 
from the non-preferred form. 

Example : 

mouse USE MICE 

6.4 Homographs or polysemes 

Homographs or polysemes (sometimes referred to by the 
broader term "homonyms") are words with the same spelling 
but different meanings. 

Example : 

CRANES, which can refer to either birds or ttfttng equip- 
ment. 

When homographs are encounted in indexing, each should be 
supplemented by a qualifying word or phrase. The indexing 
term should be distinguished from its qualifier, for example by 
using a different typeface, or by inserting the qualifier between 
parentheses. The qualifier does not serve as a scope note (see 
6.6), and the term and its qualifier should be assigned to the 
thesaurus as a unit. 

Examples : 

BEAMS (radiation) 

BEAMS (structures) 

CRANES (birds) 

CRANES (lifting equipment) 

6.5 Choice of terms 

6.5.1 Spelling 

The most widely accepted spelling of words should be 
adopted. If variant spellings exist and are commonly recogniz- 
ed, each should be entered in the thesaurus, and a reference 
should be made from the non-preferred to the preferred form. 

Example : 

Rumania USE ROMANIA 

Roumania USE ROMANIA 

Where possible, spelling should follow the practice of a well- 
established dictionary or glossary. If a choice between spellings 
is made for cultural reasons (for example between American 
English and British English), the chosen source should be 
stated in the Introduction, and the choice should be adhered to 
consistently throughout the thesaurus. 

6.5.2 Loan words and translations of loan words 

Terms from other languages are sometimes encountered as 
"loan words", i.e. foreign terms which are accepted as newly- 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



coined terms. If these terms are well-established, they should 
be incorporated into the thesaurus. Occasionally a loan word 
and a putative translation co-exist. If the loan word is more 
widely accepted, it should be treated as the preferred term, but 
if the translation becomes well-established, this should be 
preferred. Reciprocal references should be made between the 
preferred and non preferred terms. 

Example : 

X-RAYS 
UF roentgen rays 

roentgen rays USE X-RAYS 

6.5.3 Transliteration 

When transliterating terms from languages with different 
alphabets, the procedure described in a relevant International 
Standard should be followed as far as possible. 

6.5.4 Slang terms and jargon 

Slang and jargon may be encountered when indexing in cir- 
cumstances such as the following : 

a) A newly-emerging concept is expressed by a term 
originating within a particular subculture or social group, 
and no widely accepted alternative exists. The slang or 
jargon term should then be accepted as an indexing term. 

Example : 

BYTE 

HIPPIES 

b) A slang or jargon term emerges as an alternative to an 
existing and well-established term. The established term 
should then be chosen as the preferred term, and the slang 
term should be admitted as a non-preferred term only if it is 
so widely recognized that it might serve as the user's access 
point to the index. 

Example : 

ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL 
UF soccer 

soccer USE ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL 

6.5.5 Common names and trade names 

A product is frequently known by a widely recognized trade 
name. Where a suitable common name also exists, this should 
be adopted as the preferred term, and the trade name should 
be admitted as a non-preferred term only if it is likely to serve as 
a user's access point to the index. 

Example : 

POLYETHYLENE 
UF polythene 

polythene USE POLYETHYLENE 



6.5.6 Popular names and scientific names 

If a popular and a scientific name refer to the same concept, the 
form most likely to be sought by the users of the index should 
be chosen. For example, "Penguins" might be chosen as the 
preferred term in a general index, but the scientific equivalent, 
"Sphenisciformes", may be preferred in a zoological index. 
Reciprocal references should be made in these cases. 

6.5.7 Place names 

Names of countries and geographical regions sometimes vary 
from language to language. Variant terms referring to the same 
place also occur within a single language community, for 
reasons such as the following ; 

a) an "official" and a "popular" name are both in common 
use: 

Example: 

HOLLAND 

NETHERLANDS 

b) The original and a vernacular form co-exist : 
Example : 

LEGHORN 

LIVORNO 

The name which is most familiar to the users of the thesaurus 
should be designated as the preferred term. Other things being 
equal, preference should be given to the official rather than the 
popular name. Reciprocal references should be made between 
the preferred and non-preferred versions. 

Example : 

NETHERLANDS 
UF Holland 

Holland USE NETHERLANDS 

6.5.8 Proper names of Institutions and persons 

These names are frequently excluded from a thesaurus. When 
they are included, the form of name should be selected in ac- 
cordance with a recognized code of cataloguing practice. 
These names can sometimes vary, depending upon their 
origins, in which case the following should be followed : 

a) names of national or local institutions, i.e. those that 
conduct their business, and perhaps publish journals or pro- 
ceedings, in only one language, should be recorded in their 
untranslated forms. If a translated form also exists, this 
should be designated as a non-preferred term. 

Example : 

ACADEMtE DES SCIENCES 
UF Academy of Sciences (Paris) 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



Academy of Sciences (Paris) 

USE ACADEMiE DES SCIENCES 

b) names of international organizations, or of local institu- 
tions which publish documents in more than one language, 
should be expressed in their best-known forms. If the index 
is used by readers from different language communities 
who might not know the "local" name of an international 
organization, vernacular forms from other languages may 
be admitted as non-preferred terms. 

Example (in an English-language thesaurus) : 

UNITED NATIONS 
UF Nations unies 
UN 

Nations unies USE UNITED NATIONS 

UN USE UNITED NATIONS 

c) personal names should usually be recorded in their 
original forms. Some individuals, notably historical figures 
who have acquired international recognition, have local 
forms of name which are so well-established that they 
should be accepted as preferred terms, references being 
made where necessary from the original names. It should be 
realized, however, that this is an exceptional case. 

Example (in an English-language thesaurus) : 

JOAN OF ARC 
UF Jeanne d'Arc 

Jeanne d'Arc USE JOAN OF ARC 



6.6 Scope notes and definitions 



6.6.1 Scope notes and definitions may be appended to a term 
to indicate the limited sense in which it is used for indexing pur- 
poses and thus exclude other possible meanings. Further kinds 
of information may also be indicated in a scope note, for exam- 
ple: 

a) the datff when a tsrm was adopted, or when its scope 

was redefined; 

b) the source of the term, especially in the case of 
neologisms, i.e. newly-coined terms which represent 
emergent concepts; 

c) instructions intended for indexers, concerning, for ex 
ample, combinations of terms which are allowed or not 
allowed within a given indexing language. 

Scope notes should be distinguished typographically from the 
terms to which they are appended. 

Example : 

MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES 
SN 1 GHz to 300 GHz 



6.6.2 Unlike the qualifiers considered in 6.3.3 and 6.4, a scope 
note is not regarded as forming part of the term to which it is 
attached. It is not intended to be a dictionary definition, but it 
serves instead to indicate the use of a term within a given in- 
dexing language. It is not necessary to append scope notes or 
definitions to all the terms in a thesaurus. A thesaurus displays, 
through its structure, relationships which generally establish 
the "meaning" context of a given term, with particular 
reference to terms of wider and narrower connotation. This is 
usually sufficient to indicate the intended interpretation of a 
particular term. A scope note occasionally needs to be expand- 
ed into a full definition, if, for example, a term is interpreted 
loosely in common usage, or if different dictionaries give 
variant meanings. 

Example : 

DOCUMENTATION 
SN the process of storing and retrieving information in 
all fields of knowledge 



7 Compound terms 
7.1 General 

7.1.1 The establishment of procedures for dealing consistent- 
ly with compound terms introduces one of the most difficult 
areas in the field of subject indexing. It can be stated, as a 
general rule, that terms should represent simple or unitary con- 
cepts as far as possible, and compound terms should be fac- 
tored into simpler elements except when this is likely to affect 
the user's understanding. Complex subjects should be express- 
ed by combinations of separate terms, and these may be 
assigned as independent search keys in a post- coordinate 
system, or they may function as components of pre- 
coordinated index entries. It is realized, however, that this 
general recommendation does not stipulate the exact cir- 
cumstances in which a compound term encountered in 
documents should be factored into separate components, or 
else retained in its compound form, for indexing purposes. The 
procedures described below are offered as guidelines for index- 
ers using controlled vocabularies who need criteria to ensure 
consistent practice in the treatment of compound terms. 
Within this context, it is considered that the establishment of 
such criteria constitutes an important step towards achieving 
consistency, and hence predictability, not only within a single 
indexing agency, but also among different agencies working 
together, for example as members of a network or as con- 
tributors to a common data base. 

7.1.2 Compound concepts can frequently be expressed in 
more than one form. For example: 

a) in English, the concept represented by "children's 
hospitals" can also be represented by the prepositional 
phrase "hospitals for children"; 

b) in French, the concept represented by "pollution de 
I'air" can also be expressed as "pollution atmospherique". 

The procedures reviewed in this International Standard are not 
concerned with the choice between such forms when more 



rS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



than one Bxists. The procedures described betow refer to 
criteria for determining whether a given compound term should 
be retained In its pre-coordinated form or factored Into separate 
components, each of which is accepted as an indexing term in 
its own right. 



7.1.3 Two teciiniques for factoring (I.e. analysing a term into 
separate meaning elements) are recognized in indexing : 

a) semantic factoring 

This technique can be applied to single words as well as to 
compound terms, A term which represents a complex 
notion is re-expressed in the form of simpler or definitional 
elements, each of which can also occur In other combina- 
tions to represent a range of different concepts. 

Example : 

thermometers could be expressed by a combination of 
three terms : 

TEMPERATURE + MEASUREMENT + INSTRUMENTS 

This technique is not recommended. It can be erTiployed 
only in pOst-coordinate indexing systems, and it should be 
applied only to terms in fringe subject areas by agencies 
which need to limit the size of their indexing vocabularies. It 
is generally recognized that semantic factoring leads to a 
loss of precision in retrieval, 

b) syntactical factoring 

This technique is applied to compound terms, i.e. terms 
which are amenable to morphological analysis into separate 
components, each of which can be accepted as an indexing 

term in its own right. 

Example : 

building construction expressed as 

BUILDINGS 4 CONSTRUCTION 

If syntactical factoring is applied to a term in common use 
which may serve as a user's access point to the Index, the 
term as a whole should be entered in the thesaurus as a 
non-preferred term, and a reference should be made to the 
elements used In combination. 

Example : 



building construction 
USE BUILDINGS + 



CONSTRUCTION 



7.1.4 In explaining the grounds for decfdlrtq- whether a term 
should be retained in its pre-coofdinatect form'or syntactically 
factored, it Is necessary to distinguish between the parts of a 
compound term through reference to their roles and Interrela- 
tionships. The majority of compound terms, whether adjectival 
phrases or prepositional phrases, can be analysed into the 
following components : 



a) the focus (also known in linguistics as the "head") : the 
noun component which identifies the broader class of 
things or events to which the term as a whole refers. 

Examples : 

"CONCRETE" in the adjectival phrase 
"REINFORCED CONCRETE" 

"HOSPITALS" in the prepositional phrase 
"HOSPITALS FOR CHILDREN" 

b) the difference (also known as the modifier) : that part of 
a compound term which refers to a characteristic, or logical 
difference, which when applied to the focus narrows its 
connotation and so specifies one of Its subclasses. 

Examples : 

"REINFORCED", which specifies a subclass of concrete 
in "REINFORCED CONCRETE". 

"FOR CHILDREN", which specifies a subclass of 
hospitals in "HOSPITALS FOR CHILDREN". 

7.1.5 A small proportion of terms encountered in indexing are 
not amenable to this kind of logical analysis. These are terms in 
which one of the elements appears to function as a difference, 
but it does not, as in the examples above, specify a subclass of 
the focal concept; instead, it tends to contradict membership 
of that class, to the extent that "artificial flowers" are not 
species of a class of things called "flowers", and "chocolate 
eggs" are not "eggs". The noun in these cases is described as 
syncategorematic, since it cannot stand alone as an indicator of 
the class of concepts to which the whole of the term refers. 
The term as a whole should then be treated as a single semantic 
unit, 

7.1.6 These factors can be taken into account when deciding 
whether a concept should be expressed as a single compound 
term, or factored into two or mors separate terms. Two ap- 
proaches to decisions of this kind are reviewed below. Criteria 
which determine when a term should be retained in its com- 
pound form are surveyed in 7.2. Situations in which syntactical 
factoring Is recommended are considered in 7.3, 



7.2 Terms that should be retained as compounds 

7.2.1 Compound terms should be retained as indexing terms 
in the following circumstances ; 

a) The compound term has become so familiar in common 
use, or in the field covered by the thesaurus, that its expres- 
sion as separate elements would hinder comprehension : 

Examples : 

DATA PROCESSING 

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

b) Syntactical factoring would lead to a loss of nneanJng, 
or ambiguity. 



10 



iS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



Examp/e : 

FOOD + PLANTS could represent either FOOD for 
PLANTS, or PLANTS as FOOD 



7.2.2 More specifically, the following classes of term should 
be retained in their compound forms: 

a) proper names, including terms that incorporate proper 
names: 

Examples : 

FREUDIAN ERRORS 

UNITED NATIONS 

b) terms in which the difference has lost its original mean- 
ing: 

Examples : 

LAWN TENNIS 

ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 

TRADE WINDS 

c) terms containing a difference which suggests a 
resemblance, as a simile, to an unrelated thing or event : 

Examples : 

CASCADE GENERATORS 

TREE STRUCTURES 

WING NUTS 

d) terms which cannot be re-expressed (for example defin- 
ed) without the use of an extra noun that is present in the 
compound only by implication : 

Examples : 

FIRE ESCAPES, i.e. ESCAPES for PEOPLE from FIRE 

PETROL ENGINES, i.e. ENGINES using PETROL as a 
FUEL 

e) terms containing syncategorematic nouns : 
Examples : 

ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 
FOSSIL FISHES 

7.3 Terms that should be syntactically factored 

7.3.1 It is more difficult to specify exact criteria for recogniz- 
ing those kinds of compound terms which should be factored 



into separate components, each of which is then entered as a 
noun or noun phrase in the thesaurus. The recommendations 
considered below are based upon general criteria, but they are 
not regarded as mandatory instructions to be applied rigidly in 
all circumstances. Some of the situations which call for terms 
to be retained in their unfactored forms were reviewed in 7.2.1 
above. The following factors may also affect these decisions : 

a) indexing in a special field, which may call for special 
treatment of terms which are familiar to users within the 
field covered by the thesaurus; 

b) control over the number of terms assigned to 
documents, or the size of the indexing vocabulary. 

In a post-coordinate system, the indexer may need to 
choose between the following procedures : 

1) using compound terms to reduce the number of 
terms assigned (or "posted") to each document, but at 
the cost of a larger indexing vocabulary; 

2) reducing the size of the indexing vocabulary by fac- 
toring terms into simpler elements, then assigning a 
higher number of terms to each document. 

7.3.2 The following recommendations, which have been 
tested in various languages, are offered as a means for achiev- 
ing consistent treatment of those compound terms which 
should be syntactically factored. Each of these recommenda- 
tions is accompanied by a converse condition which can also 
be used to identify classes of terms that cannot usually be fac- 
tored without a risk of ambiguity. 

7.3.2.1 

a) A compound term should be factored if the focus refers 
to a property or part (including materials), and the dif- 
ference represents the whole or possessor of that property 
or part : 

Examples : 

In the terms 

1) AIRCRAFT ENGINES 

2) HOSPITAL PERSONNEL 

3) SOIL ACIDITY 
the focal nouns, i.e. 

1) ENGINES 

2) PERSONNEL 

3) ACIDITY 

represent parts or properties, and the differences 

1) AIRCRAFT 

2) HOSPITAL 



11 



JS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



3) SOIL 

represent their possessing wholes. 

These terms should therefore be re-expressed as separate 
nouns, i e. 

1) AIRCRAFT + ENGINES 

2) HOSPITALS + PERSONNEL 

3) SOILS + ACIDITY 

b) Conversely, the name of the whole may be modified by 
the name of its part or property 

Examples: 

ACID SOILS 

CONCRETE BRIDGES 

SKILLED PERSONNEL 



7.3.2.2 



a) The name of a transitive action should not be modified 
by the name of the object on which the action was per- 
formed 

Examples : 

In the terms 

\) OFFICE MANAGEMENT 

2) STEEL CASTING 

3) TEXTILE PRINTING 
the focal nouns 

1) MANAGEMENT 

2) CASTING 

3) PRINTING 

represent transitive actions, and the differences 

1) OFFICE 

2) STEEL 

3) TEXTILE 

represent the patients of these actions. 

These terms should therefore be factored, cind the parts 
re-expressed as separate nouns ; 

1) OFFICES + MANAGEMENT 

2) STEEL + CASTING 



3} TEXTILES -f- PRINTING 

b) Conversely, the name of a thing or material may be 
modified by the name of an action carried out upon it 

Examples : 

CAST STEEL 

EXTRUDED PLASTICS 

PRINTED TEXTILES 



7.3.2.3 



a) The name of an intransitive action should not be 
modified by the name of the performer of the action 

Examples : 

In the terms 

1) BIRD MIGRATION 

2) PLANT GROWTH 

3) METAL DETERIORATION 
the focal nouns 

1) MIGRATION 

2) GROWTH 

3) DETERIORATION 

represent intransitive actions, end the differences 

1) BIRD 

2) PLANT 
3! METAL 

represent the performers of these actions. 

These terms should therefore be re-expressed as separate 
nouns: 

1) BIRDS + MIGRATION 

2) PLANTS + GROWTH 

3) METAL + DETERIORATION 

b) Conversely, the name of a thing may be modified by the 
name of the intransitive action in which it is or was engaged 

Examples : 

DEGRADED PLASTICS 

MIGRATING BIRDS 

MOVING PAVEMENTS 



12 



IS 14720: 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



7.3.3 In addition to their role in achieving inter-indexer and 
inter-agency consistency, the recommendations above have 
been established with the following purposes in mind : 

a) to avoid over-complexity in indexing terms; 

b) to achieve a structured thesaurus based upon principles 
that are amenable to logical explanation and teaching. 

In practice, these recommendations would ensure that a com- 
pound term such as "Aircraft engines" is factored, according 
to the procedure noted in 7.3.2.1, into two separate noun com- 
ponents, i.e. "aircraft", which belongs to a category of 
"vehicles", and "engines", which should be assigned to a dif- 
ferent category, "prime movers". They also offer a basis for a 
standard treatment of compound terms where a given focus 
may be modified by more than one difference. If, for example, 
an indexing agency woriced with policies which allow a phrase 
such as "aircraft engines" in addition to the phrases "jet 
engines" and "military aircraft", the indexer would face dif- 
ficulties when dealing with a compfex subject such as "military 
aircraft jet engines". In this kind of situation, the rules above 
offer a means of control by ensuring that the compound term is 
factored into separate and simpler components, i.e. "jet 
engines" and "military aircraft", each of which would be 
assigned to its own category in the thesaurus. 

7.4 Order of words in compound ternns 

Both adjectival and prepositional noun phrases should 
preferably be entered in the thesaurus in natural language 
order, not as inverted terms. 

Examples : 

BIRDS OF PREY not PREY. BIRDS OF 

ELECTRONIC CALCULATORS not CALCULATORS, 
ELECTRONIC 

POLYSTYRENE CONTAINERS not CONTAINERS, 
POLYSTYRENE 

When dealing with adjectival phrases in languages where 
nouns usually follow their adjectives, the focal nouns (for ex- 
ample "containers" and "calculators"), should be entered in 
their own right in the thesaurus, and they will then function as 
superordinate terms in hierarchies. The inverted form of a 
prepositional phrase may be entered as a non-preferred term, 
and a reference should then be made to the preferred term in its 
natural language order. 

Examples : 

matter, states of USE STATES OF MATTER 

prey, birds of USE BIRDS OF PREY 



8 Basic relationships in a thesaurus 

8.1 General 

8.1.1 A thesaurus should display and clearly distinguish 
between the basic relationships linking the terms it con- 



tains. Means for displaying relationships are described in 
clause 9; the present clause is concerned with defining and 
illustrating the relationships themselves. 

8.1.2 Relationships of two different kinds can occur in a 
thesaurus: 

a) relationships between individual concepts are reviewed 
in 8.2 to 8.4, where it will be seen that the hierarchical rela- 
tionship effectively organizes terms into categories, sub- 
categories, etc. according to their meanings; 

b) in thesauri which contain systematic displays (see 9.3), 
the compiler needs to consider not only these inter-term 
relationships, but also relationships between categories, 
subcategories, etc. These inter-categdry relationships are 
considered separately in 9.3.2. 



8.1.3 Three classes of basic 
recognized in thesauri : 



inter-term relationship are 



a) the equivalence relationship (see 8.2); 

b) the hierarchical relationship (see 8.3); 

c) the associative relationship (see 8,4);. 

Further subdivisions of each of these are described below. Each 
of these relationships is regarded as reciprocal, and this should 
be indicated by any system of symbols or abbreviations used to 
represent relationships in a thesaurus. The conventional ab- 
breviations described in clause 4 are used in the examples that 
follow. An alternative range of symbols is shown in the annex. 



8.2 The equivalence relationship 

8.2.1 General 

This is the relationship between preferred and non-preferred 
terms where two or more terms are regarded, for indexing pur- 
poses, as referring to the same concept. In a printed thesaurus, 
preferred and non-preferred terms should be distinguished 
typographically whenever possible. Reciprocity is expressed by 
the following conventions : 

USE, written as a prefix to the preferred term; 

UF (use for), written as a prefix to the non-preferred term. 

Example : 



BIRDS 




UF 


Aves 


Aves 




USE 


BIRDS 



This general relationship covers two types of term : 

a) synonyms; 

b) quasi-synonyms. 



13 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



8.2.2 Synonyms 

Synonyms are terms whose meanings can be regarded as the 
same in a wide range of contexts, so that they are virtually in- 
terchangeable. They occur more frequently in a controlled in- 
dexing language, where meanings are deliberately restricted, 
than in natural language. Various types of synonym are en- 
countered in practice. The following list is not intended to be 
exhaustive, but it indicates some of the more common classes 
of synonyms encountered in practice: 

a) terms of different linguistic origin 
Example 

POLYGLOT; MULTILINGUAL 

b) popular names and scientific names 
Examples : 

PENGUINS; SPHENISCIFORMES 
ASPIRIN; ACETYLSALICYLIC ACID 

c) common nouns and trade names 
Example : 

VACUUM FLASKS; THERMOS FLASKS 

d) variant names for emergent concepts 
Example : 

HOVERCRAFT; AIR CUSHION VEHICLES 

e) current or favoured terms versus outdated or 
deprecated terms 

Examples : 

RADIO; WIRELESS 

DEVELOPING COUNTRIES; UNDERDEVELOPED 
COUNTRIES 

fi variant spellings, including stem variants and irregular 
plurals 

Examples : 

ROMANIA; RUMANIA; ROUMANIA 

GEESE; GOOSE 

g) terms originating from different cultures sharing a com- 
mon language 

Examples : 

FLATS; APARTMENTS 

LIFTS; ELEVATORS 



h) abbreviations and full names 
Example : 

PVC; POLYVINYL CHLORIDE 
i) the factored and unfactored form of a compound term 
Example : 

COAL -I- MINING; COAL MINING 

In these and similar cases, preferred terms should be selected 
to serve the needs of the majority of users, bearing in mind the 
criteria proposed in clause 6. For the sake of predictability, 
these criteria should be applied consistently throughout the 
thesaurus. If, for example, it is decided that popular names 
rather than scientific names should serve as preferred terms, 
the indexer should adhere consistently to this decision except 
when an appropriate popular name does not exist. 



8.2.3 Quasi-synonyms 

Quasi-synonyms are terms whose meanings are generally 
regarded as different in ordinary usage, but they are treated as 
though they are synonyms for indexing purposes. These terms 
frequently represent points on a continuum : 

Example : 

WETNESS, DRYNESS 

The extent to which terms are treated as quasi-synonyms 
depends to a large extent upon the subject field covered by the 
thesaurus. An indexing agency concerned with "washing 
equipment", for example, may decide to designate either 
"wetness" or "dryness" as the preferred term when dealing 
with documents on either of these concepts, on the understan- 
ding that a specialist studying one of these properties should 
also retrieve all documents on the other. This situation will not 
necessarily apply in a different subject field, and quasi- 
synonyms are likely to be least common in an indexing 
language which covers several disciplines. As a general rule 
terms should be treated as quasi-synonyms only in fringe sub- 
ject areas. They should not be used as a means for reducing the 
number of preferred terms in an indexing language. 



8.2.4 Upward posting 

This refers to a technique in which the name of a class and also 
the names of its members are treated as an equivalence set, the 
broader term then fuctioning as the preferred term. 

Example : 

ROCKS 
UF basalt 
granite 
slate 
etc. 

basalt USE ROCKS 



14 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



granite USE ROCKS 

slate USE ROCKS 

This technique, which is sometimes used to reduce the number 
of terms in an indexing language, should generally be avoided. 
If employed, it should be applied only to terms in the fringe area 
of the subject field covered by the thesaurus. 

8.3 The hierarchical relationship 

8.3.1 General 

This basic relationship most distinguishes a systematic thesau- 
rus from an unstructured list of terms, for example a glossary or 
dictionary. It is based on degrees or levels of superordination 
and subordination, where the superordinate term represents a 
class or whole, and subordinate terms refer to its members or 
parts. Reciprocity is expressed by the following abbreviations : 

BT (i.e. broader term), written as a prefix to the superordi- 
nate term; 

NT (i.e. narrower term), written as a prefix to the subordi- 
nate term. 

Example : 

AIRLINES 

BT TRANSPORT SERVICES 

TRANSPORT SERVICES 
NT AIRLINES 



8.3.2 Kinds of hierarchical relationship 

This general relationship covers three logically different situ- 
ations distinguished as follows: 

a) the generic relationship; 

b) the hierarchical whole-part relationship; 

c) the instance relationship. 

Each of these leads to hierarchies which are amenable to a logi- 
cal test through reference to the basic types of concept repre- 
sented by the terms, for example those listed in 6.1.1. Every 
subordinate term should refer to the same basic kind of con- 
cept as its superordinate term; that is, both the broader and 
narrower term should represent a thing, or an action, or a prop- 
erty, etc. 

Example : 

a) METALS (a class of materials) and CASTING (an 
action) represent different types of concept, and these 
terms cannot therefore be related hierarchically; 

b) METALS and NON-FERROUS METALS both represent 
materials; these terms could, therefore, be generically rela- 
ted. 



8.3.3 Use of node labels 

When terms are arranged as hierarchies in a systematic thesau- 
rus (see 9.3), a node label is sometimes inserted into the hier- 
archy to show which characteristic was used to divide the class 
(represented by the broader term) into its species (represented 
by narrower terms). 

Example : 

CARS 

By motive power 

DIESEL CARS 

ELECTRIC CARS 

By purpose 

RACING CARS 

SPORTS CARS 

— where By motive power and By purpose function as node 
labels. 

The use of node labels is described more fully in 9.3.3. 

8.3.4 The generic relationship 

8.3.4.1 This relationship identifies the link between a class or 
category and its members or species. In addition to the test for 
validity described in 8.3.2, this relationship is also amenable to 
a logical "all-and-some" test, as shown in the following dia- 
gram : 

I BIRDS 4 



Some 



All 



PARROTS 



The diagram above indicates that some members of the class 
"birds" are known as "parrots", and all "parrots", by definition 
and regardless of context, are regarded as "birds". This test 
would usually ensure that a term such as "parrots" is not 
subordinated to a class such as "pets", since parrots are not 
pets by definition. This particular relational link could be repre- 
sented by the diagram : 



Some 



PETS 



PARROTS 



Some 



— that is, some members of the class "pets" are known as 
"parrots", but only some parrots are regarded as pets. These 
terms should therefore be assigned to different categories in 
the thesaurus, and both should be assigned to the same docu- 
ment when indexing a work on "parrots as pets". This test is 
intended to avoid subjectivity when assigning terms to catego- 
ries. It would not, however, offer a reasonable basis for assi- 



15 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



gning terms such as "pets" and "parrots" to different 
categories in a specialist thesaurus devoted to domestic 
animals, where parrots are regarded as a kind of pet according 
to the frames of reference of the majority of users. In that case, 
"parrots" could be subordinated to "pets" in the same hierar- 
chy. It needs to be recognized, however, that this is a special 
case. 



8.3.4.2 If it is considesed necessary, the generic relationship 
can be identified by the following abbreviations or their 
equivalents in other languages : 

BTG : Broader term (generic) 

NTG : Narrower term (generic) 

Example : 

RATS 

BTG RODENTS 

RODENTS 
NTG RATS 



8.3.5 The hierarchical whole-part relationship 

8.3.5.1 This reiationsfiip covers a limited range of situations 
where the name of a part implies the name of its possessing 
whole in any context. The terms can then be organized as a 
hierarchy, the name of the whole serving as the superordinate 
term, and the name of the part as the subordinate term. This 
applies to four main classes of terms : 

a) systems and organs of the body 
Example : 

CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 
CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 
ARTERIES 
VEINS 

b) geographical locations 
Example: 

CANADA 
ONTARIO 
OTTAWA 
TORONTO 



o) disciplines or fields of discourse 
Example : 
SCIENCE 
BIOLOGY 
BOTANY 
ZOOLOGY 
d) hierarchical social structures 
Example : 
ARMIES 
CORPS 
DIVISIONS 
BATTALIONS 
REGIMENTS 



8.3.5.2 In cases such as those listed as a) to d) above, the 
hierarchy is based upon a generally recognized whole-part rela- 
tionship which could be established by checking standard 
reference works, for example dictionaries or gazetteers. Other 
kinds of term may also be organized into hierarchies on the 
basis of their whole-part relationships in thesauri which are 
limited to special subject fields. For example, a thesaurus de- 
voted to "turbine engineering" may contain a hierarchy such as 

TURBINES 

COMPRESSORS 

BLADES 

This should not be attempted, however, in a thesaurus outside 
the limited field in which the name of the whole is implied by 
the name of the part. In a general thesaurus, for example, a 
term such as "blades" can occur in a number of different con- 
texts. In these cases, the name of the whole and its part(s) 
should be assigned to different categories in the thesaurus, and 
both terms should be assigned to a document on these con- 
cepts. 

8.3.5.3 If it is considered necessary, the hierarchical whole- 
part relationship can be indicated specifically by the following 
abbreviations or their equivalents in other languages : 

BTP = broader term (partitive) 

NTP = Narrower term (partitive) 

Examples : 

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
BTP NERVOUS SYSTEM 

NERVOUS SYSTEM 

NTP CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 



16 



IS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



8.3.6 The instance relationship 



8.4 The associative relationship 



8.3.6.1 This relationship identifies the link between a general 
category of things or events, expressed by a common noun, 
and an individual instance of that category, the instance then 
forming a class-of-one which is represented by a proper name. 



example : 

MOUNTAIN REGIONS 

ALPS 
HIMALAYAS 



— Class 

— instances 



In this example, the "Alps" and "Himalayas" are assigned to 
subordinate positions in a hierarchy, yet they are neither kinds 
nor parts of "mountain regions", but represent specific ex- 
amples or instances. 

8,3.6.2 .As noted earlier "ro^er names are frequent!" exclud- 
ed from thesauri, on the grounds that, if admitted, they would 
overload the categories. If these terms are excluded, the name 
of the instance and also its broader temn should both be assign- 
ed to any document that deals with the instance. 

8.3.7 Polyhierarchical relationships 

Some concepts can belong, on logical grounds, to more than 
one category at the same time. They are then said to possess 
polyhierarchical relationships . 

Example : 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

KEYBOARD INSTRUMENTS WIND INSTRUMENTS 

^"^ORGANS 

In this example, the term "organs" is assigned to subordinate 
positions on the basis of its generic relationship to two broader 
terms. In other cases, polyhierarchical links may be based upon 
whole-part relationships. 



8.4.1 General 

This basic relationship is easier to define in terms of negative 
rather than positive characteristics. It covers relationships be- 
tween pairs of terms which are not members of an equivalence 
set, or can they be organized as a hierarchy in which one term 
is subordinated to another, yet they are mentally associated to 
such an extent that the link between them should be made ex- 
plicit in the thesaurus, on the grounds that it would reveal alter- 
native terms which might be used for indexing or retrieval. This 
relationship is reciprocal, and is indicated by the abbreviation 
"RT' (related term), or its equivalent in other languages. 

Example : 

BIRDS 
RT ORNITHOLOGY 

ORNITHOLOGY 
RT BIRDS 

It is important to exercise strict control over the choice of terms 
linked in this way, and to avoid subjective judgements. As a 
general guideline it can be stated that one of the terms should 
be strongly implied, according to the frames of reference 
shared by the users of an index, whenever the other is 
employed as an indexing term. More specifically, it will fre- 
quently be found that one of the terms is a necessary compo- 
nent in any explanation or definition of the other, to the extent 
that the term "birds", for example, forms a necessary part of 
the explanation of "ornithology". 

Two kinds of term can be linked by the associative relationship : 

a) those that belong to the same category; 

b) those belonging to different categories. 
These are considered separately below. 

8.4.2 Terms belonging to the same category 



BIOLOGY CHEMISTRY 

\ / 

BIOCHEMISTRY 

In some cases, polyhierarchical links can be based upon logical- 
ly different relationships. 



Example : 



BONES 



HEAD 



SKULL 



In this example, the link between "bones" and "skull" is based 
upon the generic relationship (the skull is a kind of bone), 
whereas the link between "head" and "skull" is based upon the 
hierarchical whole-part relationship (the skull is a part of the 
head). 



8.4.2.1 This relates to siblings with overlapping meanings, 
such as "ships" and "boats", where each of the terms is 
amenable to an exact definition, (consequently they do not 
form an equivalence set), yet they are sometimes used loosely 
and almost interchangeably, so that the user seeking 
documents on one of the terms should be reminded of the 
other. This link does not need to be made explicit in the 
systematic section of a thesaurus containing organized hierar- 
chies (see 9.3 below), since this form of display automatically 
brings such terms together. The link should be indicated, 
however, in an alphabetical thesaurus, and in the alphabetical 
section of a systematic thesaurus. 

Example : 

BOATS 
BT VEHICLES 
RT SHIPS 



17 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



SHIPS 

BT VEHICLES 
RT BOATS 

8.4.2.2 It is not necessary to interrelate all sibling terms in this 
way. For example, there is no need to associate such terms as 
"horses" and "donkeys" on the grounds that they share a com- 
mon broader term, i.e. "equines", since the meaning of the 
terms do not overlap in this case. 

8:4.2.3 Concepts linked by a familial or derivational relation- 
ship (i.e. one of the concepts was derived from the other), can 
also be regarded as belonging to this group. This would apply 
to terms such as "hinnies" and "mules", which represent kinds 
of crossbreed between "horses" and "donkeys". The relation- 
ships between these concepts can be represented by a tree 
diagram. 

EQUINES 



DONKEYS 



HINNIES 



HORSES 



MULES 



These interrelationships could be expressed as follows in the 
alphabetical section of a thesaurus: 



EQUINES 
NT DONKEYS 
NT HINNIES 
NT HORSES 
NT MULES 

DONKEYS 
BT EQUINES 
RT HINNIES 
RT MULES 



HORSES 

BT EQUINES 
RT HINNIES 
RT MULES 



MULES 
BT EQUINES 
RT DONKEYS 
RT HINNIES 
RT HORSES 



HINNIES 
BT EQUINES 
RT DONKEYS 
RT HORSES 
RT MULES 

8.4.3 Terms belonging to different categories 

Many grounds can be established for associating terms belong- 
ing to different categories (i.e. they refer to different concep- 
tual types), while satisfying the requirements that one of the 
terms should be strongly implied by the other. The following 
groups are offered only as representative examples of typical 
relational situations encountered in practice : 

a) a discipline or field of study and the objects or 
phenomena studied 

Examples : 

1) FORESTRY 

RT FORESTS 

FORESTS 
RT FORESTRY 



2) AESTHETICS 

RT BEAUTY 

BEAUTY 

RT AESTHETICS 

b) an operation or process and its agent or instrument 
Examples : 

1) TEMPERATURE CONTROL 

RT THERMOSTATS 

THERMOSTATS 

RT TEMPERATURE CONTROL 

2) DATA PROCESSING 

RT COMPUTER SYSTEMS 

COMPUTER SYSTEMS 
RT DATA PROCESSING 

c) an action and the product of the action 
Examples : 

1) WEAVING 

RT CLOTH 

CLOTH 

RT WEAVING 

2) CONSTRUCTION 

RT STRUCTURES 

STRUCTURES 
RT CONSTRUCTION 

d) an action and its patient 

Examples : 

1) HARVESTING 
RT CROPS 

CROPS 
RT HARVESTING 

2} IMPRISONMENT 

RT PRISONERS 

PRISONERS 
RT IMPRISONMENT 

e) concepts related to their properties 
Examples : 

1) POISONS 

RT TOXICITY 

TOXICITY 

RT POISONS 



18 



IS 14720: 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



2) PERCEPTION 
RT ACUITY 

ACUITY 

RT PERCEPTION 

f ) concepts related to their origins 

Example : 

DUTCH 

RT NETHERLANDS 

NETHERLANDS 
RT DUTCH 

g) concepts linked by causal dependence 
Examples : 

1) BEREAVEMENT 

RT DEATH 

DEATH 
RT BEREAVEMENT 

2) DISEASES 

RT PATHOGENS 

PATHOGENS 
RT DISEASES 

h) a thing and its counter agent 

Examples : 

1) PLANTS 

RT HERBICIDES 

HERBICIDES 
RT PLANTS 

2) AIRCRAFT 

RT ANTI-AIRCRAFT WEAPONS 

ANTI-AIRCRAFT WEAPONS 
RT AIRCRAFT 

i) a concept and its unit of measurement 

Example \ 

ELECTRIC CURRENT 
RT AMPERE 

AMPERE 
RT ELECTRIC CURRENT 

J) syncategorematic phrases and their embedded nouns 

Examples : 

II MODEL SHIPS 
RT SHIPS 



SHIPS 

RT MODEL SHIPS 

21 FOSSIL REPTILES 
RT REPTILES 

REPTILES 
RT FOSSIL REPTILES 



8.4.4 Node labels 

In order to bring closely-related concepts together within a 
systematic thesaurus (see 9.3), related terms are sometimes 
printed in the same schedule as the terms with which they are 
generally associated. The related terms {which do not form a 
logical part of the hierarchy) should then be identified by a node 
label. 

Example : 

BOOKS 

Operations 

BINDING 

PRINTING 

— where Operations functions as a node label. 

The use of node labels is described more fully in 9.3.3. 



9 Display of terms and their relationships 



9.1 General 

Terms and their interrelationships can be displayed in various 
ways in a thesaurus. This International Standard does not set 
out to review all possible forms of display, but is limited to 
descriptions of three basic methods in common use 

a) alphabetical display, with scope notes and indications 
of inter-term relationships; 

b) systematic display, supported by an alphabetical Index; 

c) graphic display, with an alphabetical section. 

Existing thesauri usually belong to one of these three basic 
types, although a given thesaurus may include features of more 
than one. For example, a thesaurus in which the main part is 
organized systematically may be supported by an alphabetical 
index which aiso Indicates a relatively wide range of inter-term 
relationships. In thesauri consisting of more than one part (for 
example those with systematic or graphic displays), all informa- 
tion relating to each term should be brought together in one of 
the parts. 

These basic types are described in turn below, and each is il- 
lustrated by a typical arrangement of a common set of terms 
related to "Cameras". 



19 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



9.2 Alphabetical display 

9.2.1 In this form of thesaurus all indexing terms, whether 
preferred or non-preferred, are organized as a single 
alphabetical sequence. Non-preferred terms are usually accom- 
panied only by references (for example USE) to their preferred 
equivalents. Where ancillary information is appended to prefer- 
red terms it should be listed in the following order : 

1) SN scope notes or definitions. 

2) UF reference.s to non-preferred equivalent term(s). 

3) TT references to top terms, if necessary. 
41 BT references to broader terms. 

5) NT references to narrower terms. 

6) RT references to related terms. 



9.2.2 An example of this form of display is shown in figure 1 . 
This is probably the easiest type of thesaurus to construct and 
reproduce, but it should be borne in mind that the user of an 
alphabetical thesaurus cannot survey, at a single position, ail 
the broader and narrower terms that together constitute a 
hierarchy. Extra relational information can be added to an 
alphabetical display to indicate, for example, the top term in the 
hierarchy to which a specific concept belongs (using the ab- 
breviation TT). 

Example : 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 
TT OPTICAL EQUIPMENT 
BT CAMERAS 

NT UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
RT DIVING 



9.2.3 It may be useful to indicate more than one level of 
subordination and/or superordination, using abbreviations 
such as 

BTI = Broader term on first (i.e. next) level of supeordi- 
nation. 



BT2 = Broader term on second (i.e. higher) level of 
superordination. 

NT1 = Narrower term on first (i.e. next) level of subordi- 
nation. 

NT2 = Narrower term on second (i.e. lower) level of sub 
ordination. 

This could also be indicated by different levels of indention. 



9.3 Systenriatic display 

9.3.1 Parts of a systematic thesaurus 



9.3.1.1 A thesaurus in which terms are 
systematically should consist of two parts ; 



organized 



a) categories or hierarchies of terms arranged according to 
their meanings and logical interrelationships; 

b) an alphabetical index which directs the user to the ap- 
propriate part(s) of the systematic section. 

The link between these two sections is provided by a system of 
addresses. An address code is assigned to each of the preferred 
terms in the systematic section, and this code functions as a 
reference in the alphabetical index. These codes should have 
obvious filing values. They may consist simply of running 
numbers [as in the example in figures 2a) and 2b)], or they may 
comprise a system of hierarchically expressive notation. 

9.3.1 .2 With this type of display the systematic section is fre- 
quently regarded as the main part of the thesaurus, i.e. the part 
which carries most of the definitional and relational informa- 
tion, in which case the alphabetical index assumes the role of a 
complementary but secondary component. This is not in- 
variable, however, and thesauri differ widely in their ap- 
proaches to the relative importance and functions of these two 
sections, and also in the arrangement and kind of relational in- 
formation provided in each. Terms in the alphabetical section 
are sometimes accompanied by a level of relational and other 
information such that the two parts can be regarded as having 
equal status. 



20 



IS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



35 mm CAMERAS 

BT MINIATURE CAMERAS 

CAMERAS 

BT OPTICAL EQUIPMENT 

NT MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 

STEREO CAMERAS 

STILL CAMERAS 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 
RT PHOTOGRAPHY 

CINE CAMERAS 

BT MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 
IMT UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
RT CINEMA 

CINEMA 

RT CINE CAMERAS 

DIVING 

RT UNDERWATER CAMERAS 

INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS 

SIM Cameras which produce a finished print directly 
BT STILL CAMERAS 

Land cameras USE VIEW CAMERAS 

MICROSCOPES 

BT OPTICAL EQUIPMENT 

MINIATURE CAMERAS 
BT STILL CAMERAS 
NT 35 mm CAMERAS 

MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 
BT CAMERAS 
NT CINE CAMERAS 

TELEVISION CAMERAS 

OPTICAL EQUiPMENT 
NT CAMERAS 

MICROSCOPES 

PHOTOGRAPHY 
RT CAMERAS 



REFLEX CAMERAS 

BT STILL CAMERAS 
NT SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 
TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 

SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 
BT REFLEX CAMERAS 

STEREO CAMERAS 
BT CAMERAS 

STILL CAMERAS 
BT CAMERAS 
NT INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS 

MINIATURE CAMERAS 

REFLEX CAMERAS 

VIEW CAMERAS 

TELEVISION 

RT TELEVISION CAMERAS 

TELEVISION CAMERAS 

SN Cameras for both broadcasting and videotape 

recording 
BT MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 
RT TELEVISION 

TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 
BT REFLEX CAMERAS 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 
BT CAMERAS 

NT UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
RT DIVING 

UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
BT CINE CAMERAS 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 

VIEW CAMERAS 

SN Cameras with through-the-lens focusing and a range of 
movements of the lens plane relative to the film plane 
UF land cameras 
BT STILL CAMERAS 



NOTE — No attempt has been made to collect and organize all relevant terms within this field; terms have been selected primarily to demonstrate 
thesaura! features considered in earlier clauses, for example the treatment of scope notes, synonyms, broader and narrower terms, etc. 



Figure 1 — Alphabetical display 



21 



IS 14720: 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



301 OPTICAL EQUIPMENT 

302 CAMERAS 

RT PHOTOGRAPHY 824 

303 MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 

By medium 

304 CINE CAMERAS 

RT CINEMA 895 

305 UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 

306 TELEVISION CAMERAS 

RT TELEVISION 897 

307 STEREO CAMERAS 

308 STILL CAMERAS 

309 INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS 

SN Cameras which produce a finished print 
directly 

310 MINIATURE CAMERAS 

311 35 mm CAMERAS 

312 REFLEX CAMERAS 

313 SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 

314 TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 

315 VIEW CAMERAS 

SN Cameras with through-the-lens focusing 
and a range of movements of the lens 
plane relative to the film plane 

UP land cameras 

316 UNDERWATER CAMERAS 

RT DIVING 931 

317 UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 

318 MICROSCOPES 

Figure 2a) — Systennatic display 



35 mm CAMERAS 311 

CAMERAS 302 

RT PHOTOGRAPHY 824 

CINECAMERAS 304 

RT CINEMA 895 

CINEMA 895 

RT CINECAMERAS 304 

DIVING 931 

RT UNDERWATER CAMERAS 316 

INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS 309 
SN Cameras which produce a finished print directly 

land cameras USE VIEW CAMERAS 315 

MICROSCOPES 318 

MINIATURE CAMERAS 310 

MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 303 

OPTICAL EQUIPMENT 301 

PHOTOGRAPHY 824 

RT CAMERAS 302 

REFLEX CAMERAS 312 

SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 313 

STEREO CAMERAS 307 

STILL CAMERAS 308 

TELEVISION 897 

RT TELEVISION CAMERAS 306 

TELEVISION CAMERAS 306 

RT TELEVISION 897 

TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 314 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 316 

RT DIVING 931 

UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 305; 317 

VIEW CAMERAS 315 
SN Cameras with through-the-lens focusing 

and a range of movements of the lens plane 

relative to the film plane 
UF land cameras 



Figure 2b) — Alphabetical index to systematic display 



22 



IS 14720: 1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



9.3.1.3 Typical layouts are illustrated in figures 2 a) 
(systematic section) and 2bl (alphabetical index). Attention is 
drawn to the following features: 

a) 1 he systematic section [figure 2a)] contains scope 
notes and references to equivalent and related terms. Ex- 
plicit references to broader and narrower terms are not at- 
tached to each of the terms, since these relationships are 
sufficiently indicated by the position of each term within its 
hierarchy, and by its level of indention. The following 
features should also be noted : 

1) related terms are accompanied by address codes in- 
dicating their positions in other hierarchies; 

2) node labels (for example By medium) are occa- 
sionally inserted to show the basis on which a category 
has been divided (see also 9.3.3); 

b) The alphabetical section [figure 2b)] also contains 
scope notes and reciprocal references to synonyms and 
related terms. It does not, in this instance, contain explicit 
references to broader and narrower terms, but these hierar- 
chical relationships could have been indicated in the 
alphabetical section. 



9.3.2 Primary organization of a systematic thesaurus 

9.3.2.1 General 

When terms are organized into hierarchies or categories in the 
systematic section, the compiler needs to consider not only the 
inter-term relationships described in 8.2 to 8.4, but aiso rela- 
tionships between the hierarchies or categories themselves. In 
effect, it is necessary to impose an overall structure or macro- 
classification on the systematic section to ensure that similar 
concepts are brought together and unrelated concepts are 
separated for the benefit of users. Two general approaches can 
be adopted to the primary organization of a systematic 
thesaurus : 

a) organization into fields or disciplines; 

b) organization by facets. 

These approaches are considered separately in 9.3.2.2 and 
9.3.2.3 where it will be see that each possesses its advantages 
and disadvantages. In practice these techniques are frequently 
combined : that is to say, a thesaurus may be organized primari- 
ly into fields, and facets may then be introduced as the basis for 
organizing concepts within a given field. This combined ap- 
proach is considered in 9.3.2.4. 

9.3.2.2 Organization into fields 

This approach is basically similar to that adopted by the com- 
piler of a library classification who begins by organizing the 
universe of subjects into main classes or disciplines. When ap- 
plied to a thesaurus, categories of concepts are grouped initial- 
ly to reflect the various fields of interests of its users. This 
technique is clearly applicable to a thesaurus covering a range 
of different disciplines. It would then ensure that terms which 
are usually associated with a given field, such as "art", are 



brought together, and are also effectively separated from those 
belonging to different areas of interest, such as "economics" 
or "physics". This approach can also be applied to a thesaurus 
which is ostensibly restricted to a single field. A thesaurus 
devoted to "medicine", for example, which might be organized 
initially into subfields such as "injuries", "diseases", "treat- 
ments", etc., is also likely to include a number of terms from 
different disciplines, for example "management", "law" and 
"data processing", which should be separated from the medi- 
cal terms. Although this approach ensures that concepts are 
organized into groups which generally correspond to the 
modes of thinking of its users, it also possesses an inherent 
disadvantage. A given concept may be assigned to different 
categories in different thesauri, depending upon their grouping 
by field of interest. This could introduce problems when infor- 
mation is exchanged between different documentation centres. 
Extensive revision may also be necessary when changes occur 
in the boundaries of subject fields, or when new disciplines 
emerge. 

9.3.2.3 Organization by facets 

The notion of a facet is more abstract than the concept of a 
field, and organization by facets involves a more rigorous men- 
tal discipline on the part of the thesaurus compiler. When ap- 
plying this technique, terms are organized into classes or sets 
according to the basic kinds of concept they represent, with no 
initial regard for the field or fields with which a given concept is 
usually associated. For this purpose, concepts should generally 
be distinguished at a higher level of specificity than that seen in 
the outline classes of conceptual types listed in 6. 1 .1 . Concrete 
things, for example, might be divided into two main categories, 
i.e. "naturally occurring things" and "artificial things"; the lat- 
ter might be further distinguished as "products", "tools", etc., 
depending upon the subject field. Actions are frequently sub- 
divided into "operations" (i.e. transitive actions carried out 
upon things), and "processes" (these can generally be regard- 
ed as intransitive actions initiated by or occurring within 
things). 

Organization of terms into facets offers certain advantages : 

a) the need for a major revision is less likely to occur if a 
given concept changes the field with which it is usually 
associated; 

b) a higher level of agreement between different 
documentation centres could be expected. 

It is also necessary, however, to note the following disadvan- 
tages : 

a) organization by facets tends to scatter the concepts 
usually associated with a given field or discipline; 

b) the basis on which the thesaurus is organized will be 
generally less self-evident to both indexers and users. 

9.3.2.4 Combined approach. 

In practice, the different approaches described in 9.3.2.2 and 
9.3.2.3 are frequently combined, for example when a thesaurus 
organized primarily into subject fields is further subdivided by 
facets. 



23 



IS 14720: 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



Example. A field such as "education" may be divided into 
facets representing basic categories such as operations (for 
example, "teaching"!, processes (for example, "learning"), 
and agents (for example, "teachers"). 

9.3.3 Node labels 

Tuyn kinds of node label, each \A.'ith a different function, mav be 
inserted into the schedules of a systematic thesaurus: 

a) those that serve as facet Indicators to show the logical 
basis on which the hierarchy was organized, where the 
terms on either side of the node label refer to concepts of 
the same basic type. 

Example ; 

AIRCRAFT 

By payload 

FREIGHT AIRCRAFT 

PASSENGER AIRCRAFT 

By user 

CIVIL AIRCRAFT 

MILITARY AIRCRAFT 

In this example. By playload and By user function as node 
labels. They introduce terms that are narrower than the 
class preceding the node latael. 

b) labels used to introduce different types of concepts, en- 
suring that these are collocated, for the convenience of 
users, under the concept(s! with which they are usually 
associated. 

Example : 

BOOKS 

Operations 

BINDING 
PRINTING 



etc. 



Operations functions as the node label. In these cases, the 
apparently "broader" term, for example "books", serves 
only to collocate the associated concepts introduced by the 
node label, in the 'alphabetical section, these terms should 
be indicated as associated terms (RT), not as broader and 
narrower terms (BT/NT). 



Example : 

BOOKS 

RT BINDING but NOT 

BINDING 
RT BOOKS 



9.3.4 Polyhierarchicai relationships (see also 8.3,7) 

9.3.4.1 The standard treatment of polyhierarchicai terms is 
demonstrated in figures 2a) and 2b), where the term "UNDER- 
WATER CINE CAMERAS" belongs to two classes, "304 CINE 
CAMERAS" and "316 UNDERWATER CAMERAS", and 
therefore appears at two positions in the systematic section, 
lire poiyi lierarciiicai term is tnen accompsnicu uy uotn ad- 
dresses in the alphabetical section. 

9.3.4.2 A different approach may be adopted in cir- 
cumstances such as the following : 

a) space in the systematic section is strictly limited; 

b) an extensive entry is needed for the polyhierarchicai 
term. It might be accompanied, for example, by a long 
scope note, and/or several non-preferred synonyms, nar- 
rower terms and related terms. 

It may then be decided to print the full entry under only one of 
the broader terms to which the polyhierarchicai term logically 
belongs, and make references to this entry not only from the 
alphabetical section, but also (as an added NT) from each of 
the other broader terms in the systematic section. A note of 
each of these broader terms should be incorporated (as an 
added BT) into the full entry. 

Example (assuming that "UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS" 
calls for an extensive entry at position 317) : 

304 CINE CAMERAS 

Extra NT UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 317 
RT CINEMA 835 



316 UNDERWATER CAMERAS 



317 



UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
Extra BT CINE CAMERAS 304 



BOOKS 

NT BINDING 

BINDING 
BT BOOKS 



s.t vsrapnic aispiay 

9.4.1 In this type of display, indexing terms and their interrela- 
tionships are set out in the form of a two-dimensional figure 
which allows the indexer or user to survey a range of inter- 
related terms. Various kinds of graphic display are found in 
published thesauri, but two main types can be identified : 

a) tree structures; 

b) arrowgraphs. 

9.4.2 A thesaurus which incorporates a graphic display 
should consist of two parts : 

a) The graphic display 

This is usually limited to preferred terms only, since this for- 
mat does not readily accommodate scope notes, synonyms. 



24 



IS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



etc. The main display is identified by a symbol, for example 
a running number or an element of hierarchically expressive 
notation. Symbols need not be assigned to individual terms, 
although the position of a term within the figure can be in- 
dicated by the use of a grid system as described below. The 
symbols used to identify displays also function as addresses 
in the alphabetical index. 

b) The alphabetical index 

This contains a full range of scope notes and references be- 
tween preferred and non-preferred terms, and it can also in- 
clude references to broader, narrower and relative terms. 
The indexes used as examples li.e. figures 3b) and 4b)l dif- 
fer in the extent to which they refer to broader and narrower 
terms : 

t) the index to the tree structure [figure 3b)] does not 
indicate hierarchical relationships; 

2) the index to the arrowgraph [figure 4b)] includes not 
only scope notes etc., but it also contains references to 
broader and narrower terms. 

In cases where the alphabetical section contains the higher 
proportion of definitionat and relational information, it func- 
tions as the main part of the thesaurus. It may be as full as 
the alphabetical thesaurus described in 9.2, in which case 
the graphic display should be seen as having the supportive 
role. In thesauri covering special subject fields, graphic 
displays are frequently limited to terms in the core subjects, 
whereas all terms appear in the alphabetical section. 



9.4.3 A tree structure is illustrated in figure 3a). "Cameras" 
appears as the broadest term at the head of the diagram, and 
narrower terms are printed in subordinate positions, with 
hierarchical relationships indicated by the connecting lines. 
This kind of display is more effective when the layout is relative- 
ly simple. Consequently, scope notes, synonyms and related 
terms have been excluded from the tree diagram, and are 
assigned instead to the alphabetical section. The tree as a 
whole is identified by the symbol E417, and this is appended, as 
an address, to each of its terms in the alphabetical section 
shown in figure 3b). The alphabetical section also contains 
terms which belong to other lunillustrated) trees, for example 
"television", which belongs to a structure labelled as R6ffi. 



9.4.4 An arrowgraph is illustrated in figure 4a), where the 
broadest term "cameras" is placed in a relatively central posi- 
tion and is typographically emphasized. Narrower terms are 
printed in other positions within the grid, and levels of subor- 
dination are indicated by the connecting lines and the relative 
distance of the subordinate term from the broadest term. 
Related terms, each accompanied by an address indicating the 
network in which it occurs, are printed outside the main grid, 
the connections being shown by pecked lines. The whole 
display is identified by the symbol E 417, and this forms part of 
the address of each term in the alphabetical section reproduced 
as figure 4b). In addition, the position of each individual term 
within the figure is identified through reference to a grid 
system, and these grid references are also printed in the 
alphabetical section. In this example, the alphabetical section 
contains a full range of definitional and relational information, 
and it could serve as an alphabetical thesaurus in its own right. 



25 



» 



WW 
O ^ 

•J ^ 
00 o 



E417 



00 



CAMERAS 



Still 
cameras 



Moving 
picture 
cameras 



Stereo 
cameras 



Underwater 
cameras 



Instant 
picture 
cameras 



Miniature 
cameras 



View 
cameras 



Reflex 
cameras 



Television 
cameras 



Cine 
cameras 



35 mm 
cameras 



Single lens 
reflex cameras 



Twin lens 
reflex cameras 



Undenwater 
cine cameras 



Figure 3a) — Tree structure 



IS 14720 : 1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



35 mm CAMERAS 

CAMERAS 

RT PHOTOGRAPHY 

CINECAMERAS 
RT CINEMA 

CINEMA 
RT CINECAMERAS 

DIVING 
RT UNDERWATER CAMERAS 



E417 

E417 
R562 

E417 
R668 

R668 
E417 

T473 
E417 



INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS E417 

SN Cameras which produce a finished print directly 



land cameras USE VIEW CAMERAS 

MINIATURE CAMERAS 

MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 

PHOTOGRAPHY 
RT CAMERAS 



E417 

E417 

R562 
E417 



REFLEX CAMERAS E417 

SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS E 417 

STEREO CAMERAS E417 

STILL CAMERAS E417 

TELEVISION R 685 

RT TELEVISION CAMERAS E417 

TELEVISION CAMERAS E417 

RT TELEVISION R685 

TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS E 417 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS E417 

RT DIVING T473 

UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS E417 

VIEW CAMERAS E417 
SN Cameras with through-the-lens focusing 
and a range of movements of the lens 
plane relative to the film plane 
UF land cameras 



Figure 3b) — Alphabetical index to tree structure 



27 



&j 



E417 



Diving T473 



Stereo 
cameras , 



Instant 
picture 
cameras , 



View 
cameras 



35 mm 
cameras 



Miniature 
cameras 



Still 
cameras 



7^ 



Reflex 
cameras 



/ 
/ 
Undenwater 
.cameras 




f^K 



Single 
lens 
reflex 
cameras 



Twin lens 

reflex 

cameras 



Moving 
picture 
cameras 



Television 
cameras ■ 



Cine 
cameras 



Undenwater 

cine 

cameras 



ox/} 
So 



o> 



(O 



Phiotography 
R562 



Cinema 
R668 



1 Television 
R685 



Rgure 4 a) - Arrowgraph 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



35 mm CAMERAS E 417.a2 
BT MINIATURE CAMERAS 

CAMERAS E 417.d5 

RT PHOTOGRAPHY R 562 

NT MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 

STEREO CAMERAS 

STILL CAMERAS 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 

CINE CAMERAS E 417.f4 

BT MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 
NT UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
RT CINEMA R 668 

CINEMA R 668.d5 

RT CINE CAMERAS E 417 

DIVING T473.g5 
RT UNDERWATER CAMERAS E 417 

INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS E 417.b5 
SN Cameras which produce a finished print directly 
BT STILL CAMERAS 

land cameras USE VIEW CAMERAS 

MINIATURE CAMERAS E 417.b3 
BT STILL CAMERAS 
NT 35 mm CAMERAS 

MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS E 417.e4 
BT CAMERAS 
NT CINE CAMERAS 

TELEVISION CAMERAS 

PHOTOGRAPHY R 562.d5 
RT CAMERAS E 417 



REFLEX CAMERAS E 417.c3 
BT STILL CAMERAS 
NT SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 
TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 



SINGLE LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 
BT REFLEX CAMERAS 



E 417.C2 



STEREO CAMERAS 
BT CAMERAS 



E417.C6 



STILL CAMERAS E 417.c4 
BT CAMERAS 
NT INSTANT PICTURE CAMERAS 

MINIATURE CAMERAS 

REFLEX CAMERAS 

VIEW CAMERAS 

TELEVISION R 685.d5 

RT television cameras E 417 

TELEVISION CAMERAS E 417.e3 
BT MOVING PICTURE CAMERAS 
RT TELEVISION R 685 



TWIN LENS REFLEX CAMERAS 
BT REFLEX CAMERAS 



E 417.d2 



UNDERWATER CAMERAS E 417.e6 
BT CAMERAS 

NT UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS 
RT DIVING T 473 

UNDERWATER CINE CAMERAS E 417.g4 
BT CINE CAMERAS 

UNDERWATER CAMERAS 

VIEW CAMERAS E 417.b4 
SN Cameras with through-the-lens focusing and a range of 
movements of the lens plane relative to the film plane 
UF land cameras 
BT STILL CAMERAS 



Figure 4 b) — Alphabetical index to arrowgraph 



10 Management aspects of thesaurus 
construction 

10.1 Methods of compilation 

10.1.1 If possible, the form of the thesaurus (i.e. alphabetical 
listing, systematic display or graphic display) should be decided 
before terms are collected and considered as candidates for 
inclusion. Two initial approaches to thesaurus construction are 
possible : 

a) The deductive method 

When applying this technique, terms are extracted from 
documents during a preliminary stage of indexing, but no 
attempt is made to control the vocabulary, nor to determine 
relationships between terms, until a sufficient number of 
terms has been collected. All terms are then reviewed by a 
group of specialists, preferably consisting of both indexers 
and subject experts. These should first identify terms which 



represent the broadest categories, and the remaining terms 
should then be allocated to these categories on the basis of 
their logical relationships, so that the categories tend to be 
established on a broader-to-narrower term basis. Vocabu- 
lary control should be applied at the stage where categories 
are established, following the principles described in clauses 
5 to 7. 

b) The inductive method 

With the inductive method, new terms are admitted into the 
thesaurus as soon as they have been encountered in docu- 
ments. Vocabulary control is applied from the outset, and 
each term, as it is admitted, is designated as a member of 
one or more broader categories constructed on an ad hoc 
basis at an early stage. The thesaurus is therefore establis- 
hed on a narrower-to-broader term basis. Thesaurus cons- 
truction is regarded from the outset as a continuous opera- 
tion, and although assistance from technical experts should 
be sought as necessary, they need not be involved as mem- 
bers of a format editorial group or committee. 



29 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



10.1.2 In practice, both the deductive and inductive ap- 
proaches are likely to be employed at one stage or another dur- 
ing the construction of a thesaurus. For example, categories of 
terms which were first established inductively may later be ex- 
amined from a deductive viewpoint by an editorial group con- 
sisting of indexers and specialists. Both techniques are essen- 
tially empirical, and it needs to be accepted from the outset that 
some decisions taken during the early stages of compilation 
may have to be revised as further experience is gained. The ad- 
dition of new terms to an indexing language frequently throws 
light on previous decisions concerning both the terms and their 
interrelationships. The compilers should check terms and 
hierarchies frequently to ensure that inter-term relationsips, the 
factoring of compound terms, etc., adhere to general principles 
which have been applied consistently. It is strongly recom- 
mended that expert advice should be sought when choosing 
between synonyms and variant forms of terms. 

10.2 Recording of terms 

An individual record, for example on a card, should be main- 
tained for every term admitted into a thesaurus. This record 
should be made as soon as a term is admitted, and it should 
identify the source of the term (especially in the case of 
neologisms or unfamiliar terms), the names of any authorities 
consulted, and the date of inclusion, as well as references to 
synonymous, broader, narrower and related terms. 

10.3 Term verification 

Where possible, the correctness of a term should be verified 
before it is admitted into the thesaurus, and the compiler 
should also review relationships between each new term and 
other terms in the hierarchy to which it is assigned. The follow- 
ing types of authority should be checked when terms are ac- 
cepted as candidates for inclusion : 

a) standard technical dictionaries and encyclopaedias; 

b) existing thesauri; 

c) classification schemes. 

Subject specialists, especially those with some knowledge of 
indexing and documentation, may also be consulted. 

10.4 Specificity 

The use of highly specific terms should usually be restricted to 
the core area of the subject field covered by the thesaurus, 
since an extensive use of these terms in fringe areas is likely to 
lead to an unwieldy and unbalanced thesaurus (see also 8.2.4). 
In an agency that deals with documents covering more than 
one domain of knowledge, it may be necessary to develop a 
number of specialist thesauri, each linked to, and compatible 
with, a general thesaurus with a lower level of specificity pro- 
duced by the same agency. 

10.5 Admission and deletion of terms 

10.5.1 Terms and their relationships should generally reflect 
the ways in which language is used by specialists in the field 



covered by the thesaurus. If a term in common use is factored 
for the sake of logical consistency (see 7.3), a reference should 
be made from the unfactored but non-preferred form of the 
term. 

10.5.2 When hierarchies are being established, especially 
during the initial stages of the inductive approach, terms which 
have not yet been used in indexing are frequently admitted into 
the thesaurus on the grounds that they can provide useful ac- 
cess points (for example as broader terms), and they also have 
potential value as preferred terms in their own right. These 
terms should be marked by a special symbol in the term 
authority file, or by a phrase such as "not yet used", and this 
symbol or phrase should be deleted as soon as the term is used 
for indexing a document. 

10.5.3 Over-used terms, and terms which experience shows 
are used very infrequently, should be considered as candidates 
for deletion, since both kinds of term are generally ineffective in 
retrieval. In some cases an over-used term can usefully be 
replaced by two or more terms of greater specificity, (f a term is 
deleted from a thesaurus but it occurs in previous indexing 
records, its record should be marked "for retrieval purposes 
only", and the date of deletion should be recorded. 

10.6 The use of automatic data processing 
equipment 

10.6.1 It has been assumed throughout this International 
Standard that term selection, choice of form, etc., call for in- 
tellectual decisions by indexers. Machine assistance can be 
employed, however, for tasks such as the following : 

a) candidate terms may be identified automatically from 
machine-readable texts, for example titles or abstracts. The 
number of potential terms should first be reduced by the use 
of a stop list, and any remaining terms should be matched 
against those already recorded in the thesaurus. Unrecord- 
ed terms can be considered as potential candidates for in- 
clusion; 

b) in mechanical indexing systems, the frequency with 
which a term has been used in indexing (and also, perhaps, 
in enquiries) can be registered automatically, Terms with ex- 
ceptionally high or low scores should be considered as can- 
didates for deletion. 

10.6.2 Available equipment and software may occasionally 
impose limitations when a thesaurus is to be reproduced from 
machine-held files. The following characteristics are most likely 
to be affected ; 

a) the number of characters allowed in a term; 

b) the character set, including punctuation marks, 
available on the printer; 

c) the number of levels of indention allowed in a system- 
atic thesaurus. 

Indexers should have access to equipment and programs which 
are capable of dealing with the special needs of a thesaurus. It 
should not be necessary to adapt the thesaurus to suit the 
facilities available on an inadequate machine. 



30 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788:1986 



10.7 Form and contents of a thesaurus 

10.7.1 Owing to the range of displays available (see clause 9), 
it is not possible to stipulate a standard form of layout in a 
printed thesaurus. The following parts should, however, be 
clearly distinguished : 

a) title page; 

b) contents list; 

c) introduction (see 10.7.2); 

d) systematic or graphic displays, where appropriate; 

e) alphabetical section. 

10.7.2 Alt thesauri should contain a comprehensive introduc- 
tion which clearly states 

a) the purpose of the thesaurus; 

b) the subject field(s) covered, with core and fringe areas 
separately identffied; 

c) the meaning of all conventions and abbreviations; 

d) the total number of terms, with separate totals of 
preferred and non-preferred terms; 

e) the rules adopted in selecting the preferred forms of in- 
dexing terms, and in deciding their interrelationships; 

f) the filing rules employed, following (and quoting) an ap- 
propriate national or International Standard when possible; 

g) the meanings of any punctuation marks used in non- 
standard ways; 

h) a statement on the updating policy, and the name and 
address of the responsible agency to whom comments and 
suggestions should be sent; 

i) the date when the last term was added. 

Whenever possible, these points should be illustrated by exam- 
ples. 

10.8 Other editorial matters 



10.8.2 Avoidance of duplicate work 

The compiler should ascertain, through reference to one of the 
clearinghouses named below, whether an existing thesaurus 
covers the same or an overlapping domain of knowledge. Com- 
plete duplication of subject coverage is rare, but preliminary ac- 
cess to one or more thesauri in related fields can frequently 
serve as a usefuf starting point. 

10.8.3 Deposit with a clearinghouse 

A copy of the first and any subsequent edition of a thesaurus 
should be deposited with the appropriate national clear- 
inghouse, and with one of the following international clear- 
inghouses: 

a) thesauri in the English language, including multilingual 
thesauri containing English language sections : 

Thesaurus Clearinghouse 

The Library 

Faculty of Library Science 

University of Toronto 

140 St George Street 

TORONTO 

Ontario M5S 1A1 

Canada 

b) thesauri in other languages : 

Instytut Informacji Naukowej, 

Technicznej i Economicznej 

Clearinghouse 

ul. 2urawia 3/5 

00-926 WARSZAWA 

Poland 

10.8.4 Review procedures 

It is recommended that a thesaurus should be tested by means 
of a pilot run prior to publication. A provisional version should 
be distributed to a select group of users, and any suggestions 
for changes to terms and/or their interrelationships should be 
considered by the editors. The thesaurus should also be subject 
to a major review after a period in use, and at regular intervals 
thereafter, taking acount of any changes in the use of terms 
within the field covered by the thesaurus, and the frequency of 
their occurrence in indexing and/or enquiries. 



10.8.1 Notification of intent 

When an agency has decided to publish a new thesaurus, 
notification of intent should be announced in an appropriate 
professional journal. 



31 



IS 14720:1999 
ISO 2788 : 1986 



Annex 
Symbolization of thesaural relationships 

(This annex forms part of the standard.) 



A.I The following symbols have been used throughout this 
Internationa! Standard to express the basic thesaural relation- 
ships : 

Equivalence relationship 

USE precede the preferred term 

UF precedes the non-preferred term 
Hierarchical relationship 

TT Top term in a hierarchy 
BT Broader term 

Further distinctions can be achieved by the use of : 

BTG Broader term (generic) 

BTP Broader term (partitive) 

NT Narrower or more specific term 

Further distinctions can be achieved by the use of 
the symbols : 

NTG Narrower term (generic) 

NTP Narrower term (partitive) 

Associative relationship 

RT Related term 

Equivalent symbols which represent abbreviations of terms in 
other languages are also encountered in published thesauri. A 
sample of these is given in 4.2. 



A.2 These symbols have acquired, through general use, the 
status of "standard" conventions, but they are also language 
dependent to a large extent. Indexing agencies dealing with 
users with a range of natural languages, including those con- 
cerned with the production of multilingual thesauri, might the- 
refore prefer a more neutral or language independent system of 
symbols. Those shown in the table, which have been establis- 
hed by ISO, are offered as a possible system : 



Table — Symbols 



Symbol 


Significance 




Equivalence relationship 




Symbol which precedes: 


- 


a) the preferred term 


= 


b) the non-preferred term 




Hierarchical relationship 




Symtiol which precedes : 


< 


a) the broader or superordinate term 


> 


b) the narrower or subordinate term 


-< 


c) the broader term (partitive) 


>- 


d) the narrower term (partitive) 




Associative relationship 


- 


Symbol which precedes each related 




term 




Conjunction 


+ 


Symbol printed between two terms to 




indicate that they should be used in 




combination to represent a compound 




concept 



Some of the symbols in the table do not appear on a standard 
typewriter keyboard, but they are available on some computer 
print chains, and they can be produced without difficulty in any 
hand-set or photocomposed thesaurus. 

A. 3 It is stressed that these conventions are intended to ex- 
press relationships only in printed thesauri. Relationships be- 
tween terms in thesauri which are held in machine-readable 
form (for example on disk or tape) can be expressed by any 
suitable combination of characters, provided that standard 
conventions or abbreviations are used to express these relation- 
ships in the printed output. 



32 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development or the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
F.nauiries relating tn cnnvripht be addr&<ised tn the Director ^PiihliratinnV RIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments^ are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. MSD 5 (142) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

CentiBl 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksan.stha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r337 84 99,337 85 6l 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



1-2350216,235 04 42 
123515 19,235 23 15 

f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
183278 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, JoAik 



