**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11385 (2008) : Subsurface exploration for canals and 
cross drainage works - Code of practice [WRD 5: Gelogical 
Investigation and Subsurface Exploration] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 11385: 2008 

(Reaffirmed -2012) 

Indian Standard 

SUBSURFACE EXPLORATION FOR CANALS AND 
CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS— CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 93.020 



© BIS 2008 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



November 2008 



Price Group 4 



Geological Investigations and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee, WRD 05 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, 
after the draft finalized by the Geological Investigations and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 

This standard was published in 1985. The present revision is proposed to reflect the experience gained on the 
subject since then. 

In India, canal systems have been constructed since historic times. With the improvement of the techniques 
of construction of canals and cross drainage structures, the necessity of detailed soil investigations are felt, 
before taking up the actual construction. To prevent loss of valuable water through the canal bed and banks 
passing through alluvial or flssury reaches, costly protection works, such as lining, etc, have to be provided. 
Reaches are to be avoided where damages can occur to the surrounding cultivated lands, due to water 
logging. Canal embankments often get breached and flood vast areas, if not properly designed. Therefore, 
adequate subsurface exploration is needed before the canal system is designed and constructed. Similarly, to 
construct a big aqueduct or syphon across a canal, detailed foundation investigations are required, for the 
safety of these structures. 

Subsurface explorations, therefore, form a very important part in the planning and designing of canals and 
cross drainage structures. The term subsurface exploration as used herein covers all types of exploration 
connected with determination of the nature and extent of the soil and/or rock along the alignment of the 
proposed canal and its distributaries and also the foundation condition at the sites of the proposed cross 
drainage structures. It is not possible to lay down the required extent of exploration to cover all types of 
cases. The standard provides guidelines for planning the exploratory works through various stages of the 
project development. These recommendations may have to be modified for individual cases, depending upon 
the site conditions and other characteristics peculiar to each of them. 

It has been assumed in the formulation of this standard that the execution of its provisions is entrusted to 
appropriately qualified and experienced people, for whose guidance it has been formulated. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 11385 : 2008 

Indian Standard 

SUBSURFACE EXPLORATION FOR CANALS AND 
CROSS DRAINAGE WORKS— CODE OF PRACTICE 

(First Revision) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard provides guidance on the type, extent 
and details of subsurface explorations needed in 
connection with the following items of work: 

a) Canals — Stability of banks and bed in: 

1) cutting, and 

2) filling. 

b) Canals — Water loss due to seepage and 
water logging in the command area. 

c) Canals — Selection of lining with reference 
to the characteristics of bed material, 
permeability, subsoil water table and salinity. 

d) Cross drainage structures — Design and 
construction of the foundation for head 
regulators, cross-regulators, drops or falls, 
super passages, syphons, aqueducts, level 
crossings and bridges. 

e) Borrow area investigations for the suitability 
of material to be used for canal embankments 
and necessary compaction procedure. 

2 REFERENCES 

The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on these standards are encouraged to investigate 
the possibility of applying the most recent editions 
of the standards indicated below : 



IS No. 
1498:1970 



1892:1979 



1888:1982 
2131:1981 



Title 

Classification and identification 
of soils for general engineering 
purposes {first revision) 

Code of practice for subsurface 
investigations for foundations 
{first revision) 

Method of load test on soils 

Method for standard penetration 
test for soils {first revision) 



IS No. 
2720 
(Parti): 1983 

(Part 2): 1973 
(PartS): 1985 
(Part 7): 1980 

(Part 13): 1986 
(Part 14): 1983 

(Part21):1977 
(Part 28): 1974 

4078:1980 
4434:1978 
4453 : 1980 
4464:1985 

4968 
(Parti): 1976 



Title 
Method test for soils: 
Preparation of dry soil samples 
for various tests (second 
revision) 

Determination of water content 
(second revision) 

Determination of liquid and 
plastic limit (second revision) 

Determination of water content- 
dry density relation using light 
compaction (second revision) 

Direct shear test (second 
revision) 

Determination of density index 
(relative density) of 
cohesionless soils (first 
revision) 

Determination of total soluble 
solids (first revision) 

Determination of dry density of 

soils inplace, by the sand 

replacement method (first 

revision) 

Code of practice for indexing and 

storage of drill cores (first 

revision) 

Code of practice for in-situ vane 
shear test for soils (second 
revision) 

Code of practice for subsurface 
exploration by pits, trenches, 
drifts and shafts (first revision) 

Code of practice for presentation 
of drilling information and core 
description in foundation 
investigation (first revision) 

Method for subsurface sounding 
for soils : 

Dynamic method using 50 mm 
cone without betonity slurry (first 
revision) 



IS 11385: 2008 



IS No. 
(Part 2): 1976 

(Part 3): 1976 

5529 
(Parti): 1985 
(Part 2): 2006 

6403:1981 

6926:1996 

7422 



Title 

Dynamic method using cone and 
bentonite slurry (first revision) 

Static one penetration test (first 
revision) 

Code of practice or in-situ 
permeability test: 

Test in overburden (first 
revision) 

Tests in bedrock (second 
revision) 

Code of practice for 
determination of bearing capacity 
of shallow foundations (first 
revision) 

Diamond core drilling — Site 
investigation for river valley 
projects — Code of practice (first 
revision) 

Symbols and abbreviations for 
use in geological maps, sections 
and subsurface exploratory logs: 



(Part 1) : 1974 Abbreviations 

(Part 2): 1974 Igneous rocks 

(Part 3) : 1974 Sedimentary rocks 

(Part 4) : 1985 Metamorphic rocks 



(Part5):1992 Line symbols for formation 
contacts and structural features 

9214:1979 Method for determination of 

modules of subgrade reaction (k- 
value) of soils in the field 

15662:2006 Recommendations for 

preparation of geological and 
geotechnical maps for river valley 
projects 

15686 : 2006 Recommendations for 

preparation of geological and 
geotechnical maps for river valley 
projects 

3 GENERAL CONDITIONS 

3.1 All subsurface explorations should be preceded 
by geological mapping on scales as given in IS 1 5686, 
covering 100 m on either side. 

3.2 The type and extent of exploration should be 



commensurate with the size and importance of the 
project and will depend upon the size of canal system 
or the cross drainage structure. This should be 
neither too little, resulting in inadequate data, nor 
too much, resulting in excessive cost and time. 

3.3 Subsurface explorations in connection with a 
canal would cover suitable alternative alignments for 
the main canal and its distributaries and will be carried 
out to a specified depth, preferably up to a few metres 
below the proposed bed of the canal. In case of cross 
drainage structures, the exploration should cover 
also, the alternative suitable sites and up to the 
critical depth below the proposed bottom of the 
foundation. A complete programme of exploration 
should be able to give information regarding the 
following aspects: 

a) Canals and distributaries 

1) Shearing properties, that is, cohesion and 
angle of internal friction of the bed and 
bank material; 

2) In-situ moisture content and density of 
the bank and bed material; 

3) Seepage characteristics or permeability of 
bed and bank material; 

4) Chemical test on ground water; 

5) Ground water table, both in dry and 
monsoon season, along the alignment; 
and 

6) Grain size distribution of the material at the 

bed for calculating the critical velocity 
and rugosity of the canal. 

b) Cross drainage structures 

1) Cohesion, angle of internal friction and 
density of the material up to critical depth 
below the proposed foundation level; 

2) Bearing capacity of the soil or rock at the 
proposed foundation level; 

3) Ground water table at the site of the 
proposed structures; 

4) Possibility of liquefaction, if any, of the 
sandy material in foundation, under 
seismic condition; and 

5) Silt factor for assessing scour depth. 
4 STAGES OF EXPLORATION 

4.1 The extent of foundation exploration required 



IS 11385 : 2008 



for a canal or a cross drainage structure of given size 
varies greatly from site to site, depending on the 
subsurface conditions and cannot be adequately 
visualized in advance. The exploration generally 
proceeds in stages, the details of each stage growing 
out of the one before. 

4.2 Explorations can be, however, generally sub- 
divided into four stages as given in 4.2.1 to 4.2.4. 

4.2.1 Reconnaissance or Prefeasibility Stage 

This shall comprise of selection of suitable alternative 
alignments of the canal and suitable alternative sites 
for the cross drainage works on the basis of regional 
and local geology, relative impermeability of the area, 
economy of excavation and filling and foundation 
conditions. The geophysical methods for 
investigations during the reconnaissance stage may 
be deployed to assess the thickness of overburden 
and bedrock configuration on various alternatives 
under consideration. The investigations in this stage 
will consist of a general field inspection by a qualified 
engineering geologist and an engineer, for 
assessment of the overall aspects of feasibility, 
economy and safety. On the basis of information 
gathered at this stage and evaluations made about 
the expected seepage in the canal, cost of excavation 
and filling, type and cost of foundation of cross 
drainage structures, etc, planning of the detail field 
work will be made. 

4.2.2 Preliminary Investigation or Feasibility Stage 

4.2.2.1 Objectives, types and methods of exploration 

During this stage, certain essential data regarding 
the canal and cross drainage structures would be 
collected. The coverage of exploration should be 
adequate for examination of the feasibility, which 
includes estimation of the cost, expected seepage 
losses in the canal and stability of canal banks and 
cross drainage structures. This stage would also 
include studies for preliminary choice of the canal 
alignment, selection of the type of lining and the 
choice of the type and depth of foundation for the 
cross drainage structures. The stage of exploration 
will include the following methods: 

a) Exploration by test pits; and 

b) Exploration by augering/drilling. 

4.2.3 Detailed Investigation or Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) Stage 

4.2.3.1 In this stage of investigation, the data 
required for detailed design and preparation of 
construction drawings should be collected. Close 
coordination is essential between work of the 
organizations for exploration, geology design and 



construction. The design engineer and the geologist 
should be closely associated with the exploration 
and they should be required to prepare an outline of 
the scope and extent of exploration. 

4.2.3.2 Investigations at this stage would comprise 
the following: 

a) Intensive exploration for specific difficult 
reaches of the canal, where the banks need 
special protection against land slides, 
breaches, water logging, seepage, etc. 

b) Additional drillings of the foundation of the 
cross drainage structures, to determine the 
actual condition of the foundation of each and 
every component of the structures. The 
possibility of high submergence, sudden 
drawdown of the embankments, seismic 
effects, etc, have to be kept in mind at this 
stage. 

c) Ascertaining the relative merits and demerits 
between the open foundation and well, raft or 
pile foundation under the piers and abutments 
special field shear tests may be used, 
wherever necessary. 

d) Compaction methods to be determined for 
canals in filling, from the reach by reach 
borrow material testing. 

4.2.3.3 The engineer-in-charge should be consulted 
to get an idea of the type of foundation that was 
likely to be provided at a later stage and accordingly 
the depth of exploration should be fixed. The stage 
of exploration will include the following methods: 

a) Determination of the depth of water table, 
evaluation of field permeability and 
determination of salinity of the ground; 

b) Field penetration and field density tests at 
the sites of the foundation of the cross 
drainage structures and along the alignment 
of the canal; and 

c) Laboratory tests on the disturbed and 
undisturbed samples for the determination of 
engineering properties of the canal bed and 
bank material, borrow materials for 
embankment and proposed foundation 
material of the cross drainage structures. 

4.2.3.4 Choice of methods 

Normally, for canals and cross drainage structures 
of moderate size, exploration by trial pits and drill or 
auger holes would be sufficient. Some field tests of 
permeability and penetration would also be 
necessary. 



IS 11385: 2008 



4.2.3.5 Spacing 

For canals, exploration by pits at spacing of 500 m 
depending upon the nature of the soil may be 
necessary. However, wherever there is an apparent 
change of characteristics, the pits may be dug at 
even 200 m to 300 m spacing or closer, if required. 
Under the major cross drainage structures the holes 
or pits should be selected at specific points, where 
the proposed piers, wells and abutments are to be 
rested. 

4.2.3.6 Location 

Explorative holes and pits should follow the central 
line of the proposed canal alignment and also the 
axis of the cross drainage structures. 

4.2.3.7 Depth of exploration 

a) In case of canals, exploration should reach at 
least 3 m below the proposed bed of the canal. 
If the canal is to be in a rocky reach, this depth 
may be reduced at the discretion of the 
engineer-in-charge. If the strata appear to be 
changing, the depth of exploration should go 
up to an extent of canal depth below the bed 
level. 

b) In case of cross drainage structures, the depth 
of the holes or pits should be up to the bottom 
of the expected bulb of pressure under the 
abutments or the piers or down to the hard 
firm strata or rock, if available. In case of well 
foundations, however, the depth of 
exploration should reach the stable strata, 
which can support the foundation safely (see 
IS 4453). 

4.2.4 Construction Stage 

Construction stage exploration should aim at making 
available data generally, for the evolution of specific 
foundation problems and preparation of the 
foundation after excavation and special precautions 
to be taken along the canal as and when the project 
is under actual execution. 

5 METHODS OF EXPLORATION 

5.1 The following categories of methods may be 
used for subsurface exploration for canals and cross 
drainage works: 

a) Trial pits, 

b) Borings ( auger boring and core drilling ), 

c) Field tests in-situ, and 

d) Geophysical methods. 



6 EXPLORATION BY PITS 

6.1 Shallow or deep trial pits may be used, according 
to the size of the canal, to investigate the engineering 
properties of the material, salinity of the ground, 
water table, seepage rate, etc, along the canal 
alignment. Similar investigation may be performed at 
the proposed foundation of the cross drainage 
structures of minor nature. 

6.2 At the surface near the pit, the excavated material 
shall be placed in an orderly manner around the pit 
and marked stakes shall be driven to indicate depth 
of pit from which the material is removed, in order to 
facilitate logging and sampling. 

6.3 The level of the water table and the level, 
location and rate of seepage flow in the test pit 
should be recorded date wise. 

7 EXPLORATION BY BORINGS 

7.1 Borings provide the simplest method of 
subsurface investigation and sampling. They may 
be used to indicate the subsurface strata and to 
collect samples from each of the strata. 

7.2 Borings may be made by several methods 
depending upon the importance of the work and on 
the nature of the sub-soil strata. They are as below: 



SI No. 


For Soils 


For Rocks 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Post hole auger 


Bore drilling 


i<) 


Shell and auger 


(s«? IS 6926) 




boring 


Short drilling 




(see IS 1892) 


(«>eIS1892) 


iii) 


Wash boring 
(see IS 1892) 




iv) 


Rotary drilling 
(see IS 1892) 





7.3 Auger Boring 

7.3.1 Post Hole Auger 

Hand operated post hole augers 100 mm to 300 mm 
in diameter may be used for exploration up to about 
6 m. However, with the aid of tripod, holes for greater 
depths can be excavated. Depth of auger 
investigations is limited by ground water table and 
also by the presence of gravels and boulders. 

7.3.1.1 Mechanically operated augers are also 
available and may be used in case of deep borings in 
difficult strata. 

7.3. 1 .2 An auger boring is made by tuning the auger 
to desired depths into the soil, withdrawing it and 
removing the soil for examining and sampling. The 
auger is inserted in the hole again and the process is 



IS 11385 : 2008 



repeated. Holes are usually bored without addition 
of water in loose, moderately cohesive moist sand. 
But in hard dry soils or cohesion less sands the 
introduction of a small amount of water into the hole 
will very much facilitate the drilling and sample 
extraction. 

7.3.2 Shell and Auger Borings 

Pipe casing or shell is required in unstable soil, in 
which the bore hole collapses and especially where 
the boring is extended below the ground water level. 
Stabilisation of the hole, by means of bentonite slurry, 
can also be done. The inside diameter of the casing 
should be slightly larger than the diameter of the 
auger used. Boring up to 200 mm dia and 25 m depth 
can be done with manual operation. The casing is 
driven to a depth not greater than the top of the next 
sample and is cleaned out by means of the auger. 

7.4 Core Drilling 

7.4.1 Core drilling should be done in accordance 
with IS 6926. 

7.4.2 The accuracy and dependability of the records 
furnished by diamond drilling depend largely upon 
the size of the core in relation to the kind of material 
drilled, the percentage of core recovery and 
experience of the drill crew. Recovery of core is much 
more important than the rapid progress in drilling 
the hole. When drilling in soft materials, the water 
circulation should be reduced or stopped entirely 
and the core recovered 'dry'. 

7.4.3 Detailed history of mechanical operation of 
drilling including observations on the loss of 
returned water and its reappearance, difficulties 
encountered should be included in the drilling report. 

7.4.4 Percolation tests under specified pressure 
may be done in drill holes, if needed, using packers 
as the drilling progresses. 

8 FIELD TESTS 

8.1 Field tests (in-situ) are those in which material is 
tested without actual removal of the material from its 
existing position. Those applicable to stability of 
canal banks and foundation of cross drainage, 
structure are the following: 

a) Strength tests 

1) Penetration tests; and 

2) Shear tests. 

b) Measurement of density of foundation 
material. 

c) Permeability tests. 



d) Determination of modulus of subgrade 
reaction(A-value) of soils in field as 
indicated in IS 9214. 

e) Determination of safe bearing capacity by 
plate load test as per IS 1888. 

8.1.1 The necessity and the number of each type of 
test to be conducted, depend on the type of material 
and its degree of variability. 

8.2 Strength Tests 

8.2.1 Penetration Tests 

8.2.1.1 These tests [see IS 2131, IS 4968 (Part 1 ), 
IS 4968 (Part 2) and IS 4968 (Part 3)] consist of 
measuring the resistance to penetration under static 
or dynamic loading of different shaped tools. The 
tests are empirical and have been developed from 
experience. They should be performed carefully in 
the prescribed manner. 

8.2.1.2 Static and dynamic penetration tests provide 
simple means of comparing the results of different 
bore holes on the same site and for obtaining an 
indication of the bearing value of the soils and of 
the state of densification of non-cohesive soils. Co- 
relation between the number of blows obtained in 
standard (dynamic) penetration tests with relative 
density of non-cohesive soils and consistency of 
soil (that is, soft, medium, stiff, etc ) in cohesive soil 
(see IS 2131) and between penetration resistence in 
static penetration tests with bearing capacity and 
relative density of non-cohesive soils are given in 
several publications (see also IS 6403). 

8.2.1.3 The number of tests should be fairly large to 
cover the entire critical foundation area. 

8.2.2 Shear Tests 

These tests (see IS 4434) measure the in-situ strength 
of cohesive soils, which are too soft or sensitive for 
sampling. 

8.3 Permeability Tests 

8.3.1 Permeability of a soil gives the measure of the 
rate, by which water can flow through unit area of it 
under unit hydraulic gradient. Knowledge of the 
permeability of the soil is necessary in estimating 
seepage through the canal banks in permeable soils 
or fissured rock and in determining the type and 
necessity of lining the canal. 

8.3.2 Permeability is usually determined by in-situ 
pumping in and pumping out tests [see IS 5529 
(Part 1 ) and IS 5529 ( Part 2 )] in holes or wells. This 
test is very important where loss of water from the 
canal is not at all desirable and also where it may 
cause water logging in the neighbourhood. 



IS 11385: 2008 



8.4 Measurement of Density of Foundation Material 

8.4.1 in-situ density of canal banks and of 
foundation material is used in stability analysis. It 
also offers information on the state of compaction 
and to decide whether further compaction is needed. 

8.4.2 The sand density method is used to determine 
the in-place density by excavating a hole from a 
horizontal surface, weighing the material excavated 
and determining the volume of the hole by filling it 
with calibrated sand [see IS 2720 ( Part 28 )]. The 
water content [see IS 2720 (Part 2)] of the soil at the 
place of determination of in-situ density is needed 
to calculate the dry density of the soil. Other 
methods, such as core cutter method and surface 
nuclear gauge may be used. 

8.4.3 This test is applicable to very shallow depths 
only, or to the depths of pits and trenches, where it 
is possible to perform the test up to the depth 
excavated. The density determination at depth 
should be made from undisturbed samples obtained 
from depths, or by deep penetration tests in non- 
cohesive soils. 

9 SAMPLING 

9. 1 The methods employed for enabling for enabling 
collection of samples for visual examination and for 
performance of laboratory tests thereon have already 
been described in 6 to 8. 

9.2 To take undisturbed samples from bore holes, 
properly designed sampling tools shall be used. 
These differ for cohesive and non-cohesive soils and 
for rocks. Special samplers like piston samplers and/ 
or freezing or grouting techniques may have to be 
employed in cases where samples are to be collected 
from cohesion less sand which cannot be sampled 
by ordinary equipment and methods, particularly 
those existing below ground water level. 

9.3 Sufficient quantity of representative undisturbed 
samples shall be collected for carrying out the 
necessary tests. 

9.4 While boring small diameter bore holes in 
foundation area of cross drainage works or along 
the canal alignment, the total material recovered as 
core should be collected and stored in core boxes 
{see IS 4078 ). Samples of soil and rock should be 
collected and preserved in sealed bars to retain their 
natural water content. Samples should be 
representative of the material, as it is found in the 
area, 

9.5 Samples collected in the process of routine 
exploration are not as a rule satisfactory for 
determination of properties of soil in its natural 



condition. For this purpose, undisturbed samples 
should be collected from large diameter bore holes 
( 1 00 mm to 1 50 mm diameter minimum), or from the 
open pits. 

9.5.1 Bore hole samples should be 450 mm to 
600 mm long and should open pit samples 250 mm to 
300 mm cubes. Every effort be made to preserve 
such samples as nearly in their natural condition as 
possible. 

10 EXAMINATION AND TESTING OF SAMPLES 

10.1 The samples of soils and rocks collected as 
described in 9 should be examined and tested in the 
laboratory, for determining their index and 
engineering properties. The various tests that are 
usually necessary are given in 10.2. 

10.2 Tests for Soils 

10.2.1 Visual and Manual Examination 

This would give general description of the soil or 
rock in terms of colour, consistency, structure, etc, 
to help in general classification of the material. 

10.2.2 Natural Moisture Content 

It helps in assessment of pore pressure in the 
foundation and backfill. 

10.2.3 Liquid and Plastic Limits 

Liquid and plastic limits are measures of water 
absorption qualities of clay. They give an indication 
of the cohesiveness of soil and are also useful in 
soil classification [ see IS 2720 ( Part 5 )]. 

10.2.4 Particle Size Distribution 

Knowledge of particle size distribution is of use for 
soil classification and in understanding its specific 
features such as density, permeability, etc. 

10.2.5 5m/* Density 

In case of canal banks and foundation of cross 
drainage works, it is essential for computing their 
stability. 

10.2.6 Permeability 

Knowledge of permeability of the canal banks and of 
the foundation strata of the cross drainage structures 
is necessary, for estimating the seepage loss, uplift, 
grouting requirements, etc. 

10.2.7 Consolidation Characteristics 

These are required for estimating the magnitude and 
rate of settlement due to consolidation in the canal 
banks and also in the foundation of the cross 
drainage structure. 



IS 11385 : 2008 



1 0.2.8 Swelling Tests 

Swelling tests are useful for clays present in the 
embankment to assess the likely pressures the clay 
would exert on saturation. These tests should be 
conducted at the lowest moisture content that may 
be obtained in the field. 

10.2.9 Strength Characteristics 

Strength characteristics of soil may be determined 
by unconfined compression test [see IS 2720 
( Part 1)], direct shear test [see IS 2720 (Part 13 )] 
and triaxial shear test. 

10*2.10 Compaction Test 

Compaction test may be required for comparison with 
in-situ densities [see IS 2720 ( Part 7 )] . 

10.2.11 Relative Density 

For cohesionless soil to assess the degree of 
compaction of the soil in-situ [see IS 2720 (Part 14) ] 

10.2.12 Chemical Analysis 

Chemical test may be performed on soil samples from 
areas suspected to be saline, to determine soluble 
salt content [see IS 2720 (Part 21)]. 

11 RECORDING AND REPORTING OF DATA 

11.1 General 

Information collected from the explorations should 
be recorded and presented in a systematic manner 
suitable for convenient use. The locations of the 
canal and crossdrainage structures and points of 
exploration should be clearly indicated on a map. 
Trial pits and different types of bore holes should be 



indicated on the location maps using suitable 
symbols, in accordance with IS 7422 (Parts 1 to 5). 

11.1.1 The scales used for maps should be in 
accordance with IS 15686. 

11.2 Logging of Pits and Holes 

11.2.1 Location 

Every pit and hole should be definitely located on a 
map by being tied to a co-ordinate grid system. The 
top elevations should also be recorded in the map. 

11.2.2 Identification 

The holes and pits should all be numbered normally 
in the order in which they are drilled and with suitable 
symbols, as given in IS 7422. 

11.2.3 Logs 

A standard and exhaustive log form should be used 
giving as much information as possible ( see IS 4453) 
and IS 4464. 

11.2.4 Description of Soils 

The soils should be described in the logs and in the 
records according to IS 1498. 

11.3 Subsurface Sections in Foundations of Cross 
Drainage Structures 

Sections showing subsurface conditions believed to 
exist should be prepared. The locations of the 
sections should be selected in a manner such that 
the information is presented in the best possible way. 
In the sections, different information like type and 
nature of subsurface materia!, C, $ , natural moisture 
content, density, etc, may be shown for the different 
strata. 



MGIPF— 644 Deptt. of BIS/08—8-1 2-2008— 300 Books 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. WRD 05 (455). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amendment No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 1 0002 

Telephones: 2323 013 1, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEWDELHI 110002 

1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 



Central 
Eastern 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 1 3 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephones 

( 2323 7617 
\23233841 

(23378499,2337 8561 
\23378626,23379120 

/2603843 
\2609285 

T2254 1216,2254 1442 

\2254 2519,2254 2315 

T2832 9295, 2832 7858 
\2832 7891,2832 7892 



Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANATHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Printed at the Manager, Govt, of India Press, Faridabad. 



