**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12633  (1989) :  First  filling  and  emptying  of  pressure 
tunnels  -  Guidelines  [WRD  14:  Water  Conductor  Systems] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  12693  1 19B9 

(Reaffirmed  2000) 

Indian  Standard 

FIRST  FILLING  AND  EMPTYING  OF 
PRESSURE  TUNNELS  -  GUIDELINES 

5T5(  HTn  ITT^  iftt  ^mft  ^\^  WWt  —  'imwf  ftWtT 


UDC    627*842!  621-6  057  21/*4 


©  BIS  1989 

BUREAU     OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN.    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI  1 10002 

SfpUmhiT  1989  Price  Group  3 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1  AUGUST  1992 

TO 

IS  1203:1989  FIRST  FILLING  AND  EMPTYING  OF 

PRESSURE  TUNNELS  —GUIDELINES 

I  Page  1,  clause  3.1^  (a)  ]  —  Inscn  tbc  following  «t  the  end: 


'iuch  as  left  over  concrete  lumps,  projections,  protruding  dowels^  etc.  These 
tbouU  be  ground  smooth.' 

( Page  1 ,  clause  XX  2(b)\  —  Insert  tbc  following  it  the  end: 


'prcfcnbly  with  resin  based  hardeners.* 

( Page  1,  clause  X12  (c) )  —  Insert  the  following  at  the  end: 

'ind  the  boles  for  grouting  be  sealed  perfectly  aad  the  surface  ground  smooth/ 
(Page  3,  clause  7A2 )  —  Insen  the  following  at  the  end: 

'This  shall  apply  to  penstock  and  draft  tube  gates  also. 


(RVD14) 


Repfognphy  Uoit,  BIS.  New  Delhi.  Imiu 


Water  Conductor  Syfltemi  Sectional  Committee,  BDC  58 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  24  February  1989,  after 
the  draft  finalized  by  the  Water  Conductor  Systems  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the 
Civil  Engineering  Division  Council. 

The  pressure  tunnel  is  a  part  of  water  conductor  system  and  hence  the  filling  and  emptying  is  linked 
with  overall  planning  of  filling  and  emptying  of  the  water  conductor  system. 

The  schedule  of  first  fiUing  and  emptying  of  tunnel  for  a  project  shall  be  prepared  and  discussed 
among  design  and  field  engineers  in  detail  before  commencement  of  operation. 


IS  12633  1 19B9 


Indian  Standard 

FIRST  FILLING  AND  EMPTYING  OF 
PRESSURE  TUNNELS  -  GUIDELINES 


1  SCOPE 

l.l  This  standard  covers  the  guidelines  and 
precautions  to  be  observed  for  first  filling  and 
emptying  of  the  pressure  tunnels  of  water  con- 
ductor system  of  hydro-electric  projects. 

2  GENERAL 

2,1  Water  conductor  system  of  a  hydro-electric 
project  generally  consists  of  the  following  com" 
ponents: 

a)  Intake  structure, 

b)  Head  race  tunnels, 

c)  Surge  tank, 

d)  Valve  housr, 

e)  By-pass, 

f)  Penstocks/pressure  shafts, 

g)  Draft  tube, 

h)  Downstream  surge  tank,  and 
j)  Tail  race. 

3  CHECK  LIST 

3.1  Before  commencement  of  filling  operation,  it 
shall  be  ensured  that  all  construction  material, 
labour  and  departmental  personnel  are  cleared 
from  the  entire  water  system.  Before  actually 
filling  the  sy.stem,  the  following  checks  (  3.1.1  to 
3.1.9  )  shall  be  exercised. 

3.1.1  Intake  Structure 

a)  Trash-rack  and  air  vent  shall  be  cleaned 
and  its  cleaning  device  shall  be  checked. 
In  projects  where  trash-rack  cleaning 
device  is  not  equipped,  the  racks  shall  be 
inspected  manually. 

b)  Gates/stop  logs  shall  be  checked  for  their 
^eals,  tracks,  guides  and  smooth  operation 
of  gates.  Filler  valves  shall  also  be  check- 
ed, if  provided. 

c)  Hoisting  arrangements  shall  be  checked 
for  proper  operation. 

d)  Automatic  system  for  operation  and  alarms 
shall  be  checked. 

e)  A  telephone/wireless  set  shall  be  provided 
at  gate  with  trained  crews  posted  for 
operation  of  gate. 

3.1i2  Head  Race  Tunnel 

a)  It  shall  be  thoroughly  inspected.  All  the 
construction   material/equipment  shall   be 


removed  and   the  tunnel  cleared   of    all 
extraneous  material. 

b)  It  shall  be  repaired,  wherever  required. 

c)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  all  cold  joints  are 
prop«rIy  treated. 

d)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  contact  grouting 
has  been  done  in  the  prescribed  reaches 
and  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  design 
requirements. 

e)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  consolidation 
grouting  has  been  done  in  the  prescribed 
reaches  and  shall  be  in  accordance  with 
the  design  requirements. 

f)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  all  the  points,  such 
as,  man-hole  construction  adits,  etc,  have 
been  properly  sealed/plugged  in  accord- 
ance with  design  lequirements. 

g)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  all  the  instruments 
required  for  observations  before  filling, 
during  filling  and  after  filling  have  been 
installed  at  required  locations  and  are  in 
proper  working  order. 

h)  Drainage  holes  and  dewatering  pipe, 
wherever  provided,  shall  be  checked  and 
it  shall  be  ensured  that  these  are  function- 
ing properly  and  there  is  no  particle  flow. 

j)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  proper  arrange- 
ments for  gradual  filling  and  dewatering 
are  functioning  properly. 

k)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  there  is  no  obstruc- 
tion in  the  air  vent  pipes,  where  provided, 
and  around  outlet  and  inlet  pipes. 

m)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  the  adit  gates, 
where  provided,  are  working  and  sealing 
have  been  bolted/locked  properly. 

3.1.3  Surge  Tank 

a)  Gates/stop  logs,  wherever  provided,  in  the 
surge  tank  shall  be  checked  for  their  sealst 
tracks^  guides,  etc,  by  lowering/raiding 
in  respective  slots  or  all  the  slots.  It  is 
also  necessary  to  check  filler  valves  to 
ensure  balanced  operation  of  gates. 

b)  Hoisting  arrangement  for  the  above  shall 
be  checked  for  proper  operation. 

c)  Water  level  indicators,  automatic  system 
for  operation  and  all  the  alarms  shall  be 
checked. 

d)  Drainage  galleries,  if  provided,  around  the 
surge  tank  shall  be  cleaned. 


IS  12633 1 1989 


e)  Man  holes,  construction  adita,  etc,  shall  be 
properly  plugged   in   accordance  with  the 

design  requirement. 

f)  Air  vent  shall  be  clear  of  any  obstruction 

g)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  the  instruments 
needed  for  observation  before  filling,  during 
tilling  and  after  filling  are  installed  at 
required  places  and  are  in  working  order 

NOTE  —  Tha  above  rhecki  apply  to  upitream  as  well  as 
dowiutreatn  lurge  tanlu 

3.1.4  Penstocks! Pressurt  Shafts 

a)  Entire  length  of  penstocks/pressure  shafts 
shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned.  The  penstocks 
shall  be  painted  and  completed  in  all 
respects  and  inspected  for  before  filling  the 
water, 

b)  All  the  machine  inlet  valves  shall  be 
checked  for  proper  operation. 

c)  All  the  bolts  of  man-holes  shall  be  checked 
and  tightened. 

d)  All  the  bolts  of  the  seals  of  expansion 
joints  of  penstocks  should  be  tested  and 
team  kept  ready  with  required  kit  to  carry 
out  tightening  as  required  in  case  of  leak- 
age. 

e)  In  case  of  rockers  provided  as  supports  for 
penstocks,  these  should  be  set  and  greased 
for  free  movement. 

f)  Any  instruments  provided  in  pressure 
shaits  or  on  anchor  blocks  shall  be 
monitored. 

g)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  grouting  holes  are 
properly  plugged  and  repainted. 

h)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  the  air  vents  are 
clear  of  any  obstruction  and  air  valves  are 
working  properly. 

j)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  filling  and 
dewatering  systems  are  working  properly. 

3.1.5  Draft  Tubes 

a)  AH  the  draft  tubes  shall  be  clean  and 
ready  for  running. 

b)  Draft  tube  gates  and  their  hoisting 
arrangement  shall  be  checked  for  their 
smooth  operation. 

3.1.6  Tad  Race 

The  following  checks  in  addition  to    those 
mentioned  in  3.1,2  shall  be  carried  out* 

a)  The  temporary  cofferdam  on  downstream, 
if  any,  shall  be  removed. 

b)  Pumps  for  dewatering  the  tail  race  should 
be  ready  at  hand. 

c)  The  area  around  the  tail  race  should  be 
cleared  of  all  obstructions  for  any  imme- 
diate movement  of  equipment. 

d)  After  dry  testing  of  draft  tube  gates, 
water    should    be  filled  in  tail  race  by 


pumping   and   following  systems  in  power 
house  be  checked  foi  proper  functioning: 

1)  Operation  of    draft  tube  gates  under 
water, 

2)  Cooling  water  system  for  power  house, 

3)  Pressure  filters  m  the  power  house, 

4)  Draft  tube  dewatering  system. 

5)  Emulsifier  pumps  in  the  power  house, 
and 

6)  All  dramage  and  dewatering  system. 

e)  In  case  of  any  malfunctioning,  the  tail 
race  may  be  emptied  by  pumping  and 
refilled  after  rectifying  the  defects. 

f)  The  tail  race  and  draft  tube  shall  be  filled 
up  to  minimum  water  level  before  the  start 
of  initial  filling. 

3.1.7  Valve  House 

The  following  checks  shall  be  carried   out  on 
valves  before  filling  operation  is  started: 

a)  All  hydraulic  and  electrical  systems  should 
be  checked 

b)  The  air  inlet  valve  and  vacuum  bieaking 
valves  should  be  cleared  for  overflow  of 
any  water. 

c)  The  drain  from  the  valve  house  should  be 
cleared  for  overflow  of  any  water. 

d)  The  communication  between  valve  house 
and  power  house  shall  be  tested, 

e)  The  control  system  from  the  control  room 
to  the  valve  house  shall  be  checked  and 
tested  for  proper  operation. 

3.1.B  Power  House 

a)  All  pre-commissioning  test  in  the  dry  stage 
shall  be  completed  in  all  respects  and 
certified  by  the  manufacturer  and  the 
erector. 

b)  The  staff  required  for  the  operation  of 
power  plant  shall  be  in  position  and  assume 
the  specific  duties. 

c)  Adequate  number  of  spare  dewatering 
pumps  shall  be  in  position  at  various  floors 
of  the  power  house. 

d)  All  temporary  stops  provided  during  the 
construction  shall  be  removed  and  tested 
against  full  tail  race  level. 

e)  All  drainage  and  dewatering  pumps  shall 
be  conditioned  and  made  in  operational 
condition 

f )  Turbine  seals  shall  be  tested  and  checked 
for  perfect  sealing. 

g)  Inlet  valve  seals  shall  be  tested  and  check- 
ed for  perfect  sealing 

h)  Alternative  source  of  power  supply  for 
working  all  auxiliaries  in  the  power  house 
shall  be  ensured  24  hours. 


IS  12633 1 1989 


j)  Electrical  ovethead  crane  shall  be  in 
operating  condition  and  tested, 

k)  All  vacuum  valves  and  air  release  valve 
and  drainage  valves  shall  be  tested. 

m)  The  securiiy  staff  and  security  arrangement 
shall  be  completed  to  restrict  the  entry  of 
unauihojizcd  petson  in  the  power  house. 
n)  The  staff  for  operation  and  maintenance 
of  the  power  house  shall  be  in  position  and 
full  compliment  shall  be  detailed  on  shift 
duties  bejore  mitial  fillmg  starts. 

3.1.9  By-Pa^s 

a)  The  gates  stoplogs,  where  provided,  shall 
be  chpcked  for  thoir  seals,  track,  guides, 
^tc^  by  lowenng  rai^mg  in  respective  slots 
or  all  the  slots  as  the  case  may  be. 

b)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  the  liners  and 
embedded  metal  works  are  painted 
properly. 

c)  It  shall  bo  ensuied  that  diainage  arrange- 
ment around  the  by-pass  has  been  provided 
in  accordance  with  design  requirements. 

d)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  the  air  vents  are 
clear  of  any  obstruction. 

e)  It  shall  be  ensured  that  arrangement  for 
gradual  filling/dewatermg  are  functioning 
properly 

f )  It  shall  be  ensured  that  the  alarm  system 
indicating  the  stait  of  by-pass  arrangement 
is  woiking  properly. 

4  LOCATION  OF  OBSERVATION  POINTS 

4.1  Before  filling  the,  water  conductor  system, 
the  observation  points  shall  be  judiciously  located 
at  convenient  places  along  the  system.  Such 
points  may  be  located  near  the  tunnel  plugs 
(  such  as,  those  at  intermediate  adits  in  a  long 
tunnel )  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  surge  shaft  and 
along  the  penstocks  slopes  ( say,  in  the  upper 
expansion  chamber  ).  Observation  points  shall 
also  be  located  at  water  systems,  such  as,  existing 
springs,  water  level  in  wells,  retaining  walls,  etc, 
in  lower  cover  reaches  and  monitored  after  filling. 
If  any  leakage  is  observed  at  the  observation 
point  or  an  appreciable  diop  in  surge  tank  water 
level  is  seen,  the  same  shall  be  reported  and 
attended  to  immediaiely.  Since  minor  leakages 
through  plug  concrete  may  be  anticipated, 
grouting  equipment,  such  as,  grout  pumps,  pipes, 
nozzles,  drilling  machine,  cement,  sand,  water, 
etc,  shall  be  kept  handy  for  urgent  requirements. 

5  COMMUNICATION  FACILITIES 

5»1  Communication  facilities,  such  as,  walkie- 
talkie  and/or  telephone  shall  be  provided  at  the 
intake  as  well  as  at  all  observation  points  so  that 
important  messages  may  be  fiashed  across  easily 
and  quickly  without  any  loss  of  time. 


6  CHECKS  BEFORE  START  OF  FILLING 

6.1  Obtain  final  clearance  ensuring  that  no 
man  or  material  of  any  kind  has  been  left  m  the 
tunnel  and  other  works.  The  engineer  in-charge 
shall  himself  inspect  the  tunnel  ond  other  works 
and  ensure  that  no  material  or  equipment  has 
been  left  inside,  before  he  orders  closing  of  access 
doors/manholes. 

6.2  Check  that  access  door,' manholes  are  properly 
closed  and  locked. 

6.3  Check  that  all  the  draft  tube  gates  are  in 
raised  position. 

6.4  Check  that  all  the  main  inlet  valves  are 
closed. 

6.5  Check  that  the  guide  vanes  of  all  the  machines 
are  closed  with  oil  pressure  applied  ( Apply  gene- 
rator brakes  to  prevent  creeping,  if  necessary  ). 

6.6  Check  that  the  surge  shaft  gates/stoplogs  are 
in  open  position, 

6.7  Check  the  reservoir  level.  The  filling  should 
only  start  when  the  reservoir  level  is  at  or  above 
the  minimum  permissible  level. 

7  FILLING  OF  THE  SYSTEM 

7.1  General 

Filling  is  normally  done  from  the  downstream 
end  of  the  water  conductor  system,  that  is^  the 
machine  inlet  valve.  However,  in  case  of  long 
head  race  tunnel,  where  a  surge  shaft  is  provided, 
the  system  shall  be  filled  initially  up  to  the  surge 
shaft,  if  provided  with  gates,  otherwise  up  to  the 
emergency  valves  downstream  of  valve.  The 
portion  of  water  conductor  system  between  the 
emergency  valves  downstream  of  shaft  and  the 
main  inlet  valve  provided  just  upstream  of  the 
machine  may  be  filled  up  only  after  detecfion 
and  rectification  of  leakage  upstream  of  the 
butterfly  valve, 

7.1.1  The  water  conductor  system  shall  be  filled 
at  very  slow  rate  so  that  the  internal  pressure 
increases  gradually  and  the  surrounding  condi- 
tions get  sufficient  time  for  stabilization. 

7.1.2  In  case  of  gated  arrangement,  the  leakage 
on  gates  shall  be  checked  and  ascertained  for  the 
efficacy  of  the  seals. 

7.1.3  The  water  conductor  system  shall  be  filled 
at  a  slow  rate  so  that  there  is  no  scope  for 
the  air  to  get  entrapped,  compressed  and  then 
released. 

7.2  Initial  Filling 

742,1  Depending  upon  the  length  of  the  system, 
number  of  probable  seepage  observation  points 
and  filling  requirements,  the  total  time  taken  to 
complete  the  initial  filling  shall  be  estimated. 
This  can  be  calculated  and  arrived  at  once  the 


IS  12633  t  1989 


volume  of  water  required    to   fill  the  system  is 
known. 

7.2.2  Following  steps  shall  bo  followed  for  initial 
RJling: 

a)  Gales  of  intake  shall  be  lowered  and  pond 
level  maintained  at  desired  level  with  the 
help  of  spillway  gates  and/or  other  dis- 
churge  outlets. 

h)  Surge  shaft  gaies/bulterfly  valve  and 
machine  inlet  valve  gate  bhall  be  kept 
closed. 

c)  ir  filling  ib  to  be  done  by  crack  opening, 
intake  gate  shall  be  raised  up  to  the  height 
calculated  by  estimating  the  discharge 
requirements  for  filling  up  ihe  system  in 
the  programmed  schedule  of  time  frame 
of  filling.  The  velocity  shouM  be  restric- 
ted to  about  6  ni/sec.  The  crack-opening 
would  generally  be  of  the  order  of  20  to 
40  mm.  Thus,  in  order  to  limit  the  velo* 
city  through  the  gate,  water  level  in  the 
reservoir  should  not  be  more  than  300  to 
500  mm  above  the  tiest  level  of  the  intake 
sill. 

d)  Surge  shaft  gates/butterfiy  valves,  machine 
inlet  valves,  penstocks  couplings,. etc,  shall 
be  checked  and  tested. 

e)  The  tunnel  shall  be  filled  in  appropriate 
pre-determined  steps  of  water  head  so  that 
excessive  tension  in  the  lining  is  avoided, 
The  steps  may  be  worked  out  on  the  basis 
of  known  properties  of  the  surrounding 
fock  mass. 

f )  A  waiting  period  of  at  least  48  h  shall  h*i 
allowed  between  first  and  second  steps  of 
filling  and  of  at  least  24  h  between  each 
subsequent  steps  of  filling  to  get  the 
surrounding  strata  surchaigcd  with  water 

g)  Wfltci  levels  in  the  suige  tank  shall  be 
recerdcd  concurrently  during  the  fiHim; 
operation. 

h)  At  the  end  of  each  step  of  filling,  tjie 
intake  i<atc^  shall  be  closed  and  water 
levels  in  the  surge  tank  shall  be  observed 
rvery  hour.  The  loss  of  water  from  tunnel 
through  drainage  galleries  around  surge 
tank  and  leakage  through  machine  inlet 
valve  shall  also  be  noted. 

j)  CIo^P  monitoring  of  insiiuincnts  instajlrd 
in  licad  lacc  tunnel,  iurge  tank  and  pen- 
stock ^hall  he  donr  before,  during  and 
after  filling  of  the  system. 

k)  After  the  watei  conductor  systeni  t»  filled, 
t'he  tcseivoir  level  shall  be  maintained  at 
the  lowest  level.  The  water  level  shal]  bo 
raised  slowly  in  the  leservolr  till  it  reaches 
the  maximum  jeservoir  level. 


rn)  If  the  di'op  in  watei  IqvcI  is  more  at  any 
step,  the  reasons  for  leak  i^je  shall  be  inves- 
tigated and  remedial  meantres  should  be 
taken.  Next  filling  steps  shall  only  be 
taken  after  ensuring  that  drop  in  water 
level  in  the  preceding  i>iep  is  witl)Jn  the 
pre-determined  limits. 

p)  Ail  gates,  Bloplogs,  obsei \ ation  points, 
values  and  expansion  points  un  penstocks 
shall  be  monitored  for  leakage  duiingand 
after  filling. 

7.3  Filling  of  Tail  Race  Syitem 

7.3,1  The  tail  race  shall  be  filled  up  to  (he  rniwi- 
mum  tail  water  level  gradually.  Tn  ra^e  of  pouei 
houses  having  a  deep  setting,  thn  filling  of  the 
tail  race  may  have  to  be  accomplished  by  pump- 
ing water  into  it  from  a  source  located  near  the 
tail  race. 

8  EMPTYING  THE  SYSTEM 

8,1  If  fjuantity  of  leakage  or  any  other  situation 
warrants  emptying  the  tunnel  or  entire  water 
conductor  system,  following  procedure  and  jire- 
cautioni  shall  be  adopted: 

a)  Close  all  the  intake  gates, 

b)  Emptying  of  the  tunnel  shall  be  done 
through  the  by-pass.  However,  if  no  by- 
pass is  provided,  the  water  shall  be  dis- 
chargecl  through  the  turbine. 

c)  Before  emptying  the  system  through  the 
turbine,  it  shall  be  ensured  that  the  turbine 
is  just  sufficient  to  run  the  machine  at  no 
load  and  the  generator  is  not  being  con- 
nected. 

<l)  Rale  of  euiptying  the  tunnel  shall  be 
•slower  than  the  rate  of  filling.  Emptying 
of  the  tunnel  shall  be  done  in  steps.  In  no 
ca^e,  I  he  number  of  steps  in  emptying 
•hall  be  Jess  than  ihr  number  of  steps 
followed  in  filling*  The  number  of  steps 
may  be  increased  if  a  smaller  discharge 
IS  to  be  passed  through  the  machines. 

e)  Suitable  waiting  period  shall  be  allowed 
between  earh  step  of  emptying. 

9  PRECAUTIONS   BEFORE   ENTERING 
THE  TUNNEL  AFTER  EMPTYING 

9.1  On  emptying  the  access  dooi, manhole,  there 
may  be  ventilation  due  to  the  .stock  effect  of  the 
surge  shafi  This  may  clear  limited  areas  on 
either  side  of  the  surge  shaft.  Other  areas  may 
be  oxygen  deficient,  contain  hydrogen  sulphide 
and/or  methane.  I'lie  water  in  the  tunnel  has 
been  jrradnally  toweicd,  giving  time  for  any  gases 
(  CO2.  CO.  CH4,  SO2,  HaS  )  m  the  water  to  be 
liberated. 


IS  12633 :  1989 

9.2  Keep  the  access  door/manhole  open  for  12  h  within  the  adit  or  any  sectioa  of  the  tunnel, 
to  permit  fresh  air  draft  inside  the  tunnel   and  ^  ^  „      ,  ,  .  ,  , 
thus  to  bring  humidity  to  a  safe  level  for  human  »•*  Send   an  advance  party   with  gum    boots, 
breathing.  raincoats,  torch  lights  for  a  distance  of  500  m 

(  or  less   if  ihey   Teel   uneasy  )   only   and  report 

9.3  Do  not  enter  the  tunnel  without  carrying  back.  Depending  upon  the  condition  of  watei 
personal  monitoring  equipment  and  have  breath*  and  slush,  carry  out  regular  inspection  either  on 
ing  apparatus  within  reach.  Under  no  circum-  foot  or  on  a  vehicle  with  spot  lights  mounted  on 
stances,  less  than  two  persons  shall  enter  or  move     it. 


Staiidftrd  Mmrk 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  »  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Burtau  qf  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on 
products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  asiurance  that  they  hav«  been  produced 
to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the  pro- 
ducer. Standard  marked  product!  are  alio  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity  to  that 
standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the  use 
of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained  from 
the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Barc«n  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  ii  a  statutory  iaititution  established  under  the  Bwiau  tf  Indian  Standards  Att,  1986  to  promote 
harmoaiou)  development  of  the  activitiei  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of 
goods  and  Attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

CopyHsfc{t 

BIS  ha)  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  pubtications  may  be  reproduced  in 
any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  6f  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use^  in 
the  course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sixes,  type  or 
grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  ( Publications),  BIS. 

Revialon  of  ludJan  Standard* 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any, 
are  issued  from  time  to  time.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in 
possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition.  Gomments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent 
to  BIS  giving  the  following  reference  : 

Doc:  No.    BDC58(4467) 


Amendment*  Iiined  Since  PnbHcation 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INblAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones :  331  01  31,    331  13  75 


Telegrams :  Manaluanstha 
(  Common  to  all  Offices  ] 


Regional  Offices: 

Central :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern  :  1/14  G.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Koad,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446.  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036 


Southern  :  C.  L  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600113 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  £9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (  East ) 
BOMBAY  400093 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 
GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  PATNA. 
TRIVANDRUM. 


Telephone 


i 


331  01  31 
331  13  75 

36  24  99 

(2  18  43 
(3  16  41 

r41  24  42 
i  41  25  19 
(,41  29  16 

6  32  92  95 


Prioted  at  Prmtogr«pb,  Delhi,  ladia 


