**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10487 (1983): Sand rammer [MTD 14: Foundry] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



rs: 10487 * i?aj 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR SAND RAMMER 



UDG 621-744*4 0(33 




© Copyright 19S3 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK HHAVAN, ¥ BAHADUR SHAH 7 A FAR UA»r; 

INEW DELHI ITOP02 

Gr 2 7wn# 19S3 



IS : 10487 - 1963 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR SAND RAMMER 

Foundry Sectional Committee, SMDC 17 

Chairman Representing 

Db S. S. Khanna National Institute of Foundry and Forge Techno- 

logy, Ranchi 

Members 
Shbi M. M, G. Agrawal Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd ( Foundry 

Forge Plant ), Ranchi 
Shbi A. K. Banerjee ( Alternate) 
Shbi A. K. Awasthi Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel 

Plant ), Bokaro 
Shbi K. A. Gandhi HMT Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi Sanjit Sen ( Alternate I ) 
Shbi A. Shanthabam {Alternate II ) 
Shbi R. M. Gobane Kirloskar Brothers, Pune 

Shbi D. M. Dabae ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. L.Jain National Institute of Foundry and Forge 

Technology, Ranchi 
Shbi K. Kishobe ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. M. Joshi DGM Ltd, Delhi 

Db V. P. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. S. Lal Indian Iron & Steel Go Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi R. N. Mukheejee ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. N. Mehba Cooper Engineering Ltd, Satara 

Shbi M. L. Navabe Versatile Engineers, Kolhapur 

Shbi Subhash Kulkabni ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. V. Pandit M. M. Suri & Associates ( P ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi Thomas Paul Pioneer Equipment Go Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

Shbi G. Bhaskaban ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. N. Rao National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi P. P. Rastogi Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant), Rourkela 
Shbi S. Chaubey ( Alternate) 
Shbi R. N. Saha Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

( Inspection Wing J, New Delhi 
Shbi Dabbaba Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi U. Sen Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shbi Y. H. Raut ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS: 10487- 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Senior Chemist and Metallur- 
gist CLW, Chittaranjan 
Chemist and Metallurgist 
( SF ) CLW, Chittaranjan 
( Alternate 1 ) 
Chemist and Metallurgist 
NF Railway, New Bongai- 
Gaon ( Alternate II ) 
Shri V. P. Shenoy 



Representing 
Ministry of Railways 



& Locomotive Co Ltd, 



Tata Engineering 
Jamshedpur 
Shri A. Bhattachabjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Sundeuajan M. N. Dastur & Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Thiyagarajan Southern Alloy Foundries Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri A. Thangavelu ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Upadhayaya Federation of Engineering Industries of India, 

New Delhi 
Shri H. L. Bhardwaj ( Alternate) 
Shri T. S. Venkoba Rao Ennore Foundries Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. V. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

ShriS. K. Gupta 
Assistant Director ( Metals ), ISI 

Foundry Ancillary Equipment Subcommittee, SMDG 17:2 



Convener 
Cdr K. N. Nair 

Members 
Shri J. N. Bhakta 



Pioneer -Equipment Co Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 



Shri T. K. Chanda 



Development Commissioner, Small Scale In- 
dustries, New Delhi 
Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, 
Jamshedpur 
Shri I. S. Sagu ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Kothari 

Shri Thomas Paul ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. G. Londhe 
Shri S. P. Natarajan 

Shri V. S. -Kandaswamy ( Alternate) 
Shut M. L. Navare Versatile Engineers, Kolhapur 

Db P. K. Panda National Institute of Foundry and Forge Techno- 

logy, Ranchi 



Pioneer Equipment Co Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

Premier Automobile Ltd, Bombay 
Ennore Foundries Ltd, Madras 



IS: 10487 -1963 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR SAND RAMMER 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 21 February 1983, after the draft finalized by the Foundry 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals 
Division Council. 

0.2 Since the strength of a moulding sand depends greatly on degree of 
ramming, the conditions on which standard sample is moulded should be 
carefully controlled. Reproducible ramming conditions can be achieved 
with standard sand rammer and specimen tube accessories. The ramming 
device mounting should be sufficiently rigid. 

0.2.1 This standard has been formulated with a view to assist both the 
manufacturers and the users. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



L SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers requirements for sand rammer used to ram 
specimens for green and dry strength tests of mould and core sands. 

1.1.1 Typical sand rammer is illustrated in Fig. 1. However, any other 
suitable design satisfying the requirements of this standard may also be 
used. 

2. SUPPLY OF MATERIAL 

2.1 General requirements relating to the supply of sand rammer shall be 
as laid down in IS : 1918-1966|. 



*RuIes for rounding off numerical values { revised). 
fMethods of physical tests for foundry sands. 



IS s 10487 - 1983 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 Material specified in this standard shall comply with the following 
requirements: 

Material Grade and Specification 

Grey iron castings FG-220 of IS : 210-1978* 

Medium carbon steel 35G4 or 40C8 of IS : 1570 

section ( Part II )-1979f 

Mild steel IS : 226-1975$ 

3,1.1 Aii other parts which are not specified in this standard shall be 
manufactured from mild steel in accordance with IS : 226-1975$. 

d s CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Body — The rammer body shall be of grey iron castings. 

4.1.1 The make and construction shall be such as to absorb shock load- 
ing and shall be mounted on a rigid base. It shall also be free from 
harmful surface or subsurface defects. 

4.1.2 The base casting shall have a bosh, machined on the top surface, 
to locate the pedestal cup to the specimen tube. 

4.2 Sliding Weight — The sliding weight shall be of grey iron casting. 
It shall weigh 6 36 + 001 kg and shall be mounted in such a manner, that 
it can slide freely upward and downward, with minimum lateral play, 
on the rod for a distance of 50 ± 0*25 mm with the help of a mechanical 
cam device. 

4.2.1 Total mass of the moving parts of the assembly shall be 7*94 ± 
02 kg. 

A. O. 1 "I TVi^ r^mm^ir naic 3,P'^ '"'am cr»*all K*» Trie* nil "Fa C^Ured frOm 

medium carbon steel and suitably heat treated to give a hardness of 
35 to 40 HRC. 

l»j Axauiiuiu" x iuu^ci — i\aiiimuig piuu^^i oij.au u^ ui tiibuiuui taiuwii 

steel. 

4.3.1 Diameter of bottom face of the ramming plunger shall be within 
50 =o-of9 mm ( 50e8 ). 



♦Specification for grey iron castings ( third revision ). 

^Schedule for wrou°ht steels for general en^ineerinc rmrnoses * Part II Carbon 
steels ( unalloyed steels ) ( first revision ). 

^Specification for structural steel ( standard quality ) {fifth revision ), 



IS : 10487 - 1983 

4.3.2 The bottom face of the plunger head and the machined surface 
of the base shall be parallel to each other within 0'05 mm at the periphery. 

4.4 Specimen Tube — The specimen tube for ramming shall be of 
medium carbon steel, and shall be hard chrome plated in accordance 
with IS : 1337-1980*. Alternatively material like wear-resistant steel, 
hardened to 55 to 60 HRG and ground may also be used for specimen 
tube. 

4.4.1 Dimensions of the specimen tube shall be as shown in Fig. 2. 

4.4.2 For making specimens of low green strength (core sand) split 
specimen tube may by used. 

4.4.3 To suit the specimen tube, bottom pedestal cups shall be provided, 
with suitable location to place the specimen tube in the centre of ramming 
plunger ( see Fig. 1 and 3 ). 

4.5 Stripping Post — It is a specially designed plunger to take out the 
rammed sand specimen from the specimen tube without any damage or 
change in shape of the specimen. The plunger head shall be within 

50 Ion9 mm ( 50 d8 ) in diameter - 

4.6 Tolerance Marker — A scale with three horizontal tolerance marks 
shall be suitably placed to indicate the correctness of the specimen height. 
The centre mark shall correspond to the standard height of 500 mm of 
prepared sand specimen after 3 rams. The other two marks shall be 
10 mm above and 1*0 mm below the centre mark to indicate allowable 
tolerance in specimen size for routine testing. 

5. ACCESSORIES 

5.1 The ramming head may be detachable for facilitating replacement 
and for fixing other accessories for transverse/tensile specimens. 

6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

6.1 The workmanship and finish of each part of the equipment shall be 
of the highest quality and shall be free from any harmful and surface 
defects. 

6.2 All movable parts of the equipment shall be properly coated with 
a suitable rust-preventive like oil, grease, etc. 

6.2.1 All fixed parts of the equipment shall also be suitably painted or 
coated to prevent rusting. 



♦Specification for electroplated coatings of hard chromium on iron and steel for 
engineering purposes ( second revision ). 



IS: 10487 -1983 



RAMMER 
BAR 

SLIDING 
WEIGHT 

RAMMER 
PIN 



ECCENTRIC 
CRANKS 



RAMMING 
PLUNGER 

RAMMER 
PEDESTAL 
CUP 




+ 



□fit 



c^ 



M3b 

EZL 



b 



1 



<'', 'i 



L 



Fig. 1 Sand Rammer 



tS i 10487 - 1983 



■*-<£50H8- 



122+0.2 



SURFACE FINISH 
WITH N5 GRADE 



BOTH ENDS 

TO BE PARALLEL 

WITHIN 0.05mm 



l--<i>60d8- 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Specimen Tube 




MACHINED 
SURFACE 

All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 3 Pedetsal Gup 



7. PACKING 

7.1 Proper packing of the equipment and accessories shall be made, to 
avoid any damage while in transit, or otherwise, as specified by the 
purchaser. 



IS : 10487 - 1983 



8. MARKING 

8.1 Each equipment shall be marked clearly with the manufacturer's 
name or trade-mark, serial number and manufacturing date. 

8.2 It may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark, 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



