**************** 



* i&$z 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11289 (1985) : Code of practice for performance 
monitoring of computer based systems [LITD 14: Software and 
System Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



?&&IiII}g&*±2te 



^llll^V!^^> 



\\\«KTv 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR V^ T^TT <sMHI | 3ft ^ft ^FT\ ^f W *T^?TT )f 
Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




• 



• 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



^ *g», 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 






"HE-AFFIRM LD S9W 

IS: 11289-7986 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR j W 

PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF 
COMPUTER BASED SYSTEMS 



UDC **r3|-03:6:Hn6:0M , 7G 







I N IJ I A N STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN. 'J BAHADUR S£!AH ZAPAR MAAO 

KEW DELHC 1LHMI 

Gr? Zhtf<<¥Fii&tr I5E5 






IS : 11289 * 1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF 

COMPUTER BASED SYSTEMS 



Computer, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional 

Committee, LTDC 24 
Chairman Representing 

Dr N. Seshagiri Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri R. P. Ahuja Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd. 

„ „ n New Delhi • 

Shri C. K. Bapiraju State Bank of India, Bombay 

Shri S. K. Bhatia Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri P. V. C. Chellapatti Rao 

( Alternate ) 

DrVijayP. Bhatkar Kerala State Electronics Development 

r»„ c vr c u r j,* ■ Corporation Ltd, Trivandrum 

Dr S. N. S. Rajasekran C Alternate ) 
Dr C. R. Chakravarthy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

ShriK.N Dheer Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shri S. P. Gothoskar Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 

Shri Deepak Gupta Tata Electric Companies, Bombay 

Shri R. M. Nair ( Alternate ) y 

DrMathai Joseph NCSDGT, Tata Institute for Fundamental 

_ „ _ Ai Research, Bombay 

Dr S. Ramani ( Alternate ) 
DrA. Lahiri Department of Science & Technology, New 

Delhi 
Shri N. Lakshmanan Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Shri Arjun Malhotra Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Arun Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. C. Mehta Steel Authority of India, New Delhi 

Shri S. L. N . Murthy Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. S. Perinanayagam ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Pandey International Computers Indian Manufactures 

Ltd, Pune 

Shri H. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. R. Prabhu Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

c ., „ , ,, Industries ), New Delhi 

Shri M. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 

Shri G. Raghukumar Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd New 

Delhi 
Shri A.N . Pawar ( Alternate ) 

__^ ( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and re- 
production in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:11289-19*5 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr V. K. Ravindran PSI Data Systems Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. t,. Dcshpande ( Alternate ) 
Prof R. Sad an and a Computer Society of India, Bombay 

Shri Ashis Sen Jndiim Statistical Institute , Calcutta 

Shri Umesh P. Shah ORG Systems, Vadodara 

Shri P- K. Sridharan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Shankralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 

Shri K. L. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. G. Subramanyan Electronics Trade and Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Ishwar Dutt ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Swamy Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, fty4erabad 

§HRi V. R. Unmiraman Telecommunication Research Centre, New Delhi 

hri K.M. Viswanathan Hindustan Teleprinter Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Devarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-oflicio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. S. Raw at 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Information Systems and Procedures Subcommittee, LTDC 24 : 3 

Shri C. K. Bapiraju State Bank of India, Bombay 

Shri S. K. Bhatia Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. P. Saxena ( Alternate) 
Shri S. P. Gothoskar Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 

Shju M. M. N. Kapur Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi 

Dr R. Shankar Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 

Shri R. Thiagarajan Department of {Science and Technology " New 

Delhi 
Dr N. Vijayaditya National Information Centre, New Delhi 



IS: 11189*1061 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

PWQRMANCE MONITORING OF 

COMPUTER BASED SYSTEMS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standard? 
Institution on 29 April 1985, after the draft finalized by the Computer, 
I&siness Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been 
approved by t£e Electronics and TeiecommMnjcatiQn PJvision Council.' 

0.2 This code of practice applies to all computer-based systems and 
covers following aspects: 

a) Gives guidance in carrying out a detailed examination of the 
system that is to be monitored. It identifies Jq&y aspects of the 
system, its usage and otfcer systems tfiat share t>e/same operat- 
ing environment. Guidelines and check lists are provided for 
each of these aspects to assist the user in identifying foments of 
change that can affect performance; 

b) Identifies a variety of monitoring techniques that may fee used 
to measure these changes in performance; and 

c) Gives guidance on the documentation of performance monitoring 
information. 

0.3 This code gives guidance to enable organizations to: 

a) assure the continuing quality of a computer-based system in 
service, 

b) develop and apply appropriate monitoring techniques, 

c) obtain early diagnosis of changes in $$ behaviour of ihp system, 
and 

d) detect faults so that action can be taken to avoiji fault pro- 
pagation. 

0,4 This code assumes that the system: 

a) was adequately tested and documented in accordance with 
relevant standar4s, 

b) performed as required under n©*mat operating conditions, and 

c) was initially schedulable within the constraints imposed fey 
other systems and manufacturer's design. 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

0.4.1 This code also assumes that, in service: 

a) the system runs under effective configuration management, and 

"b) documentation is maintained. 

0.5 This, standard is based on BS : 6238 : 1982 'Code of practice for 
performance monitoring of computer based systems', issued by the British 
Standards Institution. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code of practice provides guidance for carrying out exami- 
nation of the system with a view to monitoring and documenting its 
performance. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purposes of this standard the terms and definitions as given 
in IS : 1885 ( Part 52 ) Series* shall apply. 

3. KEY ASPECTS OF THE SYSTEM BEING MONITORED 

3*0 The system monitoring requires a detailed examination as under for 
all likely causes of a change in performance and the ways in which 
changes to other systems sharing the same resources that may affect the 
performance of the system being monitored. 

3.1 Applications Software 

3.1.0 General — Some elements of change may have been anticipated 
during the design of the system but serious effects can arise from 
changes that occur, which were not visualized in the original specifica- 
tion. 

3.1.1 Elements of Change — Among the elements of change that 
should be examined, the user should note that: 

a) standards of accuracy can affect processing times, 

b) security controls can extend input and output duration, 

c) validation checks can extend input and output duration, 

d) changes in coding of data can affect input and output times and 
storage capacity required, 



•Electrotechnical vocabulary: part 52 Data processing. 

4 . 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

e) changes in code structures can affect input and output times and 
storage capacity required, 

f) changes in the structure of the data base and files can affect 
input and output times and storage capacity required, 

g) changes in input method/documents can increase input times, 

h) changes in output method/documents can increase output times, 

j) changes in parameter values can change processing times, 

k) changes to algorithms or formulae could change processing 
times, 

m) some changes may not be reflected in the procedures, and 

n) some changes may not be reflected in the documentation. 

3.2 Operating and Support Software 

3.2.0 General — Changes to the operating and support software and 
system can have a considerable influence on the efficiency and beha- 
viour of a system. Such changes are quite usual for various reasons 
( for example, correction of faults or the improvement of facilities ) but 
a careful examination of their implications should be made to ensure 
that no harmful side effects will occur. 

3.2.1 Elements of Change 

3.2.1.1 Operating software — Operating software includes all the 
system, facilities used in the course of running application programmes. 
The main consideration is that an alteration to a system facility may 
affect some or all application programmes, or modules, and it may not 
be practicable or desirable to Cross-reference facilities with applications. 
Hence changes cannot necessarily be ^ruaratateed to have no side effects 
and each one should be treated onits, merits. 

The main system facilities that come under this consideration are: 

a) system library, holdling commonly used modules; 

b) file handling system ( changes here almost certainly affect all 
application programmes ); 

c) job control language ( new or added commands or formats); 

d) input/output; and 

e) scheduling. ( Changes to the priority strategy will affect run- 
times, elapsed times dr even what time of day or night an 
application will be run, These in turn will affect the run-time 
costs. ) 



J.2.1i2 Support software 

a) General — This software includes aft the systeM facilities used in 
the cdurse of ptfogf ahlme pr^rmratiori; The" untes^Me* feslflt of 
changes iff this area is the necessity for* '^rdgrgtitmtt? Retraining 
and the possible reduction in software quality and throughput 
until the changes are fully understood. 

b) Language translator ( compilers ) — Special consideration should 
be given to tnis facility. Changes in this af da may have a very 
significant effect on application sysfems performance and should 
be carefully vetted as they may not always be apparent. Generally, 
changes will be manifested as version updates or the same 
language from a different supplier ( probably giving faster run- 
time code, or better store utilization, or just improved facilities ). 
Even if a system has been extensively acceptance tested, there 
remains a need to understand that is inherently impossible t6 
obtain 100 percent assurance that errors have been eliminated or 
all implications fully appreciated. Some of the inbre obvious 
features that may cause difficulty on ah otherwise identical trans- 
lator are syntax, semantics, reserved words and keywords, 
translator directive's and linfcirig. 

Some of the less obvidus fe&ttre* tfcfitt &®M \W considered 
are as follows: 

1) Arithmetic — Although these problems should be resolved 
during acceptance testing ^f the new translator* explicit 
checks should be made on the following points to ensure 
conformity with previous software: 

[i) TUrrication and fdhhdirig, 

ii) The result and remaindef from the division algorithm* 

iii) Equality tests for floating of Mixed atttfcnietic 1 , and 

iv) Overfibw limits stibutd tfdt be lesS tfcah preViolis Hihits. 

2) Expression* ^-¥h& featui* is a 1 simiiair ptfflikm to (a) and 
the following points should be checked: 

i) Order of evaluation should t*6 ide%t&ai, 
10 Mm 'W& ©^Version" sUdtflS gi^ id«fltie1tf fe*tult$, and 
iii) Intermediate state limits should not be loss than previous 

limits. 

3) Prtmtdbfes arid fiMion8^*f)te f^wi^pwiita Should be 

i) Order of parameter evaluation should be tne" Wtfflbi and 



16:112^-19^ 

ii) The parameter mechanism should behave in the same way 
for the same cases (by reference, vai% et^X f m beha- 
viour is particularly important for default eases. 

4) Optimization — A different dptimizatidn can give different 
results for some application programmes. 

5) Error handling — Changes can cause some temporary 
mi sinterpre tation . 

c) Other support software — This category includes facilities such 
as: 

1) time sharing command structure, 

2) debugging tools, 

3) editor, and 

4) linker. 

Changes to the linker can also interact with the system library, which 
is considered under operating software ( see 3.2.1.1 ). 

3.2.143 Software reconfiguration — Although there may be no 
changes to the products that form the operatiiig and supporting soft- 
ware, they may be reconfigured in such a way as to affact the perfor- 
mance of a system. Some of the aspects that need to be considered in 
these circumstances are: 

a) mapping of software on to different types and speeds of med}$/ 
devices, 

b) minimizing the possibly pvef^eac?B Qf pftjglflg* 

c) change in programme loading format and method, 

d) f egenerattea of s^iteia sof^rati, 

e) selection of new ruhhi^ mddes such as choice of to#g error 
messages or full listings,! 

f) change in normal residence and running verUdfil of sbftw&fd, 

g) change in use af fite/daiti catalogue system, 

h) change in^se\Gfs&u^ity!ft^^ iptf 

j) change in use of application programme diagnostics. 

3.3 Hardware Configuration 

3.3.0 General — The performance of a computer-based system can De- 
limited by one or otbto har##are riftdtftle. A ekftnge to tie o&nmura- 
tion tm remove err ifttNMiuc* any Mtcft liffiitWid%"or lurtntu^ M& 

1 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

limitation for another. The effect of configuration changes should be 
considered under the following heading: 

a) Processor ( CPU ) capacity, 

b) Storage devices, and 

c) Input/output devices. 

3.3.1 Elements of Change 

3.3.1.1 Processor ( CPU ) capacity — A change in ^he speed or 
capacity of the processor unit can put pressure on the ability of storage 
input or output or any combination of these devices to cope with the 
resultant changes in volume of data or speed of data flow. 

3.3.1.2 Storage devices — A balance should be maintained between 
the amount of main storage and the number of peripherals attached. 
Increasing the amount of main storage can allow more programmes to run 
concurrently, but will increase the loading on existing peripherals and 
degrade the performance of existing systems accordingly. Conversely, 
increasing auxiliary storage can also reduce the performance of a 
computer-based system. 

3.3.1.3 Input} output devices — In the' context of this code, input/out- 
put devices include automatic control devices, VDUs and sensors, etc. 

Increasing the speed, number or function of these devices can affect 
the performance of a computer-based system. In particular, increasing 
the number or changing the usage mode of VDUs can increase the 
communications overheads with a consequent impact on other systems 
areas. 

Greater peripheral capacity can allow more programmes to run con- 
currently, increasing CPU load, channel load and operating system 
overhead. 

3.4 Hardware Ageing 

3.4.0 General — Ageing can be a serious problem with those compo- 
nents of a computer configuration where motion and hence wear can 
occur. The two main areas that should be considered are: 

a) electromechanical devices, and 

b) magnetic media. 

3.4.1 Elements of Change 

3.4.1.1 Electromechanical devices — These devices become less 
reliable with age, decreasing the mean time between failures, and hence 

8 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

increasing the elapsed time for jobs. Despite preventive maintenance 

SXSESf!? J* if blI,ty ° an ? ventua «y *°P below the acceptance^ 
demanded by the response-time of the system. 

in „f; 4 * 1 Tv,^!I ,e ' /C ' m /-' //i, ~ T ^ es a ? d ' disks are subjectto deterioration 
of ™h /?? deten °ration manifests itself in an increase in the number 
of read/write errors that occur. The number of hidden re-tries bvthe 
operating system can greatly increase the run-time of thY progkmme 
s^oulTbea^/d.* *°* len ^ °f -«>» tape reel increases wVaTd 

3.5 System Inputs 

3.5.0 General — All computer systems should check the validity and 
£*£?? ° t f th ^ in P ut da J a - However, there are many changes that Sn 
be made to the input data that may not be detected" and such changed 

system ay * * ™* ° f adverse effects on the Performance of the 

The input data should be considered under the following headings: 

a) Manual data collection systems, 

b) Data preparation procedures, 

c) On-line data entry, 

d) Data validation, 

e) Parameter data, 

f) Data brought forward, 

g) Real time data, and 

h) Transmission channels. 

3.5.1 Elements of Change 

3.5.1.1 Manual data collection - Most commercial batch processing 
systems rely heavily on some form of manual data collection. The da^ 
co ec tion can range from filling in forms or marks - sen^ng cards T 
collecting magnetic encoded strips or pre-punched tags. 

The system performance can be affected by the following factor 
amongst other things on this stage: wmg Iactor 

a) New or temporary staff who have not been adequately trained, 

b) Instruction manuals not kept up-to-date, 

C) o\more%rthf fi t e ff f ° rm design not P ro P erl y under stood by one 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

d) A new or modified means of expressing the data not properly 
understood by one or more of the staff, and 

e) A cut-off point for end of month or end of year not clearly 
defined. 

The performance of a system can also be affected by fluctuations in 
the volume of data. If there are not sufficient data collection staff to 
deal with peak loads a back-log builds up. When this is cleared by 
overtime or additional staff it can have disastrous effects on system 
performance. 

3.5.1.2 Changes in data preparation procedures — Changes in these 
procedures are likely to have a significant effect on system performance. 
A cut in verification rate can result in more errors which means more 
machine time on error printing plus ( usually ) a second input when 
corrected. Also, inadequate training of new staff can cause problems if, 
for example, a punch operator is not aware of the installation standard 
for writing the letter '0* and the figure zero. Changes in input media 
from, say, punched cards to disk can cause problems if not handled 
carefully. 

3.5.1.3 On-line data entry — There needs to be adequate control 
over personnel permitted access to the terminal. It is particularly impor- 
tant that new personnel should be properly trained in the correct way to 
enter data, and existing personnel are retrained when equipment is 
changed. It is essential that people who have the facility to interact 
with an on-line system are sufficiently familiar with the system and what 
it has been designed to do so that the implications of human intervention 
are thoroughly understood. 

3.5.1.4 Data validation — Inadequate checking and cross checking 
of data being input to a system can result in all manner of problems 
that may affect the performance of the system in unpredictable ways. 

Very few systems can afford to carry out total validation on all 
input data. All systems should, however, check that data are valid within 
reasonable limits. What is reasonable can change, however, as a result 
of modifications to the system and erroneous data can remain undetected 
by the existing validation routines. 

3.5.1.5 Parameter data — Parameter data can be used for a variety 
of purposes including: 

a) determining whether a programme functions in a weekly or a 
monthly mode, 

b) establishing data validation limits, 

c) setting constants or literals, and 

10 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

d) determining the extent and nature of processing to be undertaken 
by general utility programmes. 

The very nature of parameter data makes it difficult to validate on 
input because data that are within allowable limits can be incorrect for 
the intended purpose. 

Where parameters are used to determine the extent and nature of 
processing by generalized utilities ( for example, report generators ), the 
run time may vary greatly depending on the parameters used. Misuse 
of such facilities can result in severe impact on other system areas and 
therefore adequate parameter validation and control over these runs is 
required. U is recommended that arrangements should be made for 
the data to be independently checked from a different source whenever 
possible. 

Changes in staff, inadequate training of staff responsible for entering 
parameters and out-of-date instruction manuals are likely causes of 
error. 

3.5.1.6 Data brought forward — Data that are brought forward may 
come from a previous run of the system that is being monitored or from 
another system. It is necessary to ensure that the system being moni- 
tored checks that the correct data have been brought forward. If the 
data brought forward have come from another system, checks should 
be made on the validity of the data by the system being monitored. 
Likely causes of performance degradation include: 

a) amendments to the programmes or the system that wrote the 
data, 

b) operational problems such as malfunction of the device on which 
the data were written, and 

c) an additional unscheduled run of the system that wrote the data. 

3.5.1.7 Heal time data — Real time data are data that are intended 
to represent the immediate measured state of the environment, for 
example, data from sensors, analogue to digital converters, instrumen- 
tation and control equipment, radar systems. 

In many cases the data source can itself be a complex related 
system with its own error and integrity checks so that main concern of 
the system being monitored will be the data transmission errors and 
possible periodic message integrity checks ( for example, byte counts )* 

When the control of the data source comes within the province of 
the system being monitored, then in addition to the data transmission 
and message integrity checks, the system should include periodic 
integrity /calibration checks or runs on the data source. 

11 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

It should be emphasized that, however, consistent the data appear to 
be to any integrity tests, if the data source is inconsistent with the 
environment the information content of the data will be impaired and the 
system performance will. be degraded accordingly. 

3.5.1.8 Transmission channels — Although operation of on-line 
systems should be transparent to users, various levels of error checking 
and retransmission will be occurring within each system. An increase 
in the number of retransmissions will occur if the transmission path 
becomes 'noisy' or unreliable, giving rise to increasing delays in the data 
transmission. This aspect should be monitored and warnings generated 
when the degradation reaches a predefined limit. 

It should also be noted that changing the physical nature of a trans- 
mission channel can affect not only the bandwidth but also the type of 
noise or interference on the channel ( for example! public/private, wires/ 
ratio links, wire/optical fibre ) and the error checking/monitoring 
routines may have to reflect this in order to minimize system degradation. 

3.6 System Usage 

3.6.0 General — Changes in the usage of the system being monitored 
can be reflected in modifications to the significant characteristics of 
the system inputs, processing or outputs orany combination of these. In 
some instances, the impact of a change will be readily apparent, for 
example, doubling the number of employees paid by the system will 
increase the size of the payioll run. In other instances the effect cannot 
be so easily predicted, for example, a change in an organization's sales 
discount structure may result in customers changing their ordering 
habits, thus affecting the sales invoicing routines. 

Prominent among the aspects of system operation likely to be 
affected by changes in usage are: 

a) increases or decreases in volumes of data, 
<l) revision of timing, 

c) revision of quality controls, and 

d) misuse of the system. 

3.6.1 Elements of Change 

3.6.1.1 Increases or decreases in volumes of data — Increases in 
volumes of data can be expected to pose a potential threat to system 
performance while decreases will normally be expected to have either a 
beneficial effect or none at all. Increases in volume can occur in, for 
instance, numbers of documents, numbers of items in a document, 

12 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

numbers of items on a file, numbers of characters per data item, numbers 
and ranges of parameters. 

It is advisable to trace the possible effect of any change through the 
sequence of input, processing and output to ensure that all possible 
effects on the performance of the system are fully explored. 

3.6.1.2 Revision of timing — Revisions of timing can include changes 
to deadlines for inputs or outputs and frequencies of computer runs. 
These changes can threaten maintenance of schedules by exerting pres- 
sure on any or all of the inputs, processing, storage or output facilities 
available at the time. 

3*6.1.3 Revision of quality controls — System performance can be 
adversely affected by revisions to the nature of the controls applied, 
including validation techniques, security dumps, access controls, boundary 
limits, reconfiguration rules. Again, it is advisable to trace the impact 
of change both forward and backward through the input, processing 
and output sequences to determine what effect they may have on the 
overall performance of the system. 

3.6.1.4 Misuse of the system — A system can be run in a way not 
intended by the designer in order to obtain urgently required infor- 
mation. Although such actions can appear to have been achieved quitfr 
successfully, they can have serious and unforeseen secondry i effects on, 
for example, data integrity, run frequencies, dependent systems and 
security. 



3.7 Effects of Other Systems 

3.7.1 General — For the purposes of this code, other systems are 
considered under two main categories: 

a) Unrelated systems, and 

b) Related systems. 

An unrelated system is one that has no direct interface to thfr 
system being monitored but that shares resources with it. A change in 
use of the shared resources can therefore affect the performance of any 
system that uses them. 

A related system is one that has a direct interface with the system 
being monitored. A change in an interface or in use of the related 
system can therefore affected the performance of the system being: 
monitored. A related system can also include the characteristics of an 
unrelated system, that is, share resources. 

13 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

3.7.2 Elements of Change 

derefln t L^ rel T dsyStem i'~ The ^ajor items that should be consi- 
«fc? I ■ s y s . tem s are those resources that can be shared with the 
system being monitored, as follows: 

a) Processor — Any variation in the programmes that concurrently 
use the processor capacity can have an effect on performance, in 
particular the elapsed time and through-put. The variation may 
be the introduction of a new programme, which increases the 
rJl/S ■ J-~ T a chan S e in priorities and scheduling, which 
results in a different mix of jobs. Increased usage of an existing 
programme or new arrangements for the use of the processor to 
act as standby or backup can also affect the overall loading and 
performance of the processor. 

b) Communications systems - An increased load on communication 
lines and controllers by one system can affect the performance 
ot another system that shares the communication facilities. A 
cnange m the configuration of the communications aspects of a 
system should be considered as a change in the hardware of that 
system and be reviewed under that heading. However, a commu- 
nications configuration change, for example, new connections 
or new line speeds, can affect the performance of the mainframe 
processing system and therefore affect the performance of other 
systems, even if they have no communications capability. 

c) File . s tore and peripherals - A change in the size of usage of 
a T™iLf n f afl £ c V he Performance of all filestoreitraffic andliave 
a significant effect on any associated system. Re-allocation of 
nerf™^ ?*¥* peri P heral ^P™ can improve or degrade the 
nn/^tif \ 0fthe ^ S Ii Stem beiD S ^nitored even though it does 
comm^r! C ?w gCd fileSt0re ; Recon figuration of peripherals or 
c^ll It that ar t ° utslde the astern being monitored can 
onerntir,. g ? m ^l P norities or service requests within an 
operating system and hence change overall performance. 

Stor A a % e ™ ed } a — The most significant changes arise when the 
media that form part of the system are directly changed. How- 
ever, a change in the size or organization of a media library 
or handling mechanism can cause a change in the service 
provided. An increase in the media volumes, for example, packs, 
cartridges or reals, may also require a change in housekeeping 
and archiving practices which could affect the users of the 
volumes. 



d) 



14 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

e) Data preparation — A change in data preparation equipment, 
the number of staff employed or the workload can affect any 
user of the service and therefore can affect the total behaviour 
of all systems that rely on that service. 

f) Operations — A change in the total hardware configuration or 
the total workload or the number of operations staff can affect 
any system that is the responsibility of one group of operations 
staff. 

3.7.2.2 Related systems — In addition to the major items listed for 
unrelated systems, the items to be considered in these system are those 
areas where there may be direct interfaces with the system being 
monitored: 

a) Interface data formats — Any change in the format of data, 
even if not used by the system being monitored, can affect per- 
formance, for example, increased record length or new record 
types. Data to be considered can be transferred in processor 
main store, through filestore, on magnetic media, over communi- 
cations lines or on paper. Change can be planned or* accidental; 

b) Data sets — A change in frequency of operation can introduce 
more data volumes to hold the same amount of data and there 
can be an indirect effect on performance; 

q) Procedures — A change in operational procedures for one system 
can change the procedures for another; and 

d) New or changed system — A new use of existing data can 
influence the old system to which it is related, for example, data 
rejection causing a requirement for more stringent vetting of the 
original input data. 

4. MONITORING TECHNIQUES 
4.0 General 

4.0.1 This section identifies various types of monitoring techniques 
and provides guidance on the purposes for which each is best suited. 
Information is provided on each technique and what it achieves. General 
information and guidance is also included on the implications of the use 
of each technique and of the types of resources which may be required. 

4.0.2 Each system to be monitored and its environment are unique 
and will require a different combination of monitoring techniques in 
order to be cost effective. In the event that a change to a critical quality 
is revealed by the chosen monitor, the user will need to investigate 
further, possibly with selective use of other monitoring techniques, in 

15 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

order to discover which of the possible areas of change has actually 
caused the deterioration in performance. 

4.0.3 The prospective user should review his system and the total 
operational environment before introducing any monitoring techniques 
and some of the questions that should be considered are as follows: 

a) Which are the critical qualities which require monitoring ? 

b) What is the cost ( man and machine resources ) of obtaining 
the data? 

c) What is the effect on the performance of the system of intro- 
ducing a monitoring technique ? 

d) What is the output from the monitoring technique ? 

e) What training is required in order to introduce and implement 
a monitoring technique and process its output ? 

4*1 Use of Routine Records 

4.1.1 Records should be kept as a routine management control of the 
day to day running of a computer installation. The information contain- 
ed in these records will very often provide the first indication of a charge 
in the performance of the hardware, software and human components 
of a computer-based system and, thence, of the system as a whole. 

4.1.2 Classes of information that may be found useful include: 

a) volumes of data handled; 

b) system response times; 

c) job run frequencies 

d) achievements against run schedules; 

e) equipment availability, utilization and idle time; 

f ) backlogs of work; 

g) environment (temperature, humidity, etc); 
h) errors in inputs, processing and outputs; 

j) nature, frequency and duration of hardware faults; 

k) nature and effect of software faults; 

m) frequency and duration of power supply failures; 

n) nature, frequency and duration of communication faults and 
their effects; and 

p) change-control records. 

16 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

4.1.3 Routine reports generated from these records should enable 
changes in performance to be detected. This may then lead to the applica- 
tion of specific monitoring techniques to identify the causes of these 
changes. 

4.2 Hardware Monitors 

4.2.0 General — A hardware monitor provides the most powerful per- 
formance measurement capability available to assist in the monitoring of 
computer systems. In simple terms a hardware monitor is an electronic 
device that is physically connected to the computer and that measures 
and record its activity. It is called a hardware monitor, not because it 
monitors the hardware, but because it is a piece of hardware as opposed 
to an item of software. 

Whatever measurements might'be taken by a hardware monitor dur- 
ing a performance analysis study, they are rarely sufficient in themselves 
to determine the causes of good or bad performance. The results of the 
measured utilization should be investigated further. 

4.2.1 Capabilities — A hardware monitor is normally able toi 

a) time or count the activity of every device ( CPU, channels and 
peripherals) in a computer configuration; 

b) distinguish between classes of activity within a device, for 
example, the component parts of a disk access ( seek, latency, 
transfer, feed-back check ); 

c) measure the frequency of obeying identified instructions in a 
programme or the amount of time accessing each track of a direct 
access device; 

d) analyse and display the results of measurements in real time, 
using in-built minicomputers and VDUs; and 

e) impose no interference or degradation to the system hardware. 

4.2.2 When to Use a Hardware Monitor — A hardware monitor can 
be usefully employed: 

a) when the system hardware or software does not provide facilities 
suitable for a software monitor, 

b) when a software monitor compatible with the system hardware is 
not available, 

c) when the overheads imposed by a software monitor are not 
acceptable, and 

d) when measurements beyond the abilities of a software monitor 
are required. 

17 



IS: 11289-19*5 

4.3 Software Monitors 

4.3.0 Qenetal ^ A software monitor is a computer programme- that 
resides ifi a computer system, the task of which is to collect information 
about the way the system is being used over a period of time. There are 
three categories of software monitor: programme monitors, system 
monitors and operating system data logging. 

All three categories use system resources, the extent of which should 
be considered when interpreting results. It is also desirable to incorporate 
run time switches to permit them to be initiated, suppressed and used 
selectively. 

4.3.1 Frogramfhe Monitors 

4.3.1.0 General — Programme monitors report on the CPU utiliza- 
tion of an individual programme. If it is intended to extract a little more 
capacity from a configuration then it may weii be worth considering a 
performance evaluation exercise concentrating on the five to ten most 
timeconsuming programmes. Programme monitors can be obtained 
commercially for a relatively low sum, but alternatively they can often be 
provided by the individual programmer/installation. There are three types 
of programme monitor. 

4.3.1.1 Programme instruction — This instruction can count the 
number of tinles a routine is entered duting a programme. 

4.3.1.2 A 'harness' monitor — This monitor comprises a programme 
compiled into the subject programme providing information in such forms 
as histograms of the frequency with which any instruction is obeyed 
or traces of branching paths. 

4i3*1.3 Measurement by timing each instruction or routine — This 
measurement can be done using either of the following methods: 

a) Interrogation of the central pwctsttar time fdt$ttty &y user pro- 
gramme — This can impose severe overheads on the running time 
of the programme. 

b) Activity sampling — This involves the random capture of the 
current contents of the instruction ©ounief and can either be 
done with proprietary software or by using the central processor 
timer ihtltftfupt facility to activate tM m^ftitor at r^ula* inter- 
vals. Currently available software has the advantage 6f in-built 
techniques, to ensure the random nataro Of the sample, 

4.3.2 System Monitors 

4&2M t§m?al—* System mttoitdfs eblfect MttMtiim da* the per- 
formance of the system as a whole including chdftilel Sfid peripheral 



IS : 11289 - 19g5 

utilisation^ They are essentially packages working on a sampling basis 
siinilaf to the programme monitors described in 4*3.1 but capturing copies 
of tabled and lists maintained by the operating system* showing the status 
of the system at any one time. However, tb«y demand resources from the 
system they are monitoring; amounts vary but. are likely to be significant. 
The copies produced are stored and subsequently analysed by a second 
package which prdduces a comprehensive series of reports detailing the 
utilization levels of the various hardware com|>6nentSj incltMihg store 
utilization arid central processor usage, broken down between operating 
systems arid user programme. It is usual to obtain system software moni- 
tors from independent software houses by purchase or lease. 

4.3.2.1 Capabilities — A system monitor is: 

a) simple to use; and 

b) capable of producing output records relating to the logical 
components of the system ( for example, usage of system files 
is reported under file name rather than the physical device 
concerned ). 

4.3*3 Operating System Data Logging 

4.3.3.0 General — This facility can be considered as a Software 
monitor and the value of the information provided to the performance 
measurement process cati be enormous. 

4.33.1 Capabilities — The data can: 

a) show the hardware resources required to process a given 
Work-load; 

b) provide information for the diagnosis df causes of variations in 
system performance, for example, excessively high demand for 
particular system resources during certain phases of the work- 
load will explain degraded processing times; and 

c) provide information as a basis for prtfdictiflg levels of perfor- 
mance. 

4*4 In Smiee Testing 

4.4.0 General — During acceptance testing the user should have ensured 
that the system will meet his requirements. He Will' &fc& n§etl 
to repeat certain tests to ensure that thfr system continues to meet his 
performance requirements, fhis task ean be divided into) 



a) ensuring that the hardware Continued it fiinetfca i&frfetJy, MM 

a m 

1* 



b) ensuring that the system as a whole continues to prdviicte satis- 
factory service. 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

Both categories usually involve running bench mark programmes where 
the expected result has been predetermined. It is not necessary to carry 
out regular tests on the software as it does not degrade with use or 
time. Any changes to the software should be subject to the normal 
acceptance test procedures. 

4.4.1 The System Hardware — It is important to remember that 
system hardware in this context includes power lines, voltage stabilizers, 
no-break systems and similar equipment. The bench marks for in-service 
testing of all the major hardware elements are usually provided by the 
manufacturer, who should also provide diagnostic facilities. The checks 
need to be performed periodically for preventive maintenance purposes. 
In addition, certain elements of the hardware may need to be monitored 
continuously where they are critical to performance. 

4.4.2 The Total System — Testing of the performance of the complete 
system involves constructing some form of bench mark test where the 
rjench mark bears some known and close relationship to the usual work 
profile. The user will need to consider which method to use to apply the 
bench mark, for example, externally through a peripheral device or inter- 
nally using a data base. Also, it is necessary to consider the method to 
be used to measure the relevant characteristics. It should also be appre- 
ciated that, although greater accuracy may be achieved when the bench 
mark has a close relationship to the actual environment, the cost factor 
can be significant and a more loosely coupled relationship may give a 
more cost effective indication. 

4.4.2.1 As the characteristics of the system will vary with the work 
load it is important to establish the effect of high load conditions on 
through-put, response time, and availability at different levels of load. 
It will also show how different failure modes will occur. 

4.4.2.2 Suitable bench marks can be used to show that corrective 
action taken to fix errors has been effective. In a similar way bench 
marks can be used to optimize a performance of a system by trading off 
one characteristic against another. This should be done by studying the 
effects of various parameters under constant bench mark test and then 
seeing the result of making discrete changes, that is, introducing high 
speed memory or changing queuing arrangements to remove bottlenecks. 

4.5 System Audit 

4.5.0 General — One of the objectives of a system and it is to check 
for changes in the performance characteristics of the system. These 
changes can indicate a degradation of the system or alternatively may be 
required to show an improvement following some earlier corrective 
action. To audit a computer-based system it is necessary to perform 

20 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

some checks both manually and by automatic means and then to com- 
pare the results with historical records. In an ideal situation, special 
benchmark programmes can be run whose results would give an indication 
of performance changes since they were last executed, these bench mark 
programmes having been produced as part of the original system and 
acceptance tests. 

In order to be able to define precisely the reasons for a particular 
change in parameter, the audits need to be comprehensive. 

4.5.1 Utilization Time by Users — This information will show which 
areas of the organization are increasing their use of the system and those 
that are in decline. In a teleprocessing system this information can sug- 
gest that a redistribution to access nodes may be necessary. 

4.5.2 Mean Number of Jobs Processed — This analysis will indicate 
the type of programmes that are used most frequently and those which 
should be most efficient when running. 

4.5.3 Mean Time to Process Jobs — This characteristic will show how 
long jobs have taken to run; this will include any queuing time. It may 
be necessary to adjust a priority structure to the system to achieve a 
satisfactory balance or to increase the speed of some common peripherals. 

4.5.4 Mean Time to Prepare Jobs — This time will indicate how well 
the manual part of the system is functioning. If long delays are occurring 
then additional staff or more efficient facilities may be required. 

4.5.5 Time Taken to Archive — If this time shows excessive increase 
then more effective means should be found as the integrity of the system 
could be at risk. 

4.5.6 Unsuccessful Attempts to Acquire Peripherals — Use should be 
made of any in-built fault logs; these logs should record the number of 
times the operating system has been unsuccessful in acquiring a 
peripheral. This number could indicate excessive loading or some faulty 
equipment. 

4.5.7 Spare Storage — The rate of consumption' of spare storage since 
the last audit should be considered. If excessive, this consumption rate 
could indicate either the need to provide additional capacity, or a poor 
allocation/collecting algorithm within the system. 

4.5.8 Amount of Useful Spare Processor Time Remaining — This para- 
meter should be assessed accurately as it may limit the efficiency of the 
system. If it is inadequate and process completion times are rising, then 
additional capacity should be procured or more economic programmes 
produced. 

21 



18:11289-198* 

4i5.f System PmnfiwmwelM Mli$-me- T|f»ai*4&,n$ejte $o con- 
sider *he amount of down toe sinm IM 1^1 mM\m& iftm&te 4$&? 
mine any systematic pattern. 

4,540 Discrepancy ^parps and "{%$£? #P?e* — In action to 
examining the data related to performance characteristics, ih» audit 
should consider discrepancies notified by the user and associated correc- 
tive action. These considerations require th& the u§er pr puliation has 
set up procedures for dealing with; 

a) discrepancy reporting, and 

b) change control. 

The audit should try to correlate the perturbation. >n performance 
characteristics with deficiency reports. If correlation cannot be establi- 
shed for particular deficiencies, the auditor should consider if additional 
characteristics need to be measured. When planning an audjt, considera- 
tion should be given to changes implemented in response to deficiency 
reports to determine what effect this ac#on had on the performance of 
the system. 

4.0 User Surveys 

4,6,Q Geizeral —?■ 4 |op^l system is one that meets the requirements of 
the user, tp the user's satisfaction. The techniques recommended in this 
standard can be used to ensure that the stated requirement? of the user 
continue to be met. However, as user awareness of the system and com? 
puter systems in general increases, expectations may change and dissatis- 
faction set in. A dissatisfied user might disregard the system, use it care- 
lessly or misuse it and the effect will be a detrimental cliange in system 
performance. 

4.6,0,1 The user survey, as a technique of approaching users, jean. 
be compared to an opinion poll. The questions should fee carefully ££&.,. 
structed so as to be precise and not misleading. Tine compiler of 1kg 
survey should take care that the questions themselves do mot laadte 
dissatisfaction by suggesting the system could be bettered. The qu$&tign$ 
shoujd also be within tfce scope and v^omprehepsion of thg user. 

4.-&0.2- The methods by '-which the survey ®$ay b#e®aju$ed ?ilpu]d 
be considered. A regular questionnaire, iUstrtbutgff fcy Pi^f/*f%§$ 
memo, to be filled in and returned, wiM provide jj$r$ ;&$$f .-$$ $ rJf&twffi 
basis, but not all users wjll respond. A|i .experienced interviewer may 
get a better response an$ fee a>Ie, tQ aj$gsjg the users' answers feut this is 
very tim# consuming, 

4.6.1 Collection of Facts *— A i»er survey can be U]Sed tp 4J«c^£r 
changes in requirements and the effect of changes made bf^|f |§jje 

2% 



m : ion * »•* 

system being monitored and other systems whigfa may affect it, for 
example: 

a) volume of input, 

b) frequency of use, 

c) increased worl? load caused by a change to some other system, 
and 

d) response time. 

4.6.2 Determination of the Level of Satisfaction — Although the 
performance of a system may change, it is also necessary to determine 
the importance of the change to the user. A system may run unchanged 
in all respects other than the level of expectation of the user, or with 
continual use he may come across operating difficulties which will cause 
dissatisfaction or annoyance, for example: 

a) the 'abort' button is next to 'accept' button on the keyboard, 

b) he has seen a different design of VDU, and 

c) the space on a report is not sufficient for additional handwritten 
notes. 

4.6.3 Prevention of Dissatisfaction — The user survey may prevent 
psychological dissatisfaction growing, as it is evidence of the designer's 
continuing concern for the user and that the user is the driving force 
behind the system not vice-versa. 

5. PERFORMANCE MONITORING REPORTING 

5.0 General 

5.0.1 This section makes recommendations to assist the user to esta- 
blish a system of performance monitoring reporting that enables changes 
in performance detected by monitoring techniques to be analysed and 
presented in a meaningful fashion. 

5.0.2 When deciding upon the scope of a reporting system it is neces- 
sary to be clear about its purpose and value so that true cost effectiveness 
is achieved. Inadequate reporting can fail to fulfil its purpose while a 
superfluity of records and reports can be both costly and lead to impor- 
tant trends being overlooked among a mass of valueless information. 

5.0.3 It is important that management specifies clearly the form in 
which performance information should be presented. 

5.1 Performance Criteria 

5.1.0 Genera! — An essential foundation pf $$xfmm?mm monitoring 

23 



IS: 11289 -1985 

reporting is a schedule of the criteria by which the system to be moni- 
tored will be assessed, together with an acceptable value ( or range of 
values ) for each criterion. Because system development and operation 
is often a dynamic process, this schedule will contain a mixture of 
original criteria and revised and additional criteria. 

5.1.1 Original Criteria — These criteria should be obtainable from 
the system specification described in IS : 11290-1985* and should be set 
out in the form of a schedule of criteria to be met by the system being 
monitored. 

5.1.2 Revised Criteria — Revised criteria can arise from: 

a) amendments made during system development and documented 
in accordance with relevant standard ( IS : 11290-1985* ). 

b) temporary or permanent concessions recorded on the test 
summary described in relevant standard ( IS : 11291-1985t ). 

c) changes made subsequent to the handover of the system. 

5.2 Evaluation of Performance Measurement Data 

5.2.1 From the data produced by the chosen monitoring techniques, 
measures of achievement can be recorded for comparison with the 
scheduled performance criteria. In assessing the significance of these 
comparisons it is important to take account of: 

a) any assumptions made with respect to the conditions in which 
the monitoring took place, 

b) problems encountered in applying the monitoring techniques, 
and 

c) how accurately the techniques applied actually measure the criteria 
being monitored. 

5.2.2 It is also important to ensure that all significant measures and 
comparisons are truly comparing like with like. 

Similarly careful consideration should be given to the period of 
time or number of occurrences which should be included in these 
comparisons and records so that, for example, periodic variations or 
long term trends do not escape attention. 

5.3 Performance Reporting 

5.3.1 Care should be taken in determining the precise form in which 
performance reports should be presented so that their practical or 



♦Code of practice for documentation of computer based system. 
tCode of practice for testing of computer based system, 

24 



IS : 11289 - 1985 

economic significance is made perfectly clear to the recipients. The 
nature of the contents may suggest whether they should take the form 
of, for example: 

a) exception reports; 

b) statistical analyses and summaries; and 

c) trend reports ( for example, charts or graphs ). 

5.3.2 In additional to the fcrm of presentation, the time at which 
reports are submitted ( in relation to the comparisons which they con- 
tain ) can be of importance for management control. Consideration 
should be given to the cost effectiveness of having reports made: 

a) immediately a change in performance is detected; 

b) on trends reaching predetermined levels or values; and 

c) periodically ( for example, daily, weekly, monthly, annually ). 

5.3.3 Consideration should also be given to the possibility that the 
application of alternative reporting criteria could assist management 
decision making. For example, a system loading report may be made 
at set periods but, in addition, immediately a load exceeding a given 
value is detected. 

5.3.4 Because computer-based systems tend to be dynamic in nature, 
it is essential to ensure that the monitoring and reporting is reviewed 
on a regular basis to ensure that it is at all times: 

a) relevant to the current environment, 

b) presented in the most suitable form, 

c) timely in its submission, and 

d) cost justifiable. 



25 



a 



NDEAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Mar.** ihavan, Bahadur Shah Zalar Ntorg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Tale*honaa t 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Teleararns: Meneksangiha 

( Common io all oMlcas ) 
Regtomt Offices; Tefephanw 

'Waslern : ManakaEaya, E9 MlDC r Morel, Andheri { EasE), 6 32 92 B& 
BOMBAY 40O0B3 

t Eastern : 1/14 C.IJ, Scheme VII M, V. I, P r Road, 
Manikcola, CALCUTTA 700054 

Southern : C. I. T. Ctfllpua, MADRAS 6CC113 

Northern : BB9 Phat« Vll. Indualrial Focal Point 
5. At S. NAGAR 160051 (Punjab} 

Branch Qfftcas; 

, Puahp3k\ NuimahHwad Shllkh .Vlartj. Khanpui> 
AHMADABAD 380001 

*F Block, Unily Bldg r Narislmburaja Square 
BANGALORE 560002 

Gangntri Complex, Ghidbriftda Head, T r T. NaoaN 
BHOpAL 462003 

22£ Kalpana Arsa. BHUSANESHWAR 751 01 4 

6-fl-Bec L, N, Gupta Merg, HYDERABAD 500QG1 

R1 4 Yudriistar Mang, C Schome, JAIPUR 302005 

11 2/41 3 B SarVOdoya Nagar, KAN PUR 209005 

Palliputfa indua trial Estate, PATHAOD0013 

Hantoa Bldg{ 2nd Floor 1 Railway Snttan Road, 
TR I VAN DRUM 695001 

Inspection Office { With Sale Point )i 

Inililulton oT Engineer* { India ) Uuilding,1332£h|vijlNMBT i 5 24 35 
PUNE411M5 



36 24 99 


41 24 42 


S 73 23 


2 63 46 


2 S3 49 


22 49 0E 



$ 27 te 

6 36 27 
22 to S3 

&9B32 

4 72 02 

8 23 06 

32 27 



■Sal** Olfk-D in [i-cmbay U m NnvaHy Chimbtrt. Qeuie Raid 
Bombiv 4ODP0T 

tS*l*¥ DiffcB fn CAteucm l| >l iCb&HHin&hi, Approach, P L 0. Fimicm 
lIPHL Cnicutci 7i!0|?H 



B9 6* H 

3T SB QQ 



FTjmad d SniEinEn tif.ir^. pi«*. Dei hi [lnd|n) 



