**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 10974-5 (1984) : Code for hygienic conditions for 
production, transport, storage and distribution of 
indigenous milk products, Part 5: Fermented products 
SHRIKHAND [FAD 15: Food Hygiene, Safety Management and 
Other Systems] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | *ft ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5) -1984 
(Reaffirmed - 2012) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 5 FERMENTED PRODUCTS SHRIKHAND 



UDC 637.1/.3.004.3/.4/ SHRIKHAND : 613.6 




© Copyright 1985 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTE 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 
Gr 3 January 1983 



IS : 10974 (Part 5) - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PR ODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 5 FERMENTED PRODUCTS SHRIKHAND 



Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, AFDC 36 



Chairman 
Dr A. N. Rai ChowdhurY 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser 
to Government of India 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate) 
Dr N. P. Bhalla 

Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
ShriD. S. Chadha 



Representing 

National Institute of Communicable Diseases 
( DGHS ), New Delhi 



Directorate of Marketing and Inspection 
( Ministry of Agriculture ), Paridabad 

Indian Veterinary Research Institute (ICAR ), 
Izatnagar 



Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Dr ( Shrimati ) Indira Chakraborty All India Institute of Hygiene & Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Export .Inspection Council of India, New 

Delhi 
Central Food Technological Research 



Shri Om P. Dhamiia 
Shri C, T. Dwarkanath 
Executive Health Officer 



Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Col O. p. Kapur 
ShriS. Kasturi 

Shri S. J. Kekobad 
Maj-Gen Kewal Krishna 

N. L. Sachpeva {Alternate) 



Institute ( CSIR), Mysore 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 
Bombay 

Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 
Government Analyst to the Goyernrnenjt of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Cadbury India Ltd, Bombay 
Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi Col 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be ah infringement of copyright undert the said Act. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) -1984 

( Continued from page \) 

Members Representing 

Dr ( Shrimati ),R. Sankaran Defence Food Research Laboratory, Ministry 

. . of Defence ( R&D ), Mysore - 

Dr ( Shrimati ) D. Vijaya Rao (Alternate ) 
DrN.K.Sen Northern Railway, New Delhi 

Shri G. D. Sharma Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies 

Dr B. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
Col L. R. Sharma Health Department, Municipal Corporation 

of Delhi, Delhi 
Dr A. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 

Dr I. A. Siddiqi . Directorate of . Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & 

Fats, Ministry of Food &: Civil Supplies, 
New Delhi 

Shri S. M. Bhatnagar ( Alternate) 
Dr R. S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute (ICAR), 

Karnal 
Dr S. C. Sarma ( Alternate ) 

Dr T. A. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi . 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandum, Director General, ISI ( Ex~officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. K. Grover Assistant Director 

( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcommittee, AFDC 36 : 5 Convener 

Dr R, S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute (ICAR), 

Karnal 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
to Government of India Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. P. Bhau.a Indian Veterinary Research Institute (ICAR), 

Izatnagar 
. Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Brahme ' Deonar Abbatoire, Bombay 

DRD:RGoRE( A ef«flfc) 
Shri D. R. Choudhuri Department of Food and Technology 

Bio-chemical Engineering, Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 

Shri C. TV Dwarakanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

( Continued on page IX ) 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 5 FERMENTED PRODUCTS SHRIKHAND 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 5 ) was adopt by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 5 March 1984, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
andFood Products Division Council. 

0.2 Indigenous milk products, such as KHOA, KHOA based sweets, 
DAHI, RASOGOLLA, CHHANA are produced in large quantities in India. 
It has been often observed that proper hygienic conditions are not 
maintained in production, transport, storage and distribution of these 
indigenous milk products and there is a considerable scope for improving 
the hygienic conditions in this respect. Unless proper hygienic norms are 
adopted, the consumption of such indigenous milk products may be a 
potential health hazard to the consumer. 

0.3 As the process of production, handling, transport, storage and 
distribution of various indigenous milk products differ very widely, 
codes of hygienic conditions for different milk products are being 
published in parts, Part 1 covers hygienic conditions for production, 
transport, storage and distribution of KHOA and KHOA based sweets, 
Part 2 covers DAHI, Part 3 covers CHHANA and CHHANA based 
sweetmeats, Part 4 covers KULFI. 

0.4 SHRIKHAND is a semi-soft, slightly sourish-sweet, skimmed or 
whole milk product prepared by sweetening wheyless DAHI obtained 
from lactic fermentation of fresh, sweet, clean cow or buffalo milk. 
Reconstituted, recombined or standardized milk may also be used- Milk 
after boiling or pasteurization is cultured and DAHI (curd) prepared by 
indigenous method. The curd is hung in a muslin cloth to drain off the 
whey and it is, sometimes pressed during the last stages to hasten the 
process. Absorbants like sand, ash and strawbeds are also used for quick 
drainage of whey. The semi-dry mass known as CHAKKA forms. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 

the base of SHRIKHAND and. is mixed up with 25 to 30 percent sugar, 
colour and flavour to yield finished SHRIKHAND. When CHAKKA is 
mixed with an equal amount of sugar and dried on an open pan at low 
heat to non-sticky product and powdered sugar is further added along 
with colour and flavour, the indigenous toffee sweet SHRIKHAND VADI 
is obtained. These products are very popular in the states of Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and other adjoining areas. 

0.5 Conventionally prepared SHRIKHAND has a relatively short shelf 
life and becomes more acidic at room temperature. Therefore it is 
necessary to protect the eatable during production, storage and distri- 
bution from extraneous contamination to maintain and prevent its 
physico-chemical and nutritional characteristics. This standard provide 
guidelines for maintaining optimum hygienic conditions in production 
storage and distribution ofSHRIKHAND. 

0.6 It is expected that this standard would be of considerable assistance 
to local Health Authorities in enforcing proper hygienic condition in the 
interest of public health. 

0.7 This code is subject to provisions of the Prevention of Food Adul- 
teration Act, 1954 and its Rules framed thereunder as amended from 
time to time and other local' regulations. 

0.8 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from the National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This Code (Part 5) prescribes the hygienic conditions and practices 
for production, storage, transportation and distribution of SHRIKHAND. 

2. SITE AND PREMISES 

2.1 Site and premises should be as given in 2 of IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 
1984*. 

3. RAW MATERIAL HANDLING — See IS : 2491 - 1972f . 

4. FACTORY AND PROCESSING HYGIENE — See IS : 2491- 
1972f. 

5. EQUIPMENTS 

5.1 Heating Pans. 

5.1.1 Traditionally, boiling pans made of brass are used for domestic 
purpose and iron open vessels are generally used by sweetmeat maker 

*Code for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and 
distribution of indigenous milk products: Part 1 KHOA and KHOA based 
sweets, 

fCode of hygienic conditions for food processing units (first revision) 



IS : 10974 (Part 5 ) -1984 

(H A LW A I), The brass vessels shall be plain, seamless and 'properly 
tinned concave bottomed and having sufficiently wide brim. Iron vessels 
( cauldron, KADAHI) shall be constructed from a mild steel sheet with 
hemispherical or dished bottom and with rigid welded handles. 

5.1,1-1 After boiling or pasteurization, milk is transferred to 
earthenware vessels for culturing. The vessels may be having the previous 
curd as the inoculum. - This introduces the undesirable organisms 
especially yeasts and enteropathegens which may have developed during 
previous incubations. Therefore, their use shall be dispensed with. 

5.1.1.2 Clean and sanitized glass bottles, plastic trays, heavily tinned 
brassware or stainless steel vessels shall be preferred to conventional 
earthenware pots. 

5,1.2 Alternatively, heating-cum-culturing of milk can be accom- 
plished in stainless steel jacketed pans heated by passing steam through 
the jacket. The capacity of the pan should be of 10 to 20 litres enough 
to hold 5 to 15 kg of milk at a time. 

5.2 Heating of Milk 

5.2.1 Ovens of different types are used for heating of milk in the small 
scale production of SHRIKHAND. Wood, charcoal, coal, cow dung cake, 
kerosene or gas, are normally used as fuel. 

5.2.2 When open hearth is used, the fuel used for burning should not 
give rise to smoke or obnoxious odour which may be absorbed by the 
product. Adequate protection must be provided to ventilate the 
combustion products and to prevent the ash and unburnt material 
coming in contact with the product. 

5.2.3 Where heating is done by steam in large scale operations, the pan 
shall conform to IS : 2829-1979*. Stainless steel jacketted, round 
bottomed open pan provided with steam line, steam control and safety 
valves, pressure guage and cold water line in the jacket, with steam trap 
and air outlet may be used. There should be arrangement for tilting the pan 
and also keeping it fixed in normal position. 

5.3 Stirrers — After first boil or pasteurization, heated milk is allowed 
to cool down to 28 to 30°C and then inoculated with the lactic culture at 
the rate of 1 percent and mixed well. Mild steel hand-operated ladles or 
spatulae are generally, used for stirring. Stainless steel or/aluminum alloy 
stirrers with flattened end on one side may preferably 



•Specification for steam jacketted ghee pans ( stainless steel ) (first revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 



be used in place of iron. The stirrers shall be such as to resist acid action 
on the culture. 

5.4 All the components and metallic parts which come in contact with 
milk and curd shall be constructed from iron or stainless steel confor- 
ming to grade 07 Cr 18 Ni 9 of IS : 1570 (Part 5)-1972* or aluminium 
conforming to IS Designations 19000 (SIC). 31000 (NS 3), 52000 (NS 4) 
or 53000 (NS 5) of IS : 737-1974f . 

5.5 Copper and its alloys, cadmium, lead and zinc shall not come in 
contact with curd at any stage. 

5.6 Nonmetallic materials, if used for sealing or gasketting, shall be 
nontoxic, nonabsorbant and shall not impart any flavour and be inert to 
milk, curd or any cleaning solution normally used. 

5.7 Fabrication — All surfaces coming in contact with milk or curd 
shall be finished smooth, free from pits, crevices or other constructional 
features which might inhibit satisfactory sanitation. 

5.8 Strainer — Whatever method of straining, immediate or delayed, a 
clean bleached dirt free, fresh or washed piece of muslin cloth shall be 
used for the purpose. The cloth should be strong enough to hold the 
weight of the coagulum alongwitb the trapped whey when hung up for 
draining out the whey or when pressed in hoops. 

6. RECEPTION DOCK 

6.1 Milk brought to the processing unit shall be received in an airy, clean, 
spacious enclosure. Only fresh, sweet, clean milk free from colostrum 
and in every way fit for human consumption shall be used. The milk shall 
be free from adultrants, preservatives and any matter foreign to milk. 

7. TRANSFER OF STRAINED CURD (CHAKKA ) TO THE 
KNEADERS 

7.1 The semi-solid mass, CHAKKA, is transferred to fiat shallow vessels 
trays or cauldron and required amouut of sugar is admixed. 

7.2 The trays should be thoroughly cleaned, washed and dried before use. 
The metallic containers used in such transfers, with which the product 
comes in contact should be non-toxic corrosion resistant, 



*Scbedules for wrought steel: Part 5 Stainless and heat resisting steels {first 
revision ). . 

f Specification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys sheet and strip ( for 
general engineering purposes) ( second revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 

resistant to mild acids, and be kept thoroughly cleaned and sanitized 
before use. 

7.3 While handling for transfer or cutting, direct touch by hands should 
be avoided to safeguard against contamination by body microflora. 

7.4 The kneaders may be mild steel hand operated ladles, stainless steel 
or aluminium alloy stirrers with flattened end on one side or wooden 
ladles having flattened or round swollen end. The stirrers shall be such 
as to resist acid action of the curd. Suitable arrangement may be made on 
the brim of the tray for resting of kneaders. 

7.4.1 All components and metallic parts shall have same specifica- 
tions as mentioned in 5.4 and 5.5. 

7.4.2 Non metallic materials shall be nontoxic, nonabsorbant and shall 
not impart any flavour and be inert to milk, CHAKKA or any cleaning 
solution normally used* 

7.5 All surfaces of the kneader and the trays coming in contact with 
curd shall be finished smooth, free from pits, crevices or other cons- 
tructional, features which might inhibit satisfactory sanitation. 

8. ADDITION OF"SUGAR TO CHAKKA 

8.1 The sugar used shall be of good quality ( see IS : 1679-1960* ). 

8.2 The sugar should be clean and properly packed, preferably in 
multiwall paper bags and stored in a clean dry place to prevent conta- 
mination from moulds and yeasts. If sugar is improperly packed in dirty 
gunny or cloth bags and handled carelessly it may become heavily 
contaminated particularly during monsoon. It is preferable to purchase 
sugar during dry season and store it in a clean dry place. 

8.3 If sugar is suspected to be heavily contaminated it may be made into 
a syrup and boiled for a few minutes before adding to CHAKKA. 

9. OTHER INGREDIENTS 

9.1 The ingredients used shall conform to the specifications given in IS : 
5550-1970f. 

9.2 Flavouring Materials — Various artificial or imitation flavours are 
added to CHAKKA based sweets. As most of them are prepared and 
maintained in the form of alcoholic solutions and used in small 



♦Specification for sugar used in food preservation industry. 
f Specification for BURFL 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 

concentration they ace not considered to be significant, sources of 
contamination. 

9.3 Aqueous flavour extracts may be sanitized by pasteurization at 63°C 
for 30 minutes without any serious deterioration in the flavour. 

9.4 Colouring Materials — Only food grade colours permitted under - 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 should be used in the 
CHAKKA based sweet preparations. 

10. DESICCATION TO FORM SHRIKHAND VADI 

10.1 When SHRIKHAND is further desiccated to a hard mass by heating 

on an open pan over a direct fire SHRIKHAND VADI is 

obtained. 

10.1.1 Alternatively, the CHAKKA m worked up with an equal 
«.quantity of sugar and dried on an open pan over a low heat. The 
hardened nonsticky product is flavoured and coloured and powdered 
sugar further added. 

10.1.2 The solid mass is cut into shapes and packed like biscuits. This is 
thus a milk toffee. 

11. PRINTING AND PACKAGING 

11.1 The seal used for printing or embossing on the surface of the 
product should be made of nontoxic material. It should be cleaned and 
sanitized before each usage by dipping in a sanitizing solution and 
wiping with a clean dry cloth in order to prevent it from becoming a 
source of contamination. 

11.2 It is always desirable to provide modern packaging materials which 
include parchment or laminated pouches, plastic (polyethylene, poly- 
vinyl chloride, nylon, polyster ), bags/pouches etc. Wrapping should 
-be done as soon as (the .product is manufactured and moulded/cut into 
shape; These materials shall be placed in bamboo baskets for protection. 

11.2.1 The packaging material purchased from approved sources shall 
preferably be pre-sanitized and stored under dry and hygienic conditions. 
If parchment paper used is suspected to be exposed, it could be dipped in 
boiling water prior to use. Treating the paper in chlorine solution ( 15 to 
20 ppm) prior to use, would also be satisfactory. Ah ideal wrapper 
should be completely opaque, scalable, impermeable to odour, moisture 
and grease and should have sufficient physical rigidity to preclude 
damage during packaging. A secondary outer wrapper like fibre card 
board, wooden <.or metal container should also 

8 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 

be used-for facilitating transporting. All' reusable secondary containers 
should be presentized before use. 

11.3 Storage at Manufacturing. Centre — Being highly acidic and dry 
and preserved by sugar in nature, SHRIKHAND resists spoilage 
organisms for quite some time yet moulds and other acid tolerant, 
organisms start proliferation after 4 to 5 days at room temperature; Hence 
the product should preferably be stored at refrigeration temperature. 

12. LABORATORY CONTROL. PROCEDURES — See : IS 2491 
1972*. 

13. TRANSPORT 

13.1 During the transport of CHAKKA from manufacturing centres to- 
urban markets, precautions should be taken not to expose the product: to 
sunlight, dust and contamination. It is advisable to make suitable 
arrangement to maintain the product below 10°C during transport. 

14. STORAGE AND SALE OF SHRIKHAND 

14.1 Restaurants, catering establishments, HALWAIS, sweetmeat shops 
and other selling outlets which store and sell CHAKKA based sweets in 
retail to customers should be fully licensed for the purpose and fulfil all 
the hygienic requirements prescribed by the appropriate authorities in 
respect of public catering places. 

14.2 The floor and drains of the premises and every bench, counter,, 
stall or other place where CHAKKA based sweets are stored or exposed 
for sale should be washed and cleaned effectively everyday using an 
odourless bactericidal solution for example Quaternary Ammonium 
Compound. There should be sufficient amount of clean water and- 
detergents for cleaning of utensils and arrangements for toilet and 
washing of hands, plates and disposal of wrapping materials, if any. 

14.3 It is desirable to store CHAKKA based sweets at a low temperature 
( around 4°C ) so that they will have a longer shelf life. Suitable cold 
storage facilities may, therefore, be provided. 

15. DISTRIBUTION 

15.1 Sweet meats prepared from CHAKKA should not be allowed to-get 
contaminated during distribution. 



*Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units (first revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) -1984 

15.2 Products stored for a long period should hot be distributed. 

153 She products should be distributed in suitable and presenitized 
packing-materials and containers which may be kept closed. In case of 
bulk delivery the containers should have well fitting lids. 

16. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

16.1 Employee Hygiene should be as given in 13 of IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) 
-1984*. 



♦Code for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and distribution of 
indigenous. milk products: Part 1 KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 

10 



IS : 10974 ( Part 5 ) -1984 



( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members 
Dr. B. N. Ghosh 



Representing 
All India Institute of Hygiene and Public 
Health, Calcutta 
DrS. P. Mukhopadhyay ( A/fernafe) , . 



DrB. C. Ghoshal 

Dr M. N. Gurnani 

Joint Director ( Prevention of 

Food Adulteration ) 
Col O. P. Kapur 
Dr V. V. Karnik 

Dr S. J. Pardikar ( Alternate) 
DrB. K. Nandi 

Shri Harpal Singh (Alternate ) 
DrP. V. R. C. Panicker 



Central Health Education Bureau (DGHS ), 

New Delhi 
Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay 
Delhi Administration, Delhi 

Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 
Brooke Bond India Limited, Aurangabad 

Food and Nutrition Board, Ministry of Food 
and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 



National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute ( CSIR), Nagpur 
Dr ( Shrimati ) A. S. Gadkari ( Alternate ) 



Shri Ravi Krishna 
Secretary 

Brio R. N. Verm a 

Lt-Col K. N. Acharya (Alternate ) 
Shri Kailash Was 

Dr Brijesh Narayan { Alternate ) 



Britannia Industries Ltd, New Delhi 
Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
QMG'S Branch, Army Headquarters, New 
Delhi 

Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers' 
Union Limited, Anand 



11 



0TlRmi|C^AL^SimM:GF:iimiS (SI il&II*S) 



BaseUaits 






: .• /. 


Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass "■ 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelyin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


moie 


mot 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradiao 


. sr 




Derived Units 








QUANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = I kg.m/s a 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J *> 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


w 


1 W « 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb «* 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T - 1 Wb/ms 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hr « i c/s (s -i) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S-1A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V <= 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = 1 N/ma 



■ 



TBI INDIAN. STAND A'RDS INSTITUTION 




Headquarters , 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 Telegrams : Manafcsanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : f e /ephone 

"Western : Msnakalaya, E9 WIIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 
tEastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P, Road, Maniktols, 36 24 99 

CALCUTTA 700054 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 24 42 

Northern : B69 Phase VII, Industrial Focal Point, 8 73 28 

S,A,S. NAGAR 160051 (Punjab) 

Branch Offices : 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 

•F' Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square. BANGALORE 560002 

Gangotri Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T, Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 

22E Kalpana Area, BHUBANESHWAR 751014 

5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Schema, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 BSarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Patiiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 80Q013 

Hantex Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), Rly Station Road, TRIVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Office ( With Sale Point ) : 

Institution pf Engineers ( India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE-411005 5 24 35 



, 2 63 48 
i 2 63 49 


22 48 05 


6 27 16 


5 36 27 


22 10 83 


6 S8 32 


4 72 92 


6 23 05 


32 27 



*Sales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 65 28 

Bombay 400007 

-j-Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, 27 68 00 

P.O, Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 



Printed at takshms Printindia, Sfiahdara, Delhi 110032 



