**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14501-1 (1998): Pulse techniques and apparatus. Part 1: 
Pulse terms and definitions [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

'IR 1 ^ 5# % ^d^'^TO 

Indian Standard 
PULSE TECHNIQUES AND APPARATUS 

PARTI PULSE TERMS AND DEFINmONS 



ICS 33,120.10 



©BIS 1998 

BUREAUOF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1998 p^^Grwp 7 



Electronic Measuring Instrutnents, Systems and Accessories Sectional Comniittce, LTD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by die Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

The objective of this standard (Part 1 ) is to standardize the definitions of an internally consistent, mathematically 
rigorous and general set of pulse terms which are applicable to a wide range of technologies and disciplines. 
The terms are also applicable in a measurem.ent situation, regardless of the means of m.easurem.ent or the m.eans 
for waveform evaluation employed. 

This standard (Part 1) covers pulse terms and definitions. The Part 2 of this standard covers pulse measurement 
and analysis, general considerations. 

This standard (Part 1) is largely based on EEC Pub 469-1(1987) *Pulse techniques and apparatus: Part 1 Pulse 
terms'and defmitions', issued by the Ihtemational Electrotechnical Commission. 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



Indian Standard 



PULSE TECHNIQUES AND APPARATUS 

PART 1 PULSE TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard (Part 1) provides fundamental 
definitions for general use in time domain pulse 
technology. It defines terms for pulse phenomena and 
pulse characteristics which are prerequisite to: 

— efficient communication of technical 
infonnationj 

— standards for methods of pulse characteristic 
measurement, 

— standards for pulse apparatus, and 

— standards for apparatus which employ pulse 
techniques. 

2 GENERAL TERMS 

2.1 Co-ordinate System 

Throughout the following, a rectangular Cartesian 
co-ordinate system is assumed in which, unless 
otherwise specified: 

— time (t) is the independent variable taken along the 
horizontal axis, increasing in the positive sense 
from left to right; 

— magnitude (m) is the dependent variable taken 
along the vertical axis, increasing in the positive 
sense or polarity from bottom to top; 

— the following additional symbols are used: 

e - baseof naturallogarithms; 

a, b, c, etc = real parameters which unless 
otherwise specified may have any 
value and either sign; and 

n = a positive integer. 

2.2 Wave* Pulse and Transition 

2.2.1 Wave 

A .modification of the physical state of a rnxdium. 
which propagates in that medium as a function of time 
as a result of one or more disturbances. 

2.2.2 Pulse 

A wave which departs from a first nominal state, 
attains a second nominal state and ultimately returns 
to the first nominal state. 

NOTE — Throughout the remainder of this standard, 'pulse' is 
induded in 'wave'. 

2.2.3 Transition 

A portion of a wave or pulse between a first nominal 
state and a second nominal state. 



NOTE — Throughout the remainder of this standard, *transition' 
is incltjdexj in 'onlse* and 'waye\ 

2.3 Waveform, Epoch and Feature 

2.3.1 Waveform, Pulse Waveform, Transition 
Waveform 

A manifestation or representation [for example, graph, 
plot, oscilloscope presentation, equation(s), table of 
co-ordinates or statistical data] or a visualization of a 
wave, pulse or transition. 

NOTE — Throughout the reniainder of this standard: 

— 'pulse waveform* is included in 'waveform*. 

— 'transition waveform' is included in 'pulse waveform' and 
'waveform'. 

2.3.2 Waveform Epoch 

The span of time for which waveform data are known 
or knowable. A waveform epoch manifested by 
equations may extend in time from -«« to -h» or, like 
all waveform data, may extend from a first datum time 
/bto a second datum time^i {seeVig. 1). 

2.3.3 Waveform Feature 

A specified portion or segment of, or a specified event 
in, a waveform. 

2.4 Qualitative Adjectives 

The adjective in this clause may be used individually 
or in combination, or in combination with adjectives 
in 2.5, to modify any substantive term in this standard. 

2.4.1 Descriptive Adjectives 

2.4.1.1 Major (minor) 

Having or pertaining to greater (lesser) importance, 
magnitude, time, extent, or the like, than another 
similar feature(s). 

2.4.1.2 Ideal 

Of or pertaining to perfection in, or existing as a perfect 
exemplar of, a waveform or a feature. 

2.4.1.3 Reference 

Of or pertaining to a time, magnitude, waveform 
feature or the like, which is used for comparison with, 
or evaluation of, other times, magnitudes, waveforms, 



TIME ORIGIN UN£ 



PUL5£ START 

yilE TOP CENTRE POINT PULSE STOP UNE 



FIRST BASE 
POIMT 




&3 






ve 

00 



BASE 
MAGNITUDE 



HRST TRANSITION 
DURATION 



PULSE START TU4E 



UST TRANSmON 
DURATION 

PULSE DURATION m^ 



PULSE STOP TIME 



OFFSET 



MAGNITUDE ORIGIN LJNE* 



PULSE WAVEFORM EPOCH 






Fig. I Single Pulse Waveform 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



features or the like. A reference entity mav, or may not, 
be an ideal entity. 

2.4.2 Time-Related Adjectives 

2.4.2.1 Periodic (aperiodic) 

Of or pertaining to a series of specified waveforms or 
features which repeat or recur regularly (irregularly) 
in time 

2:4.2.2 Coherent (incoherent) 

Of or pertaining to two or more repetitive waveforms 
whose constituent features have (lack) time 
correlation. 

2.4 J Magnitude-Related Adjectives 

Of w pertmning to two or more repetitive waveforms 
whose sequential mnstituent features have O^ck) time 
correlation. 

2.4*3.1 Proximal (distal) 

Of or pertaining to a region near to (remote from) a 
first state or region of origin. 

2.4.3.2 Mesial 

Of or pertaining to. the region between the proximal 
and distal regions. 

2.4.4 Polarity-Related Adjectives 

2.4.4.1 Un^^olar 

Of having or pertaining to a single polarity. 

2.4.2.2 Bipolar 

Of Wing or pertaining to both polarities. 

2.4.5 Geometrical Adjectives 

2.4.5.1 Trapezoidal 

Having or approaching the shape of a trapezoid. 

2.4.5.2 Rectangular 

Having or approaching the shape of a rectangle. 

2.4.5.3 Triangular 

Having or approaching the shape of a triangle. 

2.4.5.4 Sawtooth 

Having or approaching the shape of a right-angled 
triangle {see Fig. 2, waveform D). 

2.4.5.5 Rounded 

Having a curved shape characterized by a relatively 
gradual change in slope. 

2.5 Quantitative Adjectives 

The adjectives in this clause may be used individually 
or in combination, with adjectives in 2.4, to modify 
any substantive term in this standard. 



2.5.1 Integer Adjectives 

The ordinal integers (that is, first, second, .., nth, last) 
or the cardinal integers (that is, 1, 2, ..., n) may be used 
as adjectives to identify or distinguish between similar 
or identical features. The assignment of integer 
modifiers should be sequential as a function of time 
within a waveform epoch and/or within features 
thereof. 

2J.2 Mathematical Adjectives 

All definitions in this clause are stated in terms of time 
(the independent variable) and magnitude (the 
dependent variable). Unless otherwise specified, the 
following terms apply only to waveform data within a 
waveform epoch. These adjectives may also be used 
to describe the relation(s) between other specified 
variable pairs (for example, time and power, time and 
voltage). 

2.5.2.1 Instantaneous 

Pertaining to the magnitude at a specified time. 

2.5.2.2 Positive (negative) peak 

Pertaining to the maximum (minimum) magnitude. 

2.5.2.3 Peak'to-peak 

Pertaining to the absolute value of the algebraic 
difference between the positive peak magnitude and 
the negative peak magnitiide. 

2.5.2.4 Root-mean-sguare (rms) 

Pertaining to the square root of the average of the 
squares of the values of the magnitude. If the 
magnitude takes on n discrete values, m\, its 
root-mean-square value is: 



niniis = 



1 



n 



'( 1 ^ 


h 


"2 

m^ (t) At 





wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of 
m\ are equal. 

If the magnitude is a continuous function of time, m(t), 
its rms value is: 



ftlnrn 



The summation or the integral extends over the 
interval of time for which the rms magnitude is desired 
or, if the function is periodic, over any integral number 
of periodic repetitions of the function. 

2.5,2.5 Average 

Pertaining to the mean of the values of the magnitude. 
If the magnitude takes on n discrete values, m\, its 
average value is: 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



m = 



wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of 
mj are equal. 

If the magnitude is a continuous function of time, m(0, 
its average value is: 



m = 



f— 1/' 

[l2-,j',. 



m{t)6t 



The summation or the integral extends over the 
interval of time for which the average magnitude is 
desired or, if the function is periodic, over any integral 
number of periodic repetitions of the function. 

2.5.2.6 Average absolute 

Pertaining to the mean of the absolute values of the 
magnitude. If the magnitude takes on n discrete values, 
mj, its average absolute value is: 

wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of 
mj are equal. 

If the magnitude is a continuous function of time, m(t), 
its average absolute value is: 



Iml 



=f— If 



\m(t) \dt 



The summation or the integral extends over the 
interval of time for which the average absolute 
magnitude is desired or, if the function is periodic, over 
any integral number of periodic repetitions of the 
function. 

2.5.2.7 Root sum of squares (rss) 

Pertaining to the square root of the arithmetic sum of 
the squares of the values of the magnitude. If the 
magnitude takes on n discrete values, mj, its root sum 
of squares value is: 

I 

2 

I 

wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of 
mj are equal. 

If the magnitude is a continuous function of time> m(0, 
its root sum of squares value is: 



mres = 



r 



m^ (0 dt 



The summation or the integral extends over the 
interval of time for which the root sum of squares 
magnitude is desired or, if the function is periodic, over 
any integral number of periodic repetitions of the 
function. 



2.53 Functional Adjectives 

2.53.1 Linear 

Pertaining to a feature whose magnitude varies as a 
function of time in accordance with the following 
relation or its equivalent: 

m-a-^bt 

2.5.3.2 Exponential 

Pertaining to a feature whose magnitude varies as a 
function of time in accordance with either of die 
following relations or their equivalents: 

-bt 



m ~ ac 

m = a(l-c'^') 

2*533 Gaussian 

Pertaining to a waveform or feature whose magnitude 
varies as a function of time in accordance with the 
following relation or its equivalent: 



m = ae 



,-t 0-c) 



where b >0 



2.53.4 Trigonometric 



Pertaining to a waveform or feature whose magnitude 
varies as a function of time in accordance with a 
specified trigonometric function or by a specified 
relationship based on trigonometric functions (for 
example, cosine squared). 

2.6 Time-Related Definitions 

2.6.1 Instant 

Unless otherwise stated, a time specified with respect 
to the first datum time, to, of a waveform epoch. 

2.6.2 Interval 

The algebraic time difference calculated by 
subtracting the time of a first specified instant from the 
time of a second specified instant. 

2.6.3 Duration 

The absolute value of the interval during which a 
specified waveform or feature exists or continues. 

2.6.4 Period 

The absolute value of the minimum interval after 
which the same characteristics of aperiodic waveform 
or a periodic feature recur. 

2.6.5 Frequency 

The reciprocal of period. 

2*6.6 Cycle 

The complete range of states or magnitudes through 
which a periodic waveform or a periodic feature passes 
before repeating itself identically. 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



2.7 Reference Lines and Points 

The reference lines and points defined in this clause 
and used throughout the remainder of this standard are 
constructions which are (either actually or 
figuratively) superimposed on waveforms for 
descriptive or analytical purposes. Unless otherwise 
specified, all defined lines and points lie within a 
waveform epoch. 

2.7.1 Time Origin Line 

A line of constant and specified time which, unless 
otherwise specified, has a time equal to zero and passes 
through the first datum time, to, of a waveform epoch 
(see Fig, 1). 

2.7.2 Magnitude Origin Line 

A line of specified magnitude which, unless otherwise 
specified, has a magnitude eqOal to zero and 
extends through the waveform epoch (see Fig. 1)* 

2.7.3 Time Reference Line 

A line parallel to the time origin line at a specified 
instant. 

2.7.4 Time Referenced Point 

A point at the intersection of a time reference line and 
a waveform. 

2.7.5 Magnitude Reference Line 

A line parallel to the magnitude origin line at a 
specified magnitude. 

2.7.6 Magnitude Referenced Point 

A point at the intersection of a magnitude reference 
line and a waveform. 

2.7.7 Knot 

A point /k. /nil (where /: = 1, 2, 3 n) in a sequence of 

points wherein t^ ^ /k+i through which a cubic natural 
spline passes {see Fig. 3). 

2.7.8 Cubic Natural Spline 

A catenated piecewise sequence of cubic polynomial 
functions p(l, 2). p(2, 3)..., p(n-l, n) between knots 
t\m\ and timz and t3m%,j(n-\yn(n-\) and tamn 
respectively, wherein: 

a) at all knots, the first and second derivatives of 
the adjacent polynomial functions are equal, 
and 

b) for all values of t less than t\ and greater than 
rn the function is linear (see Fig. 3 and 5.5). 

NOTE — The cubic natural spline yields a curve which, 
throughout, is continuous and has continuous first and second 
derivatives. The resulting curve is the rigorous mathematical 
embodiment of what is conventionally called a smooth curve 
drawn through a group of points (that is. knots) and it consists 



of a sequence of curvilinear segments which are defined by 
equations of the third degree. 

2.8 Miscellaneous 



2.8.1 Pulse Shape 

For descriptive purposes, a pulse waveform may be 
imprecisely described by any of the adjectives, or 
combinations thereof, in 2.4.1.1, 2.4.4, 2.4.5 and 
2.53.2 to 2.5J.4, inclusive. When so used these 
adjectives describe general shape only and no precise 
distinctions are defined. 

For tutorial purposes, a hypothetical pulse waveform 
may be precisely defined by the further addition of the 
adjective 'ideal' {see 2.4.1.2). 

For measurement or comparison purposes, a pulse 
waveform may be precisely defined by the further 
addition of the adjective 'reference* (see 2.4.1.3). 

2^.2 Transition Shape 

For descriptive purposes, a transition waveform may 
be imprecisely described by any of the adjectives, or 
combinations thereof, in 2.4.1.1, 2.4.4, 2.4.5.5 
and 2^3. When so used, these adjectives describe 
general shape only and no precise distinctions are 
defined. 

For tutorial purposes, a hypothetical transition 
waveform may be precisely defined by the further 
addition of the adjective 'ideal* {see 2.4,1.2). 

For measurement or comparison purposes, a transition 
waveform may be precisely defined by the further 
addition of the adjective 'reference' {see 2.4.U). 

2.8J Pulse Power 

The power transferred or transformed by a pulse(s). 
Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical 
adjective (jfe^ 2^.2), average power over a specified 
inttfval is assumed. 

2A4 Pulse Energy 

The energy transferred or transformed by a 
pulse(s). Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical 
adjective {see 2.5.2), the total energy over a specified 
interval is assumed. 

3 SINGLE PULSE WAVEFORM 

3.1 Mi^or Pulse Waveform Features 

3.1.1 Base 

The two portions of a pulse waveform which represent 
the first nominal state from which a pulse departs and 
to which it ultimately returns. 

3.1.2 Top 

The portion of a pulse waveform which represent the 
second nominal state of a pulse. 



IS 14501( Parti): 1998 



3.1.3 First Transition 

The major transition waveform of a puise waveform 
between the base and the top. 

3.1.4 Last Transition 

The major transition waveform of a pulse waveform 
between the top and the base. 

3.2 Magnitude Characteristics and References 

All magnitude characteristics unless otherwise 
specified, are derived from data within the waveform 
epoch. 

3.2.1 Base Magnitude 

The magnitude of the base as obtained by a specified 
procedure or algorithm. Unless otherwise specified 
both portions of the base are included in the procedure 
or algorithm (j^e Fig. 1 andSJ-l). 

3.2.2 Top Magnitude 

The magnitude of the top obtained by a specified 
procedure or algorithm (see Fig. 1 and 53.1 for 
suitable algorithms). 

3.2.3 Pube Amplitude 

The algebraic difference between the top magnitude 
and the base magnitude (see Fig. 1). 

3.2.4 Percent Reference Magnitude ^ 
A reference magnitude specified by: 

(x)%Af,=Mb+ ^(^r-Mb) 

where 

0<jc<100 

(x)% Afr = percent reference magnitude 

Afb =: base magnitude 

M, ss top m.agnitude 

MhMt and (x)% A/r are all in the same unit of 
measurement. 

3.2.5 Magnitude Reference Lines 

3.2,5.1 Base line (top line) 

The magnitude reference line at the base (top) 
magnitude {see Fig. 1). 

3-2,5,2 Proximal (distal) line 

A magnitude reference line at a specified magnitude 
in the proximal (distal) region of a pulse waveform. 
Unless otherwise specified, the proximal (distal) 
line is at the 10(90) percent reference magnitude 
(seeFig. 1). 

3.2.5.3 Mesial line 

A magnitude reference line at a specified magnitude 
in the mesial region of a pulse waveform. Unless 



otherwise specified, the mesial line is at the 50 percent 
reference magnitude (jee Fig. 1). 

3.2.6 Magnitude Reference Point 

3.2.6.1 Proximal (distal) point 

A magnitude referenced point at the intersection of a 
waveform and a proximal (distal) line (see Fig. 1). 

3.2.6.2 Mesial point 

A magnitude referenced point at the intersection of a 
waveform and a mesial line (see Fig. 1). 

3.3 Time Cisaracteristics and References 

3.3.1 Pulse Start (Stop) Time 

The instant specified by a n^utgnitude referenced point 
on the first (last) transition of a pulse waveform. 
Unless otherwise specified, the pulse start (stop) time 
is at the mesial point on the first (last) transition (see 
Fig. 1), 

3.3.2 Pulse Duration 

The duration between pulse start time and pulse stop 
tlmt (see Fig. 1). 

3.3.3 Transition Duration 

The duration between the proximal point and the distal 
point on a transition waveionu. 

3.3,3,1 First (last) transition duration 

The transition duration of the first (last) transition 
waveform in a pulse waveform (see Fig* 1)= 

NOTE — Previously called *rise (fall) time*. 

3.3.4 Time Reference Lines 

3.3.4.1 Pulse start (stop) line 

The time reference line at pulse start (stop) time (see 
Fig, 1). 

33.4.2 Top centre line 

The time reference line at the average of pulse start 
time and pulse stop time (see Fig. 1). 

33.5 Pulse Time Reference Points 

3-3.5,1 Top centre point 

A specified time referenced point or magnitude 
referenced point on a pulse waveform top. If no point 
is specified, the top centre point is the time referenced 
point at the intersection of a pulse waveform and the 
top centre line (see Fig. 1). 

33.5.2 First (last) base point 

Unless otherwise specified, the first (last) datum point 
in a pulse epoch (compare with base centre point, 
5.3.2.7) (jee Fig. I). 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



3.4 Other Pulse Waveform Features 

3.4.1 Pulse Comer 

A continuous pulse waveform feature of specified 
extent which includes a region of maximum curvature 
or a point of discontinuity in the waveform slope. 
Unless otherwise specified, the extent of the comers in 
a rectangular or a trapezoidal pulse waveform are as 
specified in the following table: 



Corner 
First 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 



First point 
First base point 

First transition 
distal point 

Top centre point 

Last transition 
proximal point 



Last point 

First transition 
proximal point 

Top centre point 

Last transition 
distal point 

Last base point 



3.4.2 Pulse Quadrant 

One of the four continuous and contiguous pulse 
waveform features of specified extent which include a 
region of inaximum curvature or a point of 
discontinuity in the waveform slope. Unless otherwise 
specified, the extent of the quadrants in a rectangular 
or a trapezoidal pulse waveform are as specified in the 
following table: 



Quadrant 
First 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 



First point 
First base point 

First transition 
mesial point 

Top centre point 

Last transition mesial 
point 



Last point 

First transition 
mesial point 

Top centre point 

Last transition 
mesial point 
Last base point 



4 SINGLE TRANSITION WAVEFORM 

4.1 Step 

A transition waveform which has a transition duration 
which is negligible relative to the duration of the 
waveform epoch or to the duration of its adjacent first 
and second nominal states. 

4.2 Ramp 

A linear feature. 

5 COMPLEX WAVEFORMS 

5.1 Combinations of Pulses and Transitions 

5. LI Double Pulse 

Two pulse waveforms of the same polarity which are 
adjacent in time and which are considered or treated 
as a single feature. 



5.1.2 Bipolar Pulse 

Two pulse waveforms of opposite polarity which are 
adjacent in time and which are considered or treated 
as a single feature. 

5.1.3 Staircase 

Unless otherwise specified, a periodic and finite 
sequence of steps of equal magnitude and of the same 
polarity. 

5.2 Waveforms Produced by Magnitude 
Superposition 

5.2.1 Offset 

The algebraic difference between two specified 
magnitude reference lines. Unless otherwise 
specified, these two magnitude reference lines are the 
waveform base line and the magnitude origin line (see 
Fig. 1), in which case the offset is the base magnitude 
(see 3.2.1). 

5.2.2 Offset Waveform 

A waveform whose base line is offset from, unless 
otherwise specified, the magnitude origin line. 

5.2«J Composite Waveform 

A waveform which is, or which for analytical or 
descriptive purposes is treated as, the algebraic 
summation of two or more waveforms (see Fig. 2). 

5.3 Waveforms Produced by Continuous Time 
Superposition of Simpler Waveforms 

5.3.1 Pulse Train 

A continuous repetitive sequence of pulse 
waveforms. 

5.3.2 Pulse Train Time-Related Definitions 

5.3.2.1 Pulse repetition period 

The interval between the pulse start time of a first pulse 
waveform and the pulse start time of the immediately 
following pulse waveform in a periodic pulse train. 

5.3.2.2 Pulse repetition frequency 

The reciprocal of pulse repetition period. 

5.3.2.3 Pulse separation 

The interval between the pulse stop time of a first pulse 
waveform and the pulse start time of the immediately 
following pulse waveform in a pulse train. 

5.3.2.4 Duty factor 

Unless otherwise specified, the ratio of the pulse 
waveform duration to the pulse repetition period of a 
periodic pulse train. 



IS 1450J ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



5.3.2.5 On/Off ratio 

Unless otherwise specified, the ratio of the puise 
waveform duration to the pulse separation of aperiodic 
puise train. 

5.3.2.6 Base centre line 

The time reference line At the average of the pulse stop 
time of a first pulse waveform and the pulse start time 
of the immediately following pulse waveform in a 
pulse train. 

5.3.2.7 Base centre point 

A specified time referenced point or magnitude 
referenced point on a pulse train waveform base. If no 
point is specified, the base centre point is the time 
referenced point at the intersection of a pulse train 
waveform base and a base centre line [compare with 
^irst (last) base point, see 3.3.5.2)] 

5.3.2.8 Pulse train epoch 

The span of time in a pulse train for which waveform 
data are known or knowable and which extends from 
a first base centre point to the inmiediately following 
base centre point, 

5.3.3 Square Wave 

A periodic rectangular pulse train with a duty factor of 
0.5 or an OPi/off ratio of 1 . 

5.4 Waveforms Produced by Non-continuous Time 
Superposition of Simpler Waveforms 

5.4.1 Pulse Burst 

A finite sequence of pulse waveforms. 

5.4.2 Pulse Burst Time-Related Definitions 

5.4.2.1 Pulse burst duration 

The interval between the pulse start time of the first 
pulse waveform and the pulse stop time of the last 
pulse waveform in a pulse burst. 

5.4.2.2 Pulse burst separation 

The interval between the pulse stop time of the last 
pulse waveform in a pulse burst and the pulse start time 
of the first pulse waveform in the immediately 
following pulse burst. 

5.4.2.3 Pulse burst repetition period 

The interval between the pulse start time of the first 
puise waveform in a puise burst and the pulse start time 
of the first pulse waveform in the immediately 
following pulse burst in a sequence of periodic pulse 
bursts. 

5.4.2.4 Pulse burst repetition frequency 

The reciprocal of pulse burst repetition period. 



5.5 Waveforms Produced by Operations on 
Waveforms 

All envelope definitions in this clause are based on the 
cubic natural spline (or its related approximation, 
the draughtsihan's spline) with knots at specified 
points. 

All burst envelopes extend in time from the first to the 
last knot specified, the remainder of the waveform 
being: 

a) that portion of the waveform which precedes 
the first knot, and 

b) that portion of the waveform which follows the 
last knot. 

Burst envelopes and their adjacent waveform bases, 
taken together, comprise a continuous waveform 
which has a continuous first derivative except at the 
first and last knots of the envelope. 

5.5.1 Pulse Train Top (Base) Envelope 

Unless otherwise specified, the waveform defined by 
a cubic natural spline with knots at each point of 
intersection of the top centre line and the top line (the 
base centre line and the base line) of each (between 
adjacent) pulse waveform(s) in a pulse train. 

5.5.2 Pulse Burst Top Envelope 

Unless otherwise specified, the waveform defined by 
a cubic natural spline with knots at: 

a) the first transition mesial point of the first pulse 
waveform in a pulse burst, 

b) each point of intersection of the top centre line 
and the top line of each pulse waveform in a 
pulse burst, and 

c) the last transition mesial point of the last pulse 
waveform in a pulse burst (see Fig. 3). 

5.5.3 Pulse Burst Base Envelope 

Unless otherwise specified, the waveform defined by 
a cubic natural spline with knots at: 

a) that point of intersection of the pulse burst top 
envelope and the pulse burst waveform which 
precedes the first pulse waveform in a pulse 
burst, 

b) each point ofintersectionofthe base centre line 
and the base line between adjacent pulse 
waveforms in a pulse burst, and 

c) that point of intersection of the pulse burst top 
envelope and the pulse burst waveform which 
foiiOws the last pulse waveform in a pulse burst 
(see Fig. 3). 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



WAVEFORM A 



WAveroRM B 



WAVEFORM 



^ pVHu — MV^V-MvWVV — ^^-^^Hi^^^^ 



WAVEFORM D 



COMPOSITE 
WAVEFORM 



A. 



tvw^ 



X 



fcAH^MV^^ 



A. 



A*«^W^^ 



_l\ k__k_| 

_N N U 



rJ^^tA^f^ 



Fig. 2 Composite Waveform 



OtTEMT OF PU»£ BURST TOP ENVELOK 



PULSE BURST 
' TOP ENVELOPE 



PULSE TOP 
_ CENTRE UNE 




PULSE PULSE BURST 

BASE UNE BASE ENVELOPE 



PULSE BASE 
CENTRE UNE 



EXTENT or PULSE BURST BASE ENVELOPE 



Fig. 3 Pulse Burst Envelopes 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 



6 TIME RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN 
DIFFERENT PULSE WAVEFORMS 

6.1 Pulse Advance (Delay) 

The occurrence in time of one pulse waveform before 
(after) another pulse waveform. 

6.2 Pulse Advance (Delay) Interval 

The interval by which the pulse start time, unless 
otherwise specified, of one pulse waveform precedes 
(follows) the pulse start time, unless otherwise 
specified, of another pulse waveform. 

6.3 Pulse Coincidence (Non-coincidence) 

The occurrence (lack of occurrence) of two or more 
pulse waveforms in different waveforms either 
essentially simultaneously or for a specified interval. 

6.4 Pulse Coincidence (Non-coincidence) 
Duration 

The interval between specified points on two or more 
pulse waveforms in different waveforms dtiring which 
pulse coincidence (non-coincidence) exists. 

7 DISTORTION, JITTER AND FLUCTUATION 7.2.6 TUt 



distortion. Quantitative measures of distortion are 
defined in 7.L 

7.2.1 Preskoot 
A distortion which precedes a major transition. 

7.2.2 Overshoot 
A distortion which follows a major transition. 

7.2.3 Rounding 

A distortion in the form of a rounded feature which 
occurs where relatively abrupt change in slope is 
desired or expected. 

7.2.4 Spike 

A distortion in the form of pulse waveform of 
relatively short duration superimposed on an otherwise 
regular or a desired pulse waveform. 

7.2.5 Ringing 

A distortion in the form of a superimposed damped 
oscillatory waveform which, when present, usually 
follows a major transition. 



7.1 Distortion 

7.1.1 Pulse Waveform Distortion 

The algebraic difference in magnitude between all 
corresponding points in time of a pulse waveform and 
a reference pulse waveform. Unless otherwise 
specified by a mathematical adjective {see 2.5.2), 
peak-to-peak pulse waveform distortion is assumed 
{see Fig. 4). 

7.1.2 Percent Pulse Waveform-Distortion 

Pulse waveform distortion expressed as a percentage 
of, unless otherwise specified, the pulse amplitude of 
the reference pulse waveform. 

7.1.3 Pulse Waveform Feature Distortion 

The algebraic difference in magnitude between all 
corresponding points in time of a pulse waveform and 
a reference pulse waveform feature. Unless otherwise 
specified by a mathematical adjective {see 2.5.2), 
peak-to-pcak pulse waveform feature distortion is 
assumed {see Fig. 4), 

7.1.4 Percent Pulse Waveform Feature Distortion 

Pulse waveform feature distortion expressed as a 
percentage of, unless otherwise specified, the pulse 
amplitude of the reference pulse waveform. 

7,2 Qualitative Distortion Terms 

The terms defined in this clause are colloquial terms 
which qualitatively describe various types of 



A distortion of a pulse top or pulse base wherein the 
overall slope over the extent of the pulse top or the 
pulse base is essentially constant and other than zero. 
Tilt may be of either polarity. 

7.2.7 Valley 

A distortion in the form of a portion of a pulse 
waveform between two specified peak magnitudes of 
the same polarity. 

7.3 Jitter and Fluctuation 

7.3.1 Jitter 

The instability of a time characteristic of the pulse 
waveforms in a pulse train with respect to a reference 
time, interval <n duration. Unless otherwise specified 
by a mathematical adjective {see 2.5.2), peak-to-peak 
jitter is assumed. 

7.3.2 Fluctuation 

The instability of the pulse amplitude or other 
magnitude characteristic of the pulse waveforms in a 
pulse train with respect to a reference pulse amplitude 
or a reference magnitude. 

Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical 
adjective {see 2.5.2), peak-to-peak fluctuation is 
assumed. 

8 MISCELLANEOUS PULSE TERMS 

Throughout this clause, where applicable, 'pulse' 
includes *pulse train' and/or *pulse burst' . 

NOTE — AU terms listed in 8.1.1, 8.2.1, 8.3 and 8.4.1 have their 
conventional technical nwanings. All other terms have unique 



10 




PEAK-TO-PEAK 
PUL5C WAV^ORM 
DISTORnON 



Extent of data included in pulse waveform feature distortion: 
A 1 and A2 = Pulse base distortion, 
B = First transition distortion, 

C ~ Pulse top distortion, and 

D ~ Last transition distortion. 



Fro. 4 Pulse Waveform Distortion and Pulse Waveform Feature Distortion 



O 



80 



SO 

90 



IS14501(Partl):1998 



meanings in puise technology and arc individually defined. 
However, some defined tenns also have conventional technical 
meanings. In any particular use of such terms, the distinction 
between conventional usage and pulse usage can only be 
determined from context. 

8.1 Operations on a Pulse 

8.1.1 General 

Amplification, attenuation, conditioning, conversion, 
coupling, demodulation, detection, discrimination, 
filtering, inversion, reception, reflection and 
transmission may occur or be performed. 

8.1.2 Clamping 

A process in which a specified instantaneous 
magnitude of a pulse is fixed at a specified magnitude. 
Typically, after clamping. all instantaneous 
magnitudes of the pulse are offset, the pulse shape 
remaining unaltered. 

8.1.3 Delaying 

A process in which a pulse is delayed in time by active 
circuitry or by propagation. 

8.1.4 Shaping 

A process in which the shape of a pulse is modified to 
one which is ideal or more suitable for the intended 
application wherein time and/or magnitude 
characteristics may be changed. Typically, some 
property(ies) of the original pulse is/are preserved. 

8.1.4.1 Regeneration 

A shaping process in which a pulse with desired 
reference characteristics is developed from a pulse 
which lacks certain desired characteristics. 

8.1.4.2 Stretching 

A shaping process in which pulse duration is increased. 

8.1.4.3 Clipping 

A shaping process in which the magnitude of a pulse 
is constrained at one or more predetermined 
magnitudes. 

8.1.4.4 Limiting 

A clipping process in which the pulse shape is 
preserved for all magnitudes between predetermined 
clipping magnitudes. 

8.1.4.5 Slicing 

A clipping process in which the pulse shape is 
preserved for all magnitudes less (greater) than a 
predetermined clipping magnitude. 



8.1.4.6 Differentiation 

A shaping process in which a pulse is converted to a 
wave whose shape is or approximates the time 
derivative of the pulse. 

8.1.4.7 Integration 

A shying process in which a ptilse is converted to a 
wave whose shape is or approximates the time integral 
of the pulse. 

8.2 Operations by a Pulse 

8.2.1 General 

Activation, blanking, clearing, deactivation, 
deflection, reading, resetting, selection, 
sequencing, setting, starting, stopping, storing, 
switching and writing may occur or be performed. 

8.2.2 Synchronizing 

The process of rendering a first pulse train or other 
sequence of events synchronous with a second pulse 
train. 

8.2.3 Strobing 

A process in which a first pulse of relatively short 
duration interacts with a second pulse or other event of 
relatively longer duration to yield a signal which is 
indicative of (typically, proportional to) the magnitude 
of the second pulse during the first pulse. 

8.2.4 Sampling 

A process in which strobing pulses yield signals which 
are proportional to the magnitude (typically, as a 
function of time) of another pulse or event. 



8.2.5 Triggering 

A process in which a transition 
predetermined event or response. 



mitiates a 



8.3 Operation Involving the Interaction of Pulses 

Addition, chopping, coding, comparison, decoding, 
encoding, mixing, modulation, subtraction, 
summation and superposition {see also 5) may occur 
or be performed. 

8.4 Logical Operations with Pulses 

The pulse is considered in this clause as a logical 
operator. Frequently, some operations defined in 8.1, 
8.2 and 8.3 are often logical operations in the sense of 
this clause. 

8.4.1 General 

*AND\ NAND\ OR\ NOR' exclusive OR\ 
inversion, inhibiting, enabling, disabling, counting or 
other logical operations may be performed. 



12 



IS 14501 ( Part 1 ) : 1998 

8.42 Slivering portions of a second pulse or other event for the 

. • u- u . • 11 . J 1 r duration of the first pulse. 

A process in which a typically unwanted pulse of 

relatively short duration is produced by a logical 8.4.4 Shifting 

operation. Typically, slivering is a result of partial . • l- . i • , r- ^ 

pulse coincidence, ^ P'^"^^"" '" ^^'^^ *°^'^^* '^^^^' *" ^ specified 

sequence are transferred without alteration ot the 

8.4.3 Gating sequence from one storage element to another by the 

A process in which a first pulse enables or disables ^ 



13 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending lo connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the b;isis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. LTD 21 ( 1430 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Za£ar Marg, New Delhi 1 1 0002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Eastern 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : QLT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMB AI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r33784 99,33785 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



f235 0216,235 04 42 
12351519,2352315 

1-83292 95,832 78 58 
183278 91,832 7892 



Printed at Simco fainting PrcM, Delhi, ^ia 



