**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10075 (1981) : Start relay and overload protector for 
resistance start induction run hermetic compressors [ETD 
35: Power Systems Relays] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

START RELAY AND OVERLOAD PROTECTOR 

FOR RESISTANCE START INDUCTION 

RUN HERMETIC COMPRESSOR 



UDG e2i-316r925'4: 621-51 : C2l 56/59 




© CQpyrtght \m 

IPIPIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK HHAVAN. 9 BAHAnUK 8HAH ZAFAR MARC 

NEW DELHI 110002 



ll& : 10675 * 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

START RELAY AND OVERLOAD PROTECTOR 

FOR RESISTANCE START INDUCTION 

RUN HERMETIC COMPRESSOR 

Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi N. Nath English Electric Go of India Ltd, Madras 

Members 
Shri K. Ghakba-BArti ( Alternate to 
ShriN.Nath) 
Shbi R. D. Bath a Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shui S. K. Bandopadhyaya {Alternate) 
Shri K. G. Bawa Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Deputy DmEOTOB ( PSl/TI ) Railway Board, New Delhi 

[ Deputy Dibector Standards 
( Eleg ) G 2 ] ( Alternate ) 
Shei a. p. Dhandb Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Shbi N. A. Joshi ( Alternate) 
Director ( GIF ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Shbi K. L, Gabo Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing J, New Delhi 
Shri A. Gtjpta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Govind Appa Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shbi R. K. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri D. P. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. N. Kamra Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh 

Shri J, G. Jitneja ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Kaushikkau Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi Devbndeb Nath ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Madhavan Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri P. U. Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri E. J. MahAbleshwarwalla Bombay Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking, 

Bombay 
Shri S. G. Karadkar {Alternate) 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyngkt 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 1Q075 - 1981 

{ Contimed from page 1 ) 



Members Representing 

Shbi G. K. Malaviya Universal Electrics Ltd, 24 Parganas 

Shri G. Ghose {Alternate) 
Shri B. G. MukherJee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi D. P. MuKHERJB^ ( AUerrtat^ ) 
Shri Nachhatter Singh Bbarat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri Ramsubbiah ( 4^terrtaf« ) 

Shri V. Rajjhakbishnan { Alternate ) 
ShriJ. S. Negi Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Dr K. K. Thakkab ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Palki ASEA Electric India Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shbi a. K. Raja University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Shri A. M. Sahni Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Go Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri V. S. Dobai {Alternate) 
Shbi B. S. Shabma U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow 

Shri G. N. Thadani Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. K. Das (Alternate ) 
Shbi R. Venkataraman Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shbi A, P. Ramaswamy ( Alternate ) 
Db R. P. Wadhwa National Physical Laboratory ( GSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shri K. G. Ghhabra ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Saohdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shr R. K. Monga 
Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 

Relays for AirGOnditioning and Refrigeration Equipment, 
ETDG35/P7 

Convener 
Prof A. K. Mehta Kelvinator of India Ltd, Faridabad 

Members 

Shbi V. S, Ghandrasekhar ( Alternate to 
Prof A. K. Mehta ) 
Shbi G. Ananthanabayan Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. S. Dhabher Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi B. J. Wadia ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Kbswani 31 ue Star Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S, Madhava Rao The Hyderabad Allwyn Metal Works Ltd, 

Hyderabad 

Shbi Bhasear Narayak ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Chaman Mahajan Ranutrol Ltd> New Delhi 

Shbi Ashim Boss ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. K, Talwab Danfoss ( India ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr K. K. Thakkab Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Dr B . K. Dasgupxa ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10075 . 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

START RELAY AND OVERLOAD PROTECTOR 

FOR RESISTANCE START INDUCTION 

RUN HERMETIC COMPRESSOR 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Relays Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 The function of this device is to operate as a starting device for the 
resistance start-induction run ( RSIR ) motor of the refrigeration hermetic 
compressor and also to disconnect in the shortest possible time power 
supply to the compressor in the event of abnormal current drawn by the 
compressor motor and/or overheating of the compressor motor under 
abnormal operating conditions. 

0.3 The design of the starting relay portion of this device is such as to 
ensure satisfactory starting and running of the compressor motor over its 
specified operating voltage range and operating conditions. The thermal 
overload protector portion of the device is designed to protect the 
compressor motor from damage in the event of overload conditions; it also 
ensures avoidance of nuisance trippings in the specified operating range. 

0,4 The start relay and overload protector combination unit covered 
by this standard is one of the relays used in the domestic refrigerators, 
water coolers, deep freezers, bottle coolers and other similar applications, 

0.5 This standard provides guidance to the manufacturers and the users 
for rating and testing the start relay and overload protector for hermetic 
compressor, 

0.6 IS : 9994-1981* has been prepared separately to cover potential relays 
for capacitor start-capacitor run hermetic compressors. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 

*Specification for potential relays for capacitor start-capacitor run hermetic 
compressors. 



IS : 10075 . 1981 

expressing the result of a test or analysis^ shall be rcurdfd off in accord- 
ance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements of start relay and overload 
protector assembled either as a composite unit or mounted separately 
outside the compressor shell. 

1.2 This standard is applicable only to start relay and overload protector 
used in conjunction with hermetic compressor which has split phase 
resistance start-induction run motor ( RSIR ), 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition 
to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part XVII )-1969t and IS : 1885 ( Part IX )- 

1966J shall apply, 

2.1 Pick<-Up Current of a Relay — The minimum increasing value of 
current in the coil above which the relay contacts will close, 

2.2 Drop-Out Current of a Relay — The maximum decreasing value 
of current in the coil below which the relay contacts will open. 

2.3 Overload Protector — A device consisting of a bimetal strip or disc 
optionally in combination with a heating clement capable of automatically 
disconnecting power to the hermetic compressor in case the compressor 
motor is overloaded either due to heavy currents or overheat or both 
during starting or running condition and automatically resets upon cooling 
of the compressor and/or lowering of the overloading current. 

2.4 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity to the require- 
ments of this specification. They are intended to prove general quality 
and design of a given type of relay. 

2.5 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each relay to check require- 
ments likely to vary during production. 

3. RATINGS 

3.1 Rated Current — The value of the current marked on the relay upon 
which its performance is based. It is the current in the coil of the relay 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
tElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part XVII Switcht^ear and controlgear. 
|Electrotecbnical vocabulary; Part IX Electrical relays. 



IS: 10075 -1981 

tor which the relay and the overload protector are intended to be used at 
the rated voltage, 

3.2 Maximum Pick-Up Current — The value of maximum pick-up 
current of the start relay shall be as agreed to between the manufacturer 
and the user. 

3.3 Minimum Drop-Out Current — The value of the minimum drop- 
out current of this start relay shall be as agreed to between the manu- 
facturer and the user. 

3.4 Locked Rotor Current — The value shall be as agreed to between 
the manufacturer and the user. 

4. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 General 

4.1.1 Material used shall be mechanically sturdy and electrically safe 
and suitable for the particular application and shall be capable of with- 
standing the mechanical and electrical tests specified in this standard. 

4.1.2 All parts must be resistant to rusting and deterioration under 
conditions of normal use, 

4.2 Contacts 

4.2.1 The electrical contacts of the overload protector shall be of snap 
acting type. 

4.2.2 The contacts of the start relay as well as the overload protector 
shall have sufficient capacity to make, carry and break their respective 
locked rotor current at 110 percent of the rated voltage. 

4.2.3 Plug-in Contacts — The plug-in contact design of the combin- 
ation and other units shall be such as to ensure easy snug fitting upon the 
compressor glassmatic terminal pins to achieve proper contact resistance 
and facilitate case of fitting or dismantling without damage or getting 
loose in compressor during actual use, 

4.3 Clearances and Creepage Distances — The clearances and cree- 
page distances shall be as large as practicable and creepage distances 
shall, wherever applicable, incorporate ridges, in order to break the 
continuity of conducting deposits which may form. 

4.4 Terminals 

4.4.1 The terminals shall be of substantial mechanical construction and 
shall provide adequate electrical contacts for the appropriate size of 
conductors. 



IS t 10075 « 1981 

iA*2 The terminals shall be such that they do not turn or get displaced 
when the connections are made. 

4.4*3 The terminals shall be so mounted that the appropriate conductor 
may be connected without impairing the safe performance of the unit. 

4AA The relay ( combination unit ) may be provided with insulated 
body cover to avoid electrical shock hazard due to accidental contact with 
live terminals, 

4-5 Overall Dimensions — The preferred overall dimensions for the 
relay ( combination unit ) are given in Fig. L 



rrr 



SA max. 



■ ^ 27 max. 



tt-66^Q03 



^ 






\^ 



SO max 



/3 SOCKETS TO ENSURE GOOD ELECTRICAL 
f CONTACT WITH PiNS OF DIAMETER 2-2ioi3 
AND 7-K LENGTH 




Fig. 1 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Start Relay and Overload Protector ( Combination Unit) 



5. OPERATING CONDITIONS 
5.1 Limits of Operation 

5.1.1 Pick-Up Current ( of the Start Relay ) 
between the manufacturer and the user. 



It shall be as agreed upon 



5.1.2 Drop-Out Current ( of the Start Relay ) — It shall be as agreed 
upon betv/een the manufacturer and the user. 

5.2 Performance of the Overload Protector 

5*2p1 Short Time Locked Rotor Trip Current {under Cold Conditions) at 
21^C — The value of trip time at this current shall be as agreed upon 
between the rnanufacturer and the user. 



18:10075.1981 

5.2.2 No-Current Trip Temperature — The value of the temperature at 
which the overload protector trips, without carrying any current through 
the protector, shall be as agreed upon between the manufacturer and the 
user. 

5.2.3 Ultimate Trip Current of the Overload Protector — The value of the 
ultimate trip current at specified temperature shall be as agreed upon 
between the manufacturer and the user. The value shall be considered 
at the steady state temperature in the temperature rise condition. 

5.2.4 When the overload protector has stabilized to a steady state 
temperature or predetermined temperature as may be agreed upon 
between the manufacturer and the user, it shall comply with the require- 
ments given in 7.6.2, 7.6.3 and 7.6.4. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Marking on the device shall be visible and indelible and shall be on 
the name-plate or on the body. 

6.2 Each start relay and overload protector shall be marked with the 
following: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Type designation or serial number, 

c) Rated voltage, 

d) Mounting position indicating * top *, and 

e) Country of manufacture, 

6.3 The device may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a weU-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use oi the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. TESTS 

7*0 General Conditions of Tests 

a) Unless specified otherwise in the individual clause, the ambient 
temperature shall be 43 i 1°G. 

b) Unless specified or stated otherwise by the manufacturer, each 
type test shall be carried out on a clean and new device. 



IS ; 10075 - 1981 

c) Ail the tests shall be done at rated frequency for which the device 
is intended. 

d) For tests, the device shall be mounted and installed as indicated 
by the manufacturer. The details of installation (type and size 
of enclosure, if any, size of conductor, etc ) shall be indicated in 
the test report* 

7.1 Type Tests — The following shall constitute the type tests: 

a) Insulation test ( 7.4 ); 

b) Test for operating limits of the start relay ( 7.5 ); 

c) Test for operating limits and characteristics of overload prote- 
ctor ( 7.6 ); 

d) Test for mechanical endurance ( 7.7 ); 

e) Test for electrical endurance ( 7.8 ); 

f) Make, carry and breaking current capacity of the contacts 
[ pocked rotor current ] ( 7.9 ); and 

g) Bump test ( under consideration ) ( 7.10 ). 

7.2 Routine Tests — The following shall constitute the routine tests:. 

a) Insulation tests ( 7.4 ); 

b) Test for operating limits of the start relay ( 7.5 ); 

c) Test for operating limits of the overload protector ( 7.6 ); and 

d) Short time locked rotor trip current ( cold conductor ) ( 5.2.1 ). 

7.3 Acceptance Tests — The sampling procedure for acceptance tests 
shall be as agreed upon between the manufacturer and the user* 

7.3.1 The following shall constitute the acceptance tests: 

a) Insulation tests ( 7.4 ); 

b) Test for operating limits of start relay ( 7*5 ); 

c) Test for operating trip ^ OFF ' timings of the overload protector 
limits ( 7.6 ); and 

d) Verification of make, carrry and breaking current capacity of 
the contacts ( locked rotor currents ) ( 7.9 ). 

7.4 Insulation Test 

7.4.1 Condition of the Device for Test — Apart from the general conditions 
specified in 7.0, the additional conditions shall be as follows: 

a) When the dielectric strength of the device is dependent upon the 
taping of leads or the use of special insulation, such taping or 
special insulation shall also be used during the test. 

$ 



IS ! 10075 . 1981 



b) Metallic parts shall be placed at all the fixing points in accord- 
ance with the conditions of normal installation of the device and 
these parts shall be considered as a part of the frame of the 
device. 

7.4.2 The test voltage shall be applied for 1 minute between: 

a) all the incoming and outgoing terminals connected together and 
the frame, 

b) the incoming and the outgoing terminals of the relay contacts, and 

c) the incoming terminals. 

The incoming and outgoing terminals of the device are shown in 



Fig. 2. 



OVERLOAD 

PROTECTOR 



INCOMING 

TERMINALS 

POWER SUPPLY 



hjit- 



^ 



START COIL 



CONTACT 



TO MAIN 
WINDING 



TO START 
WINDING 



OUTGOING 
^TERMINALS TO 
COMPRESSOR 



Fig. 2 Illustration of Incoming and Outgoing Terminals of 
Relay and Overload Protector ( Combination Unit ) 



7.4.3 The test vohage shall be of sinusoidal waveform and shall have a 
frequency between 40 and 60 Hz. The test voltage for type tests shall be 
2 U + I 000 V rms applied for a period of 1 minute, where U is the rated 
voltage. For the purpose of routine test, a voltage of 2'5 kV rms shall be 
applied for a period of 1 second, 

7.5 Test for Operating Limits of the Start Relay 

7.5.1 The device shall be mounted as required for normal service. 
This test shall be carried out at an ambient temperature of 27 ± 2'*C. 

7.5.2 Pick-Up Current — Starting from zero, the current in the relay coil 
shall be increased gradually until it picks up and this value of pick-up 
current shall be within the limits stated in 5.1.1. The closing of the relay 
contacts shall be swift and chatter-free. 

7.5.3 Drop-Out Current — Th^ current in the relay core after pick-up 
shall be decreased gradually and the drop-out current shall be recorded 



IS: 10075 -1981 

which shall be within the limits stated in 5.I.2. The opening of the relay 
contact shall be swift and chatter-free. 

7.5 Test for Operating Linuts aad Characteristics of Overload 
Protector 

7.6.1 The unit under test should be complete and duly assembled with 
its cover shall be mounted in an oven. The position of the device shall 
be in accordance with the actual service conditions. Cables of proper 
size as agreed upon between the manufacturer and the user shall be used 
while determining the characteristics of the overload protector. 

7.6.1.1 Test oven — The test oven shall maintain uniform tempera- 
ture inside the heating cabinet. The total temperature variation in 
the cabinet where the overload protector is tested shall not exceed 2°G 
when measured at two extreme corners, such as front bottom right hand 
and rear top left hand corners. Any air circulation, hot or otherwise, 
shall be controlled in such a way that no cold or hot air pockets are created 
in the oven. Continuous and uniform heating of the oven shall be 
maintained. The initial rate of uniform temperature rise in the test 
chamber shall be not more than 5"G per minute until a temperature 5°C 
below the required temperature is reached. Thereafter, the rate of heating 
shall be so controlled that the temperature rise shall not be more than 
0*5°C per minute. The final test temperature shall be maintained wuthin 
±VC of the temperature stated in 5.2.1. 

7.6.2 Test for No'Current Trip Temperature — The device shall be kept in 
the oven mounted as for normal service and its temperature shall be 
increased gradually as given in 7.6.1.1. The protector shall trip within the 
limits stated for no-current trip temperature. 

7.6.3 Test for Reset Temperature — In the test for no-current trip tempera- 
ture ( see 7.6.2 ) after the device trips, the oven shall be switched off and 
allowed to cool gradually at a rate not more than 1°G per minute. The 
temperature at which the protector resets shall be recorded and it shall 
be within the limits stated by the manufacturer. 

7.6.4 Test for Verification of Trip Characteristic of the Overload Protector — 
The test shall be carried out to check the conformity to 5.2, The method 
of test shall be as agreed upon between the manufacturer and the user. 

7.7 Mechanical Endurance Test 

7.7.1 Start Relay — The relay shall be mounted as for normal service 
and energized at its rated locked rotor current at a frequency of operation 
to be stated by the manufacturer. The period of energization of the relay 
shall be greater than the starting time of the motor with which it is 
intended to be used. The relay shall withstand satisfactorily 500 000 

10 



IS : 10075 - 1981 

energization operations without failure. During this test, the relay 
contacts shall not carry any current. 

At the end of the mechanical endurance test, the pick-up/drop-out 
currents shall be checked and compared with the initial values obtained. 
The deviations in the values shall not exceed ± 5 percent. 

7,7.2 Pmh'On and Pull-Out Force Test { Applicable to Plug-in Contact 
Relays ) — The plug-in type relays shall be pushed on to the plug on the 
compressor body. The push-on force for the first insertion shall not 
exceed 15 kgf. The relay shall be tested to withstand 20 insertions and 
withdrawals on the compressor body without damage. At the end of the 
test, the pull-out force for withdrawal of the contacts shall not be less 
than 2-5 kgf. 

7.8 Test for Electrical Endurance of Contacts 

7.8.1 The relay shall be mounted as for the normal service. The 
contacts shall be tested for compliance with the ratings. The contacts 
shall make or break the current, voltage and power factor of a test circuit 
simulating the actual service conditions. The test shall be carried out at 
the rate of 5 operations per minute. The contacts shall work satisfactorily 
for a minimum of 100 000 operations without excessive burning or pitting 
of the contacts. 

7.9 Make, Carry and Break Current Capacity of Contacts ( Locked 
Rotor Current ) 

7.9.1 The relay shall be connected in a test circuit to achieve the stated 
values of make, carry and break current. The voltage shall be 90 percent 
of the rated voltage of the relay. The duration of test shall be 15 days 
or 50 000 cycles of operation of opening and closing of the relay contacts, 
whichever is higher. At the end of the test, the maximum deviation from 
the initial values of no-current trip temperature and reset temperature 
shall not be more than ±7 percent. Also, no excessive burning or 
pitting of the overload and start relay contacts shall take place. 

7.9.1.1 At the end of 12 500 operations (25 percent of the test 
operations), a check shall be made for the values of no-currents trip 
temperature and reset temperature. If these values differ by more 
than 7*0 percent of the initial values, further testing shall be suspended. 

Note — This test shall be carried out at an ambient tecnperatare of 3^°0. 

7»10 Bump Test — Under consideration. 



U 



INDIAN StANDAUD^ 

ON 

RELAYS 

IS: 

1885 Electrotechnical vocabulary 

Part IX-1966 Electrical relays 

Part X-1968 Electrical power system protection 
3231-1965 Electrical relays for power system protection 
3637-1966 Gas-operated relays 

3638-1966 Application guide for gas-operated relays 
3842 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: 

Part 1-1967 Overcurrent relays for feeders and transformers 

Part 11-1966 Overcurrent relays for generators and motors 

Part III-1966 Phase unbalance relays including negative phase sequence relays 

Part lV-1966 Thermal relays 

Part V-1968 Distance protection relays 

Part VI-1972 Power relays 

Part VII- 1972 Frequency relays 

Part VIII-1976 Voltage relays 

Part IX-1977 Relays for busbar protection 

Part X-1976 Relays for transverse differential protection 

Part XII-1976 Differential relays for transformers 
4483 ( Parti )-1968 Preferred panel cutout dimensions for electrical relays: 

Part I Flush mounting IDMTL relays 
5834 Electrical timer relays for industrial purposes; 

Part 1-1973 Pneumatic 

Part 11-1973 Motorized 

Part IIM981 Electronic 
8686-1977 Static protective relays 

8714-1978 Electrical protective relays for use in seismic areas 
9124-1979 Guide for maintenance and field testing of electrical relays 



