**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12672 (1989) : Internal fuses and internal overpressure 
disconnectors for shunt capacitors [ETD 29: Power 
Capacitors] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12672 : 1989 

Indian Standard ' "^^"'™^' ^''' ' 

INTERNAL FUSES AND INTERNAL 
OVERPRESSURE DISCONNECTORS FOR 
SHUNT CAPACITORS — SPECIFICATION 

5ia ?T«nfT«Tf % M 3n??ffW 1^ sftT 3TT?!?fT«P 3Tf«RW fsRt^np — filf5rfes 



UDC 62r316'923 : 621-316-545 : 62V2l9'A016-6\ 



© BIS 1990 

» 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI U0002 

March 1990 P"*'« *^'«"P ^ 



Power Capacitors Sectional Committee, ETDC 29 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 19 April 1989, after the 
draft finalized by the Power Capacitors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
technical Division Council. 

This standard is intended to formulate uniform requirements regarding performance, tests and 
provides guidance for the coordination of internal fuse and internal disconnector protection of the 
shunt capacitors covered in IS 2834 : 1986 'Specification for shunt capacitors for power systems 
( second revision )'. 

The fuses and disconnectors conforming to this standard are designed to isolate faulted capacitor 
elements or capacitor units to allow operation of the remaining parts of that capacitor unit and the 
bank in which the capacitor unit is connected. Such fuses and disconnectors are not a substitute 
for a switching device, such as, circuit breaker, or external protection of the capacitor bank, or part 
thereof. 

This standard is based on the following publications/documents issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( lEC ): 

a) lEC Pub 593 ( 1977 ) and Amendment No 1 ( April 1980 ) Internal fuses and internal 
overpressure disconnectors for shunt capacitors, and 

b) Doc : 33 ( Central Office ) 72 Draft Amendment No. 2 to lEC Pub 593 ( 1977 ). 



IS 12672 : 1989 



Indian Standard 

INTERNAL FUSES AND INTERNAL 
OVERPRESSURE DISCONNECTORS FOR 
SHUNT CAPACITORS — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements, tests 
and guidance for coordination of internal fuses 
used to protect shunt capacitors. 

1.2 This standard also applies to internal over- 
pressure disconnectors used to protect self-heal- 
ing metallized dielectric capacitors. 

NOTE — The requirements of self-healing and non- 
self healing shunt capacitors for power systems are 
covered in IS 2384 : 1986 ^Specification for shunt capa- 
citors for power systems ( second revision )'. 

1.3 This standard does not apply to fuses and 
disconnectors for which service conditions, in 
general, are not compatible with the require- 
ments of the standard, unless otherwise agreed 
to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

1.4 The guidance for coordination of fuse and 
disconnector protection is given in Annex A. 

2 REFERENCE STANDARD 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard. 



IS No. 
IS 1885 (Part 42 ) 

IS 2834 : 1986 

IS 9224 ( in parts) 
IS 9385 ( in parts ) 
IS 9926 : 1981 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 The following definitions in addition to those 
covered in IS 1885 ( Part 42 ) : 1986 shall apply. 

NOTE — The word 'element' in this standard is used in 
accordance with definitions contained in IS 1885 
( Part 42 ) : 1986 and not in accordance with IS 9224 
IS 9926: 1981 or IS 9385. 



Title 

1986 Electrotechnical voca- 
bulary: Part 42 Power 
capacitors (first revi- 
sion ) 

Specification for shunt 
capacitors for power 
systems ( second revi- 
sion ) 

Specification for low 
voltage fuses 

Specification for high 
voltage fuses 

Specification for fuse- 
wire used in rewirable 
type electric fuses up 
to 650 volts 



3.2 Bank Protection 

A general term for all protective equipment for 
a capacitor bank, or part thereof. 

3.3 Internal Fuse 

A fuse connected inside a capacitor unit in series 
with an element or a group of elements. 

3.4 Internal Overpressure Disconnector 

A disconnecting device inside a capacitor designed 
to interrupt the current path in case of excessive 
rising pressure. 

NOTES 

1 This overpressure disconnector is not a current- 
]iniiting fuse, 

2 This type of disconnector can also be placed outside 
the capacitor unit but is still considered an integral 
part of the capacitor unit, and shall fulfil the same 
requirements and pass the same tests as the internal 
overpressure disconnector. 

3 This device is normally used in capacitors of the 
self-healing type, 

3.5 Unbalance Protection 

A device sensitive to capacitance difference bet- 
ween branches of the bank normally in balance 
with each other. The capacitance difference may 
be due to a blow fuse(s), or operation of a dis- 
connector or insulation failure within the bank. 

NOTE — Other protective devices, such as, overcurrent 
and earth fault protection, are self-explanatory since 
they are commonly used for other applications. 

4 GENERAL REQJUIREMENTS 

4.1 The fuse is connected in series to the 
clement(s) which the fuse is intended to isolate 
if the element(s) becomes faulty. The range of 
currents and voltages for the fuse is, therefore, 
dependent on the capacitor design, and in some 
cases also on the bank in which the fuse is 
connected. 

4.1.1 The operation of an internal fuse is in 
general determined by one or both of the follow- 
ing factors: 

a) The discharge energy from elements or 
units connected in parallel with the faulty 
element or unit, and 

b) The power-frequency fault current. 

4.2 The disconnector is intended to interrupt the 
current to all elements of the capacitor. The 
proper operation of the disconnector is ^dependent 



1 



IS 12672 : 1989 



Rated Bank 
Voltage 

(1) 


Ui (Lower 
Limit) 

(2) 


Up to 650 V 


0-9>/2Ui( 


Above 650 V 


0-9^TUn 



ofl the leak tightness of the container during the 
life of the capacitor. 

5 DISCONNECTING REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 The fuse shall enable the faulty element to 
be disconnected when electrical breakdown of 
elements occurs in a voltage range, in which Ui 
is the lowest, and t/g is the highest (instantaneous) 
value of the voltage between the terminals of the 
unit at the instant of fault. 

5.1.1 The recommended values for U^ and U^ are 

given in Table 1. 

5.2 Tiie disconnector shall enable the faulty 
capacitor unit to be disconnected for voltages up 
to and including U^. 

5.2.1 The recommended rms value is U^^Vl I7n. 

NOTE — The purchaser shall specify if this voltage 
will be exceeded. 

Table 1 Recommended Value of Ui and U2 

( CfausesSAA and 6.5 ) 

Ut (Upper 
Limit) 

(3)^ 

V5^2U^ 

2-0 V2Uj^ 

NOTES 

1 The Ui and Ut values above are based on the voltage 
that may normally occur across the capacitor unit 
terminals at the instant of electrical breakdovi^n of the 
element. 

The C/a values are of a transient nature and allowance 
has been made for increased damping at low voltage. 
The purchaser shall specify if the Ui and U2 values 
diflFer from those given in Table 1. If so, the values in 
Tables 3 and 4 shall be changed accordingly. 

2 The requirements are valid for a bank switched by 
a restrike-free circuit-breaker. If the breakers are not 
restnke-free, the other requirements shall be as agreed 
to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 



6 WITHSTAND REQ,UIREMENTS 

6.1 After operation, the fuse assembly and the 
disconnector must withstand full element voltage 
and full voltage between the terminals of the 
disconnected capacitor respectively plus any 
unbalance voltage due to fuse or disconnector 
action and any short-time transient overvoltages 
normally experienced during the life of the 
capacitor. 

6.2 Throughout the life of the capacitor, the 
disconnector shall be capable of carrying conti- 
nuously a current equal to or greater than 1*1 
times the maximum permissible unit current and 
the fuses capable of carrying continuously a 
current equal to or greater than the maximum 
permissible unit current divided by the number 
of parallel fused paths. 



NOTE — The requirements are valid if the capacitors 
are switched by a restrike-free circuit-breaker. 

If the breakers are not restrike-free, other require- 
ments are to be agreed between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser. 

6.3 The fuse and the disconnector shall be cap- 
able of withstanding the inrush-currents due to 
the switching operations expected during the life 
of the capacitor. 

6.4 The fuse connected to the undamaged ele- 
ment(s) must be able to carry the discharge 
currents due to the breakdown of element(s). 

6.5 The fuses and disconnectors must be able to 
carry the currents due to short-circuit faults 
extended to the unit(s) on the bank occurring 
within the voltage range in accordance with 
Table 1. 

7 MARKING 

7.1 The marking regarding the presence of 
internal fuse and internal overpressure disconnec- 
tor shall be provided on the rating plate of the 
shunt capacitor. 

8 TESTS 

8.1 Type Tests 

The following shall constitute type tests: 

a) Discharge test ( see 9 ); 

b) Disconnecting test on fuses ( see 10 ); and 

c) Disconnecting test on disconnector ( see 
11). 

NOTES 

1 In addition to above requirements, the fuses and 
disconnectors shall be able to withstand all type tests 
of the capacitor units specified in IS 2834 : 1986. 

2 Type tests of fuses are performed either on one 
complete capacitor unit or, at the choice of the manu- 
facturer, on two units, one unit being tested at the 
lower voltage limit, in accordance with 10. i and one 
unit at the upper voltage limit. 

Theunit(s) shall have passed all routine tests stated in 
IS 2834: 1986. 

3 Due to testing, measuring and safety circumstances, 
it may bs necessary to make soms modifications to the 
unit(s) under test; for example, those indicated in 
Annex B ( see the different test methods given in 
Annex B ). 

8.1.1 Type tests of disconnectors are performed 
on a capacitor unit that shall have passed all 
routine tests stated in IS 2834 : 1986. 

8.1-2 Type tests are considered valid if they are 
performed on capacitors of a design identical 
with that of the capacitor offered, or on a capa- 
citor of a design that does not differ from it in 
any way that might affect the properties to be 
checked by the type test. 

8.2 Routine Tests 

8.2.1 No routine tests are required. » 



IS 12672 5 1989 



9 DISCHARGE TEST 

9-1 The fuses and disconnectors shall be subject- 
ed to five discharges within 10 min from a dc 
test voltage through a gap situated as closely as 
possible to the capacitor, without any additional 
impedance in the circuit. 

9,1.1 The test voltage shall be taken from 
Table 2. 

9.2 To prove that the fuses or disconnector have 
not operated, a capacitance measurement shall 

Table 2 Test Voltages 

( Clause 9.1 A ) 



Rated Bank 
Voltage 

(1) 
Up to 650 V 
Above 650 V 



Test Voltage 
( Times Unit Voltage ) 

(2) 

20C/n 
2 5U^ 



be made before and after the test. A measuring 
method shall be used, that is, sufficiently sensitive 
to detect the capacitance change caused by one 
blown fuse, 

10 DISCONNECTING TEST ON FUSES 

10.1 Test Procedure 

The disconnecting test on fuses is performed first 
at the lower voltage limit, in accordance with 
Table 3 and then, as soon as possible after the 
blowing of one fuse, at the upper voltage limit 
until the blowing of another fuse. 



10.1.1 Certain 
Annex B. 



test methods are indicated in 



Table 3 ac Test Voltages 

( Clause 10.1, and Table 1 ) 



container, a check should be made to ensure 
that: 

a ) no significant deformation of sound fuses 
is apparent; and 

b ) not more than one additional fuse ( or 
one- tenth of fused elements directly in 
parallel ) has been damaged ( see B-1.2, 
Note 1 ). If method B-3 in Annex B is 

used, the following Note must be observed. 

NOTE — A small amount of blackening of the impreg- 
nant will not affect the quality of the capacitor. 

10.4 Voltage Test After Opening the 
Container 

A voltage test shall be carried out by applying for 

10 seconds the voltage given in Table 4 acrcss 
the broken down element and the gap in its 
blown fuse. During the test, the gap shall be in 
the impregnant. No breakdown over the fuse gap 
is allowed. 

Table 4 dc Test Volta ge 

{Clause 10.4, and Table 1 ) 

Rated Bank dc Test Voltage 

Voltage ( Times Element Voltage ) 

(1) (2) 

Up to 650 V 2*6 Use 

Above 650 V 3*5 U^e 

NOTE — For units with all elements in parallel and for 
all units if test procedure B-3, B-4, B-5, or B-6 indi- 
cated in Annex B is used, this test can be replaced by 
an ac test before the opening of the unit. The test 
voltage between the terminals is selected through cal- 
culations using capacitance ratio such that the voltage 
across the breakdown element and the gap in its blown 
fuse is the Table 4 value divided by V2. 

11 DISCONNECTING TEST ON 
DISCONNECTOR 



Rated Bank 
Voltage 


ac Test Voltage 
( Times Unit Voltage ) 

Lower Limit Upper Limit 


(1) 
Up to 650 V 
Above 650 V 


(2) (3) 
0*9 Us 1-6 Us 
0-9 Us 2-2 Us 



NOTE— If the test is carried out with dc, the test 
voltage shall be v 2 times the corresponding ac test 
voltage. 

10.2 Capacitance Measurement 

After the test, capacitance shall be measured to 
prove that the fuse(s) has ( have ) blown. A 
measuring method shall be used that is suffi- 
ciently sensitive to detect the capacitance change 
caused by one blown fuse. 

10.3 Inspection of the Unit 

Before opening, no significant deformation of the 
container shall be apparent. After opening the 



11.1 Test Procedure 

The capacitor is preheated in a chamber before 
applying the test voltage until all parts reach a 
temperature of 60°C. An ac test voltage of 1*6 
t/N shall be applied until the disconnector inter- 
rupts the current through the capacitor. If the 
disconnector does not operate within 8 h, the test 
voltage is raised to 1*75 Un. 

11.1.1 If, after further 8 h the disconnector 
has still not operated, the test voltage should 
finally be raised to 2 C/n until the current is inter- 
rupted. If no interruption is achieved, the tempe- 
rature may further be raised at the option of 
the manufacturer- 

NOTE — Precautions shall be taken when performing 
this test against the possible explosion of a capacitor 
unit. 

11.2 Capacitance Measurement 

After the test, the capacitance shall be measured 
to prove that the disconnector has operated. 



IS 12672 : 1989 



11*3 Inspection of the Unit 

Only slight traces of impregnant on the outside 
of the capacitor are allowed. 

11.4 Voltage Tests 

A voltage test between terminals shall be carried 
out by applying for 10 seconds an ac voltage 
equal to 2*15 1/n, or a dc voltage equal to 
4-3 t/N. 



In addition, a voltage test between terminals 
and container shall be made by applying for 10 
seconds, the test voltage given in IS 2834 : 1986. 

The test voltages shall be applied after the 
capacitor has cooled to room temperature. 

No internal breakdown is allowed. 
NOTE — The current shall be recorded during the test.. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 14 ) 

GUIDE FOR CO-ORDINATION OF FUSE AND DISCONNECTOR PROTECTION 



A-1 GENERAL 

A-1.1 The fuse is connected in series with the 
element that the fuse is designed to isolate if the 
element becomes faulty. After the breakdown of 
an element, the fuse connected to it will blow and 
isolate it from the remaining part of the capacitor 
which allows the unit to continue in service. The 
blowing of one or more fuses will cause voltage 
changes within the bank. 

A-1. 2 The voltage across sound unit(s) must not 
exceed the value given in the relevant standard 
(IS 2834 : 1986). 

A-1.3 Depending on the internal connection of 
the units, the blowing of one or more fuses may 
also cause a change of voltage within the unit. 

A-1.4 The remaining elements in a series group 
will have an increased working voltage and the 
manufacturer of capacitor shall, on request, give 
details of the voltage rise caused by the blown 
fuses. 

A-1.5 A typical arrangement of internal over- 
pressure disconnectors in a three-phase unit is 
given in Fig. I. 



A-L6 In Fig. 2, the operational principle of the 
internal overpressure disconnector is given. 

A-1.7 Because of the self-healing properties of 
the capacitor, breakdowns are not dangerous and 
do not increase the current significantly. But, in 
the event of rising pressure ( for example, caused 
by thermal instability which may occur at the 
end of the life of the capacitor, or in some 
cases, by an excessive number of self-healing 
breakdowns, caused by extreme overloads), the 
self-healing power capacitor should be protected 
by an internal overpressure disconnector. 

A-2 PROTECTION SEQUENCE 



A-2.1 The protection of a capacitor bank 
operate selectively. 



must 



A-2.2 The first step is the fusing of the elementCs) 
or the operation of the disconnection. 

A-2.3 The second step is the relay protection of 
the bank ( for example, overcurrent or unbalance 
protection ). 

A-2.4 The third step is the network or the plant 
protection. 




CAPACITOR UNIT 



Fig. I Typical Lay-cut of a Three-Phase Delta-Connected Capacitor 
UNir, WITH Two Internal Overpressure Disconnectors ( Di and D2 ) 



IS 12672 : 1989 



NOTES 

1 Depending on the output of the bank, the design of 

the relay protection, etc, all the three steps are not 
necessarily used in all capacitor banks. 

2 In large banks, an alarm stage may also be used. 



3 Unless the fuse always ijiows as a result of discharge 
energy within the voltage range in 5 1, the manu- 
facturer shall provide the current/time charactcristrc 
and tolerance of the fuse. 




m 



o 1 




2A Disconnector Before Operation 



2B Disconnector After Operation 



NOTE — In the event of rising pressure, a resilient wall of the container bulges out. By movement of the 
pull strap, the notched copper strip is torn into two sections. By the action of the tension spring, the 
current is interrupted and the arc is extinguished very quickly, because the disconnector is installed in an oil- 
filled insulating tube. 

Fig. 2 Principal of Design for an Overpressure Disconnector for Self- 
Healing Medium Voltage Power Capacitors 



ANNEX B 
[ Clauses 8.1, lOlJ, 10.3{ b ), and Table 4 ] 

TEST PROCEDURES FOR THE DISCONNECTING TEST ON INTERNAL FUSES 



B-1 GENERAL 

B-1.1 One of the test procedures given in B-2 to 
B-6, or an agreed alternative method, shall be 
used. 

B-l*2 If no agreement has been reached, the 
choice is left to the manufacturer ( see also Note 
3 under 8.1 ). 



NOTES 

1 At the upper voltage limit, one additional fuse ( or 
one-tenth of the fused elements directly in parallel ) 
connected to a sound element(s) is allowed to be 
damaged. 

2 The test voltage shall be maintained for some 
seconds after a breakdown, to ensure that the fuse has 
disconnected correctly, unaided by disconnection of 
the power supply. 



I&i2672;1989 



3 In special cases, it may be necessary to extend the 
tests until two or more breakdowns of capacitor elements 
have occurred. The number of breakdowns at each 
voltage limit shall in such cases be subject to agreement 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. If the 
number of breakdowns is exceeded, the voltages stated 
in 10 4 may have to be increased, 

4 To verify the current limiting behaviour of the fuses 
when tested at the upper voltage limit, the voltage drop 
excluding transient, across the blown fuse must not 
exceed 30 percent. 

5 If the fuse does not fulfil the requirements of Note 4 
precautions must be taken to make certain that the 
parallel stored energy and the power-frequency fault 
current available from the system are representative of 
service conditions. 

demonstrate the satisfac- 



A test shall then be made to 
tory operation of the fuse. 

6 Precautions shall be taken when performing this test 
against the possible explosion of a capacitor unit and 
the explosive projection of the nail. 



B-2 CAPACITOR PREHEATING 

B-2.1 The capacitor unit is preheated in a 
chamber before applying the ac test voltage at 
the lower limit. Preheating temperature ( 100 to 
150"" C ) is chosen by the manufacturer to achieve 
a practical short time ( a few minutes to a few 
hours ) to the first breakdown. 

B-2.2 A lower preheating temperature should be 
used when applying the test voltage at the higher 
voltage limit to avoid breakdowns before reach- 
ing the test voltage. 

B-2.3 Capacitor current is to be recorded during 
the test. 

NOTE — To prevent excessive internal liquid pressure 
due to high temperature, the unit may be equipped 
with a relief tube including a valve which must be 
closed at the instant of applying the test voltage. 

B-3 MECHANICAL PUNCTURE OF THE 
ELEMENT 

B-3.1 Mechanical puncture of the element is 
made by a nail which is forced into the element 
through a pre-drilled hole in the container. The 
test voltage may be dc or ac, the choice being left 
to the manufacturer. 

B-3.2 If ac voltage is used, capacitor current is 
to be recorded during the test and the timing of 
puncture is to be done to ascertain that the break- 
down is triggered to take place at the instant of 
the peak of the ac test voltage, or very near to 
it. 

NOTES 

1 Puncture of only one element cannot be guaranteed, 

2 In order to limit the possibility of a flashover to the 
container along the nail, or through the hole caused by 
themail, the punctures may be performed in the elements 



connected, permanently or during the test, to the con- 
tainer, 

3 dc voltage is specially suitable for capacitors having 
all elements in parallel. 

B-4 ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN OF THE 
ELEMENT ( FIRST SOLUTION ) 

B-4.1 Some elements in the test unit are each 
provided with, for example, a tab, inserted bet- 
ween the dielectric layers. Each tab is connected 
to a separate terminal. 



B-4.2 The test voltage may be ac or dc, 
choice being left to the manufacturer. 



the 



B-4.3 To obtain the breakdown of an element 
thus equipped, a surge voltage of sufficient ampli- 
tude is applied between tab and one of the foils 
of the modified element. 

B-4.4 In the case of ac voltage, the surge must 
be triggered at the instant of the peak or very 
near to it. 

B-4.5 Capacitor current is to be recorded during 
the test. 

B-5 ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN OF THE 
ELEMENT ( SECOND SOLUTION ) 

B-5.1 Some elements in the test unit are each 
provided with, for example, a short fuse wire 
connected to two extra tabs and inserted between 
the dielectric layers. Each tab is connected to 
its own bushing. 

B-5.2 The test voltage may be dc or ac, the choice 
being left to the manufacturer. 

B-5.3 To obtain breakdown of an element equip- 
ped with this short fuse wire, a capacitor charged 
at a sufficient voltage is connected to the two 
bushings connected to it in order to explode the 
wire. 

B-5.4 In the case of ac voltage, the connection 
of the charged capacitor causing the wire explo- 
sion must be triggered at the instant of the peak 
voltage or very near to it. 

B-5.5 Capacitor current is to be recorded during 
the test. 



B-6 ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN OF THE 
ELEMENT ( THIRD SOLUTION ) 

B-6.1 A small part of an element ( or some ele- 
ments ) in a unit is at the time of manufacture 
removed and replaced with a weaker dielectric. 

For example : 10 to 20 cm^ of a film-paper-film 
dielectric is punched away and the hole is covered 
with two thin papers. 

This method will require experience on how to 
make a suitable dielectric strength redjjction. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. » 



Bureau of ludiau Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Gop3nrigbt 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

RevisifOfii nif Indian Standards 

Indian Stad&ards are revieiii^ ^periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issuod from time to timcL: 'lasers of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or ^NP^on. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving 
the following reference : 

Doc : No. ETDC 29 ( 2978 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi II0002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

(Common to all Offices) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL, BHUBANESWAR. 
GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. 
TRIVANDRUM. 



Telephone 


331 01 31 
.331 13 75 


36 24 99 


2 18 43 
.3 16 41 


r41 24 42 
i 41 25 19 
L41 29 16 


6 32 92 95 



Printed at Saini IVintcrs, Delhi, India 



