**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14254-1 (2006): Programmable controller. Part 1: General 
information [ETD 18: Industrial Process Measurement and 
Control] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS14254(Part1):2006 
rEC 61131-1 (2003) 



( wm^^jftmf ) 

Indian Standard 
PROGRAMMABLE CONTROLLERS 

PART 1 GENERAL INFORMATION 

( First Revision ) 

ICS 25.040.40; 35.240.50 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELH1 110002 

March 2006 P"ce Group 6 



Industrial Process Measurement and Control Sectional Committee, ET 18 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) which is identical with lEC 61131-1 (2003) 'Programmable 
controllers — Part 1 : General information' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC) 
was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Industrial Process 
Measurement and Control Sectional Committee and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

This part of the standard constitutes a series of standards on Programmable Controllers and their 
associated peripherals should be read in conjuction with the other parts of the series. Other parts of the 
series are as follows: 

Part 2 Equipment requirements and tests 

Part 3 Programming languages 

Part 4 User guidelines 

Part 5 Communications 

Part 6 Reserved 

Part 7 Fuzzy-control programming 

Part 8 Guidelines for the application and implementation of programming languages for programmable 
controllers 

The text of the lEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention 
is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard* appear, referring to this standard, they should be read 
as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian 
Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its respective place 
is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence 

lEC 61131-2 (2003) Programmable IS 14254 (Part 2) : 2005 Programmable Identical 

controllers — Part 2 : Equipment controllers: Part 2 Equipment 
requirements and tests requirements and tests 

The technical committee has reviewed the provisions of following International Standards referred in this 
adopted standard has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 

International Standard Title 

lEC 60364 Electrical installations of buildings 

lEC 61 1 31 -3 (2003) Programmable controllers — Part 3 : Programming languages 



( Continued on third cover) 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

Indian Standard 
PROGRAMMABLE CONTROLLERS 

PART 1 GENERAL INFORMATION 

( First Revision ) 

1 Scope 

This Part of lEC 61131 applies to programmable controllers (PLC) and their associated peri- 
pherals such as programming and debugging tools (PADTs), human-machine interfaces 
(HMIs). etc., which have as their intended use the control and command of machines and 
industrial processes. 

PLCs and their associated peripherals are intended to be used in an industrial environment 
and nrtay be provided as open or enclosed equipment. If a PLC or its associated peripherals are 
intended for use in other environments, then the specific requirements, standards and 
installation practices for those other environments must be additionally applied to the PLC 
and its associated peripherals. 

The functionality of a programmable controller can be performed as v»^eli on a specific hardware 
and software platform as on a general-purpose computer or a personal computer with industrial 
environment features. This standard applies to any products performing the function of PLCs 
and/or their associated peripherals. This standard does not deal with the functional safety or 
other aspects of the overall automated system. PLCs, their application programme and their 
associated peripherals are considered as components of a control system. 

Since PLCs are component devices, safety considerations for the overall automated system 
including installation and application are beyond the scope of this Part. However, PLC safety as 
related to electric shock and fire hazards, electrical interference immunity and error detecting 
of the PLC-system operation (such as the use of parity checking, self-testing diagnostics, etc.), 
are addressed. Refer to lEC 60364 or applicable national/local regulations for electrical instal- 
lation and guidelines. 

This Part of lEC 61131 gives the definitions of terms used in this standard. It identifies the 
principal functional characteristics of programmable controller systems. 

2 Normative references 

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For 
dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of 
the refereaced document (including any amendments) applies. 

lEC 61 131-2, Programmable controllers - Part 2: Equipment requirements and tests^ 

lEC 61 131-3:2003, Programmable controllers - Part 3: Programming languages 



^ To be published. 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 



3 Terms and definitions 

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply. 

3.1 

application programme or user programme 

logical assembly of all the programming language elements and constructs necessary for the 
intended signal processing required for the control of a machine or process by a PLC-system 

3.2 

automated system 

control system beyond the scope of lEC 61131, in which PLC-systems are incorporated by or 
for the user, but which also contains other components including their application programmes 

3.3 

field device 

catalogued part to provide input and/or output interfaces or to provide data pre- 
processing/post-processing to the programmable controller system. A remote field device may 
operate autonomously from the programmable controller system. It can be connected to the 
programmable controller using a field bus 

3.4 

ladder diagram or relay ladder diagram 

one or more networks of contacts, coils, graphically represented functions, function blocks, 
data elements, labels, and connective elements, delimited on the left and (optionally) on the 
right by power rails 

3.5 

programmable (logic) controller (PLC) 

digitally operating electronic system, designed for use in an industrial environment, which uses 
a programmable memory for the internal storage of user-oriented instructions for implementing 
specific functions such as logic, sequencing, timing, counting and arithmetic, to control, 
through digital or analogue inputs and outputs, various types of machines or processes. Both 
the PLC and its associated peripherals are designed so that they can be easily integrated into 
an industrial control system and easily used in all their intended functions 

NOTE The abbreviation PLC is used In this standard to stand for programmable controllers, as is the common 
practice in the automation industry. The use of PC as an abbreviation for programmable controllers leads to 
confusion with personal computers. 

3,6 

programmable controller system or PLC-system 

user-built configuration, consisting of a programmable controller and associated peripherals, 
that is necessary for the intended automated system. It consists of units interconnected by 
cables or plug-in connections for permanent installation and by cables or other means for 
portable and transportable peripherals 

3.7 

programming and debugging tool (PADT) 

catatogued peripheral to assist in programming, testing, commissioning and troubleshooting the 
PLC-system application, programme documentation and storage and possibly to be used as 
HMIs. PADTs are said to be pluggable when they may be plugged or unplugged at any time into 
their associated interface, without any risk to the operators and the application. In all other 
cases, PADTs are said to be fixed 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

3.8 

remote input/output station (RIOS) 

manufacturer's catalogued part of a PLC-system including input and/or output interfaces 
allowed to operate only under the hierarchy of the main processing unit (CPU) for I/O 
multiplexing/demultiplexing and data pre-processing/post-processing. The RIOS is the only 
permitted limited autonomous operation, for example, under emergency conditions such as 
breakdown of the communication link to the CPU or of the CPU itself, or when maintenance 
and troubleshooting operations are to be performed 

4 Functional characteristics 

4.1 Basic functional structure of a programmable controller system 

The general structure with main functional components in a programmable controller system is 
illustrated in Figures 1, 2 and 3. These functions communicate with each other and with the 
signals of the machine/process to be controlled. 



other systems 



Mains . 
supply 



^ 



POWER 
SUPPLY 
function 



COMMUNICATION 
functions 



HUMAN-MACHINE 

INTERFACE 

functions 



V 



PROGRAMMING, 
DEBUGGING. 
TESTING 
functions 



SIGNAL PROCESSING 
functions 



APPLICATION 
PROGRAMME 
functions 



OPERATING 

SYSTEM 

functions 



APPLICATION 
PROGRAMME 
STORAGE 
functions 



DATA 
STORAGE 



I 



INTERFACE functions to 
sensors and actuators 



f==f 

Machine/Process 



OPERATOR 



APPLICATION 
programmer 



Figure 1 - Basic functional structure of a PLC-system 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 



Peripherals 



Remote I/O statlon(s) 



z: 





Main processing unit 












Input module(s) 






Memory (ies) 

and 
processing unit(s) 




Output nrKxiule(s) 


Communication modute(s) 










Power supply unit(s) 


Implementer-specific subsystem(s) 













Figure 2 - Programmable controller hardware model 
(from lEC 61131-5) 



rS 14254 (Parti) .2006 
lEC 61131-1 (200^) 



y\ 



Al 



Peripherals 

(permanently /non-permanently installed) 



Ar 



Remote lOs 



Local extension rack 



Basic PLC 



Memory 
(ies) 

and 

processing 
unit(s) 


Input 
module(s) 


Output 
modute(s) 


Commu- 
nication 
modules 
(optional) 



Power supply 



D 



^ 



Auxiliary power 
supply (optional) 



'•I 



Be , 



Bi 



tI 



■^ 



Bei 



^ 



# 



Be 



Bi 



Limit of the scope of this standard 



^ Digital and analogue 
^ input signalintefface/port 

^ I/O power interface/port 

Digital and analogue 
► output signallntertace/port 

^ I/O power interface/port 



^ Communication signals Interteoet/port 
^ With third-party devices 

(computers, printers, fieldbus, etc.) 



^ Mains power input interface/port 



Auxiliary power output interface/port 
^ (to provide energy for sensors 
and actuators) 

^ Protective earthing port 



^ Functional earthing port 



Open communication signals 



^ interface/port 



(internal communications also open 
to third-party devices 



> 4 



Interfaced devices and signals 



Key 

Al Communication interface/port for local I/O 

Ar Communication interface/port for remote I/O station 

Be Open-communication interface/port also open to third-party devices (for example, personal computer used 
for programming instead of a PADT) 

Bi Internal communication interface/port for peripherals 

C Interface/port for digital and analogue input signals 

D Interface/port for digital and analogue output signals 

E Serial or parallel communication interfaces/ports for data communication with third-party devices 

F Mains power interface/port. Devices with F ports have requirements on keeping downstream devices intel- 

ligent during power-up, power-down and power interruptions. 

G Port for protective earthing 

H Port for functional earthing 

J I/O power interface/port used to power sensors and actuators 

K Auxiliary power output interface/port 

Figure 3 - Typical interface/port diagram of a PLC-system 
(from lEC 61131-2) 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

The CPU function consists of the application programme storage, the data storage, the 
operating system, and the execution of the application programme functions. 

The CPU processes signals obtained from sensors as well as internal data storage and 
generates signals to actuators as well as internal data storage in accordance with the 
application programme. 

« Interface function to sensors and actuators 

The interface function to sensors and actuators converts 

- the input signals and/or data obtained from the machine/process to appropriate signal 
levels for processing; 

- the output signals and/or data from the signal processing function to appropriate signal 
levels to drive actuators and/or displays. 

The input/output signals to the interface functions may be coming from special modules 
which pre-process external sensor signals according to the defined functions contained in 
the special modules themselves. Examples of such special modules include RID module, 
fuzzy-control module, high-speed counter module, motion modules and others. 

• Communication function 

The communication function provides data exchange with other systems (third-party 
devices) such as other PLC-systems, robot controllers, computers, etc. 

• Human-machine interface (HMI) function 

The HMI function provides for interactron between the operator, the signal processing 
function and the machine/process. 

• Programming, debugging, testing and documentation functions 

These functions provide for application programme generation and loading, monitoring, 
testing and debugging as well as for applicatron programme documentation and archiving. 

• Power-supply functions 

The power-supply functions provide for the conversion and isolation of the PLC-system 
power from the mains supply. 

4.2 Characteristics of the CPU function 

4.2.1 Summary 

The capabilities of the programmable controllers are determined by programmable functions 
which are summarized in Table 1. They are subdivided for ease of use into application-oriented 
groups. 



iS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 



Table 1 - Summary of programmable functions 



Function group 


Examples 


Logic control 

- Logic 

- Timers 

- Counters 


Programming language elements 

AND, OR, NOT, XOR, bi-stable elements 

On-delay, off-delay 

Up- and/or down-counting (of pulses) 


Signal/data processing 

- Mathematical functions 

- Data handling 

- Analogue data processing 


Basic arithmetic: ADD, SUB, MUL, DIV 
Extended arithmetic: SORT, trigonometric functions 
Comparisons: greater, smaller, equal 
Selecting, formatting, moving 
PID, integration, filtering (not as standard elements) 

Fuzzy control 


Interfacing functions 

- Input/output 

- Other systems 

- HMI 

- Printers 

- Mass memory 


Analogue, digital I/O modules 
BCD conversion 
Communication protocols 
Display, commands 
Messages, reports 
Logging 


Execution control 


Periodic, event-driven execution 


System configuration 


Status checking (not as standard elements) 



4.2.2 Operating system 

The operating system function is responsible for tiie managennent of internal PLC-system 
Interdependent functions (configuration control, diagnostics, memory management, application 
programme execution management, communication with peripherals and with the interface 
functions to sensors and actuators, etc.). 

After a power-down or a distortion, the PLC system can restart in thr^e different ways. 

a) Cold restart 

Restart of the PLC-system and its application programme after all dynamic data (variables 
such as I/O image, internal registers, timers, counters, etc., and programme contexts) are 
reset to a predetermined state. A cold restart may be automatic (for example, after a power 
failure, a loss of information in the dynamic portion(s) of the memory(ies), etc.) or manual 
(for example, push-button reset, etc.). 

b) Warm restart 

Restart after a power failure with a user-programmed predetermined set of remnant data 
and a system predetermined application programme context. A warm restart is identified by 
a status flag or equivalent means made available to the application programme indicating 
that the power failure shut-down of the PLC-system was detected in the run mode. 

c) Hot re&tart 

Restart after power failure that occurs within the process-dependent maximum time aHowed 
for the PLC-system to recover as if there had been no power failure. 

All I/O information and other dynamic data as well as the application programme context 
are restored or unchanged. 

Hot-restart capability requires a separately powered real-time clock or timer to determine 
elapsed time since the power failure was detected and a user-accessible means to 
programme the process-dependent maximum time allowed. 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

4.2.3 Memory for application data storage 

• Application programme storage 

The application programme storage provides for memory locations to store a series of in- 
structions whose periodic or event-driven execution determines the progression of the 
machine or the process. The application programme storage may also provide for memory 
locations to store initial values for application programme data. 

• Application data storage 

The application data storage provides for memory locations to store I/O image table 
and data (for example, set values for timers, counters, alarm conditions, parameters and 
recipes for the machine or the process) required during the execution of the application 
programme. 

• Memory type, memory capacity, memory utilization 

Various types of memory are in use: read/write (RAM), read-only (ROM), programmable 
read-only (PROM), reprogrammable read-only (EPROM/UV-PROM, EEPROM). Memory 
retention at power failure is achieved by a proper selection of the memory type where 
applicable (for example, EPROM, EEPROM) or the use of memory back-up for volatile 
miemories (for example, a battery). 

Memory capacity relates to the number of memory locations in Kbytes, which are reserved 
to store both the application programme and the application data. Memory capacity 
measurements are: 

- capacity in the minimum useful configuration; 

- size(s) for expansion increments; 

- capacity(ies) at maximal configuration(s). 

Each programmable function used by the application programme occupies memory 
locations. The number of locations required generally depends on the programmable 
functions and the type of programmable controller. 

Application data storage requires memory capacity depending on the amount and format of 
data stored. 

4.2.4 Execution of tlie application programme 

An application programme may consist of a number of tasks. The execution of each task is 
accomplished sequentially, one programmable function at a time until the end of the task. The 
initiation of a task, periodically or upon the detection of an event (interrupt condition), is under 
the control of the operating system. 

4.3 Characteristics of the interface function to sensors and actuators 

a) Types of input/output signals 

Status information and data from the machine/process are conveyed to the I/O system of 
the programmable controller by binary, digital, incremental or analogue signals. Conversely, 
decisions and results determined by the processing function are conveyed to the 
machine/process by use of appropriate binary, digital, incremental or analogue signals. 
The large vari^ety of sensors and actuators used requires accommodating a wide range of 
input and output signals. 

b) Characteristics of the input/output system 

Various methods of signal processing, conversion and isolation are used in input/output 
systems. The behaviour and performance of the PLC-system depend on the static/dynamic 
evaluation of the signal (detection of events), storing/non-storing procedures, opto-isolation, 
etc. 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

Input/output systems in general display a modular functionality which allows for con- 
figuration of the PLC-system according to the needs of the machine/process and also for 
later expansion (up to the maximum configuration). 

The input/output system may be located in close proximity to the signal processing function 
or may be mounted close to the sensors or actuators of the machine/process, remotely 
from the signal-processing function. 

4.4 Characteristics of the communication function 

The communication function represents the communication aspects of a programmable 
controller. It serves the programme and data exchange between the programmable controller 
and external devices or other programmable controllers or any devices in an automated 
system. 

It provides functions such as device verification, data acquisition, alarm reporting, programme 
execution, and I/O control, application programme transfer, and connection management to the 
signal-processing unit of the PLC from or to an external device. 

The communication function is generally accomplished by serial data transmission over local 
area networks or point-to-point links. 

4.5 Characteristics of the human-machine interface (HIMI) function 

The HMI function has two purposes. 

• To provide the operator with the information necessary for monitoring the operation of the 
machine/process. 

• To allow the operator to interact with the PLC-system and its application programme in 
order to make decisions and adjustments beyond their individual user scope. 

4.6 Characteristics of the programming, debugging, 
monitoring, testing and documentation functions 

4.6.1 Summary 

These functions are implemented as either an integral or an independent part of 
a programmable controller and provide for code generation and storage of the application 
programme and application data in the programmable controller memory{ies) as well as 
retrieving such programmes and data from memory(ies). 

4.6.2 Language 

For the programming of the application, there is a set of languages defined in lEC 61131-3. 

a) Textual languages 

1) instruction list (IL) language 

A textual programming language using instructions for representing the application 
programme for a PLC-system. 

2) Structured text (ST) language 

A textual programming language using assignment, sub-programme control, selection 
and iteration statements to represent the application programme for a PLC-system. 

b) Graphical languages 

1) Function block diagram (FBD) language 

A graphical programming language using function block diagrams tor representing the 
application programme for a PLC-system. 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

2) Ladder diagram (LD) language 

A graphical programming language using ladder diagrams for representing the 
application programme for a PLC-system 

3) Sequential function chart (SFC) 

A graphical and textual notation for the use of steps and transitions to represent the structure of 
a program organization unit (program or function block) for a PLC-System. The transition 
conditions and the step action can be represented In a subset of the above-listed 
languages. 

4.6.3 Writing the application programme 

• Generating the application programme 

The application programme may be entered via alphanumeric or symbolic keyboards and, 
when menu-driven displays are, or a graphical programme entry Is, used via cursor keys, 
joystick, mouse, etc. All programme and data entries are generally checked for validity and 
internal consistency In such a way that the entry of Incorrect programmes and data is 

minimized. 

• Displaying the application programme 

During application programme generation, all instructions are displayed Immediately, state- 
ment by statement or segment by segment (in the case of a monitor or other large display). 
In addition, the complete programme can generally be printed. If alternative representation 
of programming language elements is available, then the display representation is generally 
user-selectable. 

4.6.4 Automated system start-up 

a) J-oading the application programme 

The generated programme resides either In the memory of the programmable controller or 
in the memory of the PADT. The latter requires a programme transfer via down-load or 
memory cartridge insertion into the programmable controller before start-up. 

c) Accessing the memory 

During start-up or trouble-shooting operations, the application programme and application 
data storage are accessed by the PADT as well as by the processing unit to allow 
programme monitoring, modification and correction. This may be done on line (I.e. while the 
PLC-system Is controlling the machine/process). 

d) Adapting the programmable controller system 

Typical functions for adapting the PLC-system to the machine/process to be controlled are: 

T) test functions which check the sensors and actuators connected to the PLC-systems 
(for example, forcing the outputs of the PLC-system); 

1) test functions which check the operation of the programme sequence (for example, 
setting of flags and forcing the inputs); 

2) setting or resetting of variables (for example, timers, counters, etc.). 

e) Indicating the automated system status 

The ability to provide information about the machine/process and the internal status of 
the PLC-system and of its application programme facilitates the start-up and debugging 
of a PLC application. Typical means are: 

1) status Indication for Inputs/outputs; 

3) Indication/recording of status changes of external signals and Internal data; 

4) scan time/execution times monitoring; 

5) real-time visualization of programme execution and data processing; 

6) fuse/short-circuit protection status Indicators. 

10 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

f) Testing the application programme 

Test functions support the user during writing, debugging and checking the application 
programme. Typical test functions are: 

1) checking the status of inputs/outputs, internal functions (timers, counters); 

2) checking programme sequences, for example, step-by-step operations, variations of 

programme cycle time, halt commands; 

3) simulation of interface functions, for example, forcing of l/Os, of information exchanged 
between tasks or modules internal to the PLC-system. 

g) Modifying the application programme 

Functions for modification provide for changing, adjusting and correcting application 
programmes. Typical functions are search, replace, insert, delete, and add; they apply to 
characters, instructions, programme modules, etc. 

4.6.5 Documentation 

A documentation package should be provided to fully describe the PLC-system and the 
application. The documentation package may consist of 

a) description of the hardware configuration with project-dependent notations; 

b) application programme documentation consisting of 

1) programme listing, with possibly mnemonics for signals and data processed; 

2) cross-reference tables for all data processed (l/Os, internal functions such as internal 
stored data, timers, counters, etc.); 

3) comments; 

4) description of modifications; 

5) maintenance manual. 

4.6.6 Application programme archiving 

For rapid repair and to minimize down-time, the user may want to store the application 
programme in non-volatile media such as flash, PC-cards, EEPROM, EPROM, disks, etc. Such 
a record needs to be updated after every programme modification so that the programme 
executing in the PLC-system and the archived programme remain the same. 

4.7 Characteristics af the power-supply functions 

The power-supply functions generate voltages necessary to operate the PLC-system and 
generally also provide control signals for proper ON/OFF synchronization of the equipment. 
Various power supplies may be available depending on supply voltages, power consumption, 
parallel connection, requirements for uninterruptible operation, etc. 

5 Availability and reliability 

Every automated system requires a certain level of availability and reliability of its control 
system. It is the user's responsibility to ensure that the architecture of the overall automated 
system, the characteristics of the PLC-system and its application programme will jointly satisfy 
the intended application requirements. 

a) Architecture of the automated system 

Techniques such as redundancy, fault tolerance and automatic error checking, as well as 
machine/process diagnostic functions can provide enhancements in the area of availability 
of the automated system. 

11 



IS 14254 (Parti): 2006 
lEC 61131-1 (2003) 

b) Architecture of the programmable controller system 

A modular construction in conjunction with suitable internal self-tests allowing rapid fault 
identification may provide enhancements in the area of maintainability of the PLC-system 
and therefore of the availability of the automated system. Techniques such as redundancy 
and fault tolerance may also be considered for special applications. 

c) Design, testing and maintenance of the application programme 

The application programme is a key component of the overall automated system. Most 
programmable controllers provide enough computing power to permit implementation 
of diagnostic functions in addition to the minimum control function. Machine/process 
behaviour modelling and subsequent identification of faulty conditions should be 
considered. 

Adequate testing of the application programme is mandatory. Every modification implies 
proper design and testing so that the overall availability and reliability are not impaired. The 
programme documentation ^hall be maintained and annotated accordingly. 

d) Installation and service conditions 

PLC-systems are typically of rugged design and intended for general-purpose service. 
However, as for any equipment, the more stressing the service conditions, the worse is the 
reliability, and benefit in this area may be expected when permitted service conditions are 
better than the normal service conditions specified in lEC 61131-2. Some applications 
may require consideration of special packaging, cooling, electrical noise protection, etc., for 
reliable operation. 



12 



(Continued from second cover) 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard rs complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of srgnificant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution establislned under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harnnonious development of tlie activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and ^Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ET 18 (5610). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 01 31 , 2323 3375, 2323 9402 website : www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r2323 7617 

NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 L 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme Vil M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi r2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 L2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 r260 3843 

1 260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 r2254 1216, 2254 1442 

12254 2519,2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) r2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 1 2832 7891 , 2832 7892 

Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH, PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



