**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^viiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 




•^■•■^^^■r 




li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12456 : 2004 

( wcTT j^mr ) 

Indian Standard 

FIRE PROTECTION OF ELECTRONIC DATA 
PROCESSING INSTALLATION — CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 13.220.20; 35.020 



© BIS 2004 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



September 2004 Price Group 6 



Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Electronic data processing (EDP) equipment is a machine or a group of machines that uses electronic circuitry to 
perform arithmetic or logical operations automatically by means of an internally or externally stored programme 
of machine. The development and the use of EDP system is a direct result of the technological breakthrough. 
With increased complexity of modem industry, business and research work, it has become a vital tool in recent 
years and obviously warrants proper protection. As the equipment is used for processing large amount of statistical, 
problematical and experimental information, its malfunctioning can put the whole programming operation in 
jeopardy. This speaks for the importance of its safeguarding against any fire hazard since a rise in temperature of 
the surroundings of the system exceeding 45°C will cause its malfunctioning and a sustained ambient temperature 
above 50°C may cause irreversible failures. 

The electronic data processing area should be deemed to include the following areas: 

a) Central processing area — Where the central processing unit and its associated equipment are installed. 

b) Data handling area — Where the data is processed through the computer media, for example, punched 
cards, punched paper tape, magnetic tape or disk, etc. 

c) Media stores — Ready use paper store and magnetic media library. 

d) Output printing area — Where the printing of output data is carried out. 

e) Communication area — Where the EDP telecommunication system is installed. 

The tackling of fire with speed and effectiveness assumes great importance. The security staff and other staff 
should be trained in the use of fire fighting equipment. 

The purpose of this standard is to set forth the minimum requirements for the protection of electronic computer/ 
data processing equipment and associated areas from damage by not only fire but also its associated effects that 
is smoke, corrosion and water. This standard was first published in 1988 and with the experience gained and 
technological advancement in the field and in view of halon phase out, the technical committee has now revised 
this standard. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 12456 : 2004 

Indian Standard 

FIRE PROTECTION OF ELECTRONIC DATA 
PROCESSING INSTALLATION — CODE OF PRACTICE 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down the minimum requirements 
for the protection of electronic computer/data 
processing equipment from damage by fire covering 
the structural environment and its protection. 

NOTES 

1 The requirements contained in this standard are applicable 
to installations for commercial electronic data processing (EDP) 
and industrial process control where substantial material 
damage and/or business interruption losses could occur. They 
are not intended to cover tabletop or desk type computers or 
remote terminals or micro-processors (having limited value 
concentration) although they may be used as a guide for the 
protection of this type of equipment. This document may also 
be useful where a small group of desk type computers are 
installed in a certain location. 

2 Software installations situated in electronic and industrial 
parks may also use this standard as a guide for protection of 
their equipment. 

2 REFERENCES 

The standards given in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated at Annex A. 

3 GENERAL 

3.1 The application of this standard shall be based on 
the risk considerations as stated in 3.2. The mere 
presence of the electronic computer/data processing 
equipment does not constitute the need to invoke the 
requirements of this standard. 

3.2 Following factors shall be considered when 
determining the need for protecting the environment, 
equipment, function, programming, records, and 
supplies: 

a) Fire threat of the installation to occupants 
or exposed property particularly for the 
telecommunication installations, 

b) Economic loss from loss of function or loss 
or records, and 



c) Economic loss from value of equipment. 

3.3 Nothing in this standard is intended to prevent use 
of systems, methods or devices of superior quality, 
strength, fire resistance, etc, provided technical 
documentation is submitted to the authorities 
concerned to demonstrate the superiority. 



4 TERMINOLOGY 



4.1 Approved 

concerned. 



Acceptable to the authorities 



4.2 Authority Concerned — The authority concerned 
is the organization, office or individual responsible for 
"approving" equipment and/or an installation or a 
procedure. 

4.3 Automated Information Storage System 
(AISS) — An enclosed storage and retrieval system 
that moves recorded media between storage and 
electronic computer systems. 

4.4 Aspiring (Smoke Sampling) System — A fire 
detection system that monitors a protected space for 
the presence of smoke by drawing an air sample from 
the protected space, through pipework, to a central 
detection point. The air sample is tested for the quantity 
of smoke present and an alarm condition is signalled 
at a pre-determined response level. 

4.5 Business Interruption — The effect on business 
operations from the time that equipment was initially 
lost or damaged until ithas been restored to the former 
level of operation. 

4.6 Central Processing Area — The room or 
enclosure in which the central processing unit and its 
associated equipment are installed. 

4.7 Coincidence Connection — A facility incorporated 
into a fire detection and alarm system, whereby the 
detection of the products of combustion (for example 
smoke from afire) by at least two separately identifiable 
detection sources (that is detection and confirmation of 
the existence of fire) generates a suitable output for 
triggering, for example, the release of a gaseous total 
flooding extinguishing system. 

4.8 Communications Area — The room or enclosure 
in which the EDP telecommunications are installed. 



IS 12456 : 2004 



4.9 Computer Area — An area of a building where 
the computer room is located including support rooms 
served by the same special air conditioning/air handling 
equipment as the computer room. 

4.10 Computer Room — A room within the computer 
area that contains the electronic computer/data 
processing equipment. 

4.11 Console — A unit containing main operative 
controls of the system. 

4.12 Data Handling Area — The room or enclosure 
in which data is received and transferred to computer 
input media such as magnetic tape or disc, including 
direct heading equipment. 

4.13 Easily Accessible — When the covers, panels, 
doors, or other enclosures for the electronic components 
within the equipment or the flooring can be removed or 
opened by quick, simple operations to expose any area 
that might be involved in fire and permit the application 
of an extinguishing medium. 

4.14 EDP Installations — A fixed installation of a 
system of electronic data processing equipment or 
industrial ptocess control. 

4.15 Electronic Computer System — Any electronic 
digital or analog computer, along with all peripheral, 
support, memory, programming or other directly 
associated equipment, records, storage, and activities. 

4.16 Electronic Data Processing Area (EDP 
Area) — The room or enclosure in which the 
machinery and electronic equipment necessary to 
receive or transmit data, to process it and either to 
record or print the output results, or to feed the output 
directly to controlled process are situated. The EDP 
area may comprise the central processing area, data 
handling area, media stores, output area, 
communications area and other areas served by the 
same air conditioning system. Other areas such as 
clean rooms and industrial processing may be 
determined to constitute part of the EDP area. 

4.17 Electronically Interconnected— Units that must 

be connected by a signal channel to complete a system 
or perform an operation. 

4.18 Fire Resistance — The period for which an 
element of structure satisfies the relevant requirements 
of the test for fire resistance specified in IS 3809. 

4.19 Fire-Resistant Rated Construction — 

Construction in which the structural members, 
including walls, partitions, columns, floors, and roof 
construction, have fire resistance ratings of time 
duration not less than that specified in this standard. 

4.20 Heat Detector — A device that detects abnormally 
high temperature or rate-of-temperature rise. 



4.21 Interconnecting Cables — Signal and power 
cables for operation and control of system. 

4.22 Labelled — Equipment or materials to which has 
been attached label, symbol or other identifying mark 
of an organization acceptable to the authority 
concerned and concerned with product evaluation, that 
maintains periodic inspection of production of labelled 
equipment or materials and by whose labelling the 
manufacturer indicates compliance with appropriate 
standards or performance in a specified manner. 

4.23 Listed — Equipment or materials included in a 
list published by an organization acceptable to the 
"authority concerned" and concerned with product 
evaluation, that maintains periodic inspection of 
production of listed equipment or materials and whose 
listing states either that the equipment or material meets 
appropriate standards or has been tested and found 
suitable for use in a specified manner. 

NOTE — The means for identifying listed equipment may vary 
for each organization concerned with product evaluation, some 
of which do not recognize equipment as listed unless it is also 
labelled. The concerned authority should utilize the system 
employed by the listing organization to identify a listed 
product. 

4.24 Master Record — A record of information on a 
medium that can be referred to whenever there is a 
need to rebuild a database. 

4.25 Media Stores — The ready-use paper store and 
magnetic media library. 

4.26 Non-combustible — The property of a material, 
which satisfies the requirements for non-combustibility 
when tested in accordance with IS 3808. 

4.27 Operations Room — A room in which the 
general running of the EDP operations is managed. 
This room may be remote from the EDP installation. 

4.28 Output Printing Area — The room or enclosure 
in which the printing of output data is carried out. 

4.29 Program — Instructions to direct system 
operation. 

4.30 Protected Enclosure — An enclosed volume 
protected by a fire detection and/or extinguishing 
system in which the EDP installation and other related 
equipment is installed. 

4J1 Protected Space — The area or volume protected 
by a fire detection and/or extinguishing systems in 
which the EDP and other equipment are installed. 

4.32 Raised Floor — A platform with removable 
panels on which equipment is installed, with the 
intervening space between it and the main building 
floor used to house the interconnecting cables and at 
times as a means for supplying conditioned air to the 



IS 12456 : 2004 



data processing equipment and the room (Sometimes 
referred to as a false floor or secondary floor). 

4.33 Records (Important) — Records of which a 
reproduction could be obtained only at considerable 
expense and labour only after considerable delay. 

4.34 Records (Vital) — Records that are irreplaceable, 
such as records of which a reproduction does not have 
the same value as an original; records needed to sustain 
the business promptly or to recover monies with which 
to replace buildings' equipment, raw materials, finished 
goods, and work under progress; and records needed 
to avoid delay in restoration of production, sales, and 
service. 

4.35 Separate Fire Division — A portion of a building 
cut off from all other portions of the building by 
firewalls, fire doors, and other approved means 
adequate to prevent any fire that may occur in one fire 
division from extending to another fire division. 

4.36 Smoke Detector — A device that detects the 
visible or invisible particles of combustion. 

4.37 Supervision — Cpntinuous surveillance of a 
system or operation by special supervisory equipment 
or personnel to alert those responsible that failure has 
occurred or that a hazardous condition is being 
approached. 

5 LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION 
5.1 Location 

a) EDP areas should preferably be housed in 
a separate building of non-combustible 
construction (including linings) having a fire 
resistance of at least 1 h, reserved solely for 
the purpose of carrying out all processes 
associated with that function. 

b) Where the EDP area is bounded partly or 
wholly by external walls, which may be 
subjected to exposure from an external fire, 
all window openings therein shall be protected 
by 6 mm thick-wired glasses in metal frames 
having a fire resistance of at least 60 min. No 
door openings shall be permitted on the 
exposed side unless protected by fire check 
doors having 60 min fire rating, conforming 
to IS 3614 (Parti). 

c) The EDP area should be so located that it is 
not exposed to fire, water, corrosive fumes 
and smoke from adjoining areas directly or 
indirectly. 

5.2 Where the EDP area forms a part of larger premises, 
that is, it is in communication with the adjoining 
occupancies in the same building, it should be separated 
from those occupancies by non-combustible walls/ 



floors having a minimum period of fire resistance as 
given in Table 1 . 

5.3 Openings in the fire rated walls between the EDP 
and adjoining areas shall be protected by fire check 
doors on either side having a combined fire rating 
equivalent to that of the walls. The fire check doors 
shall be fabricated and erected in accordance with 
IS 36 14 (Part 1) and the same can be'of either manually 
or automatically operated type. No window openings 
shall be allowed in separating walls. 

Table 1 Fire Resistance for Walls and Floors 

{Clause 5.2) 



SI Fire 

No. Separation 

minutes 



Nature of Adjoining 
Occupancies 



Walls Floors 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 120 120 Houses, office premises, banks and the 

like 
ii) 120 120 Shops, canteens, risk having low fire 

hazard [see National Building Code 

(Part IV)] and the like 
iii) 240 240 Moderate and high hazard risks [see 

National Building Code (Part IV)], 

Storage warehouses and the like 

5.4 Consideration should also be given to the use of 
smoke check doors for the separation narrated in 5.3. 

5.5 The data handling area and output printing area, 
and other areas where large quantities of paper are 
handled, should preferably be separated from the 
central processing area by wall or partitions of non- 
combustible construction having at least 1 h fire 
resistance extending from the main floor to structural 
ceiling. Self-closing fire check doors of at least 1 h 
fire resistance should protect every opening therein. 
Paper and other combustible materials should be kept 
in totally closed metal cabinets or similar receptacles. 

5.6 Walls (both external and internal), wall linings, or 
ceiling materials/lining and any suspended ceiling 
should be built from non-combustible materials. 

5.7 Where raised (platform) floors are built above 
existing main floors, they should be of a adequate 
strength, non-combustible and should not incorporate 
materials having a melting point lower than 600°C. 
The design of a raised floor should be such that it retains 
its integrity and provides adequate thermal insulation 
in the event of a fire developing in the void beneath. 
Wherever combustible materials are used, the raised 
floor should be faced on the underside with non- 
combustible material. 

5.8 The false floor material should be anti-static. 
Provision of facing on underside of panels with GI 
sheet/non-combustible material is preferable. 



IS 12456 : 2004 



5.9 In order to avoid the risk of water damage from 
external sources in the computer area, the main floor 
level should be raised and sills (with or without ramps) 
fitted at all door openings. Particular care should be 
taken to avoid flooding of cable voids formed by 
cutting ducts in main floors. The main ceiling and the 
main floor of the EDP area should be made water- 
resistant and dust proof, by suitable means to ensure 
long-term protection. 

5.10 Service pipes carrying water (for example, central 
heating), other than pipes for sprinkler protection of 
the EDP area shall not be brought into the EDP area 
unless a water supply is essential for the efficient 
operation of the installation. In such cases provision 
should be made for cutting off any water supplies other 
than those to sprinkler systems in an emergency. 
Bunding of pipes and the use of leakage detection 
systems should also be considered. 

5.1 1 All ventilation or service or air conditioning ducts 
serving other parts of the building shall not pass 
through EDP area. Where this is impracticable, this 
may be allowed subject to the condition that the 
ventilation and service ducts pass through fire resistant 
shafts having rating according to that of walls and 
floors of the EDP area {see 6.1). 

5.12 EDP areas should not be located in basements 
where this is absolutely impracticable; precautions 
should be taken to prevent flooding and there should 
be adequate access for fire fighting personnel. 

5.13 Where large discharges or deposits of water may 
occur (for example from the operation of sprinklers or 
leakage of water services), adequate facilities should 
be available to enable removal of the water. 

5.14 Small workshops required for the maintenance of 
EDP installations, supervisor's room and the like 
occupancies may form part of the EDP area only, if they 
are adequately sepa|^ted from critical areas by fire 
resistant compartrhentation of at least 1 h fire resistance. 

6 UTILITIES AND SERVICES 

6.1 As far as possible dedicated air conditioning plant 
should be considered for the EDP area and the plant 
room should be separated from the EDP area by walls 
having fire resistance of at least one hour. The access 
to the plant room should be from outside and not 
through the EDP area {see 5.11). 

6.2 All air conditioning ducts, including insulation and 
lining, should be constructed of non-combustible 
materials. In large EDP areas, consideration should be 
given to air conditioning systems independent from 
the rest of the building and to the type of system used. 
AH air ducts should include automatic dampers 
{see 6.8) having a rating of at least one hour. 



6.3 Any filter media should also be non-combustible 
and regularly cleaned or replaced to remove 
accumulations of combustible materials. 

6.4 Good fire (and fire spread) prevention measures, 
manually operated and suitably labelled Emergency 
Override switches that can shut down the air 
conditioning system should be provided in addition to 
the automatic control facilities. The switches should 
be located near the main exit door with controlled 
access. Manual controls for disconnecting the electrical 
power supplies to the EDP installation (but not to 
essential services such as emergency lighting) should 
be located near the main exit door and the operator's 
consoles. 

6.5 The air conditioning duct on the delivery side of 
the fan should be protected by smoke detectors as part 
of the detection system described in 8.1. 

6.6 Only indirectly heated air should be used in the air 
conditioning system. 

6.7 Special arrangements should be made to prevent 
the accumulation of heat and smoke in the EDP area 
by the use of extract systems. 

6.8 To ensure control of fire spread and tightness of 
space in the event of extinguishant discharge, the air 
conditioning system (including dampers) should be 
interfaced with the fire protection system {see 8). 

6.9 Facilities should be provided for the extraction of 
extinguishant after a discharge. 

6.10 Lighting systems should be provided 
in compliance with various requirements of the 
National Electrical Code. The illumination level shall 
not be less than 500 lux. 

6.11 The building housing the EDP area should be 
equipped with an efficient lightning protection system 
in accordance with National Electrical Code and also 
IS 1646. Consideration should also be given to 
providing voltage transient protection on power and 
telecommunication lines and to electrical bonding of 
equipment. 

6.12 All new electrical installations should also meet 
with the requirements in the applicable sections of the 
National Electrical Code. 

a) Cables should be installed in conduit or 
trunking, or clipped to the slab or perimeter 
or on a tray. Loose bundles of cables are not 
acceptable. 

b) Power, lighting and communication cables 
should be segregated. 

c) In ceiling and floor voids used as air handling 
plenums, PVC data cables clipped to a tray 



IS 12456 : 2004 



are acceptable only if they are separated 
from power cables and smoke detection is 
provided. Mineral insulated cable may be 
installed unenclosed. 

It is recommended that flame retardant, non-corrosive 
and low smoke producing cables, as specified in IS 
1554 (Part i), be used where appropriate. 

6.13 All services, cable ducts, etc, should be fire stopped 
to ensure the required integrity of the construction. 

6.14 The number of junction boxes in under floor areas 
should be kept to a minimum. If they are required to 
be used, they should be of metal, completely enclosed, 
easily accessible, properly grounded and in accordance 
with the requirements of the SP 30. No connection 
should be made in the underfloor area except within 
junction boxes, approved type receptacles, the 
connector. 

6. 1 5 Cable openings or other penetrations through fire- 
rated walls and/or floors or other fire rated partitions/ 
assemblies within the EDP area and also between the 
EDP area and the adjoining occupancies shall be fire 
stopped with a properly installed listed fire stopping 
material (passive equipment) that has a fire resistance 
rating of at least equivalent to the fire resistance rating 
of the penetrated building components as stated above. 

6.16 AH the passive equipments, such as fire doors, 
dampers, fire stops, etc, shall have a fire rating of atleast 
equivalent to the fire resistance rating of the building 
components in which they are installed. 

7 MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT WITHIN EDP 
AREA 

7.1 General 

7.1 .1 Only computer equipment and support equipment 
shall be permitted in EDP area. 

NOTES 

1 Small supervisory offices and similar light hazard 
occupancies directly related to the electronic equipment 
operations may be permitted within the EDP area. 

2 Records shall be permitted in the EDP area but the amount 
of records within the EDP area shall be kept to the absolute 
minimum required for its essential and efficient operation. Only 
records that are essential to the computer operations should be 
allowed to be kept in the EDP area. 

7.1.2 Office furniture in the EDP area shall be of metal 
construction. 

NOTES 

1 Metal frame chairs with integral upholstery shall be 
permitted. 

2 Insulated or controlled conductive coverings shall be 
permitted on surfaces of chairs, tables, desks etc. 

7.1.3 Interconnecting cables and wiring between units, 



power cords, plugs, and connectors shall be of a listed 
type. They shall be considered as part of the computer 
system and suitable for installation on the floor or under 
a raised floor. 

7.1.4 Cords 

Approved flexible cord and plug assemblies used for 
connecting computer equipment to the branch circuit 
(to facilitate interchange) shall not exceed 4.5 m in 
length. 

7.1.5 Filters 

Air filters for use in the cooling systems of individual 
units shall be of a listed type. They shall be arranged 
in such a way that they can be readily removed, 
inspected, cleaned or replaced when necessary. 

7.1.6 Liquids 

If the design of the unit is such that oil or equivalent 
liquid is required for lubrication, cooling or hydraulic 
purposes, it shall have a closed-cup flash point of 
150°C or higher, and the container shall be of a sealed 
construction, incorporating automatic pressure relief 
devices. 

7.1.7 Acoustical Materials 

AH sound-deadening material used inside computer 
equipment shall be of such material or so arranged that 
it does not increase the potential of fire damage to the 
unit or the potential or fire propagation from the unit. 

7.2 General Storage 

7.2.1 Paper stock, inks, unused recording media, and 
other combustibles within the EDP area shall be 
restricted to the absolute minimum necessary for 
efficient operation. Any such materials in the EDP area 
shall be kept in totally enclosed metal file cases or 
cabinets. If it is provided for individual machine design, 
shall be limited to the quantity prescribed and located 
in the area designated by the equipment manufacturer. 

7.2.2 Reserve stocks of paper, inks, unused recording 
media and other combustibles shall be stored in one or 
more rooms outside of the EDP area {see 5.5). 

7.2.3 The space beneath the raised floor shall not be 
used for storage purposes. 

7.2.4 Abandoned cables shall not be allowed to 
accumulate. Cables not identified for future use shall 
be removed. 

8 FIRE PROTECTION, DETECTION AND 
EXTINCTION EQUIPMENT 

8.1 Automatic Fire Detection System 

a) The EDP and all associated areas (including 



IS 12456 : 2004 



floor and ceiling voids) which contain 
components critical to their functioning 
should be protected by an approved automatic 
fire alarm system installed in accordance with 
this Standard as well as IS 2189. Where 
requirements in both the standards differ, this 
Standard shall take precedence. Adjoining 
areas communicating with EDP area should 
also be protected by an approved automatic 
fire alarm system as stated above unless 
separated as stated in 5.2. 

b) All fire detectors should be sited in the most 
advantageous position to detect the anticipated 
phenomenon (theory of detection). 

c) Where problems exist that may prevent the 
rapid detection of a fire (such as fast air 
currents caused by air conditioning) the 
additional or alternative measures should be 
taken as given in Table 2. This table is mainly 
concerned with conventional point detection 
but specialized detection operating on 
other principles, such as aspirating system 
[see 8,1 (f)] may also be appropriate. 

d) The operation of the fire alarm system 
covering the protected space should 
automatically initiate emergency shutdown 
procedures for all electrical power supplies 
in the EDP area and shut down any air 
conditioning system serving the protected 
space [see 6.4 and 8.1(a)]. The only, exception 
to the above is where an automatic shutdown 
of equipment controlled from a continuously 
manned EDP area would result in extensive 
business interruption. Installation should be 
capable of being shutdown manually in a 
predetermined manner on the indication of the 
operation of the fire alarm system. 

e) Coincidence connection — if it is intended 
that gaseous extinguishing systems are to be 
actuated by the operation of a fire detection 
system, then every care should be taken to 
avoid unwanted discharge. This could be 
caused by false alarms in the detection system. 
A method of minimizing the possibility of 
false alarm leading to unwanted discharge is 
by using coincidence connection of smoke 
detectors. The following recommendations 
should be adopted when using coincidence 
connection: 

1 ) All smoke detectors used should conform 
to IS 11360. 

2) Operation of the first detector should 
resuk in an indication of fire at the fire 
alarm control and indicating equipment. 

3) If the control and indicating equipment 



can uniquely identify the status of each 
detector on a circuit (that is addressable 
system), then the detector and confirmation 
detector(s) may be connected on the same 
detection circuit. For non-addressable 
systems, coincidence detectors need to be 
installed on separate detection circuits. 

4) Due to the principles of operation of 
coincidence connection (for example 
Loss of up to 50 percent of point detectors 
within a protected space, after the first 
detector operation) it is recommended 
that the density of detectors is increased 
to 15 m^ per detector for all protected 
spaces, or greater as given in Table 2. 

5) Where the fire hazard requires the use of 
both photo-optical and ionization chamber 
point smoke detectors, a minimum of two 
of each type should be provided in the 
protected space, with at least one of each 
type per circuit (for non-addressable 
systems). The two types of detector should 
be evenly distributed over the protected 
space and over any sub-division of the 
protected space (for example a ceiling 
void). At least two of each type of detector 
should be provided in each protected space 
or sub-division (cross-zoning principle). 

f) Aspiring systems may be used as additional 
protection to the ore conventional point 
smoke detection. If such systems are used, the 
following points should be considered: 

1) The system should be approved by the 
authorities concerned or have approval 
from the country where it originated. 

2) If the level of response to smoke is 
adjustable, then qualified personnel 
should make all adjustments. The 
adjustments should ensure the optimum 
response to smoke without unduly 
increasing'the risk of false alarm. 

3) The sitting and spacing for all parts of 
the system should be in accordance with 
manufacturer's instructions and where 
appropriate in accordance with IS 2189. 

4) The system should not be used to directly 
initiate extinguishant discharge, unless 
prior agreement exists between the user 
and the authorities concerned. 

g) An indicator panel associated with the 
automatic fire alarm system should be installed 
in a readily visible position adjacent to the EDP 
area. Panels used for the indication of the status 
of the extinguishing system should be located 



IS 12456 : 2004 



outside the EDP area at all entrances. All 
manual controls for the extinguishing system 
should be readily accessible. 

h) In some circumstances, in addition to the 
general protection, specialized in-cabinet 
detection devices may be required. If 
such devices are used, they should, where 
applicable, conform to an appropriate 
standard and be installed by qualified 
personnel to the manufacturer's instructions. 
There should be remote indication of any 
concealed detectors. 

j) Where interlock and shutdown devices are 
provided, the electrical power thereto shall be 
supervised by the fire alarm panel(s). 

Table 2 Siting of Detectors 

[Clause Z. 1(c) and (e)] 



SI 

No. 


Description of Risk 


Spacing/Siting of Detectors 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


General EDP area 


25 m^ per detector 


ii) 


Paper storage 
(Bulk and Roll) 


100 m^ per detector 


iii) 


Ceiling and floor 

voids 


1 5 m^ per detector for velocities up 

to4m/s 

10 m^ per detector for velocities 

beyond 4 nVs 


iv) 


Equipment cabinets 
in EDP area 


To be sited in agreement between 
the manufacturer and the user 


V) 


Air conditioning 
installation and 
ventilation ducts and 


Sited at all inlets and outlets where 
the dilution factor is low and 
within ducts, where practical 




plenums 


Specialized duct mounting 
detectors should be sited in 
agreement between manufacturer 
and user 



8.2 Fixed Automatic Extinguishing Systems 

a) EDP and adjacent areas (including associated 
floor and ceiling voids) should be protected 
by one of the following fixed automatic 
extinguishing systems: 

1) A sprinkler installation in accordance 
with IS 15105 for automatic sprinkler 
installations. 

NOTE — Sprinkler systems is unsuitable for floor 
void protection (see Table 3). 

2) Clean agent total flooding system in 
accordance with IS 15493. 

NOTE — There are restrictions on the use of 
Halons are identified by the Country Strategy 
prepared by the Halon Alternative Options 
Committee in consultation with Ozone-cell. 

3) A carbon dioxide total flooding system 
in accordance with IS 15528. 



4) A High expansion foam system 
(Recommended for use in floor voids 
only). 

5) System selection depends largely on the 
specific hazards presented by the risk to 
be protected. In general, however, the 
applications recommended in Table 3 
should be used. 

b) Procedures for ventilating the protected 
enclosure after discharge of tiie extinguishing 
agent should be established. Where foam is 
used, special facilities may be required for its 
removal, after discharge (see 6.9). 

c) In order to minimize the period during 
which protection is not provided following 
discharge, procedures for the replacement of 
extinguishing agent supplies should be 
established. Where appropriate, the provision 
of standby supplies should be considered, 
especially for critical installations where 
minimal disruption is required. 

The operation of the gaseous total flooding 
systems, should comply with the health 
and safety requirements contained in the 
respective Indian Standards. The requirements 
for operation of each type of system are set 
out below. Persons must not be present in the 
protected space during the discharge of: 

1) Any carbon dioxide total flooding 
systems. 

2) Clean agent total flooding systems where 
the designed concentration exceeds 
the limits by volume at the maximum 
anticipated temperature set in the 
respective Indian Standards. 

d) Carbon dioxide — When the protected 
enclosure is normally unoccupied, operation 
of the automatic fire detection system should 
automatically actuate the extinguishing 
system. When it is occupied, carbon dioxide 
total flooding systems should be in the manual 
only operating mode with the controls located 
outside the computer area or near the main 
exit door. Entry to the computer area should 
be possible only when the system is under 
manual control. 

e) Clean agents — When the protected enclosure 
is unoccupied, operation of the automatic fire 
detection system should automatically actuate 
the extinguishing system. 

f) The following precautions, are relevant to 
automatically operated clean agent total 
flooding systems in areas which may be 
occupied: 



IS 12456 : 2004 



Table 3 Selection of Extinguishing Method 

[Clause 8.2 (a)] 



SI 

No. 


Risk Type 


Extinguishing System 




Sprinkler 


High 
Expansion Foam 




^ Clean Agent COj 


~^ 






Total flood Local Total flood 


Local 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) (4) (5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 


Computer rooms, EDP 
installations and associated 
electronic equipment 

Equipment, cabinets in above 
areas which do not have clean 
agent total flooding system 

Bulk paper storage and/or 
handling areas or other risks 
presenting deep-seated 
carbonaceous fire hazards 




• 


• 
• 




iv) 


Plant areas housing equipment 
such as generators, air handling 
units, etc. 


• • 




• 




V) 

vi) 


Floor voids where separate 
flooding is required 

Ceiling voids 


• • 






•/ 



vii) Godown and Warehouse 

" Manually operated systems only. 



• 



1) To allow the protected areas to be 
evacuated prior to extinguishing agent 
discharge, a time delay may be 
incorporated in the automatic system. 
The delay period will depend upon 
potential speed of fire spread and the 
means of escape from the protected area, 
but it should not normally exceed 30 s. 

2) Where a time delay facility is provided 
the system may also be equipped with a 
single action biased switch (hold switch) 
located within the protected space which 
can stop the countdown to discharge from 
continuing whilst being held. Upon 
release of the switch, and provided the 
system remains in 'alarm', the timer 
should restart from the beginning. 

3) An audible warning that the hold switch 
is being operated should be provided, 
which may be the same as the time delay 
signal. The design and location of the 
hold switch and circuit should be such 
that the possibility of accidental operation 
by falling objects or Stacking of 
equipment against it is prevented.. 

8.3 Portable Fire Extinguishing Appliances 

a) Fire extinguisher of carbon dioxide type in 



accordance with IS 2878 shall be available 
near EDP and similar equipment. Staff should 
be trained to ensure that ready and safe 
injection of extinguishant into the CPU and 
associated equipment is achieved. 

b) In addition to the portable fire fighting 
appliances referred to in 8.3(a), suitable 
portable gas pressure type water fire 
extinguishers should be provided in 
accordance with IS 940 in the EDP area and 
near any equipment handling large quantities 
of paper. There should be adequate access to 
hose reels at any part of the EDP area. 

9 COMMISSIONING OF FIRE PROTECTION 
SYSTEMS 

9.1 In order to confirm that fire protection systems are 
fully functioning and adequate for their purpose, 
commissioning tests should always be undertaken as 
part of the standard acceptance procedures. 

9.2 All fire detection systems should be checked for 
correct operation, such as simulating a fire condition 
as described in 9.3. All fimctions and indicators should 
be checked including the operation of coincidence 
connection of smoke detectors (where included). 
Where detection systems are used to initiate 
extinguishant discharge, the systems should be checked 



IS 12456 : 2004 



for operation from detector through to all actuating 
mechanisms. Simulators may be used where one-shot 
devices are incorporated as actuators. 

9.3 Due to the prevailing air movement conditions 
that may exist in the protected area, placing a smoke 
source close to a detector is not considered to be a 
realistic simulation of a fire condition. It is therefore 
recommended that a series of fire/smoke tests are 
carried out within the protected area as stated in items 
(a), (b) and (c). The appropriate series depends on the 
sensitivity required of the fire detection system and 
the materials existing in the protected area. The 
detection system should respond within 2 min from 
the start of each test, with the air conditioning system 
both on and off. 

a) Series 1 — High sensitivity (for example, for 
monitoring cable and electronic components 
in equipment for overheating). 

b) Series 2 — Standard sensitivity (for example 
to provide room space protection). 

c) Series 3 — Special risks. 

In addition to the tests above, where special hazards 
may exist, for example, in process control room fire 
test using samples of resident hazardous materials 
should be undertaken. 

9.4 Where the fire detection system is designed to 
actuate a total flooding extinguishing system, it is 
recommended that the commissioning test is in the 
form of: 

a) Checking the electrical operation of the 
systems (see 9.2). 

b) Where required, testing the integrity of 
the enclosure. One method of testing the 
enclosure is by using 'door fan' apparatus. 

c) Ensuring that the fire extinguishing equipment 
is satisfactorily connected and fit for the 
purpose. This may be checked by passing 
pressurized air through the pipework and 
nozzles. (It should be noted that pressurized 
air does not simulate the characteristics of 
CO^ or clean agents.) 

9.5 Details of commissioning/acceptance testing of 
specific extinguishing systems are contained in the 
respective clean agent standard. 

9.6 A full site clean agent discharge test should not be 
carried out unless it can be shown that no other 
commissioning method can be used. If a discharge test 
is to be used then it should be undertaken in accordance 
with the respective Indian Standard for each clean 
agent. 



10 MAINTENANCE OF FIRE PROTECTION 
SYSTEMS 

10.1 In order for the reliable and continued operation 
of the fire protection systems, a maintenance plan 
should be drawn up which should include details of 
routine tests. 

10.2 The fire detection system should be maintained 
in accordance with IS 2189 and any additional 
maintenance required peculiar to the equipment as 
defined by the manufacturer. 

10.3 Carbon dioxide and clean agent total flooding fire 
extinguishing systems should be maintained in 
accordance with the requirements stipulated in the 
respective Indian Standards for these agents. 

10.4 Automatic sprinkler installations should be 
maintained in accordance with the requirements 
specified in IS 15105. 

10.5 Portable fire extinguishers should be maintained 
in accordance with IS 2190. 

10.6 Alterations to the EDP area or equipment layout 
are very likely to affect the performance of the 
protection system. Particular attention should be made 
with regard to fire stopping and room integrity. 

11 PROTECTION OF RECORDS 

11.1 The amount of record media (paper, magnetic 
tapes, memory drums, etc) within the computer area 
should be kept to a minimum. 

11.2 All record media on which data is recorded and 
which are essential to the completion of an operation 
should, while not in use, be stored outside the computer 
area in a fire resisting room or fire resisting storage 
cabinet. Such rooms or storage cabinets should be 
specifically designed (according to the record media 
to be stored) to give protection against the effects of 
heat and moisture in the event of fire. Records of 
primary importance should be designed as vital records 
and may require additional protection measures, such 
as sub-division and stdrage in a number of smaller, 
protected, fire resisting cabinets; located separately. 

11.3 Rooms used for the storage of records should be 
equipped with suitable fire protection system (s) and 
portable extinguishers. 

11.4 Where it is necessary to keep records referred to 
in 11.2 in the EDP area for short periods they should 
be stored in a cabinet as described in 11.2. 

11.5 Duplicates of records such as program tapes, disc 
packs, etc, which may be used unchanged from time 
to time should be made unless, for example, the data 
can be reconstructed at reasonable cost. These should 
not be stored in the same location as those referred to 



rS 12456 : 2064 



in 11.2, but in another building adequately separated 
from that housing the computer area. This is especially 
important for vital records. It is also advisable that all 
operating manuals are duplicated. 

1 1.6 Records should be protected against electrostatic 
discharge and electromagnetic field influences. 

11.7 Multiple generations of records should be kept 
(if other records of equal value are not available) and 
should be stored as described in 11.5, if possible 
different generations being stored separately. 

12 HOUSEKEEPING PROCEDURES AND 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

12.1 Any flammable materials (for example flammable 
cleaning fluids) used for computer maintenance, should 
be stored outside the EDP area. 

12.2 Smoking, eating and drinking should be 
prohibited within the EDP Area. 

12.3 Waste paper should not be allowed to accumulate 
in the computer area. Metal bins with self-closing lids 
should be provided and emptied as necessary. 

12.4 Voids should be maintained clean and free from 
litter, by adopting a regular cleaning policy. 

12.5 When the computer is in use, it should be manned 
by personnel trained in the operation of the fire 
protection equipment at all times. Cleaners or other 
personnel having access to the EDP areas should be 
supervised. 

12.6 An effective cable management plan should be 
maintained to avoid unnecessary or badly installed 
cables, especially under floor voids. 

12.7 The electrical wiring and equipment, associated 
with the computer should be regularly inspected, tested 
and maintained as required by the lEE Wiring 
Regulations and manufacturer's instructions. 

12.8 Consideration should be given to the selection of 
furniture with minimum content of combustible 
materials. 

12.9 Floor tile removers should be readily available 
and located with the portable fire extinguishing 
appliances. 

12.10 Action to be taken in the event of and following 
a fire, or the operation of an automatic extinguishing 
system, should be prominently displayed. Measures 



or means should be available to ascertain when an area 
is safe to enter following a discharge. All personnel, 
including visiting workers, should be familiarized with 
the procedures. 

13 CONTINGENCY MEASURES 

13.1 A list of contingency measures and plans of action 
should be drawn up to cater for the following: 

a) Loss of equipment or records due to fire or 
other hazard, 

b) Loss of equipment or records due to faults or 
major failures, and 

c) Re-sitting or alteration of equipment or 
records. 

The plan should include detailed procedures that would 
enable full recovery from back-up tapes/media. The 
plan procedures together with the back-ups should be 
controlled and guarded as vital records. No plan is 
effective unless it is tested. There are three levels of 
testing to check procedures, vital records and vital 
business processes: 

a) Paper exercise, 

b) Recovery exercise, and 

c) Recovery and production run and service 
restoration from recorded system. 

The frequency of testing should depend on the 
criticality of the risk. 

13.2 The measures should ensure that where losses 
occur, experts in the salvage and reclamation of data 
processing equipments are available as soon as 
possible. 

13.3 In order to minimize interruption of computer 
time, consideration should be given to obtaining under 
contract either an immediate computer back-up service 
operation by a specialist computer company or delivery 
of portable computer recovery centres to the site. The 
disaster plan should describe the procedure to obtain a 
cold restart in the shortest possible time. 

In some cases, duplicate (back-to-back) computer 
systems may be justified to minimize disruption still 
further. Alternatively, companies operating in 
proximity to one another having the same computer 
facilities or divisions of the same company, may adopt 
a mutual aid arrangement. 



10 



IS 12456 : 2004 



ANNEX A 
{Clause 2) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. 
940 : 2003 



1554 
(Part 1) : 1988 

1646 : 1997 



2175 ; 1988 



2189: 1999 



2190: 1992 



2878 : 1986 



Title 
Specification for portable fire 
extinguisher, water type (gas 
cartridge) (first revision) 
PVC insulated (heavy duty) electric 
cables : Part 1 For working voltage 
up to and including 1 100 V 
Code of practice for fire safety 
of buildings (general) — Electrical 
installations 

Specification for heat sensitive fire 
detectors for use in automatic fire 
alarm system 

Code of practice for selection, 
installation and maintenance of 
portable first-aid fire extinguishers 
Code of practice for selection, 
installation and maintenance of 
portable first-aid fire extinguishers 
(third revision) 

Specification for fire extinguisher, 
carbon dioxide type (portable and 
trolley mounted) 



IS No. 


3614 


(Parti): 1966 


3808 : 1979 


3809 : 1979 


11360: 1985 


15105:2002 


SP30: 1985 


IS 15493: 2004 


IS 15528:2004 



Title 
Specification for fire check doors: 
Part 1 Plate metal covered and rolling 
type 

Method of test for non-combustibility 
of building materials 
Fire resistance test for structures 
Specification for smoke detectors for 
use in automatic electrical fire alarm 
system 

Design and installation of fixed 
automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing 
system 

National Electrical Code 
Gaseous fire extinguishing systems 
— General requirements 
Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — Carbon dioxide, total 
flooding and local application 
including incabinet subfloors 
systems 



11 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 

and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendmeiits or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 36 (7094). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 9402 

Regional Offices ; 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1 / 1 4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Western 



Branches 



: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

12323 7617 
\ 2323 3841 

r2337 8499, 2337 8561 
\2337 8626, 2337 9120 



{ 



60 3843 
60 9285 



J2254 1216,2254 1442 
\2254 2519,,2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
\2832 7891, 2832 7892 



AHMED AB AD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



