**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 11451 (1986) : Recommendations for Safety and Health 
Requirements Relating to Occupational Exposure to Asbestos 
[CED 53: Cement Matrix Products] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11451 - 1986 

(Reaffirmed 2010) 



Indian Standard 



RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SAFETY AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS 

RELATING TO OCCUPATIONAL 

EXPOSURE TO ASBESTOS 



Second Reprint OCTOBER 2007 
( Including Amendment No.l ) 

UDC 677.511: 628.511 : 658:382.1/3 



© Copyright 1986 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



^ , March 1986 

Gr 4 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SAFETY AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS 

RELATING TO OCCUPATIONAL 

EXPOSURE TO ASBESTOS 



Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDC 2 
Chairman Representing 

Dr H. C. VisvESVARAYA National Council for Cement and Building 

Materials, New Delhi 

Members 

Additional Director Standards Research. Designs and Standards Organization 
( B & S ) { Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Director Standards 
( B & S ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P- Banerjee Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shr! Harish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Banerjek National Test House. Calcutta 

CHitF Engineer ( BD ) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal 

Township 
Shri J. C. Hasur ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Designs ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

ExrcinivE Engineer ( D )-III 
( Alternate ) 
Chief I noineer ( Research ) - Irrigation Department. Government of Punjab, 
cuM-DiKECTOR Chandigarh 

Research Officer ( Concrbee 
Technolouy ) ( Alternate ) 
Director A, P. Engineering Research Laboratories. 

Hyderabad 
Joint Director ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 

New Delhi 
Chief Rfsfarch Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( C & MDD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( C & MDD-I ) 
( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

BUREAU Ol- INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed 10 be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri V. K. Ghanekar Structural Engineering Research Centre 

( CSIR ), Roorkee 
ShriA. V. GoKAK Development Commissioner for Cement 

Industry ( Ministry of Industry ) 
Shri S. S. Miglani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Gopinath The India Cements Limited, Madras 

Shri T. Tamilakaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Gupta Hyderabad Industries Limited, Hyderabad 

Shri P. J. Jaqus The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Dr A. K. CHATTtRJEE ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Joshi Indian Hume Pipes Co Limited, Bombay 

Shri R. L. Kapoor Roads Wing ( Ministry of Transport ), New 

Delhi 
Shri R. K. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Laha The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri B. T. Unwalla ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. K. Mullick National Council for Cement and Building 

Materials, New Delhi 
Shri K. K. Nambiar In personal capacity ( ' Ramaruilaya' 11 First 

Crescent Park Road, Gandhinagar, Adyar, 
Madras ) 
Shri S. N. Pal M. N. Dastur and Company Private Limited, 

Calcutta 
Shri Biman Dasoupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. Pasricha Hindustan Prefab Limited. New Delhi 

Shri Y. R. Phull Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and 

Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), 
New Delhi 
Shri M. R. Chatterjee Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ). 

( Alternate ) New Delhi 

Dr Mohan Rai Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 

Roorkee 
Dr S. S. Rehsi ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. Ramana Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Limited, New Delhi 

Dr K. C. Narang ( Alternate ) 
Shri G Ramdas Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals. 

New Delhi 
Dr a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen GoPTA ( /l//er/»fl/« ) , . .. ^ , 

Shri R. V. CHalapathi Rao Geological Survey of India. Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) .....„, 

Shri T. N. Subba Rao Gammon India Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. A. Reddi ( Alternate ) 
Dr M Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre 

( CSIR ), Madras 
Dr a. O. Maqhava Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. U. Rijhsinghani Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shri C. S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. Satyanarayana Engineer-in-Chief s Branch, Army Head- 

quarters, New Delhi 
Shri V. R. Kotnis ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 13 ). 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2005 

TO 

IS 11451 : 1986 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SAFETY AND HEALTH REQUHIEMENTS RELATING 

TO OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO ASBESTOS 

( Page 4, clause 3.2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'3.2 Asbestos — The fibrous form of mineral silicates belonging to the 
serpentine and amphibole groups of rock forming materials; under serpentine 
group chrysotile variety and under amphibole group crocidolite, amosite, 
actinolitc, anthophyllite and tremolite varieties arc commercially used.' 

[ Page 5, clause 4.1(a) ] — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'a) For 8 hours time-weighted average (TWA), the permissible 
exposure limit sliall be 1 fibre/cc or as stipulated by competent 
regulatory authority. ' 

[ Page 9, clause 4.2.4 J(a) ] — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'a) Every worker, irrespective of his exposure profile shaH have 
periodic medical examination done, as recommended by regulatory 
authority.' 

( Page 10, clause 4.2.7 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'4.2.7 Lung Function Evaluation — The spirometer used to record FVC and 
FEVi should have a device which provides a tracing of volume-time or 
volume-flow curve. This tracing hard copy shall be stored and available for 
recall. 

While recording FVC and FEVi, the technique shall be properly 
demonstrated, and a minimum of three acceptable manoeuvers shall be 
performed, and a maximum value out of three shall be recorded. 

Predicated values of lung function of that cthinic group for comparison is an 
approximation accepted in the absence of pre-employment and periodic 
medical examination observations.' 



Amend No.1 to IS 14511 : 1986 

( Page 10, clause 4.2.8, second para ) — Substitute the following for 
the existing: 

'The records shall be maintained and stored for a period of IS years following 
the termination of employment or for 40 years afler first day of employment, 
whichever is later.' 

( Page 12, clause 4..S.2.2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'4.5.2.2 Sampling frequency and patterns 

San^ling fiequency shall be maintained as detailed in clause D-2.S of IS 11450.' 



( CED 53 ) 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

SAFETY AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS 

RELATING TO OCCUPATIONAL 

EXPOSURE TO ASBESTOS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 22 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Cement 
and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 In recent years, there has been a growing awareness about exposure 
to asbestos dust which can have harmful effects on the health of workers 
engaged in industries handling asbestos. Therefore, in order to give 
guidance on how the risk of exposure to asbestos dust can be prevented, 
controlled or minimized, it was felt neecssary to lay down standards 
regarding the safety in handling and use of asbestos in asbestos mines 
and factories producing asbestos based products. Though it is absolutely 
essential to control the level of concentration of airborne asbestos dust 
below the exposure limit by appropriate engineering controls and work 
practices in mines and factories dealing with asbestos, certain safety and 
health requirements arc also to be followed and adopted. This standard 
lays down the recommendations for safety and health requirements of 
works exposed to asbestos dust. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard due wcightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in this 
field in this country. This has been done by deriving assistance from 
ILO Codes of Practice: Safety in the use of asbestos, 1984, published 
by the International Labour Office ( ILO ), Geneva. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS: 2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified values 
in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the recommendations for safety and health 
requirements of workers exposed to asbestos dust in mining and milling 
of asbestos, manufacture of products containing asbestos, and trans- 
portation, storage and handling of asbestos or products containing 
asbestos. 

2. APPLICATION 

2.1 The provisions of this standard shall apply to any operation invol- 
ving a risk of occupational exposure to airborne asbestos dust like, 
mining and milling of asbestos, manufacture of products containing 
asbestos, and transportation, storage and handling of asbestos or 
products containing asbestos. 

2.2 For occasional work that may involve short term intermittent 
occupational exposure to asbestos at all places where there is likelihood 
of exceeding the exposure limit, an approved respiratory equipment shall 
be used. 

3. TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following general definitions 
shall apply. 

3.1 Action Level — The level of airborne particulate matter in the air 
which is distinctly below the exposure limit. Consequently exposures 
below the action level do not usually necessiatate application of all the 
preventive measures, for example, those of a medical nature often 
required for exposures exceeding the action level. 

The action level will generally lie at or below half of the exposure 
limit, as decided by the competant authority. 

3.2 Asbestos — The fibrous form of mineral silicates belonging to the 
serpentine and amphibole groups of rock-forming materials, including 
actinolite, amosite ( brown asbestos, cummingtonite, grunnerite ), antho- 
phyllite, chrysotile ( white asbestos ), crocidolite ( blue asbestos ), 
termolite, or any mixture containing one or more of these, whether 
crude, crushed or opened. 

3.3 Asbestos Dust — Airborne particles of asbestos or settled particles 
of asbestos which may become airborne in the working environment. 

3.4 Aspect Ratio — Ratio of length of the fibre and its diameter. 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

3.5 Biologically Important Fibre — A fibre with a length more than 5 
microns and a diameter less than 3 microns with an aspect ratio of 3 : 1 
and more. 

3.6 Ceiling Limit — The concentration of airborne asbestos particulate 
matter in the respiratory air which shall not be exceeded at any time. 

3.7 Exposure Limit — The concentration of airborne asbestos particulate 
matter in the air which shall not cause adverse health effects, including 
long term effects, in workers who are exposed for 8 hours a day and 48 
hours per week. 

The exposure limit is not an absolute dividing line between harmless 
and harmful concentrations, but merely serves as a guide for the preven- 
tion of hazards- 

3.8 Respirable Asbestos Fibre— A particle of asbestos with a diameter 
of less than 3 microns and of which the length is at least three times the 
diameter. 

3.9 Respirable Dust — Fraction of the total dust which passes through 
a particle size selector having specific characteristics approaching those 
of the human respiratory tract. 

3.10 Workplace — The place where workers need to be or need to go by 
reason of their work and which is also under the control of employer. 

4. REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Environmental Levels — The concentration of airborne asbestos 
particulates in the working environment shall be controlled $o that work- 
ers are not exposed to levels in excess of the following unless specified 
otherwise by the competent authority: 

a) For 8 hours time-weighted average ( TWA ), the permissible 
exposure limit shall be 2 fibres per cm'; and 

b) For peak level sample, the permissible exposure limit shall be 10 
fibres per cm*. 

4.1.1 The 8-h TWA ( 8 hours time-weighted average ) is defined as the 
number of fibrous particulates collected in each individual sample taken, 
multiplied by the duration of the individual sampling period, summed 
for all the samples taken during an 8h interval, and divided by total 
sampling time. It is calculated as follows: 

8-h TWA = y^ 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

where 

ci = number of fibrous particulates per cubic centimetre in 
the /th sample; 

ti = the time period over which the / th sample was 
collected; and 

/ == subscript denoting any one particular sample taken 
during the 8-hour interval of time to which 8-hour 
TWA applies. 

4.1.1.1 If the single sample durations /I given in 4.1.1 are of equal 
durations, then the equation given in 4.1.1 is simplified as follows: 

8-h TWA = ^!-^"' + ^' + + ^° 

// n 

where 

n = total number of samples 

4.1.2 The peak is the highest concentration of fibrous particulates 
taken during a short sampling interval of 10 minutes or less. 

4.1.3 The concentration of airborne asbestos fibre shall be determined 
as described in IS : 11450-1986*. 

4.2 Medical Surveillance 

4.2.1 General 

4.2.1.1 All the workers potentially exposed to asbestos dust above 
the action level shall be provided with medical surveillance by the 
cmp'.oyer. 

4.2.1.2 Medical surveillance shall be provided free of cost to the 
workers. 

4.2.1.3 Medical surveillance shall be carried out by occupational 
physician or chest physician or a physician trained in occupational 
medicine. 

4.2.1.4 The recommendations laid down in this standard serve only 
as basic medical guidelines. Occupational physicians may wish to 
supplement these standards to assist in proper evaluation of individual 
cases. 



* Method for determination or airborne asbestos fibre concentration in work 
environment by light microscopy ( Membrane filter method ). 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

4.2.2 Plan and Structure — Medical surveillanci prograume shall 
consist of the following: 

a) Pre-employment medical examination; 

b) Periodic medical examination; 

c) Medical examination at cessation of employment 

d) Maintenance of medical records; and 
c) Health education. 

Every employee on his appointment for a job with a possibility of 
exposure to airborne asbestos, shall get the pre-employment medical 
examination done within 30 calender days of his employment, by the 
employer. The details of medicals surveillance programme are covered 
in 4.2.3 to 4.2.9.1. 

4.2.3 Pre-employment Medical Examination 

4.2.3.1 Objective — The objectives of pre-employment medical 
examination are as follows: 

a) To determine any condition which would be a contra-indicat- 
ion to occupational exposure to asbestos dust. For example, 
a worker with markedly reduced lung function than predicated 
values ( FVC and FEV,, percent ) and a worker with a gross 
radiological lung abnormality shall be prevented from joining 
work entailing potential exposure to asbestos. A worker with 
chronic bronchitis, bronchiactasis gross cardiac impairment, 
gross chest wall abnormality, and active or inactive tuberculosis 
shall not be employed in a place where there is a potential 
exposure to asbestos dust. Persons below 18 years also shall 
not be employed; 

b) To establish baseline records for the future surveillance of the 
health of workers; and 

c) To educate and advise workers about the risks associated with 
the exposure to asbestos dust, the preventive measures 
provided by the employer and the precautions to be taken by 
the workers. 

4.2.3.2 Structure — Pre-employment medical examination shall 
include the following: 

a) A complete case history including personal, family and 
occupational histories. 

Emphasis shall be given to respiratory system, smoking 
history and previous occupational exposures. 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

b) A general clinical examination, with an emphasis on respiratory 
system; 

c) Lung function tests ( spirometry ) to record FVC ( forced 
vital capacity ) and FEVi ( forced expiratory volume in one 
second ); and 

d) A full-sized postero-anterior chest radiograph, sufficient 
enough to include thoracic inlet and both costo-phrenic angles 
(film size 305 x 381 mm or 356 X 356mm or 356 
X 432 mm ). 

Note — In addition, lung function tests ( spirometry ) shall be done every year 
for first two consecutive years to establish a more reliable baseline data. In case 
any gross difference is observed in above two tests, a repeat test shall be done after 
six months of second test. 

4.2.4 Periodic Medical Examination 

4.2.4.1 Objective — The objectives of periodic medical examination 
are as follows: 

a) To detect the earliest signs and symptoms of asbestos related 
diseases; 

b) To detect the earliest signs and symptoms of a non-occupat- 
ional illness which could present a similar picture of inter- 
stitial fibrosis, and advise accordingly; 

c) To detect any significant change in health status relative to the 
baseline examination; and 

d) To continue to educate and advise workers about health 
hazards in asbestos industry and to ensure that appropriate 
preventive measures are being taken to minimize risk. 

4.2.4.2 Structure — Periodic medical examination for workers 
occupationatly exposed to asbestos dust shall include the following: 

a) A brief medical history, with an emphasis on respiratory system 
and smoking habits; 

b) Job details that could allow reconstruction of exposure profiles 
for study; 

c) A clinical examination, with an emphasis on the respiratory 
system; 

d) A full-si^ed postero-anterior chest radiograph, suflScient enough 
to include thoracic inlet and both costophrenic angles ( film 
size 305 x 381 mm or 356 x 356 mm or 356 x 432 mm ); 

e) Lung function tests ( spirometry ) to record FVC and FEVi; 
and 

8 



18:11451-1986 

f) Other relevant investigations which are deemed to be necessary 
by occupational physician in diagnosing asbestos-related 
disease. 

4.2.4.3 Frequency of medical examination — Frequency of periodic 
medical examination shall be as follows: 

a) Every worker, irrespective of his exposure profile, shall have 
his first periodic medical examination done, five years after 
pre-employment medical examination. Thereafter, workers who 
are occupationally exposed to asbestos dust level which is more 
than action level shall have periodic medical examination done 
every three years; 

b) Exposure to asbestos dust levels below action level do not 
necessitate application of preventive measures of a medical 
nature according to ILO Code of Practice 'Occupational 
Exposure to Airborne Substances Harmful to Health, 1980'. 
However, as a matter of extra precautionary measure it is 
recommended that this category of workers shall get medical 
examination done every ten years; and 

c) Periodic medical examination shall be conducted more fre- 
quently if the occupational physician deems it necessary, based 
on the findings of the previous medical examination. A more 
frequent medical examination is justified only to confirm a 
suspected case of asbestos-related disease. 

4.2.5 Medical Examination at Cessation of Employment — Upon the 
cessation of employment, a full medical evaluation which shall include a 
review of all medical tests previously done, shall be performed within 30 
days of cessation of employment. A decision shall be made whether 
further follow-up of the health conditions of the worker is advisable, 
taking into account the duration and level of the past asbestos dust 
exposure and the health conditions of ihe worker. If so, the frequency 
of examinations shall also be recommended. 

4.2.5.1 Follow-up medical examination of the retired workers, who 
show suspicious signs of asbestos related diseases at the time of 
retirement shall be made by the employer according to decision taken 
under 4.2.5. 

4.2.6 Radiographic Evaluation — Radiographic evaluation shall be 
based on the 'ILO 1980 International Classification of Radiographs of 
Pneumoconioses' ( or its subsequent revision ). 

The occupational physician may ask for additional views of the 
chest, like lateral or oblique, in selected cases, for further information. 
In case of any abnormality two more physicians shall be consulted. 



IS : 11451 • 1986 

4.2.7 Lung Function Evaluation — The spirometer used to record 
FVC and FEVi should have a device which provides a tracing of volume- 
time or volume-flow curve. This tracing shall be stored and available 
for recall. 

While recording FVC and FEVi, the technique shall be properly 
demonstrated, and a minimum of three acceptable manoeuvcrs shall be 
performed, and the maximum value out of three shall be recorded. 

Predicated values of lung function of that ethinic group for 
comparison is an approximation accepted in the absence of pre-employ- 
ment and periodic medical examination observations. 

4.2.8 Medical Records — Medical examination record shall be main- 
tained in accordance with good medical practice, recognizing the long 
latent period for asbestos related diseases. 

The records shall be maintained and stored for a period of 10 years 
following the termination of employment, or for 40 years after first day 
of employment, whichever is later. 

Medical records shall include the details of pre-employment 
examination, the periodic medical examinations, medical examination 
done at other times, if any and the medical examinations conducted at 
cessation of employment and further follow-up examinations, where 
done. 

Records shall also be maintained of the individual employee's 
occupational exposure profile to asbestos, specific work practices, and 
preventive measures prescribed, if any. 

4.2.9 Health Education — Every employer shall ensure that all workers 
( employees ) on employment and periodically, get education and train- 
ing in regard to sources of asbestos dust exposure, potential health effects, 
risk associated with asbestos dust exposure and smoking, and methods 
of prevention. 

4.2.9.1 Smoking precautions — The employer shall apprise the 
employees of the synergistic effect on the hazards of smoking cigarettes, 
beedies, cigars and occupational exposure to asbestos. 

4.3 Personal Protection — Respiratory equipment, protective clothing 
and proper hygienic facilities shall be provided to the workers likely to 
be exposed to asbestos dust exceeding exposure limit as given in the 
'Indian Standard Recommendations for personal protection of workers 
engaged in handling asbestos' ( under preparation ). 

4.4 Engineering Metiiods and Work Practices 
4.4.1 Engineering Methods 

4.4.1.1 Engineering control — Suitable engineering controls shall be 

10 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

put into practice, such as ( but not limited to ) isolation, enclosure, 
exhaust ventilation, dust collection, etc, in order to maintain the working 
environment within the prescribed exposure limit. 

4.4.1.2 Tools — Hand operated tools are recommended, as the use 
of equipment with low mechanical input and slow action ( hand 
operated ) will produce less airborne dust than equipment with high 
mechanical input and rapid action ( power operated ). If power operated 
tools are to be used they shall be provided with enclosures and exhaust 
ventilation. 

4.4.2 Work Practices — Appropriate work practices shall be followed 
where materials or processes are used which may give rise to asbestos 
dust in the working environment. Such work practices shall include the 
following: 

a) Requirements to use and maintain process machinery, instal- 
lations, equipment, tools, local exhausts and ventilation systems 
in accordance with instructions; 

b) Damping, where appropriate, of asbestos products and materials 
at workplaces before processing, handling, using, machining, 
cleaning, stripping or removing; 

c) Regular cleaning of machinery and work areas by appropriate 
methods; 

d) Proper use of personal protective equipment wherever regulations 
so require; 

e) Preventing asbestos dust discharged from exhaust apparatus from 
being drawn into the air of any workroom; and 

f) Collection of asbestos bearing dust removed from any workroom 
by the exhaust system in suitable receptacles or filter bags which 
shall be isolated from all work areas. 

4.5 Monitoring in the Workplace — Static and personal monitoring shall 
be carried out in order to identify the sources of asbestos dust emission 
and to determine the extent of asbestos dust exposure when asbestos or 
products containing asbestos are produced, handled or used in such a 
manner as to be liable to emit airborne dust. 

4.5.1 Static Monitoring — Indications of the spatial and temporal 
distribution of airborne asbestos throughout the general atmosphere of 
the working area shall be obtained by taking air samples as follows: 

a) Close to sources of emission in order to evaluate dust concen- 
trations or the standard of engineering controls; 

11 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

b) At various places in the working area to ascertain dissemination 
of asbestos dust; and 

c) From working areas which represent typical exposure. 

4.5.1.1 Sampling frequency — Sampling frequency shall be deter- 
mined depending upon locations and the previous dust concentrations 
recorded. Sampling frequency is to be increased at locations where 
dust concentrations exceed the exposure limit, so that appropriate 
engineering controls are planned. 

Sampling shall also be carried out after structural modification of 
the plant or any changes made in the process of product manufacture. 

4.5.2 Personal Monitoring — Air samples shall be collected in the 
worker's breathing zone by means of personal samplers in order to 
evaluate the risk to the individual worker. Sampling shall be carried 
out while the work process is in operation. 

4.5.2.1 Where concentrations of airbone asbestos may vary from one 
work operation or phase to another, dust sampling shall be done in such 
a manner that the average, and in any case the maximum, level of 
exposure of each individual worker may be determined. 

4.5.2.2 Sampling frequency and patterns — Samples shall be of such 
frequency and pattern as to represent with reasonable accuracy the levels 
of exposure of the employees. Sampling shall be done at intervals of 3 
to 6 months, for employees whose exposures to asbestos may reasonably 
be foreseen to exceed the permissible level. Personal sampling shall 
be carried out at various times throughout the work shift and, where 
necessary, shall be supplemented by short-term sampling during periods 
of peak emission. 

4.6 Labelling of Risk Areas — All workplaces where asbestos dust may 
cause a hazard shall be clearly indicated as an asbestos dust exposure 
area through the use of a well-displayed sign which identifies the hazard 
and the associated health effects. 



12 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. R. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Public Works Department, Government of 

( Designs ) Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer ( SM & R 
Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. Swaroop Orissa Cement Limited, New Delhi 

Shri H. Bhattacharyya ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Guha Thakurta Gannon Dunkerley &. Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. P. Sankarnarayanan 
( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offcio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. C. Bandyopadhyay 

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Asbestos Cement Products Subcommittee, BDC 2 : 3 

Convener 
Dr S. K. Chopra 
S-436 Greater Kailash, New Delhi 110048 
Members Representing 

Shri S. K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Basu Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri T. N. Oboveja ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Bhandari Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. R. Natarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Chakraborty Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries, New Delhi 
Shri S. C. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director Standards Research, Designs and Standards Organization 

(B <& S) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Assistant Director Standards 
(B&S)-II( Alternate) 
Shri K. D. Dharival Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Director, Engineering Geology Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 
Division I 
Shri S. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ganapathy Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras 

General Manager ( Cement ) Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar 

Shri D. N. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Goenka Sarbamangala Manufacturing Co, Calcutta 

Shki I. P. Goenka ( Alternate ) 
Shri Srinivasan N. Iyer Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. G. Upadhyaya ( Alternte ) 
Shri P. S. Kalani Saurabh Construction Co, Indore 

( Continued on page 14 > 

13 



IS : 11451 - 1986 

( Continued from page 13 ) 

Members Representing 

Lt-Col Kamalesh Prakash Engincering-in-Chief's Branch, Army Head- 

quarters. New Delhi 
Shri K. R. Bhambani ( Alternate ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) S. Laxmi National Council for Cement and Building 

Materials, New Delhi 
Shri Harshao R. Oza Flowel Asbestos Products, Ahmadabad 

Shri V. Pattabhi Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri A. K. Gupta ( Alternate) 
Dr A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate) 
Superintending Surveyor of Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works ( CZ ) 
Surveyor of Works ( CZ ) ( Alernate ) 
Shri S. A. Swamy Municipal Corporation, Delhi 

Panel for Safety in Handling and Use of Asbestos, BDC 2 : 3/P2 
Convener 

Shri D. K. Biswas Department of Environment ( Ministry of 

Environment and Forests ), New Delhi 

Members 

Shri B. K. Banerjee Sundaram-Abex Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Pandarinath ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. B. Chatterjee National Institute of Occupational Health, 

Ahmadabad 
Dr S. K. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. G. Davay In personal capacity ( 7172 Varma Nagar, Old 

Nagardax Road, Andheri East, Bombay 69 ) 
Shri S. Ganapathy Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras 

Dr V. P. Gupta Directorate General of Factory Advice Service 

and Labour Institute, Bombay 
Shri Shrinivasan N. Iyer Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay 

Brio D. B. Kapoor (Retd) Asbestos Information Centre ( India ), New 

Delhi 
Dr J. L. Kaw Industrial Toxicology Research Centre ( CSIR ;, 

Lucknow 
Dr M. V. Nanothi National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Dr D. M. Dharmadhikari ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. K. Pandey Department of Environment, New Delhi 

Shri V. Pattabhi Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr N. Raohavenora National Council for Cement and Building 

Materials, New Delhi 
Shri S. Ramaswamy Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay 

SHRr Navnit Talwar Reinz Tal-Broz ( Pvt ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Sharma ( Alternate ) 



14 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

HBadquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 11 0002 

Telephones 232301 31 , 23233375, 23239402 Fax 91 +011 23239399, 23239382 

E - Mall info@bis org in website http //www bis org in 

Central Laboratory: Telephone 

PlotNo 20/9, Site IV, SahibabadlndustrialArea.SAHIBABAD 201010 277 0032 

Regional Offices: 

Central ManakBhavan 9BahadurShahZafarMarg,NEWDELH1 110002 23237617 

•Eastern 1/14CITSchemeVIIM,VIP Road,Kankurgachi KOLKATA700054 23378662 

Northern SCO 335-336 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 260 9285 

Southern C I T Campus IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 1 3 2254 1 984 

tWestem Manakalaya, £9 MIDC Behind Marol Telephone Exchange 28329295 
Andhen (East) MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 560 1 348 

PeenyalndustrialArea,^ Stage Bangalore-Tumkur Road BANGALORE 8394955 

Comnneraal-cum-Office Complex, Opp DusheraMaidan.Arera Colony, 242 3452 

Bittan Market, BHOPAL 462016 

62-63, Ganga Nagar, Unit VI, BHUBANESHWAR 751 001 240 31 39 

5"" Floor, Kovai Towers, 44 Bala Sundaram Road, COIMBATORE 641018 221 0141 

SCO 21 , Sector 12, Faridabad 121007 229 2175 

Savitn Complex, 1 1 6 G T Road, GHAZIABAD 201 001 286 1498 

53/5 Ward No 29, R G Barua Road, 5th By-lane, Apurba Sinha Path, 245 6508 

GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C. L N Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 2320 1 084 

Pnthavi Raj Road, Opposite Bharat Overseas Bank, C-Scheme. JAIPUR 302001 222 3282 

11/418B, Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR208005 2233012 

Sethi Bhawan, 2"" Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 261 8923 

LUCKNOW 226001 

H No 1 5, Sector-3, PARWANOO, Distt Solan (H P ) 1 73220 235 436 

Plot No A-20-2 1 , Institutional Area, Sector 62, Goutam Budh Nagar, NOIDA 201 307 240 2206 

Patliputra Industnal Estate, PATNA 80001 3 226 2808 

PlotNos 657-660, MarketYard.Gultkdi.PUNE 411037 24274804 

"Sahajanand House" 3'* Floor, Bhaktinagar Circle, 80 Feet Road, 237 8251 

RAJKOT 360002 
TC No 2/275 (1 & 2), Near Food Corporation of India, Kesavadasapuram-Ulloor Road, 

Kesavadasapuram, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695004 255 791 4 

1' Fk>or, Udyog Bhavan, VUDA, Sinpuram Junction, VISHAKHAPATNAM-03 271 2833 



*Sales Office is at 5 Chownnghee Approach, P O Princep Street, KOLKATA 700072 
tSales Office (WRO) Plot No E-9. MIDC, Rd No 8, Behind Telephone Exchange, 
Andheri (East), Mumbai-400 0093 



23553243 



28329295 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Pres?, New Delhi 2 



