**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12239-2  (1999) :  Tractors  and  Machinery  for  Agriculture 
and  Forestry  -  Technical  Means  for  Ensuring  Safety,  Part  2 : 
Tractors  [FAD  11:  Agricultural  Tractors  and  Power  Tillers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  12239  (Part  2):  1999 

W^^Wm  (Reaffirmed  2004) 

^RT»r  2  t^^ 

Indian  Standard 

TRACTORS  AND  MACHINERY  FOR  AGRICULTURE 

AND  FORESTRY  —  TECHNICAL  MEANS  FOR 

ENSURING  SAFETY 

PART  2  TRACTORS 

(First  Revision  ) 

ICS  65.060.10;  65.060.01 


©BIS  1999 

BUREAU      OF      INDIAN      STANDARDS 

MANAK     BHAVAN,     9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 

NEW  DELHI  110002 

^MgM5/ 1999  Price  Group  7 


Agricultural  Tractors  and  Power  Tillers  Sectional  Committee,  FAD  32 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Agricultural  Tractors  and  Power  Tillers  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Food  and 
Agriculture  Division  Council. 

With  the  increased  use  of  agricultural  tractors  and  power  tillers  for  various  agricultural  operations,  the  need 
of  human  safety  has  attained  importance.  This  standard  indicates  appropriate  safety  parameters  to  be  met 
when  designing  tractors. 

This  standard  has  been  published  in  three  parts.  This  part  (Part  2)  covers  requirements  related  to  agricultural 
tractors.  Part  1  of  the  standard  covers  general  requirements  and  Part  3  relates  to  power  tillers. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1988.  This  first  revision  is  based  on  the  following  ISO  standards: 

ISO  4252  :  1992  Agricultural  tractors  —  Operators  work  place,  access  and  exit  —  Dimensions 

ISO  4254-3  :  1992  Tractors  and  machinery  for  agriculture  and  forestry  —  Technical  means  for  ensuring 
safety  —  Part  3  :  Tractors. 

This  standard  is  technically  equivalent  to  ISO  4252.  As  tractors  with  three  point  linkage  at  front  are  not 
being  manufactured  in  India,  requirements  of  front  three  point  linkage  of  ISO  4252-3  has  not  been 
incorporated  in  this  Indian  Standard. 

Requirements  of  guards,  operators  controls  and  lighting  of  earlier  version  has  been  retained  and  certain 
norms  that  should  be  observed  during  the  operation  of  tractors  are  also  given  in  Annex  A  for  guidance. 

Requirements  given  in  4.3.1  to  4.3.3  of  this  standard  are  applicable  only  for  tractors  with  cabs. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final 
value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance 
with  IS  2: 1960  *Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)".  The  number  of  significant  places  retained 
in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


Indian  Standard 


TRACTORS  AND  MACHINERY  FOR  AGRICULTURE 
AND  FORESTRY  —  TECHNICAL  MEANS  FOR 

ENSURING  SAFETY 

PART  2  TRACTORS 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  (Part  2)  covers  constructional  and 
operational  requirements  for  improving  the  degree  of 
personal  safety  of  operator  of  the  agricultural  tractor. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  Indian  Standards  contain  provisions 
which  through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute 
provision  of  this  standard.  At  the  time  of 
publication,  the  editions  indicated  were  valid.  All 
standards  are  subject  to  revision  and  parties  to 
agreements  based  on  this  standard  are  encouraged 
to  investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the  most 
recent  editions  of  the  standards  indicated: 

IS  No,  Title 

4468  (Parti):     Agricultural   wheeled   tractors  — 

1997  Rear-mounted  three  point  linkage: 

Part  1  Categories  1,  2  and  3  {third 
revision) 

6283  Tractors      and      machinery      for 

agriculture  and  forestry,  powered 
lawn  and  garden  equipment  — 
Symbols  for  operator  controls  and 
other  displays: 
(Part  1) :  1998  Common  symbols  (first  revision) 
(Part  2):  1998  Symbols  for  agricultural  tractors 
and  machinery  (first  revision) 

8132 :  1999  Tractors  and  machinery  for 
agriculture  and  forestry  —  Operators 
manual  —  Content  and  presentation 

8133 :  1983  Guideline  for  location  and 
operation  of  operators  controls  on 
agricultural  tractors  and  machinery 
(first  revision) 

9939  :  1981  Glossary  of  terms  relating  to  agri- 
cultural tractors  and  power  tillers 

10703  ;  1992  Agricultural  tractors  —  Maximum 
activating  force  required  to  operate 
control  (first  revision) 

11113:  1993  Earth  moving  machinery  —  Seat 
index  ^omi  (first  revision) 


IS  No.  Title 

12061  :  1994  Agricultural  tractors  —  Braking 
performance  —  Method  of  test 
(first  revision) 

12207  :  1999  Agricultural  tractors  —  Recom- 
mendations on  selected  performance 
characteristics  (first  revision) 

12224  :  1987  Method  of  test  for  hydraulic  power 
and  lifting  capacity  of  agricultural 
tractors 

1 2239  (Parti ) :    Tractors      and      machinery      for 

1996  agriculture  and  forestry  —  Technical 

means  for  ensuring  safety  —  Part  1  : 
General 

12343  :  1998  Agricultural  tractors  —  Operators 
seat  —  Technical  requirements 
(first  revision) 

14683  :  1999  Agricultural  tractors  and  machinery 
—  Lighting  devices  for  travel  on 
public  roads 

3    DEFINITION 

For  Ihe  purpose  of  this  standard  in  addition  to  the 
following  definitions  given  in  IS  9939  shall  apply. 

3.1  Access  Door  (Doorway) 

Means  of  entry  to  and  exit  from  the  workplace  or 
cab. 

3.2  Emergency  Exit 

Means  of  exit  which  is  capable  of  being  opened 
from  the  inside  of  the  cab.  It  may  be  a  normal 
access  door. 

3.3  Narrow  Track  Tractor 

A  narrow  track  tractor  is  an  agricultural  tractor  with 
a  smallest  adjustable  track  range  equal  to  or  less 
than  1  150  mm. 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


4    REQUIREMENTS 

4 A    Three-Point  Linkages 

The  hazards  of  coupling  implements  with  three 
point  linkages  can  be  reduced  by  the  use  of 
semi-automatic  implement  couplers  (quick  coupling 

devices). 

4.1.1     Three-Point  Linkage  at  Rear 

4.1*1.1  Forward  of  a  plane  passing  through  the 
median  plane  of  the  pivot  points  of  the  lifting  rods 
in  a  three  point  coupling  system,  a  minimjjm_  safety 
margin  of  25  mm  shall  be  maintained  between  the 
moving  parts  at  each  point  of  the  lifting  device's 
travel.  This  does  not  however  apply  for  Uie  extreme 
upper  and  lower  range  of  travel  OA  n  which  are 
defined  in  (a)  below  and  illustrated  in  Fig.  1.  A 
minim.um.  clearance  of  25  mm  or  a  m.inimum  angle 
of  30^C  shall  be  maintained  between  parts  in  shear 
where  the  angle  can  change  (see  Fig.  2). 

a)  For  the  total  movement  range,  n,  the  lower 
position  A  of  the  lower  hitch  point  is  limited 
by  the  dimension  in  definition  3.3,14  and  [14] 
in  Fig.  2  of  IS  4468  (Part  1)  while  the  upper 
position  B  is  limited  by  the  maximum 
hydraulic  travel.  Travel  n'  corresponds  to 
travel  n  reduced  upwards  and  downwards  by 
O.I  n  and  constitutes  the  vertical  distance 
between  A'  and  J5'. 

b)  Within  the  distance  of  travel,  a  minimum 
safety  margin  of  25  mm  in  relation  to  the 
adjacent  parts  shall  be  maintained  around  the 
profile  of  the  lifting  rods.  ^ 


4.1.2    Controls 

4.1.2.1  main  controls 

The  main  controls  and  their  linkage  shall  be 
arranged  or  protected  in  such  a  way  that  the 
operator  cannot  reach  them  if  he  is  standing  on  the 
ground  between  the  tractor  and  the  mounted 
implement. 

4.1.2.2  External  controls 

When  additional  external  controls  are  fitted,  they 
shall  be  arranged  in  such  way  that  the  operator  can 
actuate  them  from  a  safe  position,  for  instance 
where  the  three  point  hydraulic  lift  controls  or  the 
additional  controls  for  the  lifting  mechanism  are 
located  outside  the  vertical  planes  formed  by  the 
internal  walls  of  the  mudguards. 

In  addition,  the  three  point  hydraulic  lifting 
mechanism  shall  be  actuated  by  means  of  controls 
which  either  restrict  the  amount  of  movement  to  a 
maximum  of  100  mm  each  time  the  control  is 
actuated,  the  measurement  points  in  this  case  are 
formed  by  the  coupling  points  on  the  lower  arms  of 
the  three  point  coupling;  or  operate  on  the  operator 
presence  and  continual  activation  principle  (dead 
man*s  con^ol). 

4.1.2.3  main  controls  on  narrow-track  tractors 

The  controls  on  narrow  track  tractors  are  arranged 
in  front  of  the  transverse  vertical  plane  through  the 
seat  index  point  (SIP)  as  defined  in  IS  111  13. 


c 

\^  1 

-Tk 

♦ 

1 

^^ 

1      » 

^^ 

77777. 


y////y/7////////////// 


Fig.  1  Lift  Range 

2 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


•TRACTOR 


LIFT  ARM 


CLEARANCE  ENVELOPE 


PLANE  THROUGH 
THE  LIFT  RODS 


LIFT   ROD 


Fig.  2  Three-Point  Linkage 


4.1.2.4  Other  arrangements 

Other  arrangements  are  permitted  if  the 
manufacturer  provides  evidence  that  they  have  an 
effect  at  least  equivalent  to  the  requirements  set  out 
in  4.1.2.1  to  4.1.2.3. 

4.1.2.5  All  controls  shall  be  identifiable.  If  symbols 
are  used  for  controls,  they  shall  be  in  accordance 
with  IS  6283  (Part  1  and  2). 

4.1.2.6  Location  and  movement  af  operator  shall  be 
in  accordance  with  Table  1  of  IS  8133. 

4.1.2.7  It  should  be  possible  to  activate  the  controls 
with  reasonable  force,  where  appropriate,  in 
accordance  with  IS  10703. 

4.1.2.8  Hand  controls  should  be  of  a  shape  and  size 
permit  an  adequate  grasp  and  hand  clearance.  The 
clearance  around  these  controls  shall  be  not  less 
than  70  mm. 

4.1.2.9  The  pedals  shall  be  in  position  where  all 
free  play  is  removed.  The  steering  wheel  shall  be 
adjusted  to  its  mid  position.  The  pedals  shall  be 
placed  in  the  following  order  from  the  left  hand  side 
to  the  right  hand  side  : 

a)   Clutch  (operated  by  left  foot),  and 


b)   Brake(s)  (operated  by  right  foot). 

4.1.2.9.1  The  accelerator  pedal,  if  installed  should 
normally  be  operated  by  right  foot. 

4.2    OPERATOR'S  WORKPLACE 

4.2.1  When  seated,  no  shearing  or  pinching  points 
are  permitted  within  reach  of  the  operator*s  hands 
(Reach  B  in  Fig.  3)  or  feet.  For  tractors  designed 
for  special  applications  the  requirements  in  IS 
12239  (Part  1)  may  not  apply.  In  these  cases  the 
requirements  in  4.2.2  shall  apply. 

4.2.2  The  reach  of  the  operator  is  divided  into 
spherical  volumes  A  and  B  (shown  as  Reaches  A 
and  B  respectively  in  Fig.  3).  The  spherical 
centre-point  of  the  volumes  is  located  60  mm  in 
front  and  580  mm  above  the  seat  index  point  (SIP) 
{see  Fig.  3).  Volume  A  is  formed  by  a  spherical 
radius  of  550  mm,  volume  B  is  the  volume  between 
this  radius  and  a  spherical  radius  of  1  000  mm. 

Within  volume  A,  a  minimum  clearance  of  120  mm 
between  power  and  inertia-operated,  and  other 
adjacent  parts  shall  be  maintained.  Within  volume 
B,  a  minimum  clearance  of  25  mm  shall  be 
maintained.  Within  both  volumes,  a  minimum  angle 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


All  dimensions  in  miUimetres. 

Fig.  3  OPERATOR'S  Reach 


of  30*^  shall  be  maintained  where  parts  shear  against 
each  other. 

In  the  case  of  narrow-track  tractors,  these 
requirements  do  not  apply  to  any  points  behind  a 
plane  which  is  located  at  an  angle  of  45°  to  the  rear 
and  which  runs  transverse  to  the  travel  direction 
through  a  point  located  230  mm  behind  the  SIP  {see 
Fig.  4).  Warning  decals  shall  indicate  hazards,  if 
any. 

4.3  Access  to  Operator's  Seat  and  Optional 
Passenger's  Seat 

4.3.1  Access  Doorway(s) 

The  minimum  dimensions  of  the  access  doorway 
aperture,  both  for  the  frame  and  with  the  door  open 
shall  be  as  shown  in  Fig.  5  and  6. 

4.3.2  Emergency  Exits 
4.3.2.1     Number  and  location 

There  shall  be  a  minimum  of  three  emergency  exits, 
each  of  which  shall  be  on  a  different  side  of  the 
cab  :  the  front,  rear  and  roof  of  the  cab  may  be 
considered  as  sides  for  this  purpose. 


4.3.2,2    Dimensions 

The  cross  sectional  dimensions  of  emergency  exits 
shall  be  large  enough  to  enclose  an  ellipse  with 
principal  axes  of  640  mm  and  440  mm. 

4.3.3  Internal  Clearance  Dimensions 

4.3.3.1  The  minimum  clearance  dimensions  inside 
the  cab  shall  be  as  shown  in  Fig.  7  and  Table  1  and 
Table  2. 

These  dimensions  are  defined  in  relation  to  the 
vertical  reference  plane,  generally  longitudinal  to 
the  tractor  and  passing  through  the  seat  index  point 
and  the  steering  wheel  centre. 

NOTE  —  The  dimensions  are  basically  valid  for  cabs  with 
only  one  driving  seat. 

4.3.4  The  seat  index  point  (SIP)  shall  be  determined 
according  to  IS  11113. 

4.3.5  The  distances  from  the  seat  index  point  to  the 
pedals  and  the  steering  wheel  shall  be  in  accordance 
with  IS  12343. 

The  exhaust  outlet  shall  be  positioned  so  that 
exhaust  fumes  T)ass  above  or  behind  the  driver 
(see  6.6  of  IS  12343). 

4.3.6  Access  should  minimize  the  probability  of  the 
operator  being   inadvertently   restrained;  that  is 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


Table  1  Minimum  Internal  Clearance  Dimensions 

{Clause  4.3.3.1) 


EMmension,  Min 

(mm) 

960 


Distance 

Distance  from  the  seat  index  point  to  any  part  of  the  cab  ceiling  surface,  above,  forward  of  and  to  either  side  of  the 
operator's  head'^ 

Distance  from  the  seat  index  point  to  the  cab  back  wall  ata  height  between  210  nun  above  the  seat  index  point  and 
the  line  roof  contour  defined  by  the  960  mm  radius  plus  the  150  mm  blend  radius^* 

Lateral  clearance  at  any  distance  between  310  mm  above  the  seat  index  point  and  the  roof  contour  defined  by  the 
960  mm  radius  plus  the  45**  line,  perpendicular  to  the  vertical  reference  plane  for  a  distance  of  235  mm^  rearward 
from  the  seat  index  point 

Distance  from  the  outer  side  of  the  steering  wheel  rim  to  the  cab  surface  or  other  hand  controls^* 

'  ^Soft  materials  such  as  padding  may  penetrate  into  the  free  space  up  to  a  maximum  of  50  mm. 

^If  the  horizontal  seat  adjustment  provide  exceeds  ±  75  mm  from  the  mid-position,  then  any  dimensions  forward  from  the  seat  index 
point  shall  be  reduced,  and  dimensions  to  the  rear  from  the  seat  index  point  increased,  on  the  basis  : 

[Total  adjustment  to  the  rear  of  the  seat  mid  position  minus  75  mm] 

'  Excluding  hand  controls  mounted  on  the  steering  column. 


365 
450 

80 


Table  2  Clearance  Dimensions  Around  the  Contrc^s 

(Clause  4.3.3.1) 


Type  of  Control 

For  engine  controls  and  controls  which  require  an  operating  force  of  more  than  150  N 
For  controls,  other  than  engine  controls,  which  require  an  operating  force  of  80  N  to  150  N 
^These  minimum  distances  shall  be  valid  for  all  control  positions 


Dimeiision^\  Min 

(mm) 

50 

"25 


catching  or  holding  of  the  person  or  clothes  should 
be  avoided. 

If  any  parts  protrude  from  the  standing  area  (for 
example  clutch  pedal),  provisions  shall  be  made  to 
enable  one  foot  to  be  placed  either  in  front  of, 
rearward  or  at  the  side  of  such  parts. 

These  requirements  also  apply  where  an  optional 
passenger  seat  is  provided  (see  Fig.  8).  In  addition* 
where  a  passenger  seat  is  fitted  and  where  parts 
could  constitute  a  danger  to  the  feet,  provision  shall 
be  made  for  protective  devices  within  a  hemi- 
spherical radius  of  800  mm  starting  from  the 
forward  edge  of  the  seat  cushion  and  pointing 
downwards.  Dangerous  parts  in  reaches  A  and  B 
shall  be  protected  within  a  sphere  centred  670  mm 
above  the  centre  of  the  passenger  seat  front  edge. 

4.3.7  For  narrow-track  tractor,  the  exhaust  system, 
whether  vertical  or  horizontal,  shall  be  positioned 


so  that  its  hot  parts  cannot  be  touched  by  the  driver 
whilst  gaining  access  to  the  tractor  seat  or  sitting  at 
the  controls. 

4.4  Guards 

Guards  [See  5  and  6  of  IS  12239  (Part  1)]  shall  be 
provided  wherever  necessary,  particularly  on 
following  points. 

4.4.1    Hot  Parts 

A  guard  or  shield  shall  be  fitted  to  reduce  to  a 
minimum,  the  possibility  of  inadvertent  contact 
during  normal  operations  with  any  exposed  hot 
element  that  may  cause  harm  when  the  operator  is 
seated  in  the  normal  operating  position.  The  guard 
should  be  constructed  of  heat-insulating  material,  or 
positioned  and  mounted  in  such  a  manner  that  it 
will  not  itself  become  hot. 


iS  12239  (Fart  2)  :  1999 


All  dimensions  in  Tnillimetres. 

Fig.  4  Limitation  to  Operator's  Reach  Volumes  for  Narrow-Track  Tractors 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

note — For  tractors  where  the  seat  can  be  reached  straight  from  the  footstep,  the  height  at  which  the  widths  are  measured  may  be 
decreased. 

Fig.  5  Access  Doorway  Dimensions 
6 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


WHEEL  OR  OTHER 
TRACTOR  F%RT 


Fig.  6  Examples  of  Limitation  of  Dimensions  with  Door  Open 


4.4.2  Rear  Wheels  or  Tracks 

All  tractors  shall  be  provided  with  rear  wheel  or 
full  track  guards  (mud  guards)  which  should  be 
higher  than  the  circumference  of  the  wheels  or  track 
and  so  far  ahead  that  the  operator's  or  passenger's 
feet  cannot  com^  into  contact  with  the  wheels  or 
track.  The  wheel  guard  may  be  omitted  when  the 
wheels  are  already  protected  by  other  means,  such 
as,  auxiliary  equipment. 

4.4.3  Fans 

All  propeller  or  axial  fans  which  are  exposed  and 
within  the  reach  of  the  ground,  the  operator's 
position  or  the  passenger's  position  shall  be  guarded 
against  contact. 

4.4.4  Pulleys  and  Belts 

Tractor  belt  pulleys  shall  be  so  located  or  guarded 
that  while  in  operation  if  the  belt  breaks  or  slips 
off,  it  should  not  strike  the  operator  and  there  is  no 
risk  of  contact  with  the  nip  point.  Open  gears,  belts 
and  chain  drives,  and  idlers  shall  have  nip  points 
protected  by  guards  or  by  other  parts  of  the 
equipment.  Chain  drives  as  well  as  belts  that  are 
joined  in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  protrusions, 
shall  be  guarded  over  their  entire  length  if  there 
would  be  a  possibility  of  contact  with  them. 


4.4.5    Other  Points 

Other  dangerous  points  shall  also  be  guarded  by 
adequate  guards  or  so  located  that  they  are  safe 
enough. 

5  LIGHTING 

For  safe  operation  in  night  and  on  highway  lighting 
provisions  shall  be  made  according  to  IS  14683. 

6  BRAKE  PERFORMANCE 

When  tested  in  accordance  with  4  of  IS  12061  each 
tractor  shall  meet  the  requirement  given  in  3.5  of 
IS  12207. 

7  SLOW  MOVING  VEHICLE  EMBLEM 

One  SMV  (Slow  Moving  Vehicle)  identification 
emblem  as  shown  in  Fig.  9  consisting  of  a 
fluorescent  orange  equilateral  triangle  with  a  red 
retro-reflector  border  positioned  with  a  point  of 
triangle  up  shall  be  provided  on  the  rearside  of  the 
vehicle.  The  red  retro-reflector  border  defines  the 
shape  of  the  fluorescent  colour  in  daylight  and 
appears  as  a  hollow  red  triangle  with  path  of  motor 
vehicle  headlight  in  the  night.  The  emblem  shall  be 
mounted  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  direction 
of  travel  and  shall  be  visible  from  the  rear  of  SMV. 
It  shall  be  located  0.6  m  to  1.8  m  above  the  ground 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


^300  mrn.^     300  min. 


LEFTCAL^ 
WALLg 


QSmln, 


)  K 


^     RIGHT  CAB  WALL 


SEAT  INDEX  POINT 


y/////////\ 


SEAT  INDEX 
POINT 


HAND  CONTROLS  • 


^==1- 


SEAT  INDEX  POINT- 


235  mSn. 


215  min. 
365fflln.' 


Valid  for  tractors  with  only  one  operator  position. 
^  See  Table  2. 

If  the  horizontal  seat  adjustment  provided  exceeds  ±  75  nun  from  the  mid-position,  then  .my  dimensions  forward  from  the  seat 
mdex  pomt  shall  be  reduced,  and  dimensions  to  the  rear  from  the  seat  index  point  increased,  on  the  basis: 
[Total  adjustment  to  the  tear  of  the  seat  mid-position  minus  75  mmj 
''  The  clearance  zone,  as  defined  in  this  region  by  the  .960  mm  radius,  may  be  reduced  for  cabs  whet*  limiting  overall  tractor 
maximum  dimensions  are  of  prime  design  imponance  and/or  for  accommodating  specific  roof-mounted  equipment. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
FIG.  7  MINIMUM  INTERNAL  CLEARANCE  DIMENSIONS 


8 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


PASSENGER 
SEAT 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 


Fig.  8  Part  of  Tractor  End  View  Showing  Reach  Volumes  in  Relation  to  Passenger  Seat 


measured  from  the  lower  side  of  the  emblem.  If  the 
structure  of  the  vehicle  makes  it  impossible  to 
maintain  the  dimensions  of  the  SMV  emblem  as 
given  in  Fig.  9,  it  may  be  suitably  modified 
provided  that  each  side  is  not  less  than  200  mm. 

8  OTHER  REQUIREMENTS 

8.1  When  tested  in  accordance  with  5.1  of  IS  12224 
the  drop  in  the  height  of  the  point  of  specification 
of  force  after  each  5  minutes  interval  for  a  total 
duration  of  half-an-hour  shall  meet  the  requirement 
given  in  3,4  (b)  of  IS  12207.  However,  implement 
shall  not  suddenly  drop  to  the  ground  duriag  the 
test  under  any  circumstance. 

8.2  Spark  arresters  shall  be  provided  in  the  exhaust 
system  of  the  engine  of  each  tractor. 

8.3  Provision  for  locking  the  agricultural  trailer 
shall  be  provided  at  the  hitch  point. 

8.4  Differential  lock  shall  be  provided  in  the  tractor. 

8.5  Safety  device  against  accidental  start  of  engine 
shall  be  provided  in  the  tractor. 

9  ACCESS  FOR  SERVICING  AND  FLUID 
LEVEL  CHECKS 

Appropriate  access  steps  and  handholds  shall  be 
provided  for  routine  servicing  and  fluid  level 
checks. 


10  OPERATOR'S  MANUAL 

The  operator's  manual  shall  meet  the  requirements 
of  IS  8132.  It  shall  also  include  mention  of  the 
safety  aspects  of  the  tractor  together  with 
information  on  any  special  requirements  to  ensure 
its  safe  operation. 

The  operator's  manual  should  also  cover  the  fitting 
and  use  of  additional  accessories  and/or  optional 
extras  and  their  routine  maintenance. 

11  MARKING 

11.1  Each  tractor  shall  be  marked  with  the  following 
information  on  a  metallic  plate  rigidly  attached  at 
prominent  place  on  the  tractor: 

a)  Manufacturer's  name  and  trade-mark,  if  any; 

b)  Model,  code  and  serial  number; 

c)  Power  take-off  power,  kW;  and 

d)  Specific  fuel  consumption. 

1L2  A  minimum  cautionary  notice  worded  as  under 
shall  be  written  in  vernacular  language  legibly  and 
prominently  on  a  label  fixed  on  the  tractor: 

a)  DO  NOT  MAKE  ADJUSTMENTS  WHEN 
TRACTOR  IS  IN  OPERATION; 

b)  DO  NOT  USE  INTOXICANTS  LIKE  LIQUOR, 
OPIUM,  ETC,  WHILE  OPERATING; 

c)  DO  NOT  PUT  OR  TAKE  OFF  BELT  WHILE 
PULLEY  IS  RUNNING; 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


RED  RETRD  REFLECTIVE 
BORDER    3  STRIPS 


FLUORESCENT  ORANGE 
EQUILATERAL  TRIANGLE 


NOTE  —  Emblem  must  be  mounted  with  the  point  upward. 

Fig.  9  Slovz-Moving  Vehicle  Identification  Emblem 


d)  DO  NOT  SIT  OR  STAND  OR  SIT  IN  AN 
UNSAFE  PLACE  SUCH  AS  ROOF, 
DRAWBAR,  TVIUDGUAJID,  RUNNING 
BOARD  OR  LOAD  WHEN  THE  TRACTOR  IS 
MOVING; 

e)  NO  PERSON  SHOULD  MOUNT  OR 
DISMOUNT  FROM  A  TRACTOR  WHILE  IT  IS 
IN  MOTION  EXCEPT  IN  AN  EMERGENCY; 

f)  THE  OPERATORS  OF  TRACTOR  SHOULD: 

1)  BE  ADEQUATELY  TRAINED  AND,  WHEN 
REQUIRED,  PROPERLY  UCENSED; 

2)  OBTAIN  AND  READ  THE  OPERATING 
MANUAL  BEFORE  USING  A  TRACTOR 
FOR  THE  FIRST  TIME; 

3)  WEAR  ADEQUATE  AND  WELL- 
FITTING  FOOTWEAR; 

4)  WEAR  SNUG-FITTING  CLOTHING; 

5)  KEEP  HANDS,  FEET  AND  CLOTHING 
AWAY  FROM  ALL  MOVING  PARTS; 

6)  PUT  THE  GEAR  SELECTOR,  POWER 
OPERATED      ATTACHMENTS      AND 


7) 


POWER  TAKE-OFF  TO  NELTTRAL  AND 
LOWER  THE  ATTACHED  EQUIPMENT 
TO  THE  GROUND  BEFORE  LEAVING 
THE  STOPPED  TRACTOR; 

LOCK  THE  BRAKE  PEDALS 
TOGETHER  WHEN  TRAVELLING  ON 
PUBLIC  ROADS;  AND 


8)  STOP  AT  ALL  UNGUARDED  RAILWAY 
CROSSINGS  AND  MAKE  SURE  THAT 
NO  TRAINS  ARE  COMING. 

11.3    BIS  Certirication  Marking 

Each  tractor  may  also  be  marked  with  Standard 
Mark  for  safety. 

11.3.1  The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed 
by  the  provisions  of  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 
AcU  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made 
thereunder.  The  details  of  conditions  under  which 
the  licence  for  the  use  of  Standard  Mark  may  be 
granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be 
obtained  from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


10 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


ANNEX  A 

(  Foreword  ) 
INFORMATION  ON  SAFE  OPERATION  OF  TRACTORS 


A-1    GENERAL 
A-1.1     Operator 

All  operators  of  tractors  should: 

a)  be  in  good  health,  sound  mind  and  be  not 
under  the  influence  of  any  sort  of  intoxicants; 

b)  be  adequately  trained  and,  when  required, 
properly  licensed; 

c)  obtain  and  read  the  operating  manual  before 
using  a  tractor  for  the  first  time; 

d)  wear  adequate  and  well-fitting  footwear; 

e)  wear  snug-fitting  clothing;  and 

f)  keep  hands,  feet  and  clothing  away  from  ail 
moving  parts. 

A-1,2    Starting  of  Tractor 

Before  starting  a  tractor,  the  operator  should; 

a)  clear  all  material  from  the  operator's  work 
place  and  mud  from  the  pedals; 

b)  inspect  the  tractor  to  make  certain  that  it  is 
properly  adjusted  and  is  in  good  working 
condition; 

c)  lubricate  working  parts,  tighten  all  loose  parts 
and  secure  safety  shields  in  place; 

d)  check  engine  oil  level  and  water  in  radiator  (in 
case  of  water  cooled  engines);  and 

e)  place  all  the  controls  in  neutral. 
A-1.5    Operating  Conditions 

a)  Tractors  should  not  be  started  or  operated  in 
buildings  unless  conditions  are  such  that  there 
is  no  risk  of  fire  or  contamination  of  the  air. 

b)  All  shields  for  power  take-offs,  including  the 
tractor  master  shield  and  the  ^ower  take-off 
shaft  shield,  should  be  in  place  during  use. 

c)  When  power  take-off  is, not  in  use,  the  stub 
shaft  should  be  provided  w|th  a  shield. 

d)  Except  in  an  emergency,  no  person  should 
mount  or  dismount  from  a  tractor  while  it  is 
in  motion. 

e)  All  clutches  should  be  engaged  gradually, 
particularly  when  starting  to  move  heavy  loads. 


A-2    TRAVELLING 
A^2.1    General 

A -2.1*1  When  a  safety  frame  or  cab  is  provided,  the 
operator  should  use  a  seat  belt.  It  is  strongly 
recommended  that  no  seat  belt  be  used  if  a  safety 
frame  or  cab  is  not  provided. 

A-2.1.2  Adjustable  wheels  should,  whenever 
necessary,  be  spread  as  far  as  practicable, 
considering  the  work  to  be  done,  to  reduce  tipping 
hazards. 

A-2»1.3  Tractors  should  not  be  driven  faster  than  is 
safe,  having  regard  to  prevailing  conditions. 

A-2.1.4  While  a  tractor  is  moving,  no  person 
should: 

a)  stand  or  sit  in  an  unsafe  place  such  as  roof, 
drawbar,  mudguard,  running  board  or  load; 

b)  climb  from  one  tractor  or  trailer  to  another; 
g)  jump  on  or  off  except  in  emergencies; 

d)  apply  wheel  choices;  and 

e)  leave  arms,  legs  or  any  object  protruding 
outside. 

A-2.1»5  The  operator  should  check  brake  adjustment 
at  the  start  of  the  day,  before  starting  down  steep 
slopes  and  before  entering  a  public  hijghway. 

A-2,L6  Tractors  should  be  driven  with  particular 
care: 

a)  over  sloping,  uneven,  soft,  slippery  or 
otherwise  unsafe  ground; 

b)  along  side  ditches  or  banks; 

c)  when  turning; 

d)  when  reversing;  and 

e)  when  driven  with  any  attachment  that 
drastically  raises  or  changes  the  tractor's 
centre  of  gravity. 

A-2.1.7  Owing  to  the  possibility  of  tipping 
backward,  particular  care  should  be  taken  in  driving 
when: 

a)  transporting  heavy  loads  up  a  slope; 

b)  using  rear  wheel  weights  or  ballast  in  rear 
tyres; 


11 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 

c)  using  rear-mounted  equipment; 

d)  raising  the  position  of  the  hitch  point  on  towed 
loads; 

e)  the  rear  wheels  dig  into  soft  ground; 

f)  using  forward  gear  if  the  wheels  are  frozen  to 
the  ground;  and 

g)  attempting  to  drive  forward  if  the  rear  wheels 
are  in  a  ditch  or  hole. 

A-2.1.8  If  necessary  to  prevent  rearing,  the  front  of 
the  tractor  should  be  weighted. 

A-2.2    Travelling  on  Public  Roads 

A-2.2.1  When  travelling  on  public  roads,  the 
operator  should: 

a)  lock  the  brake  pedals  together; 

b)  comply  with  all  traffic  laws  and  regulations; 

c)  stop  at  all  unguarded  railway  crossings  and 
make  sure  that  no  trains  are  coming; 

d)  signal  intention  to  turn,  slow  down  or  stop; 

e)  keep  on  the  correct  side  of  the  road  and,  when 
it  is  safe  to  do  so,  pull  of  the  highway  to  allow 
faster  traffic  to  pass; 

g)  shift  to  a  lower  gear  for  control  when  going 
downhill; 

h)  shift  to  a  lower  gear  to  avoid  stalhng  when 
going  uphill;  and 

j)    reduce  speed  when  the  roads  are  slippery. 

A-2.2.2  The  moving  of  tractors  should  be  planned 
in  such  a  way  that: 

a)  moves  are  made  during  daylight  hours;  and 

b)  moves  are  not  made  during  periods  of  heavy 
traffic. 

A-2.2.3  When  moves  are  made  during  the  night  or 
other  periods  of  reduced  visibility,  all  lights  and 
reflectors  should  be  used  as  required  by  law,  and 
they  should  be  kept  in  good  working  condition  and 
clean. 

A-2.2.4  Rear-view  mirror  should  be  properly 
adjusted. 

A''2.2.5  In  case  of  travel  during  rain  and  hot  sun 
when  a  cab  is  not  provided,  provision  should  be 
made  to  mount  a  canopy  above  the  driver's  seat. 

A-3  REVERSING  AND  TURNING 

A-3.1  Speed  should  be  reduced,  using  the  tractor 
throttle  as  much  as  possible,  before  marking  any  turns. 


A-3.2  Before  turning  or  reversing,  the  tractor 
operator  should  make  it  certain  that  there  are  no 
workers  or  obstacles  in  the  path  of  travel. 

A-3.3  When  a  tractor  is  mired  in  mud  or  stuck  in 
a  ditch,  the  operator  should  always  attempt  to  drive 
out  in  reverse  gear  only.  If  this  attempt  is 
unsuccessful,  he  may  secure  logs  or  planks  behind 
the  rear  wheels,  to  increase  traction,  and  again 
attempt  to  drive  out  using  reverse  gear.  Under  no 
condition  should  logs  or  planks  be  secured  in  front 
of  the  rear  wheels  to  increase  traction. 

A-4  STOPPING 

A-4.1  Before  leaving  a  stopped  tractor,  the  operator 
should: 

a)  shift  the  gear  selector  to  neutral; 

b)  re-engage  the  master  clutch,  except  in  the  case 
of  torque  converter  machines; 

c)  lock  the  parking  brake; 

d)  lower  attached  equipment  to  the  ground;  and 

e)  put  all  power- operated  attachments  and  power 
take-off  into  neutral. 

A-4.2  The  operator  should  not  dismount  unless  the 
tractor  is  stationary  and  there  is  an  adequate  anti 
safe  place  for  him  to  step  onto. 

A-4.3  When  slowing  down  or  stopping,  brakes 
should  be  applied  equally  to  the  two  rear  wheels. 

A-4.4  Tractors  should  not  haul  heavy  vehicles  or 
machinery  unless  they  can  be  stopped  in  a  safe  and 
controlled  manner. 

A-5  USE  OF  ATTACHED  EQUIPMENT 

A-5.1  Towed  equipment  should  be  attached  only  to 
the  drawbar  provided  on  the  tractor. 

A-5.2  In  no  case  should  attachments  be  secured  at 
the  front  or  rear  axle,  to  the  seat  bracket  or  to  any 
other  frame  member. 

A-5.3  When  attachments  are  hitched  to  the  tractor: 

a)  the  attachment  should  be  blocked  with  blocks 
or  chokes,  if  the  tractor  is  backed; 

b)  if  the  attax;hment  is  pulled  onto  the  tractor,  the 
attachments,  should  be  kept  under  control  by 
brakes  or  chokes;  and 

c)  no  person  should  remain  between  the  tractor 
and  the  attachment,  and  the  drawbar  should  be 
handled  with  a  hook  or  other  suitable  device. 

A-5.4  When  attachment  and  tractor  are  unhitched, 
both  vehicles  should  be  blocked  by  brakes  or 
chokes. 


12 


IS  12239  (Part  2)  :  1999 


A-5.5  All  shield  should  be  secured  in  place  after 
hitching  and  before  the  use  of  any  attachment. 

A-6  CARRYING  OF  PASSENGERS  OR  OBJECTS 
A-6.1  Tractors  should  not  carry: 

a)  any  person  for  whom  there  is  not  a  safe  seat, 

b)  children,  or 

c)  loose  objects  unless  a  safe  place  is  provided 
for  them. 

A-7  TOWING  AND  PUSHING 

A-7.1  A  tractor  should  not  be  used  to  push  other 
vehicles  unless  an  adequate  and  securely  fastened 
push  bar  is  fitted  to  it. 

A-7.2  Tractors  should  not  haul  loads  so  heavy  as  to 
prevent  effective  control,  specially  on  any  sloping, 
uneven,  soft  or  otherwise  unsafe  ground. 

A-8  OPERATING  ON  SLOPING  GROUND 

A-8.1  When  starting  up  a  slope,  the  operator  should 
choose  a  power  gear  to  avoid  stalling  or  shifting  of 
gears  on  the  slope  and  should  engage  the  clutch 
slowly  to  avoid  upsetting  backwards. 

A-8.2  Adjustable  wheels  should  be  spread  as  far  as 
possible  for  the  job  at  hand. 

A-8.3  The  gear  lever  should  not  be  put  in  neutral 
and  clutch  pedal  should  not  be  disengaged  when 
descending  slopes.  A  low  gear  should  be  selected 
to  assist  in  braking  the  tractor. 

A-8.4  If  necessary  to  prevent  rearing,  the  front  of 
the  tractor  should  be  weighted  when  ascending  a 
slope,  or  the  tractor  should  preferably  be  backed  up 
to  the  top. 

A-8.5  Unbraked  towed  equipment  should  not  be 
taken  down  steep  slopes  without  extreme  caution. 

A-9  STATIONARY  WORK 

A-9.1  When  using  the  tractor  as  a  source  of  power 
for  stationary  power  take-off  or  belt  work, 

a)    all  shields  and  guards  should  be  in  place  before 
the  power  is  applied, 


b)  the  tractor  frame  should  be  earthed  to  remove 
static  electricity,  and 

c)  while  threshing,  spark  arrestor  should  be  used 
on  the  exhaust  pipe, 

A-9.2  When  tractors  are  used  for  stationary  work 
inside  a  building,  adequate  means  of  removing 
exhaust  gases  and  supplying  fresh  air  should  be 
provided, 

A-9.3  When  a  tractor  with  a  winch  is  used  for 
pulling,  the  tractor  should  be  properly  aligned  in  the 
direction  of  the  pull. 

A-10    TRACTOR  FUELLING 

A-10.1  When  the  fuel  tanks  of  internal  combustion 
engines  are  being  filled: 

a)  the  engines  should  not  be  running,  and 

b)  no  open  flame  devices,  open  hghts,  lighted 
cigarettes  or  the  like  should  be  allowed. 

A-10.2  Hot  engines  should  be  allowed  to  cool  down 
before  refuelling.  Normally,  the  fuel  tank  should  be 
refilled  in  the  evening  after  the  day's  work. 

A-10.3  After  fuelling,  some  time  should  be  allowed 
for  fuel  vapours  to  disappear  before  the  engine  is 
re-started. 

A-10.4  Contact  should  at  all  times  be  maintained 
between  the  metal  outlet  of  the  refuelling  hose  or 
the  can  spout,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  fuel  tank 
opening  on  the  tractor  on  the  other,  or  other  means 
of  bonding  should  be  ensured  to  minimize  the 
possibility  of  an  explosion  or  outbreak  of  fire  due 
to  the  discharge  of  an  accumulation  of  static 
electricity. 

A-10,5  The  tractor  fuel  system  should  be  checked 
frequently  to  detect  fuel  leaks.  To  be  checked  in 
particular  are  the  fuel  tank  seams,  fuel  lines,  fuel 
filler  caps,  fuel  line  shut-off  valves,  chokes  and  all 
fuel  line  connections. 

A-10.6  Fire  extinguishers  should  be  provided  on  the 
tractor,  at  the  refuelling  point  and  in  the  building 
where  the  tractor  is  stored. 


13 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and 
attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publication),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
4ieeded;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions' 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  FAD  32  (837). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Pul>lication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones:  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices; 


Central 
Eastern 

Northern 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

1/14  CLT.  Scheme  VII M,  V.I.P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 


SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern   :  CLT.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  6001 13 
Western    ; 
Branches  : 


Manakalaya,  E9MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMB  AI 400093 


AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHCPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZL\BAD.  GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
PATNA.     PUNE.    THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Telegrams:  Manaksanslha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

323  76  17,323  38  41 


r337  84  99,337  85  61 
1337  86  26,337  9120 


{ 


60  38  43 
60  20  25 


1-235  0216,235  0442 
12351519,235  2315 

f  832  92  95, 832  78  58 
1832  78  91^8327892 


Piiiited  at  Simco  Printing  Prcn^  Delhi,  JbAim 


