**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13173 (1991) : Code of practice for handling and usage of 
graphite and silicon carbide crucibles [MTD 15: 
Refractories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13173 : 1991 

(Reaffirmed 2002) 



/>fd/0fl Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

CLAY BONDED GRAPHITE CRUCIBLES AND 

CARBON BONDED SILICON CARBIDE 

CRUCIBLES— HANDLING AND USAGE 



UDC 542-233-54-032-36-002-71 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 1991 Price Group 3 



Refractories Sectional Committee, MTD 15 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Refractories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 

The Committee felt the necessity of preparing a code of practice for the handling and usage of graphite 
and silicon carbide crucibles, because these are widely used by small scale industries. This code of 
practice will help in improving the performance and enhancing the life of crucible. 



IS 13173 : 1991 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

CLAY BONDED GRAPHITE CRUCIBLES AND 

CARBON BONDED SILICON CARBIDE 

CRUCIBLES — HANDLING AND USAGE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the guidelines for 
handling and usage of clay bonded graphite 
crucibles and carbon bonded silicon carbide 
cr ucibles. 

2 STORAGE 

2.1 As the clay bonded graphite crucibles and 
carbon bonded silicon carbide crucibles are 
generally porus in structure, they tend to absorb 
moisture from the air. Even though the crucible 
are provided with a special protective coating 
which reduces the absorption of moisture to a 
maximum extent, the absorption of moisture by 
the crucibles would not be totally eliminated 
during their transportation from the factory to 
consumer units. It is, therefore, advisable to 
store the crucibles under warm dry condition to 
permit any moisture to evaporate soon after 
they are received. 

2.2 The crucible should bs placed on wooden 
plank or on any matal plates/stands. The ideal 
temperature in stores should be 30° to 40°C 
( see Fig. 1 ). 

2.3 The crucible should in no circumstances be 
rolled or subjected to rough handling ( see 
Fig. 2). 

3 FRE-HEATING 

3.1 Before use, very slow preheating is necessary 
below 100°C to remove moisture without forma- 
tion of steam. The different methods for pre- 
heating are given below: 

a) Put the crucible on an iron plate and put 
some sawdust or dung cake inside the 
crucible and fire them. 

b) Keep the crucible in the room/shed where 
the melting is going on. 

c) Keep the crucible near the furnace and 
rotate it slowly. 

3.2 Before putting the crucible in the furnace, it 
is recommended to inspect the crucible for any 
cracks during preheating. 



4 POSITION OF THE CRUCIBLE IN THE 
FURNACE 

4.1 The crucible should be placed perfectly low 
in the furnace about 10 cm above the fire bars. 

4.2 The crucible should not be placed too high 
since it will adversely affect the crucible in not 
getting uniform fire particularly in the upper 
part where proper glazed coat may not be 
obtained on the crucible due to insufficient heat 
on the upper part. The carbon inside crucible 
may also get burnt out. 

4.3 Fuel coke should be fully covered around 
the crucible so that proper firing may take 
place. Larger pieces of coke should be at the 
bottom up to the level of the stand and smaller 
pieces thereafter up to the top of the crucible. 
The coke should be stoked often and replenished 
so that the crucible is always uniformly heated 
( seeTlg. 3 ). 

4.4 Care should be taken that fuel covers the 
entire crucible up to the top to avoid oxidation. 

4.5 It is recommended that the crucible should 
be placed on a stand preferably made of similar 
crucible material specially manufactured for 
this purpose. 

4.6 It is important that the stand placed at the 
bottom of the crucible should conform in dia- 
meter to the corresponding size of the crucible 
base and that the crucible should rest firmly on 
the stand with no fragments of smouldering coke 
or any other material between the crucible on 
further heating ( see Fig. 4 ). 

4.6.1 Prior to insertion of the crucible the 
underlay must be strewn with an insulating 
coating of fire clay grog ( below 100 mesh ) or 
fine coke/graphite to avoid sticking ( see Fig. 5 ). 

4.7 Coke fragments should not be too large as 
the cold air from below directly strike crucible 
walls. This will adversely affect the casting effi- 
ciency ( see Fig. 6). 

4.8 The grate rods should not be laid too 
closely. Slag free coke should be used. The grate 
should be frequently cleared of slag ( see 
Fig. 7). 



1 



IS 13173 : 1991 



4.9 The crucible should not be installed too 
tightly in the tilting furnace. A wooden wedge 
which will be consumed during the heating 
process should be inserted between the crucible 
rim and the holding stone ( see Fig/ 8 ). 

5 PROTECTION FROM OXIDATION 

5.1 If a crucible is kept too long in the furnace 
at a low temperature its surface gets deteriora- 
ted and starts crumbling. The carbon gets burnt 
out and appears as if the crucible is made of 
reddish coloured spongy clay. If the firing is 
further prolonged the crucible will get perished 
by fractures. This is mainly due to the fact that 
the pure carbon/graphite in the crucible com- 
bines readily with oxygen and then gets oxidised. 
In order to prevent such oxidation and to pro- 
tect carbon which is most essential ingredient in 
the crucible from destruction, proper care 
should be taken in maintaining suitable tempera- 
ture and reducing atmosphere in the furnace 
though the composition of the crucible contains 
special admixtures which easily melt and form a 
protective coating on the surface of the crucible. 
To obtain that result, a certain minimum tem- 
perature is necessary, when melting metals such 
as brass, bronze, etc. 

6 CHARGING OF CRUCIBLE 

6.1 The charging of metal to be melted should 
be carried out very carefully since the crucible 
is made of much soft a material than the metal 
to be melted. 

6.2 Longer ingots should be inserted into the 
crucible vertically. Ingots should be placed 
bosely in the crucible leaving enough space to 
expand the metal with progressive heat ( see 
Fig. 9). 

6.3 The ingots of heavy scrap should be placed 
gently with the help of proper tongs ( see 
Fig. 10 ). 

6.4 Hollow sciap must be absolutely free of 
fluids. Care should be taken to remove fluids, if 
any, in such metals by evaporation before they 
are charged into the crucible {see Fig. 11 ). 

6.5 Cold metal should not be added to a hot 
charge which retards melting besides damaging 
the crucible. 

6.6 The ingot or scrap metal may be placed 
around the top of the furnace before charging 
for warming/preheating as much as possible. 

6.7 Avoid hitting the top inside rim of the cruci- 
ble with furnace tools, while charging metal for 
Tnelting or while mixing the molten metal to 
prevent cracks and flaking. 



7 DESIGN AND FURNACE MAINTENANCE 

7.1 The furnace should be correctly dimension- 
ed and the lining should be regularly repaired to 
ensure a rapid and uniform heat transfer to the 
charge. This will prevent flame deflection that 
could cause localised over heating and flame 
erosion. 

7.2 It should be noted that too abundant fuel 
space around the crucible is disadvantageous as 
the casting efficiency slackens accordingly and 
never reaches the height which would be attain- 
ed with the properly proportioned furnace 
interior. 

7.3 Proper space margin should be given for 
allowing free expansion of crucible. 

7.4 Gap between crucible and wall of furnace 
should be such that required amount of heat 
can be generated and transmitted to metal at 
desired level. 

7.5 Vents/voids in the furnace should be avoid- 
ed as they allow cold air and harm the crucible. 

7.6 In the case of electro-heating furnaces the 
safety hatch must always be kept tightly closed 
( see Fig. 12 ). 

7.7 Oil feed lines should be checked regularly in 
case of oil fired furnaces for any blockage as 
otherwise only cold air will penetrate to the 
crucible base and will create stresses. Oil feed 
lines should be cleaned frequently. 

7.8 The burner element should be so adjusted 
that the flame is directed on to the crucible at 
a tangent which then circulates around the 
crucible in an upward direction ( see Fig. 13 ). 

7.9 The oil or gas burner should be installed at 
a height so that flame jet should first strike past 
the underlay and then circulate around the cru- 
cible in an upward direction ( see Fig. 14 ). 

7.10 The flame should be correctly adjusted so 
that unburned oil is not sprayed on to the 
crucible. The flame should be slightly oxidised 
(.see Fig, 15). 

8 FURNACE WITH FORCED DROUGHT 

8.1 If the furnace is with the artificial drought, 
excess air pressure should be avoided through- 
out the firing operation as the excessive pressure 
will retard the operation by upsetting the 
correct ratio of fuel and air. 

8.2 The drought should be continuously observ- 
ed in order to avoid obstruction, if any, that 
may occur at times due to unsuitable coke, by 
which the fire bars will be partly blocked in 
allowing the flames freely. The darting flames 
may occur in such circumstance which may 
furrow the crucible material adversely affecting 
the life of crucible. 



IS 13173: 1991 



9 IMPLEMENTS FOR HANDLING 
CRUCIBLES 

9.1 Special care should be taken that the tongs 
grip evenly and firmly ( see Fig. 16 ). 

9.2 The tongs must be set at adequate depth 
and must exercise even contact with crucible 
wall for facilitating firm grip. 

9.3 The tongs should be regularly repaired to 
keep them in original shape to ensure proper 
grip (.see Fig. 17 ). 

9.4 The poking bar should be bent at the end 
thereby ensuring that it is unable to bypass the 
ingots ( see Fig. 18 ). 

9.5 A lighter crowbar with a flat end should be 
employed for removing scoria/slag from the 
crucible wall while crucible is red hot ( see 
Fig. 19 ). 

9.6 A suitable pair of tongs should be employed 
for charging heavy scrap ( see 6.3 ). 

10 FUEL 

10.1 Solid fuel such as coke must be perfectly 
dried and free from sulphur to the extent pos- 
sible. 



10.2 The solid fuel such as coke should 
broken into small pieces before use. 



be 



10.3 Good hard foundry coke is decidely prefer- 
able to soft coke. 

11 OTHER PRECAUTIONS 

11.1 Care should be taken after every hour to 
remove any scoria/slag/dross on the interior of 
the crucible while it is still glowing. 



11.2 Residues of metal should not be left in the 
crucible to cool down as these can lead to a 
crack on reheating. 

11.3 Admixtures such as fluxes should only be 
added to red hot charge. Use only the required 
quantity of flux. Adding excessive flux will harm 
the crucible ( see Fig. 20 ). 

11.4 In order to prevent the crucible from stick- 
ing to the stand, the layer of coke powder and 
sawdust should be applied to the bottom of the 
crucible ( see Fig. 5 ). 

11.5 When making or mixing metal from ingot 
or large scrap, care should be taken that the 
ingots do not rest on the crucible wall as to 
avoid run down on the outer surface of the 
crucible and into the furnace. 

11.6 When the crucible is taken out of the 
furnace care should be taken that no fragments 
of solid fuel adhere to the bottom as these may 
pierce the bottom of the crucible due to heavy 
weight of the metal when placing the crucible 
again on the stand. 

11.7 After low preheating, the crucible should 
be gradually brought up to a dull red-heat and 
then rapidly up to a bright red heat, thereby 
permitting the requisite protective glazing to 
form. 

11.8 The brightly red-heated crucible should be 
placed on a fire clay plate or preferably on an 
asbestos sheet when bailed out (see Fig. 21 ). 

11.9 At the end of each pouring day all salt 
residue must be carefully removed from the 
crucible with a scraper ( see Fig. 22 ). 

11.10 In the case of extended furnce break- 
down the molten metal should be poured into 
moulds ( small ingots ) which can subsequently 
be used without difficulty ( see Fig. 23). 



IS 13113 I Wl 





INCOltECT 



COIKfCl 



Fio i 




INCOniFCT 









IL 






I (l 


f 














AX 




n l 


m '/" 




SENSES 

INCORRECT CUIlltCT 

Fin. J 




1 


1 



INCOtRECT 



FJu. 1 





IHCOttECT CG1KKT 

Fig, J 




■J 














>." 
























U M -" 








SurL 




t 
















: : 


■ 



INCOKRECT COfitCT 

Fio,« 











p- 














1^ 




























-™ .. JfjK 

















INCOMfCT 



] 


1 f 
11 




] 






_ ■■■■■ — * 




CORRECT 





.'4 

■ c •" 






FNCOIHECT 

rid. a 




INCORRECT CORffiCT 

Fifi. 1 * 




INCORRECT 

Fib, 12 



IS 1 J ]7J : iwi 




H— 




1-VCOKftECT COIIliCT 

Fuo, 13' 







-■■ 




INCORRECT COH3EC1 





INCOR^CT COIB ECf 

Fju, L5 





INCOB3ECT COfl^CT 

Fk.. |$ 




INCORRECT CORRECT 

Fiti- IT 





INCORRECT CORRECT 

F'ju. Lt 





INCOdfltCt CORflrCT 

F]<J. 19 





thCOERICT CORRECT 

Fjg. » 





.J u 

INCOPBECT COftfiECT 

Fro. Jl 



C Id;, hp hour h 





IWCORBECT COftSECT 





1 1 


l --* - ; .r-p 

KW . irJJ . 


ffiWJr 








INCORRECT C0RREC1 

Flti. 13 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, tosting and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use oft he Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Ihdian Standards, 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications )» BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc : No. MTD 15 ( 3426) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central ; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg / 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 \331 13 75 

Eastern ; 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 87 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 632 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COTMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Pteas. Khuria, India 



