**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  10449  (1983) :  Code  for  transport  of  live  fish  seed  for 
inland  pisciculture  purposes  [FAD  5:  Livestock  Feeds, 
Equipment  and  Systems] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


JS:  10449-  19B3 

(Reaffirmed  2000) 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR 

TRANSPORT  OF  LIVE  FISH  SEEDS  FOR 
INLAND  PISCICULTURE  PURPOSES 


V\X:     656071  :  639*2 


©  Copyright  1983 

INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MANAK     BHAVAN,     y     HAHAHl  K      SHAH    /AFAR     MARC 

NEW     DELHI    111 

Gr  2  ito£|  1983 


18:10449-1983 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR 

TRANSPORT  OF  LIVE  FISH  SEEDS  FOR 

INLAND  PISCICULTURE  PURPOSES 

Live  Animals  Sectional  Committee,  AFDC  24 

Chairman  Representing 

Dr  H.  G.  Sen  Organon  (  India  )  Limited,  Calcutta 

Members 

DBV.  S.  Alwab  Animal  Welfare  Board  (Ministry  of  Agriculture  ), 

Madras 
Dr  S.  R.  Chadha  (  Alternate  ) 
Animal      Husbandry    Gommis-    Animal  Husbandry   Commissioner  to  the  Govern- 
sioner  ment  of  India  (  Ministry  of  Agriculture  ),  New 

Delhi 
Dr  B.  R.  Baliga  Central    Food    Technological     Research     Institute 

(GSIR),  Mysore 
"Dr  M.  A.  Haleem  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  -M.  S.  Bhamji  Indian  Council  of  Medical  Research,  New  Delhi 

Dr  S.  Jayaraman  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  R.  Bhardwaj  Central  Drug  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Lucknow 

Dr  J.  N.  S.  Yadava  (  Alternate  ) 
Da  D.  F.  Budtjic  Haffkine  Bio-pharmaceutical  Corporation  Limited, 

Bombay 
Dr  A.  Y.  Nimbkar  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  P.  R.  ChaNdran  Zoological  Gardens,  Trivandrum 

Shri  C.  P.  Chandrasekhaban        Railway    Board    (  Ministry     of     Railways  ),     New 

Delhi 
Dr  G.  P.  Das  Sarabhai  Research  Centre,  Vadodara 

Dr  D.  C.  Banik  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  P.  J.  Deoras  In     personal     capacity      ( 341-A     Sahitya  Sahawas, 

Bandra  East,  Bombay  ) 
Dr  P.  K.  Gangopadhyay  Indian   Institute   of    Chemical    Biology    (  CSIR  ), 

Calcutta 
Dr  S.  K.  Mttra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  D.'Xima  Air  India,  Bombay 

Shri  Felix  Noronha  (  Alternate  ) 
Da  Dev  Raj  Narang  Delhi   Society   for    the    Prevention    of    Cruelty    to 

Animals,  Delhi 
Honorary  Secretary  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1983 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall   be   deemed   to   be   an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act, 


IS:  10449-1983 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Dr  A.  V.  Natarajan  Central  Inland  Fisheries  Research  Institute  (  ICAR  ), 

Barrackpore 
Db  K.  L.  Sehgal  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  P.  R.  Pabrai  Directorate  General  of  Health  Services,  New  Delhi 

Shri  S.  G.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  E.  Patterson  T.   E.     Patterson    (  India  )   Private  Limited,   New 

Delhi 
Shri  D.  D.  Dhawan  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  R.  S.  Prasad  University  of  Kerala,  Trivandrum 

Da  R.  R.  Rao  Ciba-Geigy  Research  Centre,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  M.  Mathews  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  A.  Reddy  Central  Poultry  Breeding  Farm  (  Ministry  of  Agri- 

culture ),  Bombay 
Brig  P.  D.  Saksena  In  personal  capacity  (  E-20,  Saket,  New  Delhi  ) 

Dr  Satish  Kumar  Indian  Veterinary     Research     Institute    (  ICAR  ), 

Izatnagar 
Dr  H.  S.  Pandey  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  (  Smt  )  Saraljit  Sehgal  National  Institute  of  Communicable  Diseases,  New 

Delhi 
Dr  Hari  Om  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  U.  K.  Sharma  Indian  Airlines  Corporation,  New  Delhi 

Shri  G.  P.  Bhatnagae  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  Brijpal  Singh  Central  Avian  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Bareilly 

Dr  Manohar  Singh  Director      of      Animal        Husbandry        Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Dr  G.  P.  Grover  (  Alternate  ) 
Prof  P.  N.  Srivastava  University  Grants  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Maj-Gen  S.  N.  Srivastava  Directorate  of   Remount  Veterinary  Services,  Army 

Headquarters,  New  Delhi 
Shri  M.  E,  Thomas  Chief  Controller  of  Imports  and  Exports,  New  Delhi 

Shrimati  P.  Mohan  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  T.  R.  Thyagarajan  Indian  Drugs  and  Pharmaceuticals  Ltd,  Rishikesh 

Dr  S.  P.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  T.  N.  Vaishnay  Director      of     Animal   Husbandry     Gujarat    State, 

Ahmadabad 
Dr  B.  M.  L.  Varmani  Industrial  Toxicology    Research    Centre    (  CSIR  ), 

Lucknow 
Dr  J.  L.  Kaw  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Purnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-qfficio  Member  ) 


Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 


Secretary 

Shlu  Lajinder  Singh 
Deputy  Director  (Agri  &  Food  ),  ISI 


IS  :  10449  -  1983 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  FOR 

TRANSPORT  OF  LIVE  FISH  SEEDS  FOR 

INLAND  PISCICULTURE  PURPOSES 


0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  3i  January  1983,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Live 
Animals  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council. 

0,2  The  transport  of  live  fish  seeds  of  in]and  species  is  an  important  part 
of  pisciculture.  Since  the  stocking  of  inland  water  with  seeds  is  mostly 
seasonal,  the  timely  implementation  and  success  of  national  programme 
for  extension  and  intensification  of  pisciculture  would  largely  depend 
upon  the  speed  and  effectiveness  with  which  the  fish  seeds  are  transported 
from  the  limited  centres  of  collection  or  production  to  the  far  flung  water 
areas  spread  over  the  entire  country.  The  existing  transport  practices 
range  from  open  containers  with  renewal  of  water  at  intervals  to  closed 
polyethylene  bags  sealed  with  oxygen  under  pressure. 

0.3  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated, 
expressing  the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2-1960*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded 
off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  code  prescribes  the  conditions  for  transport  of  live  fish  seeds  of 
inland  fish  species  for  pisciculture  purposes. 

Note  —  This  Code  excludes  seeds  of  fresh  water  shell  fish. 


♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 

3 


IS  :  10449  *  1983 

2.  DEFINITION 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard  the  following  definitions  shall 
apply. 

2.1.1  Fish  Seeds  —  Fish  seeds  (  fertilized  eggs,  spawn,  fry  and  finger- 
lings  )  of  quick-growing  species  of  warm  and  cold  fresh  water  fish  meant 
for  development  of  inland  pisciculture. 

3.  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

3.1  The  live  fish  seeds  shall  be  stored  where  they  shall  not  be  subjected 
to  desiccation,  extreme  high  and  low  temperatures  and  any  other  type  of 
stress. 

3.2  Only  healthy,  disease  resistant  and  conditioned  live  fish  seeds  shall  be 
selected  and  released  for  packing  and  transportation. 

3.3  As  far  as  practicable,  live  fish  seeds  of  the  same  species  and  size  shall 
be  packed  for  transport.  However,  fish  seeds  of  certain  compatible 
species,  of  uniform  size  which  are  non-predaceous  in  habits  can  be  packed 
in  the  same  container. 

3.4  Fish  seeds,  as  far  as  possible,  shall  be  transported  either  by  air  or  by 
the  fastest  passenger  train. 

3.5  Minimum  of  50  percent  of  the  space  in  each  polyethylene  bags  used 
as  containers  for  holding  live  fish  seeds  shall  be  filled  with  oxygen,  so  as 
to  provide  a  pressure  of  l'O  kg  per  cm2.  The  mouth  of  the  polyethylene 
bag  shall  be  tied  tightly  to  prevent  escape  of  oxygen  during  transporta- 
tion. 

3.6  During  transport,  jerks,  jolts  and  shocks  shall  be  avoided,  as  far  as 
possible.  In  case  of  transport  by  rail,  the  fastest  train  shall  be  chosen  and 
in  case  of  road  transport  for  short  distances  nearest  but  metalled  or  good 
surfaced-road  shall  be  used. 

4.  PACKING  REQUIREMENTS 

4.1  Fertilized  Eggs  —  Fertilized  eggs  of  brown  and  rainbow  trouts  at 
eyed-stage  shall  be  transported  in  insulated  wooden  cabinet  of  the 
dimensions  50  X  25  X  40  cm.  On  the  top  of  the  cabinet  20  cm  high 
cupboard  with  glavanized  wire-netting  base  shall  be  provided  to  pack 
moss  with  snow  or  ice.  Under  the  cupboard  two  trays  shall  be  arranged 
above  the  other  perforated  zinc  sheet  base  for  packing  moss,  and  to  hold 
the  water  from  the  melting  snow  or  ice  lying  above.  Below  the  two 
trays  42  egg  trays  shall  be  placed  in  two  rows  of  tray  21  each.  Each 
egg  tray  (  23  x  23  x  100  cm  )  shall  have  a  muslin  cloth  base  to  keep 
the  eggs  moist.  Each  egg  tray  shall  hold  1  000  eyed  eggs  in  a  single 
layer. 


IS:  W449U983 

4.2  Spawn,  Fry  and  Finger  lings 

4*2.1  Only   tested    leakproof  polyethylene  bags   having   not  less  than 
75    micron  thickness  shall  be  used  to  pack  spawn,  fry  and  fingerlings  of 
fresh  water  fish.     The   dimensions   of  polyethylene   bags  shall  be  82  X 
60  cm. 

4.2.2  The  fish  seed  of  Indian  and  exotic  carps  shall  be  packed  in 
accordance  with  size  and  number  as  given  in  Table  1,  to  avoid  mortality 
of  more  than  5  percent. 


TABLE  1 

PACKING  DENSITY  OF  CARP  SPAWN,  FRY  AND 
FINGERLINGS 

Size  Range 

(  mm  ) 

Dur 

ATION  OF  TRANSPORT 

(  hours  ) 

Number  to  be  Packed  per 
Polyethylene  Bag 

(i) 

(2) 

(3) 

5  to  10 

12  to  24 

10  000-12  000 

n  to20 

Up  to  12 

2  500 

21  to  30 

Up  to  12 

1  500 

31  to  40 

Up  to  12 

1  000 

41  to  50 

Up  to  12 

300 

51  to  60 

Up  to  12 

200 

61  to  70 

Up  to  12 

100 

71  to  80 

Up  to  12 

50 

4.3  The  polyethylene  bags  holding  live  fish  seeds  shall  be  packed  in  an 
outer  16*5  litre  oil  cans  having  press-in-lid.  The  tins  shall  be  of  good 
quality,  rust-free,  and  of  enough  strength  to  withstand  the  stresses  and 
strains  encountered  during  transportation  by  air  or  rails  and/or  road. 
Only  one  polyethylene  bag  shall  be  packed  in  each  tin. 

4.4  As  far  as  possible  the  tins  shall  be  insulated  with  thermocole  lining 
from  inside.  Alternatively  some  soft  packing  material  (  paper  shaving/ 
old  newspaper  )  shall  be  provided  at  the  bottom  and  four  sides  of  the  tin 
to  act  as  cushioning  material  to  the  polyethylene  bag  and  to  give  protec- 
tion from  tearing  off  and  temperature  fluctuations. 

4.5  The  polyethylene  bag  shall  be  filled  with  pure  chlorine-free  fresh 
water  up  to  50  percent  of  its  capacity  before  releasing  spawn,  fry  and 
fingerlings. 


IS  t  10449 -1983 

4.6  Loading  and  unloading  of  the  tins  shall  be  done  efficiently  and 
quickly  after  sealing  the  mouth  of  the  polyethylene  bag  and  be  done 
immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  consignment  of  fish  seed.  The  tins 
shall  be  handled  with  care  during  storage  in  aircraft,  train  or  motor 
lorry. 

5.  LABELLING 

5.1  Each  tin  shall  bear  a  label  giving  the  following  information  written 
legibly  and  indelibly: 

a)  Name  of  the  species; 

b)  Stage  offish  seeds  (  spawn,  fry  or  fingerlings  ), 

c)  Name,  address  and  telephone  number  of  the  consignor;  and 

d)  Name,  address  and  telephone  number  of  the  consignee. 

5.2  Each  container  shall  also  be  marked  with  a  cautionary  notice  reading 
as  under: 

'TOP  PRIORITY.  LIVE  FISH  SEEDS.  HANDLE  WITH  CARE' 

5.3  Each  container  shall  bear  on  the  face  a  red  arrow  showing  the  upper 
side. 


