**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11016 (1984) : General safety requirements for machine 
tools and their operation [PGD 3: Machine Tools] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC em: 614-8 18:11016-1984 




, . ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
MACHINE TOOLS AND THEIR OPERATION 



1. scope 

1.1 Identifies the basic requirements with regard to safety provisions for machines tools and their 
accessories and is applicable for new designs as well as re-designs and modifications and describes the 
safety measures to be adopted (a ) at the actual place of working; and (b) for setting, utilisation and 
maintenance of machine tools and their accessories. 

1.2 Provides a general guidelines for safety on machine tools and their operations. 

1.3 Provides a general guideline and wherever specific limits are to be applied for values such as noise, 
vibration, etc, reference shall be made to relevant standards on specific subjects. 

Note 1 — In al! such cases where it has not been possible to identify specific causes or identify specific 
limiting values the best possible safety practices identified to overcome such specific cases should be practclsed. 

Note 2 — A number of related standards have been identified and listed and given In Appendix A. However, 
wherever a doubt arises regarding the application of a particular standard, a decision regarding the applicability to 
betaken keeping in mind the safety requirements to be provided. 

2. Terminology 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Normal Working Area — Area occupied by the machine tool and all its accessories and that 
required for operation, maintenance and material handling. 

2.2 Hazardous Working Area — Area in which the actual machining operation is carried out. This 
includes (a) the area taken up for the movement of tools and workpieces, (b) the area required for 
material handling in the proximity of both the tool and the workpiece, (c) the area required for the 
movement of clamping elements, and (d) the area endangered by the flying of chips. 

2.3 Hazardous Points ■— freely accessible points between relatively moving parts of the machine and 
between these parts and the workpieces where there is a possibility of the operator being injured either 
during machining or during setting. 

2.4 Cutting Fluid — Fluid, which serves to reduce heat and friction between the too! and the 
work-piece, and aids in easy removal of the chips termed during machining. 

2.5 Maci)ine Tool — Metal cutting machine tool is a power-driven machine, generally not portable by 
hand while in operation, which works metal by cutting, forming, physico-chemical processing or by a 
combination of these techniques. 

2J6 Standard Accessories —l\\ese are tools and aids which are necessary for proper setting, 
functioning, control, service and maintenance of machine tools. 

2.7 Special 4ccessor/es — These are tools and aids which increase the scope of function of machine 
tools. 

2.8 Mactiine Tool Equipment --These include standard and special accessories as per the technical 
requirements, supplied in accordance with the agreement between the manufacturer and the customer. 
They include the servicing and instruction manuals. 

2.8 Control £/eArfe/?^s — These are elements such as levers, hand-wheels, push buttons, etc, required 
for cor^trolMng the various functions of the machine tool mechanically, electrically, hydraulicaliy or 
pneumatically. 

2.10 Clamping Elements — These are elements such as collets, chucks, arbors, etc, required for 
clamping of either tools or workpieces. 



Adopted 17 August 1984 



© January 1985, ISt 6r 6 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVANp 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 11016-1984 

3. Basic Regulations 

3-1 Every manufacturer and user of machine tool shall ensure the safety and protection requirements 
under the Factories Act and this standard as well as the operating, servicing and maintenance manuals 
are properly complied with. 

3.2 Besides other technical requirements, every machine tool shall conform to the safety requirements 
specified in this standard. 

4, Design Requirements 

4.1 General Principles 

4.1.1 Machine tools and their accesso'ies shall be so designed that they can be safely operated as per 
the instructions indicated in the operating manual of the respective machine tool. 

4.1.2 While designing machine tools and their accessories, the physiological and psychological factors 
coupled with the safety and hygienic factors of the operator shall be considered as a composite of the 
requirements. 

4.1.3 Sources of danger, wherever possible, shall be eliminated completely. 

4.1.4 In a situation where it is not possible to eliminate the sources of danger, care shall be taken to 
incorporate safety precautions which will reduce the risk of accidents to a minimum. 

4.1.4.1 Protective equipment shall be simple, reliable and conven^ent for use as well as inspection, 

4.1.4.2 Protective equipments shall not themselves be sources of accident and shall not hinder the 
setting, normal working and maintenance of the machine tool. 

4.1.4.3 Protective equipment shall be so designed that it is possible to get them mutually 
interconnected with the control mechanism. This will ensure such equipment to be brought 
automatically into action, once the machine tool is switched on, and does not get disconnected till the 
machine tool is switched-off. 

4.2 External Arrangement and Shape 

4.2.1 As far as possible, the external surfaces shall be free from sharp edges, sharpcorners, projections 
and cavities. Projections and sharp corners shall be avoided in close proximity to control elements and 
in all such places where there is a risk of the operator getting injured. 

4.2.2 For such of the machine tool parts which cannot be covered and which protrude into the 
working region either temporarily or permanently ( for example, clamps, clamping screws, ect. ) it is 
necessary to minimise the risk of an accident by: 

a) preventing accessibility to such parts, by incorporating suitable protective guards, railings or 
partition; 

b) judiciously locating such parts and providinrg suitable shape; 

c) providing convenient guiding system for tubes, hoses and electrical wires, so that while the 
machine tool is in operation, there will be no obstruction from them; and 

d) cautioning against danger by means of warning colour markings. 

4.2.3 The external shape of the machine tool and its protective equipment shall be such that the 
operator is able to see the workspot without any obstruction and is able to operate without getting 
unduly strained. 

4.3 Painting 

4.3.1 Colour schemes for machine tools shall be selected so as to provide an optically suitable and 
balanced appearance of the machine tool without causing any strain to the operator. 

4.3.2 The painted surface of the machine tool should be smooth and attractive. 

4.3.3 When controls are confined to distnict regions of the machine tool, the control area should be 
painted with a suitable shade which provides a convenient neutral base for coloured indication plates. 

4.3.4 For rapid assessment of hazards and for identification and location of safety facilities and 
equipment, suitable safety colours shall be used. 



ISi 11016-19S4 

4.4 Maintenance and Operation 

4.4.1 The design of machine tool shall permit easy cleaning and ^afe removal of chips. All such 
places which are required to be manually cleaned, shall be easily accessible. 

"t.*t^^ I aiLo icH^i'i'i^ aujuoiiiic7iiL, oicaiiin^, uiit^ui lUJJi luaiiui I, ciu ( lur |?Aciiii[Jic;, uiULUimd, ucaiiii^, 

cams, stop drums, etc ) shall be easily accessible. Special care shall be taken while locating such parts 
requiri^ng regular setting and cleaning, to restrict any possibility of an accident while operating the 
machine tool. 

4.4.3 Standardized symbols shall be marked at all lubricating points according to the periodicity of 
lubrication. 

4.4.4 Coolant tank/filters and their distribution piping shall be so designed as to permit easy cleaning/ 
replacement and it shall also be possible to drain off the coolant completely. 

4.4.5 Parts located below the hazardous working area shall be safely accessible for the purposes of 
maintenance and repairs and suitably provided with protective guards. 

4.4.6 Ail control elements shall be located at a suitable height convenient for normal operation of the 
machine tool. 

4.4.7 Where necessary, suitable slip proof platforms shall be provided for the operator. Where such 
platforms exceed a height of 500 mm. they shall be provided with guard rails. 

4.5 Transportation, l\/lounting and Installation 

4.5.1 Design of machine tools shall enable easy assembly and dismantling for the purposes of repairs 
or replacements. 

4.5.2 Machine tools and their individual comiponent parts shall be so designed as to facilitate safe 
handling during transportation, assembly, maintenance or manufacture. For this purpose it is essential 
to provide, wherever necessary, on individual parts and/or on sub-assembly units, suitable lugs, 
eyebolts, opening for wire ropes, etc. Suitable provision for slinging of wire ropes should be provided 
and such provisions should be rounded so that the slinging rope does not get damaged. While 
providing these handling facilities, due regard should be given to the position of the centre of gravity 
and the strength of the material. 

4.5.3 The instruction manual or service manual shall clearly state the best and safe method of 
slinging for the purposes of transporting and installation. 

4.5.4 The base of the machine tool shall be so designed that it is possible to use levers for easy 
mounting and installation. 

4.5.5 To help easy and safe installation, the machine tool shall be provided Vvith sufficient number 
of lugs and holes for fixing the base, safely and rigidly on the foundation. 

4-6 Design of Moving Parts 

4.6.1 All moving parts likely to cause hazards shall be provided with protective guards. 

4-6.1.1 Driving and transmission mechanism forming an integral part of the machine tool shall be 
completely enclosed within the framework. 

4.6.1-2 When the driving and transmission mechanism does not form an integral part, but has to 
be provided within the reach of the operator, shall be positioned at a convenient height and covered 
by protective yuards. 

4.6.2 Whenever moving parts are enclosed by hinged and locked protective covers, it shall be 
ensured that it is not possible to remove them during operation. 

4.6.3 The protective equipment shall be designed with due consideration to the surroundings in which 
it will be installed and fabricated from non- inflammable material which cannot be easily damaged and 
which is capable of getting cleaned easily. 

4.6.4 in such machine tool where the weight of the moving parts is balanced by counterweights, 
which shall be located inside the machine frame or suitably covered by protective guards. 



iS: 11016 -1984 

4.6.4.1 it shall also be ensured that both the counterweights and the balanced parts do not move 
unless they are operated. 

4.6.4.2 There shall be easy access to the balancing equipment for inspection purposes, 

4.7 Design of Braking and Locking Equipment 

4.7.1 Wherever necessary the design of machine tool shall provide for a reliable and efficienl braking 
system enabling quick stopping of the movement of either the workpiece, or the tool or any other part 
of machine tool. 

4.7-1.1 For hydraulic or pneumatic braking system, the design shall provide for suitable 
precautionary measures to bring the machine tool to a stop automatically when the fluid pressure drops 
below the limiting pressure at which the braking efficiency would be affected. 

4.7.2 In case the machine tool has a provision Tor loading and removal of heavy workpieces only in 
certain positions of the work table, the design shall provide for suitable braking device to stop the 
auxiliary motions of different parts of the machine, when the work table is positioned at these points. 

4.7.3 Machine tool shall be suitably designed to prevent undesirable hazardous movements of parts 
due to either a drop in the fluid pressure, a drop in the supply voltage, power failure or due to damage 
of the threads of the bearing nut. 

4.7.4 Suitable safety devices such as locking switches, shear pins, couplings, temperature relays, 
pressure switches, etc. shall be provided to eliminate any possibiFity of an accident as a result of either 
overloading or damage of individual parts. 

4.7.5 In all cases where there Is an independent feed drive, suitable system shall be provided to 
switchoff the feed drive before switching-on the main drive. It will be ensured that the feed is 
switched-off automatically if there is an interruption to the main drive. 

4.8 Design of Hydraulic Equipnyent 

4.8.1 The design of hydraulic equipment for machine tools shall be noise free and it is ensured that 
the fluid is discharged only into the concerned receiver or tank. 

4.8.2 For controUing the fluid pressure and level, suitable devices shall be incorporated in the design. 
The design shall also provide for overload-protective device. 

4.8.3 The design shall also provide for suitable equipment for the release of air at all places where 
there is a possibility of forming of air cushion. 

4.8.4 Suitable controls shall be incorporated in the design for cautioning an eventual fault in any 
part of the circuit such as choking of oil filter, temperature of oil in excess of normal range, etc. 

4.9 Design of Clamping Equipment 

4.9.1 Clamping equipment for clamping of either the wo^kprece or the tool shall facilitate easy and 
safe clamping and unclamping. If the unit comprises several dismantleable parts, then assembling and 
dhsmantling of the unit shall be as smooth as possible and shall not be a source of injury to the 
operator. 

4.9.1.1 Loading and unloading positions on the machine tool shall be so arranged that any 
manipulation on the damping unit is done at a safe distance from the dangerous parts. The design of 
clamping unit shall also permit easy and safe removal of the chips. 

4.9.2 Rotating clamping units shall have a provision for locking against self-release either during 
braking or during rotation in the opposite direction. 

4.9.2.1 All p?ojecting parts of the rotating clamping urnit shall be covered by protective guards. 

4.9.3 In case the clamping units are designed only for a limited range and not the entire range of 
speeds and feeds of the machine tool, suitable locking system shall be provided for preventing any 
possibte over-running of the machine tool beyond the range of the clamprng unit. 

4.9.4 For clanrrping equipment operated either electrically, electro-magnetically, pneumatically osr 
hydrualically, suitable safety precautions shall be taken either to bring the machine to a dead stop or to 



IS: 11016-1984 

move the tool away from the workpiece, whenever there is a drop in the clamping force. This drop in 
the clamping force may be either due to an interruption of the power supply or due to a drop in the 
fluid pressure, A suitable warning signal should be incorporated to warn the operator of any fault or 
of the eventual stopping of the machine. 

4.9.5 If possible, protective equipment should also be able to prevent the starting of the machine tool 
when the minimum clam.ping force is not attained. 

4J.6 The design should also provide for a means of preventing the workpiece from getting itself 
released during machining due to accidental operation of the release button. 

4.10 Designing for Protection Against Chips etnd Cutting Fluid 

4.10.1 The design of a machine tooi should ensure protection to operator from the action of chips, 
cutting fluid, grinding dust, broken tool particles, etc. For this purpose the design should provide for 
adjustable protective guards capable of arresting chips from flying hazardously and preventing the 
splashing of cutting fluid. 

4.10.1.1 These guards should not come in the way of normal manipulations required on the 
workpiece or the tool. They should also not cause an obstruction to the operator in carrying out his 
normal duties nor should they obstruct the light needed at the cutting zone, 

4.10.1.2 The protective equipment shall be sufficiently rigid and form an integral part of the 
machine tool. The transparent part of the equipment shall b© made out of abrasion resistant material 
which can be easily cleaned and if damaged shall be capable of being replaced easily and safely. 

4.10.2 The design should also enable easy and quick removal of chips from the hazardous working 
places, by providing suitable inclination and smooth surfaces. 

4.10.3 The design should also provide for suitable equipment for cleaning the cutting fluid for removal 
of foreign matter. 

4.11 Design of Control Equipment 

4.11-1 The design and location of control panel shall ensure an accurate, easy and quick manipulation 
and reading. 

4.11.2 Every machine too! shall be provided with a *Main Switch'" by operating which the entire 
machine tool gets disconnected ^rom energy source. 

4.11.3 The location of all control elements such as levers, hand wheels, switches, buttons, etc, shall 
ensure: 

a) easy and safe operation with least physical strain, 

b) that they are within easy reach of the operators from their normal working place in all 
positions of control, 

c) that there is no danger to the operator from the hazardous moving parts while operating the 
controls, and 

d) that they do not come in the way of normal movements of the operator. 

4.11.4 Different control units for various motions which do not simultaneously set in shall be 

mutually blocked. 

4.11.5 Control elements shall be so designed as to prevent their changing of positions by themselves, 
anjd foot-operated controls shall be locked against accidental release. 

4.11 6 For machine tools having more than one control station, the design should ensure that it is not 
possible to simultaneously operate from different control positions by providing suitable interlocking 
facility except for emergency stop push button. 

4-11.7 Provision of automatic disengagement shall be made for manual control elements for 
preventing any forceful operation during the cutting process. 

4.11.8 The control elements shall be easily distinguishable by shape, colour or symbols or by suitable 
combination of thes6. 



ISi 11016 -1984 

4*11.9 For recommended practice regarding the direction of operation of controls, 15:2987-1983 
'Recommendations for direction of operation of controls for mechine tools {first revisIonY shall be 
followed. 

4.11.10 Suitable control stops shall be provided near the places of danger or at all control points by 
means of which the machine may be brought to a total stop. However, for machine tools which have 
3 Single operating position, only one such stop will suffice. 

4.11.11 Whenever indication plates are used to clearly indicate the purpose of control elements 
then symbols to be used in siich indication plates shall be in accordance with 15:2182-1962 
'Recommendation for symbols to be given on indication plates for machine tools'. 

4.11.12 Electrical control elements intended for stopping the machine or its parts shall be in red 
colour, or be indicated by red colour light signals. Similarly, control elements intended for starting 
shall be in green colour, or be indicated by green-colour light indication. 

4.11.13 In general, control elements for electrical equipment of tools shall be in accordance with 
IS : 1356 (Part 1 )-t972 'Specification for electrical equipment of machine tools: Part 1 Electrical 

c^ulpHlClll ui iiia\./iiiiic9 lui ^t;iii?iai uoc ^ oc^^kjuu icvi^iun } . 

4.11.14 For all machine tools, especially for automatic and programme controlled machine tools, 
auxiliary manual controls enabling manual operations of tables, slides, etc, shall also be provided to 
meet emergency requirements. ( For example during failures of electric supply, or during accidents.) 

4.11.15 For programme-controlled machines operating with a tape, it should be so controlled that the 
machine comes to a dead stop when the tape is broken or when there is an error in tape movement. 
Sufficient care should also be taken while designing the control system for such machine tools to 
prevent the starting of the working cycle when the tape is wrongly introduced. 

4.12 Design of Electrical Equipment 

4.12.1 Regarding the safety requirements of electrical equipment for machine tools, standards have 
been formulated both at the International and national levels. IS : 1356 ( Part 1 )-1972 serves to the 
needs of the designers as regards the safety requirements of electrical equipment i'or machine tools, as 
applicable in India. 

4.12.2 in addition, special care shall be taken regarding the tropicalization and climate proofing of 
electrical equipment for machine tools. 

4.13 Design of Exhaust Equipment 

4.13.1 The design of exhaust equipment should take into consideration the general hygienic and 
safety regulations prevailing. In addition, the following points are required to be borne in mind while 
designing the exhaust equipment. 

4.13.1.1 They should not obstruct the operation, impair the work and the view of the working 
area. 

4.13.1.2 They should be noisefree in operation and should be capable of being easily assembled 
and disassembled. 

4.13.1.3 The suction head of the exhaust equipment shall cover the entire area of all sources of 
dust particles and shall be located in the immediate vicinity in such a way that the direction of suction 
is the same as direction of flow of the dust. 

4.13.1.4 if the sources of dust get shifted during machining, the suction head should also be made 
to shift simultaneously to the proper suction position. 

4.13.2 The exhaust equipment shall be so designed as to prevent any choking-up of the piping. 

4.13.3 The exhaust pipes, dust separator and other rigid parts shall be so designed as to enable easy 
dismantling and cleaning. 

4.13.4 The exhaust equipment should not be a source of danger either due to excess noise or due to 
excessive cooling down of the working area and the surroundings of the machine tool, 

4.14 Design witt) Regard to Noise and Vibration 

4.14.1 Design should take care of the permissible noise levels for different types of machine tools and 
maintain the noise levels within these limits; if necessary, with the aid of separate noise suppressors 
and vibration dampers. 



IS: 11016-1984 

4.14.2 Vibration and noise shall be kept to minimunn by proper design of kinematic mechanisnn, 
proper balancing, accurate manufacture of components and proper use of scund insulating materials, etc. 

4.14.3 The instruction manual shall provide the correct information regarding type of foundation and 

their isolation. 

4.14.4 If pneumatic clamping units are used, then the design shall include suitable damping of the 
air exhaust noise. 

5. Additional Requirements 

5.1 Instructions for Servicing of Macliine Tool 

5.1.1 With each new machine tool the manufacturer (supplier) shall provide the customer (the 
person who orders ) with at least two copes of detailed and legible descriptions of the machine tool, 
Its equipment and accessories, with necessary drawings and schematic diagrams of electrical 
connections together with instructions for its correct and safe installation, adjustment maintenance and 
operation. 

5.1.2 Similar descriptions and instructions shall also be prepared for the existing machine tools by the 
users. 

5.2 Training of Operators 

5.2.1 Every machine tool user shall carefully consider the provision of training of operators from the 
point of view of safe working as soon as they are employed. If necessary, refresher courses may also 
be arranged as and when required. 

5.2.2 The training course should preferably include the safe and suitable methods of machining 
adopted in various machine tools, setting up of the machine tool, cutting tool, etc, proper use of 
measuring instrum.ents, and care to be taken while using the cutting fluid, during material handhng and 
during machining. The operators should also be taught the principles of first aid, action to be taken in 
case of emergency, etc. They should also be taught the proper oulfit to be worn during machining. 

5.3 Requirements of the Shop Floor and the Arrangement of Machine Tools 

5.3.1 The floor area alloted to each machine tool and the operator shall be in accordance with the 
valid health regulations. In addition to this, necessary space required for storing the auxiliary 
equipments, raw materials, tools, etc, shall be provided. 

5.3.2 Machine tools shall be so located that they are at a distance of at least 600 mm from the 
permanent obstructions (walls, columns, etc) and at least 100 mm in cases where the operator is 
constantly stationed at one place during the operation. The dimensions shall be measured when the 
moving parts of the machine are positioned at their extreme positions in that direction. 

^.3.3 Parts of machine tools which exceed the average height of the surrounding machines, may be 
marked in warning colours or provided with danger lights at their topmost points, if ^n overhead 
travelling crane travels above them. 

5.3.4 Machine tools shall be located in the most faverable conditions for natural light. If natural light 
is inadequate, proper artificial lighting should be provided. Additionally, operating zones shall be 
illuminated properly, if required. 

5.3.5 Old machines equipped with belt transmission from the line shall have a free pulley and a 
shifter which could be controlled from the normal place of operation of the machine. However, in 
majority of the cases, it may be necessary to change over to unit drives. 

5.3.6 Additional adjustable lights on machine tools shall be provided to illuminate to the operational 
zone, 

5.4 Working Place 

5.4.1 Working places shall be selected with due care to see that the operator is not disturbed by the 
neighbouring work places and that there is no obstruction to his movement during working. 

6.4.2 The working floor should be insulated against dampness and should enable easy movement of 
the workers. 

5.4.3 The working place shall be maintained clean and tidy, cleaning of chips shall be preferably 
mechanised and done regularly. 



IS: 11016-1984 

5.4.4 Spilling of oily substances on the floor to be cleaned and dried by saw dusts immediately. 

5.4.5 Working area shall be illuminated adequately by overhead illumination and shall conTorm 
the requirements of IS : 6665-1972 'Code of practice for industrial lighting'. 

5.4.6 All waste material shall be dumped in a separate portab'e waste bin, which ensures safety 
while transporting. The load-carrying capacity of the bin shall be clearly marked on it. 

5.4.7 While stacking combustible and light inflammable materials (solvents, lubricants, etc) at the 
working place, suitable safety procedures currently in vogue may be followed. 

5.4.8 Used cleaning material ( cotton waste, etc) shall be staked in separate metaHic containers with 
lids,xind they shall be regularly emptied. 

5.4.9 Tools, gauges, etc, shall not be placed on the frames, tables or beds of the machine tools unless 
separate space specially for keeping them is provided. 

5.4.10 While stacking the raw material at the work place, the stack shall preferrably be not higher 
than 100 mm and the width of the passage between the stacks or between the stack and the machine 
be not less than 800 mm. To prevent sliding of the stack and falling of the workpieces, suitable 
supports shall be provided. 

5.5 Movement of Objects {Material Handling) 

5.5.1 For clamping and removal of heavy fixture, tools and workpieces, suitable lifting equipment 
shall be made available. Lifting equipment shall enable reliable gripping of the object and its 
convenient and safe lifting and location on the machine. 

5.5.2 Workers engaged In lifting operations shall be suitably trained and provided with all auxiliary 
equipments, 

5.6 Working with Cutting Fluid 

5.6.1 Protection of the worker shall be ensured against any possible harm telng caused due to the 
action of the cutting fluid. Only such cutting fluids, which have been approved by the competent 
authorities shall be used and all precautions taken as per regulations provided in corresponding 
health code, 

5.6.2 Instructions shall be given to concerned workers regarding the safe methods of preparation and 
use of cutting fluids. They shall be provided with suitable protective equipments according to safety 
requirements. 

5.6.3 Cutting fluid shall be regularly changed as per recommendation of the supplier. During each 
change, the tank and the entire system shall be washed with hot water and soda. If any disinfectant is 
used for cleaning, this should be later washed off from the tank. 

5.6.4 Such workers who are suffering from skin diseases or those who are liable to contact them 
when they are in contact with the cutting fluid, shall not be encouraged to go near the places where 
the cutting fluid is being used, 

5-7 Utilisation of Machine Tools 

5.7.1 Machine tool shall be used only for such work for which it is intended and which corresponds 
to its type, size and capacity. 

5.7-2 While machining special metals and alloys, due caie shall be taken to meet the specific health 
and safety repuirements. 

6. Duties of the Operator 

6.1 Duties of the Operator Before Starting the Work on the Machine Tools 
6.1.1 Before starting the work, the operator shall attend to the following: 

a) Examine the machine tool, check its parts, safety equipments, starting and stopping switches, 
etc. Any discrepancy or damage should immediately be reported to his supervisor. 

8 



IS: 1101«- 1984 

b) Check the oil level to make sure about the correct functioning of the lubrication equipment. 

c) Check the functioning of the clamping equipment. 

d) Carry out proper selection of the tools and check their use. 

e) Check whether the controls are in correct positions. 

f) Adjust the protective guards to their active positions. 

6.2 Duties of the Operator While Working on the Machine 

6.2-1 Safe and proper method of working on the machine tool shall be followed. It is necessary to 
follow strictly the instructions provided in the instruction manual taking aLI precautions as prescribed. 

6.2.2 While lubricatting or cleaning or whHe leaving the workspot, the machine tool shall be brought 
to a total stop. 

6.2.3 While changing the tools, checking the surface of the workspot, clamping and removing the 
workpiece, and while measuring, the spindle of the machine tool, shall be stopped. However, if there 
is a damping equipment of tools or workpieces designed for safe clamping during motion, and if there 
is a provision for automatic measurement, this need not be done. 

6.2.4 During any interruption in the supply of the electric current, the operator shall switch-off the 
main switch immediately and all other control elements brought to such a position that once the supply 
Is restored, the machine tool does not get started automatically. 

6.2.5 If rapid traverse is switched-on, the operator shall carefully observe the parts approaching the 
workpiece, and switch-off the rapid traverse at a safe distance. 

6.2.6 For workpieces which project beyond the clamping surface its surface of revolution should be 
checked as to whether it exceeds the maximum swing diameters and similarly for workpieces whose 
width exceeds the clamping width of the table, It shall be checked as to whether there is sufficient 
space for the movement of the workpiece between frames, cross-rails, etc. 

6.2-7 The workpieces shall be clamped by the right clamping equipment depending upon the shape 
and size of the workpiece to enisure perfect clamping, 

6.2.8 Workpieces having irregular shape and centre of gravity outside the axis of rotation shall be 
properly balanced before machining to prevent any increase in vibration of the machine tool. Defective 
( broken ) workpieces shall not be machined. 

6.2.9 While clamping heavy objects, the object shall remain supported by the lifting equipment until 
it is set and clamped. For supporting, correct and undamaged clamps and supports shall be used. 

6.2.10 Bearing surfaces of clamping equipments shall be clean and undamaged. Tool shall be safely 
clamped and its overhang shall be adjusted such that during machining, unnecessary and dangerous 
stresses are not set up and that chip formation is easy and uniform. 

6.2.11 Only suitable and undamaged tools shall be clamped. It is not permitted to leave the 
clamping key inserted in the clamping unit when it is in motion. For driving a higher force, suitable 
leverage should be made use of. 

6.2.12 If the machine is not equipped with protective guards against chips or the guards cannot be 
used even if provided, then the operators shall use separate personal protection ( goggles, face covers, 
etc), 

6.2.13 All tools, gauges, clamping keys, etc, shall be stacked in their definite positions. 

6.2.14 Manual slipping and lubrication of belts during run shall be prohibited. 

6.3 Duties of the Operator After Completing the Shift 

6.3.1 After completion of the work, the operator shall arrange his working place properly, remove the 
chips and used cutting fluid, clean the places meant for gauges, tools, etc. All cleaning aids shall also 
be suitably stacked. 

6.3.2 If there are any faults or short-comings on the machine observed during the shift, the same 
should be reported to the superior for repair or remedy and for proper care to be taken by the operator 
working in the next shift, 

9 



IS: 11016-1984 

7. Outfit of the Operator 

7-1 The operator should preferably wear close fitting dress without any loosely hanging part; loose 
shirts should be tucked in the trousers. A close fitting apron covering up to the knees may be used. 

7.2 The operator should preferably wear a suitable head cover ( cap or kerchief ) to protect the hair. 

7.3 The operator should preferably wear a working shoe to protect his feet. Use of open sandals 
should be restricted. 

7.4 Workers having bandages on iheir hands or on fingers shall not work on machine tools where there 
is change of his ha{)d or the fingers coming in contact with the rotating part ( dniling machine, lathe, 
etc ). 

7.5 Protective hand gloves should preferably be worn while handling workpieces or tools or while 
clamping them in the hazardous working region. However, for normal working operations gloves need 
not be worn. 

7.6 Wherever needed suitable eye protection equipment such as 'safety goggles' should be worn for eye 
protection. 

8. Removal of Chips 

8.1 in general, chips shall not be removed when the machine too! is running unless the operation of 
the machine tool itself permits it. 

8.2 For removing the chips when the machine tool is running, hooks, scrapers and long-handled 
brushes shall be used as and when necessary. Dusters and waste may be used for cleaning only when 
the machine tool has been stopped and after removing the chips by scrapers, etc. 

8.3 In general, cleaning of the machine tool by compressed air is prohibited. However, if it is necessary 
as per the technological processes to use compressed air for cleaning the workpiece, clamping fixture, 
etc, then the air nozzle shall be covered and the pressure reduced to 1 atmosphere. In such cases the 
operator shall wear protective facial covers. 

9. Setting up and Maintenance 

9.1 Setting up of the machine tool and its maintenance shall be in accordance with the instructions 
given in the manual of instructions for operation and maintenance of the machine. 

9.2 Before setting up the machine, it must be ensured that all safety and protective equipments are 
working properly and are positioned in accordance with the instructions. 

9.3 While setting, it must be ensured that the cutting speed, change of tool and the working cycle do 
not cause any harm or injury to Ihe near by operators ( due to dust, noise, spray of cutting fluid, etc ). 
Also all valid safety instructions and standards shall be strictly followed. 

9.4 Routine inspection of the machine tools shall be carried out at regular intervals, particularly with 
regard to parts which are liable to fail or break down. Any fault shall be immediately rectified. Work 
shall never be carried out on defective machines. 

9.5 A regular preventive maintenance schedule shall be worked out for each one of the machine 
tools and this schedule shall be strictly followed. 

9.6 Before repairing the machine tools, a fool-proof arrangement shall be made to ensure that it is not 
started by unauthorised persons. It can be accomplished by several ways as for example, by 
switching-off the electric motor and removing the pulley belts or by pressing the main switch to the 
netural position, etc. In addition to this, a suitable placard reading MACHINE UNDER REPAIR— DO 
NOT OPERATE shall be placed near the control switch. Restarting of the machine tool shall be done 
only after the repair and inspection of all protective guards have been completed. 



10 



IS: 11016-1984 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 1 .2, Note 2 ) 

LIST OF RELATED INDIAN STANDARDS 

IS : 818-1968 Code of practice for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding and 
cutting operations ( first revision ) 

IS : 1179-1967 Equipment for eye and face protection during welding {first revisior)) 

IS : 1991-1973 Safety code for the use, care and protection of abrasive wheels {first revisior)) 

IS : 2553-1971 Safety glass ( second revision ) 

IS : 2925-1975 Industrial safety helmets ( first revision ) 

IS : 301 6-1982 Code of practice for fire precautions in welding and cutting operations ( first revision ) 

IS : 3103-1975 Code of practice for industrial ventilation ( first revision ) 

IS : 3483-1965 Code of practice for noise reduction in industrial buildings 

IS : 4167-1980 Glossary of terms relating to air pollution ( first revision) 

IS : 4501-1981 Aprons, rubberized, acid and alkali resistant ( first revision ) 

IS : 4770-1968 Rubber gloves for electrical purposes 

IS ; 5216-1969 Guide for safety procedures and practices in electrical works 

IS : 5983-1980 Eye protector's ( first revision ) 

IS : 6153-1971 Protective leather clothing 

IS: 6229-1980 Method of measurement of real-ear protection of hearing protectors and physical 
attenuation of earmuffs {first revision ) 

IS : 6665-1972 Code of practice for industrial lighting 

IS : 6994 ( Part 1 )-1973 Industrial safety sloves: Part 1 Leather and cotton gloves 

IS : 7194-1973 Assessment of noise-exposure during work for hearing conversation purposas 

IS : 8235-1976 Guide for safety procedures in hand operated hand tools 

IS : 8519-1977 Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for body protection 

IS : 8520-1977 Guide for selection of industrial safety equipment for eye, face and ear protection 

IS : 8964 ( Parts I to XXIV ) Recommendations for safety conditions for woodworking machines 

IS : 9474-1980 Principles of mechanical guarding of machinery 

IS : 9637-1980 Guidelines for presentation of information in technical manuals 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard has been formulated to lay down the principles of providing maximum safety and 
protection to the personnel operating all types of metal cutting machine tools and to provide general 
guidelines for safety on machine tools and their operations. The specific requirements concerning any 
particular kind to machine tool or accessory will be delt with separately in individual safely standards to 
be prepared later. 

Notwithstanding the requirements indicated in this standard, if a particular requirement has been 
covered by any other legal document such as. Factories Act, Electricity Act etc, the conditions stipula- 
ted in these legal documents should be satisfied completely. 

This standard has been prepared mainly based Jupon various Indian Standards published on 
safety aspects and experience gained by our industry. However, certain assistance has been derived 
from JIS B 6014-1980 'General code for safety for machine tools' published by the Japanese Industrial 
Standards Committee. 

11 

Printed at Arcee Pr»««, New Delhi, India 



